

I *
OF TH E
wm» cKAttnat
r I
eX-B-YA'
; FOWLER.. .
:A-£-
u i nw
nrjirr m w




THE
WRECK
OF THE
“ROYAL CHARTER.”
COMPILED FROM AUTHENTIC SOURCES, WITH
SOME ORIGINAL MATTER.
FRANK FOWLER,
LATE OF HER MAJESTY’S CIVIL SERVICE, NEW SOUTH WALES.
AUTHOR OF “SOUTHERN LIGHTS AND SHADOWS,” "DOIIINGS OF A LOUNGER,” ETC.
LONDON:
SAMPSON LOW, SON, AND CO., 47 LUDGATE HILL.
1859.


LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET,


NOTE INTRODUCTORY.
W bi 65)f 970 g
SL C 6-7/
This little book is prepared under the conditions of
saving the Mail which leaves England on the 12th, and
of being a complete narrative of the Wreck. The one
condition is adverse to the other ; but I have endeavoured
to meet them both.
London, November ihe Eighth, 1859.


“ Forth from the polar caverns of the snows,
Dripping with winter, leapt a northern storm,
And shook himself, and she lay buried white. .
Oh ! and we were homeward bound I”
Balder.


THE WRECK
THE “ ROYAL CHARTER.”
Tjie prints of Tuesday, the 25th of October, contain ed this
brief telegram:—
‘Queenstown. — The “Royal Charter,” from Melbourne, fifty-eight
days out, is off this port. She expects to be at Liverpool tomorrow
night.’
In the Times of Thursday, the 27th, appeared the follow-
ing
‘ A telegraphic despatch has reached us as we are going to press,
announcing the loss, on her way from Queenstown to Liverpool, of the
“ Royal Charter,” with over four hundred passengers on board, of
which number only about twenty are saved.’
The last news was so overwhelming—so unexpected and
improbable after the early telegram—that at first it was
received with some amount of incredulity. No other paper
of that morning but the Times contained the intelligence;
and from behind this fact there came a gleam of hope. At
about eleven o’clock, however, the journals issued as usual
their second editions, and then it was the statement in the
Times was confirmed, and that the mournfullest piece of news
in connection with marine disaster which ever reached this
country was generally accepted. The ‘ Royal Charter ’ was


lost! Men passed the news from one to another in whispers,
shook their heads, and moved on to the newspaper and tele-
graph offices for later items bearing upon the calamity. The
announcement in the first edition of the Times was sad
enough. Such details, however, as that journal was enabled
to give in its second edition far more than confirmed the early
telegram. Instead of only four hundred persons being on
board, it appeared there were close upon five hundred, while
the proportion of saved was not in the slightest increased.
Some of the circumstances grouped around the wreck, too,
were now supplied us. The vessel had, after a terrible battle
with the storm, in which masts were cut down and much noble
life was spent, struck upon the rocky coast of Wales, parted
amidships, and gone down not twenty yards from shore, and
scarcely four hours’ sail from Liverpool.
I was in Sydney when the ‘ Dunbar ’ was lost, I remember,
with painful distinctness, the gloom cast upon the colony by
that catastrophe. The same cold sense of horror seemed on
Thursday last to take possession of the metropolis. At
Lloyd’s, at the Jerusalem, at the Baltic, men moved silently
about with white faces and knitted brows. As each new
telegram arrived and was posted in the rooms, groups would
crowd anxiously around it, and amongst them—thrust forward
with a most touching anxiousness—the face of many an old
colonist could be seen. There was an element of uncertainty
in the disaster which added to its painful and prostrating
effect upon the public mind. The ship had brought eleven
days’ later news; there was no list of its passengers to be had
in England; and who could tell but that his friends or
kinsmen were on board? We allJaiew here the splendid
qualities of the vessel: we all knew how high her colours
stood in the colony'. I knew I had travelled the six
hundred miles of dangerous sea between Sydney and Mel-


bourne to make my journey home in her. Who then that had
a relative or connection in the colony could—or can to this
hour—help the bleak conviction that in this vessel, which the
cruel rocks have battered, and the remorseless waves have
beaten to fragments, he or she was making a visit to the
mother country ? There were many of course that Thursday
morning at Lloyd’s, and the colonial coffee-houses, who by
the last mail had received letters from friends intimating their
intention of coming home by the ‘ Charter.’ To them the in-
telligence of the wreck had terrible interest. Hour after hour
they hung about the City, and when, just before closing, a ‘List
of the Saved ’ was received at Lloyd’s, it was with difficulty the
clerk was enabled to keep them from tearing the document from
his hands and post it upon the walls. One gentleman, white-
headed and bent with age, who, I subsequently found, had a son
on board, swooned the moment he saw the list. His hoy teas
saved.
I endeavour to be brief in these introductory remarks;* but
somehow the atmosphere of dejection which has rested upon
us all since the evil tidings first met us, reproduces itself as I
write, and I find myself calling up with mournful minuteness
the earlier passages in the History I have been requested to
prepare. To that task let me now compel myself.
While the news of the wreck was still being bandied from
mouth to mouth, I, who knew the ill-fated craft, and thought,
without taking upon myself to suggest a reason for the dis-
aster, I could yet set down many things which might enable
others to do so, wrote the following article for one of the news-
papers :
‘ The finest ship that ever left the port of Liverpool has
gone down with five hundred lives on board. I knew the ship
—unhappily I knew some of those who have perished. I
purpose to tell my impressions of the vessel, of the captain—


everything I know that is likely to be read with interest by
the dread light of the calamity.
‘ Nearly this time two years I left Melbourne for Liverpool
in the vessel. She had—and, in most particulars, deserved it
—the reputation of being the finest ship that ever came to
Hobson’s Bay, The “ Great Britain,” belonging to the same
line, was of larger burden, and of much higher steam capa-
city ; but among her splendid performances there was no
record of a passage from England to Australia in fifty-nine
days. This extraordinary run the “ Royal Charter ” had
made, and a reputation had in consequence attached to her
which always filled her cabins with home-bound colonists
within ten days or a fortnight of her arrival at Melbourne.
As I am writing this I am in utter ignorance of the details
connected with the loss of the vessel; and it would be a mere
impertinence were I to suggest a cause for the catastrophe.
This I must say, however—l feel bound to say it, for the
sakewf all those who go down to the sea in ships —that if the
“ Royal Charter ” had not made such rapid passages, lives
lost on board before this final casualty would certainly not
have been sacrificed. Let me, before proceeding further, ex-
plain what I mean. It is a practice with more than one
large shipping firm, like that to which the “ Charter ” be-
longed, to give very heavy rewards to those captains who are
enabled to make “ the voyage ” —that is, the passage out and
home—within a specially limited time ; let us say five months.
Captain Taylor, of the “ Royal Charter,” told me himself that
his owners had promised him five hundred pounds whenever
he made the journey from Liverpool to Melbourne and back
in one hundred and fifty days. The consequence of this ar-
rangement was, that speed rather than safety became the cha-
racteristic of Captain Taylor’s command. It would be cruel
to make this statement if I were not prepared to prove it; but


when I add that the “ Charter” never made a voyage without
an accident of some kind # or other occurring—that when I
came from Melbourne in her, her gear was so defective that a
yard-arm fell, killing one man and wounding others, the very
day we left Hobson’s Bay, and that throughout the passage
her rudder was so faulty that we had to slacken sail whenever
the ship attained a speed of twelve knots, —the veracity (or
taste) of my assertion cannot be questioned. Everything was
sacrificed to speed: a quick passage seemed to be the sole aim
of the captain— was , in fact, the sole aim, as, to conclude
these prefatory remarks, one little circumstance will show.
When I came home in the ship, she happened, from a stress
of foul winds, to an extraordinarily long run. Well, a
month before we arrived in port, we were placed on short
allowance of food. Rapidity was so relied on that only sixty
or seventy days’ provisions (instead of, as the Shipping Act
provides, one hundred and twenty) had been put on board
when we left Melbourne! ♦
‘ But, with all, she was a noble vessel; and the captain was
a noble sailor. If he was a little reckless, the “ Liverpool
System ”is rather to blame than he. He had risen, I believe,
from before the mast, and was a man of a certain rough amiabi-
lity, of seafaring energy, and dogged determination. A slight
anecdote fits in here as an illustration. Once he was command-
ing a ship which had sprung a leak, and a number of the sailors,
for some reason or other, refused to work. Captain Taylor
ordered all the refractory men in irons, and then, fitting up a
windmill, pumped out the vessel without any manual assist-
ance whatever.
‘ The “ Royal Charter ” was a magnificent specimen of
shipbuilding. She was some thirty feet longer than the
<£ Great Britain;” could, without her “ auxiliary screw,”
sail eighteen knots an hour; and was, in matters of internal


appointment, more like a West-end hotel than a ship which
had to brave the seas and storms of Cape Horn. Her prin-
cipal saloon was one hundred feet long’, was fitted up with
stained glass, rich hangings, velvet couches, candelabra, book-
cases, piano, and all the other elegancies which have of late
been made so much of in the reporters’ descriptions of the
“ Great Eastern.” There were about forty cabins at the sides
of the saloons, beside some twenty or thirty first-class berths
on the deck immediately under. The “intermediate” and
“ steerage ” accommodation was very large—capable, I should
say, of receiving from four hundred and fifty to five hundred
passengers—while in the forecastle and “cock-pit” there
were, when I came from Australia, aboi»t one hundred men,
consisting of officers, pursers, midshipmen, crew, etc., etc.
Along the main-deck there was a row of shops—a wine-store,
a grocery-store, a meat-store, and a bakery, together with two
or three kitchens. (I may add here that the ship carried a
scor<?of stewards and cooks.) In the centre of the vessel a
large space was devoted to the engine and engineers’ apart-
ments, and just on one side were the cow and sheep pens.
Altogether a noble craft —so noble that I never looked at it
without thinking, “ Great God! will this vessel ever be swal-
lowed by the waters!”
‘ Why was this Thought always uppermost as I walked
about the ship ? I can scarcely tell. I used to think it arose
from the gloomy influence of the accident which occurred as
we left Hobson’s Bay ; but then for weeks after I arrived in
England I seldom went to sleep without dreaming I was
perishing in a wreck, and that that wreck was the “ Royal
Charter.” There”are those who will be inclined to smile at
this portion of my communication ; but as I hope never to
meet with such a fate as that which has befallen those poor
souls whose bodies now lie rotting on the coast of Wales, I


solemnly declare that, from the hour I placed my foot on
board the vessel until the moment when the news reached me
that she had gone to pieces, I had a presentiment some dire
calamity would overtake her. Some of those who were on
board with me will, doubtless, recognize the hand that pens
this memoir. Henceforward, the most stolidly sceptical of
these must admit that feeling is sometimes higher than reason ,
and that there are more things under heaven and earth than
are dreamt of in our material philosophy. I should not waste
space to chronicle these presentiments—which the majority of
readers will, I am aware, regard, and perhaps naturally so, as
idle —had they not arisen with me in a manner so utterly
unaccountable, and been fulfilled in a manner so utterly
disastrous.
‘ And at this point, as bearing somewhat upon these fore-
bodings, I may as well state that, from first to last —from her
birth to her death, as it were—the “ Royal Charter” was, except
in the all but uniform swiftness of her voyages, an unfortunate
vessel. Imprimis , she was originally built as a sister boat to
the unfortunate “ John Tayleur.” It will be in the recollection
of the reader that, some years ago, this “John Tayleur” was
wrecked not very far distant from the spot where the “ Charter”
went ashore, and with about as many passengers as the
“ Charter ” had on board. There was a great deal written and
said at the time about the negligence of the captain, but on
inquiry he urged that the wreck had been occasioned through
a deviation —the ship was of iron—in the compasses. This
explanation was accepted; but it had so much weight with
the owners of the “Tayleur” that they at once sold the iron hull
of the sister ship they were engaged in building, determining
never to have anything more to do with other than wooden
vessels. This hull was bought by Messrs. Gibb and Brights,
and, as it was originally intended merely for a second-class


ship of a thousand or eleven hundred tons, it was, I was
told, lengthened amidships by the new owners until it was
thirty feet longer than the 44 Great Britain,” or nearly one-half
the length of the “ Great Eastern.” It is unnecessary to add
that while this extension of the craft from stem to stern was
going on, her beam could never be increased. She was, in
fact, more like a long iron arrow than a ship. Her extreme
length, coupled with her extraordinary narrowness, rendered
her a splendid sailer; but it is a grave question with me
whether her peculiarity of build may not have had something
to do with the accident. In a heavy sea she rolled tre-
mendously, and xoould only “wear” on one tack. But to
continue my record of her calamitous career, the very first
time the sister ship of the unfortunate “ Tayleur ” went to sea
(and, let us note, a year had been spent in trying to launch
her) she had to put in at Plymouth owing to bad weather,
and—l think —some slight injury to her machinery. On
arriving at Melbourne, an accident happened on board, and
several men were killed. On returning to Liverpool, she ran
foul of a vessel just leaving’ that port, took away her anchor
in her bows (fortunately above water-mark), and carried it
with her into dock. On the next passage out to Melbourne,
the unfortunate ship, soon after crossing the line, was found
to be on fire, and it was with great difficulty the conflagration
was extinguished. It was on the same run, too, that her
rudder was first discovered to be faulty in its working—that
is, it shook the vessel to such an extent that sleepers were
sometimes thrown from their bunks at night. On her return
to England, the yard-arm fell, and —as I have already
mentioned—one man was killed, and several were injured.
On this passage it was that the ship found itself short of food ;
moreover, the coal had run out long before we had reached
the tropics. In consequence of the last fact, the journey


home occupied ninety-seven clays; and I was subsequently
told great was the anxiety throughout the country for the
safety of the vessel. And, apart from the long passage, there
was special cause, although unsuspected on shore, for this
anxiety. For three days before we made Cork, we had been
unable to get a sight of the sun, and, consequently, no obser-
vations had been taken. On the eve of the last day a stiffish
gale was blowing, and a thick fog floated on the water. At
about midnight the gale increased, and the captain, not know-
ing exactly where we were, ordered the ship to be laid to.
Next morning we found we were about twelve miles from
the coast. Another hour’s run overnight, and we should all
have been landed in eternity.
‘My narrative is now brought down to about eighteen
months ago. I know little of the “ Royal Charter ” since then.
She made, it seems, her last run out to Australia in fifty-nine
days, and in a Melbourne paper I received by the last mail, I
saw it stated that “an able band of musicians had been en-
gaged to proceed with the vessel home 1” Ah! jollity enough
was there on board, I doubt not, as the barque neared port!
Fifty-eight days from Melbourne to Cork! Splendid winds
must she have had all the way home; high must have been
the spirits of captain, crew, and passengers! Where is the
merry company now? It is a sad, sad story. Women must
wring their hands, and strong men must weep, as they read
that after a haven had been actually reached —after some of
the passengers had even landed in Ireland, and set the tele-
graph in motion to tell their friends in distant places that
they were safe on British soil —the ship should have been
dashed to pieces by the merciless sea-spume, and that of the
five hundred souls on board, four hundred and seventy should
have perished !
‘ I could write more. I knew so many of the brave officers


and crew who have perished. I knew' the bluff, honest, daring
captain. But of what avail is it to speak of them now?
They have all gone. May they rest in peace until that clay
w'hen even the sea shall render up its dead!’
That was written on Thursday afternoon. The evening
papers of that day contained nothing very new. On the
Friday morning, however, there w r as sufficient in the daily
journals to show me that I had—without presuming to ex-
pressly state—rightly indicated the cause of the ship’s destruc-
tion, Not a life need have been lost if the “ Charter ” had not
broken her hack. What a strange light that sentence sheds
upon what I have written concerning the build of the ship—
of her scant beam and startling length ... Of the setting
aside, in fact, of the normal conditions of the Thing !
How the vessel came upon the coast is a question running
parallel with the foregoing, and the character of the captain,
as set forth in that newspaper communication of mine, comes
in here with answer. That answer, w r e all desire, should
carry due amount of weight with other commanders of ships
with precious freight of human souls on board. There are a
few iron plates, rolled up like shrivelled parchment, on the
rocks of Molfre Bay. They are all that is left to us of the
WTeck of the “ Royal Charter,” auxiliary screw, thousands of
tons burthen, fire-proof bullion-room, patent reefing topsails,
and the rest. What precious warning in those crumpled
iron plates ! Will sea-captains read of them and still go
steaming up channel on nights piteously dark with fog and
mist? Unhappily, experience says they will.
If shrivelled iron plates fail, as perhaps they may, to carry
caution, then let our sea-captains read deeply of the narra-
tives of the saved, which I must now, assuming my proper
duty as compiler, proceed to set forth. And at the onset,
the bitterest narrative lies in the fact that of near five huu •


tired souls —passengers and crew —on board Hie vessel, the
following mournfully scant catalogue contains ‘the name of
every survivor* :
Saloon Passengers.
W. H. Mouse. I H. C. Taylor.
F. Grundy.
Saloon Passengers landed at Queenstown.
Me. Gardner. I Mrs. Nahmur and child.
Mr. M'Evoy.
Third-Class Passengers (including those landed at Queenstown).
C. MThiel.
John Judge.
W. J. Ferris.
James M'Clappon.
W. Russell.
J. Bradbury.
William Foster.
John O’Brien.
Thomas Griffiths.
William M'Arthur.
George Irisiier.
George Suaicar.
E. Wilson.
Thomas Tims.
Henry Evans.
John Richards.
Samuel Granfell.
Carl Bertal.
N. Began,
John Loome.
S. E. Capper.
W. Bowden.
James Rogers.
David Stroman.
William Hughes.
Thomas Ellis.
George M'Givrin.
Owen Williams
William Draper.
Thomas Cormick.
John Stannard.
We are anxiously awaiting the next mail, in order to
learn the names of those who are lost. At present the
lists that have been published are limited, contradictory, and
hypothetical. Each survivor has supplied the newspaper
reporters with the names of just as many of his lost fellow-
passengers as he could remember. You in the colony,
however, will be able, with your files of papers, to complete
this section of the story of the Lost Ship.l
* A list of the riggers who were saved will be found at p. 32.
f The following is from the Times of November Ist. It is only a


The narrative which is at once the completest and most
touching 1 is that of Mr. Russell, which takes the following
historical form :
‘ On entering the saloon, Mr. Allen, the head steward of the second
cabin, came and told the passengers they had better not go on deck,
as it might cause confusion. The order was implicitly obeyed. Time
passed anxiously and Wearily : the storm still raged. Suddenly the
vessel struck, not violently—not even with sufficient force to throw the
passengers off their seats. Water then came pouring down into the
cabin. A voice shouted for the second-class passengers to go into the
lower saloon, as the mainmast was going to be cut away. The pas-
sengers nearest to the entrance doors attempted to open them (they
were hinged in the ceiling), and finding some difficulty, they were im-
mediately smashed. Still there was no hurrying or crushing; all
silently took their seats. On deck, sailors and officers, stripped to the
waist, laboured to cut away the mainmast. The vessel rolled and
thumped so heavily that in delivering their blows, the men were many
times thrown on to the deck, but the motion of the vessel assisted the
work; the waves, too, lent their aid, and soon the mast tottered, then
fell with a crash overboard. Immediately afterwards the raging sea
threw the vessel still higher up upon the rocks. The foremast was
then cut away, and almost at the same time the mizenmast broke oft’
at the mizeumast-head. Boats were lowered, but the moment they
touched the waves they were carried with irresistible force against the
rocks, and their inmates were cither crushed or drowned in the sea.
No boat could live in such a storm. There appeared scarcely any need
of boats, so close upon the shore was the vessel. Having struck, the
vessel slewed round port side to the rocks. When in the lower saloon,
about this time, an apprentice boy, Charley, entered, telling the pas-
sengers from the captain that they were to keep up their hearts, all
sample of a class of advertisements that are daily appearing in the
papers; —
TO the SURVIVING PASSENGERS of the ROYAL CHARTER.-Could any one
inform the under-mentioned whether among the saloon passengers of that ill-fated
vessel there was one named HENRY LAFARGUE, age 26? They would greatly
relieve the anxious minds of that gentleman’s relatives. There appeared in the Times of
Thursday, in the list of the lost, the name of LaFargur; in Friday’s, M. La Forgue;
and in Saturday’s, La Fargol, which might all have been intended for Lafargue. Address,
Miss Lafargue, No. 2 Clarges-street, Piccadilly, \V.


•was well, they were only on a sand-lank. The passengers still remained
quietly in the cabin. Mr. Oowie, the second mate, accompanied by the
purser and two men, came down; they were stripped, having on only
their shirt and trousers. They passed through the saloon to the
powder-magazine —as they went bidding the passengers keep up their
hearts, as they were not far from the shore. The water entered the
saloon at the same time, and the waves striking more heavily, the
vessel thumped harder. Those in the lower saloon then passed into
the upper one. There they found assembled some of the first and
third class passengers. No words were spoken, hope and fear struggled
for the mastery in their countenances; by this alone was it seen that
life and death were in the balances. The stillness of the assembly was
at length broken : a young lady, about twenty, Miss Murray, who was
on board with her father, mother, and brother, fainted, and was im-
mediately carried to her cabin, from whence she never emerged. Day-
light now began to dawn. They had been tossing on the sea and
labouring on the rocks all night. Shortly after daylight, a third-class
passenger came down ; he had on only his trousers, and had been in
the bows of the vessel for several hours. He said the forepart of the
vessel and the bows touched the land—every one could wade ashore.
All hopes of saving the vessel having disappeared, and the boats having
been rendered unserviceable, the captain ordered a hawser to be got
ready. A seaman, named Joseph Rogers, volunteered to swim ashore
with it. The line was made fast to his body, and the noble fellow
gallantly dropped overboard and breasted the waves with the resolu-
tion of a sailor. For a time he was lost to sight, as wave after wave
dashed over the vessel and broke upon the rocks; then the line tightened,
and the man was seen clambering up the rocks.
•The villagers (brought by the signal-lights) crowded round, the
hawser was hauled ashore and made fast to a rock, a boatswain’s chair
was slung on to the rope, and a number of sailors ordered ashore to
work it. Every order was obeyed without confusion. Amongst others
landed were two brave fellows—George Suaicar, Malta, boatswain’s
mate, and William Foster, Liverpool, carpenter. Word was passed
down to the saloons that the ladies were to come on deck. There was
a movement immediately towards the staircase. At the same time the
ship s sides began to creak: then there were two heavy thumps
experienced; and the ship broke in two across the main hatch. A
great number of passengers were standing amidships, and when the
vessel parted they disappeared for ever. At the same time a boat


abaft the fore rigging fell. The chief officer, Mr. Stevens, and tiro
chief engineer, Mr. Rogers, were standing under it, and both were
killed, A second line was attempted to be carried on shore from the
poop, but failed. Mr. Russell, his wife, and children, on gaining the
deck found that they were on the stern part of the vessel, separated
from the fore part by a yawning chasm, into which every moment
human beings were dropping, or being driven by the waves. It was a
moment of the intenscs't anguish. As each clung to the rail at the top
of the stairs, a hurried farewell was spoken; then they awaited death
calmly. Mr. Russell had several times essayed to get a rope. So
close were they to the shore, he imagined he might fasten the rope
around his family, cast the rope ashore and save them. In vain were
his efforts. They were still clinging to each other, when a huge wave
came and separated them. When the wave had passed, Mr. Russell’s
eldest girl was missing; and when she was found, a box had been
washed on to her leg. Mr. Russell moved the box and liberated her.
Again for a few minutes they were united. Another wave came—they
lost hold of the rail; Mrs. Russell and the two girls were washed
against the side of the vessel, Mr. Russell overboard. As the water
returned, Mr. Russell sprang at a piece of iron which hung from the
side, seized it, then caught a rope ; in another moment he was on deck.
His youngest daughter was nearest him; he attempted to lay hold of
her, had his hands just on her, when another wave came, broke over
the ship, poured down with irresistible force, and washed him overboard
again. For a time he was struggling in the waves convulsively ; he
clutched at something which he felt against his body; it was only a
piece of canvas ; another moment and he felt seaweed under his feet.
A wave came, he was almost insensible, yet he saw a man standing
before him. Was it a dream, or a reality? He stretched out his hand,
he grasped another hand—yet another wave came, and the hand
unloosed—he was borne back again—a mightier wave broke, and the
hand was again grasped —it held him —he was saved. In a moment
or two he recovered his senses, he was lying on a rock; he turned his
eyes seaward, there was no living creature left on the stern of the
vessel. Ho then became insensible again, and was borne by the
villagers to the hospitable cottage of Mr. and Mrs. Lewis, in the
neighbourhood.
‘ There were one or two scenes before Mr. Russell was finally washed
off the wreck, which imprinted themselves on his memory; words
uttered which no time can ever obliterate. They were the last glimpses


caught of fellow-voyagers; the dying expressions of old companions.
Mr. Henderson, a merchant of Melbourne, on his way to London, was
holding on to the binnacle with a gentleman named Watson, one of the
firm of Watson, Passmore, and Co., of Melbourne, and he exclaimed,
“Oh ! Watson, all is gone.” A Jewess, named Markes, was jammed in
near a place where the vegetables were kept: and her husband, in vainly
endeavouring to release her, tore all her clothes to rags. They had
two children on board, and came from Ballarat. A gentleman named
Welsh, while in the lower saloon, tied two black canvas bags full of
gold around his neck. He was lost. Several other passengers fastened
money about their persons; all were lost. Mr, Taylor, one of the saved,
had 35/. in his pockets when he jumped into the sea : on reaching shore
he had 10/. remaining. Mr. Capper, another saved, lost about 50/. out
of his pockets while he was being carried ashore by the waves. A
gentleman named Bradbury, who was on his way to Manchester, dislo-
cated his right ankle on board, and in endeavouring to free himself
broke his leg. He afterwards lowered himself overboard into the sea,
exchanged one piece of wood for another, shared it with a gentleman
named Lewis, who was not hurt at all, was dashed against the rocks
several times, was saved, and his companion was lost.’
Mr. Russell completes his statement in these affecting
words:—
‘ When the vessel broke, an awful shriek—the death-cry of hundreds—
was heard above the violence of the storm.. On shore, the villagers and
the sailors who had escaped unhurt linked hands, and the bravest
stepped into the surf to catch hold of those whom the waves boro
towards them on their crests, before they were drawn back into the sea.
Foremost in one link was George Suaicar, and he was instrumental in
laying hold of nine out of those rescued, until exhausted, he fell sense-
less on the rock, and was borne away. William Foster was another
who joined in forming the link. The vessel struck finally about seven,
and broke about nine o'clock. On board were the officers of three
vessels coming from Australia, and they, with the captain and officers
of the ill-fated “ Royal Charter,” were all lost.’
The George Suaicar, thus honourably mentioned, speaks
for himself with the modesty of a brave sailor. His position
on the ship was that of boatswain’s mate. His testimony has


special value as bearing upon the earlier passages of the
tragedy: —•
‘On Monday,’ he says, assuming a staid, log-book form, ‘we left
Queenstown in the afternoon, after putting some passengers on board
the pilot-boat “ Petrel,” who desired to be landed. We proceeded on
with calm weather and water smooth. We made Ballycotton Light at
half-past seven p.m. ; and Youghal Light, on the Irish coast, at half-
past eight. Reached the Menay Light at nine; made the Nook Light
in half an hour; and sighted Tuskar at about half-past eleven o’clock.
On Tuesday morning saw Bardsey, at which time the wind began
to freshen. The wind heading, we took in the square-sails; and at
ten o’clock a.m., the wind increasing, took in all the fore and aft sails.
In the afternoon made Holyhead at half-past one, and at half-past
four were right ahead of Holyhead harbour. Could see the steamship
“ Great Eastern.” Off Bardsey the steam-tug “ United Kingdom ” came
alongside and handed on board some newspapers, asking if we would
give a free passage to eleven riggers, as wo were going to Liverpool, and
the tug was not going until she got a tow. The riggers were taken
on board. At a quarter to eight on Tuesday evening were abreast of
the Skerries, distant about a mile and a half. At this time the wind
had increased to a heavy gale, and the ship was making little or no
progress in the water. She was driving up with the strength of the
tide, and nearing the shore ; the steam had no effect, but we did all
to keep the ship off. The maintopsail was lowered, but she still drifted.
Clewed up the maintopsail, and the hands were sent up to furl it. The
wind had now increased considerably, almost blew the sail from the
yard, and it became entangled on the starboard side. It was difficult
to get the sail stowed. At this time Mr. Bean, the third officer, with
several seamen and myself, were trying to make the sail fast, but
could not succeed in accomplishing it. Shortly afterwards orders
were given to cock-bill the port anchor, and let go. This was done,
giving her seventy-five fathoms of chain. The vessel was steaming
the whole time. Finding she was dragging, we let go the starboard
anchor. Still finding her dragging, we paid out all the port chain.
The vessel was still steaming, and the wind had now increased to a
perfect hurricane. We then went to get the stream anchor up, and
while doing so the starboard chain parted. I then felt the ship cant-
ing over to port, and fancied the wind had changed.
* Orders were then given to cut away the mainmast, which was done,


and in a few minutes afterwards she struck on a bank. The captain
gave orders to the engineer to give her as much steam as he could, to
harden her on the bank. It was then about three-quarters ebb tide.
The place where she struck was at the west of Moelfra, eastward of
Point Lynas. Heard the captain give orders to starboard the helm, to
keep her on the shore, so that the sea would not have so much power
on her broadside. When she became hardened on, the chief officer
gave me and the boatswain orders to cut the main and maintopmast
stays, as they were lying across the boat, so that the boat could be
cleared in case of need. Wo did so. The chief boatswain and myself
were afterwards sitting on a spar, on the deck-house, the sea at the
time making a complete breach over the ship. I then went forward
to look out, and ascertain whether we were on sand or rock, when I
discovered the land distant about thirty yards. I went back, and told the
chief officer that it was land ; and he said, “We will loose the foretop-
mast-staysail, and when the tide makes up run her up.” I said it
would be as well to give her the foresail. It was then getting day-
light. I volunteered to go ashore with a line to get a hawser ashore,
immediately after which I felt the ship striking heavier than ever,
supposing it was in consequence of the tide making. The sea still
broke over her with even greater violence than ever. The captain
was at this time on deck, standing by the steam telegraph. I told the
chief officer again I was willing to go ashore with a line, and do every-
thing to save life. Asked him if he would allow me a few minutes <o
put my lifebelt on ; and he said of course he would. I afterwards told
the boatswain I was going to try and get a line on shore, and he said
it was useless, the sea was running too high. Afterwards had a small
line slung round my body, and wished some one to volunteer to attend
to it while I swam ashore. After some hesitation, a man volunteered.
Just as I was being lowered into the water, some one called out that
there was a line on shore from forward. Upon hearing that I did not
go. A hawser was got on shore and made fast to a rock, and with
this contrivance myself and some of the other seamen saved our lives.
The hawser was made fast by several of the inhabitants on shore, who
came to render assistance.
‘ After the ship struck, all the passengers were directed to go aft
until the hawser could be properly got out, so that as many as possible
might be saved. Shortly after this the vessel parted amidships ; and
a large number of passengers, standing on the deck where she parted,
were swept into the sea and drowned. ! The boats were smashed to


pieces by the fury of the gale, and the others could not be lowered, so
that none of them could be made available. The passengers saved
were driven on shore by the force of the waves. Sixteen of the crew
got ashore by the hawser. An endeavour was made to get a second
hawser ashore to rescue the female passengers ; but this could not be
accomplished. Not a single female passenger was saved. In three
hours after the vessel struck she began to go to pieces. Saw about
seventy passengers on the port bow, all anxiously awaiting some means
of getting them on shore ; but a heavy sea which struck the starboard
bow stove it in, the ship gave a lurch, and the people were all driven
into the sea and drowned. Some of the passengers saved were thrown
upon the rocks, and picked up by the crew and others who came to
render assistance.’
From the narratives, then, of Mr. Russell and the Boatswain’s
Mate, this much may be gathered—that the ‘ Royal Charter ’
had drifted (shall we say had been foolishly allowed to drift?)
too near the coast; that the hurricane had gradually increased,
and as the vessel laboured so heavily, the masts had been cut
away to ease her; that the screw, which had to an extent
served to keep the ship from striking, became suddenly en-
tangled with the falling spars, and ceased to work; that the
strong wind and stronger waves then bore the craft against
the rocks ; that, through the courage of a seaman, a rope was
carried to the coast with a £ boatswain’s chair” secured upon it;
that (when a sufficient number of the crew had landed to work
1 this contrivance’) the passengers had been summoned to be
sent ashore; that, just as they were congregating amidships,
a crash was heard, the vessel parted, and fell to pieces like
a house of cards ; that a few hasty farewells, a quick exchange
of hopeless glances, a waving of hands which heretofore had
been joined in all life’s struggles, and a last wild cry to
heaven, through which the wintry sun was slowly breaking,
followed that awful crash; that the ship gradually sank and
the sea gradually swelled; that a few bodies, cruelly mutilated,
were washed upon the shelving crags; that the sun rose


Higher and higher, until at length its beams flickered among
the crimson gouts upon the faces of the rocks; and, finally,
that the YYelsh villagers gathered upon the spot, and, with
true Welsh hospitality, bore the bodies of the unfortunate
passengers to their homes.
And the sun set and the moon came up; and the wives of
the officers and crew—and all those who knew, or thought, they
had friends or relatives on board—assembled upon the spot,
searching along the shore for tokens or memorials however
slight from which life or death might be interpreted, and
suspense changed, for better or for worse, to certainty.
Other narratives come in at this point, all more or less
afflicting. The first is that of James Dean, which is re-
markable as showing how, in the most harrowing exigencies,
the presence of mind of some men never deserts them. Dean
is a smith returned from Melbourne, and he speaks bravely
and bluffly, after the manner of his class. In reading his story,
it is well to mark the religion and heroism which breathe
through the words I have underlined.
‘ He says he was in bed in a berth with four other passengers when
the ship struck, and lie was aroused by one of his comrades exclaiming,
“ I think we’re lost.” He dressed himself, and after a Jew minvtes’
prayer, ascended on deck, where he had not been more than a very
brief period when the vessel parted in the centre “ like the snapping
of a tobacco stump.” The people on board stood petrified, as if were,
seemingly unable to make the slightest struggle for their lives; whilst
their terror was increased by the awful scenes presented as unfortunate
creatures fell and were crushed to atoms in the chasm separating the
two parts of the ship. He never for a moment lost his presence of
mind. He saw that most of those in the water struggled towards the
large pieces of the wreck, and he saw also that most of those who
trusted to these heavy portions of the vessel were crushed to death,
and their bodies dreadfully mutilated against the rocks. Though
totally unable to swim he jumped overboard, and just seized a box ho
saw floating near him. Almost at the very moment he seized this a
head was thrust under his arm, and a second claimant appeared. J)can


said it would not support both of them; so as soon as possible he left the
box for another piece of wood , and with this he was thrown upon the
shore. He left his support and tried to gain a position of security ; hut
ere he could do so a wave overpowered him and carried him hack to
sea, where he became entangled in the floating remnants of the vessel,
and it was with the greatest difficulty that he extricated himself.
When he had succeeded in this, he was again thrown on shore. Whilst
momentarily expecting the arrival of another wave, a rope was thrown
to him, and by it he was finally drawn out of. danger, without expe-
riencing any injuries or bruises other than of a very trifling description.
Ho soon recovered strength. He was bringing home a cheque for a
considerable sum of money, and before his voyage he had taken the
precaution to enclose this in a waterproof belt, which he kept around
his waist. This cheque is therefore saved, and his only losses are his
clothes and a small sum of money which was with them.’
Mr. John Buadbuiiy speaks not only on the accident,
but gives us a glimpse of the earlier portion of the voyage.
His sufferings on escaping from the wreck were very great,
and will serve as a hint of what may have been endured before
death by many of those whose bones are now bleaching beneath
the waters. But for his athletic person and robust constitution,
John Bradbury —who speaks as under—would, without doubt,
have been numbered with the lost:—
‘We sailed from Melbourne on the 26th of August, and had on
board, as I know, about five hundred passengers and crew. The captain
was Mr. Thomas Taylor; the chief officer, Mr. Stevens ; and the second
mate, Mr. Oowie. The ship ran almost entirely under canvas up to
the equinoctial line, when she encountered strong head winds. Her
screw power was then brought into requisition. On the 10th of
September, about four o’clock in the morning, the weather being thick
and dark,we ran close past a large iceberg. Mr. Oowie was on watch, and
had it not been for his able manoeuvring, the ship would have been in
imminent danger. The passengers showed their appreciation of his
ability by presenting him with a testimonial on the eve of the dreadful
disaster. We arrived at Queenstown on Monday forenoon, when twelve
passengers disembarked. We left Queenstown about two o’clock, under
steam alone. The ship was laid on her course for Liverpool, but the
storm had the effect of diverting her to such an extent that I saw the


“ Great Eastern ” at Holyhead. The wind was then blowing very hard.
We sighted the light on Point Lynas about five o’clock in the after-
noon, The sea was running high, though not equal to what we had
experienced on the passage; hut the wind was stronger, it was found
we could make no headway, and two anchors were dropped. She
dragged her anchors, and the engines were working, but I understood
the screw was broken.
‘ About two o’clock on Wednesday morning the vessel struck. A
great number of passengers were then in their berths; but they
suddenly rushed upon deck, many of them but partially dressed. There
was not much confusion at first, but it increased as people became
aware of the real danger. I believe the captain was not sober; but
Captain Withers, who was a passenger, and the chief mate and officers,
did all they could to save the ship. A rope was got out from the head
of the vessel, but I cannot say how. A kind of rope chain was made
and placed upon it. By means of this some were drawn along the
hawser to the shore. When the rope was seen there was a great rush
to the forecastle deck, in order to get the first advantage. A largo
wave washed over her head and carried them into the sea. Others
followed, but only to meet a similar fate. I was standing near the davit
of a boat on the poop, when a sea jammed me fast between the boat
and something else. I was beaten about and my ankle dislocated, and
then my leg was broken. I then became, insensible for a short time,
but on regaining my consciousness I got a rope, and fastening it,
lowered myself down from the poop into the sea, upon a piece of the
wreck, along with the storekeeper. I was knocked up and down,
turned topsy turvy, driven and battered against this thing and the
other till I lighted upon a piece of cabin framework, and paddled
myself along with my hands. The waves washed me three times on
the rocks, and took me back, battering me about. The next time I fell
between two rocks, which held me, and I was picked up by two men.
Four men brought me to this house, which is kept by Mr, Owens ;
who has been very kind to me. My leg was set by Mr. Thomas of
Liverpool,’
The simplicity of that statement, must touch the strongest.
Captain Withers, it may be worth mentioning, was returning
from Australia, after having lost his ship in the Pacific. His
exertions throughout the storm were very great, and it was


under his advice that the masts were cut away.* There are
those who say that if the ship had been earlier dismasted she
would not have gone to pieces. I can speak with no authority
upon this point. This, however, I know, Captain Taylor so
loved his craft that when we ran short of provisions coming
home, and might, with two or three hours’supply more of fuel
have made the Island of St. Vincent, and taken in a stock
both of firing and food, he preferred running all the hazard
of 1 keeping on,’ rather than touch the ‘ beautiful spars ’
of his vessel. The loss to his owners in consequence was many
thousand pounds. In compensation to second and third class
passengers alone, they had to pay something like fifteen
hundred pounds. I can, therefore, readily understand that
the dismasting of the vessel may have been unfortunately
delayed until it was too late to save her. At the same time it
is but fair to the memory of the captain—than whom a braver
sailor never trod a deck —to say that all such rumours should
* The following appears in the Morning Herald of November 2nd :
‘ Captain Withers, the master of the wrecked vessel “ Virginia ” (lost in
the South Pacific), with nine men, after being nineteen days at sea in an
open boat, and enduring innumerable privations, all arrived safe at the
Foejce islands, and thence they were conveyed to Sydney, New South
Wales. On arriving at Sydney, Captain Withers after seeing that the
crew were provided with clothes, went on to Melbourne, and took a
passage home to England in the “Royal Charter,” He is the “Cap-
tain Withers” mentioned by one of the persons saved from the wreck
of the “ Royal Charter,” who behaved with such noble fortitude and
unflinching bravery when all seemed lost, and when it was a mockery
to hope against such a fearful tempest. But he was doomed to die a
sailor’s death, for the last seen of him was when he called out to
Mr. Stevens and Captain Taylor, “ God bless you, Stevens! God bless
you, Taylor! Keep firm.” The ship broke up immediately after: the
rest is already too well known.’ Strange are the ways of Providence!
Captain Withers was saved, after terrible privations, from perishing in
the South Pacific to be dashed to pieces on the rocks of Wales!


he accepted with caution. Colonial readers will well re-
member the many absurd and contradictory reports which
were current when the ‘ Dunbar’ went ashore.
That the captain was in some degree ignorant of the exact
spot where he was, and was but imperfectly acquainted with the
coast, seems manifest from this, —when the hurricane gathered
in its might, it was proposed that a barrel of tar should be
fired and sent adrift, in order to light up the coast. ‘ When
the vessel struck,’ says one of the daily newspaper reports,
‘ signal guns were fired, rockets sent off, and every means
adopted to attract attention from the shore; but the houses in
the neighbourhood being few and far between, no practicable
assistance was attracted. No life-boat could live in the
raging sea, and the boats of the vessel herself were perfectly
unavailable.’
From the foregoing, a picture only too vivid of the cata-
strophe may be realized. The Boatswain’s Mate describes the
storm; Mr. Russell paints the ship with all its intense and
death-foreboding excitement; and Mr. Bradbury conveys,
with dread distinctness, the manner in which the handful
of saved fought their way from the jaws of death.
One or two other narratives, purporting to be from sur-
vivors, have appeared, but as they are mere paraphrases of
those I have given, I have some doubt in the first place of
their genuineness, and in the second of the desirability of
occupying space with repetitions.
Let the description of the night of the wreck end here.
The moment the news of the disaster reached London
and Liverpool, agents from Lloyd’s and the owners of the
ship were despatched to Molfre Bay. They were accompanied
by representatives of the principal London and Liverpool
journals, and the communications which the reporters subse-


quently addressed to their several papers were affecting in
the extreme. Here is the first;—
‘Molfra Bay, Thursday Evening.— lt is my very painful duty to
record the total wreck of the screw steamship “ Royal Charter,” Cap-
tain Taylor, which took place at from three to eight o’clock on the
morning of Wednesday, at Molfre, a rugged portion of the Anglesea
coast, and about midway between Amlwch and Ruffin Island. The
ill-fated vessel sailed from Melbourne on the 26th of August, having
on board 388 passengers, of whom 63 occupied the saloon, and a crew,
including officers, of 112 persons. While the ship was passing Queens-
town, on Monday morning, 1.3 of the passengers landed in a pilot-boat.
On Tuesday morning, at eleven o’clock, the “ Royal Charter ” spoke
the steam-tug “ United Kingdom,” which, instead of returning to port
with riggers who had been assisting in the working of a ship to Cardiff,
transferred 11 of the riggers to the “Royal Charter,” Captain Taylor
having kindly agreed to take them to Liverpool; so that there were
on board at the time of the wreck 498 souls, and of these only 39 were
saved.
‘ The loss of life on this sad occasion was 459 persons. The “ Royal
Charter ” had on hoard a large quantity of specie on freight, the exact
amount of which cannot be ascertained, as all the ship’s papers have
been lost, but it was variously estimated by the surviving passengers
and crew at from 500,000?. to 800.000 Z. One of the saloon passengers,
who was drowned, was stated to have had in his possession gold to the
value of 10,000?. She had only a moderate cargo, principally of wool
and skins.’ [Did the small cargo have anything to do with the loss of
the vessel ? Would she, if more heavily laden, have drifted so rapidly
upon the rocks ?] ‘ From[the time of leaving Port Phillip Heads till
the arrival off the Irish coast the passage was in the highest degree
favourable; she was only once in danger, and then from an iceberg.
After passing Queenstown the wind veered round to E.N.E., blowing
strong. On Tuesday night it blew a gale, and continued to increase in
violence, till at length, on the morning of the fatal disaster, it became
a perfect hurricane. Arriving oft’ Point Lynas at six p.m. on Tuesday
evening, signal rockets were for several hours thrown up, in the hope
of attracting a pilot, hut none made their appearance. Captain Taylor,
finding that his ship was making leeway, and gradually drifting towards
the shore, let go both the anchors, but such was the violence of the
wind, and the heavy cross sea prevailing, that the chains parted.’ [The


same night the “ Great Eastern ” was all but lost through one of her
massive cables snapping.] ‘Notwithstanding that the engines were
worked at their full power, the captain was unable to work to windward,
and the unfortunate vessel struck the rocks stern first in four fathoms
water. Up to this period (about three a.m.) not the slightest alarm
was evinced among the passengers, a large portion of whom were
women and children. The most perfect discipline and order prevailed.
The masts and rigging were cut adrift, but caused no relief, as the ship
continued to thump on the sharp-pointed rocks with fearful rapidity.
‘ Shortly after she struck, the ship was thrown broadside on, per-
fectly upright upon the shelving stony beach, the head and stern lying
due east and west, the former not being more than twenty yards from a
projecting rock. At this juncture one of the crew, a Maltese, named
Joseph Rogers, nobly volunteered to struggle through the heavy surf
and convey a rope on shore. Though it was not believed by any one
that danger was imminent, the captain gave the order, and Rogers ably
fulfilled his duty. A strong hawser was then passed and secured on
shore, and to this was rigged a “ boatswain’s chair.” At five o’clock the
ship laboured and bumped to such an extent that the ladies and
children exhibited the greatest anxiety and fear: they crowded
together in the after part of the saloon, and the Rev. Mr. Hodge, of
East Retford, a Clergyman of the Church of England, offered up a
prayer; but his exhortations were interrupted by the violent thumping
of the vessel on the rocks, and the heavy seas which came dashing
into the cabin.’ [Throughout the passage, this reverend gentleman
had administered religious service, and had made so many friendships
that his fellow-passengers had presented him with a testimonial.]
‘ The scene in the saloon was of the most heartrending description;
children and parents, husbands and wives, were clinging to each other
in affectionate embrace. Captain Taylor and Captain Withers came
down and tried to allay their fears by assuring them that there was no
immediate danger. Scarcely had their words been uttered before a
succession of tremendous waves swung her about on the rocks, and she
divided amidships, engulfing all on board. Shortly afterwards she
also parted at the forehatch, throwing a large number of persons into
the sea. Many were killed by the breaking up of the ship. Several of
the crew saved themselves by means of the hawser to the shore, while
the remainder were hurled upon the rocks by the waves. All the
officers perished. Captain Taylor was the last man seen alive on
board. He had lashed his body to a spar and was drowned.’ [Some


affirm he was killed, after he was in the sea, by a boat falling from its
davits. It is said he and Mr. Oowie, the second officer, were seen
together, and that the boat struck both at once. Mr. Stevens, the
first officer, and Mr. Rogers, the chief engineer, were —runs the main
body of testimony—also killed together by the falling of a suspended
boat upon the deck.] ‘ Mr. Stevens, the chief officer, was killed, it is
thought, by the falling rigging. Several of the more fortunate passengers
received severe injuries while struggling for life. With the exception of
a portion of the midship bulkhead, which appears a few feet above the
water, there is scarcely a vestige of the “Royal Charter” remaining.
The bullion chest, which was substantially built of iron, and secured to
the framing of the ship, is supposed to have been shattered, from the
fact of a gold box having been picked up with the address of a leading
banking firm upon it.’ [The subsequent operations of the divers have,
up to the time I am writing, tended to confirm this hypothesis, although
assurances at fifty, sixty, and eighty per cent, are still being effected at
Lloyd’s.]
* About two hundred and fifty sovereigns and a quantity of notes
had been picked up among the rocks.
‘ At least thirty bodies which have been cast ashore are lying in the
adjacent church ; most of them are frightfully mutilated. William
Hughes, the only apprentice saved, states that when the vessel parted
he was in the waist, and was precipitated among the machinery, which
was hurled to and fro by the action of the waves. He had given
himself up for lost, when a wave lifted him clear of the ship, and
landed him in an unconscious state. The survivors during their stay
at the scene of the wreck were very kindly treated. Two ladies made
themselves conspicuous by their attention to the sufferers. It is stated
that all the boats were in perfect readiness for lowering had circum-
stances permitted.’ [Some of the passengers say the boats were
launched, and were dashed to pieces on the rocks.]
The second correspondent’s letter is equally interesting.
Of course a number of persons describing one event will, as
has bedn often pointed out, fall into discrepancies of statement.
It is not for me to make the reports uniform. I have thrown
in a parenthetical explanation here and there ; but otherwise
the several newspapers must'speak for, and explai 11 , themselves.
The second communication runs thus :


‘The “Royal Charter” did not, as was at first stated, strike the
ground in Red Wharf Bay, hut a place between that point and Amlwch.
It is a small opening in the coast, the beach being chiefly sand and
stones. It is to the west of Point Lynas, and known as Molfra, a
village in the immediate locality, being of that name. The coast is
thinly inhabited, and the land flat and uncultivated. Very soon after
the fatal catastrophe, which resulted in such an awful sacrifice of
human life, the vessel broke up, and nothing remains but pieces of the
wreck, which were moved to and fro by the action of the tide. As one
of the seamen described it, she broke up like a bandbox.
‘ Those of the crew and passengers who escaped were provided with
temporary accommodation in the neighbouring cottages, where they
received every mark of kindness from the inhabitants. During the
day most of them left the jdace, and were conveyed to Liverpool in
steam-tugs sent out by the owners of the ship.’ [And were, it is said,
shamefully treated after their arrival. But of this in time.] ‘ Last
(Friday) evening only one passenger remained, Mr. Russell, with the
boatswain s mate and the carpenter of the ship. Many persons visited
the scene of the wreck yesterday, and were making anxious inquiries
as to the fate of relatives and friends. For this purpose every facility
was afforded. Some of the scenes arising out of these inquiries
amongst those deprived of their nearest relatives and friends 1 were
aflecting in the extreme. ■ Shortly after the wreck several of the
bodies of the unfortunate sufferers by the calamity floated upon the
beach ; subsequently others were picked up, and the number amounted
at a late hour last evening to twenty-six. Of these, five were females,
and two of them young children. The bodies were conmyed to
Llanallgo church, and carefully laid out on straw, so as to afford an
opportunity for identification. Some had on their clothing, while
others were only partially dressed, as though when the vessel struck
they had been in their berths, and rushed suddenly to the deck in a
state of alarm on being made acquainted with the perilous position of
the ship. Many of the bodies bore evidence of injuries, probably sus-
tained from being dashed against the rocks, or coming into violent con-
tact with portions of the wreck. One man had nearly all his limbs
broken, and the body had, as it were, to be gathered up. Another was
without the head, and several were much bruised on various parts of
the body. Some small boats and papers were picked up yesterday on
the beach. One of the papers appeared to be a diary kept by a
passenger on board, supposed to bo a clergyman of Nottingham. The


various incidents of the voyage, from the time of leaving Melbourne
until the arrival at Queenstown, were carefully recorded by the writer.’
[This is doubtless Mr. Hodge, a good man who would keep a diary.]
* The riggers previously referred to as being on board the “ Royal
Charter ” when she grounded have lost six of their number, namely,
James O’Neill, Richard Morris, William Thomas, Peter Topping,
Thomas Corcoran, and Henry White. Those saved are James White,
Patrick Devine, — Pritchard, Thomas Cunningham, and William Burton.
Some of them swam ashore, and others succeeded in saving themselves
by the aid of the hawser. So far none of the passengers’ luggage or
articles of a similar kind have been washed on shore.’ [Much was
afterwards found, as will be seen.] ‘ A few articles of male and female
attire have been collected, and these are taken care of by the officers
of police and coast-guard now on duty. The services of the Anglesea
militia have also been called into requisition, to assist in the protec-
tion of any property received, and also in the removal of the bodies
washed up on the shore. The position of the vessel at the time of the
catastrophe, and whether or not blame attaches to the captain or his
officers, were subjects of comment amongst many of those who visited
the spot yesterday. At present it would be unfair to give currency to
these remarks, seeing that the matter will undergo a strict investiga-
tion at the coroner’s inquest. The number of persons saved is now
stated to be thirty-nine ; and of these, twenty-one are passengers, and
the remainder belong to the crew. Only very few of the bodies
recovered have yet been identified. A gentleman attended yesterday,
to make inquiry as to his wife, whom he supposed to be on board the
“ Royal Charter,” The body of his beloved partner was not amongst
those lying in the church, but on a closer investigation, his eye fell on
the corpse of a faithful servant, who, he felt sure, would accompany
his wife on the voyage. This fact too truly told the mournful result.
‘ The man who swam oh shore with the hawser was a Maltese, and
not a Portuguese, as first said. He lost everything he possessed, and
swooned when he reached land.’
Depend upon it that man (“heroism has no country”) will
be rewarded. We shall not do here as was done in Sydney when
the ‘Dunbar’ was lost, —allow our sympathy to expend itself
upon the saved to the all but utter forgetfulness of the saviour.


A third and a later newspaper reporter’s letter must find a
place:
‘ Molfra Village, Redwharp Bap, Saturday.- —Who does not
shudder at the mention of a shipwreck ? In Llanailgo church, about a
mile from the desolate coast on which the unfortunate “ Royal Charter ”
has gone on shore, lie about thirty distorted and mangled bodies, and
to that locality anxious and distracted relatives crowded early yester-
day morning. At another church hard by, which is known as Penrhos,
there were also the bodies of two children and two ladies laid out; and
the anxiety of friends may be gathered when it is stated that through
pelting and incessant rain, over almost inaccessible roads, for more than
fifteen miles, hundreds of people wended their way to the locus in quo
of the wreck.
‘ This has been pronounced the most dreadful occurrence of the
kind that has happened on this coast. Perhaps it is the most terrible
marine disaster that has ever happened anywhere. So complete is the
wreck, that Captain Fell says in his naive nautical style, that he has
been seventeen years “ at this sort of work,” but never saw a vessel so
completely destroyed. The size of the ship, too, and the number of
persons lost, render it an unexampled calamity.
‘ Captain Fell, from Lloyd’s, was in attendance early yesterday
(Friday) morning, at Molfra or Moelfra, deputed to make inquiries for
the underwriters. The vessel had on board 49,000?. in specie, 79,000
oz. in gold, valued at 320,000?., making a total of 369,000?., besides a
large quantity of money in the hands of the passengers. The excite-
ment at Lloyd’s on the arrival of the disastrous intelligence is described
by Captain Fell as intense, the confidence from the first in the ship’s
sailing qualities being so great that insurances were taken at 80s. per
cent. As an indication of the wealth in the hands of the crew and
passengers, it may be mentioned that torn and dilapidated garments
have been picked up on the shore, some of which contain considerable
amounts of money, watches, and other valuables. Intimation was
early given of the danger in which the ship was placed, but though
little hope was entertained of the safety of the vessel herself, every one
seems to have retained a hope of life, and rushed to his and her valu-
ables and money, and sought safety with as little encumbrance in the
shape of clothing as possible.’
And yet another communication, though only of a few lines,


must be given. It were easy to write a most pathetic pro-
lusion to it, but I prefer to let it stand in its nude sig-
nificance :
‘ Liverpool, Sunday Morning.— This banquet (that is, a Grand Con-
servative Banquet to the Earl of Derby and Mr. Disraeli), which during
the last two months has been anticipated with so much interest by the
whole Conservative party, is just concluded. . . . Altogether the general
effect was remarkably brilliant and picturesque. It ought to be re-
marked, however, that many persons of position were absent on account
of the wreck of the “ Royal Charter.” The calamity has cast a per-
ceptible gloom over the town, and at the beginning of the banquet the
conversation rather turned on the catastrophe than on politics. Some
thought the banquet ought never to have been held; but the news of
the accident arriving so near the day, it was impossible to delay it:
otherwise there is no doubt it would have been postponed.’
That one brief paragraph will attest to the colony how
deep is the sympathy entertained in England for the friends
of those who are lost. Had it been practicable to put off the
feast to a more convenient season it would have been done.
The committee met and considered the matter, and found it
was impossible. The shadow of the lost ship, however, rested
upon the banquet!
How could it be otherwise ? The day before, the inquest
on the bodies of some of the lost voyagers had been opened,
and the following heartrending description of it appeared in
the Saturday’s papers which the banqueters must have
bought on their way, from all parts of the country, to Liver-
pool
* The Inquest.— The inquest on the bodies was commenced yester-
day (Friday) afternoon, at Llanallgo church, before Mr. William
Jones, coroner of Anglesea, and a jury who were sworn in Welsh. It
was an impressive sight when the coroner, standing at the communion
table, surrounded by the group of dead and mangled corpses, amid the
audible sobs of those who had recognized their friends, commenced his
melancholy task.


‘ Mr. Moore, solicitor of Warrington, before opening of the in-
quest, asked the coroner what course he intended to pursue.
* The coroner thought he should be satisfied, under the melancholy
circumstances, with the identification of the bodies.
* Mr, Bright, of the company owning the vessel, undertook to have
any of the surviving crew present who would be able to give any infor-
mation.
‘ Mr. James Russell, who said his father lived in Linlithgowshire,
and who was one of the passengers who escaped, recognized John
Smith, son of Edmund Smith, Mrs. WoodrotF (companion to Mrs.
Forster, also in the vessel and lost), Catherine Margaret Russell, and
Richard Reed. Mr. Forster lives at Grindlow House, Manchester, Mrs.
Woodroifs husband is expected home by the “George Marshall.” Richard
Walton, of 22 Duckworth Street, Brunswick Road, Liverpool, identified
his brother James, between 21 and 22. Thomas Outerside, 6 Clare
Street, Liverpool, printer, identified John Emery, Stone, Staffordshire.
* The coroner then proceeded to Penrhos church, where he also
charged the jury with the investigation into the circumstances of the
death of the bodies lying there. The inquests were adjourned until
Wednesday.’ [Later proceedings before the coroner, will be found
elsewhere.] ‘ln reply to an application, the coroner undertook to have
an interpreter provided.
‘ Several parties were present who stated they were prepared to
vindicate the character and memory of Captain Taylor. The vessel it
was stated, made no water until it broke up. The ladies it was
arranged, should go first; but before opening the saloon doors, the
vessel parted in two and stopped all communication.
‘ Mr. Samuel Henry, a jeweller from Adelaide, who had been con-
fined on the ground that he was insane, was amongst the number in
Llanallgo church. Mr. Glover, a gentleman of fortune (from Adelaide,
it is said), who was coming to England for the purpose of consulting some
skilled oculist, is also amongst the number, and a large sum of money
was found on his person. Writing-desks, likenesses, letters, a part of
the post-office, and various other relics, have been washed up.’
The touching allusion to the likenesses and letters leads
naturally to the following (further) particulars from the scene
of the calamity:—
‘ Molfka Bat, Tuesday, KoV. the 2nd.—lt is ncoessal-y that the


public should be on their guard against the rumours in circulation as to
the discoveries made by the divers who commenced operations on
Sunday. It was reported as an established fact in Bangor last night
that one of the divers had entered the saloon of the “ Royal Charter,”
and there found about 200 passengers in the positions they occupied
when the ship went down; some sitting round the table, others stand-
ing upright, and others, as if in the act of coming from their berths. A
similar story was told some six or seven years ago, after the wreck of a
large steamer off the Bailey Light, Hill of Howth. Indeed, in that
case, the diver was made to describe some of the passengers as in the
act of lifting glasses to their mouths. The lie was printed, and ob-
tained very general circulation before it was contradicted. The less
detailed account is in the present case equally destitute of foundation.
Two experienced divers, who came from Liverpool in the steam-tug
“ Fury,” the property of Gibb, Brights, and Co., made a descent yes-
terday, and remained a considerable time under the water, but they saw
no corpses beneath ; neither did they find any gold ; but they saw some
copper. This morning they resumed their descents under very favour-
able circumstances as regards weather and the state of the sea. They
have discovered no bodies ; but up to one o’clock this afternoon they
had succeeded, with the assistance given them by men on board the
steam-tug, in raising about three tons of copper bars. These bars have
undergone some smelting, but are not in a finished state. There is a
good deal of silver mixed with the copper. At one o’clock the divers
suspended operations for a short rest and refreshment. They resumed
after about an hour’s interval.
* Some additional articles of wearing apparel, with spars, etc., have
been cast upon the beach. One or two canvas huts have been erected
on the remnants of masts, and in front of one of these such articles as
have names on them, or would otherwise serve for purposes of identifi-
cation, are spread out in melancholy array. Amongst them are seven
photographs, two of men, two of ladies, two of children, and one land-
scape. None of these have as yet been identified as portraits of indi-
viduals whose friends have arrived at the scene of the wreck. There
is a stocking with the name “ Jane Murray,” and another with the
name “F. Davis ” upon it. There is a portion of a shirt, with the name
“J. E. Smith,” and another with the name “R. Thornhill,” followed
by the date “ 1846.” A large, coarse wrapper has the inscription
“ 0. R. Ross, passenger, ‘ Royal Charter,’ ” painted in black letters upon it.
On a piece of a shirt, “E. Fenwick on another, “John Lees, 1855,”


On a piece of a stocking, “ T. W.and on a small piece of linen,
“T. G.” There are a number of - visiting cards spread on a piece of
wood : one has the inscription, “ Mr. Eddowes, 146 Cambridge-street,
Pimlicoanother, “ Mr. Sam. Moxley Wade, Low, and Gill, Liver-
pool.” On apiece of linen is “James Davis, Woodside, 1859.” The
whole scene of the wreck is an extremely melancholy one ; but a pecu-
liarly affecting incident took place to-day. A poor young woman was
searching along the beach to endeavour to find some trace of her hus-
band, about whose fate she was uncertain. She discovered a waistcoat
which had just been washed in, and which had been hung up in front of
the tent by one of k the coast-guard. Almost frantically, she pulled it
down. It proved to be that of her husband, a man named Barrett, who
had been painter aboard the “ Royal Charter.” The grief of the poor
widow was heartrending to witness. Some of the standers-by, in an
attempt to comfort her, suggested that she might be mistaken. “ Oh,
no,” said she, “here is my own work upon it. My husband, my hus-
band ! God, look down ujion me!” Amongst those who anxiously
inspected this relic was the Rev. Mr, Lewis, a Wesleyan minister.
Two of his brothers were aboard the ship—one as purser. Their arrival
at Queenstown had been telegraphed to their aged mother, who wrote
to the rev. gentleman to meet them at Liverpool. He now, poor fellow,
paces the shore at Molfra Bay to watch for the dead bodies. Five
bodies were washed ashore at Molfra, and seven at Penmaenmaur
yesterday. None of these have as yet been identified. No bodies have
been washed up to-day. Several of the dead persons have already been
interred in Molfra and Llanallgo churchyards. The wreck remains in
precisely the state as she was on Wednesday last when the coast-guard
from Amlwch were put in charge. At low water a good piece of her
hull is visible. At high water there are only portions of two of the
masts. As the officials along the line of the London and North-Western
Railway are besieged with inquiries as to where Molfra Bay is, it may
be as well to state that the nearest approach to it for any person not in
the island of Anglesey, is from Bangor railway station. It is fourteen
miles from Bangor, over a horrible road, with most expensive posting.
There is no mode of communicating with London from it but through
Bangor, and there are no public conveyances of any kind. But, not-
withstanding this, great numbers arc visiting the scene. On the whole,
the people in the neighbourhood are reported to have acted very well.
Several sums of money found by them have been given up to the coast-
guard, The fragments of the spays, and even of the mainmast, seem as


if they had been smashed into small pieces by some crashing blade im-
pelled by steam power. If an array of giants had fallen to to hew
up the ship it could not have presented a more fragmentary appear-
ance.’
A correspondent of the Manchester Guardian describes the
wreck from the same stand-point. He says: —
* Immediately after the adjournment of the inquest, ou Friday,
orders were given for the interment of the bodies which had been
identified; the remainder were kept throughout the whole of Saturday,
and every hour brought a fresh accession of visitors bent on the
melancholy errand of inquiry after missing friends. The distortion
and disfigurement of the bodies consequent on drowning, and the
absence of clothing, made the examination necessarily more minute
and painful; but in some instances the features and limbs were
mangled from violent dashing against the rocks, and recognition of
friends was almost impossible. Mr. Bradbury, a survivor, describes
one of the young ladies whose bodies were lying in Penrhos church
as the recognized belle of the vessel, and the charm and admira-
tion of a large circle. Mrs. Foster, who is among the lost, had
gone to Australia to superintend the sale of some land, and it is
conjectured that she had with her the whole of the proceeds of the
sale. Her companion, Mrs. Woodroff, who has been identified, was
the wife of an innkeeper in Melbourne: her husband is expected to
follow her. Among the company at Bangor was an elderly gentleman
from Gloucestershire, named Wright, who had heard of the wreck at
Liverpool, where he had come in expectation of meeting his son, Mr.
lies Wright, of Evesham, who was the surgeon of the ship, and who
had written from Queenstown anticipatory of his arrival.
‘At low water the remaining portion of the hull of the vessel is quite
discernible, and when the neap tides prevail it is expected that much
of the treasure and many more bodies will be j-ecovercd. The fact
that so few, proportionately to the number lost, have been recovered
has occasioned much wonder, and is variously accounted for. The
partition of the vessel is supposed by some to have enclosed the bodies
as in a box. The dtfhris of the wreck lies scattered about the shore,
the woodwork being literally nothing but chips. The exact position
of the wreck is about a mile and a Half from the Llanallgo church,
where most of the bodies are lying. The Anglcsea militia, the coast-
guard, and a body of police are placed there for the protection of


the property washed on shore, and a temporary slied is constructed
on the shore. The nearest dwellings to the wreck are at Molfra
village, which is more than half a mile from the spot. Captain Fell
and a staff from Lloyd’s are located there. At the inquest, which is
adjourned to Wednesday, a strict examination is expected to take place
into the statement made of the captain being intoxicated at the timo
of the fearful disaster. The statement is broadly made by some of
the survivors ; but the owners of the vessel and some nautical men
say they can triumphantly vindicate the memory of the deceased.
‘Among the Lancashire people lost in the vessel whose friends
came to seek for them on hearing of the wreck, were Mr. Casper
Lowin, nephew of Mr. Adam Casper, of Market Street, Manchester;
Miss Wrigley, Byron Street, Manchester; Mr. and Mrs. Kirkbride
Liverpool; and Mrs. Robinson, of Southport, wife of the editor of one’
of the Melbourne newspapers/
In a letter dated ‘Molfra, Wednesday afternoon/ another
writer says:—
‘Four more bodies, all males, have been cast ashore since my com-
munication of yesterday—one last night and three this morning. Three
of them are now lying in the parish church of Llanallgo ; the remaining
body has been removed to the church of Penrhos Lligny, having been
thrown ashore in the latter parish. All yesterday evening a very heavy
sea rolled ; and about four o’clock the lifeboat, manned by a crow of
eight, put out to rescue those on board a brigantine, which was observed
to be rapidly approaching the rocks a little to the north of the spot in
Dulas Bay, in which the wreck of the “ Royal Charter ’’ lies. The
brigantine, however, got safely in on the sands, in a little creek about a
mile from Molfra, where she now lies. As the waves beat violently in
on the Dulas Rocks last evening, large quantities of clothing were to
be seen tossed about. Some of it was cast ashore, but a great deal was
carried out to sea again. It has been suggested by some of the relatives
of the drowned passengers and seamen, that if boats were sent out many
more bodies would be recovered. I think this extremely likely, after
what I have witnessed with respect to the action of the waves on the
clothing and spars. The Rev. Mr. Hughes is about to take the mattet
in hand. There has been some objection on the part of the authorities,
as they apprehend that thefts might bo committed by some of the per-
sons going out in the boats; but if rumour speaks truly the watchers
ihcrnselvcs require watching. It is unfair to make charges against men


having a responsible duty to perform, but one of the police inspectors
has told me that he himself caught a coast-guardsman in the act of
thieving. Friends and relatives complain that there is more anxiety to
discover gold than bodies; but the fact is no gold has as yet been dis-
covered by the divers. They recommenced operations at ten o’clock
this morning, but have brought up nothing but copper bars. Fathers,
mothers, wives, children, and other relatives pace the beach from an
early hour in the morning. Yesterday delicate women braved the rain
and storm all day, making their melancholy search. Every now and
then I was met by persons with sorrowful faces, one inquiring, “ Have
you seen any trace of my husband? his name was or “Have
you found anything with the name of ? she was my child.” Indeed,
it is a heartrending thing to go near the beach, and to see these
mourners, and to meet the carts carrying the mangled corpses, or the
parish coffins in which they are to be interred. None of the bodies
found last night have been identified. Forty-five bodies have been
discovered up to this time.’
The tone of one part of that communication leads natu-
rally to the following stinging words from a Liverpool jour-
nal :
‘Loud are the complaints here at the manner in which those saved
from the wreck were treated after their arrival here. It is said, with
great indignation, that when Captain Martin (the representative of
Messrs, Gibb and Brights) arrived here, with the rescued passengers, in
the steam-tug which had been despatched to the scene of the wreck, he
left them standing upon the landing-stage; and had they not been
received at the Sailors’ Home, they would have had to wander all night
about the streets.’
This, of a verity, is caring more for gold than human bodies.
One would have thought the best accommodation the best
hotel in Liverpool could afford would have been prepared by
the owners of the wrecked vessel in anticipation of the arrival
of the poor creatures whose all, save life, had been buried
beneath the waves.
In penning my narrative up to this point, it is impossible
but that the reader should have felt a large amount of interest


in the captain and officers of the vessel. Whatever mistake of
those in command may have brought the ship so near the coast,
the heart of every one must swell as he reads how heroically
the storm was coped with. * First killed,’ or ‘ last seen on the
ship,’ are phrases that, like the noblest epitaphs, are asso-
ciated with the captain and his officers. They succumbed, after
glorious battling, to the fate of the sailor; but to show how
ill the world could afford to lose such- men let me endeavour,
in a few concluding lines, to portray them to the reader.
Brave and rugged as a lion was the captain. His defiant
front, his curt, honest conversation, his implacable will, which,
like a wave, bore down all before it; his natural humour and
intense love of jollity ; his large solicitude for his passen-
gers and crew ; his all but feminine love for his ship, and
his fervent belief that no other craft was /it to touch the
waters with her, —all these points grow upon me as I write,
and cause me to blur the paper as I lash them to the
name of Thomas Taylor, Ido not believe that man was
drunk on the evening of the calamity. This, however, I
know, that to those who were not in constant communication
with him, Captain Taylor ahvays appeared drunk. He had a
ruddy face, a quick, abrupt manner, and a husky utterance
which, to the superficial observer, naturally proclaimed him in-
toxicated. This concludes on that head : 1 never saw Captain
Taylor the worse for liquor during our passage home. On
the other hand, I heard him pronounced drunk by second and
third class passengers nightly.
Mr. Stevens, the first officer, was a fine young fellow of
some thirty summers. He was a most agreeable companion,
delighted in song or dance, and if he got a quiet moment
with a friend, would talk by the hour of tiie young wife and
little-ones he had left at home. He made every one his friend
—was a friend to every one.


Mr. Covvie, the second officer (he was third when I came
home) was like a character out of Marryat. He was about
three or four and twenty years of age, was as bold and bluff'
as the captain ; and was never so delighted as when he was
singing ‘ Hearts of Oak ’ in the cock-pit.
Mr. Rogers, the chief engineer, was a man of rough ex-
terior, but of simple, child-like manners. His whole time
during my sojourn on the ship was spent in looking after the
engines, and entering into amusing discussions with the
purser on the right pronunciation of words. Poor fellow !
The purser (Mr. Lewis) was one of the bast men that ever
walked the earth. He did justice to passengers and owners,
and at the time when we ran short of food, I knew him, with
all the ship’s stores at his command, to abstain from dinner,
that the children of the intermediate and steerage passengers
might in turn receive his share of the slender stock of dainties
left to us on board. He has gone where stewards cease from
troubling!
But why continue these memorials of the dead? We call
on the names of the good and brave men in vain. Saddest of
all sad stories is that which I have attempted to tell. The
cheek of the boldest grows pale as he reads it, and my pen
falls from my fingers as the old familiar faces rise before me.


THE PRESS ON THE CATASTROPHE.
The Times, after some preliminary observations on the gale
of Wednesday, contents itself with a general record of the
calamity :
* The “ Royal Charter ” was built about four years ago ; she was of
2,719 tons register, and 200 horse power. Her owners were Messrs.
Gibb, Brights, and Co., of Liverpool. She was an iron vessel, worked
by a screw. On the 26th of August last she sailed from Melbourne,
having on board 988 passengers, and a crew, including officers, of 112
persons. She accomplished her passage in two months as near as may
be. On Monday morning she passed Queenstown, and thirteen of the
passengers landed in a pilot-boat. The next day the “ Royal Charter ”
took on board from a steam-tug eleven riggers who had been assisting
in working a ship to Cardiff. Thus, at the time of the calamity there
were on board 498 persons, and of these only 39 were saved. Tho
ship, as we are informed, had on board but a small cargo, mainly of
wool and skins. A more important item of her freight was gold and
specie, which at the lowest estimate is put at 500,000 h On Tuesday
evening there was blowing from the E.N.E. a violent gale, which fell
with full force on the ill-fated ship. She arrived off Point Lynas
at six o’clock in the evening of Tuesday, and for several hours Captain
Taylor continued throwing up signal rockets, in the hope of attracting
the attention of a pilot. None made his appearance. The gale
increased in violence; tho ship was making leeway, and drifting gra-
dually towards the beach. It was pitch dark ; no help was at hand.
The captain let go both anchors, but tho gale had now increased to a
hurricane, and had lashed the sea up to madness. The chains parted,
and, notwithstanding that tho engines were worked at their full
power, the “ Royal Charter ” continued to drift towards the shore. At


three a.m. she struck the rocks in four fathoms of water. The pas-
sengers till this moment had no idea of the imminence of their peril.
The masts and rigging were cut adrift, but this gave no relief. The
ship continued to grind and dash upon The screw became
foul with the drift spars and rigging, and ceased to act. The conse-
quence was, that the ship was thrown broadside on to the rocks, and
now the terror began. The officers of the ship either hoped against
hope, or endeavoured to alleviate the agony of the passengers by
assuring them there was no immediate danger. A Portuguese sailor,
Joseph Rogers—his name deserves to be recorded —volunteered to
convey a rope on shore through the heavy surf, and succeeded in his
attempt. Had time been given no doubt every person on board could
now have been safely conveyed on shore ; but it was fated that the end
should be otherwise. One tremendous wave came after another, play-
ing with the “ Royal Charter ” like a toy, and swinging her about on
the rocks. She divided amidships, and wellnigh all on board were
swept into the furious sea, A few minutes afterwards she also parted
at the forehatch, and then there was an end. Those who were not
killed by the sea were killed by the breaking up of the ship. In the
course of a very few moments the work was done, and four hundred
and fifty-nine persons were numbered among the dead. It was about
seven a.m. on Wednesday that she broke up.
‘ It is said by those who have visited the scene of the calamity that
never was destruction more complete. The ironwork of the vessel is
in mere shreds; the woodwork is in chips. The coast and the fields
above the cliffs are strewn with fragments of the cargo and of the
bedding and clothing. In the words of one of our reports, “ A more
complete annihilation of a noble vessel never occurred on our coast.”
Worse still, the rocks are covered with corpses of men and women
frightfully mutilated, and strewn with the sovereigns which the poor
creatures had gone so far to seek, and which were now torn from them
in so pitiful a way. Of course, as is usual in all such cases, the reasons
given for the occurrence of the calamity are various. In one account
wo see it attributed to the order given before midnight to veer out on
the starboard cable. This, as it is said, brought too much strain upon
the port cable, which parted, and then the other parted also, and then
the ship drifted ashore. Others tell us that if the screw had not been
fouled by the drift rigging and spars, the “ Royal Charter ” might
have been saved. These, however, could have been but secondary
and minor causes. The origin of the calamity seems to have been


that in a wild night, with a gale blowing that soon -oecame a hurri-
cane, the ship was brought up dangerously near a lee shore. Let it
he remembered, however, that Captain Taylor was the last man seen
alive on board.’
The Morning Herald, after chronicling the disaster, con-
cludes with this valuable paragraph :
‘ This greatest and most terrible of the results of the late hurricane
•—for it cannot be otherwise described—will argue strongly either on
behalf of those who demand ports of departure less channel-bound
tlian Liverpool, or for those who urge the great necessity for a
national system of providing life-boats which shall give, even in such
wild bays as this where the “Royal Charter ” went to pieces, a chance
to some of the passengers of ill-fated ships that may be driven into
them in such a storm as that of Tuesday night or Wednesday morning.
Unfortunately the outcry on these subjects rises only while the mind
of the public is resting on such a disaster as that which has just
befallen the “Royal Charter,” or at a time when the whole country is
deploring [such a series of wrecks as those which have strewn our
coasts within the last three days. The life-boat question should
certainly not be left to private benevolence, or to the efforts of com-
panies. Governments have gone too far in their neglect of such
subjects or their refusal to interfere, and we are certain that there is
no other mode of using the public money which would meet with
more hearty popular assent than that which would devote it to the
provision of life-boats and harbours of refuge.’
The colony may study these words with equal advantage to
ourselves.
The Daily News is none the less able on the subject,
because for once disposed to be smart. Does “Singleton
Fontenoy” speak in the following?—
‘ There is a true savour of sea-salt in the grim irony of that couplet
in one of Dibdin’s sea-songs, where Jack is contrasting the freedom
and security of life aboard ship with the continual jeopardy to which
landsmen who walk about streets and dwell in houses are exposed ;
“ While you and I, Bill, on the deck
Are comfortably lying,
My eyes! what tiles and chimbly pots
Around their heads are flying!”


* The recklessness’ of temperament which sends a lad to sea, and
which, hardened and confirmed by conflict with the elements, laughs
at real danger, and yet is apt to shrink with a sort of dismayed disgust
from the vulgar inconveniences of artificial existence, is happily and
humorously expressed. The dweller in cities, on the other hand,
with all his habitual scepticism and indiiference, who peeps at the
moon as at a raree show, and takes a return ticket to go and gape at
an eclipse from some distant hill in the country—your acute, hard-
headed, practical man on ’Change, in the Law-court, in the Club, stares
and marvels like a mere baby when he is brought face to face with
the terror and mystery of Nature in any of her sublimer moods. A
fashionable public at Brighton running out to see the effects of a gale
of wind upon real “ water ” is surely as sorry and ludicrous a combina-
tion as the genius of mockery can devise for the laughter of the
stars. Accidents and offences, fires and murders, burglaries and
poisonings, are as dull and stale as taxation, or as births, deaths, and
marriages ; they are the “ useful and the beautiful ” of well-regulated
society ; and who but a dry statistical philanthropist reads the wreck-
list, or ponders the significance of the annual catalogue of casualties
among merchantmen and coasters? It is only when the great
meteorological staple of English conversation derives a certain freshness
and novelty from a sudden attack of winter upon the rear of autumn, or
when a hurricane has torn up a tree in the park and blown an old
woman into the river or a child into the canal, that our inland world
begins to feel that the universe is not absolutely done to order yet.
‘Last Tuesday night, when town and country were well abed, and
let us hope not without thankfulness of heart, nor without having
taken thought of “all those who travel by land or sea;” —when even
the rancid haunts of vice in London were emptying, and the homeless
were slinking oft’ to snatch forgetfulness somewhere out of reach of
wind and rain :—in the dead hour of a desolate night, desolate enough
among street lamps flickering in a clammy fog, more desolate still
when a sickly moon peered dimly through a drift of ragged cloud, and
the wind howled and moaned with a roar of rage and anguish—in that
desolate night and that dead hour one of those terrible calamities
which are remembered for centuries was hurrying near five hundred
of our fellow-creatures to sudden death at sea, after a safe and pros-
perous voyage of twelve thousand miles, within six hours of port, and
within stonethrow of the long-wished-for land. Heartrending and
disastrous is the shipping intelligence of this week all round our


coasts, but the wreck of tbe “Royal Charter’’ will „be a melancholy
fireside tale among our children’s children. If, indeed, what is called
“ progress ” be truly defined as an increasing dominion over time and
space, then England, marching at the van, atones for her pre-eminence
by many a hostage. We talk of bridging seas by the size and speed
of our ships, but every now and then we offer up costly sacrifices to
avenge our triumphs, and correct our pride.
‘ It would be easy for some glib interpreters of Providence to pro-
nounce homilies on the fate of a ship laden with the root of all evil,
and of men hasting to be rich; for it is certain that the “ Royal
Charter ” had at least 500,000 Z. on board, and that many of her passen-
gers were returning from Australia with fortunes in their hands. But
this catastrophe may point, we think, a safer and more serviceable
moral. To mortal sight human destinies are at best a chaos, and it is
not for mortal wisdom to presume to fabricate out of inexplicable
chances a providential order of its own. Here, for instance, was a ship
touching at Queenstown, and landing thirteen passengers, one of whom
left his wife on board to pursue her voyage to Liverpool, and, as it
turned out, to meet death on the way; here were ten poor riggers, just
returned from working a vessel to Cardiff, taken on board from a steam-
tug in the Channel, and five of them condemned to perish with a ship
that had come all the way from Australia in safety. Who will presume
to judge? “The one was taken and the other left.” Let us be con-
tent to moralize more humbly and humanely on the fate of our fellow-
creatures, It were a miserable task, while the bodies of the poor cast-
away people are still awaiting Christian burial, to look about for whom
to blame, when all but a score are beyond the reach of blame or praise.
It is easy for us to wonder and regret that the “ Royal Charter ” should
ever have passed on from Queenstown and sailed up the Irish Channel
without a pilot in wild and threatening weather —that without a pilot,
and with a northerly gale coming on, she should have passed by Holy-
head, and kept hugging a dead lee shore at night along the most dan-
gerous lino of all our coast. Any one who knows that coast, or who
has even glanced at a chart, cannot fail to be struck with consternation
at the bare thought of such a ship as the “Royal Charter” keeping that
Welsh land close on board in the worst of weather, night coming on,
without a pilot, in the hope of finding one, and for the sake of saving a
few hours at the close of an astonishingly rapid and successful passage.
‘How the “Royal Charter” ever had the right to get into that
atrocious Dulas Bay, where the rocks stick up like jagged teeth, is a


question quite as easy to ask as it is difficult to understand how the
“ Royal Charter ” should have ventured to pass Holyhead in a gale
without a pilot. From Holyhead to the point where the ship struck
is all danger; and though with the wind off the land and a pilot on
board the course for a ship bound to the Mersey may bo in shore, was
it the safe course, it may be asked, under opposite circumstances ?
Yet it is not to be presumed for a moment that the common signs of
weather, or the rules for approaching land, were deliberately set at
nought, or that the weather-glasses were not consulted, or that the
tidal currents and the notorious indraught on the Welsh coast were
forgotten or neglected by the lamented commander of the “ Royal
Charter ” and his officers, none of whom, alas! remain to tell the story.
From the moment when it was found that the ship could not make
head against the hurricane and the indraught, and that it was impos-
sible to make the Mersey, the fate of the ship needs no explanation, (
Blue lights and rockets were burnt for a pilot; but, as no one who
knows Welsh pilots will be surprised to hear, no pilot appeared; and,
pilot or no pilot, it was now too late. The ship was hove to, and drift-
ing helplessly into Hulas Bay. Here she let go her anchors, “ keeping
her screw working to ease the cables.” One after the other the cables
parted with the strain ; at half-past two she struck, the tide ebbing, and
with the flood she went broadside on to the shelving beach, literally
split in two amidships, and was smashed to pieces on the rocks. We
are guilty’of no presumption in drawing one conclusion, and that is,
the worse than uselessness, the absolutely fatal mischief of the so-
called “ auxiliary ” screw. The “ Royal Charter ” was, it should be
remembered, an iron ship of 2,749 tons, “ originally intended for a
sailing vessel,” but transformed into a screw steamer, “with engines
of 300 horse power.” The value of these screw engines to a ship of
this size and quality seems to us at least problematical; at best it
could only serve her in making way across the “ calm belts and as
a set off to this exceptional service, there was the dead weight of the
engines and the space they occupied, often to no purpose. Whatever
may have been the use of the auxiliary screw in calms, it is too cer-
tain that in working off a lee shore it was not only not serviceable,
but disastrous ; it not only failed to claw the ship off, but it failed to
case the cables, and when the spars were cut away, the screw got
fouled, and ceased to work. Is it absurd or unjust to suppose that had
there been no auxiliary steam power in the “ Royal Charter ” she
would never have been permitted to hug a lee shore at night in search


of a pilot, with a hurricane dead on her weather bow, and strong in-
draught to the shore ? Had she trusted to her sailiitg powers only,
would she not have consulted her weather-glasses more anxiously, and
kept well out to sea? We do not attempt to answer these questions,
but we ask them deferentially, sorrowfully, and under a due sense of
responsibility.
‘The “Royal Charter,” like others of her class, was probably built
for speed rather than for strength; and it is no secret that these
Australian clippers are severely strained by “ carrying on.” It is no
matter of surprise, then, that the ship “split amidships” after she
struck, “ letting her engines and passengers through,” and afterwards
parted longitudinally “at the forehatch.” Even the “ Great Eastern ’’
would have been ’ [was] ‘ sorely tried by such a sea on such a shore.
Let us draw a veil of pity over the horrors of that scene. The poet of
“ The Shipwreck,” with all his imagination, aided by all his terms of
art, has not conceived anything more terrible than the sudden, complete
and indiscriminate destruction of the “ Royal Charter ” with her four
hundred and seventy souls on board, and her chests of gold—all going
down together in that hungry sea, and tom to pieces by those cruel
rocks. Yet even a calamity like this has its compensations; for all on
board, from Captain Taylor—who by his stedfast devotedness and un-
alterable courage preserved discipline to the last, and died like a British
seaman at his post of duty—to the poor seaman who volunteered to
carry through the blinding hurricane and the foaming surf a hawser to
the rocks, and the good clergyman who calmly said the last prayers for
the dying, all met death unflinchingly, and in their last moments left
an example to the few who survive, and to all who mourn them.’
The above is the most notable article which has appeared
on this disaster. It deals with gale, ship, captain, causes, and
results. Its penultimate paragraph seems to me to hit the
secret of the casualty direct.
The Morning Chronicle is rather didactic than descrip-
tive :
‘The loss of the “Roydl Charter” is an awful illustration of that
solemn text, the vanity of all human expectations. It preaches the
humiliating lesson which divine s and moralists are ever urging with an
impressiveness which must mak 3 its way to the dullest and most callous


mind. When the poet ov preacher of old drew his illustration of mun.
dane instability from the perils of the sea, and hade men look how “ a
dark night and an ill guide, a boisterous sea, and a broken cable, a hard
rock and a rough wind, dashed in pieces the fortune of a whole family,”
his imagination fell far short of the fearful fact we now deplore. A
noble vessel, which had sailed round the world in safety, has been
totally destroyed within a few miles of its port; and nearly four hundred
human beings, whose eyes had already been gladdened by a glimpse of
their native land, have found a fearful death on the morning of that day
whose evening should have made that land again their home. , . .
We hardly know whether to note with satisfaction or sorrow that, so
far as can be gathered at present, this melancholy catastrophe was not
the result of negligence and overconfidence on the part of any one.
Whilst it is most gratifying to think that no prudence could have
averted the disaster, and that no blame attaches to the memory of a
man who perished as Captain Taylor did, at his post, it is lamentable
to reflect that no application of human ingenuity is, able to withstand
the elemental rage. Here was a large stout ship, one of the kind and
size which assumed to enjoy an immunity from the power of the
tempest —left to work its will on small craft and old crazy tubs—well
manned, well commanded, nothing neglected that art or experience
could suggest, offering as useless a resistance to the storm as the worn-
out hulls in which greedy owners were wont to convey poor Irish
emigrants. A blunder on the part of some one would have allowed us
to cherish the idea that security is possible, and may be guaranteed, to
stout material and good seamanship; but the new ship, the “ Royal
Charter,” completely destroyed within sight of port, with the loss of
400 lives, although it may read a useful lesson of humility, and warn
men against too great an assumption of victory over natural forces, is a
terrible blow to that confidence which the past immunity of ocean steam
navigation had fostered.’
Thus—judicially—the Morning Post :—
‘ Out at sea such a vessel as the “ Royal Charter,” if well commanded,
ought to be proof against any gale of wind; and in point of fact hardly
any ship can pass from Australia to these shores without encountering
as heavy seas in mid ocean as that which raged a few days ago so fear-
fully in the Irish Sea. It is only when such a ship accidentally fouls
land that much danger is to be apprehended. Captain Taylor has


shared the fate of his crew and passengers ; and one may hesitate to
criticise one who is not here to answer for his seamanship. But i
seems clear that Captain Taylor knew perfectly well where he was, and
that, instead of putting out to sea, there to ride out the gale of Tuesday
night, he stood in for the Welsh coast, burning lights for a pilot in a
sea in which no pilot, it may be assumed, could have joined him, with
the whole force and scope of the Irish Sea to windward and an iron-
bound coast to leeward. The result was, as a mere instinct in dynamics
would suggest, that the force of wave, wind, and current was greater
than the steam power of the “ Royal Charter.” Captain Taylor soon
found that his anxiety to keep in the most direct track to Liverpool
was fraught with fatal results. The ship gradually made leeway; and
when he attempted at length to put out to sea he could not. At last
he threw out two anchors ; but the chains of one of them broke. The
ship, steaming away from the rocks, gradually neared the rocks ; and
at length came the first fatal crash. Then the masts and rigging were
instantly cut away in a forlorn attempt to save her; but it appears that
the falling rigging fouled the screw, and from that moment it ceased
working. From that moment, probably, in spite of desperate exertions
and words of encouragement, all hope was really abandoned. After the
first thump against the rocks, the ship rebounded, only to thump again
with fearful force in a few moments by the stern ; for it was in the at-
tempt to steam away from the coast, nearly head to wind, that the first
crash took place. Then she was completely at the mercy of wind and
wave ; and as soon as the screw ceased working her position changed,
and she went broadside against the rocks. Still she did not lurch. At
this juncture a negro sailor volunteers to swim through the surf with a
hawser, and thus to gain a communication with the shore. Lucky
fellow! he was well rewarded for his heroism. He escaped the wreck
first, and two others, according to the most reliable accounts, got to
shore by the rope thus thrown out.’
‘ Then followed the last scene with appalling and unexpected ra-
pidity. Time after time the “ Royal Charter ” was driven with the same
heavy thump against the rocky shore; the darkness and the tempest
mingled together in increasing confusion and relaxing discipline.
Everything was felt and nothing was seen. The waves dashed with
overwhelming force upon the ship, and the wind drowned every voice ;
for when the “ Royal Charter ” struck it was but two hours past mid-
night and by seven in the morning, when the sun rose, she had entirely
broken up. The passengers during these successive collisions with the
P 2


rocks, had huddled together in the saloon, where the chaplain was
offering up a prayer. In the midst of this Captain Taylor came down
to offer a few words of hope, couched in that ominous assurance that
“ there was no immediate danger.” But he had hardly spoken when
the waves burst upon the ship with new force, and after being thus
struck several times, she suddenly parted amidships, the machinery
falling through, and the waves sweeping out the crew. Nearly at the
same moment the fore part of the ship thus dissevered from the rest,
is reported to have split longitudinally also. Then of course all perished
but those few who, in a manner which most of them themselves cannot
explain, found themselves on the beach. The force of the waves seems
to have dashed some on shore before they knew what had happened,
and before life had become extinct; while later in the morning the
sea began to give up also its dead who had been tossed upon the ebb
and flow. One child was thrown on the shore yet breathing, but it
expired shortly afterwards. Most of the bodies washed ashore were
found with sums of gold upon them, and all were placed in a field
adjoining the churchyard of Moelfre for identification.
‘ Such is the sad story of the loss of at least four hundred and sixty
lives, of a fine ship, and of gold variously estimated between 300,000 h
and 500,000 Z. The gold lost is again computed at seventy-nine thou-
sand ounces ; but it is hoped that the iron case which contained the
treasure may yet be recovered. The ship had had a favourable and
remarkably fast passage. It was supposed to be eleven days in advance
of every other in its letters and information, and to anticipate the next
overland mail from Australia. Probably the pride of all this contri-
buted to the catastrophe ; and the captain appears to have been
resolved to make Liverpool as soon as possible after his successful
passage. The scene of the wreck is in itself an ill-fated one. At
Moelfre, some ten miles from Beaumaris, the wreck happened, and
close to that spot the “ Ilothsay Castle ” was also wrecked some years
ago. Only one danger appears to have been experienced by the “ Eoyal
Charter ” during her whole voyage from Australia to Queenstown, and
that arose from proximity to an iceberg. All this seems a cruel result
of so much hope, and so much apparent prosperity. All the care and
watchfulness devoted to a voyage from the antipodes—all the prospects
of return after long expatriation to one’s native country—all the suras
hoarded through years of industry in the gold fields or in Australian
farming—all the self-felicitations for a voyage thus far so favourably
encountered—thus vain, thus useless, thus belied.


* Viewing the shipwreck simply in its bearing on nautical manage-
ment, we can hardly doubt that it might have been prevented; but the
only utility of that reflection is now to warn other captains from
hugging a Welsh shore in a gale from the North.’
The Morning Advertiser ;
‘ One of those awful calamities which carry mourning and desolation
to hundreds of hearths, hearts, and homes—which send a pang not only
through the bosoms of bereaved relatives, but cast a gloom over every
thoughtful and feeling mind, has just visited us in the wreck and total
loss of a noble steamer, the “Royal Charter,” which perished with more
than 400 souls, on the Welsh coast, on the night of Tuesday last. There
are circumstances which add largely to the melancholy facts, so far as
they are yet known of this dreadful disaster. The stately steam-ship,
with her rich freight and her numerous had gallantly
ploughed the waters of the broad Pacific and breasted the waves of the
rude Atlantic ; she had sighted the noble haven of Queenstown ; and
there, fondly dreaming the perils of the deep were past, her joyful pas-
sengers had voted a testimonial of gratitude to the commander of the
gallant ship, who had so far safely brought them from their far port of
homeward departure at the antipodes. Among these 450 passengers
and crew, how many anxious hearts already in anticipation* embraced
expectant kindred and friends!—how many—the “ battle of life ”
fought out successfully, and competency gained—looked for that native
shore, which they were only to see with despairing eyes in their death-
struggle, as the haven of a peaceful life, to bo closed by a calm death
among those they loved best, in the land of their birth! We can well
imagine the buoyant spirits of the young, and the calmer joy of the old,
at the near prospect of the happy close of their long sojourn on the wide
waters. But He, in whose hands are the issues of life and death, willed
otherwise. The ship left the shores of Ireland on Monday last, all well;
on Tuesday a gale arose, which towards night became a tempest of sur-
passing violence. The doomed vessel was driven towards the Welsh
coast, and there her fate was sealed. There is at present no reason to
suppose that in this sad disaster any want of precaution; any undue
effort to effect a speedy passage by running a dangerous course ; any
miscalculation of rate of sailing, deviation of compass, or other neglect
or accident, contributed to the lamentable catastrophe. It seems to
have been one of those calamities beyond human foresight or wisdom to
avert, to which wc must bow the head in silent resignation, not, how-


ever, without thoughtful consideration as to whether human] means
might not have mitigated the sufferings of the wrecked, or diminished
the loss of life. We are as yet without sufficient data to know whether
a more efficient life-boat service at this part of the coast, a supply of
life-lines, coast-mortars, &c., at the principal places near Moelfra, at
Beaumaris, Penmanmawr, might not have enabled us to add to the
scant list of the rescued sufferers. We repeat, we are as yet without
details, and write merely in presence of an overwhelming calamity,
hopeful that so solemn a warning to be prepared may have its effect,
while yet the grief is now, of producing an increased energy in doing
all that may be done by liberality and skill to save the lives of our
brave seamen, and of those who “ go down into the great waters.” The
steamship “ Royal Charter,” the loss of which has given occasion for
these remarks, was a nearly new and splendid screw steamer. She had
on freight 79,000 ounces of gold, valued at 316,0001, besides a large
amount of gold and valuables belonging to her 450 passengers and
crew. She sailed from Melbourne on the 2Gth of August, with 60
cabin passengers, ten of whom are saved, and ten others, we are happy
to say, are reported as having been landed at Queenstown. Of the sea-
men 25 survive, thus leaving nearly 400 souls, including Captain Taylor
and all the officers of the ill-fated ship, sharers in her sad fate.’
The Standard touches on the event with its usual calmness
of utterance: —
‘ But as the approach to Liverpool was more alive with shipping, of
course the most terrible of the disasters were to be expected off the
coast of Wales; and there has seldom been recorded a more awful wreck
than that of the “ Royal Charter ” in Red Wharf Bay, near Bangor.
The “ Royal Charter,” a very splendid vessel, left Melbourne on
the 26th of August, having on board about five hundred souls, and
carrying seventy-five thousand ounces of gold. The power of the
vessel may be concluded from the fact that she made Cork Harbour in
less than two months. At this port some ten or a dozen of the passen-
gers had the fortune to quit her, and she proceeded on her way to
Liverpool as far as the Welsh coast, where she was overtaken by the
terrible storm of Wednesday morning, and utterly lost in a wild bay
some seven miles to the north-west of Beaumaris, and about three miles
west of Puffin Island, in Anglesea. The circumstances are surrounded
with unusual suspense and terror, for the railway has been at several
points washed away, the embankment thrown down, and the action of


the telegraph stopped. We are, in fact, acquainted'with only the de-
tails of the distressing disaster which we have presented yesterday, and
present elsewhere to-day. The rapidity of the voyage had led the pas-
sengers to offer to unfortunate Captain Taylor a testimonial, and every-
thing in the shape of danger was taken naturally to be at an emf when
the unfortunate ship went down in sight of her port.’
The Telegraph proposes the speedy exaltation of the sailor
who swam ashore with the rope:—
‘ The passengers were crowded in the saloon, where the scene was of
the most heartrending description. Children and parents, husbands
and wives, were clinging to each other in despairing embraces. The
captain endeavoured, hoping against hope, to reassure those under his
charge. Mr. Hodge, a missionary from New Zealand, did his best to
administer religious consolation, but the victory was on that black
Wednesday morning with the demon of the storm. A succession of
tremendous waves swung the “Royal Charter” from the rocks, and she
parted, first amidships and then longitudinally, and was soon but a
mass of shapeless spars, eddying about in a briny maelstrom. All the
officers, save, as we mentioned yesterday, the carpenter and a boat-
swain’s mate, perished. Captain Taylor was the last man seen alive on
board. A few of the crew saved themselves; the remainder were hurled
upon the rocks, and suffered a speedy but agonizing death. It is some
miserable consolation, however, to record that between thirty and forty
of the passengers and seamen were enabled to save their lives by
means of the hawser, rigged at the peril of bis life by the man described
as a Negro. If this hero, foreigner and civilian as he may be, does not
deserve the Order of Valour, Horatio Nelson was a coward, and Bayard
was false and craven.’
The Observer has a leader which, dealing vvitii what may
be termed the technics of the matter, stands out from the mass
of articles which have appeared in the weekly papers :
‘ The disastrous wreck of the “ Royal Charter ” is one of those calami-
ties that come upon us now and then, at intervals, to remind us of the
insignificance of man and his grandest works, when opposed to the
mighty forces of Nature. There has seldom happened such an amount
of destruction in one single storm of short duration as was effected
amongst the shipping upon the coasts of this island on Tuesday night;
but the list of mortality in that terrible conflict with the elements is


swollen to a lamentable extent by the four hundred and sixty souls
who perished at that one fell swoop. This wreck is another illustra-
tion of the well-marked fact that all the perils of long voyages across
the broad ocean are little in comparison with those that beset the
mariner in leaving or approaching these shores. The “ Royal Charter ”
was a noble specimen of the clippers employed in our great Australian
trade, and had made several prosperous voyages, of which the last, if
it had ended happily, would have been the most remarkable fox-
rapidity. Iron built, supplied with all the improvements of modern
shipbuilding, aided with the auxiliary power of steam, and manned
with a sufficient crew, well officered and commanded, it would have
seemed almost out of the range of probability that such a ship should
have been drifted upon a lee shore in a familiar locality by a gradually
increasing storm, and there shattered to fragments, and engulfed, with
well nigh all her human freight, within a few hours’ sail of her own
port. In reading the account of this wreck we cannot escape the con-
viction that the possession of auxiliary steam power, which should have
been her safety, was really the cause of the “Royal Charter’s” loss.
Tliis vessel was of nearly 3,000 tons burden. The engines by which
her screw propeller was worked were only of 300 ’ [only of 200] * horse
power. Such a power was enough for working a vessel over the tropi-
cal calms, or aiding her progress now and then in light winds, but it
was a treacherous reliance in such a position as she was allowed to
get into on Tuesday evening. It was useless for contending against
the furious pressure of the hurricane that was surely driving her upon
the jagged rocks of Dulas Bay, whilst the structure of the ship was
greatly weakened by the dead weight of the engines and the open
spaces necessary to contain them.
‘ Captain Taylor was evidently an able and courageous seaman. He
animated all his officers and crew to maintain discipline and continue
their exertions to the latest moment, and it is with no desire to suggest
blame that we express the belief that but for relying on the power of
his screw to keep the vessel off, he would never have been in the
position he was on that fatal Tuesday evening, when on a rugged lee
shore he was losing precious hours endeavouring to procure a pilot.
Either a safe port or the open sea were the only situations that could
give security in a hurricane like that of Tuesday. There seemed to
be a fatality attending the last voyage of the ill-fated ship that was to
pursue her crew and passengers to the extremity of destruction, for the
rapidity of her passage brought her upon the most perilous part of our


coast that she had to near, just at the outbreak of the most violent
storm we have experienced for very many years, and after striking upon
the shore, her hull succumbed to the fury of the waves, and became rent
and shattered almost in a moment, just as a communication had been
established, by means of the hawser passed to the shore, that promised
the fairest chance of saving the lives of all on board. The gallant
action of the seaman who performed this feat, all but too late as it
proved to be, was the means of saving many of the thirty-nine, who
were all that escaped out of near five hundred.
* The records of shipwrecks upon the coast of Great Britain have been
carefully compiled for some years past, and the annual number of
vessels totally lost is known to range from 1000 to 1200. Of these,
however, a very large proportion are small craft, coasting traders, and
colliers, whose short voyages generally keep them in dangerous
proximity 'to the shore, and whose crews are often insufficient for
working them successfully out of a sudden emergency. This year,
there will be a terrible excess over the average losses. The destruc-
tion of vessels in the night between Tuesday and Wednesday amounts,
according to what is already known, to hundreds ; whilst the loss of life
by the “ Royal Charter,” which, though the greatest, is only one
amongst a numerous list of such losses, will vastly increase the average
mortality. The sacrifices even of human life, demanded and paid in
the pursuit of our peaceful commerce, are not less appalling sometimes
than those which render war terrible. This storm gives us a longer list
of lives lost in a few hours on the English coast than has been the
result of many a mighty battle.’
Many other articles have appeared in the English journals;
but those here given will speak for the scope and tone of them
all. British sympathy was never perhaps more intensely
quickened than it has been by this unparalleled marine disaster.
It is the topic of every tongue. From almost every pulpit
the subject was dwelt upon last Sunday. Mr. Binney, who
narrowly escaped coming home in the ship, preached with
pathetic power on the melancholy event of the week. Prayer
was put up for his miraculous preservation. Many good men
have gone, but the blow to Both Worlds—the Old and the
New—would have been severe indeed if the 1 old man elo-
quent ’ had perished.


ADDENDA.
LIST OF STEERAGE PASSENGERS.
The following list of steerage passengers is supplied by
Mr. Lynch, of Cashel, who was one of the fortunate passengers
who landed at Queenstown. The list is from memory ;
‘Mr. Holland, wife and three children ;|had been in India, and was
in the volunteer corps. Two brothers named Hogarth, from Scotland ;
one was married, and had a little boy about eight years old. Mr. and
Mrs. Lyons, from London, had two sons, one about ten and the other
about twelve. Mr. Lyons was a watchmaker. Mrs. Atkey, somewhere
near London, had a girl about sixteen. Mr. and Mrs. Kennedy,
from Bruff, county Limerick, and three children. Mrs. Willis and two
children, one a little boy about nine and a girl eleven years, English.
Mr. Faulkner and little girl about six years old. Mr. Barrett, be-
longed to the medical profession, and was employed tOj take care of
Mr. Henry, a lunatic, English. A young man, native of Dublin, about
twenty-six, named Kelly, dark foxy hair, worked at Prarhan, near
Melbourne, brickraaking. A musician, named Harris, an Irishman,
but was going to see his brother to London, or some of his friends,
age about twenty-eight, foxy whiskers and hair, low size, but stout
and smart looking. Mr. WWicke t, another musician, about thirty,
dark complexion, and dark hair. George Taylor, age about forty-
live, was going to Belfast, and went out to Melbourne as doctor in
the “ Ben Nevis,” andj|was only just recovering from colonial fever ; was
but a few months in Australia. Henry Laughton, from some part of
Lincolnshire, was going home to his wife and children, and was seven
years in the colony : he had a son ten years old, who wrote him a letter
to come home, and it was signed John Hudson Laughton. William
J. Green, London ; had been some time in South Australia. Edward
Allen, London, red hair, and about thirty years old ; was a digger.
A fine-looking young man named Bishop, about twenty-five years old,
from London. Two brothers named Roe, English. Peter and John
Morton, Cornwall, England. Bakewell, a draper, about twenty ; tall,
and light hair. I think he was from London. A most respectable man,
named Wade ; tall and slight make, with dark hair, and was some time
at the Ovens Diggings ; English, age about forty.
‘A respectable man named Thompson; went out in the “Royal
Charter,” obtained a situation in Melbourne, and was coming home for


the purpose of bringing out his family. Mr. Thompson, aged about
fifty ; a stout-looking man, an engineer ; bad left his wife and family in
Hobart Town, Tasmania. James Wyatt, a fine stout-looking young
man, age about twenty-eight, dark complexion and dark hair, about
six feet high; a native of England, and had been at sea before. An
Irishman, named Cavan ago, low sized, but very stout; light hair, and
age about thirty. I think be was from the county Limerick, but am
not certain; had been in America, and had been sailoring for some
time, and worked in a steamer that sailed between Melbourne and
Launceston, Tasmania. An Englishman named Cowley, age about
thirty-five. A stout-looking man named Grice, aged about forty-
five. An old man and his son, from about Nenagli ; I think
their name was Faba. Charles Conway, from some part of England,
age about twenty-eight, and was a working jeweller; was of low size
and slight make, with light hair, William Ford, age about twenty-
five, dark complexion and dark hair, of low size and slight make, and
was a smart intelligent fellow; I think he was from London, or some
part of England, and was working at the Ovens Diggings for some
time. A young man named Purdy, a blacksmith, native of England;
of low size, age about twenty-five, dark complexion. Joseph Moss,
London, a Jew, age about forty-five ; was in Australia before, and sailed
in the “ Kent.” Mr. Davis, a Jew, low size, dark hair, age about forty-
three. Mr. Rea was going to London, and had been some time in
New Zealand, spoke French and English, age about forty, with thin
features. A, low size, thin-faced man, named Jones, age about forty,
very much pock-marked. An old man, over fifty, low size, stout make,
worked in a foundry in Castlemaine, was going home for his family.
I wrote a direction on two cards for him, one was Dowles and tho
other Abergavenny; these were to put on his boxes or luggage. I
think he worked for Mr. Yarian, Castlemaine, and was an Englishman.
John Tyrrel, ago about twenty-three, dark hair; was a native of some
part of England. An Englishman named Jacob. George Sieter,
a German, age thirty. Francis Weber, German, age twenty-six.
A young man named Fowler, a German, age twenty-one. A young
man named Hughes. Mr James P. O’Dowd, of Dublin, who had made
several voyages in the ill-fated vessel.'
This list is given with all its imperfections, because the
names of steerage passengers not usually published in the
colonial newspapers.
Dk. Scokesby on the ‘ Eoyae Charter.’
It will be recollected that the late Dr. Scoresby —who made
himself so great a name in the history of Arctic discovery —
went round the world in the £ lloyal Charter ’ in order to


study the deviation of compasses in iron ships. The fine old
sailor in his posthumous work * thus speaks of the ship and
her performances:—
‘Now, as to the action and performance of the “Royal Charter”
under this hard gale and mighty disturbance of the waters, the
experience we again derived was truly astonishing, and, compared
with all my previous experience, what I should have deemed im-
possible ; for by far the greatest portion of the time, I should say four
minutes out of five, we had no observable motion, the ship being
steady, quiet, and often apparently absolutely still. A minute or two
would often pass whilst these heavy waves were rolling harmlessly
forward, and but just raising in a slight degree the stem and alter-
nately depressing it, when we might have seemed to be sailing in a
sea of extreme calmness in the finest weather. In these intervals of
dead quiet, no woodwork, joint, or junction of iron and timber,
emitted an audible sound—no creaking was heard, —and at night
there was sometimes a quiet most striking in its stillness. Of cases of
this perfect quiet in time of heavy sea, squalls, and storm, I frequently
noted intervals of seven and eight seconds, of ten to twelve, some-
times twenty up to twenty-four seconds, where there was not motion
sufficient to break a silence of repose like that of dock or harbour.
Hence, notwithstanding the lurches on rolling, extending sometimes to
10° or 20° on one side, and perhaps once in several hours to 30°—the
maximum never exceeded up to this time, —a rolling inseparable from
a progress directly before the wind, in difficult steering and with
squared yards,—yet most occupations below, while ladies as well as
others, went on as usual; and, when the state of the decks as to dry-
ness would admit, exercise on the deck likewise. Thus when the
waves were at the highest—when elevations of forty feet and upwards
were rolling around and beneath the ship—Mrs. Scoresby accompanied
me on deck for exercise, and to view, in an instant of bright sunshine,
the sublime scenes around, and found no difficulty in walking the
poop deck, which was unencumbered and dry. She accompanied mo,
too, along the gangways extending from the poop to the deck-house,
and from thence to the broad and spacious forecastle up to the very
bitts, within a few feet of the stem, —and even to this extent, and along
a range of three hundred and twenty feet of deck and platform, the
progress was perfectly easy, and at the time the whole extent was
clean (unusually so, almost to whiteness), and dry from end to end.
1 Again, I may remark, that our meals were always served up to the
minute, in the handsome services, covers, and appendages before
noticed. Everything cooked with the same effectiveness and com-
pleteness in storm as in calm : fresh provisions, roasted and boiled,
* ‘Journal of a Voyage to Australia and Round the World, for
Magnctical Research.’


in fowls, mutton, pork, etc., unfailing and puddings,
and the variety of niceties, for each particular course, always ample and
good of their kind ; so that in speaking of the servants and cooks as
part of the ship, and of the ship as a thing or creature of life, I may
say that the “ Royal Charter ” had no consciousness of bad weather,
and made no signs of complaining in storms or heavy seas. During
a heavy squall, for instance, at dinner-time on this day—a fierce snow-
storm for a period, the wind blowing tremendously—no effect whatever
was produced on the comfort of those who sat at table ; and a wine-
glass I had emptied stood for many minutes entirely unsupported
betwixt the protecting bars of the table, and it was only liable to be
disturbed by some particular lurch which might happen to occur.
Again, in regard to pitching and “ sending,” the action of the ship
was equally remarkable, both for the easiness of the motion and the
smallness of the inclination of the keel from the horizontal level.
A forty-feet wave, on its entrance below the stern or counter of the
ship, whilst the bow was exactly in the lowest or most depressed
portion betwixt crest and crest, should raise the stern, as from the
simplest view of the case it might seem, to at least its own elevation,
or give an angle of inclination to the keel of about 7° ; but no such
measure of pitching or “ sending ” motion was ever observed—probably
not above half as much. For, in no instance in scudding, did I ever
observe the bow of the ship plunge nor the stern rise to anything like
the position apparently due to the elevation of the passing waves.
The action, indeed, was obviously of this nature ; from the admirable
adjustment of the ship’s lines of construction, forward and aft, the
loftiest wave, on its reaching the stern-post below, exerts its lifting
tendency, not abruptly or suddenly, as where the quarters are heavy
and the run thick, but very gradually, so that the disturbing force,
passing beyond the place of greatest influence before its due action
is realized, becomes modified and reduced.
‘ These principles are no doubt in operation in every tolerable moed
of marine architecture, but not to the degree of perfection in which
the tendency to assume horizoutality of position, and to receive the
least possible disturbing effects from the most formidable disturbing
causes in the action of rough, irregular, or heavy seas, has been at-
tained in the modelling and building of the “ Royal Charterand
whilst similar results in kind will be found to have been obtained in
very many or most of the scientifically constructed and splendid clipper
and other first-class ships of this important age, I should much doubt
whether in any single instance the approach to perfectness of the model
of the “ Royal Charter ” has been exceeded, or even —in all the ele-
ments of the perfect “ sea-boat,” as adapted for these southern regions,
proverbial for turbulent seas and boisterous weather—been equalled.
The view from the poop and forecastle which my wife and some
others of our ladies witnessed for considerable periods together, even in
the height of the gale, was one, especially during the favourable occa-


sious of bright sunshine, of sublime magnificence; whilst the general
view of the tumultuous waters as we looked astern, as the ship was
scudding before the storm, and as we marked the waves rolling per-
petually onward, and overtaking in succession the swift-sailing ship,
presented a picture of striking grandeur. The more threatening storm
seas, as every now and then they rose high above our position, and
intercepted (astern and on the quarters of the ship) every other portion
of the mighty waters, could hardly be contemplated,—l ought to say,
could not rationally be contemplated, without awe ! Nor was the action
of the ship under the mighty disturbance the least impressive or least
striking feature in the general picture.’
I remember that passage being quoted in the Athenceum,
with this pleasant remark ; ‘ Only to think of all this jollity at
sea—in a voyage round the world—dainty ladies for com-
panions instead of howling savages ; fresh fish, flesh, and fowl,
champagne, old port, and silver dishes, in place of remainder
biscuit, salt pork, and hot grog.’ Ah! only to think of all the
jollity! Little did Dr. Scoresby imagine, when he penned
that passage—little did the reviewer think when he affixed
that genial comment to it—that the ship, with its jollity, its
dainty ladies, and its silver trappings, would so soon lie ‘ sunk
in the waves!’
But the life on board the vessel has been elsewhere described.
In a tiny tome of sketches lately published * is the following
attempt at a picture :
‘ Our Ship looks best, I think, at night. She's by no means unworthy
of being sketched in the morning when a few albatrosses are sailing
round her, and a whale blowing his foamy fountain just a length or
two behind. She’s pretty at sunset again, when her sails flush purple,
and the passengers form themselves into so many little knots, and, as
the twilight thickens, watch the roseate touches dying in the west.
She’s brave in a storm at any time. ~ . She shakes oft'a sea as a restive
horse throws its rider. But she’s best of all o’ nights, when the dancing
is going on aft, the sailors are singing “Chiliman” round the galley,
and any number of proposals are being made among the “ interme-
diates ” behind the long-boat. How beautifully, at the stilly hour of
eight bells, she moves through the Avater, and flings the phosphorescent
foam about her like an Eastern queen beneath a rain of pearls. What
was Cleopatra’s barge in comparison, or any “ Niccan barque ” that
ever sailed upon a “perfumed sea?”
* But the best part of Our Ship, either by day or night, isn't on deck
* * Dottings of a Lounger,’ By Frank Fowler,


at all. There is a snug little cockpit forward, before the jollity of
which mere cuddy luxuries count as nothing. The second and third
mates, one or two young middies, a guitar, plenty of grog and smoke,
a good old cheese, and some biscuits, will make as jolly an evening
among them as any Christian need wish to spend. On Our Ship these
parties are nightly occurrences. There is a young midshipman on
board with lots of money. He is always inviting his friends to meet
him. He is a pleasant youth, with large, bland eyes, and a superfluous
number of oaths. I never knew a lad, though, who imprecated more
innocently. He evidently thinks that good swearing and good sea-
manship go together. He sw-ears at a little child on board all the time
he is filling its lap with candy and comfits. He is, withal, a good-
tempered youth, but constantly getting into scrapes with the officers.
After the breaking up of these festivities—which doesn’t generally
happen until an advanced hour, when not even the ghost of a dead-
light remains—it sometimes happens that you find it difficult to dis-
cover your right “ home ” amongst the long line of cabins down the
side of the dimly-lighted saloon. This kind of thing, though, is by no
means confined to festivities at sea.
‘There is pleasant work on the R C in the evening.
A select whist party takes one table, chess, draughts, and backgammon
occupy another, and a jovial circle of “ speculators ” a third. At nine
o’clock the hot water is served, when each brews his glass of toddy—
baling out a wine-glass of the smoking liquor for his lady neighbour—
and jollity holds sway for the remainder of the evening. Those who
don’t understand Hoyle—who are dummies at whist, dull at dominoes,
and regularly thrown on their backs with regard to all-fours—who
think draughts dry, and see no point in backgammon—generally retire
to the poop after tea, to get up their little music and dancing parties,
and warble and waltz gaily enough ’neath the light of the glistening
stars.
‘ln dirty weather Our Ship is not to be altogether slighted. She
rolls a good deal, I admit, but show me the vessel that doesn’t. There
is a polarity, too, as Mr. Emerson would say, about this rolling. See
how it churns the preserved milk (there is a cow attached to Our Ship,
but I think she is only a kind of stage property, for, certcs, her via
lactea is as dry as leather), and makes a rich syllabub of the port wine.
What an excuse it affords, too, for bad carving at dinner, and for be-
coming a short of “ shore ” to the pretty young lady who sits next to
you. If the lurches do empty the soup-plates occasionally in your lap,
and chip the edges of the crockery until the dishes look like circular
saws—if they do throw you out of your bunk at night, and land your
head in the water-jug—what of that? Of course, no harm can over-
come to the R C , and, comforted by this conviction, all
you have to do is to put up with the little annoyances for the sake of
the “ amenities ” which, as I have shown, lurk beneath them.
‘ For there are some very nice girls—and with this I must conclude—
journeying upon Our Ship. I like to see them in the cold morning


furred up to their pretty little noses, peeping up the companion-ladders
to see if the weather will admit of a walk before breakfast. I like
to see them at “ church ” on Sundays, gathered round a pork barrel
“ rigged ” as a pulpit, with an old Union Jack rolled up for the cushion,
and hear them lifting up their voices in solemn praise across the solemn
sea. It is a grand sight this last. Full service in a cathedral is nothing
to it. Jack in his clean shirt, and with that same Bible in his hand
which his mother gave him years ago, when his face, now hardened
with brine and scarred with sleet, was the pride of the old woman's
heart, is as impressive a figure to me as the finest-clad young neophyte
who ever swung a censer. I know Jack sings out of tune, and ulti-
mately swamps the Old Hundredth in the Bay of Biscay. But what
matters that ? Despite defects in harmony, the song of praise goes
aloft in all its purity,’
Truly, a very ghastly humour plays about these descriptions
as we read them now. The mirth seems like that in Holbein’s
‘ Dance of Death.’
The Rev. Charles Yere Hodge.
‘ The rev. gentleman was appointed to the vicarage of Clareborough
in 1844, and shortly afterwards his wife, from some unsettled disposi-
tion, proposed to visit some distant relation in New Zealand. Not-
withstanding all the remonstrances of her husband, she proceeded
to the antipodes without a guide, protector, or friend. After re-
maining some years there, she returned to this country, and again
took up her residence with her husband and children, of whom she
was the mother of ten—seven sons and three daughters. She, how-
ever, could not rest long in this country, and ultimately persuaded
her husband and part of her family to accompany her to New
Zealand. For this purpose the rev. gentleman applied to and obtained
leave of absence from the bishop of his diocese for two years ; but, at
the expiration of that period, not returning, a monition was issued for
his immediate return to his cure. It was in obedience to this mandate
that the rev. gentleman was returning in the “ Royal Charter,” when
he met Ids melancholy fate. Mr. Hodge left beliind him in New
Zealand his wife and three sons. Three sons and one daughter are at
present in England, the others having died in infancy. Mr. Hodge’s
only brother, the Rev. Henry Yere Hodge, M.A., perpetual curate of
Middleton, near Tam worth, is at present engaged in the melancholy
duty of watching the shore in the immediate neighbourhood of the
wreck, seeking to recognize the person of the deceased. Mr. Hodge
was universally respected and held in high esteem by his parishioners
for his deep-rooted piety and sincerity in all things.’
He died like old Gilbert—went down beneath the waters
Bible in hand.


The Adjourned Inquest.
When the inquest (see p. 34) was adjourned, every one
imagined the inquiry would be of a most searching character.
The calamity was of a nature which demanded the fullest
investigation ; and the public naturally expected that an
officer from the Board of Trade would be despatched to Molfra
to watch the proceedings. How these notions have been
realized will be gathered from the following remarks which
appeared in the Manchester Guardian of November the
4th :— ‘ Our readers will peruse with deep and painful inte-
rest the report we give to-day of the evidence adduced at the
Llanallgo inquest. The statements of the survivors examined
yesterday and the day before add but little perhaps to the
information we were already in possession of as to the general
features of the wreck of the “ Royal Charter,” but many de-
tails of a personal nature are given, and thus the several nar-
ratives are invested with a peculiar fascination. It will be
observed that the statement that Captain Taylor was intoxi-
cated at the terrible moment that his ship was drifting on to
destruction is repudiated by all the witnesses who have hitherto-
been examined, and that they bear the highest testimony to
his courageous attitude from the commencement of the storm
down to the time when the vessel broke up. He was always
at his post, and they express their firm conviction that every-
thing was done which good seamanship could suggest. To
their testimony is added that of one of the passengers landed
at Queenstown. ‘ Mr. J. M‘Envoy writes: —“Of all men I
ever met, he was the most sober. I cannot recollect an occasion
on the voyage when he exceeded the strictest bounds of tempe-
rance ; he was always true to his duty, devoting his abilities and
his attention to the safe guidance of the ship.” If we may
judge from the character of the proceedings so far, it is highly
probable that the Llanallgo inquest will be eminently un-
satisfactory. The jury is composed of Welshmen, and the
evidence has first to be written down—in English of course —


by the Coroner, and afterwards translated by an interpreter.
This must prove a very tedious process, but it will cause less
concern than the behaviour of the jurors. These gentlemen
do not appear to appreciate, in the most remote degree, the
serious importance of the duty they have been called upon to
perform ; they have to be watched like schoolboys by a police-
man, and, indeed, this latter functionary seems as much in-
clined as his wards to steal out of the schoolroom whenever an
opportunity presents itself. We do not always perhaps expect
to find Coroners’ Juries composed of the most intelligent men
of the community; but we cannot help observing that these
Welshmen have conducted themselves with a clownish levity
which, in the interest of the public, we must stigmatize as
utterly disgraceful.’
The tone of this is fully justified, as the readeir will admit
when he has perused the following;—
‘ The general inquiry into the cause of the wreck, and of the conse-
quent death of her crew and passengers, was commenced in the school-
room of Llanallgo parish at one o’clock on Tuesday, the 2nd of Novem-
ber, before Mr. William Jones, coroner for Anglesea. The Rev. Mr.
Williams, of Tyddyu, and H. Pitchard, Esq.," of Troscawan, magistrates,
attended to see that a full investigation was gone into. Mr. Moll or, of
Oldham, solicitor, attended for Messrs. Gibb and Brights, the owners
of the “ Royal Charter.”
‘ The jury was composed of very humble-looking men—small farmers
and seafaring persons.
* The Coroner asked Mr. Bright if ho had got any witnesses ?
‘ Mr. Bright replied that he had collected all the witnesses whom he
thought could throw any light on the matter, and several first-class pas'
sengers were in attendance. Mr. Gapper, a second-class passenger >
William Foster, the carpenter of the ship ; George Suaicar, the boat-
swain’s mate ; John O’Brien, sailor ; Henry Evans, sailor; and Thomas
Cormick, one of the stewards, were also present.
‘ Coroner. —Is there any one else who wishes to give evidence on this
inquiry ?
* Several voices.—Mr. Russell.
‘ Mr. Russell then answered to his name.
‘Coroner.—l believe there are other persons. Where is Mr. Brad-
bury ?


‘ It was answered that he was laid up with a broken leg.
‘ Mr. Bright.—There is also Hughes, an apprentice, who is in bed,
laid up.
‘ The Coroner then said he was about to commence one of the most
painful investigations which it had ever been his or any other coroner’s
lot to conduct. He hoped the jury would discharge their duty without
fear, favour, or affection, and quite uninfluenced by anything which
they might have read or heard outside that room. He regretted the
circumstance that some of the jury did not speak English, or under-
stand it at all when spoken; but he had requested Mr. Robert Pritch-
ard, auctioneer, of Bangor, to act as interpreter, and that gentleman
had kindly consented to do so. He (the Coroner) was now prepared to
hear any evidence that might be tendered to him, and which might
throw any light on the unfortunate occurrence, the precise cause of
which it would be desirable to ascertain. He had every intention that
the inquiry should be a full and searching one.
‘ Mr. Bright said that he had taken down a statement from Mr. Morse,
one of the saloon passengers, which the Coroner might avail himself of
if he thought it would be of any use to him.
* The Coroner.—l shall examine the witness in the first instance my-
self.
* The interpreter having taken the usual oath,
‘ Mr. William Henry Morse, a saloon passenger, was sworn and exa-
mined by the Coroner. —I was a saloon passenger on board the “ Royal
Charter,” from Australia. That vessel was wrecked on this coast on
Wednesday morning, the 26th ult. She sailed”from Melbourne on the
26th of August last. The captain’s name was Taylor. The “Royal
Charter ” was bound to Liverpool. There were about sixty-one saloon
passengers, including myself, and about three hundred second and third
class. The vessel did not touch or call at any place before wo were
wrecked. She was said to be 3500 tons burden. Ido not know what
her register was. Her engines were 200 horse power. She had a full
supply of coal and a full cargo. The crew consisted of one hundred and
ten or one hundred and twelve persons, including officers. At no time
was the vessel deficient in sailing, or in any other respect, up to the
time of the wreck. Wo first saw land on the Monday morning. We
saw the Irish coast then. That was at daybreak. We put some pas-
sengers on shore by a pilot-boat when we were off Cork —about thir-
teen. We passed Holyhead about four or half-past four on the evening
of Tuesday, the 25th ult. No passengers were landed at Holyhead.
K 2


The wind was blowing fresh off Holyhead, Ido not know from what
point, but it was rather ahead, and against us. We passed two or three
lighthouses. The storm continued to increase, till at last it came to a
perfect hurricane. She was drifting when the anchors were let go in
sight of Point Lynas at about twelve at night. I cannot toll at what
part of the vessel the anchors were let go, as I am not a nautical man.
We had passed Point Lynas then, I believe. I do not know how far
we had passed Point Lynas when the anchors were let go. I had no
conversation with the captain during the hurricane, but I saw him. No
one in my hearing made any remonstrance with him about turning back
or going into any harbour. I saw him on deck, giving orders and direc-
tions, up to five o’clock on Tuesday evening. I was not much on deck
myself after that time. There was nothing wrong that I knew of with
the machinery of the vessel after the anchors were let go. There was
nothing that I knew of wrong with the screw. She must have parted
her first cable about two in the morning. The anchors were let down
at ten or twelve o’clock. She parted her first anchor at, I think, two
or three o’clock. She parted the other about an hour after. Lights
and signals were “ going ” before we came to Point Lynas. Guns
were fired and blue lights and rockets sent up, which were continued
till daybreak on Wednesday morning. We struck on the rocks about
three o’clock. I was below at the time. I do not know what part
struck first, but I understood it to be the bow. The first shock was but a
slight one. I went on deck once after that. She divided about daylight.
She broke in two about seven or half-past seven o’clock. It was four or
five hours from the time she first struck till she went to pieces. The
hawser was out just before she went to pieces. One of the seamen took
it on shore. I did not see him. I was in the saloon, and heard it. I saved
myself by swimming. I was, I believe, washed on shore. I had no
conversation with the captain after the vessel struck. He came down
into the saloon, and spoke to some ladies. I believe I saw him in the
cabin. He told the ladies there was no danger; that they would
shortly be able to walk on shore. I heard him say that.
‘ The Coroner. —I now come to a very painful part of the inquiry.
Was Captain Taylor sober then ?
* Witness. —Perfectly sober.
* The Coroner. —Had you seen him intoxicated before ?
‘Witness.—Never at any time during the whole voyage, nor any of
the officers of the ship. Everything was going on well till this accident
occurred. I think the captain was aware of the part of the coast he was


on; but he thought we were on a sandy beach. I did not hear him say
that; I heard Captain Withers, one of the passengers, tell that to the
ladies. Captain Withers was consulted by Captain Taylor, but I had
no conversation with Captain Taylor after about three o’clock on the
Monday.
‘ The Coroner. —Mr. Bright, you can now put any question you like.
‘ Examination by Mr. Bright.—There was a testimonial given to Cap-
tain Taylor by the passengers. All the saloon passengers except two
joined in that testimonial. There was a slight difference between
Captain Taylor and the second and third class passengers. This was,
I believe, about their not being allowed to dance on the poop. After
the anchors were let down I heard Captain Taylor speak cheeringly to
the passengers. He was calm and collected while doing so. He was
down two or three times after he cast the anchors, and exhibited the
same calm and collected manner. He came down to cheer the ladies,
and one time to order coffee, I partook of that coffee, I did not see
Captain Taylor drink anything whatever that night. He was not at
dinner with us on Tuesday evening. I heard him tell the ladies and
other passengers in the saloon that he had been forward, and there Avas
no strain on the cable. Ido not know how far the vessel was from
the rock when she struck, but the anchor was in sixteen fathoms of
water.
‘Examined by Mr. John W. Mellor, solicitor, of Oldham (who asked
the Coroner to pardon him if he exhibited any excitement, as he had
lost a brother and cousin). —The testimonial was presented to Captain
Taylor either on Saturday or Monday, I cannot say which. It was in
the evening. After leaving Cork we took riggers on board from a
steam tug; I do not know how many. We had had no weather so
rough during the voyage as wo had off this coast at the time of the
wreck, or on the night of Tuesday, the 25th ult. I remember a storm
off the River Plate. It was not so bad there as here during the wreck.
Up to the time the ship had her anchors let go the weather was not so
bad as it became afterwards, I think the storm off the River Plate was
as bad as that which we had here previous to the anchors being let go.
I do not know where the riggers were shipped; I only know from
hearsay. I saw a vessel leaving the side of ours. Ido not know how
long the vessel lay off Queenstown; I think about two hours, I had
no moans of knowing accurately. I really cannot tell the hour of the
last time I was on deck before the vessel struck. I was on deck once
after dark and before she struck. I cannot tell the time, for, not ex-


pccting any accident, I took no particular notice. Ido not know what
part of the coast the ship was at; not being a nautical man I did not
pay much attention to that. I did not, to my knowledge, see the cap-
tain on deck at that time. I was on deck several times after half-past
three in the afternoon, but I did not speak to the captain after that
hour. I saw him about three times. This was in the saloon. He was
in the saloon at the time word was sent him that she had parted her
anchor, I know nothing whatever about the management of a
ship.
‘ To the Coroner. —No one, in my hearing, asked the captain to turn
to Holyhead or any other harbour, saying it would be dangerous to
proceed.
‘ To Mr. Mellor.—lt was when the first anchor parted the captain
was in the saloon. He had only shortly come down. The reason the
captain did not dine with us that day was that he had been up for three
or four nights, and was resting. The captain did not always dine
with us.
‘ The Coroner. —I cannot think that is material.
‘Mr Mellor.—-It may become so. The ’ fitness now says the captain
had been up for two or three nights before, and before he said every-
thing had gone right up to the accident. If everything had gone
right, why was the captain up for two or three nights ? (Laughter.)
Gentlemen, this may be a laugliing matter for you ; it is none for me,
‘ The Coroner. —The matter is not a laughing one for any one.
*To Mr. Bright. —The captain might have been on dock without my
seeing him. He left the saloon as soon as it was announced that the
anchor had parted.
‘ The Coroner. —I think it would be very convenient if the friends
and relatives of parties combined and employed one solicitor to put all
their questions.
‘ A Relative. —There is no combination amongst us.
* The Coroner. —I am only suggesting that there might be, so far as
regards the employment of a solicitor, for my convenience and that oi
the public.
* Mr. Mellor.—l should be happy, not as a matter of business, but as
one of friendship, to put any question for a relative of any one who has
been lost (applause).
‘ Mr. Russell, one of the passengers, asked permission to make a
statement in reference to what had been said about a difference between
the captain and the second-class passengers.


‘ Mr. Martin, one of the owners of the vessel, said that any statement
made by a passenger ought to be on oath.
‘ The Coroner.— It is better for Mr. Russell to reserve any observa-
tions he may have to make.
‘ Mr. Bright observed that the tonnage of the “ Royal Charter ” was
2719 tons register, and her horse-power 200.
‘ Mr. Thomas Oarew Taylor said—l concur in the evidence given by
Mr. Morse up to the time of our arriving off Cork. Some of the pas-
sengers were there sent ashore in a pilot-boat. While we were at
dessert on Tuesday one of the stewards came and asked me if I would
like to see the “ Great Eastern.” This was about five o’clock, I think.
It was then blowing very strong, almost a gale, and it was foggy weather.
I do not recollect having seen Captain Taylor on deck the whole of
that day. I might have seen him. I saw him after I jumped over-
board, when the accident occurred. I saw him in the saloon after the
vessel struck last. I saw him on deck when I jumped over. I saw him
before daylight come into the saloon, and assure the ladies that they
would be all on shore in ten minutes. I cannot tell how long this was
before the vessel divided, because I was greatly frightened. Captain
Withers joined him in what he said, and added, “ Ladies, you will all
be able to walk on shore.” Captain Taylor said that we were firmly
embedded in the sands. I was deputed by some ladies to see some of
the officers and get authentic information. The two captains seemed
so cheerful that when I saw them I felt sure we should be saved.
Captain Taylor made use of the expression, “ We shall be left high and
dry.” I felt so sure that all was safe that I went to bed at eleven, and
lay there till I heard Captain Withers say to a lady, “ I shall take your
child.” The port anchor was out when I went to bed. He said, “ Come
directly; I shall take your child.” There was some answer to this,
and Captain Withers said, “No, directly. There is no time to be lost.”
His voice had awakened me, and I jumped out of bed. I heard it was
half-past two o’clock. Then I opened my door and looked up and down
the saloon. I saw no one ; but lam sure it was to Mrs. Woodroff ho
spoke. I then felt the ship as if rubbing along the ground, and then
there were three or four violent concussions. I immediately put on my
greatcoat, trousers, and slippers, and ran up into the upper saloon. I
found ladies and gentlemen in the greatest state of consternation. Mr.
Hodge, the clergyman, was there, and they all prayed together. I
went up to look for my nurse and child. The lobby of the saloon was
so crammed that there was no chance of my being able to find my


child there. I eventually found them. The bumping of the vessel
continued and increased in rapidity and violence, and water began to
come in in all directions, so that I was perfectly wet through for hours
before I left the ship. Ido not know what hour it was when I jumped
overboard; but the man who saved me told me it was half-past seven.
I was on deck when the vessel split. I was knocked down by the waves,
and I saw Captain Taylor lying on the deck, where he had been knocked
down by a wave. He had a rope round his waist and a log tied to the
end of it. I said, “ Oh, Captain Taylor, what a fearful scene this is I”
He did not reply. Another wave came in on me. I flung off my
greatcoat and jumped overboard. I got hold of a log of wood, on
which there was a mainyard. I then got on the mainyard. I w r as
washed off it twice, I was washed to the rock, and grasped the weed.
I was twice washed away with weed in my hands, I was carried in a
third time, and two or three men caught me by the point of the fingers,
and prevented me from being carried out again. A man, named Robert
Lewis, had me carried to his house, where I was treated with the
greatest kindness by Lewis and his wife. My little daughter and also
her nurse were lost. Captain Taylor was perfectly sober when I saw
him, before I jumped overboard —as sober as a child three months old.
I never saw him intoxicated, or anything approaching to it. He was
rather averse to taking anything. I have frequently asked him to take
a glass, and he declined on the ground that he had already had some. If
I had thought he was intoxicated I should not have gone to bed and
left my valuables away from me, and I have left all except ten sovereigns
and my gold watch. I never heard any one suggest that he was on any
occasion intoxicated, till I heard a man do so after this accident.
‘ To Mr. Bright.—Captain Taylor had been knocked down by a wave
when I saw him lying on the deck.
‘To Mr. Mcllor.—l heard Captain Withers say once or twice during
the voyage that there was some difficulty in steering the ship. Ido not
know whether Captain Taylor was present.
‘ The Coroner did not think this was evidence.’ [The Coroner seems
about equal in sagacity to his class.]
‘ Mr. Mcllor. —1 think it is, sir, and I hope the press will think so.
* The Coroner. —Unfortunately the press are not the jury here, and I
think it is rather early for speeches.
‘ Mr, Mcllor. —Oh, sir, I am not going to make any speeches.
‘ Examination by Mr. Mcllor continued.—When Captain Taylor said
.all was right, Mrs, Fenwick sent for her children’s shoes and stockings,


and put them on, that they might walk ashore. I felt in a state of
uncertainty. I did not know what to think. Sometimes I thought
one thing and sometimes another.
‘ Mr. F. Thomas Gundy examined.—His evidence was corroborative
of the foregoing.
‘ The inquiry was then adjourned till next morning.
‘ The inquest was resumed on Thursday morning at eleven o’clock.
As on the previous day, the owners of the “ Eoyal Charter,” Messrs,
Gibb, Brights, and Martin, were present. Mr. Mellor, solicitor, of
Oldham, again attended. The room in which the inquest was held was
very much crowded.
‘ The Coroner observed that he was not a nautical man himself, and
asked Mr. Bright whether he had any gentleman present who could
at a future stage of the inquiry give a professional opinion on matters
connected with the management of the ship ?
‘Mr. Bright.—I have, sir.
‘ The Coroner said that, though the county paid for a large police
force, he had, on the day before, been left without the assistance of
even a single constable to see that the jury remained in their places
and that order was preserved.
‘A constable who was present promised [!] to remain during the
day.
‘ Mr. Samuel Edward Gapper, examined by the Coroner.—l was a
second-class passenger on board the “ Eoyal Charter.” I have been
working at threshing machines in New Zealand, The “ Eoyal Char-
ter ” reached Queenstown about half-past one on Monday, the 24th
October. Either eleven or thirteen passengers were sent on shore
there. The vessel arrived off Holyhead about half-past four on
Tuesday afternoon; it was hazy weather, and blowing fresh, when we
arrived off Holyhead. There was a tug called the “ United Kingdom ”
came up before we reached Holyhead, and put some men on board.
‘I do not recollect seeing Captain Taylor on deck on Monday. I saw
him many times on dock on Tuesday. It came on to blow very hard
after we passed Holyhead. The wind was on our port bow. The first
signal of distress or for pilots that I remember to have seen exhibited
was put out about eight o’clock on Tuesday evening. Ido not know
the distinction between signals of distress and those for pilots. There
were rockets and blue lights, and occasional guns were fired. The
anchors were first let go about eleven o’clock; we had then passed
Point Lynas. Previously to the anchors being let go, or at any time,


I did not hear any one remonstrate with the captain about the course
of the vessel or any one say she ought to be turned back. I should
say she struck the rocks about half-past two in the morning, but I can-
not remember to within a quarter of an hour. She parted her first
anchor at about two o’clock. It would be impossible for me to say
how far we were from shore when the first anchor was let go. One
could not see from the poop to the other end of the ship. She first
struck on the sands, and not on the rocks. It must have been six
o’clock when she struck on the rocks. She was about three-quarters
of an hour on the rocks before she went to pieces. The hawser was
sent ashore as soon as it was light. I cannot say how it was sent
ashore. I saw the captain on deck during the three-quarters of an
hour that the ship was on the rocks. I was up and down the deck at
least twenty times during the night, and saw the captain several times
on the deck. In the intervals between the signals he was walking on
the quarter-deck, with a telescope in his hand. The gun at last filled
with water. The signals were continued up to the time the anchors
were let go. I did not hear the captain speak while he was walking
up and down. He appeared to bo watching. He appeared to me to
be perfectly sober, for though the ship was pitching heavily he did not
stagger. At half-past four in the morning I heard him speak to the
ladies in the saloon. He said, “ Ladies, we are on shore, but I think
we are on a sandy beach ; with the help of God we shall all get on
land when daylight appears or words to that effect.
‘ Examined by Mr. Bright.—We could see the “ Great Eastern,” but
only very dimly, when we were off Holyhead. I cannot answer as to
whether the wind was blowing a hurricane after we passed Point
Lynas ; but it was blowing tremendously. The wind shifted about ten
o’clock. There was a captain on board named Adams. I was down
stairs witli him examining a chart of the coast about ten o’clock at
night. He said he should not be surprised if we were on shore before
morning, and, describing the operation of swimming with his hands, he
said he thought we could not get off, and would have to do that. The
vessel was then to the eastward of Point Lynas Light. I never saw
Captain Taylor the worse for liquor on board.
‘Mr. Pitcher (a gentleman who lias lost several relatives by the
wreck). —Was there any request made of Captain Taylor on Tuesday
to go near Holyhead, fur that was out of his course?
* Witness. —Yes; I heard persons in the second cabin say, they
wished he would go close to Holyhead, so that we might see the “ Great


Eastern,” the men who came on board having told us that she lay there.
The wind was blowing to the shore, I heard no orders given to put
the ship out to sea.
‘ The Coroner. —Did you hear any one ask Captain Taylor to go near
Holyhead ?
‘ Witness.—l heard that that wish was expressed to him.
‘ Mr. Mellor. —What was the answer of Captain Taylor ?
‘ The Coroner.—l think we are going too far.
‘Mr. Mellor.—lf this was an inquiry against Captain Taylor, it
would not be evidence, but as it is an inquiry into the cause of the
death of other people, the answer ought to be taken even on hearsay
for what it is worth.
‘ The Coroner.—What was the eifect of the answer carried back?
‘ Witness.—That the captain said, we might sight the “ Great Eastern,”
but he must not stand away for it, as he wanted to get home.
‘By Mr. Mellor.—l knew the time I have mentioned principally by
the changes of the ship’s watch. I cannot say there were no signals
before eight o’clock. Those that I saw at that hour were the first I
knew of. We had examined the chart three or four times with Captain
Adams previously to the time I have mentioned. Point Lynas Light
bore on the starboard quarter at ten o’clock. The chart was similar to
the one you now show me, and we were in hopes when the anchors
were snapped off. Ido not know the exact hour when Captain Adams
said he should not be surprised if we were on tire shore before morning.
It was after the anchors were let go.
* Examination by Mr. Mellor resumed.—When off Holyhead we saw
the “ Great Eastern,” but very indistinctly. This was on account of the
distance and of the thickness of the weather. It was not very thick.
I cannot say it was very hazy. It was not dark before we were off
Holyhead. The masts were cut after the anchors were broken from
their moorings. I have no idea how soon after. The mainmast was
cut away before the ship struck on the rock. Captain Withers, Captain
Adams, and Captain Taylor consulted together ; I know that because
Mr. Croome, the fourth officer, came to the second cabin and took
Captain Adams from my side to the consultation. Croome told Adams
that Captain Withers was with Captain Taylor, and that they were
waiting for him to consult together as to the best means of saving the
ship. This was before the mainmast was cut away, and after the
anchors had parted. There were two guns on board. Both were used
for signals. The weather gun was full of saltwater the last time they


went to charge it. The vessel ceased to use the screw when she w r as
hard and fast. She was lying for about half an hour near the rocks
before she struck. She was lying on the sand from half-past five o’clock.
No rocket was fired to the shore to carry a rope or anything else. I
never saw any mortar on board for firing shells. It was so dark from
half-past five to six o’clock that we could not see. I saw no prepara-
tions on board between half-past five and six o’clock for putting the
passengers ashore, but I saw some of the passengers with life-belts on,
and others putting them on at that time. I know of no light being
shown from the ship’s deck between half-past five and six o’clock. I
don’t think I was on deck during that time. Previously to half-past
five I had seen a globe light at the telegraph which communicated
with the engine-room, I remarked it because I had never seen a light
there before. It was a globe light. Rockets and blue lights were let
off at intervals during the whole night.
‘ Mr. Mellor said it might be a convenience' to the Coroner and the
owners of the ship if he ’announced that he should confine himself to
endeavouring to ascertain what was the ship’s course on Tuesday night
and Wednesday morning previously to the wreck. There was another
matter which he wished to ask, which was -whether the “ Royal Charter ”
had been altered at any time after she was built.
‘ Mr. Bright.—No, sir, there was no —’ [No what ?]
* The Coroner. —Do not enter into an argument.
* Mr. Bright.—l am prepared to give evidence as to her course ; the
vessel took—
‘ Mr. Mellor. —I wished to give you notice of what I intend to ask.
* The inquiry was then adjourned.’
At a later period in the day the inquiry was resumed.
* George Suaicar, a Maltese, was examined. On the Scriptures being
tendered to this witness, he asked what the book was, as he was a
Roman Catholic. On it being explained to him that the book was a
copy of the sacred Scripture, he said ho felt an oath on it perfectly
binding on his conscience. He Avas then sworn, and gave evidence
similar to his statement at pp. 20-22. *
‘ William Foster, examined by the Coroner. —I Avas carpenter on board
the “ Royal Charter.” Nothing wrong occurred to the ship from the
time she left Melbourne till she reached Queenstown, nor till avo came
tip to Point Lynas on this coast. The wind Avas right ahead as avc came
from Holyhead, but I do not knoAV in what point. It Avas blowing a


good stiff breeze after we came off Holyhead. We were'obliged to put
out signals off Point Lynas, first for a pilot, and then signals of distress.
She reached Point Lynas in the evening.
‘ The inquiry was then adjourned till the following day.
‘ The Coroner and jury assembled at a quarter before ten o’clock the
next (Friday) morning, when
‘ William Foster, the carpenter of the “Royal Charter," proceeded
with his evidence.
‘ To the Coroner. —The “ Royal Charter” was from half an hour to
an hour on the rocks before she parted. She broke right off at the
main-hatch, across the main-hatch. Previous to this a line had been
sent ashore. There were villagers on the rocks when the hawser was
cast ashore. Sixteen were sent ashore by the hawser. Those sixteen
were a portion of the crew. More could have been got across only that
there was a female in the forecastle who hesitated, and delayed, and
dallied for half an hour. There were a great many on the forecastle at
that time. In the end the female refused to go, and I went across my-
self, and about three of the crew after me. Some of the passengers
were below in the saloon. A heavy sea broke across the starboard bow
and swept every one from the foi'ecastle —about sixty or seventy.
During the whole time we were trying to wear and stay the ship, the
captain was on board. I saw him frequently, and he was sober. I
have been four or five voyages at sea. Considering the gale of that
night, I do not think the captain could have doue more than he did to
save the vessel. I do not think I observed any change in the wind
after we passed Point Lynas. I never mind the wind or the course of
the vessel. The wind freshened and blew stronger and stronger. Took
soundings. The lead was kept going the whole night, bofh hand and
deep-sea leads. It is my duty to sec that the vessel was making no
water. She made no water after she first grounded.
‘To Mr. Mellor.—We could see Point Lynas Light when the
anchors were dropped. Ido not know how it bore. I cannot say how
soon we lost sight of it afterwards. I think we were between three
and four miles off shore when the ship dropped anchor. I cannot tell
how far we were from where the ship first grounded when wc dropped
anchor.
4 To Mr. Bright. —I did ’[? not] 4 hear Suaicar say that the captain
was drunk.
4 To the Coroner. —I have no recollection of seeing Mr. Mellor and
Mr. Walsh at the cottage where Suaicar and I lodged yesterday week.


There have been hundreds of people there. I never heard Suaicar tell
Mr. Mcllor that he had asked the captain to cut away the masts, and
that the captain had refused. I never said that the captain was drunk,
or anything to corroborate that statement.
‘ Mr. John Brown Marsh, of Chester, said—l had a conversation with
Suaicar about nine o’clock on the night of Thursday, the day after the
wreck. Foster, the carpenter, was present at the time. After taking
down Suaicar’s and Foster’s narratives in writing, I asked Suaicar
whether he had anything more to tell me. He said —“ Some man on
the beach has been saying the captain was drunk, but he was as sober
all the time as lam now. I should like to meet the man who says he
was drunk.” He then added, ‘‘l was running about all night carrying
messages from the captain to the officers, and from the officers to the
crew, and I can swear he was not drunk.” I took these words down at
the time.
‘ Mr. Mellor here announced that he had received a letter from home
announcing the death of another relative, and he was sorry to say that
ho must now leave Molfra.
‘ Tiie Coroner said he was sorry for the occurrence, as lie should
like Mr. Mellor to hear some remarks which he should feel it iris duty
to make to the jury. If the jury were satisfied that the captain was
sober, it would not be necessary to examine the steward on that
point.
‘ The Jury said they were satisfied that the captain was sober.
* The Coroner then asked, could any of the sailors give evidence as
to the navigation of the vessel ?
‘Mr. Bright observed that the common sailors did not understand
this.’
THE VERDICT.
‘ After some further evidence of the same general character, in the
course of which nothing new was elicited, the jury late the same
evening found a verdict to the effect that the wreck of the “ Royal
Charter” was caused by purely accidental circumstances; that
Captain Taylor was perfectly sober ; and that he did all in his power
to save the vessel and the lives of the passengers.’
"Who doubted that Captain Taylor did all he could to save
the vessel after she struck upon the rocks ? That was only one
question out of several that should have been considered. The


construction of the ship, the * hugging of the coast,’ looking
for a pilot in such tempestuous weather, the delay (if any
delay there were) in cutting down the masts —these were the
lines of inquiry to which the coroner and jury should have di-
rected their special attention, and followed to their just termi-
nations. But the investigation was feebly conducted throughout,
and is not likely to rest at its present unastisfactory point.
The Press will not be silent upon the matter. While no one
desires a different verdict, the public at large has a right to ex-
pect that the evidence upon which any verdict in such a case
as this is founded should be of the completest character. Every
calamity has its lesson ; and if that lesson is not learnt at once,
depend upon it the calamity will be repeated until it is. But
what lesson is it possible to learn from such an ‘ investigation ’
as that which has just concluded at Bangor ?*
Latest Details from MoLFRA.f
The latest particulars (Nov, the 7th) from the scene of the
wreck which can be here incorporated are these: —
* The divers found one body yesterday forenoon, and some copper,
but no specie. No bodies have been cast ashore last night or this
morning. Up to the present moment forty-eight bodies have been
recovered, but of these few have been identified. The following is a
correct list of those who have been identified, with sucli further particu-
lars respecting them as have, after the best inquiries that could have
been made here, been discovered. A child named Pitcher, claimed by,
the uncle, Mr. Pitcher, of Northfleet, Kent. John Emery, of Liverpool,
steward on board the “ Eoyal Charter.” [I know poor Emery so well!
He was a good, generous fellow.] John Smith, four years old, child of
Mr. and Mrs. Smith, passengers; there were five of this family on
board. Miss Russell, ten years old, child of Mr. Russell, the passenger
who had the miraculous escape, and whose wife and two children were
drowned. Mrs. Lyon, of Melbourne, identified by Mr. Gapper, a
passenger.’ [There is some doubt as to this lady’s identity.] ‘Miss
Jane Fowler, supposed at one time to be a Mrs. Woodroff. Richard
* The Times of this day (Bth of Nov.) states that a government in-
quiry into the causes of the catastrophe is immediately to take place.
t There is a want of sequaciousness in the arrangement of these
Addenda which the exigencies of a hurried publication can alone
justify.


Read, of Plymouth. Jacob Roberts, fireman. James Walton, steward,
son of Mr. Walton, of the Amphitheatre, Liverpool. James Edwards,
passenger. Henry Aspinall, rigger. Mr. John Grove, on whose person
a sum of 56 1. 10«. was found, Richard Tierneough, sailmaker. Wilson,
boiler-maker. John Rees, of Pistill-Nevin, Lambert, seaman. Russell,
seaman.
‘All the above have been interred. In cases where the relatives or
friends do not bury, the bodies are interred in trenches. Parish coffins
are provided for them, and the Rev. Mr. Hughes, of Llanallgo, and
other benevolent individuals, have provided linen and flannel for
several of the poor shipwrecked passengers. His lordship the Bishop
of Bangor, Mrs. Williams, lady of the Rev. Mr. Williams, Llandygnan,
Captain Moore, 4th Dragoons, and Mr. Marshall are amongst those who
have contributed to this charitable object.’
The whole of the details which have crowded the papers
for the last eight or ten days are now, in such summary man-
ner as their importance would permit, entirely disposed of. It
would be useless to delay this Narrative for any further par-
ticulars from Molfra. One knows so well what the nature of
those particulars will be —fresh bodies, more tattered rags,
more copper bolts and bars twisted like wire, more iron plates
and beams gnawed by the sea as dogs gnaw bones, more recog-
nitions by disconsolate friends of those whom, long ere this,
they had hoped to welcome at an English fireside !
Let us drop the curtain upon the picture as speedily as pos-
sible, and pray Our Father in Heaven to take unto his keep-
ing the bereaved friends of those who have left Life’s sea of
troubles for the Haven of Eternity.
POSTSCRIPT.
I have been for the last thirty-six hours (the time allowed
me) preparing this book, I have had to wade through a mass
of most mournful material. The labour has certainly not been
a grateful one; but perhaps my friends in the Australian
Colonies will rightly appreciate the motives which have in-
duced me to supply them with a reliable history of the Wreck.
LONDON ; PRINTED I!V WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET.




«
Sampson Low, Son, & Co.’s List of Publications,
WHEN THE SNOW FALLS, a Book for the Fireside. A Collection
of Talcs, by W. Moy Thomas. 2 vols. post Bvo. 21s.
NEW ILLUSTRATED VOLUME FOR 1850.
The most Excellent HISTORIE of the MERCHANT of
VENICE. Written by William Shakspeahe. Superbly Illustrated,
and hound in Venetian-ornamented cloth, price 10a. (id.; or iu antique, bound by Hay day,
One Guinea. **
POEMS AND PICTURES. A Collection of Poems, Sonjrs, and Ballads
With 90 Engravings by the first Artists. Handsomely bound in inlaid leather, Qroliei
ornamented price 215.; or in morocco extra, bound by Hayday, 31 h fid.
The VOYAGE of the “ CONSTANCE ” ; a Tale of the
Beas. By Mary Gillies. With 8 Engravings, Fcp. Bvo. cloth, pri6e ss.
ERNEST BRACEBRIDGE: a Story of Schoolboy Days. By W. H
Kingston. With 16 Engravings. Fcp. Bvo. price ss;
SONGS for the LITTLE ONES at HOME. Uniform with
“Child’s Play.’-’ With 16 Coloured Pictures, by Birkul Foster and John Absolon.
Small 4fo. cloth, price ss.
The MINISTERS WOOING. By Mrs. Stowe, Author of “ Uncle
Tom’s Cabin.” Forty-second Thousand.
*** A frtsh supply is now ready. Illustrated Edition, large type.* price 7s. fid.
Popular Edition, price 2s. fid.
The HOME TREASURY of OLD STORY BOOKS and
BALLADS. Newly revised, with 60 Engravings, fromßenign* by C. W.Cojp, K-A.;
T. Webster, K.A.*? J, <5. Horsley, A.R.A., H. &c. Hquarc. cloth extra, ss.
The CHILDREN’S PICTURE FABLE-BOOK. Containing
One Hundred and Eighty Fable?, selected for the Young. With 60 large Engravings.
Square cloth, price ss.
The CHILDREN’S PICTURE BOOK of COUNTRY
SCEbfES. With 55 Engravings Square, cloth, price 5».
TEN YEARS of PREACHER-LIFE. By the Rev. W. H. Mil-
jsukn . Edited, with an Introduction by the Itev. WILMAM Arthur, Author of “ The
Successful Merchant,” 12mo cloth, price 4s. Cd. .
Dr. PRIME’S POWER of PRAYER. Twenty-fifth Thousand.
Ncv Editions . —l?mo. cloth boards, price 2s. ; crown Bvo. limp cover, price Is.
ASPECTS of RELIGION in the UNITED STATES of
AMERICA. 'By the Author of “The Englishwoman in America.” Fcp. cloth,
price 3s. fid. * ,
ANGEL OVER THE RIGHT SHOULDER ; or, the Beginning
of a New Year. By the Author of “ Sunnyside.” Cloth, with illustration Is,*
BOY MISSIONARY; By Mrs. J. M. Parker. Is. 6d
DOMESTIC SERVANTS, their DUTIES and RIGHTS.
By a Barrister. Is.
BRED. By Mrs. H. B. Stowe. Is. (id.
FOOLS’ PENCE, AND OTHER TALES. By 0. B. Tay-
lor, M.A. 2s. 64.
LIFE THOUGHTS, By the Rev. Henry Ward Beecher. 2s.
LIGHTS AND SHADES OF AUSTRALIAN LIFE. is. Cd.
MABEL VAUGHAN. By the Author of “ The Lamplighter.” Is. tidi
NOTHING TO WEAR, and TWO MILLIONS. By William I
Allen Butler. Is.
RECORDS OF ALDERBROOK By Emily Judson is
SHADYSIDE. By a Pastor’s Wife. Is.
