

« -# in
,v^T.
AUSTRALIAN & NEW-ZE ALAND
. ! ‘ Eontton:
[


aa«enger
s Booked to every Station in the United States and 1
Canada, at Lowest Rates.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND.
STEAM & SAILING SHIPS.
F. W. H ETII ERTNGTON’S PASSENGERS’ ROOKING OFFICE
334, STRAND, LONDON,
... Is in- direct communication By Telephone with the‘Docks arid Owners, of Australian
arid New Zealand Ships from London.
'i ; To secure a Perth int<aiding-Passengers should remit one half of the. Fare by Post
Office Order, made t).iyahlri at, Somerset house, giving at same time Names in full, j
also statmtr Ages, Occupation and Destination.
FOR NEXT DEPARTURES FOR AUSTRALIA, I
TIRISCiJ. T4I ALL PORTS,
AND COST OF 'PASSAGE.
See this Week's “ TJniversal Register
To bo had of all Newsagents or from the Publisher of this Pamphlet.
NOTICE.
Ship Kits supplied from SOs. and sent free. to any Ship. ' i
4V A list of necessary articles sent post free on application.
£3 17s. 6d.
LONDON TO NEW YORK,
OR PHILADELPHIA.
SALOON FARES 12 GUINEAS
. . Y .
Tiom Hull the day before; From Newcastle Two days before; or
from Leith Throe days before.
NETHERLANDS AMERICAN MAIL STEAMERS, i
Adult Passengers, JO3 10s ; Children under 13 -years lialf-pric ■


Xt*c r 1


NOTICE.
In the Press the following Useful Handbooks,
Price Sixpence each.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
NEW. SOUTH WALES.
VICTORIA.
QUEENSLAND.
TASMANIA.
Publishing Office :
334, Stkand, London W.C.


THE IMMIGRANT’S PROSPECTS
TASMANIA.
Origin.
Tasmania, or as it was formerly called Van Diemen’s
Land, was discovered on the 21th November, 1642,
by Abel Jans Tasman, a Dutchman from whom it
derived its name. He was commissioned by Anthony
Van Diemen, then governor general of the Dutch East
Indies to explore the “Great South Island.” In
December 1642, ho landed in Frederick Hendrick
Bay, and named the newly found land Van Dieman.
On January Ist, 1856, its name was changed from
Van Dieman to Tasmania.
Van Dieman’s Land was taken possession of in
August, 1803, by Lieutenant John Bowen, for the
purpose of forming a subsidiary penal settlement and
of forestalling tho French Exploring Expedition
under Commodore Bandin. Restdown corrupted to
Risdon was chosen as tho site uf the first convict
settlement. Lieutenant Bowen was succeeded by
Colonel David Collins, who disapproving of the spot
selected by Lieutenant Bowen, selected another spot
on Sullivan’s Cove or the opposite side of the Derwent
as the site of tho future town and designated it
Hobart’s Town after Lord Hobart, tho then Socrc-
t iry of State for the Colonies.
The expedition consisted of 307 convicts and 12
women, wives of the prisoners, also 5 soldiers wives,
the entire party being under 1 drummer, 1 fifer, 39
marines, 3 sergeants, with Lieutenants Edwards,
Lord, Sladen, and Johnson, with Colonel David
Collins as supreme head. Among others attached
to this expedition were its chaplain, surgeon, super-
intendent colonial surgeon, mineralogist, deputy
commissary general, and the deputy surveyor.
In 1804* Port Dalrymple was settled from Sydney
by Colonel Paterson. He took possession on October
10th. Two years later a more suitable locality was
found for the new Settlement at what is now Laun-
ceston, though it took some time for the recognition
and confirmation of this spot as the capital of
Northern Tasmania, Yorktown and Yorkton and
Georgetown for years disputing the palm for the
seat of Government.
The Colony suffered great hardships, being de-
pendent for their support upon foreign supplies.
Kangaroo was purchased by tho commissariat at Bd.
per lb., and flour was £ll2 per ton. The wheat
crop failed in 1807, and the price of that article rose
to £4 per bushel, which would make flour about
£2OO per ton. The selling-rate was regulated by a
garrison order, and armed sentinels mounted guard
over the wheat-fields, so valuable had the corn
become. In 1808 the position of the settlement was
fearful, as by July all the wheat and maize had been
consumed, and in the following month the salt beef
and pork gave out, and Kangaroo had to be the
means of subsistence. In October all the barley
was eaten up, and l£ lbs. was issued as the weekly
ration of each man. Only one vessel arrived dur-
this year from Bengal with sugar, which was pur-
chased by the Government, and issued to the settlers.
In 1809 the settlers vere allowed to pay their debts
to the Crown in wheat at 15/- per bushel. It was
not till nearly three years after the settlement that
the first sheep and cattle were imported. On January
8, 1810, the first newspaper issued in Tasmania, the
Derwent Star and Van Dieman' h Land Intelligencer ,
was published. It was of quarto size, issued fort-
nightly, at 2/- a copy. After the death of Colonel
Collins,’which occurred suddenly on March 24, 1810,
Lieutenant Lord, Captain Murray, and Lieutenant-
Colonel Geils were successfully the acting command-
ants of the colony. During Captain _ Murray’s
administration Governor Macquarie visited the
island and partially traced out the future City of
Hobart, naming many of the principal streets. On
the night of Colonel Collins’s death two officers of
the Government, for some unknown reason, burned
all the official books, papers, and documents they
could find. The population at this time was esti-
mated at 1,500, and there was the same number of
acres under wheat. Population began to stretch
over to Launceston, the vicinity of which was more
favourable for cultivation than that of Hobart, and
in 1812 Major Gordon was appointed Commandant
at Port Dalrymple. In the early days of the colony
much of the business was transacted by paper money,
in the form of promissory notes, varying from six-
pence to a dollar; some it is stated, that were
printed by a witty merchant in red ink, «old very
well. H.M. Stores were tho depot for all sorts of


provisions ; stock and material there were sold to
the settlers, and promissory notes, payable in
three years, either in money or kind, were accepted
as payment. So late as 1819 the officer who then
took charge had to look up between £3,000 and
£•1,000 of these bills, and to call in the cows and
sheep—with indifferent success.”
During the last two years Tasmania has greatly
advanced and is at the present moment in a more
prosperous and promising condition than at any
period of its history. Thinly populated districts are
growing into townships and there is every sign of
increasing progression and improvement.
Geographical Features.
Tasmania in size is nearly equal to that of Ceylon.
Its length is 170 miles, its breadth 160, and the
area about 24,330 square miles, or 15,571,500 acres,
exclusive of lakes and islands which belong to the
Colony, the aggregate of these being 1,206,500 acres,
making a total of 16,778,000 acres or 26,215 square
miles. Tasmania is in appearance almost the shape
of a heart. It is conjectured that it once was one
with the mainland but separated by some volcanic
disturbance, and it is also supposed that Tasmania,
Australia, and New Zealand all formed at one time
one huge territory extending to Madagascar, Tas-
mania, and Ceylon. Tasmania has been described
as a “ beautiful, well-watered island, rich in har-
bours and inlets, traversed by high mountain chains,
full of crags, glens, and ravines of commanding
appearance, the basaltic anchorage of some being
several hundred feet in perpendicular height. Every
where there are good anchorages and many excellent
harbours. Altogether the coast- offers the most
manifold changes, and generally charming scenery,
being for the most part of a bold and rocky char-
acter. The interior is delightful and here are united
so to speak the climate of Italy, the beauty of the
Appennines, and the fertility of England. Moun-
tain and valley, hill and dale, crowned with high
forests and rich pasture grounds in the plains, afford
the most pleasing variety.”
Islands.
The principal islands belonging to Tasmania are
55 in number. The principal are the Terneaux
Group, Cape Barren Island, Clark Island, and
Chappell Island, and Kent’s Group, then comes
King’s Island, Robbins Islands, Hunter Islands,
Waterhouse Island, Swan Island, Schonten Island,
Maria Island, Bruni Island, Slopcn, Franklin, and
Huon Islands.
Mountains.
Tasmania has two mountain ranges. The one to
the east or dividing range winds in its course in the
form of a 3, the average height of which is 3,750
feet or about 50 miles from the sea. The principal
peaks are the Bow Tor, Mount Barrow, Mount
Victoria, Ben Nevis, Ben Lomond, Mount Nichol-
son, Brown Mountain, Table Mountain, Miller’s
Bluff, Dry’s Bluff, Quamby Bluff, Ironstone Moun-
tain, Cradle Mountain, the Du Cane Range, Mount
Olympus, Mount Humboldt, Mount Huyel, Mount
William, Mount Hobhouse, Mount Rowland, Black
Buff, Valentine’s Peak, Mount Dundas, Mount
Murchison, the Eldon Range, the Frenchman’s Cup,
Weld’s Cray, Mount Field, Mount Anne, the Arthur
Range, Mount Picton, Mount Wellington, Adam-
son’s Peak, and Mount La Perouse.
Peninsulas.
The principal of which are the Freycinet Peninsula,
Tasman Peninsula, and Ralph Bay Peninsula.
Capes.
The principal capes are Cape Grim, Circular Head,
Eocky Head, Table Cape, Port Sorrell Cape, Flinders
Point, Stoney Head, Waterhouse Point, and Capo
Portland, Cape Naturalist, Eddystone Point, St.
Helen’s Point, Long Point, Capo Tourville, Cape
Bougamville, Cape Pillar, Cape Raoul, Tasman Head,
Capo Bruin, South East Cape, South Capo, and South
West Cape, Eocky Cape, Point Hibhs, Cape Sorrell,
Sandy Cape, and West Point.
Rivers.
The island being well watered abounds in rivulets
and creeks. The principal rivers are the Derwent,
Nive, Dee, Ouse, Clyde, Jordan, Florentine, Russell
Styx, and Plenty ; the Huon, the Coal River, the
rivers Davey, Gordon, Preman Pivcr, Arthur River,
the Inglis, the Emu, the Severn, the Forth, the
Mersey and Tamer and George’s River.
Bays and Ifarlvours.
The principal harbours are port Davey, Marquaric
Harbour, Emu Bay, Port Frederick, Port Sorrell,
Port Dalrymple, Anderson Bay, Ringarooma Bay,
Waterhouse Roads, George Bay, Oyster Bay, Prosser
Bay, Spring Bay, and Fortescue Bay ; Port Arthur,
Storm Bay, Norfolk Bay, Frederick Henry Bay,
D’Entrecasteaux Channel, Port Esperance, South-
port and Recherche Bay.
Lakes.
The principal lakes are the Great Lake, Lake
Sorell, Lake St. Clair, Lake Arthur and Lake
Elcho.
Subdivisions.
Tasmania consists of 18 counties, namely Dorset,
Cornwall, Devon, Wellington, Russell, Montague,
Lincoln, Westmoreland, Somerset, Glamorgan,
Pembroke, Monmouth, Cumberland, Franklin,
Montgomery, Arthur, Buckingham, and Kent.
The position and features of the counties are as
follows: —
Cornwall is in the N. E., in which are the north-
ern capital of the Colony, Launceston, the towns of
Evandal, Avoca and Falmouth, the port of George’s
Bay, and the gold diggings of Fingal and Scamander.
It has in all 26 townships, and is watered by the
Tamar, North Esk, Nile, and South Esk rivers and
their tributaries. Coal is found here, and there arc
extensive dairy farms and much land under cultiva-
tion.
Dorset occupies the N.E. corner, and is surrounded
on three sides by water, the river Tamar forming its
western boundary ; the Ringarooma, St. Patrick,
Trent, Anson, and other streams traverse it. George-
town and Bridport are its principal ports and towns.
Tin and gold are found.
Devon is situated mid-north between the counties
of Dorset and Wellington. It is bisected by the
Launceston and Western Railway. The principal
towns are—Torquay, Latrobe, Deloraxne, York, and
Ulverton. It is watered by the Emu, Blyth, Leven,
Don, Mersey, and other rivers.
Wellington occupies the N. W. corner. Its ports
are Wynard and Stanley. The principal rivers are
Montagu, Arthur, Detention,and Cam. Gold is found
in the Hellyer and Arthur rivers, and the tramway
to Mount- Bischoff tin country runs though the county.
The settlement of the Van Diemen’s Land Company,
comprising 350,000 acres, is here.
Russell is on the west coast, and contains Mount
Bischoff, with its apparently exhaustless tin stores,
and the gold-fields of Pieman River and Meredith
range. The Arthur waters the northern portion,


and the Pieman the south ; other streams are the
Donaldson, Coldstream, and Huskisson.
Montagu is to the south of Russell county. Mac-
quarie Harbour is the port. Here are the Heemskirk
tin mines, and the King River gold-field.
Montgomery is on the south-west coast, having
also Macquarie Harbour for its port It is very ]
mountainous and sparsely populated. The Gordon
is the principal stream. Marble has been found.
Arthur lies to the 8. W. It has a fine harbour —
Port Davy—on the south-east coast, whence is ship-
ped much Huon pine fiom the neigbouring forests.
The rivers Huon, Davy, De Witt, and others water
it. The country is believed to be rich in minerals.
Kent is the southermost county. Principal towns:
Franklin, Folkestone, Hythe, and Ramsgate. Rivers
Huon, Arve, Spring, Picton, and others. Huon pine
and fruit.
Pembroke is on the south-east coast. Principal
towns: Buckland, Sorell.'and Triabunna. “In this
county are the splendid freestone quanies of Orford,
Rheban, and Okehampton, from which stone is sent
to Victoria. Coal is found at Triabunna and Jerusa-
lem, where it is largely worked. Maria Island is a
few miles from the coast, and in this county is
Tasman’s Peninsular.”
Glamorgan is on the east coast. Principal town-
ships : Seymour, Swansea, Bicheno, and Avoca.
Minerals : Tin on Freycinet’s peninsular, and coal
at Seymour and Bicheno. Extensive fruit-growing
district. Principal rivers are the Swan, Elizabeth,
Macquarie and Wye.
Somerset is an inland county, and is traversed by
the Main Line of Railway. Townships: Ross, Tun-
bridge, Campbell Town. “In this con ity are the
large sheep pastures of Campbell down, Cleveland,
Tunbridge, and Oatlands.” Freestone is found at
Mona Yale, and Ross. The larger streams are the
South Esk )B lsis, ? Macquarie, and Elizabeth.
Westmoreland is a midland county to the south of
Devon. The Launceston and Western Railway
traverse the Northern portion of it. The principal
towns arc Longford, Perth, and Westbury. Fine
agricultural and farming land is found in tho north.
The Great Lake and Lake Arthur are in this county,
and many streams run through it.
Lincoln is also a midland county, but comparative-
ly little known and settled. Principal rivers: the
Nive, Forth, Cuvier, Mersey, and Murchison. The
Derwent takes its rise from Lake St. Clair in this
county.
Cumberland is an almost central county. Princi-
pal townships : Ouse and Bothwell. Rivers : Der-
went, Ouse, and Dee, and many smaller streams.
Pastoral district. Coal has also been found.
Monmouth lies to the south, and though a com-
paratively small county, is one cf the richest and
most important, abounding in coal, and having some
of the finest agricultural and fruit-growing land in
the Colony. The MainqLine of Railway traverses
its centre. The rivers are the Derwent, the Clyde,
Jordan,and Coal. Townships : Bothwell, Pontville,
Kempton, Richmond, and Hamilton.
Buckingham lies to the south, and is the Metro-
politan county. Beside Hobart, the capital, arc New
Norfolk, Bridgewater, Glenorcky, and Kingston.
Rivers: the Derwent and its tributaries, the Huon,
and several smaller streams. Coal, freestone, and
limestone are found in this county
Franklin county is in the S.VY. portion of the
island ; it is watered by the'Franklin, Gordon (which
separates it from Montgomery),Denison,And Surprise
livers. It is a mountainous district, with no town-
ships of importance.
Climate. —The climate is remarkable for its mild-
ness, being by its geographical position removed from
the extremes of heat or cold. The summers are not
unpleasantly hot, and woollen clothes may be worn
throughout the year. The winters are never so cold,
even in the more elevated table-lands, as to put a stop
to the operations of the agriculturist.
Climate.
One of the chief attractions of Tasmania is the
salubrity of its climate, there being few islands in
the world its equal in this respect. The surface is
diversified by ranges of hills and valleys with
occasionally largo plains, well cultivated, which
give it much the appearance of the old country.
No part of the world is perhaps more favourable
to infant life than Tasmania. About nine out of
every ten children survive the first year of life, and
the mortality from that age up to about 14 years old
decreases at a wonderful rate. The death-rate in
children between 3 and 14 years old only averages
about 5 per thousand annually.
The rainfall, on an average, is a little more than
22 inches, but there are not more than 40 days on
on which out-door work cannot be done. Snow
seldom falls or remains on the ground n ore than
a few hours, except in the elevated portions of the
island. It is never too hot in summer, nor too cold
in winter for out-door occupations to be carried on.
The readings of the thermometer at Hobart in
1879 were, in July, highest 54-0 in the shade, and
lowest 39T0 on the grass ; the average for the year
being, highest 6524, lowest 37'0, the average
highest in the son being 100 60, ; the average mean
temperature over 35 years being 40"44 in the winter
months and 63T7 in the summer months.
The census taken in April, 1881, shows that 8 per
cent, of the population were over sixty years of age.
Throe persons had attained the age of one hundred
years, one was one hundred and one, one was one
hundred and four, and one man was one hundred
and eight.
As Tasmania, owing chiefly to its climate, is now
largely resorted to by retired Indian officers, it will
be interesting to road the following extract from a
letter addressed to The Launceston Examiner of the
9th June, 1882 :
Tasmania, Sanitarium for Troops in India.
To the Editor of the Examiner,
Sir, —It is a remarkable fact, that among the many
interesting discussions in England, on colonial
matters, not one individual has yet portrayed Tas-
mania as particularly fitted by its position, and
salubrious climate, for a Sanitarium for troops
serving in the East Indies. Officers on leave from
India frequently come to Tasmania for recovery of
health, and after only a limited stay in the colony
return invigorated and much improved. If officers
can thus be benefited by the change, why not the
private soldier ?
Tasmania is really so close to India, by steam,
that there could be no difficulty in the immediate
removal of sick and convalescent soldiers. The un-
certain passage from Bombay to Aden, Red Sea,
the Suez Canal, the Mediterranean, and the Bay of
Biscay, could thus be avoided, by coming, and in
much shorter time, to Tasmania instead. In peace,
young soldiers, when fit for duty, could remain a
while to fill up, and bo practically instructed in the
art of war, equally as well as in England. No finer
spot could be wanted than the banks of the Tamar
for outpost duty, pontooning, etc. In war, they
would be, comparatively within call,
without delay, to their respective regiments ; this in


itself will be a strong argument in its favour. We
know that the hill sanitaria in India, once thought
free from violent epidemics, have of late years been
subject to these fatal visitations. Most of these
localities are difficult of access, very limited in ex-
tent, and expensive to live in, while the wild out-
bursts of nature, in thunder, lightning, and rain in
torrents, make “ the hills” no enviable abode.
Instead of denuding the Australian colonies of
troops, a reserve of efficient soldiers, ready to take
the field ought to he kept in hand in case of surprise,
or any combination. Tasmania, with a few gun-
boats, and its manhood under arms, could hold its
own longer than the sister colonies, and would, if
wanted, render important service to the Imperial
Government.
The cost of feeding troops here ought to he_ con-
siderably less than in England. Tasmania, with its
lovely climate, offers itself to those poor soldiers who
are too often kept to die in those hospitals in the
plains of Bengal, when by timely removal they
might he saved to their friends and their country.
With now a railway from Calcutta to Bombay, a
direct line of fast steamers is all that is wanted to
carry out the arrangement and the com-
munication between Bombay and Tasmania. What
soldier, wearing her Majestp’s uniform and bearing
his country’s arms, should be allowed to die in India
with the “ promised land ”so near? The very
thought of an immediate change of air in so short a
time would inspire hope in the patient’s breast and
give increased vitality to him. Regiments under
order for India would soon be filled up with volun-
teers, and service in that country, now so justly dis-
liked, would become popular and sought after.—
Yours, &c.,
G. Priestley, Major, late 66th Regiment.
June 6.
The Resources of Tasmania.
The following is a leading article in the Times
describing Tasmania and its capabilities.
Our Correspondent at Melbourne describes a visit j
to a country which may set many cld eyes longing ,
after it. We are all of us born with a taste for
nature, wild and tame in proportions for sporting of |
all kinds and farming of all kinds, for pretty land-
scape and neat enclosures for forest and orchards,
for the country as our forefathers found it, and as we
find it too. It is said that people never enjoy the
solitude so thoroughly as they did when they had the
option of company. Here is just such a place, quite
accessible, practically as near as the United States
when they bade us good-bye a century ago, and
inviting us to share its very pleasant lot. Tasmania
seems to have been reserved for the present crisis of
English aspirations. We have not a word to say
against Canada, but it is not every adult constitution
that can stand half a year of frost and snow, relieved
by sledging, wrapped up in a buffalo-skin, cutting
wood in a barn, and brushing up what remains of
one’s school-day learning and literature. We have
to concede that Canadians like Canada, and look
with utter contempt on our one-horse flies, our two-
stalled stables, and our dozen of fagots at a time from
the greengrocer. It is from the English standpoint
we speak. What paradise can be described more to
our taste than that seen through the simple story of
our Correspondent ? It has been reserved for this
epoch. No one thinks of Scotland under a thousand
a year. A millionaire can amuse himself there, but
.even a millionaire cannot make money there. We
are all under orders to quit Ireland, and consequently
pop to go there. There could not be a stronger
instance of utter fatuity than for a man to risk a
penny on the soil or the industry of that country.
In the country it is a universal complaint that farm-
ing will not pay, and thatit is impossible to purchase
land except where nobody wants it. Tasmania is
still in the market Its ambitious and saucy Austra-
lian neighbours have long despised it and laughed at
it. They had the wit to see there was a certain spell
upon it, and they called it Sleepy Hollow. The gold
discoveries drained its male population, till Tas-
mania was the only British colony in the world
in which the sexes were in equal proportion. There
was nothing going on there ; not even the floating
of new companies. The hotels were no better than
English country inns. The people vegetated and
were genteel. They felt exclusive and shy in the
presence of visitors from faster Australian circles.
This is like keeping girls too long at school or at
home. But the spell is broken at last. The earth
has opened its treasure-house, and Tasmania can
show now her vast deposits of tin, gold, and other
precious minerals. Fortunes can be made there, if
not in a day, yet more quickly than by sowing wheat
and planting potatoes. Meanwhile, if you arc not
obliged to be always at the grindstone, you can fish
everywhere with the line and the net, paying 10/-
for your annual license; there is the charming
scenery to put on paper ; there are mountains higher
than any in the British Isles within easy reach ;
there is a temperature which may be favourably com-
pared to that of St. Helier and its suburbs —the group
called the Channel Islands—and there appears to be
an abundance of organization for more than a hundred
thousand people. More than all, there are country
gentlemen, living in mansions, with parks, tenantry,
servants, and, at least, with a pack of beagles, occa-
sionally bringing together a field of a hundred
hunting-men in the costume of the colony.
| Our Correspondent has gone there, be it kept in
I mind, not for business, but for a holiday. It is the
third time he has gone to the island to recruit his
j spirits and his strength ; and he has returned to it
| with renewed interest. He had, indeed, to traverse
the island on a railway which reminds one of Fell’s
! line over Mount Cenis, where you were always
j turning round corners, shooting to the very edge of
an abyss, and pulling up in the nick of time, seeing
your leader that is, your locomotive turning
round upon you, and dancing, as it were on a tight
rope, on the edge of a precipice. This, however,
only shows the romantic beauty of the scenery. It
is a thing to be borne in mind, even when utility is
the main object. There is no international play-
ground, or holiday resort, in all Europe that cannot
supply all that is here summed up in a tight little
island. It is true there are features of the older
civilisation that are missed in Tasmania. Our Cor-
respondent glided through scenery that reminded
him and his fellow-travellers of the Rhine, but there
were no castles or cathedrals. Well, there is some-
thing to be said even to this want. You will not
have to spend the best hours of the day in being
shown dismal ruins or questionable skulls, and be
charged two shillings a head for it. You will not
ascend a hill or a church tower, and see a dozen
cities chequering the plain, or breaking the horizon
with their tall spires. But you may see all these
with the eye of faith. You may conceive a Tas-
mania of the future untainted with the greater
European scandals and crimes. There could not be
planned a better ground for a new country, for the
origin of familes, for honourable enterprise, for that
mixture of hard work and innocent recreation which
makes the Englishman. It is frequently said here


that old English life is gone- The country is
ploughed up and fenced in to the roadside; and the
towns are too big, too busy, too smoky and dirty
for gentry to live in, if they can possibly live else-
where. For several generations to come Tasmania
promises to combine an open country, and, so it is
said, good society, either in the country or in rather
old-fashioned towns.
If we venture to recommend a careful perusal of
this letter with a practical view, of course we are
not addressing ourselves to the golden youth of this
fine old country. There are fortunate classes to
whom it is evidently vain to suggest emigration,
even under the most favourable circumstances. If a
man be blessed with fond parents, affectionate
sisters, confiding elderly friends, or a large circle of
admiring acquaintances, ready to drain themselves
of their last shilling at his call—nay, if he has before
him the splendid prospect of a place in a Govern-
ment office rising from £lOO a year by ten at a time
to £3OO, or of a living of £2OO a year to come to him
when somebody dies, then he had better stay at home
and render himself every year a greater object of
charity. A large part, perhaps the greater part, of
our youth still possess the noble instincts inherited
from many generations of industrious and indepen-
dent men. From boyhood they have road the nar-
ratives of discoverers, settlers, founders, sailors, and
soldiers. They have looked forward with eagerness,
not dread, to the race of life, and have acquire 1 the
feeling that the pleasure of the race is the race
itself, not the casual, fleeting, and precarious
prize. Were it put to our schoolboys, even at the
very mature age at which boys are to bo found at
school, we feel sure the majority would prefer to try
their fortunes in a new ground, seemingly created
and preserved for their special use, rather than
flock together and hang in helpless crowds before
the choked-up avenues of official promotion or
commercial adventure at home. In these days of
universal education the accident of having been at a
good school or college is of much less use to a man
than it was even fifty years ago, and it is now very
common to hear of men occupying high positions in
every department without having passed through
what was at once thought the necessary
ideals, indeed, as much self-taught men as
the late President of the United States. Our
Universities have utterly lost what monopoly they
had, and the man with a good head on his shoulders,
good manners, and habits of business, beats any
number of scholars, wranglers, and prizemen out of
the field. What inducement is there now for a
youth to stay at home ? Even our nobility, hitherto
thought to have the world before them, are selling
wine, coal, tea, soap, candles, shoes and stockings—
anything for a respectable living. If the comparison
is to bo with trade, we may be excused our old
English preference in favour of country pursuits.
But the universality of this taste necessarily limits
its exercise. All Englishmen wish to be gentleman
farmers ; but all cannot be, for England is a small
country, and Scotland and Ireland, being like us in
their tastes, are keeping their country to themselves.
If therefore, we are really bent on indulging our
genius and putting ourselves in circumstances
lit for our full natural development into old English
country gentleman, we must go to a colony like
Tasmania while there is still room for us.
Population.
The population of & the Colony by the census of
1881, was 115,705, 61,162 males and 54,443 females.
As regards birth and nationality 79,991 were native
born, 3,987 Were born in other Australian colonies,
28,243 claimed the United Kingdom as their father-
land, 782 were Germans, 413 belonging to other
various countres, 141 Americans, 372 born in the
East Indies, 844 China, 293 in British possessions
not already mentioned, 43 in foreign countries other
than those named, 207 were born at'sea, and of 389
the birth places were not specified.
The conjugal condition of the people is thus re-
corded : Married, males, 17,744 ; females, 17,134;
widowers, 2,378; widows, 2,974 ; divorced, 5 males
and 6 females ; never married, 40,964 males ; 34,
females; unspecified, 71.
In regard to occupation the census figures wore :
661 persons were engaged in local or general govern-
ment; 1,659 belonged to the learned professions,
literature, art, or science ; 63,685 were engaged in
domestic offices; 5,277 in personal offices; 3,884 in
commerce; 19,489 in agricultural and kindred
pursuits; 14,484 in mechanical pursuits and manu-
factures; and 5,664 were grouped as indefinite and
non-productive.
Meligiou.
According to the census taken in February, 1870
—no later returns available—the religious denomin-
ations were thus recorded : Church of England,
53,047 ; Church of Rome, 22,091 ; Church of
Scotland, 6,644 ; Free Crunch of Scotland, 2,429 ;
Wesleyan Methodists, 7,187 ; Independents, 3,931;
Baptists, 931; Jews, 232; Society of Friends, 82;
Mahomrncdans and Pagans,!; other sects, 2,759.
The Church of England has in all upwards of 100
places of worship, with sittings capable of accommo-
dating about 16,000 persons. The body is under
the government of a Synod, comprising the Bishop,
all licensed clergymen, and lay communicants repre-
senting the various congregations, every act requir-
ing the consent of all three orders. The Synod must
have at least one meeting annually, and a dissolution
and fresh election of lay members must take place
every three years. The Roman Catholic body, by
latter returns than the census of 1870, have 43 places
of worship, and an estimated number of 12,000
attendants, and 80 Sunday-schools, with 263 teachers
and 3,000 scholars.—The Church of Scotland has 25
places of worship and 12 ordained ministers.—The
Wesleyans have 70 chapels and 51 preaching-places ;
the number of attendants is given as 11,390, of whom
1,460 are church members. There are 20 ministers,
and 79 local preachers attached to the body. The
Sabbath schools number 73, with 512 teachers and
4,112 scholars. —The Congregationalists have 11
ministers, 54 chapels, 4,500 attendants, and 34 Sab-
bath schools, with 250 teachers and 2,050 scholars.—
The Primitive Methodists have 15 chapels, with an
average attendance of 1,700, and 8 Sunday schools,
with 45 teachers and 450 scholars.—The United Free
Methodists have 1 chapel, with a congregation of
of 150, and 1 Sunday school, with 14 teachers, and
119 children.— r i'he_Society of Friends have a meet-
ing-house, and the Jews synagogues, at Hobart and
at Lauceston.-—The total number of churches,chapels,
and preaching-places in the colony is about 316.
The ministers of all sects number 129. Thare is a
Roman Catholic as well as an Anglican Bishop.
Sunday Schools.
The number of Sunday Schools was 112, with 460
male and 652 female teachers, and 10,011 scholars—•
4,6r5 boys, and 5,366 girls. These figures are now
considerably increased.
Crovernment.
The Government of Tasmania consists of a Legis-
lative Council, and a House of Assembly—the


legislative authority rests in both houses united, while
the executive power is vested in a governor appointed
by the crown.
The legislative council consists of 16 members, who
must he natural born or naturalized subjects not
holding offices of emolument from the Crown. Each
member must not be less than 30 years of age elected
for six years, viz., natural born or naturalized subjects
possessing either a £3ofreehold, or a leasehold of £2OO
yearly value or are officers in the Army or Navy, or
not in active service, or have a degreeof some Univer-
sity,or are in holy orders, or are medical practitioners.
'I he House of Assembly consists of 32 members who
must each be 21 years, who are elected for 5 years
by £7 householders, or leaseholders or freeholders of
estate of £5O, or receiving a salary of £BO a year.
Education.
The higher branches of education are under the
management of a Council; the lower under that of a
Board. There are seven public schools in Hobart,
three in Launceston, and at least one in every
country township, supported by the Government and
open to all, under a Board, under whose supervision
is the distribution and expenditure of all moneys
voted by the parliament for tho purposes of public
education. In 1881, 175 schools in all were in
operation, the average number of scholars on the roll
being 9,258, and the average daily attendance being
6,701. There were on the rolls 13,644 scholars, taught
by 128 male teachers, 159 female teachers, and 69
pupil teachers and paid monitors ; the average cost to
Government of (ach scholar was £2 14s. 3|d., the
average expenditure per child being £4 7s. lOd. Tho
average cost to Government of each scholar (includ-
ing cost of administration) was £3 4s. B|d. From
these schools exhibitions are attainable, by examina-
tions, in each year, to one of tho superior schools, of
which there are four—Horton College, High School,
Hutchins’ School, and the Church Grammar School.
These exhibitions are 32 in number, and vary from
£l6 13s. 4d. to £2O a year. During 1880 twelve in
all were awarded. Tho Council of Education is
empowered to hold local examinations similar to the
Oxford and Cambridge annual examinations; to
confer annually two scholarships, and the degree of
Associate of Arts on such candidates as have attained
the prescribed standard. To male associates between
the ages of sixteen and twenty, who have resided in
the colony for at least five years preceding condida-
ture, are opened the Tasmanian scholarships, of
which two of £2OO per annum each, tenable for four
years at a British university, are offered for compe-
tition every year. Two minor scholarships of £4O
per annum each, tenable for two years within the
colony, have also been established to enable Senior
Associates of Arts/to pursue their studies until they
are in a position to compete for the scholarships.
Thus any child possessed of tho necessary ability has
the means of rising step by step from the humble
position of a scholar in the Government elementary
school to the honourable one of “ Tasmanian
Scholar.” In 1881 there were two successful candi-
dates for the scholarship ; there were 17 candidates
—l3 males and 4 females —for the'.’dcgree of asso-
ciate, of whom 11 of the males and all the females
passed. The attendance of children at school is
compulsory, under a fine of £2, unless it can be
shown that the child is being privately educated, or
is prevented by sickness or other valid cause from
being present.
The Government grant in "aid of Public Schools
in 1880 amounted to £lB,OOO.
Telegraphs.
Between Hobart and Launceston and between
Launceston and Deloraine there exists a line of
telegraph which also extends to Both well, to New
York, and other places. There is also telegraphic
communication between Victoria and Tasmania by
means of a submarine cable. Telegraphic charges
within the colony are ten words for a shilling and
one penny for every additional word. Sunday mes-
sages double rates; press messages 100 words and
under 1/6 ; each additional fifty words 6d. The
cable charges are to Victoria, ten word three shil-
lings, each additional word threepence; to South
Australia and New South Wales four shillings, each
additional -word 4d. ; to Queensland five shillings,
each additional word fivepence. Address and signa-
ture must not exceed ten words.
Communication with England by submarine cable
and a land line across Australia was opened on the
21st of October, 1872, the first message from Hobart
to London, being sent on the 24th, by Mr. Audlcy
Coote, of the Maine Line Railway. To London the
cost is 10/8 per word, the name and address of sender
and receiver being charged for.
Postal and Jfloney Order.
Postage rates are as follows:—Postal Cards, one
penny. Town letters, half-ounce and under, one
penny. Inland letter, twopence. Ship letters for
transmission to the Australian colonies or New
Zealand, twopence. To Great Britain, via Plymouth
or San Francisco, sixpence ; via Brindisi, eightpence ;
to Ceylon, sixpence ; to India, Penang, Singapore,
China, Japan, Java, Philippine Islands, Labuan,
Borneo, Siam, Sumatra, the Moluccas, Mauritius, or
Reunion, Is. per half-ounce ; Cape of Good Hope,
lid. per half-ounce ; Canada, California, or the
United States of America, Bd. per half-ounce ; Nor-
way, Russia, Sweden, Austria, Belgium, Germany
Netherlands, and Switzerland, via Brindisi, 9d. per
half-ounce ; to Italy, via Brindisi, 7d. per half-ounce;
to France via Brindisi lid. per half-ounce. Regis-
tered letters must bear an extra 4d. stamp. Mails
for Europe are forwarded every fortnight by the
overland route, via Melbourne, and every two weeks
by the Orient Lino. The services via California and
Torres Strait are also available for the transmission
of correspondence and other mail matter, but there
is little, it any, saving of time in the employment of
these routes as regards correspondence with the
United Kingdom. Book packets for the Australian
colonies or the United Kingdom are charged one
penny for every ounce, if sent via Brindisi an addi-
4d. for every four ounces. Newspapers are exempt
from postage to the colonies; if sent to United
Kingdom via Brindisi, the charge is 2d. on each
paper, but if by any other routes there is no charge.
In 1881 there weie 206 post-offices or receiving
houses. During the year there passed through the
various post-offices 2,994,148 letters, 187,555 packets
2,049,949 newspapers ; the revenue was estimated at
£20,143, the expenditure at £29,613.
Money orders can be obtained and made payable
at all the leading post-towns in the Colony ; also on
the leading towns in Australia and Great Britain.
The commission charged is £2 and under, threepence;
above £2 and not exceeding £5, sixpence ; above £5
and not exceeding £7, ninepence ; above £7 but not
exceeding £lO, one shilling ; one shilling for £lO
and under. For the colonies the charge is £5 and
under, one shilling ; above £5 and not exceeding £lO,
two' shillings. On the United Kingdom the rates
are : £2 and under, one shilling ; above £2 and under
£5, two shillings and sixpence ; above £5 and under


£7, three shillings and sixpence ; above £7 and under
£lO, five shillings. No order is issued above £lO.
Money orders can, when necessary, bo sent to any
part of the colony by means of the telegraph, on
payment of Ihe charge for telegraphing, in addition
to the usual commission. There are in the colony
82 money-order offices. In 1881, 25,219 money-
orders were issued, and 17,272 money-orders were
paid for; the total amount of transactions was
£141,289, against £114,373 in 1880, the increase in
the business in this branch of the post office being"
larger than has ever been known.
Railways.
The lines of railway in working in Tasmania are
the Launceston and Western Railways, connecting
Deloraine, Westhury, Longford, Perth, and Evan-
dale with Launceston; and the Main line of railway
from Hobart to Launceston. The stations on the
Launceston and Western line are—Launceston ; St.
Leonard’s, 4 miles ; Breadalhano, 7|- miles ; Evandale
Road, 11 miles : Perth, 14f miles ; Longford, 17 J
miles ; Wilmore’s Lane, 21) miles ; Little Hampton
22J miles: Bishopsbourne, 24f miles; Oaks, 26) miles;
Glenore, 28) miles ; Hagley, 31~ miles ; Westhury,
35 J miles; Exton, 41) miles; and Deloraine, 45
miles, which is the terminus. The fares for the
whole distance are : 7s. first class, ss. 6d. second class.
Return tickets are 10s. 6d. and Bs. 3d. for the first
and second class respectively. There are three trains
each way daily. This line was constructed by a
company at a cost of £450,000 (or excluding interest
£429,604, being £9,547 per mile) of which £50,000
was raised by shares, the remaining £400,000 by
Government debentures, hearing 6 per cent, interest,
the interest partly re-guaranteed by the railway
district. A further sum of £60,000, at 5 per cent.,
was subsequently raised to complete it. The lino
was formally opened by his Excellency the Governor
on the 10th February, 1871. On the 3rd August,
1872, the line was taken over by the Government of
the Colony, and is now under the control of the
Minister of Lands and Works. The length of the
railway is 45 miles, the gauge being sft. Sin. The
cost of working and maintenance of permanent ways
and rolling-stock for 1881 was £17,711, and the
revenue from all sources £24,074, showing a profit of
£6,363.
The Main Line Railway extends from Hobart to
Launceston, 133 miles. Stations and distances are ;
■ —Risdon Road, 3 miles ; O’Brien’s Bridge, 5) miles ;
New Norfolk Road, 12) miles ; North Bridgewater,
13) miles ; Brighton, 1 ]\ miles ; Tea Tree, 21 miles ;
Campania (Richmond), 271 miles ; Lower Jerusalem,
31 miles ; Jerusalem, 39 miles ; Flat Top, 46) miles ;
Jericho, 51) miles; Oatlands, 55.) miles; Eastern
Marshes, 57) miles; York Plains, 62) miles ; Antill
Ponds, 68 miles ; Antill Ponds Post Office, 70 miles;
Tunbridge, 74 miles: Ross, 83) miles ; Camphelltown,
91 miles; Corner’s (Fingal Road), 98 miles; Cleve-
land, 101 miles; Epping Forest, 105 miles ; Snake
Banks, 112 miles; Clarendon, 115 miles; Evandale,
120 miles. It connects with the Western Railway
at Evandale Junction.
There are three through trains a day—fares, 31/6
and 21/6. Intermediate fares 3d. per mile first class,
2d. per mile second class. This line was constructed
by Messrs. Clarke, Punchard and Reeve, of London.
The gauge is 3) feet. The Tasmanian Government
guarantee 5 per cent, interest on the costs of con-
struction up to £650,000 for thirty years after the
opening of the entire line for traffic, subject to cer-
tain conditions embodied in the contract. The
rolling stock consists of 14 locomotives, and 232
vehicles of different kinds. The receipts for the year
1881 were £54,793 6s. sd.—passengers being
£32,502 175., parcels £3,037 7s. 10d., rents and
telegrams £640 6s. 10d., goods (including minerals)
and live stock £15,529 14s. Bd., and mails £3,083.
The total expenditure amounted to £54,434 10s. 5d.,
of which maintenance cost £19,591 6s. 6d.
The Mersey and Deloraine Railway to connect the
Mersey River with Deloraino, was partially opened
on the Ist of January, 1871; 18 miles only were
completed, leaving 12 miles to connect it with De-
loraine. It was constructed by private individuals ;
but from insufficiency of capital and other causes the
undertaking soon collapsed. The question of pur-
chasing and completing the line has been under the
consideration of the Legislature more than once, hut
each time the Bill has been thrown out. In the
Session of 1882 it was again brought forward, and it
was agreed that a sum of £120,000 should he appro-
priated towards its completion. It is intended to
extend the lino from Deloraine to Latrobe, and thence
to deep water at Formby, near the mouth of the
River Mersey.
A survey has been made by the Engineer-in-Chief
for a railway between Bridgewater and Oatlands.
He estimates the cost at £430,000, with a further
outlay of £15,000 for rolling stock. Railway ex-
tension is being loudly called for in several parts of
the island, and the survey of several lines has been
authorized.
Roads.
There are 4,837 miles of roads maintained by the
different road trusts and Main Road Boards through-
out the Colony. Government has lately voted for
further expenditure with regard to this purpose ; and
in 1881, £160,000 was granted and a further sum has
been placed in the estimates for 1882.
Coaches.
There are several lines of coaches out of Hobart,
connecting with important townships. A coach
leaves every day for the Huon. There is also a coach
connection with Greenponds, New Norfolk, Brown’s
River, Fingal, George’s Bay, Richmond, Sorrell, and
other places. There are also numerous cars and
omnibuses ply about the city, and afford a ready
means of reaching the suburbs and other parts.
Shipping.
The total number of vessels belonging to Tas-
mania on January Ist, 1881, was as follows;—2o3
sailing vessels of 17,733 tons, and 20 steamers of
1,407 h.-p. and 4,681 tons; total tonage, 22,414.
In the year 1881, 694 vessels, of the aggregate ton-
nage of 192,024, with crews 10,799 entered at the
Custom House, and 689 vessels of 101,738 tons, with
crews 11,030, cleared outwards. The 10 vessels
engaged in the whaling trade were of the aggregate
tonnage of 2,780 tons, and employ 296 men. The
produce of the whale fisheries brought into port in
1881 was 316 tons of sperm oil, valued at £22,120.
Of late years this industry has been declining, owing
to the utilization of other oils, and the uncertainty
of the occupation. The Tasmanian Steam Naviga-
tion Company possesses six powerful steamers. They
maintain fortnightly communication between Hobart
Sydney, and Launceston, and at shorter intervals
between Hobart and Melbourne, and Launceston
and Melbourne. The Union Steam Ship Company’s
Steamers leave also at regular intervals, for Mel-
bourne and New Zealand ports.


Lighthouses.
Kent’s Group on Deal Island revolving, 950 feet
above high water; Goose Island, fixed, 35 feet;
Swan Island, revolving flash, 100 feet; Low Head,
revolving, 142 feet; King’s Island, fixed, 280 feet;
South Brune,revolving, 335 feet; Iron Pot, (on Cape
Direction) guide to the River Derwent, fixed, 65 feet
lower red. Currie Harbour, (West coast of King’s
Island) revolving, 5 bright flashes every mile. These
are under the charge of the Hobart Marine Board.
The expense of five of them is shared by the Colonies
of Victoria and Now South Wales. They were
maintained at a total cost of £5,774.
Banks.
There are 5 banks in Tasmania. The rate of
discount in 1881 was 95 days and under, 7 and 6 per
cent per annum ; 95 days and over, 8 and 7 per cent.
Interest on deposits : for 3 months, 2 per cent. ; for
6 months, 3 to 3| per cent. ; for 12 months 4 to 3 per
cant.
In June 1882 the total assets amounted to
£2,869,492 9s. Gd., the liabilities to £2,857,070 12s.
4d. The note circulation was £160,870 18s. 6d , and
the deposits amounted to £2,745,815 17. lid.
Savings’ Banks.
The Savings’ Banks returns for the year ending
February 28th, 1882, showed that during the year
£239,028 were deposited at the two banks of Hobart
and Launceston, and £179,831 repaid to depositors.
The total amount to credit of depositors in 1882, was
£369,278; reserve fund, £38,775 ; invested in deben-
tures and mortgages £220,345, number of accounts
open, 14,729.
Revenue.
According to the statement of the Colonial Trea-
surer, made on July 19, 1882, the year 1881 was
commenced with a surplus of £8,718 7s. Bd. ; the
revenue (including a sum of £3,225 14s. 9d. estimated
outstanding) being£so2,l47 135., the largest for any
one year in the history of the Colony, and the ex-
penditure £466,313 17s. 7d. (including second
instalment of Treasury bills, £lO,OOO, a sum of
£5,000 estimated for outstanding claims ; and £20,800
credited to consolidated revenue under authority of
Acts 43 Vic. No. 19, but not provided by Loans Bill
re-transferred), showing a surplus on the year of
£35,833 15s. 5d., the probable surplus (all accounts
not being closed) on December 31, 1881, wa5£44,552
3s. Id. The revenue for 1882, re-estimated after
one-half had expired, was put down at £515,900,
and the expenditure (including third instalment of
Treasury bills £10,000) at £482,816 13s. 2d., leaving
a surplus of £33,083 6s. 10d., which, added to the
balance with which the year commenced, should show
a total surplus on December 31, 1882, of £77,635 9s.
lid. Deducting from this amount a sum of £70,000
to be reserved for payment of Treasury bills falling
due in 1883-4-5, the balance to be carried forward
will be £7,635 9s. 11. The revenue for 1883 is
estimated at £530,000, and the expenditure at
£457,242 4s. 3d.
Volunteer Forces.
There are three batteries of Artillery, two at
Hobart and the other at Launceston ; the former
numbers 185 of all ranks, the latter 63. The Tas-
manian Volunteer Rifle Regiments number in all
about 322. There are two companies at Launceston,
and four at Hobart; and a regiment of Light Horse
has also been organized at Launceston. The per-
manent staff comprises a commandant and other
officers with Artillery and Infantry instructors.
The defences consist of four batteries on the River
Derwent, and a small battery on the Tamar. Steps
are being taken to complete other batteries as recom-
mended by Sir W. Jervois and Colonel Scratchley,
and to provide additional means of defence for
Hobart and Launceston.
Manufactories and Industries.
The climate of Tasmania is especially adapted to
malting and brewing, and also to the growth of hops
and fruit. The Tasmanian brewed ale is that which
is chiefly drunk in the colony, and an export trade
is carried on with New South Wales and Victoria.
Jam making is extensively carried on. There arc
13 breweries, 29 tanneries, 4 soap and 6 candle
manufactories, 7 jam-boiling establishments, 49 saw
mills, 51 agricultural implement works, 3 brass
foundries, 15 coach-building factories, 83 fell-
mongeries, 21 steam flour mills, 33 water mills, 3
potteries, 4 tin smelting works, and there is also
now one manufactory of cloth, tweeds, blankets,
&c., from Tasmanian wool, which has been stimu-
lated by the payment of a bonus of £l,OOO by Par-
liament. The articles manufactured are of excellent
quality. The manufactories, large and small, are
estimated at £3,437.
Natural History.
The animals indigenous to the Colony are the
kangaroo, wallaby, native hyena, native devil, the
wombat, otter, platypus, oppossum, and tiger cat.
The smaller ones are the kangaroo rat, bandicoot,
and native cat. The majority of these are nocturnal
in their habits.
Ther 3 are a great varity of birds. They consist of
the emus, black and white cockatoos, jays, magpies,
whitehawks. crows, eagles, sparrowhawks, owls, mi-
nas, quail, bronze-winged pigeon, white cockatoo,
parrots, parroquets, thrushes, robins, diamond birds,
larks, honeysucker, blue wrens, fire tails, sand jor-
pers, red bills, and many others. Amongst the
frequenters of the lakes, lagoons and sea-coast, are
black swans, snipes, herons, bitterns, teal, duck,
tern, penquins, petrel, pelicans, gulls, and divers.
Amongst the salt water fishes are the kingfish,
trumpeter, flounder, garfish, and gurnott. The
principal fresh water fishes are the cel, blackfish,
mullet or fresh herring, the trout and lamprey.
Oysters and shell fish are plentiful.
Amongst the reptiles are to bo found snakes, lizards,
ignanas, also tortoises and scorpions, centipedes and
tarantulas.
There are 260 species of insects.
Hobart
Hobart, the capital of Tasmania, and the seat of
Government, is picturesquely situated at the foot of
Mount Wellington (which towers 4,166 feet above
the north-west end of the city), on the river Dewent,
about 12 miles from its mouth, in1at.42°53'32„5., long.
147° 21' 20,, E. Till January 1, 1881, it was known
as Hobart Town, but on that day an Act of Parlia-
ment came into force altering the name to Hobart.
The harbour is easy of access, well sheltered from
winds, with sufficient depth of water for vessels of
the largest tonnage and capacity for almost any
number of vessels; there is also ample wharf and
dock accommodation for the loading, discharge, and
repairs of ships. The city proper forms nearly a
square, and is built on a succession of hills. In area
it covers within its boundaries about 1,270 acres,
and has a population of 21,118 persons (census 1881),
inhabiting about 5,000 houses, the annual value
being assessed at £llO,BOO. The streets, whose ag


gregate length isabout 36 miles, are wide, welllaid out,
and intersect each other at right angles, the princi-
pal being Elizabeth, Liverpool, Collins, Macquarie,
and Murray (one chain in width). Most of the
streets were named by Governor Macquarie. There
are numerous public buildings, ©f which the Govern-
ment House (a handsome castellated palatial pile of
the finest white freestone, on the banks of the Der-
went) and Government offices, the Houses of Par-
liament (with library of about 8,000 vols., and speci-
fications of patents from the year 1600 to 1878), the’
town hall, post office, the museum in Macquarie-
street, the new Freemason’s Hall in Murray-street,
and the banks, may be instanced as the largest.
Churches and chapels are very numerous, number-
ing in all thirty-one, exclusive of the two cathedrals.
Among the principal are St. David’s Cathedral (Epis-
copal), the original foundation of which was laid on
February 19th, 1817. In the churchyard lies Col.
Collins, the first Governor (to whose memory a
monument was erected by Sir John Franklin in 1838),
and not far from him Sir Eardley Wilmot. Trinity
Church, with a peal of eight bells, in Warwick-st.,
St. George’s (Battery Point) ; St. Mary’s Cathedral
(Roman Catholic), a beautiful and imposing struc-
ture which has been rebuilt (reopened January 24,
1881), to which a large and handsome convent (of
the Presentation order) is attached, a new Roman
Catholic Church, dedicated to the Sacred Heart,
opened in January, 1880, St. Andrew’s, (Church of
Scotland), the Congregational Memorial Church,
lately provided with a fine organ, and the Centenary
Chapel, (Wesleyan) in Melville-street, which has
also a fine organ. The Society of Friends have
recently opened a handsome new meeting house in
Murray Street. A library of books treating on the
principles and practice of the Friends is at the meet-
ing house. The Jews’ Synagogue is in Argyle-
Street. Attached to the town-hall is a public
library, well supplied with works in nearly every
department of literature, comprising 8,208 volumes ;
there is also a reading-room. There is one theatre,
the Royal, in Campbell Street; the Town Hall, in
Macquarie-street, (a noble building of polished white
freestone), tho Freemasons’ Hall, Webb’s Rooms,
Alliance Rooms, Memorial Hall, and Peoples’ Hall,
and the Oddfellows’ Hall, are frequently used
for concerts and similar purposes. There are sixty-
two private schools, seven public schools, and four
ragged schools in the city. At the head of tho
private schools stand the High School, in the
Government Domain; Hutchins’ School (so named
in memory of Archdeacon Hutchins, who died in
June, 1841), Macquarie Street; and the City school,
also in Macquarie Street. Among tho charitable
institutions, supported principally by private dona-
tions, arc tho Benevolent Society, a Dorcas Society,
Girls’ Industrial School, and Boys’ Home. The
public charitable institutions are numerous, and
comprise a General Hospital, with 17 wards and 133
beds, which during 1880 had an average of 92
inmates, the Brickfields pauper establishment (hav-
ing 200 beds), and in 1880 134 inmates, tho New
Town Institution, average number of inmates in
1880, 569, and outdoor relief charitable agencies. At
the Cascades, about 2 miles from the city, are
situated the hospital for the insane, having 31 wards
and 100 beds, and the hospital foi contagious diseases
which has 40 beds. The principal hotels are
Webb’s, the Telegraph, the Ship, Lloyd’s, the Club,
Derwent, ar.d Rock ; there are numerous other good
hotels, and also many first-class boarding-houses,
where the charge ranges from 21s. to 635. per week.
There is steam communication to Melbourne, fare
£3 15s, and Sydney, fare £5 55., by the vessels of
the Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company; the
Union steamers also call on the way to and from New
Zealand. Melbourne can be reached about twice a
week. The main line of railway now connects
Hobart with Launceston. There are three trains
each way daily. Coaches leave regularly for the
adjacent townships and villages. Hobart on account
of its reinvigorating climate, is largely visited during
the summer season by visitors from Melbourne,
Adelaide, and Sydney. The town possesses 5
breweries, two of which are on a very extensive scale.
There are also five flour-mills, six jam manufactories,
numerous tanneries, and a woollen factory in
operation. There are three first-class patent slips
available for repairs to vessels of a considerable size.
A line of colonial ships owned in the colony, and
sailed and officered by Tasmanians, trades regularly
to London, The bishopric of the Church of England
is now vacant, pending a successor to Dr. Bromby.
Meanwhile, the Yen. Archdeacon Hales is acting as
administrator of the diocese. The Eight Eev. D.
Murphy is the Bishop of the Church of Rome. The
Roman Catholic Episcopal palace is a large and
commodious building, commanding a fine view. The
city is under municipal government (incorporated
December 22nd, 1857), the corporation consisting of
a mayor and nine aldermen. It is lighted with gas,
and plentifully supplied with water. The water
supply is conserved in a storage reservoir on the
Sandy Bay Rivulet (about one mile from the town
boundary), which is capable of containing fifty
million gallons. This reservoir is supplied from
springs in Mount Wellington. There are three
markets, the Old Market between New Wharf and
Franklin Wharf, the New Market in Macquarie
Street, and the wholesale fish market in Dunn Street.
Under the auspices of the Hobart Bathing Society,
spacious baths, with every private accommodation
for ladies and gentlemen, have been erected in the
Queen’s Domain, within five minutes walk
of the city. There is also near the same spot
a shed for the accommodation of the mem-
bers of the Hobart Rowing Club. The Derwent
is celebrated for its annual regatta, which attracts
visitors from all the colonies, and is the grand holiday
of Hobart. The Queen's Domain, a spacious reserve
of about 1,000 acres, serves as a most efficient lung
for the city. The new cricket ground is here provided
with pavilion and every requisite for the comfort of
members and visitors. The Royal Society’s Gardens,
near to Government House, covering an area of about
25 acres, are also much frequented. In the centre of
the town stands a bronze statue to the memory of Sir
John Franklin, formerly Governor of Tasmania,
around which is a pleasant garden, known as Franklin
Square, provided with seats and shelter ing trees. In
the vicinity are three cemeteries .• the Public Ceme-
tery, Cornelian Bay, tho Queensborough Cemetery
at Bay, near the second milestone, and the
Upper Davey Street Cemetery on the Huon
Road. The press is represented by the Mercury ,
published darly; the Hohart Herald and Sou-
thern Star, tri-weekly; Tasmanian Mail, weekly;
Literary Intelligencer, Church News, People's Friend,
Presbyterian Magazine , and Catholic Standard,
monthly.
Price of Provisions.
Bread, per 21b loaf, 2|d to 3|d ; beef per pound,4d,
to 7d.; sugar, 3|d. to 4|d. ; tea, 1/6 to 2/6 ; butter,
1/- to 1/6; flour, 10/- to 12/- per cwt.


The Various Markets.
The Hills.
The improved tone in the other colonies has hard-
ened things in this line generally, and the demands
from there will probably increase the values. The
following are the prices ruling at present:—For best
wheat, from 5/- to 5/2 per bushel; oats, 3/4 for best
milling and 3/- to 3/3 for feed. Local millers have,
however, given 3/6 for prime milling for local use.
Damaged samples still range from 2/- to 2/9, accord-
ing to the extent of injuries received. Coarse sharps,
£6 to £6 10s. wholesale and £7 10s. retail; fine ditto,
up to £7 wholesale and £8 retail. Pollard, £6 15s.
wholesale and £7 10s. retail. The quotations for
bran vary, some dealers quoting £6 17s. 6d. to £7
per ton wholesale and £7 10s. retail, while others
give the prices as £7 per ton wholesale and £7 15s.
retail. Oatmeal remains at £23.
General Produce.
There are no changes to note in general produce,
very little business having been transacted during
the week. Potatoes are very plentiful and are not
sought after here ; dealers mostly have a sufficiency
on hand. The bark Jules Marie is loading a cargo
for Sydney; and if the returns are satisfactory, a
large export will probably take place to that market.
We quote : Potatoes, from £2 12s. 6d. to £2 15s.
for the best samples, bags in ; but no large sales
could be made at the latter rate. There are large
quantities on hand, and the amount held in the
country is, we believe, still very great. Onions are
quoted at from 8/- to 10/- per cwt., and grey peas
have advanced 3d. per bushel, being quoted at 3/9
to 4/- per bushel wholesale, lOd. for bags and 4/3
retail, best seed bringing 4/6 retail. English barley
is worth, for good bright malting samples, 4/- to
4/2 per bushel; discoloured, from 3/3 to 3/6 ; Cape
barley, 3/9 to 4/- Seeds remain unchanged, and are
as follows : —English rye seed, from 6/6 to 7/6 per
bushel wholesale, and 7/- to 9/ retail; Italian, from
5/- to 6/- per bushel wholesale, and 6/- to 7/- retail;
cocksfoot, from 7/- to 8/- per bushel wholesale, and
8/- to 9/- retail; timothy, 'from 7d. to 9d. per lb.
wholesale, and I/- retail: couch, 1/6 per lb. whole-
sale, and 2/- retail; white clover, 1/- to 1/2 per lb.
wholesale, and from 1/4 to 1/6 retail; red, 1/- to 1/2
per lb. wholesale, and 1/4 retail; cow grass, 1/- to
1/2 per lb. wholesale, and 1/4 retail; alsyke, 1/- to
1/2 per lb. wholesale, and 1/6 retail; scarlet, 1/- to
1/2 per lb. wholesale, and 1/6 retail.
Hay.
This article continues to be in good demand, and
any coming forward would find purchasers at £5. 10s.
per ton, but farmers generally are holding for an
increase of 10s. per ton on this rate. The stock in
town is decreasing, so possibly a higher figure may
be obtained shortly.
Farm Produce.
Butter has almost ceased coming forward, and is
not much inquired for, owing to the high figure
ruling. In cheese, Pardoe has increased a penny
since last Thursday, and is now quoted at lOd. per
lb., the demand being great. Other lines are un-
changed, and may be quoted as follows: Fresh but-
ter, Is. 6d. to Is. 9d. per lb. wholesale and 2s. to
2s. 3d. retail; potted ditto, Is. 7d. to Is. 9d. per lb.
wholesale, and Is. 9d to 2s. retail, according to
quality. Cheese has risen a penny, and is now
quoted at Bd. per lb. wholesale, and Pardoe, 9d.
Eggs are not plentiful, and are worth Is. 6d. per
dozen wholesale, and from Is. 9d. to 2s. retail. Honey
has decreased to 2Jd. to 3d. per lb. whjlesale, and
from 6d. to 7d. retail (canned).
Some vendors have increased the price of milk, and
now quote it at 6d. per quart. Bread has risen to
7d. per 41h. loaf in consequence ot the rise in wheat
and flour. The quality of the poultry coming into
market is improving, hut those brought forward_ hy
hawkers are very inferior. There are no alterations
in the prices, which remain at:—For trussed fowls,
4s. to 4s. 6d. per pair ; ducks, ss. to 6s. ; geese,
ss. to 5». 6d. each ; Turkeys, ss. to 7s. 6d. each.
Hides, ikins and Bark.
These articles remain unaltered, and are quoted
at: —Green hides, 2|d. per lb.; salted, 3d. Calf
skins, from Is. to 2s. each. Wallaby skins, 6s. per
dozen ; kangaroo, 18s. per dozen; grey opossum, 7s.
and black 20s. ; inferior from 12s. to 15s. Rabbit
skins are worth from 6d. to 9d. Bark has now
become exceedingly scarce, and ground has advanced
from £9 to £9 os. per ton ; long remaining at £5 10s.
Butcher’s Heat
There are no changes to note in this market.
Stock is gradually rising in value, and has now
assumed a first-class price, the demand being just
about equal to the supply. The following are the
quotations:—Retail: Beef 4d. to 6d. per lb.,
according to cut; steaks, 6d. ; mutton, hind-quarter,
s|d.; legs and loins, 6d.: fore-quarter, 4d. : lamb,
hind-quarter, 6d. ; fore-quarter, sd. ; veal, 4d. to
6d.; pork, 6d. ; corned beef, 3d. to 5d.; roundssd. ;
mutton hams, which are particularly scarce, 6d. to
7|d. per lb. The prices of hams and bacon are un-
altered, being:—Country bacon, 6d. to 7d. per lb.
wholesale, and 9d. to 1 Od. per lb. retail; country
hams, Bd. per lb. wholesale, and 9d. to lOd. per lb.
retail. For town bacon, Bd. to BJd. per lb. whole-
sale, and lid. to Is. retail; some dealers Bd. to 9d.
wholesale, and lOd. retail. The nominal quotations
for English hams are Is. 3d. wholesale, and Is. 6d.
retail.
Timber
The weather experienced lately has prevented
building operations being pushed on, consequently
the demand for timber has slackened. There are no
alterations in prices, which remain as follows :
Sawn hardwood, from 7s. 6d. to Bs. wholesale, and
10s. per 100 superficial feet retail; battens, 9s. to
1 Is. per 100 superficial feet; boards, 11s. to 12s.
(green), 14s. (seasoned) per 100 feet; posts and rails
20s. to 255. per 100 wholesale at port of shipment,
and 335. per 100 here; for retail, from 40s. to 43s ;
palings 5 feet, Bs. to 10s. wholesale, 10s. to 13s.
retail, per 100 ; 6 ft., 11s, to 13s. wholesale, 18s. to
20s. retail. Shingles, 10s. to 11s. wholesale, and 12s.
to 14s. retail; Deloraine, 12s. to 13s. wholesale, and
15s. to 16s. retail. Laths are quoted at 7s. to 9s.
wholesale, and 10s. to 11s. retail.
Fuel.
Coal has now become plentiful, four vessels having
arrived during the week from Newcastle with coals,
and the local yards are now full. This article has
accordingly resumed its former price. The follow-
ing are the current prices:—Newcastle coal,
screened, £1 12s. 6d. per ton ; unscreened, £1 10s. ;
Don or Mersey coal, 28s. per ton unscreened, and
30s. screened. Coke is selling at 12s. per load.
Cut wood to 13s. per load, extra short 14s. up to 15s.
6d., and uncut varies in price. Wood purchased
from the boats is quoted at from Bs. 6d to 9s. 6d. per
ton for oak, and 6s. 6d. for gum.


Laundresses
.. £20 „ £35
„ i
Housemaids
.. £15 ,, £25
„ U
General Servants ..
.. £20 ,, £30
,, /'%
Shepherds..
.. £40 per an., with hoard.
Ploughman
.. 10s. to 15s. per
week.
Farm Labourers ..
.. 8s. ,, 15s.
Reapers
.. 14s. per acre.
Blacksmiths
.. 10s. to 12s. per day \
Bricklayers
10s.
)) |a
Carpenters
.. 7s. to 11s-.
„ S
Wheelwrights
,. 7s. ,, 10s.
» I*
Painters ..
.. 7s. 9s.
„ h
Tanners ..
.. 5s. 6d. to 8s.
„ 1-s
Quarry men
.. 6s. to 8s.
Ordinary labourers
,. 4s. ,, 7s.
i
Wages
The rate of wages is as follows :
Coachmen.. .. .. £25 to £5O per annum\ w
Grooms .. .. .. £2O ~ £45 ~ |’&
Gardeners.. .. .. £25 ~ £45 ~ I
Cooks .. .. .. £25 ~ £4O ~
Nurses .. .. .. £2O ~ £26 ~
Nursemaids .. .. £l6 ~ £lB ~
Price of StoeU.
Messrs. Roberts and Co., of the Mercury office,
report a full average number of transactions in
stock, at prices established ; a continued firmness
for all store sheep, and an improvement in store
cattle. With beef the market was well supplied,
although many of the cattle were only of middling
quality, and very wild. Where quality was penned,
notably the Cleveland draft, bullocks made to £l6.
55.; and one very prime cow, £l5; lighter, to
£8 12s. 6d. , lambs and calves were in moderate
supply only; but porkers from the stubbles, were
much more numerous, and made lower prices. The
demand for good draught horses continued, and
where really good stamps were submitted they realised
outside values. On Tuesday, at Jerusalem, 220
Merino ewes, in lamb to Leicesters, made 7s. 6d. and
65.; 158 from 2 to 6-tooth mixed Mcrinoes, Bs. ;
356 mixed lambs, 7s. 9d. ; 50 dry cull e*ves, 4s. 9d. ;
40 do., 6s. 5d.; 70 small Merino lambs, 4s. 7d. ; 50
Merino wethers, in good condition, 9s. Id. ; 40 do.,
6s. sd. ; 48 cross-bred ewes, in lamb to Leicesters,
11s. 4d. and 10s.; mixed meaty sheep, Bs.; woolly
stragglers, Bs. Bd.; 10 cows andheifers, some in milk
£4 to £2 2s. Gd.; calves, 10s. 6d.; 5 pairs working
bullocks, £l2 15s. to £11: single do., £7 17s. 6d. ;
2 horses, £lO each; others, £9 10s. to £5; 140
porkers at, for large, 38s. 6d. to 365. 3d. ; lighter,
18s. 3d. to 125.: sows, £2 ss. to £1 ss. ; slips, 11s.
to Bs. &c. &c. On Wednesday, at Bridgewater, 151
fat lambs made to 16s. 9d., for Mr. C. Matthews' pen;
others, 12s. 6d. to Bs. 6d. ; 825 fat Merino
to 135., for the Bashan Plains pens ; 12s. 6d. to Bs.
for others; 200 Merino ewes, from Meadow Bank,
9s. ; cross-bred wethers, 155.; and owes, 14s. 9d.
(Bushey Park), 13s. 3d. (Glen Dhu) to 10s. Gd. ;
mixed fat sheep, 11s.; fat rams, 18s. 6d. to 12s ;
one hundred 2,4, and 6-tooth ewes, in lamb to
Leicesters and Southdowns, l.°s. 6d. and 11s. 4d. ;
370 full-mouthed ditto, in lamb to Merinos, 7s. 7d.
to 4s. lOd. ; 160 Merino lambs, 7/1; 410 Merino
wethers, 6 to full-mouthed, 9/6 to 8/11 ; culls, 4/4
to 2/10 ; 100 mixed sheep, from Bruny, 7/6 and 6/4 ;
fat cows, £9 to £4 7s. 6d.; small fat heifers,
£3 2s. 6d. to £2 ss; fat calf, £2 145.; best milch
cows, £8 12s. 6d., £8 55., to £6 7s. 6d. ; second-
class milkers, £5 ss. to £3 .7s. 6d. ; heifers forward,
to £4 10s. ; 32 dry cows, £4 to £1 7s. ; 13 steers,
2 and 3 year old, £3 17s. to £1 1 Is. ; calves, 17/-
to 10/-; 7 pairs bullocks, £l3 to £lO ss. ; 5 single
bullocks, £5 each ; bull, £3 ; 151 porkers, at 40/6 to
31/- for large, 24/- to 15/- for light, and 10/- to 7/9
for slips ; woolly skins, to 3/10 ; pelts, 1/1 to 4Jd. ;
loose greasy wool, to 7|d.; locks, 2|d. to 2d ; seed
wheat, 5/- ; do. oats, 3/-; dray and frame, £l2 ; &c.
Land.
The following information by Mr. 0. Dugald
Buckler, may be eminently serviceable to the in-
tending emigrant :
‘ ‘ On landing in Tasmania and taking lodgings
according to his means, the emigrant should at once
call on the Immigration Agent at Hobart or Laun-
ceston who will give him advice and refer him to
the Surveyor General for information as to the land
regulations, the extent and locality of available
land, the prices and regulations of sale, and the
name and residence of the Surveyor of the district
in which the emigrant may decide, to settle. He is
advised to place a certain sum in one of the Savings’
Banks as a stand by for which he will receive 4 per
cent, interest. He will thus have time to consider
also whether to select Crown land to settle upon, or
invest in the purchase of a farm already cleared.
Emigrants are advised not to cumber themselves
before sailing with large agricultural implements.
These can be obtained in the Colony better adopted
to the rough lands on which they are to be used.
Seeds of all sorts are cheaper than in England, and
more likely to be pure and genuine than those sent
out to the colony, which are sometimes damaged cr
adulterated.
A great deal of the richest Crown land is heavily
timbered and covered with a dense undergrowth of
shrubs. Lightly timbered land is generally of a less
productive nature. From forty shillings to five
pounds will be required to clear an acre, according
to the nature of the timber, if done by contract —the
large trees being killed, but left standing. The
underwood is usually cut down or grubbed out in the
beginning of summer, and allowed to lie a month or
so till it gets dry, when it is burnt off, and a crop
(generally grass) is “chipped in’’ with the hoe.
The logs and sticks not consumed by the fire can
then be gathered into heaps, and the clearing will be
ready for the plough the second season. Much,
however, depends upon the nature of the underwood,
and a settler can always rely upon getting the benefit
of the experience of his neighbours as to the best
mode of clearing the virgin forest, Upon some of
the heaviest-timbered land in the country of Devon
Mr. Thomas Giblin, of Hobart, cleared about 160
acres at a cost of thirty shillings an acre, ringing
the large trees, and cutting down and burning the
small timber. On this land he obtained, with-
out ploughing, forty bushels of oats to the acre
during the first year.' A sufficient cottage of timber
can be erected in the bush for about £so—Dutch
barn and other necessary out buildings in proportion.
Of course all have to work; and that settler is best
off who has a large family whose help is available,
as the price of labour is high.
The richest settlers in Tasmania, who have made
their thousands, have not been idlers. Many a rich
settler knows how to drive and hold a plough, and
has done it for years; many a rich settler’s wife
knows how to cook a dinner for the farming men,
and has done it for years ; and such knowledge,
once acquired, is always ready for occasion.
There is a large quantity of agricultural land still
open for settlement in the colony, and although it
is not my object to direct people to any special lo-
cality, excellent authorities give me to understand
that within twenty miles of Hobart there is plenty
of good land available for small farms; that in the


100 acres at 20s
100
0
0
Add for credit
33
6
8
£133
6
8
£
s.
d.
Cash at time of purchase . r
3
6
8
,, First year
5
0
0
,, Second \ ear
5
0
0
,, Third, and following years, up to
14 year per year 1®
0
0
Above 25
acres {exc d eedg} 5 ° aCreS
4
0
5
0
0
„ 50
) > )>
100 „
7
0
8
15
0
„ 100
) ) ) )
150 „
8
0
10
0
0
„ 150
j ) ) >
200 „
9
0
11
5
0
, 200
250
10
0
12
10
0
„ 260
320
11
0
13
15
0
„ 320
640 „
13
0
16
5
0
„ 640
1000 ,,
16
0
20
0
0
1000
5) »>
1500 ,,
19
0
23
15
0
,, 1500
)) ) )
2000 ,,
22
0
27
10
0
,, 2000
n n
2560 ,,
26
0
32
10
0
,, 2560
•
3200 „
30
0
37
10
0
Single town allotment
1
5
1
11
6
Ditto suburban .. .. .. 2 10 3 2 0
For a section of any township
containing not fewer than five
allotments .. .. .. 6 5 7 16 3
Ringarooma district, county Dorset, about thirty-
five miles from Launceston, there are at least 10,000
acres; within ten miles of Port Sorrell, county
Devon, there are 5,000 acres, and near Kentishbury,
on the River Don, also in the county of Devon, about
16 miles south of Latrobe, there is some very rich
land ; it, however, lies back from the road, and the
inferior land along the road to Latrobe having been
taken up makes it difficult of access. The provision
in the land laws as to road-making, however, might
overcome this inconvenience. There is also a large
area of first-class agricultural land between the rivers
in the county of Wellington, particularly between
Wynyad and Mount Bischoff ; but here again the
Government will want pressing to provide money to
open up with roads, &c.
The quantity of land under cultivation in March
1882, was 374,374 acres.
It is unnecessary for me to enter into the question
of farming, the price of cleared farms, or the
farmer’s prospects in Tasmania, as these points are
ably dealt with by persons who have had considerable
practical experience in the colony, in their letters,
printed farther on, and from a perusal of which
much reliable information on these and other points
will be gained.
Price and Terms of Purchase of Government Land. —
The lowest upset price of Crown land fit for agri-
culture is fixed by Act of Parliament at £1 an acre ;
and the lowest upset price of pastoral land at a sum
equal to 12 years’ rental, but not less than ss.
an acre.
Any person may select for purchase, by price
contract with the Government, one lot of agricul-
tural land not exceeding 320 acres, at £1 an acre, on
the following terms, as exemplified to the extent of
100 acres, exclusive of survey fees :
£ s. d.
and so on in proportion for any greater or smaller
area than 100 acres.
Section 45 of “The Waste Lands Act” allows
selectors to pay up at any time within the 14 years,
and a rebate is made on the amount added for credit
at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum for the unexpired
period of credit.
Credit is allowed on all purchases above £l5.
When 500 acres shall have been sold in not less
than ten lots adjoining or close to each other, the
Governor-in-council is empowered to raise a sum
not exceeding half of such purchase-money for the
purpose of constructing a road or roads in the
vicinity of the lots.
After paying the expenses of the Lands and Works
Department, one-fourth of the Land Revenue and
License Fees is set apart for the construction of roads
and bridges by the various Road Trustees.
Licences for pastoral lands are issued at rates
having regard to the class of the land and the number
of sheep and cattle which can be fed thereon, the rent
being calculated on the carrying capacity of the land,
at the rate of from 4d. to Bd. per annum for each
sheep, or 2a. to 4s. a-head for cattle.
Ordinary
Survey Scale. Crown If lightly
Land, timbered.
£ s. £ s. d.
25 acres and under .. ~ 210 3 2 6
Connecting surveys, for the first
mile .. .. .. .. 50 650
Ditto, every additional chain ~ 0 1 0 13
Free Grants of Land. —Persons (not free or assisted
emigrants) proceeding to the colony either as first-
class or intermediate cabin passengers can apply to
the Government Agents in London (see below) for a
warrant, which will enable them, on arrival, to select
30 acres of land for himself, 20 acres for his wife, and
10 acres for each child.
Steerage passengers will be supplied with a warrant
authorising them to purchase lands at any of the
Government auction sales without payment to the
value of £lB for each member of the family over
fifteen years of age; their warrants being accepted
as cash for the amount.
Lands to be granted under these warrants must he
selected within one year after the date of issue, and
the holder must reside five years in the colony before
the actual freehold title will he granted him. The
land will not be forfeited by death if any of the
family remain in the colony and improvements are
made.
The following letters, relating to the colony of
Tasmania, appeared in the London Times on the dates
given:—
Times, 15th October, 1881.
TASMANIA.
[from our own correspondent.]
Melbourne, 29 th August, 1881.
Among the emigration fields open to the reduntant
population of the mother country, certainly not the
least interesting is Tasmania. Nearly as large as
Ireland or Ceylon, and with a better climate and
more productive soil than either, its population is
yet not much over 100,000 souls—men, women, and
children, all told. The health resort of the sur-
rounding colonies and even far-off India itself, it yet
has not advanced in anything like the same measure
as its neighbours. Some explanation of this may he
attempted a little farther on, but at present I wish
to call the attention of your readers to the rapid pro-
gress the island is now making, mainly on the
strength of its mineral resources. The Mount Bis-
choff Tin mine, one of the richest, if not the very-
richest tin mine in the world—described as a
mountain of metal quarried rather than mined
—has now been worked some seven or eight years,
and is paying such enormous dividends that a
mining fever has set in, and the consequent
floating of new companies is the infatuation of the


hour. The precious metals have also been discovered
in various parts of the island, and several gold mines
have been worked with great profit to the owners.
Until carefully explored, however, by Victorians,
the Tasmanians themselves were ignorant of the
variegated treasures around them and beneath their
feet.
It was in the year 1872 that large deposits of tin,
ore were first discovered at Mount Bischoff, on the
northern side of the island, opposite to Victoria.
From the outset, the mine in its product of tin
proved to be what the Burra Burra of South Austra-
lia was at first as a copper mine, viz. a deposit so
vast as to render superfluous the ordinarily tardy
and expensive operations of mining. A mining fever
set in, and successively were discovered, not merely
many more tin deposits,but also gold,silver,bismuth,
antimony, iron, and coal apparently inexhaustible.
From the year 1866 to June 30, 1879, the returns of
gold were 48,753 oz. from the alluvial and 72,186 oz.
from the quartz. People begin to talk of Tasmanian
millionaires, the floating of companies has become a
sort of profession, and many speculative and enter-
prising spirits have already left Victoria to try their
luck on the gold and tin fields of North Tasmania.
The cry is for population, and employers say,
“ What are the emigration clauses worth, of which
■we read so much in The Times, unless some reasonable
share of any exodus from the mother country shall
be poured into these colonies instead of to the United
States ? ” Surely, a not unreasonable question.
Every British emigrant landing at New York
becomes an alien to the country he has quitted, and
yet not at onee a citizen of the land of his adoption.
Every British emigrant landing here is at once at
home among his countrymen, and if sober and steady
may not only secure a comfortable livelihood, but if
also intelligent may attain, as not a few operatives
have already attained, honourable and responsible
positions in the administration of the affairs of the
country.
I have made within the last few weeks my third
visit to Tasmania. About 24 hours’ steaming takes
us from the Queen’s Wharf, Melbourne, to the town
of Launceston, situate about 40 miles up the beautiful
river Tamar. As we pass the picturesque points and
through the winding reaches of this noble stream, we
are sure to overhear some European tourist amid his
raptures remark “ that a sprinkling of ruined castles
alone is wanting to give us here an Australian
Rhine.” Artists and young ladies make use of their
sketch-books, and the time seems short which brings
us to the shallowest, shoaliest, most cramped, and
incommodious port (if pert it deserves to be called)
in all these colonies. Nevertheless, being, as it is,
the head of the navigation of the river, it is the best,
and so the good folk of Launceston get on with it as
well as they can. Now that they are becoming rich
and ambitious and have started a sort of stock-
exchange and share lists, they are beginning to make
vested interests nervous by discussing the policy of
starting another port nearer the mouth of the river,
near Bass’s Straits, and, above all, nearer to Victoria.
With much heaving, and grounding, and windlass-
ing, and some impatient expletives from less experi-
enced travellers, the steamer is hauled hither and
thither, now on the mud and now off, until we are at
last brought alongside the wharf. The passengers
pour down the gangway for their respective destina-
tions ; not a few, like myself, bound per rail for the
salmon ponds, and the trout streams, and the shoot-
ing on the southern or Hobart side of the island.
Thera is therefore, a rush for the afternoon train.
Of all the railways I have ever trusted my life to—
and I have crossed from New York to San Francisco
—I take the line which Launceston and
Hobart, the northern and southern side of the island,
as the most boldly defiant of engineers’ misgivings
touching the sharpness of curves. When, half-
expectant of being hurled by centrifugal force down
some of the Tasmanian gullies, we, with more or less
rapid, snakelike motion, wind our way round the
steep sides of heavy-wooded hills, and look down
into apparently bottomless deeps, are occasionally
whisked round such bonds that wo can look out of
window and every now and then see the locomotive
as if about to come back to us, the experience mav be
regarded as exciting rather than pleasant. Never-
theless, the Tasmanians are able to boast'their ‘ ex-
emption hitherto from serious accident, and, therefore
they rather pride themselves than otherwise in
possessing a railway which seems to go round corners,
and which, eccentric as it is, can so confound the
wisdom of the scientific. V“Tho run across the island
in seven hours brings us to Hobart, the capital (for
some aesthetic reason the inhabitants have abandoned
the old name of Hobart Town), and hero wo find—
non obstante the alleged general slowness—that the
Hobartians are little behind the rest of the world in
the comfort of their hotels and not at all behind them
in their charges.
On the following morning, which rises so fresh, sunny
and exhilarating, that indoor life seems to us like
something lost to human happiness, we start for Now
Norfolk, and are borne along the sweet-briared and
flower-decked banks of the beautiful Derwent. A few
hours before sundown we find ourselves in a comfort-
able, thoroughly old English hotel. The picturesque
little township of New Norfolk is situate on the left
side of the Derwent, going from Hobart, and we have
ample time before dinner to stroll through and around
the place and admire its beautiful hop-gardons, and
orchards, and snug homesteads, with their ruddy,
flaxen-haired sunburnt little children discontinuing '
their games for a while to stare at the now
arrivals by coach and steam. We have time, too, to
choose out the point of the 'river for attacking the
trout, and whether we are successful or not, we are not
without resource. We have a sketch-book and the
last fortnight’s (our last fortnight) file of The Times ,
and we have the “ Guide to Tasmania.” Moored in
our boat, between the toweringand magnificent cliffs,
which here enclose the fair river on either side, we
may have a picture gallery, too, in the reflected
glories of these bosky rocks in the glassy depths of
the Der went—pictures which the artist gazes at with
mixed delight and despair as he strives in vain to
secure even some faint suggestion of them on his
canvas.
I pass over angling successes and failures as of no
interest to your readers, for the operation of trout
fishingis the same wherever there are trout to be caught.
But I must here remark that the salmon trout grows
to such a size*in Tasmania that some experts assert
that the product is a hybrid—notwithstanding the
richness of hisVspots—between the salmo salar and
the English trout as imported. A small boy in a
boat near mine caught one weighing nearly 20 lbs.
avoirdupois, and the young captor was, of course, the
hero of the hour. The trout is now naturalised in
every Tasmanian river, the Clyde, Forth, Huon, &c.,
and the Government charge 10s. for the annual licence
to fish in any part of the island.
To return to the character and resources of the
country. Its climate has been justly compared with
that of J ersey or the Isle of) Wight; and the exquisite
variety of ([mountain and valley, and lake and river,


we meet in. our travels in this island is not to he found
in any part of the' adjacent continent. The very
names of the country have evidently been suggested
hy their topographical similarity to the corresponding
scenery of old England Kent, Cumberland, Devon
Dorset, Cornwall, Somerset, Buckingham, Lincoln.
Westmoreland, Pembroke, Monmouth, Glamorgan.
The land gradually rises towards the centre of the
country, and two mountain chains, the eastern and
the western, run through it in a northerly and
southerly direction. The eastern range has its Ben
Lomond, above 5,000 feet high, and Ben Nevis is
3,910 feet high. In the western range we have
Mount Humboldt, 5,520 feet; Valentine peak, 6,000
feet; Mount Arrowsmith, 4,075 feet; and Dry’s
Bluff, 4,500 feet. Mounts Wellington, 4,170 feet;
Dromedary, 3,545 feet; Thombs, 1,800 feet; Bruni,
1,060 feet; and Cape Pillar—are on the southern
*ide of the island. The noble mass, Mount Welling-
ton, immediately at the back of Hobart town,
is a fine feature in the landscape, and is con-
sulted as a “weather-glass” by the surrounding
inhabitants, who look for rain or sunshine just as the
clouds may range themselves about “Old Welling-
ton’s ” head. The lakes of the island are numerous
and all of them fresh, “The Great Lake” (as Mr.
Wildey states in his “ Australasia and the Oceanic
Region ”) “ is 50 miles in circumference, and has an
area of 50,000 acres, and is situated on the central
plateau; it is 3,822 feet above the level of the sea,
and very deep.” Lake St. Clair, 10,000 acres, is
west of the Great Lake, and Lake Arthur, 15,000
acres, is east of it. Lake Sorell, 15,000 acres, is
east of Lake Arthur. These are all very deep.
Lake Echo, 2,500 acres, is 2,000 feet above the sea
and west of Hobart Town. The rivers are numer-
ous, and some of them, such as the Derwent, the
Tamar, and the Huon, are navigable for many
miles ; “and the Nile, Florentyno, Dee, Broadriver,
Ouse, Clyde, Russell Falls, Styx, Lachlan, Humph-
rey, and'New Town Rivers flow info the Derwent.”
This latter, when it comes abreast of Hobart, is
rather an arm of the sea than a river. By far the
larger portion of the good arable land (very much of
it yet available for new arrivals) lies on the northern
—he. the Launceston side of the island, and were
this harbour only of one-fifth the capacity of that of
Hobart nothing could prevent Launceston from soon
becoming the capital city of the country. Even as it
is she is fast overtaking Hobart in population, as
she has already outstripped her in commerce. In
the broad plains and valleys the soil is generally
very fertile, and although in some parts sheep farm-
ing on a large scale is carried on, as in the neigh-
bouring colonies, there is a far larger proportion of
solid, thriving horn steads of the English style than
arc to be found in some younger settlements. Green
lanes and fields, divided from each other frequently
by black and whitethorn and sweetbriar hedges, and
the homesteads enclosed in brick walls, makes us
almost think we are in Old Kent or Sussex; and the
farmyards, barns, manure-heaps, duck-ponds, pig-
sties, stables, and cattle stalls, sis well as the orchards
and flower and kitchen gardens, are so completely
of the home style that we need no other assurance that
English farming men have been busy here for more
than one generation. In all parts of the island, too,
save the western region, country gentleman’s well-
kept mansions and grounds are very much more
commonly met with than in the younger colony of
Victoria. Fishing, shooting, and hunting are the
favourite recreations ; and following the Nile Hunt,
sometimes nearly 100 Nimrods turn out in their gay
green uniform. The hospitality of these prosperous
sportsmen is proverbial, although, perhaps, not
many them can, like the Hon Thomas Roibey, the
late Premier of the Tasmanian Government, give
a chance visitor to his beautiful place, Entally, a
run with his own capital pack of beagles. Such a
life is, perhaps, deemed slow by those whose whole
thoughts ara bent on money-making. But, after
all, there is something in the monition, “ Carpe
diem." These Tasmanians live, and live a healthy
life, while too many of our Victorians are merely,
in their feverish pursuit of wealth, only going to live
some day —if they are not snatched away before the
day comes.
Various causes have contributed to retard the
growth of Tasmania in population and other ele-
ments of material progress. The principal one may
be the convict origin of this community, and the
dependence of so many of its free, as well as of its
emancipated inhabitants, for so many years, on the
large Imperial expenditure which took place while
the transportation system was in force. The spirit
of enterprise thus dulled could not be expected to
suddenly acquire strength when the system was
brought to an end in the year 1853 But further
affecting the progress of Tasmania was the discovery
of gold in Victoria and New South Wales two years
before the abolition of transportation. The immedi-
ate effect of this was to draw from the island almost
all the able-bodied men who could get away to the
gold-fields. Farms were abandoned, shops shut up,
private houses left untenanted, and the cases were
common in which very old men and women and
young children were obliged at shortest notice to
tend the flocks and herds which had been abandoned
by the shepherds and stocksmen. Although the
island is famous for the beauty, and more especially
for the brilliant complexions of its girls, it was one
of th e facetiae of the day that, as all the bachelors had
cleared out of Tasmania, there was nothing for it
but for the girls to follow, and many of them did so.
Even Victoria never dreamt of laying an import
duty on Tasmanian belles for the purpose of protect-
ing our own damsels’ marriage interest. As time
rolled on, things adjusted themselves. As all could
not make their fortunes at the goldfields, the reflux
of Tasmanian youth to th'lr own fine country soon
restored society to something of its former condition.
It is now in its turn attracting population from
the surrounding colonies ; and it will continue
to do so. For so small a community it is singu-
larly well provided with all the means and
appliances of civilization. There are 116 public
schools in the colony—viz., seven in Hobart, three
in Launceston, and one in every country township.
There are also four high schools —Horton College,
Hutchinson’s School, the High School, and the
Church of England Grammar School, besides many
other private schools. From all these schools pupils
can be sent up annually to compete for the degree of
“Associate of Arts,” which entitles the graduate to
further compete for a scholarship of £2OO, tenable
for four years, at a British University. Education
is compulsory, under a money penalty for breach of
the law. The census of 1874 gives the whole num-
ber of churches and chapels in the colony as 316 and
the ministers as 129. The various sects are enumer-
ated as follows; — Church of England, 53,047 ;
Roman Catholics, 22,091 ; Church of Scotland, 6,644;
Free Church of Scotland, 2,420 ; Wesleyans, 7,187 ;
Independents, 3,931 ; Baptists, 931 ; Jews, 232;
Society of Friends, 82 ; other sects, 2,763. The
Roman Catholic body have started anew cathedral
within the last year in Hobart. The pride, pomp,
and circumstances of the opening—at which I was


present—were impressive in their way, and well
calculated to excite the respect ol minds, which as
Bacon says, “ are educated to believe.”
The two following: letters appeared in The Baptist
of the 14th April and Ist of September, 1882, res-
pectively :
To the Editor of the Baptist.
Dear Sir, —Although on this side of the world we
get your valuable paper every week—only about six
weeks after it leaves you—and from it we gather
that you have millions more people in England,
than can comfortably live on one another. Here wo
have a magnificent country, and but comparatively
few people to live upon it. Our island is nearly or
quite as large as England, and has only about
100,000 people in it. And when in a few years we
have made “ our pile ” we care but very little about
returning to the old country, for life here is infinitely
more enjoyable. Our summers are not so hot as a
warm English summer, and our winters are composed
chiefly of bright beautiful days and nights, with no
snow, and very little frost. All kinds of provisions
are very cheap ; fruits now, such as plums, peaches,
pears, apples, etc., are about ss. per bushel, and
very abundant. We get the credit for being the
most English of any colony ; indeed, take away
our magnificent scenery and broad streets, and you
would not know Hobart town from any English
town of 25,000 inhabitants. Wc pay our labouring
classes so well that unfortunately we get but very
little work in return. The most commonplace farm
labourer gets 30s. per week, out of which the single
man can comfortably save half, or three parts if _he
knows how to manage cheaply. I am now paying
my groom, a single young man, £1 per week with
board and lodging. My gardener gets 335. per
week and a house to live in. And of this class, as
well as miners, who get Bs. per day, we want any
number. Of the educated classes, save farmers,
of whom an unlimited number is required, we want
in Hobart first a man of the right stamp to form a
Baptist Church ; and as for pay, well, he would get
just as much as he was worth, our present
ministers being neither conspicuous for brilliancy nor
hard work, and we have no Baptist churchin the town.
A practical architect could soon work into a good
connection; also a coachbuilder, cither of which
ought very soon to make £l,OOO a year. Like you,
we have plenty of splendid flour, but no baker any
good, although we pay for bread cent, per cent, on
the cost of the flour; and if English drapers and
clothiers or stationers considered the price of their
wares here - just about double your prices—while
the cost of transit is only £2 per ton, I fancy some
of them would soon cut into the trade rather than
starve whore they are. Indeed, I can see a fortune
in every old apple-woman’s stall for the man who
knows how to work, and especially how to keep or
invest money when he has earned it. And I might
be allowed to speak with some authority, as I landed
here eight years ago with two ten-pound notes in
my pocket and within five years I was getting
£2,000 a year; but I average fifteen hours’ work a
day. I enclose my card, which you are welcome to
give to anyone asking my address, and will do my
best to answer any letters they may care to write.
Yours &c.,
Hobart, Feb. 20, 1882. Tasman.
[When we mention that our correspondent is one
with whom both Mr. Yarley and "Mr. Thomas Spur-
geon stayed when in the colony, it will be under-
stood that ho is one who may claim to speak.— Ed.
Baptist. 1
To the Editor of the Baptist.
Dear Sir, —As my letter signed “Tasman” so
much interested your readers, I will, by your kind
permission, now give them a few particulars about
our beautiful island home; and try to answer
through ycur columns many of the queries which I
have been unable to answer privately.
The first man I met when starting for Tasmania
was a croaker—on the vessel there were croakers—
in Melbourne they abounded—and on landing here
I encountered a fine specimen; all saying that I had
come to the wrong place, that it was “Sleepy Hol-
low,” &c., and they were all more or less right; but
I will not attempt to give you my opinion of the
generality of the native-born population from
English parents, or when my letter reaches this I
shall get a homily read me on the evil bird that dis-
figures its own nest, so will content myself with
saying that most of them have a strongly-rnaikcd
aversion to work, but that makes it all the better for
those who will work. What pay can I get ? seems
to be the first question to be answered, and in reply I
will give the pay now being obtained by a few I
have induced to come, or met after coming out
within the last few months. The first, a blind youth
of nineteen years old, came out as a piano-tuner
from the Sydenham Royal Normal College. He has
made from £3 to £4 per week, and within a year was
driving about in his “ Whitechapel.” The second,
a farmer, is receiving £2OO a year with house, fuel,
etc., as manager of a farm. The third, a farmer,
went straight into work as manager of a milk depot,
making £4 to £5 a week, with a good chance of
making much more. His son, aged eighteen, who
came out to assist him, was offered £lOO a year by
our Government to work as telegraphic operator—
which work he had been doing in London—and
quickly left his father; and a sister gets £1 a week to
manage a milk depot. Ayoung chemist is getting £4OO
a yearas analyist and assayer of metals; another is get-
ting a handsome salary as manager of a business and
dispenser. A lame youth, who arrived a few weeks
ago, walking with a crutch, rather puzzled us, but
we set him to work driving a cart for the delivery of
goods, giving him a small boy to do the running.
For this he gets 10s a week with board and lodging.
A blacksmith has started but a few weeks, and his
shop now is seldom without a horse to shoe at 4s. and
ss. the set. An invalid of a few months ago now
gets £lOO a year as a schoolmaster, and everyone
wishes he had come out long ago. In business a
smart fellow with “go” and some capital can do
pretty well what he likes. I knew three years ago
an assistant at £BO a year; now, after starting
with borrowed capital, and getting goods through
colonial merchants, he is making fully £l,OOO a year
an up-country storekeeper. Several assistants
have written to ask what chance there is for
them here, and what pay. The pay for an assi-
tant is about double what he would get in
England. But if his present employers would
keep him supplied with goods to open branch depots
or business here, they might find it to their mutual
advantage, especially where fashions are concerned,
as our seasons begin just when yours are over ; and
in provisions, &c., anyone at home can buy to much
greater advantage. Shops are tolerably plentiful,
and not much above English rents, with but very
few taxes. A duty of from five to ten per cent, is
charged on goods when landed. Drapery and cloth-
ing are just about double English retail prices. Gro-
cery : a shilling tin or packet is sold for 1/3. Sta-
tionery : your paper is charged l|d. ; printed books :
a 4s. book is charged ss. (there is no duty on liter-


ature), and other stationery at similar rate—printing
being about three times the English price so far as I
can ascertain. Ironware, crockery and the like are
sold at similar rates.
Assistants and labourers who will work, need not
fear finding work to do and good remuneration if
they understand their trade, with every chance of
rising in their avocation if they prove themselves
worthy of it. But, sir, we do not want lazy, spend-
thrift characters who are no good at home, who know
no trade, and will do no work. A man’s income
here will be in exact proportion to the amount of
work he can get through himself, whatever his
avocation may'' be.
What will it cost me to live ? is another question,
and the reply entirely depends upon the thrift of a
man’s housekeeper. Enough bullocks’ heads and
feet, shins of beef, sheeps’ heads and plucks, &c.,
pass my house every day in the manure-carts to
keep a small town; but these are not good enough
for our people. The butchers tell me they cannot
get a shilling for a bullock’s head, whilst rump-
steak at sixpence per pound sells readily, roasting
joints of meat, fivepence; mutton, threepence;
bread, sevenpence 4lb. loaf ; potatoes, four shillings
per cwt. Fish is very plentiful in our magnificent
river, but for want of energy in catching and
selling them they come dear to the consumer.
Rabbits are retailed at the door at fourpence and
fivepence each.
Is the climate healthy? othersask. A gentleman told
me before leaving England that if there was a heaven
upon earth it was Tasmania. Without entirely endors-
ing this I do believe that for the English constitution
there is no climate in the world so productive of long
life and invalids who are not too bad when they land
do exceedingly well. According to our census lately
taken, about every sixth man or woman is over
sixty-five years old, and the mortality in the country
districts is only ten in the thousand, or about half
vour mortality. In our towns it is rather higher.
Owing to our geographical position, we never get
very hot weather, as they do in Australia, and very
rarely see frost or snow. The atmosphere itself being
dry and bracing, we would often like to give you
a week’s sun for a week’s rain. You publish your
days of sunshine, whilst we keep account of our
rainy days. Still, the aggregate of our rainfall is
about twenty-four inches a year. With sufficient
moisture, vegetation goes on for eleven months in
the year.
Many ask for particulars about agriculture. At
present labour is so scarce that thousands of acres of
fine land are being bought up by capitalists and turned
into sheep runs, whilst we have over ten millions of
acres of bush yet to be fenced in, cleared and
stocked. This land is under offer to anyone at £1
per acre, pick and choose where he likes,
and pay for it during fourteen years ; or if a man
brio "S a wife and family with him he gets 100 acres
given him, and he can pick out this just like the
purchaser. An interesting little book, “Emigra-
tion to Tasmania, by a recent Settler,” is published
for 1/- by Moxon, Covent Garden. The writer is
quite unknown to me, and evidently has lived in
the bush since arrival. A cleared farm, with home-
stead can be bought for from £2 to £5 an acre, or
rented for about 10/- to 15/-, and there are no tithes
or poor rates and very few other rates—only a police
rate and an occasional road rate for keeping cross
and bye roads in repair. A splendid farm near
Hobart was sold by auction a few days ago for £6
an acre, with homestead, hop-garden, fruit-garden,
and 200 acres under irrigation. There are plenty of
such farms to let or sell; and where a farmer has a
little capital to start, and especially if he has sons who
can work it, he can do well. The crops grown are
similar to English, and no had summers _to spoil
crops when grown. Want of rain is our chief trou-
ble. Prices : Wheat, ss. to 7s. per bushel; barley,
3s. 6d. to 45.; oats, 2s. 6d. to 3s. 6d. ; peas, 3s. to
45.; potatoes, £4 to £5 per ton ; mangold, 2£>s. to
305.; carrots, 40s. and so on. Butter, Is. to Is. 6d. :
cows, £5 to £lO : fat stock, £lB to £2O.
Some correspondents ask me about sheep and cat-
tle runs. A large one of 17,000 acres was let by
tender lately for £1,500 a year, capable of carrying
12,000 sheep, which are worth 10s. each as store,
15s. fat, and the wool weighs heavier and is more
valuable from our merino sheep than wool produced
in England. Good flocks of merinos average from
51h. to 61b. of wool, which realised here this year
from Is. 3d. to Is. sd. per lb., and much more to
those who sent to the London wool sales. Our export
last year amounted to half a million. Of course
smaller runs are often let or sold.
For the small capitalist and agricultural labourer
fruit-growing is one of our leading industries. Last
year we exported £156,000 worth of fruit and jam, a
great part of which was produced by cottagers and
small farmers. Thus, I was in a garden a short time
since where an illiterate man, who came out as a shep-
herd,had leased about 20 acres from his master on long
lease for £l5 a year, then cleared and planted it with
raspberries and currants. I saw plenty of raspberry
canes from 10 feet to 12 feet high ; and this year he
sent into the jam stores over 40 tons, at £26 a top,
and nearly as many currants and other small fruit.
Apples, pears, and plums are largely grown, and two
or three of the principal growers tell me they can
average from £6O to £7O per acre a year out of the
produce; hut, of course, the trees take four or five
years to mature, during which the settler has a rub
along by growing small stuff, vegetables, &c., be-
tween the trees. The demand for all fruits is pretty
well unlimited.
Our mining is now developing into a large industry.
Last year we exported £587,000 worth of gold and
tin, and much of the island seems to abound with
metallic ores, so that practical miners are doing
splendidly. One tin mine—Mount Bischoff —is the
wonder of the world, and the most valuable. Whole
tracts of bush land contain tin ore in the surface soil,
so that working miners oßen make £1 a day by
washing it out. Coal seams abound, but have never
yet been opened for the want of energy and capital,
although there is a good demand at from 20/- to 30/-
per ton.
The most striking indication of the productiveness
of our island is shown in the amount of our exporta-
tion. Our population is 116,000, out of whom there
are only about 27,000 able-bodied men; yet, not-
withstanding what is written above about our people,
we last year exported £1,555,576 worth of produce,
or nearly £5B for every able-bodied man, after keep-
ing our own family of 116,000. This, I think, sir,
speaks volumes ; and I question whether any country
in the world can heat it.
Many correspondents have asked me about houses
and house rents. Houses are to he obtained at fair
rents—a small six-roomed house about 10/- to 12/-
a week. Several have asked me about the style of
house, but there are a variety —some built of wood
and others of stone or brick.' Several ask mo about
material worn for dress. Just about the same as is
worn in England, except the heaviest woollen goods,
which we do not require.


Several of the ministers you mention amongst the
many who applied for my address, have written to
me, and as I do not know any of them I can only
give general advice. If your people are careless
about going to church the mass of our people are
much worse, and if a minister cannot draw at home,
the worst possible thing he can do is to come out
here, where he will he worse off, at least in the
ministry, than where he is ; hut if he can draw five
hundred at home he will get a thousand here, and
more than double the pay he would get out of the
same number of English people.
I remain, yours faithfully,
H. Benjafield, M.B.
Hobart, Tasmania.
The following letter, written by B. 0., who went
to the colony in 1879, was written to a friend in
Manchester. It appeared in The Colonies and Indian
on sth and 12th November, 1881. Emigrants of
this class will do well to observe the rule, if on
arriving in the colonies they do not find speedy
employment at the kind of work to which they have
been accustomed to, take any kind of occupation that
turns up, and push on until something more suitable
appears. Never be idle :
Quadrant, Launceston, Tasmania.
June 2nd, 1881.
Dear Friend, —Yours of April 19 and 20 to hand
this day. I hasten to redeem (or I should perhaps
say make reparation) for my neglect in not having
written to you sooner. I fully intended to have
written you in reply to your former letter, hut was
so busy at the time struggling with harvest work
that I kept putting it off.
And now in regard to the important question of
my opinions about this colony; although I feel most
anxious to persuade both you and F. to come here
if possible, I confess I do not feel justified in taking
such a responsibility upon myself ; I therefore pur-
pose simply describing to you what I think of its
present condition and prospects, and then leaving
you to form your own conclusion and act accordingly.
As regards its'present condition, I may say it does not
require a very keen observer to see that it is in a com-
paratively prosperous condition, so much so that a
considerable item in the daily news is the recording
of new business ventures of various descriptions that
are continually being established here ; therefore, if
this can be taken as any criterion, it must indicate
a flourishing state of things. I will send you a
newspaper that will show you something of it ; I
have also during the last few months had consider-
able opportunity of observing the business of the
town. All the shops appear to be doing very satis-
factory business, and I may remark that they are
not the rude country stores that we were wont to
fancy them in England, but fine, well-appointed
shops, such as those in Oldham Street, or St. Ann’s
Square, and almost as well posted in regard to
fashion and every new designs as you are in Man-
chester ; so much so that I cannot possibly place
these few things for F., because they are said to be
so old in patterns and colours that dealers would not
entertain them at more than half their price. You
would be surprised, as I was, to see them so close
upon the heels of Europe in dress and fashion; in
fact there is scarcely anything in Launceston to dis-
tinguish it from a first-class provincial town of Eng-
land, except it be the numerous wooden houses it
still contains; but in all the principal business
streets these are being fast replaced Jby substantial
brick buildings, and the banks, post-office, town-
hall, and many other buildings, are either built
with stone or faced with cement in imitation of
stone, which sets in such a way that it appears to
possess all the solidity and hardness of real stone ;
they also make footpaths of it, as it sets so hard.
Now, although from general observation this is
the character of the place, still, on closer observa-
tion, there are many enterprises to he found in
Manchester that have no existence here, or that are
on such an inferior scale that they would be soon
eclipsed, and make a much greater success if con-
ducted on the Manchester scale ; hence I consider
that numerous openings exist for further enterprise
on improved conditions. But you might say, Are
such enterprises wanted? Well, not only do I
think that all such enterprises tend to the general
good, and that they tend to increase the want of
them, but, over and above this, I would say that
the very extensive development of mining industries,
consequent upon the recent numerous discoveries of
gold reefs and tin lodes, must necessarily tend to
increase the want of the numerous enterprises to
which I allude. You will notice that in these
remarks my mind is fixed more particularly upon
this town ; but there are new villages and towns
springing up in various directions, as, for instance,
Beaconsfield, which only a short time ago was plain
Brandy Creek, now a considerable town ; and at some
recent Government land sales, lots of 30 perches to
1 rood sold at £3O to £SO per lot, and there are
about twenty different mining companies at work
gold-mining, some of them paying very high
dividends —so much so that I hear of one firm, an
ironmonger in this town, who receives his £5,000 a
year from them. This and many such will doubt-
less circulate through various branches of trade here.
Lefroy is another similar place that has grown, and
has been rechristened by the present Governor after
himself; it was formerly Nine Mile Springs.
Another such is a place recently christened Glad-
stone, formerly Mount Cameron, where some very
extensive gold reefs and tin lodes have been
discovered. I should say about twenty com-
panies have been formed, each with from £12,000
to £20,000 of capital, during the last nine months
in that one locality. These will fast become con-
siderable towns ; and there are many many others
that I could name in other parts of the colony. In
fact, so numerous are the discoveries of the precious
metal, that I am very much tempted to go propect-
ing myself, and see if I cannot find a gold or tin
mine. There are hundreds of men less likely than
I am who have become suddenly rich by such dis-
coveries in this colony, and new finds are still being
reported almost daily. I often think if people at
home could only realise the nature and value of these
things, many a small capitalist would soon be over
here, buying them up and working them as private
concerns. Most of them do not spend in plant and
working more than from £2,000 to £5,000 before they
become self-supporting, and begin to pay back the
capital.
Many men have made a splendid thing out of
share-broking and dealing in them. I was tempted
to nibble at them myself, and bought a “promoter ”
in one new discovery, and, after keeping it about a
month, sold it for £lO more. Had I kept it another
day I could have had a further £25 for it, as that
was what they went to after a small trial-crushing of
some of the stone. I now hold a few shares in two
others that I bought by way of a small speculation.
I had them at a very low price, and should a favour-
able report come qf the working at any time, they


would go up to five times the amount, or more, imme-
diately. I have already had an opportunity of selling
one lot at 25 per cent, profit, hut held on for more.
Nearly all the people here have become interested in
mining shares. Shares and scrip are the principal
topics of the day.
I have thus far treated only of the commercial aspect
of the colony, hut I fancy you asking, What about
farming, of which you should now know something
both from observation, heresay, and experience F
Well I cannot say much in its favour, either from
experience or hearsay. I have concluded that my
venture was a mistake in that line, not as against
farming in the abstract, hut in the farm I happened
to take, without a much greater capital than I
possessed. I soon discovered my error, and would
have withdrawn from it within a week, but was not
allowed to forego the agreement. I never told you
this before, as I was ashamed to do so ; but when it
was found I was unable to cope thoroughly with such
a farm, I was permitted to leave it at the end of the
year; not, however, without considerable loss. So
much for my experience of farming. Still, had I
taken a smaller farm with a much lighter soil, or
had I taken up my own allotment of Crown land and
cleared it, or had I taken a purely pastoral farm, I
believe that I should have succeeded, even although
agricultural farming, according to all accounts, has
been satisfactory for some years past. Still, I no-
ticed where people own the farms, they are, or they
all seem to be, in a comparatively prosperous condi-
tion ; and, as I have previously remarked, the large
sheep-farmers, or pastoral farmers, are the aristoc-
racy of the colony.
Agricultural produce has certainly been at a very
low price since I came here; but I think a change
has already come in its favour, and it does not
require one to be much versed in social or commer-
cial economy, to know that the before mentioned-
development of mining industries must tend greatly
to the benefit of the farmer ; but more than this, I
am convinced that the political obstacles of financial
impost by other colonies will shortly be removed,
and leave an outlet greatly in favour of Tasmania in
the future.
There, now, although I began by treating my
subject under different heads of present and future
prospects, I find I have so interwoven them as to
sketch them both together; so you must sort them
for yourself—only I shall be sure to lose my charac-
ter as a foreign correspondent.
Now, if you think of coming here I can tell you
what would be a good thing, if it cculd be obtained,
and that is an agency for J. K. & Sons here or at
Melbourne. I would like to join you in such a pro-
j ect —one to be always at the depot, the other to be
trading with all the colonies here. I find their goods
held in sufficient repute here by the few that buy
them, and I feel sure a big trade could be done for
such a house. You might see Mr. H. in the
whites, or Mr. W, in the greys, and just tell them
what I have to say about this, and I have no doubt
but they would ascertain if such a project could be
entertained, and let you know. I only mention
them as knowing me. I think all that would be
required, would be regular posting up with patterns
and correspondence, and the orders could be sent to
them. I fancy a very moderate commission would
pay, with some small allowance for expenses to
begin with. I leave this to your consideration, but
think it worth a trial.
Idare say you have heard ere this reaches you that
we have started a small business here, but
it is. About a month or six weeks ago we received a
letter from Mr. Charles O’N., who was in Sydney :
he said he had come out for the good of his health,
and would probably come over here and see us before
going back. I wrote inviting him to do so, but he
replied that he was very ill, and intended to go back
on April 20 by steamer ; so I have no doubt, if he
survived the voyage, he would report our removal
to Launceston. Well, as our funds had got low, any
large business was out of the question; but during
my short stay in Melbourne, before coming here, I
noticed a great institution of the place was good
restaurants, where a remarkably good dinner could be
had for sixpence, which were patronised so exten-
sively that I suppose the quantity made it pay. Well,
during my numerous visits to Launceston, while at
the farm, I noticed there was no place where I could
get a decent dinner under eigkteenpence, and no
restaurant at all, but only confectioners, who pro-
vided that in addition to their bakery business. _ So,
believing that would suit my family (Mrs. being a
moderately good cook), and as they were all anxious
to undertake it, and estimating that it could be
commenced with very little capital, I decided to take
a place for that purpose, and have now been in it
four months, during which time it has done a little
more than maintain us, and seems likely to grow into
a good business, which, together with a little share-
broking, will perhaps carry us on until something
better presents itself, which I don’t think will be long.
In this colony there is a buoyancy about business af-
fairs which will enable any steady man to make his
way. We are conducting our business on a similar
principle to what it was at the club, making up a good
dinner for a shilling, which is giving general satis-
faction, and we have now a very respectable lot of
patrons. We have a good house for the purpose,
with two nice dining-rooms, a large kitchen, and
four good bedrooms ; and although not in a front or
principal street, we are in the very centre of the
town and near to the main streets. Thus, you see,
I myself have adopted one of the several little enter-
prises that I notice there are openings for in this
locality, and am sanguine it can be made a success.
There are others more or less valuable according to
the amount of capital that can be put into them._ I
submit all the information I can upon these points
for your consideration, supposing that if you elected
to come here you did not wish to farm, but that is an
alternative which I am not sure it was not desirable
to adopt—l mean in the bush on the Crown grant of
land—as every acreof new-cleared land of good quality
becomes four or five times its value, even as a nego-
tiable commodity, exclusive of its productiveness of
all the necessaries of life. I often think it would, or
might have been, a fortunate thing if I had gone on
to the land I first selected, as it was not only very
rich level ground, but it was within a few miles of
where a valuable gold reef has since been discovered,
and Government are already making a good road
through it, as the nearest way to an extensive range
of gold-bearing country, which will not only greatly
increase the value of such land, but I also might
have been allured to the discovery of some mine of
hidden treasure.
I need not dilate upon the difference of climate as
I have previously described this, but I can now say
that whenever my thoughts turn upon home —as
England is always called here —and I feel that I
would again like to see the old place and old friends,
and, if circumstances favoured me, to end my days
there—the thoughts of the loveliness of the climate


here compared with England invariably reconciles
me and dispels the desire ever to return, and I am
forced to conclude that it is much more a place to
retire to on a well-earned competency than it is to
secure (rapidly) such a competency. I therefore wind
up these observations by saying that Ido not regret
having come here ; I admire and like the place very
much, and purpose devoting my remaining energies
to consolidate a position, and henceforth remain in
it as the most desirable place I have ever before seen
or read of.
I feel so ashamed of not having written before,
that 1 do not know when to stop, but you well know
that I am writing all this for yourself, and as you are
set down as a decided pessimist, you will not conclude
from my remarks to undertake so gigantic a change
as coming here ; but should any combination of
events induce you so to resolve, I would advise you
not to come the same way we came; it was a great
mistake on our part ; but come by steamer from
London, and be assured there is a warm-hearted
friend who will receive you here, and gladly give
you all the benefit of what experience he has gained
from a two years’ precedence of you, and which I
am confident would save you from many a mistake
to which I was liable. You will doubtless let me
know if you intend to come.
I don’t know that I have anything more to say.
We had the Pope’s letter announcing a jubilee read
to us on Sunday last by the Bishop of Hobart, who
was in this town that day. Ido not think there is
near so much zeal among our pastors here as at home,
they appear to let matters move along very quietly.
I was very glad to hear of old friends from you ; I
always like to hear of all the names you can refer to.
You did not sa}' how T was coming on; I was
hoping to have heard from him. Please remember
me to all old friends you can, particularly B ,
F , and others, too numerous to mention, as I am
writing against time to catch the mail.
Yours truly, B. C.
Agriculture
The following statistics of agricultural produce
by Mr. Dugald Buckler may prove interesting to
emigrants:
The climate of the colony is so temperate and
equable, and the quality of the soil, almost through-
out, is so rich, that it produces almost any kind of
vegetation. Although farming has of late years
not been so very remunerative, yet it is freely
asserted that the large influx of population which is
now taking place, in connection with the important
mineral resources of the colony, has already given a
considerable impetus to the farming industries, avd
that it is likely to rapidly increase. The following
particulars relating to the yield of wheat and oats
corroborate this:—
Year. |
Wheat.
Yield.
March.
Average.
Acres.
62,390
58,610
57,633
42,745
38,977
46,719
48,392
45,191
50,022
51,757
1,161,859
947,813
1,066,861
700,092
752,070
846,420
778,977
1,042,999
750,040
977,365
The great increase as compared with 1881 will be
seen at once on reference to the above table, and
while there is an increase of over 200,000 bushels in
wheat, the increase in oats is even more marked,
owing in some measure to the greatly increased
acreage under crop.
A comparison of the harvest with those of the
on the Australian continent shows
Tasmania.
1881. 1882.
Yield—Average. Yield—Average.
Wheat .. 750,040—14-99 .. 977,365—18-88
Oats .. 439,446—22-13 783,129—28-44
Victoria.
Wheat ..9,719,049 9-95 .. 8,714,043 9-46
Oats .. 2,358,459—17-62 .. 3,611,384—24-57
South Australia.
Wheat .. 8,606,510 4-58 .. 8,087,000 4-34
Oats .. 32,219—10-66
While Tasmania shows a large increase in wheat,
both Victoria and South Australia show a serious
decrease upon the previous harvest, and this is more
especially noticeable on account of the flattering
anticipations which were generally indulged in at
the early part of the season.
•rter of wheat Tasmania shows the
iwing available quantity : Bushels,
he yield for 1882 .. .. 977,365
msumption for the year, taking the
population at 121,014, and allow-
ing six bushels per head.. .. 726,084
251,281
From this deduct for seed, say .. 107,000
Balance available for exportation .. 144,281
The following official agricultural statistics for the
year ending 31st March, 1882, will be highly impor-
tant to persons intending to settle in Tasmania :—■
The harvest of the last season was a considerable
improvement on the previous year; as, although the
increase in hand-grown wheat was slightly over a
thousand acres, the yield shows 977,365 bushels,
against 750,040 bushels last year ; while the average
is 18-88. The other great agricultural product, oats,
also shows an increase. Here, however, the area was
27,535 acres against 19,842 last year. The yield is
783,129 bushels, an increase of nearly 350,000
bushels, while the average was 28 -44. The total land
in crops, as might be expected, shows an increase.
The agricultural statistics for the year ending March
31, 1882, show the following results compared with
1881 1881. 1882.
Land under crop ■». .. 140,783 148,494
In permanent grasses .. 132,969 136,321
New land broken up ~ 6,383 4,639
Under bare fallow .. .. 20,442 23,930
Total land under cultivation., 373,299 374,374


It is gratifying to observe that the land under crop
shows an increase, and not a decrease, as has too long
been the case, and this despite the bad season of last
year. The following is a table of the acreage, yield
and average for the past season :
A Yield
Acreage. Bushels .
Average,
per acre.
1881-82.
Wheat
Barley
Oats
51,757 977,365
4,597 102,475
27,535 783,129
83 1,132
5,533 106,345
Beans
Tares
Potatoes
Turnips
Carrots
Mangel wurzel
Onions
Artificial grass seeds
Hay
Linseed
Hops
Wheat and oats, a
considerable increase,
for each district is as
District.
Bothwell
Brighton ..
Campbell Town
Carnarvon
Clarence ..
Deloraine ..
Emu Bay
Evandale
Eingal
George Town
Glamorgan
Glenorchy
Green Ponds
Hamilton
Hobart
Huon
Kingborough
Launceston, Selby
Longford ..
New Norfolk
Oatlands
Portland
210,601 30-77
Port Sorell
91,541 23-95
Bichmond
18,375 24-47
57,598 16-51
2,572 13-82
6,036 15-43
Bussell
20,742 41-24
1,450 26-36
9,466 23-74
Sorell . f
44,839 16-14
i7,iUO 40 < 1
3,845 21-21
Spring Bay
Westbury
6,205 17-58
92,446 24-72
160,787 18-66
Total
783,129 28-44
977,365 18-88
In wheat, Longford, as usual, owing to the grand
grain-producing districts of Bishopsbourne and Cressy
heads the lists with a gross yield of 182,743 bushels,
with an average yield of 20-64 bushels to the acre,
against 173,961 bushels, and an average of 19-36
bushels, showing an increase in gross yield of 8,782
bushels, and an increase in the average of ITB
bushel per acre. The highest average in the island
is shown by Bussell, with 26-36 bushels to the acre,
but the total yield was only 1,450 bushels. In gross
yield, Westbury stands second on the list—a position
6,387
3,182
Tons.
32,565
12,805
12,140
1,987
34,790
26,590
44,957
14,759
668,864
already mentioned.
The gross yield and
follows :
Wheat.
Bushels Average
7,154 14-84
61,248 45-87
3,857 13-20
2,443 18-79
32,388 15-50
49,452 20-36
3,322 22-52
61,092 23-51
34,299 22-57
678 12-79
13,644 16-11
3,804 17-67
42,109 20-41
14,704 18-16
402 18-07
8,093 22.83
2,154 19-36
20,903 19.11
182,743 20-54
24,469 16-56
39,490 16-69
431 17.59
355-64
1,143-81
show a
average
Bushels Average
6,446 25-57
14,500 26-67
3,757 20-36
1,170 32-50
3,395 20-20
137,043 29-12
12*318 32.20
29,715 28-19
14,675 35-88
3,502 19-89
4,996 25-81
6,117 17-88
9,796 26-80
4,879 26-99
330 21-64
5,479 24-65
1,099 22-66
4,182 27-05
59,429 38-46
9,125 19-66
60,782 30-52
1,865 29-14
it also occupied last year — with 160,787 bushels,
against 134,351 for the previous year, and an average
of 18'67 bushels per acre against 15-58, both yield
and average, thus showing a marked advance.
Second upon the list of average yields is another
N.W. Coast district—Port Sorell, and it is also third
on the list of gross yield.
In oats, Port Sorell is considerably in advance of
any other district with the grand yield of 210,601
bushels, the average being an excellent one, viz.
30-77 bushels per acre. This result is third on the
list of averages, Emu Bay and Carnarvon topping
it, but the gross yields for these districts
were only 12,318 and 1,170 bushels respectively.
Last year Port Sorell occupied the same position,
and to show the marked improvement this harvest,
we may mention that last season the yield was 73,271
bushels wheat and 125,313 bushels oats. Deloraine,
it will be noticed, is second on the list with 137,043
bushels, or nearly double as much as it produced last
year.
Barley again shows a decrease, but a much greater
one than in the previous year, the yield for last
harvest being 66,681 bushels below the previous
year, which in its turn was 13,000 below the harvest
of 1880. Evandale heads the list with 16,396
bushels, against 30,222; but the falling off in this
cereal generally is easily accounted for by the fact
that last year only 4,597 acres were in crop, against
8,297 in the previous year, the decrease for last
season being 3,700 acres. The acreage of 1881 was,
however, the largest under barley for any period
during the past decade. Fingall has the highest
average yield last season—34 - 93 bushels per acre—
but then its gross yield was only 2,253 bushels.
The highest average in the previous season was
25 - 34 bushels, obtained in the Port Sorell district,
but the gross yield was only 740 bushels. The
largest amount of rye was grown in the Green Ponds
district—29l bushels—but the total amount grown in
the colony was only 1,132. In the previous year
New Norfolk headed the list with 405 bushels, and
the total amount grown in the colony was 1,137
bushels / so that there is a slight decrease in the gross
yield; but while the area under crop has fallen off,
the yield for last year was kept up by the higher
average of 13-80 bushels per acre against 11-14 in
the previous season. Peas this year show an increase
instead of a falling off, as the yield is 106,345
bushels against 99,028 in the previous season, owing
to the higher average of 19-23 bushels to the acre
last season against 16-52 in the previous year. Port
Sorell heads the list of producers with 18,477
bushels, a position it occupied last year with 16,804
bushels. Beans show a slight increase, the figures
being 6,385 bushels against 6,231 in the previous
year, the average being 19-23 against 18*57 in 1881,
there being a falling off of 45 acres in the actual
area under crop. Sorell was the largest producer,
with 2,335 bushels, New Norfolk being next with
1,257, and none of the other districts reaching four
figures. Last year New Norfolk stood first, with
2,622 bushels. There is an increase in tares, which
show 3,182 bushels this year as against 2,598 last
year, the average for the past season being 3ST9
against 13-48 in 1881.
The figures for potatoes and hay for the past sea-
son, as compared with the previous year, are as
follows:
Potatoes. Hay.
Year. Acres. Yield. Aver. Acres. Yield. Aver.
1881 10,421 32,458 3-12 31,615 35,883 1.13
1882 9,670 33,465 3.47 34,790 44,957 D 29


It will be seen by this table that, while there is a
decrease of 751 acres in the area planted with potatoes
in the past season, the increase in the yield per acre
has made the gross yield larger by some 1,100 tons
than that of 1881,but the increase in hay is accounted
for by not only a better yield per acre, but by there
being over 3,000 acres more under crop in 1882 than
in 1881. It is noticeable that nearly half of the total
amount of potatoes grown in the island is raised on
the N.W. Coast; Port Sorell, Russell, and Emu Bay
contributing 16,639 tons out of the total yield of
33,565 tons. The previous year, however, these
three districts contributed 17,089 tons out of a total
of 32,548, so that in spite of the improved yield last
season, there is an absolute falling off in the produc-
tion of these districts. As is usually the case, the
highest average yield is found in districts where but
a small amount is grown, Oatlands last season stand-
ing first with 5-41 tons per acre, and a total yield of
only 508 tons, while in theprevious year Fingal headed
the list with an average of 4T5 tons, but a total yield
of only 379 tons. In hay, Brighton still maintains
pre-eminence, and this year again heads the list
of producers with 4,570 tons, Selby with 3,oB7,King-
borough with 3,613, and Evandale with 3,366, being
the next in order. The highest average per acre,
2*ll tons, was obtained in the Emu Bay district, but
the total was only 1,230 tons. Last year the same
district was also highest, with an average of 2 - 2 tons
per acre. There were 12,865 tons turnips raised last
year against 6,199 tons in the previous year, the pro-
duction having therefore more than doubled, while
the acreage under crop has only increased from 1,323
to 8,155. Westbury just beat Deloraine last year in
production, both having just over 1,000 tons; but
this year the figures are—Deloraine 3,096, and
Westbury 2,647 tons, making nearly half the total
produce of the colony. Very few carrots were grown
last season—B73 tons, but this was an increase of 72
tons on the previous year; mangold wurzel were re-
presented by 12,140 tons, an increase of close upon
3,000 tons as compared with 1881. New Norfolk
again shows far ahead with 2,837 tons, or more than
double the produce of any other district. Onions
show a marked increase of 90 tons upon 1881, the
figures being 226 tons for last season against 136 for
1881. Grass seeds show a decrease, as the yield last
season was only 26,590 bushels against 30,781 bushels
in the previous year; but the falling off is fully ex-
plained by a decrease in the acreage of 652 bushels,
despite the fact of the average for the past season
being 13'39 tons per acre as against 1L65 in 1881.
Brighton heads the list of producers with 4,182
bushels; but in the previous year this position was
occupied by Emu Bay with 4,479 bushels, the yield
of which this year was only 2,744 bushels. Of
hops, 668,846 lbs. were grown last season, against
644,273 lbs. in the previous year, and it is needless
to add that nearly the whole quantity came from the
New Norfolk district, namely, 553,326 lbs., against
538,471 lbs. in 1881, showing an increase of 14,855
lbs. The only Northern districts in which hops
were grown were George Town, 16,000 lbs., and
Westbury, 4,420 lbs. It is noticeable that amongst
the extra crops is 700 lbs. of flax from George Town
district, 3 tons maize from Glamorgan, 2,300 lbs.
tobacco from Launceston, this last being probably
the produce of the tobacco-grounds worked by
Chinamen at Invermay.
With regard to gardens and orchards, it may
be of interest to give the yield of apples and
pears in each district, in bushels, for the past two
years:—
Russell
Sorell
Spring Bay
The following extract is taken from Mrs. Charles
Meredith’s Work on Tasmania, which gives a bird’s-
eye view of the country and a peep of the social
life there:
“ The house at “ Cambria ” commands an exten-
sive view of large tracts both of “ bush ” and culti-
vated land; and across the Head of Oyster Bay, of
the Schoutens, whose lofty picturesque outline, and
the changing hues they assume in different periods
of the day or states of the atmosphere are noble
adjuncts to the landscape. Below a deep precipitous
bank on the south side of the house flows a winding
creek, the outlet of the Meredith River gleaming
and shining along its stony bed, and richly fringed
by native flowering shrubs, mingled with garden
flowers half-wild, poppies, stocks, wall flowers, and
bright-eyed marigolds looking merrily up, midst
thickets of the golden wattle and snowy tea-tree ;
whilst on the higher ground, huge old gum trees
stand majestically spreading wide their white
fantastic branches and shiny yet sombre foliage.
At a short distance from the opposite bank of the
creek stands a thatched cottage with its attendant
outhouses partly concealed and shadowed by some
particularly fine gum trees, such as would be
deemed highly ornamental even in an English park,
for trees of this kind growing singly or in groups
on rich land are scarcely recognizable as of
the same genius with the gaunt scraggy objects
that swarm together in the forests. The sight of
this little cottage removes rather pleasantly, the
feeling of loneliness and isolation that generally
pervades colonial country houses, which are most
commonly built each in or near the centre of its
own estate, but in this instance the river separating
a large farm from a little one, has attracted the
owners of both to place their houses near it. Large
tracts of cleared, fenced and cultivated land form a
nearly level plain in front, and towards the north,
in which direction the cottage, formerly the resi-
Clarence
Deloraine
Emu Bay
Svandale
Kingborough
Launceston,
Port Sorell
Richmond
Ross


dence of our family, peeps from its grove of wattle
trees. Steep hut not very lofty hills rise at the
hack of the Cambria plain forming a small outpost
of the rocky tier that wholly environs the Great
Swan Port district on the land side, and for want of
comparatively little labour in road-making renders
either ingress or egress a matter of much fatigue
and difficulty.
A large well built, cheerful looking house, with
its accompanying signs of substantial comfort in the
shape of barns, stackyard, stabling, extensive gar-
dens, and all other requisite appliances on a large
scale, is most pleasant to look upon at all times and
in all places, even when tens or twenties of such
places can be seen in a day’s journey ; but when our
glimpses of country comfort are so few and far be-
tween as is usually the case in a new country, and
when one’s very belief in civilization begins to be
shaken by weary travelling day after day through
such dreary tracts as we had traversed, it is most
delightful to come once more among sights and
sounds that tell of the Old World and its good old
ways, and right heartily did I enjoy them.
The noble veranda into which the French windows
of the front rooms open, with its pillars wreathed
about with roses and jessamine, and its lower trellises
hidden in luxuriant geraniums, became the especial
abiding place of my idleness; as I felt listless and
inactive after my year’s broiling in New South
Wales I delighted in the pleasant breezy climate of
our new home.
Hawthorn hedges greeted me pleasantly again,
with their old remembered verdure and fragrant
blossoms ; those of gorse, the first I had seen since
leaving England, would rival the growth of that
sturdy mountaineer even on its native hills. There
were many of these live fences although the less
pleasing ones of posts and rails, or paling, log or
brush, were necessarily more prevalent, and I find
that the unaccommodation of slip rails and gates of
refractory temper were not wholly peculiar to New
South Wales.
Flocks of sheep, herds of cattle and horses
gave life and interest to my veranda diorama,
and the distant road, half seen, half hidden by the
undulating ground, sometimes displayed in addi-
tion to its commonplace traffic of bullock and
horse teams, a light cart or jaunting car or
gig, with its living freight of “settlers,”
male or female, either journeying to or returning
from the little settlement of Swansea, where there
are one or two stores of very limited pretensions,
and two or three public-houses, all the produce of
the chief part of the district being shipped from this
place.
A large garden and orchard well stored with the
flowers and fruits cultivated in England were not
among the least of the charms Cambria possessed in
my eyes, and the growth of fruit trees is so much
more rapid and precocious here than at home that those
only ten or twelve years old appear sometimes aged
trees. Apples suffer severely here from the American
blight, although some few among the best kinds are
wholly exempt from its attacks ; the orchard pro-
duces so great an abundance as to afford a consider-
able quantity of cider every year, which is a very
pleasant summer beverage.
Judging from the remarks on cider-making in
“Loudon’s Encyclopsedia of agriculture,” I con-
ceive that our Tasmanian cider is fermented too
much, so as to deprive it of too great a proportion of
the saccharine matter, as it is of a pale colour, and
much thinner and more acid than the English, and
except by persons long accustomed to its use, is not
drunk without the addition of a large quantity of
sugar, which, with a toast and a little nutmeg, makes
an extremely pleasant “ cider-cup.”
Pears succeed excellently, usually bearing an
abundance of fruits, as do also the medlar, quince,
almond, cherry and all the family of plums from the
portly magnum bonum looking like the golden fruit
of the Hesperides and demanding to he preserved in
syrup to the luscious bloomy Orleans delicate green
and yellow gages and the common damson. I have
not yet seen the large prune damson. Seedling
peach trees, which sometimes bear the third year,
usually produce an immense quantity of mediocre
fruit, useful for tarts and preserves, hut the better
kinds of peach, together with the apricot and
nectarine are less plentiful. The summer frosts are
the direst foes of the gardener and horticulturist in
this island. Often when the tre°s are perfectly
clothed with fine blossoms, one night will destroy
almost the whole.
Of the smaller common fruits the gooseberry pro-
duces the most certain crop and bravely sustains its
well- won fame in every pleasant shape of pies and
“fool” and jam, and sparkling champagne, as in
good old English homes. In moist situations rasp-
berries also are fine and plentiful. Currants usually
bear less abundantly than in England; and straw-
berries are rarer than all; both these latter being
luxuriant in foliage but with a scanty show of fruit.
The alpine strawberry seems to make itself more at
home here and bears well. The out-of-door vines
produce grapes scarcely equal to those grown in
favourable situations without glass at home, but here
the hothouses and greenhouses supply for so long a
time a succession of the finest kinds in such beauti-
ful luxuriance, that the vines on outer walls are but
little valued.
The orchard, with its fine trees and shady grass
walks, some broad, and straight, and long, others
turning off into sly quiet little nooks and corners, was
a great delight to me. Shadowing a bowery path
and rustic bench in one place, were fine tall trees
of the beautiful English elder, rich in their noble
creamy white clusters of most fragrant blossoms,
mingling with the bright yellow fringy flowers of the
native wattle tree, which has a powerful scent like
hawthorn, and tolerably well supplies the place of
the graceful laburnam where that is wanting, but
here it grows nobly, large trees being gaily clad in
its elegant drooping flowers, the “golden chains”
of one’s childhood; and not far from these their
ancient friend and contemporary in blossoming the
rich purple lilac bearing as heavy clusters as those I
have so often robbed in dear old England. Ido not
think the white variety has yet graced these our
Antipodean climes, at least I have not seen it.
On the cool grassy bank of a little pond, under the
elder trees and overshadowed also by a thicket of
filbert and hazel bushes, which bear plenty ot nuts
in Autumn, the New Zealand flax flourishes; it is
a noble looking plant of the flag kind, with long
broad leaves of prodigious toughness, and which, torn
in long strips, make excellent ties for all garden
purposes such as binding grafts, tying up carnations,
and making nosegays.
The cultivated flowers are chiefly those familiar to
us in English gardens, with some brilliant natives of
the Cape, and many pretty indigenous flowering shrubs
interspersed. Most of these latter are so hardy that
I have no doubt the greater portion of those now
confined by their English cultivators in the green-
house, or the conservatory, would thrive better in the
open air, provided they were placed in a sheltered
spot, and guarded from the biting frosts of mid-


winter, for to moderate frosts they are well accus-
tomed here, and being evergreens their varied foliage
would be a valuable acquisition in the autumn and
early spring.
The gradual advance of the seasons is pleasantly
marked in English gardens by the progressing suc-
cession of flowers passing before u» like a heautfiul
procession led in by the “ Fair Maid of February,”
and her attendant crocuses following in unfailing
order by the brilliant train of spring, summer, and
autumn flowers, till the last pale chrysanthemums
twine in the wreath of green old Christmas himself ;
hut here, even all the gentle flowers rebel against all
Old World rules and customs, and so crowd one on
another in the year’s pageant that we can sometimes
gather spring, summer, and autumn flowers within
their months, which I, loving the old way best,
greatly lament. In favoured spots near the sea,
where the frosts are less keen than in the more
inland districts, the common red, scarlet, and large
purple geraniums grow many feet high, and flower
nearly all the year round. So do the crimson and
pink China roses, and the common fuschia, whilst
the double violets push up such bright flowers from
amidst their clustering leaves, that, hut for the
exquisite perfume which vouches for their dear
identity, on* might fancy that a blue ranunculus had
been invented.
Latterly, a few lovers of good flowers have intro-
duced some of the better and newer kinds of
geraniums, pansies, picotees, fuchsias, and other
“florist’s flowers,” greatly to the enrichment of
our Tasmanian collections and every new arrival
flourishes most satisfactorily in this fine climate.
A circular enclosure in the garden forms a small
rabbit warren, well stocked with the common kinds,
many of which have long ago been turned loose,
their abundance all over the district is now so great
as sometimes to be troublesome and mischievous.
The fence hanks overgrown with huge gorse hushes
form admirable retreats for the pretty little animals,
and they increase so rapidly and make such depre-
dations among the young' turnips and springing
corn, that occasionally a proclamation of “ war to
the knife” goes forth when a troop of sportsmen and
spaniels take the field; at such times the golden
blossomed gorse hushes do not wholly escape, many
of the most effectual covers being burned down in
order to dislodge the rabbits.
The most interesting ornaments of Cambria be-
longing to the animal kingdom, were, in my estima-
tion, a pair of beautiful tame black swans, the first
of these birds that I had seen in their native land.
They seemed to live very happily in the creek below
the house and always came at a call to he fed with
bread or corn. I cannot in conscience pronounce
them to he quite equal in magnetic beauty to the
white swan, hut certainly few of the feathered tribe
can exceed them when on the water. Their plumage
of glossy raven black with a few snow white feathers
in the wings and tail, is as elegantly grave a dress
as can be conceived, and the bright coral _ red bill
gives a gay air to the graceful and expressive head
and eyes. In the long circular neck lat first missed
the curve that looks so stately in the white swan,
hut soon got reconciled to it. Their note is very
melodious and plaintive with a kind of harp tone in
it, sounding very sweetly as they call to each other
over the water, or fly high overhead at night, when it
seems like an echo of music from the clouds.
My second Christmas was passed in Cambria, and
found me j ust as involuntarily sceptical of the time as
I had felt this year before in Sydney. To receive
the good old fashionable wishes of “ A Merry Christ-
mas and a Happy New Year, ’ ’ accompanied by bouquets
of summer flowers from girls in white muslin frocks,
and to hear such murmured sounds in pantry and lar-
der as “ Christmas Beef,” “Christmas Turkeys,” and
“Mince Pies,” on a glorious Italian-skied, radiant,
sunny, hot, midsummer day was an anomaly, but, that
the anomaly was believed in here was, however, quite
evident; for before I was up that morning busy
hands had been at work dressing the house all over.
Holly there was none; hut the picture frames and
chimneys and sideboard were gaily and gracefully
adorned with lovely native shrubs and a wreathy
crown or garland suspended from the drawing room
ceiling ; whilst plentiful bouquets of garden flowers
made the home bright and fragrant ; and a large
family dinner party, music and dancing and abund-
ant mirth, all helped to do honour to the world
beloved day: so that although not the real, proper,
genuine, original Christmas to me, it was a very
bright and pleasant parady upon it.
Pic-nic parties were very popular with our sum-
mer circle at Cambria, and several pretty spots were
occasionally selected as the scenes of our rural
banquets. The calm bright settled summer weather
of this delightful island, is far better adapted for
such expeditions than the fickle climate of England,
whose wayward skies like spoiled children, can never
be found in the right humour, hut still persist in
weeping most vehemently when we expect them
to smile their brightest. Here a fine morning might
generally ho depended upon as heralding a fine day ;
indeed, weeks and months of fair weather succeeded
each other until the farmers grew most impatient
for rain on their parching lands, and I found that
my admiration of this particular summer, as a
summer, was by no means echoed by those interested
in the growth of crops, for it was unusually dry,
insomuch, that I began to see visions of New South
Wales in the dusty road and yellow fields, that when
I first came lay like emeralds in the spring sunshine.
Our progresses to the appointed spots for our
sylvan banquets were performed in divers manners,
and the marshalling forth of the cavalcade often
made as motley and busy a scene as the “ Going to
the Chase,” or “Return from Hawking,” of many
a fine old picture, though, made of matters less
essentially picturesque.
A hold rooky point on the west of the bay, one of
the many we had traversed on our last day’s journey,
was our destination on one occasion ; the cliffs were
full of strange fantastic caves and hollows, where
the sea chafed and roared very grandly and sent jets
of foam flying high through the narrow cliffs beneath
which it surged and swelled. Some of the upper
and drier caves were strewn thickly over with in-
numerable kinds of sponges, blown in from the seas ;
some great masses one or two feet thick—others
delicate little web work on the stems of_ kelp and
corallines, some branching into five or six. finger-
shaped portions like a hand with swollen joints.
One smooth close kind I often found, exactly like
the shape of a French roll—others were like pears or
strings of sausages. And the various colours and
texture of these strange zoophytic creations seemed
infinite.
One of our expeditions was to the mouth of Swan
Port, our way lying along the broad smooth beach
at the head of Oyster Bay, which extends for 9 miles
in an unbroken sweep, and is so pleasant to ride upon,
that only one vehicle, the roomy jaunting car, was
required to carry some of the juveniles, the provi-
sions, my maid and the baby ; most of the party pre-
fering to ride on horseback. The view up the wind-
ing estuary of Swan Port, with its low islands and


the’dark wooded hills rising behind, made a pleasant
picture and the ever beautiful Schoutensrose grandly
before us.
These days always passed so rapidly that it was
generally near dark when we arrived home, and the
evenings closed with music, dancing and pleasant
saunters in the veranda, where the bright moonlight
put to shame the artifical gleam from the open win-
dows, and showed my favourite view of the bay and
Schoutens almost as clearly as by day.
The almost daring feeling of security, as it at first
seemed to me, which is general here, would assuredly
astonish any one who should witness it, whilst
remembering the fearful stories they tell you in Eng-
land of our awful condition, social degradation and
so forth. What family in England would think of
living in a large country house, with French win-
dows to the lower rooms unsecured by a single bar,
shutter or bell?
Yet such is the custom here, and the rarity here of
burglary or robbery of any description, as compared
with the constant occurrence at home, proves th«
smallness of the risk.
THE ENT).


PUBLICATIONS
UL TO INTENDING EMIGRANTS, j
; AT) AT T'H E OFFICE,
:DM-, STB AND, W. (I.
Aew Zealand. -TB Emigrant's proppacts in X«v Zealand.—This is tho very ■ latest.
• j -publication relating ft! this CMoby-, and contains mogt valtrablo-information useful to-intending l i
: Origin, Geography, Soil, Climate', Birdsy Fish, The Aborigines, The. Maori, Dress,
jj Food ami Language, Habits and Cnstoifts,”.tho. Government, Education, Volunteers, liailways,
i Post. TGegraphs, Banks* Friendly Societies,-' Institutions, Dwelling Houses* Population, j . ,
Shipping, Ivcvchue, I mports .and Exports. Advantages of the Colony, why it is-a good country ;
T aG-Arm.-IBginnirfg a Jmrm, AdviceAo English Labourer in New Zealand^
I, Farm Buildings, Stock,
I Manufacturing Judxistries, ARta-ral Wealth, Goverufijent Bonuses, Fisheries, Hiivor, Tin, Lead,
j. Iron, Goal, Limestone and Building, Rates of Wages, Interesting Facts, Isfocifcty, Aimiserabntg,
1 Land pogulations, The Provinces, of a Home, New, Zealand us a held for Euiigrafion,
-<j write home; Letters from-young woinen who Emigrated'out. A month’s trip on Horseback in
-j New Zealand, Sen., &e. y t pages, price 1 - sent post free to any .address. ;
idle In JllelhourMe.-tComainmg ValuablcyNotes by the Government Statist of Victoria-,
; together with Graphic Sketches of Life in Australia,-“ Behind the SB>m•»,”• Lodgings, Emigration,
~ 'Servants, Wages-in Alelbournc,* Buck-jumpers, Cattle 'Stations, -Hot Winds, Chinese (ramblers, -■ T '
Impoits and Export's, Wool, Meat, Sailors, Loafers l .' This is ;in instinctive book. An intending .3- '
s Flmigrant cannot fail td.find many useful hurt,A" 100 pages, If-, postage 2d. extra.
South Africa. 'CJu I tie.—Bring'V cheap handbook to the South AfßcrinX'olumps.Toprt- j
bit ion, Climate, .Produtls, Prices ,of Lands, Towns. Advice to persons thinking of • j
to South Africa, Aided Immigration, Wages, &c. "Post free C stamps. j
Mouth Australia. —Now Ready. The Immigrants’ PibsbcctS* How to get,to South
Australia. (JutJit, lire Assisted System, Tho Voyag'd, The Bind Orders,’lire Climate, Character -
• i of Land, Chief T6wns, History, Govmrment, Population, Education, Religion,, IbulTvaysyliisti- ,j
tutipns, Occupations of the People, Clothing, House Ropt, Board and' Lodging, The- [
I Vine 'Culture; The Native Woods, Alining, Gold, Pastoral Pursuits, Manufactories,- Prices of
Provisions, llapesof Wages-, Account of-a.-Settler’s Home, it Letter from South Australia, &c, t &c.
! Wetiterii Australia.— A Himdbobk for intending settlers, Oxgin oj.’Western Australia,'
Five Grant** of Laud, Advantages, Climate,Products, Wool Trade,. Mineral Resources, Social
j Conditions, Prices of- Provisions, Rates of Wages, Progress, ‘Geographical Features, Land Regu- A
if ;fntidns, Mountains, Rivers, Anfmals, Population, Pearl Fishing, Exports, Railways, Timber,
Telegraphs, <Ve., &C. Post- Free, Cd. "
.Life at- Meat -and Genepvl Description of- Australia, reprinted from “Hethenugton’ei"
Universal Register.” most interesting to intending passengers,, full of information respecting who e
I should go ; what out tit is necessary ; rates of passage by steam and sailing ships ; victualling stale ; ; --.
•1 . useful hints ; ship kit, and a diary of every day life on board ship, with,'general description of A ;
' Australia ami its natives. Post free six stamps. j:
Hew SBealimli,'— Jhsfc-rtecieived the last number .of the North Now Zealand Settlers and 1
Land Buyer? Guido. Published-monthly in Auckland, New Zealand, and mailed immediately to
f the London Ortice, 33-t Strand, Price Gd. ;
The 'l l lust rat (Ml Sew Zealand' Herald.— Published monthly at Ihincdiry-New
and Mailed imrbeiiiately to tho IjondOn Ofiice, Strand. This Newspaper Is the same I
size as the ”Illustrated London News.” .Id pages. Price 7d. - Full of illustrations of Scenes in !
Australia and New Zealand, with items of colonial interest and news of the month. '
Hueeuslaud.—-The Immigrant’s Prospects, Tho Origin of Queensland, Geography, Climate,
- Character of Band and Products?, Population, Brisbane, Railways, Institutions, Societies, Revenue I
and Expenditure, Manufactures and Industries, IVcos of Provisions, Rents, Ratos,of Wages, .
; ' Natural History, Pastoml.. Pursuits, AgriculUlfc, Sugar,,yines, Wheat, Tobacco, Arrowroot, I
Maize, Native Timbers, Farming, Land Regulations, Mining, Gold, Silver, Copper, Coal,-Tin,
; Squatters’ Homesteads, What Immigrants Write Home, &c. Post free Gd.
1 Illustrated Australian -Hcws.-just received by Mail -Steamer from Melbourne,
contains in addition to a. well written Summary of the month’s events:; a .selection of high-Class <
engravings illustrative of Colonial Scenery, Current Events. The beat Artists and Engravers in I
Australia are engaged- on this paper. PoWfrceJo any addressjnr 7 stamps. j
■ ’ ■ ■ v': '' . ■' ‘ • - ' -: H ' •' ' , ...o' " w ~ V•'


; AND NEW ZEALAND,
j ANGLO-AUSTRAL ASIAN STEAM NAVIGATION Co.
LIMITED.
MONTHLY LINE OF FULL-POWERED STEAMERS
f ' - Consisting of ■ the following-syleudidFleet. ■' j*
PORT JACKSON PORT STITTIKN KKNSTANTnN
■ -I : PORT PHILLfP HANKO HAYERTON "-d
P( »HJ' A OKI, AIDE TIVERTON NORMANTON
PORT DARWIN CHOLLERTON IIKNTiNOOON
, These Splendid Steamers are. especially Tmjlt far the AitsteUOn .TNade -[ -
j uurtvallild ■ kcftorajiiudation bn- First and Third Class, PassOigyrs. F.acb Steamer - ■
’ carries un experienced Surgeon. Liberal Dietary. Third-Class , T Wenger., are ;
; ■
berthed' uli deck usually occupied by Ist;.'aml 2nd, 'Class. ; ~N'
STEAM TO
ADELAIDE (Semaphore), j
MELBOURNE AND SYDNEY.
HOOK INO PASSENODRS THU Toll T«»
TASMAN I .jflL -
Fam to Adelaide -(Semaphore,: Melbourne & Sydney. ; '
t XU IRD CLASS, Tun Shaving a Cabin: ea,;!. adult • ' .../ OK iN it AS.
f’liUV ■■-A . . ! S ~
1 111 , v . ■) ...
Open P.nths, Dr Men only •' ... Ip .
Through Rates quoted on application to' all Colonial Ports.
- A deposit of (»ih-ko.lf PaHsayn : Money io/he. p%hi -on.-’-BooViop, jhr L/W-- »t Am/
' <£lB Land Orders given to Pull-paying Passengers
to Tasmania.
£2O Land Orders to South, Australia.
For . &<•. , apply , to
F. W. HETHERINGTON
:334.STRAND, rONUoN, W.C.
' ' ' •
vfr«rTr l .. '• i-f': ----- iT|lrn nn j|i-fr T 1 — ■ " ; ■IIWWHI Mimrin.li.! ■.■■l.r- f >"■ ■>■** iwm—wi "*f
