

THU FULL PARTICULARS OF
The Teiul mul Sentence
JMM HAMPER,
an Auctioneer of this city, who at these Assizes have been convicted of stealing a
quantity of cloth, the property of Jonas Driver of Leeds, and sentenced to
7 Years Transportation,
John Harper, aged 52, and who was stated on (he Galen- :
dar to be a prisoner who could read and write well, on
Friday last was placed at (he bar (having been called and i
resigned by his Bail) and was charged with having stolen
divers pieces of cloth on the 17th of March, at the paiish of
North Walsham, from Jonas Driver ol Le< ds, in tie county of
York. I he prisoner was arraigned with about a dozen others,
taken his place in the centre of the rest, but present 'd a
more respectable appearance, in his dress Ho pleaded not
guilty in a tone of great confidence, and the arnignment
being over was directed to stand down, which he did while
several other prisoners were tried. Soon after (he noon
hour the prisoner was called up and the trial proceeded. He
had engaged Mr. Andrews, one the first counsel on the Circuit,
with Messrs. N. Palmer and W, Utten Browne, to defend
him, and opposed to him were Messis. Preiulergast, Gunning,
and W. Cooper. Mr. Preiulergast opened the case to (lie
Jury stating to them the facts which he said lie should lay
before them in evidence, after which he felt assured they
would come to a proper verdict, although the prisoner might
have a more respectable appearance than many of the pri-
soner that stood in that dock, I f the evidence was such as to
satisfy them that lie was a guilty man, he was sure they would
do their duty,and find him so notwithstanding all that might
be ,said by the learned gentlemen on the other side. Mr.
Andrews then called Jonas Driver, who, on being sworn,
stated that he was a cloth maimfuctmer at Leeds, m York-
shire, & travelled (he country from place to place to sc 1 tins
cloth by auction. He was not an auctioneer liiniseit & had
therefore to employ auctioneers wherever he went in Nor-
wich he employed Mr. W. Wilde, hut agreed to employ Me.
Harper in country places. Harper recommended him to go
to North Walsham, saying lie knew almost eve ry body theie,
and that he was sure to have a good sale. He consented to
go to North VValsham on the Kith of March, and hero they
had a sale in the evening, in which they look about ex-
pecting tohavea better sale the next day. However, Harper
told him that they had no business to sell without a Hawk-
er?s License, and he said that the goods must be made over
to a Mr. Dye, which was done nominally, so that Dye who
was a tradesman livirig in (he Town, might have a right to
sell. Not satisfied with that he told Driver and Dye that
they were all got into a mess for that there was a warrant out
against one ot them?that he hail seen it and a Policeman
ready to serve it, and he persuaded Driver and Dye to get
outof the way, to a Beer house at the. end ot the 1 own where
the warrant could not be served, I hey were guided bv him,
and while they we re got out of the way, Harper, assisted by
his two men who were with him rent off several paces ot cloth,
from different rolls and pul them into his gig-box. When
Driver and Die came back, D.iver found itiat be bad been
tricked and robbed ol portions ot Ins cloth. 1 his was disco-
vered through the Ostler at the Public House who had seen
Harper put it into his gig, and Harper finding that it was
discovered ordered his man to take it to a Mr. Scott, a paint-
er. The man took it, and Harper was quickly there, and
with the leave of Mrs. Scott took it into an upper loom, tel-
ling Mrs. Scott if any body came to ask about it to say that
she had no such parcel except what her husband bad bought.
Tiie parcel was called tor but Mrs. Scott denied it. bhe
soon after told her husband that there was such an one up-
stairs and he went to examine it, and thinking all was not
right went to Mr. Millard?s the Magistrate s Clerk, lor the
purpose of informing him ot the same, and the parcel was
taken before (he Magistrates by Scott at the next small-
borough sitting, where the goods were sworn to by Diiver,
frt r /yyyyy f~ .... /%(*
as those he had lost, and Harper was fully committed for
Trial at these assizes. In addition to these goods there were
others tliat he had sent his man with on the way from North-
walsham to Norwich, hot he was over taken and the goods
taken from him between Coltishail and Scottov.
The above facts were spoken to by different witnesses, and
there was no donbt of the troth of the statements. Mr.
Andrews addressed a very long speech to the Jury respecting
Mr. Harper as a veiy honest man, upon whom scandal had
never breathed a censure, and represented the awful con-
sequences to a respectable man of a verdict of guilty?it
would ruin his prospects in life and Ins family. He said
that (lie proper course to have been taken would have been
to have brought a civil action and that in that case Mr
Harper would have had no justification but that the things
were entrusted to him to sell and it could not be a theft?
and no one who knew the prisoner would conceive him
capable of committing one. He said that the cloth was taken
that Harper might be secured his expences which had not
been paid him, and that it would have been sold if he had
got (hose expenecs at other sales (hey were tohave had at
Hinghunf and New Buckenham, and having made a very
long-speech chiefly addressed to the feelings, and passions
of the Jury, called witnesses to his good character. These
were Samuel Bignold, Esq who had known him for 20
years to be a vein honest man. Mr, Beckwith the Lawyer,
Mr. Keith she Lawyer, and Mr. Durrant the Lawyer said
the same Mr. Richard Coaks was tailed but did not
appear, but the Rev samuel Stone said his character was
unimpeachable, and the Rev. Mr. Hull bad always found
him honest and honourable, and they all said these things
without blushing. The judge summed up remarking that
the proceedings in point of law were correct and the only
question the\ would have to consider was whether the prisoner
did take those things with the intention to steal them. If he
took them as security why did he deny it? and say he did
not know anything about them, and why did he not take a
whole piece and not rend off so many ; and if ho took them
to sell at llingham why did he leave then secreted at North-
walsham ; his opnion wa.s he was guilty but after a speech
more than an hour long he said if they could suggest any
doubt (hey had a right to give the benefit to him, he could
not. The jury in a few minutes found him guilty. The
prisoner's courage seemed to fail him now. Ihe Judge
ni passing sentence said, he had been found guilty
on 'the clearest evidence of having stolen Mr. Driver?s
cloth, and if lie deserved that character that had
been given him he must teel his present situation very
keenly ; he was not like many of the poor uneducated people
who were before him in distress, but, he had been represented
as being in a flourishing business, and was an educated man.
If lie did not pass the same sentence on him that he did on
others it might indeed be said there was was not even banded
justice dealt. He did not wish to add any thing to the pain
be now felt, but he had a duty to perform and for the sake of
public example his must be a severe sentence, which was that
lie be transported for the- term of 7 years.
'There were expressions of approbation in the Court, and
also on tite hill, where many wished he had been transported 7
year before, when much ot the misery inflicted upon people
might have been saved. It is hoped this will be a warning
to others who have been his companions in these abominable
impositions on the unfortunate in distress 1 his all origi-
nated in a trick for there had been no proceedings taken by
the authorities at North Walsham.
Walker, Printer, Coslauy Street, St. Mile?s, Norwich,
