

THE GOLD FIELDS OF AUSTRALIA.
By J. T. Towson, F.R.G.S.
(Read 15th Novembeb, 1860.)
During the past year Mr. T. M. Mackay, of the Liverpool
firm of Messrs. James Baines & Co., visited Australia in con-
nexion with the extensive commercial relations which his
house has formed with that distant colony. During the
period he remained there he collected a valuable mass of
papers and illustrations relating to the geology, the statistics,
and every other matter referring to or connected with the sub-
ject now under consideration. He also, on leaving Australia,
made arrangement to secure monthly reports on these inter-
esting subjects. These papers he has kindly presented to
me, and continues to do so with every new arrival. This act
of liberality no doubt originated from a belief that they would
undergo a thorough investigation and discussion in my hands,
knowing that I took a great interest in these matters. Ido
not, however, think that I should have done justice to Mr.
Mackay’s liberality without reading before this or some other
Society the result -of the perusal of these interesting docu-
ments.
Having early in life had considerable practical experience
in connexion with the mines in Cornwall and Devon, I found
that I was enabled to enter into the matters referred to in
these papers with far greater facility, especially the subjects
connected with the future prospects of mining operations in
Australia, than I should otherwise have had the means of
doing. I therefore propose to take a glance at the mining
B


operations of the past in this country, as far as such a view is
calculated to throw a light on the future mining prospects of
our antipodes.
There appears to exist, in many respects, a strong analogy
between the different mining operations in the gold fields of
Australia and the tin mines in Cornwall. In both, as far as
we can judge of the past by the present, these metallic
minerals are considered to have been first deposited in strata,
descending into the earth and forming various angles with the
horizon. These planes in this country are called “lodes,”
in Australia “ quartz reefs.” This is not the only form in
which gold quartz, or other metallic minerals, are found
deposited in their primary condition, but, as far as we yet
know, it is the principal formation in Australia. We may,
therefore, confine our observations to this class of primary
deposits.
Although the lodes that contain copper are in most respects
of the same character as those which contain tin, yet in one
particular tin has a stronger analogy to gold than any other
metal found in great quantities in this country. Tin is not
only found in the lodes in which it was first deposited, but
also in the alluvium, and in the beds of rivers and streams.
Such also is the case'with gold; in fact, all the earlier mining
operations for obtaining either tin or gold were of the class
called stream-works. The tin ore and the metal gold when
collected from stream works are found in a state of fragmentary
deposits and occur associated with and indeed forming a part
of the loose superficial beds which occur in the outlays of
mineral districts, and no doubt they consist of the detritus of
neighbouring rocks which have been worn down by the action
of water at remote geological epochs. These deposits are not
generally mixed up indiscriminately with the alluvial matter
since their greater specific gravity has occasioned them to be
deposited towards the bottom of the mass. The cause of tin


and gold being the only metals found in this secondary condi-
tion to any great extent, arises from the fact that the peroxide
of tin or stream tin as well as the metal gold, is not subject
to decomposition by being exposed to the action of the
atmosphere and moisture, whereas other ores, copper pyrites
or sulphuret of copper for instance, when exposed to these
agents do undergo decomposition, the oxygen uniting with
the sulphur changing the sulphuret into the sulphate of copper,
which being a soluble salt is dissolved in the waters and thus
carried into the ocean,*
As we have before noticed, the first operations in the gold
fields of Australia were stream works. As compared with
mining operations on the lode, stream works are exceedingly
simple, requiring little or no capital, and can be conducted by
one, two or more labourers for their own benefit. In fact
Nature in the case of stream-works has performed the greatest
amount of the labour connected with dressing the minerals
previously to the process of smelting. It is probable that the
stream-works of the Cassiterides produced for two thousand
years the principal portion of the tin of the world, although in
Cornwall there are workings on the lodes, generally denominated
the old men’s works, which are evidently of great antiquity.
As it was with tin for near two thousand years, so it is with
gold up to the present period ; the greatest amount being the
produce of stream works. We have observed that stream
works consist of the detritus of neighbouring formations.
But on a close inspection of the product of the lodes and
stream works there are difficulties which cannot be satisfactorily
explained with regard either to gold or tin. With reference
to the latter, the ore found in stream works, notwithstanding
* In some cases this solution of sulphate of copper is arrested in its progress
by earthy or alkaline carbonates, and the ore is thus deposited in that beautiful
description of mineral called malachites or carbonates of copper, or is sometimes
artificially received into reservoirs, as at the Parys mines, Auglesea, and the
copper precipitated by means of small pieces of iron.


the great amount of attrition to which it has been subjected,
exists in larger masses than are found in lodes; also large pieces
of the per-oxide of tin, which are known to miners by the
name of wood-tin, are, as far as I have been able to ascer-
tain, of a character in one instance only found in a lode. Wood-
tin has much the appearance of the iron ore generally called
hematite, and in common with other descriptions of stream-tin
it generally yields a much purer tin than that obtained from
lodes, the latter being mixed with other metals, especially with
the ore of tungsten, known by the name of wolfram. This
ore contains also iron and manganese, but it is the tungsten
that principally deteriorates the quality of lode tin.* So it is
also with gold. All the largest and most valuable nuggets
have been obtained from stream works.t It has been thought,
therefore, that at the remote epoch when these mineral
deposits were broken down by the action of water, the original
formation, in which the gold now obtained from stream
works existed, was vastly superior to the present reefs;
and from this fact the inference has been drawn that gold
reefs must yield less as we descend to lower depths. This
argument does not, however, appear conclusive. If it were
an indisputable argument in the case of gold, it would also be
so with regard to tin. But although black-tin is found in larger
masses in stream works than in the lode, in very many cases
“tin stuff,” as in the cases of Buckler’s and Polgooth,
• Mr. Oxland, of Plymouth, has within a few years discovered a method of
extracting the tungsten from tin. Whilst thus he increases the value of the tin
he applies the tungsten to a valuable purpose in connexion with dyeing.
+ There appears to be one exception, in a nugget of 156 ounces found in
a reef at Victoria, and also another of 12 ounces. With a few exceptions an
ounce is the usual limit of the weight of nuggets found in reefs, and even these
are rare; whereas there appear to be no limits to the size of lumps found in
drifts. The “ Blanche Barkley Nugget ” weighed 1,743 ounces, and contained
but six ounces of quartz and earthy impurities. It was discovered 13 feet below
the surface in the alluvium, at Kingower Diggings, 120 miles from Melbourne.


improves with increased depth, and in Wheal Vor and Old
Crinnis it runs good at 300 fathoms, although in other cases
the contrary is the fact.*
Sir Roderick Murchison, f however, an authority of the
highest order, has given so decided an opinion on this subject,
that it would he presumption to doubt its correctness, had we
not abundant facts to lead us to another conclusion. Sir
Roderick in his Siluria, page 448, observes that “ experience
• A large number of the East and West lodes in Devon and Cornwall have tin
on the back, or on the shallow levels, and copper at greater depths. These lodes
run out of tin for generally ten or twenty fathoms before they are productive in
copper. A similar change takes place in gold reefs, running out of native gold,
and at greater depths they become more productive, by yielding auriferous
mundic. The Cornish United Company on Ballaarat Reef, in June, 1860,
extracted mundic yielding 56 ounces to the ton, but we are not informed how
much of this mundic was obtained from a ton of quartz,
+ Mr. Selwyn, the Government geologist, in a letter to Sir R. I. Murchison,
dated I4th February, 1859, (Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society, Ist
I 860,) contends that the finding of larger nuggets in the older drifts is not a
conclusive proof of the superior richness of the denuded upper surface of veins
or reefs. He suggests that this might have arisen from the natural crushing
process and deposit of our gold-drifts and the subsequent consolidation by heat
arising from long-continued Plutonic action, of which we have ample evidence
during the later Pliocene period. If this theory be accepted with regard to gold,
it will equally meet the difficulty we have had to contend with regarding the dif-
ference that exists in both the size and quality of the masses of tin obtained from
stream-works and lodes. But the same discussion, whether gold reefs improve
downwards or otherwise, has been also argued on the data of experience alone,
and since this subject is one of great importance in connexion with the future
prosperity of the gold fields of Australia, we have devoted a considerable amount
of time to investigating this matter by aid of the papers before alluded to. Mr.
Selwyn does not consider, from his experience, that the yield is either steadily
increasing or steadily decreasing, but fluctuating at various depths. He instances
the Port Philip Company’s reefs, which are rich at 200 feet and 230 feet ; one of
the reefs is six feet thick, and in both the quartz contained as much gold per ton
as at surface. At Maryborough 400 feet has been reached with similar results,
and there are many instances of quartz-reefs containing no gold at surface being
remunerative when followed to greater depths.


“ too dearly bought has taught the miner throughout long ages,
“ that in his efforts to follow vein-stone downwards by deep
“ shafts into the body of the rock he has either found the gold
“ diminish in volume or so difficult to obtain that the cost of
“ extraction has usually been greater than the value of the
“ metal.” Mr. Panton, in a paper read before the Mining
Institute of Australia, is decidedly of the same opinion as
Sir Roderick Murchison, and gives numerous instances of
reefs, rich near the surface, but valueless at depths varying
from 16 to 75 feet.
I must, however, observe that Mr. Panton’s experience
appears to be confined to the neighbourhood of Bendigo. *
He mentions, as proofs of the correctness of Sir Roderick’s
hypothesis, that Victoria (Ballerstedt’s)*, New Chum, Hustler’s,
Johnston’s, f Windmill Hill, Eagle Hawk, Williamson’s claim,
* When this paper was written we were of opinion that Mr. Panton was cor-
rect as far as the reefs in the neighbourhood of Bendigo were concerned. But
subsequent information from this district proves that the reefs, referred to by
Mr. Panton as illustrations of the fact that the gold decreases as we descend
deeper, have since the date of his paper supported the contrary hypothesis. Our
subsequent November report proves that the Bendigo reefs are not of the class
described by Mr. Panton. The New Chum was working very profitably at the
depth of 179 feet, and the Glasgow reef, which is a prolongation of the same reef
to the south, at the depth of 130 feet was producing 50 oz. per ton. Beaglehole,
on the same reef, at 95 feet was producing 150 oz. per ton. Gibbs, on the same
reef, at 179 feet was yielding 16.4 oz. per ton. Noble and Co.’s claim, at 112
feet was producing 9 oz.; and Gordon and Co.’s, at 110 feet 7 oz. per ton. We
may therefore conclude that even Bendigo reefs do not furnish evidence to support
the theory that the yield of gold diminishes with the depth.
+ In February, 1860, the following is the report of Johnson’s reef: —
PROPRIETORS. DEPTH OF SHAFT. YIELDS PER TON.
feet. ounces.
Murdock and Co 250 8
Lindsay and Co 260 10
Thorpe and Co 250 20
Early and Co 296 20
Chappie and Co 250 20


Buhher’s Gully and Break-o’-Hay reefs, have uniformly
yielded more gold at or near the surface than they have at sub-
sequent depths. At New Chum reef, in Power and Thomson’s
claim, quartz within ten feet of the surface yielded upwards
of 100 oz. to the ton, whilst ten or fifteen feet below this it
was scarcely paying ; and, on further sinking, that portion of
the reef was abandoned. Again, on the well-known claim of
Ballerstedt’s, from the surface to the depth of 66 feet, the reef
averaged 6 ounces per ton; and from that point to a depth of
150 feet the reef yielded only a few penny weights per ton —
not sufficient to pay expenses. Also on Steven’s and Grant’s
claim, on the Victoria reef, the vein was struck at 35 feet, and
yielded paying quartz for 30 feet downwards, below which it
yielded nothing, although followed to a depth of 200 feet from
the surface. Lastly, it may he mentioned that in a limited
space on a claim on Surface Hill, Eagle Hawk, four pounds of
gold to the bushel of quartz was obtained at a depth of 40
feet from the surface, whilst at the depth of 70 feet the quantity
was not worth working.
Against this theory we have, however, more numerous in-
stances of reefs improving as they increase in depth. We will
I
Johnson’s Reef Gold Mining Co., consisting of the following claims :—
CLAIMS. DEPTH OF SHAFT. YIELDS PEB TON.
feet. ounces.
McCallum and Co 230 9
Taylor and Co 330 7 to 8
Burk and Co 220 9
O’Brien and Co 280 9
Robinson and Co 220 6
Bryce and Co 240 7
Macintyre and Co 250 8 to 9
At a meeting of the last-named company in September, 1860, to celebrate the
inauguration of the steam pumping engine “ Midas,” Mr. Thorpe, a miner of
considerable experience, expresses a strong desire to see the reef 300 feet lower
than its present depth, thus proving that practical men even in the Bendigo
district entertain the opinion opposite to that of Mr. Panton.


NAME OF OWNEB.
Depth
of
level.
Width
of
reef.
Yield
per
ton.*
REMAKES.
feet.
ft. in.
ozs.
Thomas Channon ..
152
2 0
8
At 100 feet the reef was 6 feet;
from that to the present depth
it has varied.
Bullock and Partner..
100
2 0
8
'The three first named were rich
from surface.
Fallan and Bunn....
140
3 0
8
Vicque and Harris ..
125
1 6
8
Did not pay until a depth of
Lind and Partner....
100
2 0
8
40 feet.
Skruner and Co
116
1 0
8
Baker and Co
120
3 0
8
Rich from surface.
Iredale and Co. ....
120
6
No traces of this reef at 150 ft.
Hillhouse and Co. ..
110
2 0
H
Auriferous mundic.
Griffiths and Co
100
3 0
6*
Auriferous mundic.
107
2 0
5
\
Dent and Co. . j ....
100
1 6
5
[These three claims paid from
Lewington and Co. ..
100
2 6
5
[ 40 feet downwards.
Cumberland party ..
100
2 C
5
Unproductive to 36 feet. Struck
auriferous mundic at 40 feet.
Hays and Co
no
0 9
5
No surface reef, and struck
auriferous mundic at 50 feet.
Butter and Co
120
1 2
5
Paid from surface, but improves
downwards.
King and Co
75
2 0
n
This claim is improving with
depth.
Pierce and Co
65
0 5
5
No surface reef in this claim.
Jones Brothers ....
40
0 6
7*
Edwards and Co
60
0 9
8i
Boyde and Co
60
0 9
5*
Up to the present time this claim
has not paid.
Shaw and Co. ......
10
0 9
4
Dawson and Co
10
0 9
4J
Rukleft and Co
40
1 0
Standworthy and Co.
30
0 9
4
Woodward and Co. ..
40
1 0
8*
Paid from surface.
Hatton and Co
70
2 0
4
Mosely and Co
60
1 0
4
This claim is paying well.
Crow and Co
70
0 8
3
This vein varies from 3 to 12
inches.
selectthe Adelong reefs, and from these we instance claims
below 100 feet producing five ounces and upwards to the ton,
and compare them with those under 75 feet deep, taking in
the latter cases those which yield the greatest product.
It is generally stated that a quarter of an ounce per ton will yield a profit
if the reef is a foot wide.
Mr. Bollaert, a gentleman of considerable practical expe-
rience with reference to the gold lodes in South America, gave


a decided opinion, during the discussion of this paper, that
those lodes did not diminish in value at any depths with which
we are acquainted. He stated that he had seen lodes very
rich in gold at the greatest depths below the surface with
which the miners are acquainted, either in that or any other
country. Mr. Pollard, an Australian mining engineer of con-
siderable eminence, advises the miner at once to sink as deep
as is practicable.
From these facts and opinions we come to the conclusion
arrived at by the majority of Australian geologists, either that
reefs vary their products at various depths, or that some reefs
improve and others are less profitable as we follow them
downward, whilst at the same time those who maintain the
opinion of Mr. Pollard have many arguments to support their
hypothesis, that reefs generally improve downwards, especially
when we take into consideration the greater inducement which
miners have to work reefs that are cropping out rich at
surface, than to venture downwards in hopes the prospect of
success may improve at great depths.
We have shewn the similarity between the production
of tin from stream works to the yield of gold from
the alluvial deposits. But although the character of both
is the same, yet the aqueous action which gave existence
to .the ancient auriferous drifts must have been far more
powerful in Australia than that which caused the disintegra-
tion of the rocks in which the tin originally existed which
has been recovered by stream works. And again in Australia
we have, extended over the whole country, two systems of
alluvium, separated by vast beds of basalt, produced by the
eruption of volcanoes long since extinct, whilst 160 feet above
this ancient alluvium, rivers, or rather creeks of more recent
origin have worn down a bed for their diminished volume,
and these have also an auriferous alluvium.
In order to illustrate this most interesting phenomenon we


have given a plan of Ballaarat, Plate I represents the East
and West sections of the “Ballaarat basin,” as seen from the
North. A,A represent the beds of two branches of an ancient
river, which join a few miles to the southward. These beds
have evidently been cut down by the action of water, at some
very remote period, 432 feet deep from the summit of Black
Hill, to the left beyond the limits of the Plate, and 267 feet
below the top of “ Old Post Office Hill,” which divides Balla-
arat East from Ballaarat West, and which is also distinguished
by being the highest ground represented in the Plate. After
this river-bed had been formed or during its formation large
stones of quartz or boulders, evidently much worn down by
the action of these floods, have been deposited at the lowest
depths, and it is amongst deposits of this character the largest
nuggets have been found. The rocks thus broken through con-
sisted of schistose, known by miners as “killas,” and having
quartz reefs (E,E) running generally in the direction of their
beds. Subsequently to the deposit of these boulders and
nuggets a lighter sedimentary deposit was formed, during the
lodgment of which several secular changes must have taken
place, since this sedimentary bed is about 160 feet in depth,
and is made up of nine or ten strata, alternating from clay to
gravel. Each of these strata is to some extent auriferous.
Then occurs a volcanic epoch, traces of which are evident
throughout the whole of Australia, as far as its development
has been traced. Then it appears that the whole bed of the
Ballaarat river was filled up from the surface of this alluvium
by lava, producing the basalt formation B, thus evidently
causing the formation of a lake which in time became filled up
by detritus almost to the level of Ballaarat. Then occurs the
more modern epoch. The water at length breaks a passage
through the basalt and forms the Yarrowee creek at C, and a
smaller creek over the ancient river at D. The whole area
of the drift-water basin of Ballaarat is not less than from






sixteen to twenty miles. When we compare the extent of the
Yarrowee creek with the bed of the ancient river which drained
the same basin, there is striking evidence that a very much
smaller body of water finds its way to the sea by the present
river system than at some very remote epoch.
This is partly accounted for by the fact that, up to the
present time, a considerable portion of the surface water finds
its way to the sea through these ancient river beds. We have
already shown that the lower depths of these ancient rivers are ,
filled with rounded bodies, and through the interstices which
must exist between an accumulation of rounded bodies a
passage must necessarily exist. And these subterranean water-
courses form the principal obstruction to the working of these
ancient stream-works. The water increases in winter and
i
decreases in summer; in the latter period alone have the
miners been able to explore these ancient deposits. But every
shaft (F, F, F,) which has pierced through in succession each
stratum of impervious clay has admitted the water of the inter-
vening gravel stratum into the lower drift, and thus rendered
the deposits almost inaccessible ; on this account most of these
shafts have been abandoned.
We have already stated that the lodes and reefs in which tin
and other metallic ores are deposited are strata of various thick-
nesses, varying in the angle they form with the horizon. This
is also the case with auriferous quartz reefs. But it has been
observed that generally the latter are more nearly perpen-
dicular to the horizon than lodes in this country. Generally
speaking, the dip of reefs varies from 80 to 85 degrees with
the horizon, as in E,E, Plate I, and usually follow the direction
of the cleavage or laminae of the schist rock. In the Boroon-
dara and Balleen gold mines we have reefs at only 60 degrees
with the horizon ; hut such cases are rare.
Another matter connected with reefs worthy of notice is their
geological position. They are not found promiscuously distri


bated throughout all formations, but, on the contrary, there are
certain descriptions of rocks to which they may be considered
peculiar. The granitic and the older igneous are frequently the
depositories of the lodes of tin or copper and the reefs of gold ;
but in the old rock they are generally most productive near
situations where the * igneous and sedimentary are in contact,
or where a metamorphic structure has, from action of internal
causes, been superinduced on rock of the older igneous class.
Thus, to use the miners’phraseology, the lodes generally run rich
at the junction of the granite and killas, and thus a knowledge
of the geology of the neighbourhood often greatly aids the
miner in selecting the field for his operations.
One very remarkable feature in the deposition of lodes
and reefs is the parallelism of all those of the same general
character. In the several localities there are classes of
lodes which have been formed at different epochs. Although
these different systems of lodes, dykes or courses, have bear-
ings different from each other, yet the individual lodes of each
system are parallel, or nearly so, to all others of the same class
found in the same district. Thus, in Cornwall some geolo-
gists have considered that they can discover lodes, the formation
of which should be assigned to seven different epochs. The
earliest formations of this class, viz., those that contain tin
and copper, run east and west in Cornwall and Devon; but
those containing lead, zinc, and antimony, bear north and
south. These seven systems of courses are oblique to one
another, but the courses of each epoch are parallel. These
seven systems include the non-productive lodes traversing
the same country. From this it appears that the paral-
lelism of lodes or reefs results from some certain condition
• In this respect, also, the gold reefs are of a similar nature to tin and copper
lodes, being only in the primary rocks. Other lodes, such, for instance, as those
that contain lead, zinc, and antimony, are frequently found in the older
secondary rock, and are evidently of a later formation.


of the earth’s crust existing for one epoch only, and also that
all lodes of each particular class have a coteniporaneous period
of formation. We find that the gold reefs of Australia possess
the peculiarity of parallelism running north and south. We
have no account whether there are other dykes or lodes run-
ning in other directions; hut since we are informed that gold
reefs are subject to faults we may conclude that in Australia,*
as in other countries, the lodes in such cases are heaved by inter-
cepting dykes of a later formation. There are said by some
Australian geologists to be some exceptions to the parallelism
of gold reefs. This is a matter deserving of much considera-
tion, since previous investigations of the nature of lodes would
induce us to believe that reefs running in such abnormal di-
rections must he formations of a different epoch. In the
Sandhurst district we have gold reefs said to he bearing in all
directions, varying from nearly east and west to nearly north
and south. Of the former we have Albert and Nuggetty, and
of the latter, South Nuggetty and Balaclava.
But these abnormal hearings are said to extend for a limited
distance only, and may be regarded rather as contortions of
the reefs in that locality than as instances of reefs deviating
from the parallelism of the system to which they belong.
This, it is said, is evident, if the backs of the reefs are traced
for a distance far beyond the small limits of the claims on which,
at present, mining operations are carried on. Whether this
latter statement is correct or not it will require time to demon-
strate. But in the meantime we have the opinions of all the
eminent geologists in Australia in favour of the hypothesis of
the universal parallelism of gold reefs on the main lead.
* From reports, since received, dated January, 1861,1 find that this hypothesis
is verified. Gordon’s Kangaroo Eeef, as seen at the 18th fathom-level, is heaved
to the left, from 2 feet to 3 feet 3 inches, by three cross-courses nearly at right-
angles to the reef; and in the “Last Chance ” Company’s reef, Specimen Hill,
a right-handed heave occurs. Auriferous reefs often heave other courses, proving,
in such cases, the more recent origin of the former.


There is another subject to which my mind has been
especially directed in reading these valuable papers, —the
nature of the action which brought about the deposit of these
reefs or lodes. Previously to reading these papers I had no
doubt on the subject. I believed that the lodes were erupted
in a state of igneous fusion; that they are interposed trap
dykes thrown up from the depths of the earth at epochs subse-
quent to those at which the rocks, in which they'are found,
were deposited. I was, however, surprised to find that this
theory is disputed by two eminent Australian geologists,
Messrs. Selwyn and Acheson, both of whom stated in January
1859, that, in all the quartz reefs in every gold field in the
colony the auriferous formation contained silurian fossils—
the most delicate and beautiful organic remains—shell-fish,
etc., in the most perfect state of preservation. The existence of
these fossils does not accord with the theory that the quartz
reefs were cast up by igneous action. During the succeeding
month the former of these gentlemen, Mr. Selwyn, the Go-
vernment Geologist, made a communication to Sir R, I.
Murchison, (Notes on the Geology of Victoria), which are
recorded in the transactions of the Geological Society (May
1, 1860, p. 145.) This document I read with great attention,
believing that some further information on the above remark-
able statement would have been afforded ; hut I was surprised
to find that no allusion was made to the subject. I must,
therefore, until that statement receives further confirmation,
believe that these gentlemen came to this conclusion on data,
that on further examination were found capable of an explana-
tion less at variance with the experience of all other eminent
geologists.
The annual export of gold from Australia, taken from
“ Escort Returns,” is between one million and a-half and two
million ounces. But when we take into consideration the
large amount brought home by passengers secretly, we cannot


believe that the average amount is less than two million
ounces, in value eight million pounds sterling.
This paper is not, perhaps, the proper medium of discussing
the value of these gold fields as a commercial speculation.
But having taken a very favourable view of the future pros-
perity of the gold fields of Australia, I fear that I shall pro-
duce a false impression, if I refrain from referring to a very
strongly marked fact, illustrated by the statistics derived from
these papers. Although a very large proportion of speculators
who superintend the outlay of their own capital, and a large
number of those who employ their own labour also, have been
eminently successful, it does not appear that there is any en-
couragement, from the experience of the j>ast, f or adventurers
in Great Britain to invest capital in Australian gold mines. It
is not my intention to discuss fully the cause of this fact, but
rather to state the result of my investigation of this subject.
The share list exhibits seventy-two mines in the market. Out
of this number sixty are at a discount, and* twelve only at a
premium; and when we also take into consideration that most
of those mines which are at present offered at a very depreciated
rate were sold at the commencement of their operations at
heavy premiums, we can form no other idea than’that we have
already expressed —that these mines are speculations far from
encouraging the investment of British capital.
Although, however, we have come to this unfavourable con-
clusion with regard to the employment of British capital in
the Australian gold-fields, we still believe that these mines
will be very imperfectly developed until a much larger amount
of capital is expended in conducting their operation. But it
* Two of these twelve successful mines form very striking exceptions to
this rule. In September last the produce of “ Golden Gully,” Bendigo, was
so great as to cause a rise to a premium of two hundred and seventy-five per
cent., and the price quoted of “ Clunes quartz ” was thirteen hundred per cent,
premium.


is not practicable that any capitalists but those living in Aus-
tralia can possess the means of obtaining that class of infor-
mation which is calculated to ensure success. Mr. Selwyn
considers that the Port Philip, Clunes, Gold Mine is the only
mine at present jn Victoria where the requisites for success in
gold-mining are to be found. • These elements of prosperity
Mr. Selwyn states to be good management, efficient machinery,
and the mine being on private property, in which last case
the operations are not liable to be “ hampered by the very
“ obstructive rules and regulations made by the Government
“ and the local Mining Boards applicable to the Crown-lands.”
To meet this requirement large sums of money are necessary.
In many instances prices are demanded for known auriferous
land that no company could pay with any prospect of success,
whilst on the other hand lands have been purchased at
moderate prices by gold mining companies which are incapable
of yielding a sufficient amount of gold to pay costs. We may
therefore conclude that the advantageous outlay of capital in
gold mines requires personal, local and scientific knowledge
which we have no doubt will ultimately be generally acquired by
Australian capitalists. In the meantime it has been asserted
that the opinion entertained by eminent geologists, especially
that already quoted from Sir Roderick Murchison’s “ Siluria,”*
has had the effect of discouraging the employment of Australian
capital in following the reefs by deep shafts into the body of
the rock ; but experience is rapidly removing this impediment
if it still exists.
• Several Australian papers quote and endorse the following extract from the
Argus, November 8, 1860:—“ Sir Roderick never believed in quartz, and any
“ country that puts faith in its quartz reefs would be certain to come to grief. In
“ vain we get gold at depths of 300 and 400 feet; Siluria has said it, and it is
“ unknown what serious damage has been done to our gold-mining reputation
* because Sir Roderick refuses to be convinced, or to alter succeeding editions.”
