

THE MISSION VESSEL “DAYSPRING.”
TO THE
TEACHERS AND SCHOLARS OF THE PRESBYTERIAN
SABBATH SCHOOLS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Dear Friends,
Your attention is earnestly called to the following
minute of the New Hebrides Mission held at Aniwa in July last, and to
the letter from the Eev. Joseph Copeland addressed to the Scholars.
I trust an earnest and united effort will be made throughout the
Sabbath Schools of this colony to provide our share of the increased
expenditure. If all contribute double the usual sum, the expense will be
met. Our schools have hitherto done well, but they may do better. Some
that have hitherto done nothing, may now begin. The Vessel is employed
in the Lord’s work, and is of great service to the Mission. Cards will be
sent to all schools. Contributions should be forwarded to the Treasurer of
the Church.
I am yours, very sincerely,
EGBERT STEEL.
Sydney, Oct., 1871.
Rev. Dr. Steel, Sydney.
The “Dayspring” has now lived the average life of a vessel, eight
years, and requires a complete and thorough overhauling and repairs, new
rigging, new sails, new decks, new anchors and chains, new copper, and
many other smaller items. The Mission having taken this whole subject
into full deliberate consideration, have unanimously come to the conclusion
that it is best that all these repairs be executed, and that immediately, in
Melbourne.
It would, perhaps, be cheaper to have them done at Home, but con-
sidering the expense of the voyage to and fro, and the time lost upon it,
besides the necessity of supplying her place by chartering in her absence,
which w'ould be absolutely necessary next year, when we expect to have at
least four new Missionaries to settle, it was found that the actual outlay to
the Mission would not be much more than one-half by having the work
done in Melbourne.
The expense of these repairs will amount to £1,700, the amount of our
guaranteed annual income for her support.
It appears to the Mission that the best way of raising this money is,
that each of the churches supporting the vessel should double its annual
subscription for the present year, either from funds lying in its hands, or
by an appeal to its supporters.
The “John Williams ” has been in the habit of going Home once in
four years, and having a complete and thorough overhauling and repairs in
London. This has never yet been the case with the ‘ ‘ Dayspring. ” She
has been afloat and at work during almost her whole existence of now
nearly eight years. The repairs are absolutely and immediately required;
all things considered, they can be cheapest done in the colonies. In these
circumstances, and in the prospect of an early and large increase of our
number and extension of our labours, the Mission confidently commits the
fen/


matter to the Churches, entreating an earnest and prayerful consideration
of the premises, and an early transmission of the necessary funds to the
Treasurer of the Mission in Victoria.
On behalf of the New Hebrides Mission.
THOMAS NEILSON,
Chairman.
JOHN INGLIS,
Clerk of Meeting.
10th July, 1871
Fatuna. New Hebrides,
August 16 th, 1871.
My Dear Young Friends,
Allow me, in a short letter, to bring before
you the claims of the Mission vessel “Dayspring.” Grateful for what you
have already done for her, I should like to furnish you with a motive for
liberal giving and for giving from a right spirit. Is it right that you should
take your money and give it for the Mission vessel ? Is it better that you
should give to her or that you should not give ?
If you do wrong in giving, a great many children, and good children
too, do what is wrong. Ours is not the only Mission vessel. In the Pacific
Ocean alone there is the “Morning Star” for the islands north of the Line;
and the “John Williams,” the “John Wesley,” the “Southern Cross,” and
the “ Dayspring” for those to the south of the Line. Now all these and
and other vessels are largely supported by children. So far as I can see if
they are employed in a good and necessary work, and if they are abso-
lutely required for that work, then the children cannot be doing wrong in
supporting them. I need not w 7 ait to prove to you that the Missionary
work is a good work. You know that Jesus commands us to do it. You
know also that it is a necessary work, for the heathen cannot be enlightened
and saved without it, and 1 think I shall be able to show you that without
these vessels it cannot be carried on successfully.
Let me tell you plainly that after years of experience we find that we
cannot get on in the New Hebrides without the “Dayspring.” We could
not live and labour among the natives of these islands without her. If it
is right for us to come here at all, it is right and necessary that we should
have a vessel to go among the islands and between the islands and Australia
and New Zealand,
What would the people in New South Wales do if all the ships and
steamers from Great Britain and the other colonies and other countries
should stop coming to Port Jackson ? What would the people in Sydney
do were that to take place ? Further, what would all the people who live
along the coast, north and south, and far up the country about Goulburn
and Bathurst do, if all the coasters were laid up in harbour, and all the
railways were destroyed, and were all Cobb’s coaches to stop running, and
were all the drays to cease travelling ? How would goods of all sorts and
provisions be forwarded, and how would people get from one place to
another ? And what would become of all the newspapers, and magazines,
and letters, and telegrams were all the postmen withdrawn and all the
telegraph offices closed and the wires cut ? Would there not be a great deal
of talk in town and country, and no little consternation were all this to take
place? The people every where would hold meetings, and pass strong
resolutions, and say, “This state of matters will never do. If things are
not restored to what they were there wdll be nothing but starvation, and the
colony wdll be ruined.”
Now, what the vessels and steamers from Great Britain and other places
are to you in New South Wales, what the railways are, what Cobb’s Coaches
are, what the drays are, what the postmen are, what the telegraphs are,
what horses are all these the “ Day Spring ”is to the Missionaries. W r e
can no more do without her than you can do without them.


As you are dependent on vessels to bring you your tea and coffee and
sugar and a good deal of your flour, of your clothing, of your boots and
shoes, and whatever else the colony does not produce, so there are very
many things we need which do not grow, and cannot be made, in the islands
W® 8®? 11,010 of the necessaries of life from the colonies than on the islands’
W e Missionaries and our families cannot live on praise or good wishes • we
must have food, and as we are Europeans, a good deal of it must be
European. VV e cannot live in the open air, we must therefore have com-
fortable houses ; and we cannot go about naked, so we must get clothing
Now, take a family any where in Sydney or the country, consisting of the
father, the mother, and three or four children (for there are children among
us as well as in the more civilized places) and suppose that they could only
go once in twelve months to the shop or store to get every thing that they
required. Would it do for that family to take only half-a-crown in their
purse ? And would half a pound of tea, and three pounds of sugar, and
twenty-eight pounds of flour, and a bar of soap, and three candles, and a
single dose of medicine, and two and a half yards of cotton, and one pair of
trousers, and two pairs of shoes, and a like proportion of other things serve
that whole family for a whole year ? No ; they would require to take many
half-crowns, or rather sovereigns in their purse, and they would require to
purchase in wholesale quantities—by the hundredweight, by the bag by the
case by the cask, by the chest, by the gallon, by the web, by the dozen,
and by the gross, and it would take a horse and dray to take the whole
home, and a good large store room to hold every thing conveniently.
In New South Wales most people can go to the shop every day and get
the quality and quantity of what they wish ; we, as a rule, can only
send once a year. J
If you were down here and saw a Missionary’s yearly stores landed on
the beach you would wonder to see so many cases, boxes, and packages,
and parcels and kegs, and you would say,—well, what an amount of stuff
this is ! What can they all be filled with ? When opened in the Missionary’s
store you might see a cooking stove, chairs, tables, sofas, bedsteads, boots
and shoes, all sorts of cloth and clothing, hats and bonnets, tinware and
earthenware, tea, coffee, sugar, butter, cheese and jams, rice, oatmeal,
treacle, flour, biscuit, beef, salt, soap, soda, matches, kerosene oil, lamps
medicines, cordials, lollies, toys, a doll, and twenty other things required
about a house for use or food, which you see in shop windows, and the
uses of which you all know. You might see books in some of the native
languages, and slates, copy books, pens, ink, and pencils, with which to
instruct the natives, and a bale or two of Mission goods, to clothe them,
and to pay them for helping to put up Missionary buildings. You might
see, too articles for barter, that is to pay for native food, such as fish-hooks,
fishing lines, hatchets, knives, scissors, beads, belts, files, &c. You might
see, moreover, bundles of newspapers and magazines, and a parcel of letters,
which will give the Missionary and his family what they have been longing
for for months—the news from the adjacent islands, or from their distant
home. Lastly you might see, of course, not in the store, a house frame
with windows doors, and flooring, also, spikes, nails, screws, bolts, latches,
tools, print, glass, putty, corrugated iron, tanks, and sometimes a boat
Now, if you would multiply all this pile of stuff by the number of
Missionaries here, you will have some idea of the quantity of cargo the
Lay Spring brings down from the colonies every year. She is often so
lumbered up even on deck, that the passengers have scarcely room to
Then after she has delivered the supplies at all the Mission Stations,
say by the end of May, she does not go from island to island all the rest
of the season in ballast. She is often crowded among the islands as well
a V° n h€ f P assa ß° down, there are generally more or fewer passengers—
whne and coloured on board. Once every year she collects at one place all
Missionaries (and we are about ten) from their several islands, some of
brought 30, some 60 and others 200 miles to the Annual Meeting, at which


'all the public business of the Mission is discussed and arranged, when it is
over she takes them all back to their own stations. Generally there is a
Missionary or Missionaries on board every trip she may be visiting the
native teachers, or endeavouring to open up heathen islands, or who may be
requiring a trip for the sake of health. Then there are often more or fewer
teachers on board either on their way to some heathen island or on their way
home, after a period of service, or on a visit to their relatives. They have
of course their families with them, and no small pile of stuff. Then occa-
sionally a number of natives, perhaps, 20 or 50, or 80 are taken from their
own island for a short visit to another island, that they may see with their
eyes the fruits of Christianity. On their return they are sure to have a
quantity of yams, with pigs and other property. Or she may make a long
trip of some thousands of miles to the Christianised islands, to the East-
ward, for a band of native teachers to be placed where ever an opening can
be found on any of the heathen islands of this group.
Again, suppose a Missionary runs out of something, say flour or sugar,
or medicine, he can perhaps, by letting some of his brethren know his wants,
get a supply by the “ Day Spring” when she next calls, without going him-
self and losing a good deal of time risking his life in a boat. Or if a
Missionary on some of the islands wants servants, or a few hands to help
him with house building or other manual labour, if the natives on his own
island will not work for him, he can get by the “ Day Spring” the
natives of some other island who will give him the help he requires. Or if
a Missionary wants goats or cattle for their milk, and if they can be spared
at some of the older Mission Stations, the “ Day Spring” takes them to him.
Or if native food is scarce, as in the case on some of the islands, the
Captain of the “ Day Spring” can purchase and bring a supply of fowls, pigs,
yams, from some island where these things are more plentiful.
Then, when December comes round, and she must leave us for some
months, she makes what we call her last trip, and then sails away for some
one of the Colonies. But she does not go up empty. Each Missionary puts
on board his list of supplies for the next year, with his letters and parcels.
Often a mission family goes up by her who are leaving the Islands for good,
or for a change of climate ; or there may be a widow and child on board,
whose husband is dead, and who is going back to her relatives with a sad
heart. Perhaps there may be some one—an adult or a child on his way to
consult a doctor. As one cannot be got in the next street, nor even in all
the Hew Hebrides, the patient must go on board the “Day Spring,” and go
to one in some of the Colonies. Perhaps, too, there may be a child or
children of some of the missionaries, who has left his parents, not because
he wishes to do so, but because he must go to a civilized land to be educated
and to escape the evils of Island society and Island life.
You see, then, how very necessary the “Day Spring” is to our
comfort, and even to our existence and to the progress of the Work of God.
We cannot live without her, and if we cannot live, we cannot labour among
the heathen. She is required for communication among the Islands and for
communication between the Islands and the Colonies. Boats cannot do any
more for the one than for the other. When you hear all this, you will not
grudge us your contributions. Let them be liberal and hearty. The “ Day
Spring ” has been sailing for eight years, and she needs new rigging, new
sails, new decks, news copper, &c., &c., before she can return to the
Islands. We wish all her supporters to double their contributions for this
year. With best wishes for your present and future welfare,
I remain,
Very truly yours,
J. COPELAND.
George Loxton <& Go., Printers, 42, New Pitt-street, Sydney.
