

is-sr)
THE NORTHERN TERRITORY TRANSFER.
A REPLY to
Messrs. GWYNNETH, WILSON and BURTON,
and the
Melbourne AGE and Sydney DAILY TELEGRAPH ,
By DAVID LINDSAY, F.R.G.S.,
Surveyor and Explorer.
The Northern Territory Transfer Agreement has given many
—some whose ignorance is simply appalling, and whose local
feeling prevents them treating the subject fairly to South Aus-
tralia or from a truly national standpoint—an opportunity to
air their views.
I purpose to briefly reply to statements made by the Melbourne
“ Age,” the Sydney “ Daily Telegraph,” Messrs. Gwynneth, A.
Wilson and Burton.
The two papers mentioned have fallen into grievous mistakes,
and revealed their inexcusable ignorance of the Northern Terri-
tory by taking the opinion of men who are not competent to
express an opinion on the country, and have purposely ignored
the opinions of the explorers, surveyors, prospectors, stock drovers
and station owners who have traversed and lived in the country.
First, we must disabuse the minds of the people of the idea
that the line from Port Darwin to the other States is intended,
or will be used, for the transport of mails or passengers from
England.
Fremantle is as near Colombo as is Port Darwin, and that
route being the shortest to the eastern States must necessarily
remain the mail and passenger route.
That being so, a 3ft. 6in. gauge line is quite sufficiently fast
for a line of development, such as this must be, and also for
the transport of troops.
The “ Age ” says “ the through line from Pine Creek to Oodna-
datta would traverse a country which, to all intents and pur-
poses. is absolutely unknown and unexplored.” Then goes on
to say, “ it is a vast area of arid and uninhabited territory.”


The comparative distances from the different cities by the
“ rival routes " are all wrong. For instance, the “ Age ” gives
the distance from Port Darwin to Adelaide as 2150 miles, whereas
it is only 1896 miles.
The “ Age " and other writers also overlook the fact that a line
from Cobar to Broken Hill upsets all their calculations as to dis-
tances from the eastern cities via Oodnadatta, and that when
Queensland connects her lines with Camooweal a short line would
connect the main trunk line, giving Queensland ports their
connection with Port Darwin. In considering the development
of the Territory, it is hardly fair to calculate the distance from
Cape York down the East Coast as an argument against the
construction of the central route.
The “Daily Telegraph," falling into similar errors, says: “A
railway from Pine Creek to Oodnadatta over more than a
thousand miles of largely desert land. The fact is that no more
worthless stretch of country could be chosen in Australia than
that which this line would traverse." Then goes on to quote
Mr. Alex. Wilson, with whom I will deal later, and winds up by
saying: “ The land is not South Australia’s to sell, the State
being its holder merely as a bailee for the Imperial Government.’’
It is lamentable that any newspaper should give utterance to
such ridiculous, statements.
When the Federal Constitution was assented to, South Aus-
tralia was named as including the Northern Territory, and then
again the Crown assented to the “ Act to surrender the Northern
Territory of the State of South Australia." These two Acts
alone.prove South Australia’s absolute right and title to the
Northern Territory as a part of that province.
Mr. Gwynneth, C.E., who poses as an authority, says “it is
150 miles from Oodnadatta to the boundary of the Northern
Territory." It is only 114 miles.
He is also wrong in his comparative distances from the
eastern cities via Oodnadatta, for he says it is 2000 miles from
Adelaide to Port Darwin. I repeat it is only 1896 miles.
I would ask him why he mentions the distance from Rock-
hampton to Port Darwin?
He also says “Oodnadatta to Pine Creek 1100 or 1200 miles,
mostly through wretched country from which absolutely no
traffic can be expected.’’ He suggests that the “ Port Augusta
to Oodnadatta railway has not been kept in a high state of
efficiency nor has had much spent upon it in the way of renew-
ing ancient sleepers, etc.”
On the authority of the South Australian Commissioner of
Public Works, I am in a position to state that the railway has
been kept in first-class order and up to standard working con-
ditions ; that goods and mixed trains run 35 miles an hour,
heavy stock trains over 25 miles, and passenger trains are
occasionally run 45 miles an hour.
Air. Gwynneth says the route he proposes, straight south
from near “ Cloncurry to Broken Hill and Wentworth, would
traverse the best of the -vast pastoral, agricultural and mineral
country of our States,” His ignorance of the country on his


proposed route is not excusable, for he has 'but to look at offi-
cial documents and maps to find how false is his statement.^
The line he suggests passes for 600 miles through the driest
and worst country in Queensland and New South Wales, whose
rainfall varies from 9 inches to 5 inches. There is no known
mineral country from the Cloncurry district till well into New
South Wales: As for agriculture? Well, that is only possible
by irrigation.
Mr. Gwynneth goes on to say “the route 1 suggest means
1815 miles of new line through good and easy country as against
the direct route of 1100 or 1200 miles."
“ It would traverse all the good country that the ()odnadatta
line would serve." This is too ridiculous. Ihe fact is that the
ony part served by his line is the Barclay Tableland, leaving all
the vast pastoral and mineral country,' extending right to the
southern boundary, absolutely untouched and out of reach of
railway communication.
Let us look at his figures. From Port Darwin to Wentworth
he estimates as “ 1815 miles of new line." But to give the
connections with the other States he omits to mention would
entail the building of an additional 870 miles, making a total
of 2685 miles of new line as against the 1036 miles South Aus-
tralia asks shall be built, with this great advantage that the
whole 1036 miles would be in Commonwealth Territory, whilst
only 660 miles of the Gwynneth route would be in Federal
country, and 2000 miles in other States.
He speaks of the “ vulnerability to ” attack by forces landed
at Port Pirie or Port Augusta. If the troops were coming from
Port Darwin* to protect Sydney, there might be some force in
his argument. Is it not more likely that the troops would be
sent from the eastern and southern States to protect Port Dar-
win ? In that case, his line would be liable to interception from
the M‘Arthur River, which is the port for the Tableland.
He suggests, further, that “ the line would have to cross the
Mac Donnell Ranges at a height of 3000 or 4000 feet, and be
difficult.” The survey which has been made gives the elevation
of the saddle at 2500 feet, and the steepest gradient 1 in 80, and
no engineering difficulties.
Mr Alex. Wilson’s- —whose article and map are published in
the “ Age ” —objections to the direct route are similarly founded
on ignorance and prejudice.
His statement that the “ Oodnadatta line has had'*nothing
spent in maintenance, and that it is worn out and only able to
carry light trains at an average maximum speed of 15 miles an
hour.” is absolutely contradicted by the Railway Commissioner,
who says the line “ has been kept in splendid order, and heavy
trains travel 35 miles an hour.”
In Mr. Wilson’s map, showing the route which, in his opinion,
is “the only national line,” and his'-comments thereon, he makes
a curious blunder, which absolutely falsifies the conclusions he
draws.
Fie says. “ Against this there will be required 1381 miles
from Pine Creek to Broken Hill at £sooo per mi1e—£6,905.000.


The actual distance, according to his own map, is 1715 miles,
which, at £5OOO per mile, is £8,575,00—a trifling difference in
favor of the Oodnadatta route of £1,670,000 instead of £153,000
as stated by him and quoted by the “ Age."
Then he takes no account of the cost of the necessary con-
nections shown on his own map, which amount to 530 miles,
another £2,600,000, making a total outlay of £11,175,000 against
South Australia’s estimate of £5,315,000.
His estimates of £1,437,000 for strengthening the Fort
Augusta to Oodnadatta line and £435,000 for the Pine Creek
line are not warranted by the facts, and evidently only used to
cloud the issue and mislead the people of the eastern States.
And I suppose in his superficial treatment of this vast ques-
tion he forgets the cost of building bridges over the Murray,
Darling, and all the big flooded creeks and rivers of Queens-
land.
Mr. Wilson says “ the direct route is for 1700 miles through
a desert almost without inhabitants."
Since the distance from Port Darwin to Port Augusta is only
1637 miles, and the two routes follow the same line for 350
miles before his suggested route can diverge to the eastward, his
deliberate attempt to mislead the public is apparent, and his
ignorance of the subject is so colossal that any statements he
may make are not worth a moment s consideration.
Mr. Burton, in his articles published in the Sydney “ Daily
Telegraph," is as unfairly extravagant in his commendation of
the Barclay Tablelands and adjoining lands in Queensland as he
is in his condemnation and descriptions of the country to be
served by the direct route. A thoughtful reader will discount the
whole of his opinions and statements when he finds “ The mail-
man will ride 100 miles a day and every day throughout the
year.” (This to show the wonderful qualities of the grass.)
The fact is. there is only a monthly mail from Camooweal to
Borolodla, a distance of less than .400 miles.
Mr. Burton writes of the country north of Oodnadatta " as
a perfect desert, useless country. Central Australia is too dry
to ever carry large herds, and the rainfall is too capricious,
averaging from 5 inches to 6 inches yearly. (Mac Donnell
Ranges average annual rainfall is 10.80 inches, and increasing
further north.)
“ The country is patchy,” he says, “ you may get 10,000 acres
(16 square miles) of good pasture land, then huge tracts of
desert, waterless and uninviting, where no living thing exists.”
Let us have the truth concerning this belt of country.
According to the official returns for 1907 there are in that, the
driest portion, where the rainfall averages from 5 inches at
Oodnadatta to it inches at Alice Springs, 25.000 cattle, 57°°
horses, 1000 sheep. And the stations there have sent to the
Adelaide market during the past three years over it. ooo fat
cattle and 1000 horses.
ATr. Burton goes on to describe this country as “ a sandy
wilderness, devoid of trees, vegetation and water.” He says his
■“party travelled by camels averaging 70 miles a day (that is


as absurd as saying the mailman rode too miles a day; I ven-
ture to say his party did not average more than 30 or 35 miles
a day) across huge sand-drifts of stunted timber, a veritable
desert. (Note. —Just previously he said it was devoid of trees
or vegetation.) Water was found here and there, brackish in
nature."
Yet, strange contradiction, he goes on to say “ the place is
highly to be commended for a Government depot for breeding
horses for the Indian market."
Now let us see how the Surveyor-General of South Australia,
in his official report, describes this same country along the route
Mr. Burton says he travelled, and which is so ruthlessly con-
demned by him, Gwynneth, Wilson, the “ Age ” and " Daily
Telegraph."
“ The character of the country from Oodnadatta to
Macumba, a distance of about 30 miles, may generally be des-
cribed as fair pasture, comprising undulating stony tablelands
traversed by rough ranges and intersected by numerous broad
water-courses, and often extensive flats, splendidly grassed after
rain, timbered with gum, box, myall, gidgea, wattle, etc.
‘‘ .From iMacumba to the latitude of Charlotte Waters, about
90 miles, the country is more open and well grassed, with salt,
cotton and other edible bushes, and patches of Mitchell grass.
It is watered with numbers o'f springs.
“ From Charlotte Waters to about lat. 24.30 on southern side
of Mac Donnell Ranges the country generally comprises open
miflga, grassed plains, and red sandhills, with patches of
mulga and black oak scrub and spinifex.
“Along the course of the Hugh and Finke there is good timber—
boxwood, gum, mulga, etc. —parts well grassed, and occasional
stony ranges. The Mac Donnell Ranges, which extend east and
west about 400 miles by 100 miles north and south, is a fine
stretch of high tablelands and first-class country. The climate
is good, and water and herbage abundant.
“ From Mac Donnell Ranges to Daly Waters the country is
generally scrubby, with occasional grassy plains and rough
ranges; portions sandy, fairly grassed, and well timbered along
watercourses. . . .
“ The whole of the country is well suited for pastoral occupa-
tion, and portions, including the Mac Donnell Ranges, river flats
and mineral areas, would support a large population." „
Mr. Simpson Newland, a well-known pastoralist and public
man of S.A., writing to the press, 13/8/09, says, “ I have
traversed the country and failed to see the ‘ desert.’ The coun-
try called ‘ desert,’ in fact, contains stations annually sending
large consignments of the fattest cattle and the best horses to
the Adelaide market. Men and families are living there, doing
well, and perfectly satisfied with their prospects and the future
prosperity of the country. Numbers of cattle and horses from
Crown Point, half-way between Charlotte Waters and Mac-
Donnell Ranges, and Bond Springs, in the Mac Donnell Ranges,
sold in Adelaide from 31st July. 1907. to 31st July, 1909. For
year ending 31st July, 1908, 2364 cattle, 107 horses; for year


ending ,31st July, 1909, 2367 cattle, 108 horses,. Henbury and
Todmordon stations, cattle (fat) sold during 1908, 2962; 1909,
1142. A draft of 52 horses from these stations, just sold, averaged
£36 per head. Other consignments of cattle sold in the Ade-
laide markets from Central Australia in 1908; Dahousie, 201;
Cndoolya, 1098; Horseshoe Bend, 508; Eringa, 117; Macumba,
175; Peake, 969. Barker Bros, reported having yarded 1725
horses in September, ' 1908, over 1000 coming from the har
North.”
.Mr. Newland says—“ It is a splendid pastoral country. 1
see no reason why wheat and other cereals should not grow. 1
have seen splendid wheat plants, fully grown, in the Mac Do-
nnell Ranges.”
The S.A. “ Register,” 17/8/09, publishes an interview with
Mr. A. J. Breadon, a pastoralist from the so-called “ arid desert
region,” in which he says —“ 1 have been in the country ever
since 1878, with the exception of two years. There is only one
thing to say albout the country I live in, and that is, it is the most
wonderful in the world both for horse and cattle breeding. The
horses develop bone and stamina, which you can back against
anything in the world. The seasons have been fair. Yes, the
railway should most certainly be completed from Oodnadatta to
Pine Creek, because there is so much pastoral and mineral coun-
try to tap. It is all right for pastoral purposes as far as Barrow
Creek. ...
“ To show you what the country can do, I may say that the
last 18 months I have trucked about 4000 head of cattle from
Todmordon, and they have held their own against all comers. T
breed at Henbury and fatten on Todmordon, where Mitchell
grass, cotton bush, salt bush grow, and mulga is the great stand-
by. Ours is one of the greatest climates known. Nobody is ever
sick or sorry in that country. . . .
“ The country will have a great future if they put the railway
through from Oodnadatta to Pine Creek, and open up thousands
of miles which are lying unoccupied. At present carriage and
rations are too expensive in the out beyond. For pastoral pur-
poses I think you can get water almost anywhere.” . .
The authorities for describing the country to be traversed
by the direct route from Oodnadatta as a good, fair to first-
class pastoral country, fit in parts for agriculture—well-watered
(and none of whom use the word desert) —include the following
men. who have traversed the country more than once, and some
who have lived in it for years, are the explorers and surveyors,
J. M‘Douall Stuart, Gosse, Warburton, Winnicke, Barclay,
Lindsay; stockdrovers and pastoralists, A. Giles, J. A. Giles,
Simpson Newland. Taylor. Breadon. Harding, Wallace, Hon.
John Lewis, Warburton, Chewings; telegraph officers. Sir. Chas.
Todd. J. A. G. Little. Flint, Gillen.
1 do not think either Mr. Gwynneth or Mr. Wilson claim to
have seen the country they so. confidently condemn.
As to its being an arid region, the official bulletin of Mr. Hunt,
the Government Meteorologist, gives the following figures, which
are an eloquent condemnation of that idea:—


6300 square miles have an annual rainfall of under 10 inches.
213,430 square miles have an annual rainfall of from 10 to 20
inches.
96.790 square miles have an annual rainfall of from 20 to 30
inches.
120,600 square miles have an annual rainfall of from 30 to 40
inches.
86,500 square miles have an annual rainfall of over 40 inches.
That is, less than I*4 per cent, his under 10 inches average
rainfall.
Mr. Burton says, “ South Australia has spent millions in the
endeavour to develop the mining industry in the Mac Donnell
Ranges."
The official figures supplied by the Government are; —Gp to
1908 the expenditure has been £73,492, the receipts from crush-
ing ore £42,304, leaving a debit balance of £31,168.
Mackey & Knight, Printers, 366 Bourke Street, Melbourne.


♦
