

RECORDS OF THE EDUCATION SOCIETY.
No. 14.
THE
MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE
(The Binet Tests applied to Australian
Children).
By
R. G. CAMERON, B.A.
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEQATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
t26699 1913.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
THE TEACHERS’ COLLEGE, SYDNEY.
RECORDS OF THE EDUCATION SOCIETY,
No. 14.
THE
MEASUREMENT OF INTELLIGENCE
(The Binet Tests applied to Australian Children).
BY
R. G. CAMERON, B.A.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
J 9‘3-
t 26699




The Measurement of Intelligence.
I. New Plan—Reasons.
It. Alterations, Judged in the Light of Past Experience.
111. (a) Table I. —The Revised Tests.
(b) Further Alterations.
(c) Table ll. Individual Results.
(ij Interpretation.
(ii) A Difficulty.
(iii) Method, Time, &c., of Testing.
IV. (a) Discussion of Individual Tests.
(b) Summary of Results.
(c) Table lll.—Summary of Results for each Test.
V. Discussion from Various Aspects—
{a) Headings of Binet.
( b) Memory Test.
(c) Sex Differences.
(d) Family Groups.
(e) Some Reasons for Retardation.
(J) Pedagogical Bearings.
VI. Suitability of Tests—
(a) Was Binet Right in Alterations ?
(b) Intelligence not Always the Failing Factor.
VII. Suggested Rearrangement of Tests.
VIII. Conclusion—Bibliography.
I. NEW PLAN—REASONS.
While in the midst of reconstructing the plan of a former paper on Pro-
fessor Binet’s intelligence tests, I learnt that the 1908 series of tests had
been revised. ThrCe years’ experience had shown the need of some altera-
tions. Some tests were found to be too easy for the age to which they were
assigned. Hence they were now assigned to a lower age. Some were
found to be too difficult, and were now to be used for, a higher age. Others,
again, were found to be unsuitable; in two instances it was found necessary
to insert new tests.
Such being the case, it soon became evident that the age standard had
been considerably altered. This would mean that the greater part of my
tests would be useless as far as age classification went. The tests for 3,4,
and 5 remained unaltered. It will thus be seen that the tests on which the
bulk of the work had been done were altered. The results, however, would
still have one value; they would be useful in estimating the success or
non-success of individual tests.


Two courses were now open to me: In the first place, I might have con-
tinued with the 1908 series of tests. By them, I had tested seventy-one
children. Seeing that my aim was to obtain larger numbers for purposes of
generalisation, I felt tempted to go on. By doing so, I would have been able
to show whether the tests were unsuited to Australian children. On the
other hand, seeing that some of the tests had been dropped because they
depended solely on school training, it seemed useless to take further time
with these particular tests. And this brings me to my second possible
course.
As I felt it to be useless to go on with certain individual tests, I could
only reject the whole of the tests. And it was this course that I pursued.
It seemed to me that a series of experiments on the new tests would be
much more valuable from the point of view of standardisation. Future
experimenters would use the new tests. Hence, if my results were to be of
any value for purposes of comparison, they, too, must be obtained from
the use of the new tests.
Before leaving this point, I might state why I could make so little use
of the figures already obtained. Many of the children were no longer of the
same age in years. The alteration in age would mean alteration in tests. In
the majority of cases they would be required to do some tests already given,
and also tests not given before. That is to say, in some they would have
had practice, while others would have to be done for the first time. I felt
that this was not in accordance with the spirit of the original investigators.
It will be granted too, I think, that it would be a different matter from
testing the children in the same tests after a given interval, as M. Binet
has occasionally done. Consequently, I was forced to abandon the original
numbers.
II. ALTERATIONS, JUDGED IN THE LIGHT OE PAST
EXPERIENCE.
(a) In “ L’Annee Psychologique ” (1911), we find Binet’s account of the
reorganised tests. We will deal first with those tests that have been
omitted.
The test demanding the repetition of sixteen syllables, formerly given to
6-year-old children, has been abandoned because it is too similar to that
given to 5-year-old children, viz., the repetition of a sentence of ten
syllables.
Several have been omitted because—■
(i) They are the result of information received by the children from
those who tend them; or
(ii) Because they are a measure of scholastic attainments.
.To the former class belong knowledge of age, of the number of one’s
fingers, and of the days of the week. To the latter belong reading, writing
from a copy, and dictation. In a former paper I spoke of the unsuitability
of the reading test. Children of the infant department who excelled
primary children in general intelligence generally failed in this test,


because of their lack of experience. They did not know the words, or
perhaps they exceeded the time limit. If they had already failed in one
test for their age, this failure in a second condemned them to the list of
retarded children.
(h) Nine tests have been relegated to lower ages. We will deal with
them in turn. Two of them were not in my former list. Myers* rejected
them. Hence I did not use them.
The copy of a diamond shape, formerly a test for 7-year-olds, has now
been assigned to 6-year-olds. My former figures seem to be in accord with
this alteration. Of six children tested at 7, all were successful. One out
of three was successful at 6, and one child of 4 failed.
Naming four colours has now been assigned to the 7-year tests. My
figures give:—Three tested at 8 successful, as were six at 7 years, and three
at 3 years. No child that I tested failed. I believe that this test
is suitable for 6-year-old children. It remains to be seen whether the new
series bears this out.
Part of the questions involving the use of intelligence, formerly given to
10-year-olds, is now given to 9-year-olds. With this change, the former
results are again in agreement.
1 tested at 10 years was successful.
6 out of 6 tested at 9 years were successful.
2n2~ 8 „ „
2 j, I ~ 7 g, ~
The criticism of absurdities, formerly a 12-year test, is now assigned to
10-year-old children. With this change, judging from past experience, I
cannot agree. The figures are not satisfactory in this case. They are; —
1 at 11 years successful.
1 at 10
1 out of 6 at 9 years successful.
However, the new series may throw some light upon the matter.
With regard to the remainder—exact information as to date, naming the
coins, and enumerating the months —the figures are not satisfactory. They,
too, must be judged in the light of the new series.
(c) Five tests have been found too difficult. For one of these the pre-
vious figures are unsatisfactory; with three of them they do not agree, while
with one they are in accord. The figures are given below: —
Not in agreement:—
(i) Performance of three simultaneous commissions—
-3 out of 3 tested at 6 years were successful.
3~3~ h ~ ~
1 tested at 4 years was successful.
• “Introduction to Experimental Psychology.”


This test is now assigned to 7-year-olds.
(ii) Features missing in faces—•
6 out of 6 successful at 7 years.
3 ~ 3 „ 6 )>
3 ~ 3 ~ o ~
0„1 „ 4 „
This test is now given to 8-year-olds.
(iii) Repetition of five numbers—
-6 out of 6 successful at 7 years.
2„3 „ 6 „
0„3 „ 6 „
0„1 „ 4 „
Now an 8-year-old test.
The arranging of five boxes in order has now been assigned to 10-year-
olds. Although one’s figures do not agree entirely with this change, one
feels that experience justifies the change. The figures are: —
4 out of 6 successful at 9 years.
3 j, 4 „ 8 „
4„5 „ 7 „
III. (a) TABLE I.—THE REVISED TESTS.
Table I (below) shows the tests as revised in 1911 by M. Binet, and
as used in this present study.
Three years-
1. Point to nose, eyes, mouth.
2. Repeat two numbers.
3. Enumerate objects in a picture.
4. Give family name.
5. Repeat a sentence of six syllables.
Four years—
1. Give sex.
2. Name familiar objects— e.g., key, knife, half-penny.
3. Repeat three numbers.
4. Comparison of two lines.
Five years—
1. Comparison of two boxes of different weights.
2. Copy of a square.
3. Repetition of a sentence of ten syllables'.
4. Counting four half-pennies.
5. Arranging in order the two pieces of an oblong card.
Six years—
1. Distinction between morning and evening.
2. Definition by use.
3. Copy of a diamond shape.
4. Counting thirteen half-pence.
5. ./Esthetic comparison.


Seven years—
1. Eight hand, left ear.
2. Description of a picture.
3. Performance of three simultaneous commissions.
4. Counting in half-pence.
5. Naming four colours.
Eight years—•
1. Comparing two things from memory.
2. Counting from 20 to 0.
3. Features missing in faces.
4. Exact information as to date.
5. To repeat five numbers.
Nine years—
1. Giving change out of a shilling.
2. Definition superior to use.
3. Naming of all coins.
4. Enumeration of the months.
5. Eeplying to easy questions.
Ten years—
1. Arranging five boxes in order.
'2. Copying figures from memory.
3. Criticism of sentence containing absurdities.
4. Eeplying to difficult questions.
5. To put two words in three sentences.
Twelve years—
1. Eejection of the suggestions made by lines.
2. To put three words into one sentence.
3. To say more than sixty words in three minutes.
4. Abstract definitions.
5. Arranging words in order.
Fifteen years—
1. Eepetition of seven numbers.
2. Ehymes.
3. Eepetition of a sentence of twenty-six syllables.
4. Interpretation of a picture.
5. Problem of incidents.
Over 15 years—
1. Cutting out.
2. The reversed triangle.
3. Differences.
4. The question of the President.
5. Pensee d’ Hervier.


(b) FURTHER ALTERATIONS.
In addition to the changes already noted, we must note a few others.
There are two new tests. One is placed in the 10-year group, the other
in the 12-year group. The former consists of copying figures from
memory, the latter of resisting the suggestion given by lines. Each will
be described in detail in a later part of this paper.
Another important change is made in the later tests. It will be remem-
bered that in a former paper I found 75 per cent, of the children tested at
12, 13, and 14 years retarded. The tests I used on that occasion were taken
from “ L’Annee Psychologique,” and from the list given by Myers in his
“ Introduction to Experimental Psychology.” But now, in the new tests,
I find that what was formerly demanded of 11-year-olds is now assigned to
12-year-olds. The 12-year tests have been set down for 15 years, and what
were formerly 13-year-old tests have been assigned to adults.
(c) TABLE II.—INDIVIDUAL RESULTS.
Under Table II will be found the results of the tests with each individual.
(i) It will be seen that the children are classified according to age. For
instance, only one boy of 4 years was tested. In the first column of
each section will be found the sex of the pupils. Individuals are repre-
sented by numbers; it was not thought advisable to give the names. In- the
second column will be found the class to which each individual belongs—
e.g., K (kindergarten), 21 (Second Infants), 2B (Lower Second Primary).
The tests are grouped according to years—the upper figure (in dark type)
denoting the year, and the lower number the individual test (Cf. Table I).
The sign signifies that the subject was successful, the sign
**
nwgation denotes an unsatisfactory test. The word “ level ” signifies the
age-level the child reached; if normal, “N ” was put in this column; if
retarded, “—X ”; if advanced, “ -f-X.”' “ Inc. ” signifies incomplete.
(ii) In arriving at the results, as to retardation, &c., I used Binet’s con-
vention. That convention is, if the child does five tests superior to his age he
Sa regarded as being advanced one year; success in ten such tests would
place him two years above his age in intelligence. If the child cannot
answer four-fifths of the tests for his age, he is tried with the lower tests
till he can answer four-fifths. In some cases I found children could answer
the tests for a certain age several years higher than the normal, but yet
they were not able to answer the intervening tests. For example, one boy of
9 answered four-fifths at 9, four-fifths at 10, two-fifths at 12, and four-fifths
at 15. Now, according to the convention, he should be estimated at +2
years, seeing he answered ten tests above his age. But, in another place
Binet says if the child can succeed with four out of five tests for any age,
he is to be placed at that age. Under that condition the boy is estimated at
-f-6 years. Seeing he had been successful in a test (15/3 —repetition of a
sentence) in which the majority had failed, I placed him at +6- Such a
difficulty, of course, only arises in connection with the later tests. It is a


serious matter when one is calculating percentages for final results. The
difficulty arises from the fact that there are no tests for 11, 13, and 14
years. Is the child who answers five tests superior to his age at 10 to be
placed at the level of 11 or 12 ? I placed him at 12. Similarly, if the child
of 12 could answer four out of five of the 15-year tests, I placed him at 15.
Concerning the above, I wrote to Miss Johnston, at Sheffield. She very
kindly sent me out her account of the tests in the form of a booklet. At
the same time she wrote me a letter. In it she remarked that the above
was a difficulty, and that Dr. Bobertag had made a suggestion as to how to
deal with it. However, as M. Binet had not, at that time, been consulted on
the matter, she did not tell me what the suggestion was.
Another point calls for our attention. M. Binet remarks on the fact that
there are now five tests for each year (except at 4). That being the case,
he maintains that the child’s intelligence-can now be gauged in years and
months. This seems to me altogether too arbitrary. He maintains that
five is the common standard, and if a child answers, say, three tests above
its grade its intelligence is estimated at -f- |.
The merit of the Binet tests, it seems to me, is the fact that they attempt
an allrrcund examination. The use of the above device, I think, would
detract from the value of the tests. We have only reached the approximate
stage in attempting to express intelligence in terms of years. It would
seem premature, then, to attempt a classification so fine as to include
months.
(iii) The greater part of the present tests were made in the morning. I
usually arrived at school at about 8.15 a.m., and continued till 9.15 a.m.
On one occasion I attempted some Saturday morning work. I made
arrangements with the children to be present at a certain hour in the morn-
ing, a different time with each one, of course. Pour out of ten arrived.
Those four, however, took a little over two hours, so perhaps it was just as
well no more attended.
As I have previously noted, the tests require much time. Furthermore,
the investigator should never test for more than about two and a half hours
without some intermission. One hardly realises the amount of nervous
energy expended. It requires great self-control to maintain the same even
attitude throughout the tests. There are times when one must not aid by
a suggestion of any kind, neither by look, word, nor action. There are
times, again, when one must stimulate without giving actual assistance.
Such times would occur during the weight tests or the vocabulary test.
Considering, too, that each child tested requires about half an hour, it will
be recognised that the time spent in testing a large number is very con-
siderable.
I do not think it necessary to enter into a discussion of the work pre-
paratory to testing. I have already discussed that subject in a previous
paper. Let me here emphasise only two points: First, absolute privacy is
essential in the actual testing. One can only adroit into the room those


who are aware of the conditions to be preserved, and those who, at the same
time, are enthusiasts. Secondly, investigators should read carefully the
practical directions given by Binet. He suggests in one place that the in-
vestigator should have two books. In one should be entered the success or
failure of each test, in the other the answers given by the children. I
found this a time-saving device.
I am emphasising these details because I have found from experience
that the more mechanical 'aids one has the easier it is to conduct the tests
satisfactorily.
I have again to tender my sincere thanks to Miss Miller (of Horth Hew-
town Practice School) for her assistance in testing the infant children. I
have also to thank Mr. C. Blumer, M'.A. (of Goulburn District School), for
permitting me to test the children of his school.
I have not entered into detail concerning the conditions of each test. I
gave them in a former paper. They may be found in any of the text-books.
IV. (a) DISCUSSION OF INDIVIDUAL TESTS.
The Earliest Tests.
The earliest age at which the tests were given was that of 18 months. I
did not tabulate these results, nor those of a child of 21 years.
The child of 18 months had no difficulty with the tests for her age.
Those given by Binet (“ Les Idees Modernes sur les Enfants,” p. 126) for
3 months, 9 months, and 1 year were successfully answered. The test for
1 year is “ Diseerner les aliments,” The child could discriminate between
an ordinary boiled lolly and a piece of chocolate. Binet recommends for this
“ tin morceau de bois et un morceau de chocolat.” It will be seen that the
test given was more difficult than Binet’s.
The tests for 2 years were then tried and were answered successfully.
While in the kitchen she was told to get her father’s boots. Without any
hesitation she proceeded straight through to the bedroom and obtained the
boots. She was also successful in executing other commissions, but they
need not be mentioned here.
The 3-years tests were only partly successful. She could show her
nose, eyes, and mouth, but could proceed no further. It will thus be seen
that she was a year above the average.
One needs to exercise much tact with the tests of these young people;
not because of the little ones, but because of the susceptibilities of the fond
parents.
I tested another child of 2 years. He successfully answered the 2-year
tests, and also the following of the third year:—“ Montrer son nez, son oeil,
sa bouche. Eepeter deux chiffres, Enumerer les personnages, et objets d’
une gravure.” He could not give his surname, nor repeat a sentence of
six syllables. It will thus be seen that this child was normal.


Tests for 3 years.
Method.
In testing children of the earlier ages, one must not remove them from
their usual surroundings. Young children in unaccustomed surroundings
have a great tendency to he attentive to the wrong thing. Although quite
aware of this, I took several of the youngest children up to my own room.
Your of the five were found to be altogether overcome by their environment.
The fact that it was “ upstairs,” that it was a new room, that there were
strange pictures and strange people about, all tended to distract their
attention.
The tests were not attempted in this fashion on the next occasion. Acting
on Miss Miller’s suggestion—and I might here state that, had it not been
for Miss Miller’s assistance, I should have accomplished but little in the
infants’ department—l tested the youngest children in their own room,
sitting at their own tables. It was found necessary to devote about ten
minutes to the preliminary chat. Once the children’s confidence had been
gained they were inclined to be too voluble. Having arrived at this stage,
1 handed a postcard to each of the two or three children to be tested. They
were not allowed to discuss the cards with one another. One picture was
that of a bush-fire attacking a homestead; the others were Sydney views.
Coloured pictures are to be preferred at this stage.
Tests.
(5.) I began with test s—persons5—persons and objects on three pictures. The
children found no difficulty with these. They picked out the persons and
objects without any hesitation. There was no attempt to connect up the
various items. Only the names of the parts- of the picture were given.
(1.) All the children could show their noses, their eyes, and their mouths.
In giving directions, half of the difficulty with the child is the compre-
hension of what is required of him. In this case one must explain till the
child understands—“ Show me your nose ”; f or “Where is your nose?” or
“Put your finger on your nose! ”
All the children were successful in tests (2), (3), and (4). The latter
(Give family name) gave some difficulty. As a last resource Miss Miller
would ask, “ Whom does teacher say she -wants when she comes into your
room for you—l want Gladys ? ” This generally proved successful.
Remarks.
From Table 111 it will be seen that the tests for 3 years seem to be of
the right difficulty. Neither the child at 4 nor the children at 5 failed in
any one of the tests. One child at 1 could answer test 1. One child at 2
could answer 1,2, and 5. Evidently, then, they were too easy for the
children of 4 and of 5, and too difficult for those of 1 and of 2. Of course,
the small number tested would affect the conclusions. In the figures given
by Myers* for children of 3 years, three were normal; three, one year in
advance; and four, retarded one year —that is to say, 40 per cent, were
retarded.
* Introd. lo Exptl. Psjch,, p. 142.


Tests for 4 years.
The same conditions prevailed as for the 3-year test, as the same children
were being tested. The child at 4 and the children at 5 were successful in
all tests —(1) Give sex; (2) what is this? (key, penny, knife); (3) repeat
three figures; (4) compare two lines as to length, the lines being 5 and
6 cms. respectively, and 3 cms. apart.
Test 1 caused much amusement. With regard to test 3 (the repetition
of three numbers), I generally found that the more quickly one gave 'the
numbers, the more readily did the child repeat them. Binet allows three
attempts. The first series I always repeated in slow and measured tones
as 4—9—l. Very seldom did I get the correct answer at the first attempt.
Another peculiarity noticed was the tendency to take the first number
given, and then to count consecutively. Here again there was an inadequate
comprehension of the problem. Perhaps it might have been that the asso-
ciations were so strong that, having uttered one number, the tongue glibly
ran on to the following numbers.
Again, at the first effort, some of the children gave any numbers that
entered their head and as many as they could.
The comparison of tw© lines as to length gave no difficulty. The chil
dren were asked to put their finger on each line, and then to say which
was the longer.
Results.
According to my tests, it would seem that the 4-year tests were adequate
for that age. As I have before remarked, a wider examination might lead
to a different’' conclusion. At the same time, the children "whom I
tested showed no hesitancy whatever in three out of the four questions,
w'hile they all proved successful in the number test, allowing three attempts,
Myers’ numbers for this test are: —Normal, just over 50 per cent; ad-
vanced, 16 per cent.; retarded, about 34 per cent.
Tests for 5 years.
Tests.
(1.) Which is the heavier of two boxes? One box -weighed 3 grammes,
the other 12 grammes.
As Binet points out (in “ L’Annee Psychologique), the difficulty of this
test lies in the comprehension of the problem. Even after explanation,
the children seemed hazy about what they had to do. In no case
did I find, as Binet did, that a child hazarded the answer. Those children
who put each box in the palm of the hand were quicker and more correct
in their judgments. By such a device (one box in the palm of each hand)
they had an improvised balance. The children who grasped the boxes at
the end or on the top generally required two attempts before being correct.
Three attempts are allowed. After a child obtained the correct result I
“ shuffled ” the boxes and gave him another opportunity. Each child was
successful. This eliminated any element of chance that might have entered
in. One child at 4 and three at 5 (all tested by this device) were suc-
cessful.


(2.) Copy a Square.
The square was drawn on paper, the length of the side being 3 cms.
These children had not yet handled pen or pencil, so I took them to a black-
board and gave them a piece of chalk. The following were the results: —
Numbers 3 and 4 I passed.
Binet would pass these: —
but fail these: —
It will be seen that two of the results obtained were similar to the
second type of failure that Binet found.
I again showed the copy to the children that failed, but with the same
result. They seemed to have no conception of the square. One child was
fairly successful after being shown how to draw it.
Of course, the children have had no previous experience in drawing
figures as such. When using the chalks they have as an end the illustra-
tion of some fact. The idea of drawing a square as an end in itself did
not appeal to two of them. Most of their previous experience of drawing
had been such that their imagination had full play. It would then seem
difficult to be bound down to such a bald thing as a square.
The child at 4 was not successful in this test, and one out of the three
tested for 5 years also failed.
(3.) The repetition of the phrase, “ I did not bring my ball to school
to-day ” was sueessfully answered by all.
(4.) The counting of four pennies juxtaposed gave no difficulty to the
child at 4, but failed one at 5.
(5.) In this test, two rectangles of the same size, cut out of cardboard,
are used. One rectangle is cut along a diagonal, thus forming tw 7 o triangles.
The three pieces arc placed thus: —


The child is required to place these triangles in position, so as to form the
rectangle. A very difficult test! Binet advises that the child should he
kept at it, and that not by a look should he be told that he is right. It was
very difficult to get the child to understand what was wanted. It was
difficult to get him even to handle the pieces of cardboard. And, after
having handled them, he seemed to shuffle them aimlessly. The pieces were
generally arranged as for a diamond, thus:
Even after several attempts the child came back to this arrangement.
This test proved too difficult for the 4-year-old child, and was attempted
successfully by only one of the 5-year-old children. It would ssem to be
a very difficult test for the age of 5 years.
Of the three children of 5 that were tested, one was normal, one was re-
tarded one year, and one was one year in advance. Myers’ figures are 57
per cent., normal; 17 per cent., one year behind; and 26 per cent., one
year ahead.
Tests for 6 years.
(1.) Distinction between Morning and Afternoon.
Only one child out of fourteen failed in this test. The children generally
looked at the investigator to see if the question were a serious one. A few
took it seriously.
(2.) Definition by Use.
Throe definitions out of five will suffice. The child was asked to define
(i) a horse, (ii) a chair, (iii) a table, (iv) a hat, and (v) a fork.
The answers may be divided into three groups:—
(a) Some gave straight out “ use ” answers— e.g. : (i) what you ride,
or, what pulls a cart; (ii) what you sit on; (iii) what you have
your breakfast on, what you write on; (iv) what you wear on your
head; (v) what you eat your food with.
(h) Some simply repeated the word after me, and no amount of per-
suasion could elicit anything else; a horse was a horse, and that
was the end of it.
Perhaps in this group we might include those who refused to
answmr. The refusal was not given to the whole set; those that
were answered were answered by repetition as above.
(c) One boy is placed in a group all by himself; and he deserves it. I
was astonished, on asking him what a boy was, to hear him say,
“A girl.” “ What is a fork ?” “ A knife.” “ What is a knife ?”
“ A fork.” “ What is a chair ?” “ A table.” “ What is a table V*
“ A chair.”


I then asked a few more questions, and, where at all possible, he defined
the objects in a similar fashion.
The same boy could not count half-pence by two’s. Yet, seeing he
answered four-fifths at 6 and four-fifths at 7 (none at 8), he is to be
considered as one year in advance.
Four children out of fourteen failed in this test.
Supplement to Test (2).
In looking over my notes I found another abnormal case. Perhaps
I should not say abnormal; rather the child’s “leading idea” was of a
peculiar kind.
Her replies to the queries were as follows: —
Horse. —It does funny tricks and falls over.
Chair. —Falls over when you bend it. You can turn it upside down to
wash the legs.
Hat. —You hang hats up.
Fork. —Falls out of the drawer.
Penny. —Drops when you carry it up the street.
This child proved to be retarded one year.
(3.) Copy of a Diamond Shape.
Four children out of thirteen failed in this. These figures were regarded
as failures: —
(4.) Counting Thirteen Half-pence.
Out of eleven tested, only one child failed. The subject must both point
to the coin and say the number, no coin being counted twice.
(5.) iEsthetic Comparison.
Ho children failed in this test. I took the pictures as given by .Miss
Johnston in the Journal of Experimental Pedagogy. Larger prints of
the same pictures will be found in Whipple’s Manual of Mental and
Physical Tests,


Tests for 7 years.
(1.) Right hand; left ear.
The answers here may be placed under four groups: —
(a) Those who did not hesitate and were correct.
( l> ) Those who were right, but afterwards changed.
(c) Those who were entirely ignorant of the difference.
( d ) Those who were consistently wrong.
There were two or three children in the latter group. They were quite
consistent in giving the wrong answer. They were asked, “ Which is your
right arm? left arm? right boot? left boot?” To each query they answered
incorrectly.
Ten out of twelve were successful at 6, and twelve out of nineteen at
7 years of age.
(2.) Description of a Picture.
One would hardly credit the power of description possessed by G-year
and 7-year-old children. In the case of the children I examined the success
was probably due to specific training (picture talks). Each child took the
picture and “ went over ’’ it systematically. Nothing was too small to
notice.
The pictures used were: —•
(1) An Alarm at the Outpost. (Soldiers preparing for a supposed
attack; a scout coming post-haste in the distance.)
(2) The Good Samaritan.
(3) The Tender Grace of a Day that is Dead.
(4) The New Doll.
(5) The First Step in Life..
Generally, the descriptions were good. The child certainly showed that
he had a good stock of ideas —an important thing in estimating intelli-
gence.
(3.) Performance of Three Simultaneous Commissions.
In my former paper I expressed the opinion that if commissions that
would take a few minutes in the execution were given, the children would
not be able to perform the tasks satisfactorily. That opinion has not been
borne out by the recent investigations. On this occasion children ivere
given such commissions, and executed them successfully. Still, one feels,
and one knows from experience, that children of this age do not readily
“ go ” three messages simultaneously.
(4.) Counting in Half-pence.
In my former paper I placed a different interpretation on the French from
that of Miss Johnston. The French reads; —“Compter 9 sous, simple et double.”
I took this to mean, counting by ones and then counting by twos. It seemed
at the time to be rather peculiar, as there was already a test of counting
singly. Miss Johnston —and her interpretation is to be preferred, seeing
M. Binet and she have come into personal contact, and have discussed


the tests together—interprets it thus: —“ Three pennies and three half-
pennies are placed on the table side by side. The investigator says to the
child, “ You see this money. I want you to put your finger in turn on each
coin, and as you do it count aloud how much you have, always counting in
half-pence.”* She remarks that this is as near the French test as our
money allows.
The test as given in the present case was successfully negotiated by six
children out of nine at 6 years, and by sixteen out of eighteen at Y years.
Two children who failed gave the second series as:—2, 4,6, Y, 8 (nine
half-pence), and 4,4, 6, Y, 8.
(5.) Naming Four Colours.
Infant and kindergarten teaching so emphasise colour work that the
children are very sucessful with this test. Two out of twelve failed at
6 years, and one out of twenty-three at Y years.
Tests for 8 years.
(1.) Comparing Two Things from Memory.
The children were asked to compare—
(o) A butterfly and a bee.
( b ) Paper and cardboard.
(c) Glass and wood.
Two questions must be answered to pass the test.
Of course one could not give the bald question straight away. One had
to lead up to it by questioning.
In this test “ the scheme or the leading idea is ‘ difference.’ The ideas of
fly and of butterfly have to be subordinated to it.”f Lipmann goes on to
point out the defects of intelligence as ascertained from the replies given:—
“ ‘ A fly has six legs, a butterfly only four,’ would merely show a defect of
memory. On the other hand, such an answer as ‘ the fly flies ’ shows that
the difference problem has not been appreciated. Finally, such an answer
as, ‘ The fly is dark, the butterfly light,’ would be superficial, and would
show perhaps only inattentiveness.”
I found only one child that was confused concerning the number of
legs. In fact, the majority of the children tested grasped the idea of
difference. I find, too, on referring to my former paper, that I remarked:
“ This test proved easy.”
The main differences given were: —
(a) The bee stings or the bee makes honey. The butterfly does not.
(h) Cardboard is thicker and harder.
(c) You can see through glass; glass breaks more easily.
Only two children out of nineteen failed at 8 years.
• Eng. Version of M. Binet’s Tests, page 10. t Dr. Lipmann. School World, 3910.


(2.) Counting from 20 to 0.
This test is too difficult for 6 and I-year-olds. At 8, fifteen out of nine-
teen were successful.
One child replied that he had not been taught that way. Some refused
to try. If the test be not understood, it is permissible to say: “Count
like this—2o, 19.”
One omission or conversion is admissible.
(3.) Features Missing in Faces.
Binet’s figures were used. The best figures (Binet’s) will be found In
Whipple (p. 502).
In connection with figures of faces, almost every child mentioned that
the bodies were missing, although the question asked was: “ What is left
out of this face?”
One child, when looking at the full-length figure, remarked that the lady
had no belt on.
Twelve out of sixteen were successful at 8.
(4.) Exact Information as to Date.
This test is too difficult for 8-year-olds. Few children could give more
than the day. I find, on referring to my former paper, that I remarked
“ that nearly every child knew the day of the week, not so many the day
of the month, and most below 9 failed in the year.” That statement is
borne out by the new series of tests.
Children are very prone to suggest here. A suggestive question,
involving an alternative, would generally bring a reply—and a wrong one,
as both the suggestions given were purposely wrong.
From two children, in reply to the query as to what year it was, I received
the answer: “ Summer,” and “ winter.”
Only five out of nineteen were successful at 8 years.
(5.) To Eepeat Five Numbers.
This test was accomplished by fourteen out of sixteen children tested at
8 years.
One child ("who proved to be retarded three years) counted consecutively
from the first number given. In fact, she wanted to count everything.
Binet remarks that this denotes a very low standard.
Tests for 9 years.
(1.) Giving Change out of a Shilling.
As far as the investigations of the present writer are concerned, this was
a new test. After comparing Binet and Myers on the tests, I rejected this
one in my former series. Myers did not give it. Hence I concluded that
it had been found unsuitable to English conditions. My experience proved
it to be a valuable test.
To conduct this test, in the majority of cases I gave the child two-
sixpences, one threepence, four pennies, and four half-pence. I bought an
article from him worth 2Jd-, and asked him to give the change.


The results, as shown by the figures in Table 111, would seem to signify a
successful test. The general impression left on one’s mind is that the
children were too slow, and required to manipulate the coins over-much.
They enjoyed the idea of the game. The best solution was, of course:
fid. + 3d. -f- id. The majority of them began by counting over the pence and
half-pence. They found they did not have enough; hence they had to think
over the difficulty. Some children gave IOJd. change; some said 9Jd., and
could not give the correct change. One little girl gave the change almost
immediately. I suspected specific training at once. I questioned her, and
found she lived in a shop.
(2). Definitions Superior to Use.
In this test the children were asked to define' —(i) a table, (ii) a fork,
(iii) a chair, (iv) a horse, (v) a mother.
Some replies for the definition of a table were as follows: —“ A square
piece of wood with four legs on it.” “A square piece of wood, varnished,
with four legs.” (Given by children of 8.) “ Has four legs, flat top, and
round edges.” “Flat bit of wood with four legs.” (Nine years.)
Forte. —At 8“ A long handle with four bits of silver at the end.” “ What
you eat with, and is made of wire or steel.” “ Made of iron, with four spikes
on it.”
At 9:—“ Has four prongs, which are sharp, and a long handle.” “ Piece
of wire with prongs of it.” Two children at 9 gave me a “ use ” definition.
Chair. —At 8: —“ Is round, made of wood; has four legs and a back.” “ A
chair is made of cane, and has a back made of wood.” “ A chair is round,
with two bits up, and four legs.”
At 9:—“ It has a back with sticks to keep you from falling out, four legs,
and a flat bottom.” “It has a round surface, with four legs; the rest
(back) is curved.” From two children at 9 I received: “ What you sit on.”
Horse. —At 8: —“It is big; it has two ears, a long body, and four legs.”
“It has a long body, four legs, and its head goes up high.” “ A thing with
four legs, is brown, and it pulls the cart along.”
At 9: —“ It has a head, four legs, horse-shoes, hoofs, two big eyes, two
big ears, a hairy skin, and a tail.” “It has four legs, a body, two eyes, a
mouth, and hair on its body.” “ What goes in a trap.” “ Pulls a cart.”
(Last two not satisfactory.)
Mother. —At 8: —“ She has two eyes, two ears, a nose, and a mouth, two
legs; she is long, and wears skirts.” “ She feeds and takes care of us, and
she is married.” “ A big girl grown up; she gets dinners and teas, and she
buys our food.”
At 9:—“ She feeds us and looks after us.” “ She cooks food, does work,
has two legs; she scrubs and washes up.” “ She gets the breakfast and the
dinner; she makes things, drys our shirt, and she’s our best friend ! ”


It will be seen from the above definitions that there is a great increase
in power between 6 and 9 years. While at 6 the definitions are almost
wholly functional, at 9, while still functional, they tend to become descrip-
tive. Professor Earl Barnes, in his investigations on this point, found
that at 6, 79 -49 per cent, of the children gave use definitions, and 57 -07 pel
pent, of those at 9 gave use definitions.*
(3.) Name all the Coins.
The florin and half-crown were often confused. Sometimes the sovereign:
was called two sovereigns, the half-sovereign simply “ a coin.”
The half-crown was named four shillings by one child.
(4.) Enumeration of the Months.
Sixteen out of nineteen children at 9 succeeded in giving a good reply.
One child gave the months correctly till he came to September, for which
he substituted spring, following on then with September. Curious as to the
reason for this, I asked him to repeat it. He repeated his former answer.
Evidently there was a wrong idea somewhere.
(5.) Replying to Easy Questions.
(a) “ What would you do if you missed a train ?”
One child replied, “Run to the next stop.” Generally the replies were
good. All were good at 9 years.
(b) “ Suppose you bumped somebody when you were walking down the
street, what would you do ?”
The correct answer, of course, is: “ Say, ‘ I beg your pardon.’ ” One
replied “ Cry ! ”
(c) “ Suppose you broke something which did not belong to you, what
would you do?”
“ Pay for it ” or “Apologise ” are good answers.
Some bad answers received: “ Get bad luck!” “ Get summonsed!”
“ Get a hiding I”
One child gave this answer: “If I had money to go in the tram I would
give them the money and not go.”
All the questions were well answered at 9 years.
Tests for 10 years.
(1.) Arranging Five Boxes in Order.
The boxes I used were safety-match boxes. These I filled with sand till
they were of the required weight. To younger children one requires to
give very full directions.
Four children out of sixteen failed at 10 years.
• Quoted Bagley, “ Ed. Process,” page 80.


(2.) Copying Figures from Memory.
This is a new test. Rather, it was not in the 1908 series, but had been
used in the 1905 series.*
_ The figures are as follows
In a footnote on page 481, Whipple remarks that in the “ Archives de
Psychologic ” Decroly and Degand give illustrations of the drawings they
obtained from defective children. Unfortunately I was not able to get a
copy of this paper in Sydney. No library had a copy. It would have been
useful in other respects, as these two investigators have proved hostile critics.
Some bad drawings I received were as follows: —
• Whipple, page 482.


Of the failures in the first figure, that marked (a) "was most often
received. The smaller rectangle was placed symmetrically inside the larger.
The figure marked (c) was the most frequent misrepresentation of tho
second figure.
The figure (h) is a curious mixture of both. This child seems to be very
weak on the visual side.
The test is too difficult for 10 years. Ten failed out of seventeen.
(3.) Criticism of Absurdities.
'"'Whipple says that Decroly and Degand are of the opinion that this test
can be done at the 6th year. If the Belgian children are capable of doing
it at 6, they must have a different psychological make-up from Australian
children. Otherwise, the teacher must set out to cultivate the humorous
side in a very specific way.
I found only ten children successful out of seventeen at 10 years.
The sentences will be found on page 132 of “ Les Idees Modernes ”
(Binet). In reply, the children very often said that there was no joke, or
fdse gave a very silly reply.
In addition to the above, I used the following (from Whipple, p. 509)
‘•'Wo met a man who was finely dressed; he was walking along the street
with his hands in his pockets and twirling his cane.”
From three children, in reply to this, I received the answer: —“ There
must have been a hole in his pocket so that he could get his hand out.”
(4.) Replying to Difficult Questions.
The questions will be found in any of the books. I varied the question,
“ What would you do first, if you were preparing for some important event ?”
by inserting after the word “ event,” “ such as a trip to New Zealand.”
To this question I received such replies as: —“Tell mother!” “Get the
money!” “ Get cleaned!” “ Get washed!”
Twelve children out of seventeen tested were successful at 10 years.
(5.) To put Three Words into Two Sentences.
Myers suggests the words “London, money, gutter.” Replacing London
by Sydney, I accepted the remaining words. In future I wii! use different
words, as money and gutter have a very strong association in the child
mind —especially the mind of the city child.
Below 10 years the spelling was poor. I received a very good reply from
a child of 7 years—an infant school child.
Twelve out of seventeen succeeded at 10 years.
Tests for 12 years.
(1.) Rejection of the Suggestion made by Lines.
For this test one requires a book consisting of six pages of blank white
paper. On the first page must be drawn two lines, in the same line. The
length of the one on the left side should be 4 eras.; the other should be


15 cms. Following the same procedure, on the next page the lines shotild
be 5 and 6 ems., and on the next 6 and 7 cms. respectively. The lines on
lie remaining three pages should he equal, both being 7 cms.
The investigator asks the child which is the longer of the first two. On
coming to the fourth pair, he merely says, “ And what about these V If
the child gave the correct answer on two occasions he was considered
satisfactory.
I found this a very interesting test. It is such tests as these, and those
involving a problem, or the stock of ideas, and also those involving memory
work, that bring out the intelligent child. The self-reliant child appeared
at once. He gave his answer clearly, unhesitatingly. He looked carefully
at the lines, and then gave his answer in a firm, decided tone. The
weak child smiled, looked at the investigator to see if he could obtain any
suggestion from him, and then weakly gave the right answer, or, more
often, gave the wrong one. Other children rushed it. They found
a> b, c> d, e>f; they hardly stopped to see what relations held between
the other pairs. The following are some of the results:—
(i) a> h, c > d, e >/, g <h, i <j, k < I.
(Evidently strong contra-suggestion.)
(ii) a > b, c> d, e >/, g > h, i>j, k < I.
(iii) a> b, c > d, e >f, g > h, i>J, k> I.
(Strong suggestion.)
(iv) a > b, c > d, e > f g- h, i =j, k < I.
(v) a > b, c > d, e > f g > h, i =j, k < I.
Nine out of fourteen were successful at 12 years.
(2.) To put Three Words into One Sentence.
Fourteen children were successful at 12, out of seventeen tested. One
noticed a marked difference between these attempts and those of the
10-year-olds. The spelling was better, the composition flowed more freely,
and they grasped the problem more readily.
(3.) To say more than Sixty Words in Three Minutes.
This was a very interesting test. The child looked mildly surprised
when he was told that another child had given 200. Well he might, too!
All the adults I have tested have failed to give me 200. About 180 is the
average for an adult.
I took Binet’s suggestion (given in “ If Amice ” for 1911) to note down
the rate at which the child gives the words. He suggests to put a stroke
down for each word said, and to divide them off at each half-minute. It
seemed to me, however, that by following such a procedure I would lose
much of the value of the test (for the investigator). I would not get all
the association centres. One cannot note all the characteristics from
memory, even after three minutes. Hence I placed my watch in front of


me, told the child when to start, noted the particular spot the second-hand
was on, and counted. In place of putting a mark down, I counted mentally
up to each half-minute, and placed the number down at once. While the test
was going on I made brief notes, filling them out when the test was over.
The lowest number I received from a child was twenty-two; the highest,
ninety-three. Some children required stimulation right throughout the
test. Those who gave less than sixty were generally at a standstill for
about thirty seconds. They had no idea of association; objects were picked
out indiscriminately; there was no settled plan of attack.
The child who can give more than sixty at 11 is certainly intelligent.
Success was due to several factors. The intelligent child began by enume-
rating all the things he could see. Having exhausted these, he picked on
some association centre and exhausted that; he then passed on to another.
Another popular method was that of giving words similar in sound,
evidently echoes of word-building lessons. Ultimately success was due to
the quickness displayed in passing from one group to another.
Some of the groups given were; —Karnes of relations, as uncle, aunt, &c.;
animals, fruits, vegetables, vehicles, dress, furniture, games, minerals, plants,
school subjects— e.g., reading, writing—words containing similar sounds —
e.g., park, lark, dark, &c.; sky, high, buy; take, make, bake, rate, &c.;
also, words ending in “ing.” While one child was doing the test there was
a momentary lull; a motor-ear screeched outside. Immediately came the
series—motor-car, cab, sulky, cart, &c. Again, the motor-car attracted his
attention to the window. Having finished the vehicle series, he passed on
to oval, university park, garden, hospital, &c. (These could be seen from
the window.)
The case of one boy of 13 is especially interesting. He is a well-built
boy, and very dirty in his habits; he can give sound practical judgments,
yet is prone to be silly, and “ breaks out ” periodically, becoming a nuisance
to everyone in the school. Heedless to say, he is a street urchin.
These were the first words that greeted me: —Bar, hotel, saloon, billiards
(street influence); fruits; swimming, surf, musical instruments. The
majority of his word related to —
(1) Street experience.
(2) Food.
(3) Games he takes part in.
Invariably the elder children, on repeating a word, would say, “ Oh, I
gave that before.” With the younger children they often gave the same
word two or three times without being aware of it. Several children
wished to have another try, but of course I could not allow that, as the
practice element would enter in.
The largest number of words given by a child of 10 was 67; the smallest,
43.
8 years—Largest number, 62; smallest number, 18
9 „
12 „


(4.) Abstract Definitions.
The child is required to define adequately two out of three of the follow-
ing:—Charity, justice, kindness. “The definition of charity should con-
tain two ideas —that of unfortunates and that of the good that is done
them. The definition of justice should contain either the notion of law or
that of treating persons according to their merits. The definition of kind-
ness should contain the notion of affection, sentiment, tenderness, assist-
ance, &e.”*
On the whole, this is a difficult test.
Some replies received: —
Charity. —“ Love.” “Be rich like a king.” “ Trying to make any-
one happy.” “Helping poor.” “Give help.” “Having faith.” “To give
money to poor.” “ Aid poor.”
Justice. —“To be fair.” “Fairness.” “Finding anything and you know
who owns it, and give it up.” “ Doing right.” “ Being true.” “To obey
the law.” “Fair deal” (common).
I mentioned in my former paper that a child related to me the story of
Solomon and the disputed child.
Kindness. —“ People that are kind.” “ Kind to poor people and that.”
“ Giving anything you want yourself.” “ Giving things away you don’t
want yourself.” “To give and treat with good respect.”
Ten were successful out of sixteen at 12 years.
(5.) To Reconstruct some Disarranged Sentences.
This is a fine test, and one that is intellectual. The sentences are given
by Myers. With younger children one has to make the aim very clear.
They always have a tendency to insert words.
The children enjoy the tests, as they do most things which they consider
are puzzles.
Fourteen out of twenty were successful at 12.
Tests for 15 years.
(1.) Repetition of Seven Numbers.
Three attempts are allowed. Few children succeed at the first attempt.
Younger children will add the numbers if the test is not carefully explained
to them.
After I had finished this test with some of the children I tried them with
it in a modified form. In place of giving each number after the preceding
one at an. even rate, I grouped them in two 3’s and a 1. Thus a rhythm
was introduced. This proved much easier.
• Whipple, 5lO.


(2.) Ehymes.
Find three rhymes to a given word — thing. One minute allowed. The
child must clearly understand what is expected of him; even, if necessary,
choose a word for him, and form some rhymes for it.
Some of the rhymes received:—Sing (15 times), ding (8), bring (7),
ring (6), king (5), bing (4), wing (4), ping (2), ling (3), fling (3), sting,
string* swing, cling, spring.
Some unsuitable rhymes received: —Bing, tring, cring, tring, dring,
aching, nothing, something.
Some children gave more than three at the very first attempt.
The test is too easy for 15.
(3.) Eepetition of a Sentence of Twenty-six Syllables.
Sentences used: —“ The other day I saw a lovely brown dog in the street.”
"Little Mary has dirtied her new pinafore.” Miss Johnston used practi-
cally the same sentences. The point to note is that there are five adjectives
in the sentence.
I cannot alter my opinion given in a former paper. Children of all ages
showed themselves lacking in the test (with the minor exception of three at
11). The adjectives are still the trouble. I tried some of the children with
a sentence of the same length, but with only three adjectives. The results
were no better.
(4.) Interpretation of a Picture.
As the tables show, this test proved fairly easy. The pictures notefi in
the earlier tests were used, together with those given by Binet.
Various replies were given to the query concerning Binet’s second pic-
ture. Some said the old lady and gentleman were in a swoon. Others said
they were dying. One boy gave an astonishing answer. He said: —“ That
man ran away from his wife to go with another lady; now he has come
back again to tell her he is sorry”! I then asked him: “Have you seen
anything like this lately?” “Yes, sir; saw it at the pictures!”
(5.) Problem of Incidents.
Two correct answers to the following:—
(a) A man has just received some strange visitors. Pirst a doctor
called, then a lawyer, and then a minister. What do you think was
happening in that house?
( h ) A man was walking in the bush one day. He suddenly stopped
very much afraid; he |umed round and ran as quickly as possible
to the nearest police station. He told the man in charge there
that he had seen hanging on the branch of a tree What ?
Answers:—
(a) Someone is dying.
(5) A man hanging.


(fc) SUMMARY OF RESULTS.
Ago.
Retarded.
Normal.
Advanced.
4
—
—
1
5
1
1
1
6
• 2
1
10
7
2
7
IS
8
5
4
8
9
1
2
14
10
9
4
3
11
0
0
3
12
7
5
5
13
10
0
8
14
2
0
11
Total
... 39
24
75
Percentages
- 28-3%
17-4%
54-3%
This problem is very interesting:—
(a) The answers given to ( a ) by younger children generally consisted
of a description of three different events. The young children
(below 12) did not understand the term lawyer. If I explained
it to them thoroughly I would have spoilt the test. The older
children were fairly successful with it.
(i) The replies to the second problem were very amusing. Some were,
as follows:—Fox, snake (very popular), bear, flying-fox, tiger,
leaves, monkey, a bird.
Tests for over 15 years.
The above tests will be seen in Table I. I shall not discuss them
in detail, as I have not tested anyone over 15 in these present tests. Results
for children of 12, 13, 14, and 15 will be found in Table 11. The first three
were formerly considered a test for 13. It will be remembered that T
strongly emphasised the need for revision in this series.
I cannot give any figures in comparison, as there are no figures available
for this new series.
Total above .. ... .■ „., 138
Incomplete i.. .. .. ... . 39
Grand total 177
(i) The alteration of the tests for the higher ages has had its effect upon
the total result. Under the last series, of the total number tested at 12, 13,
and 14, 75 per cent, were retarded. Not only 41 per cent, (approximately)*
are retarded.
(n> The tests for 10, 12, and 13 show a large number of retarded
children.


I. — Information relating to Practical Life.
Total
Years
Test.
Successful.
attempts.
4
(1) Give Sex ’ ...
1
1
(2) Familiar objects
1
1
6
(1) Distinction between morning and
evening 13
14
7
(1) Right hand : left ear
12
19
8
(4) Date ...
5
19
9
(3) Naming coins ...
... 17
19
(4) Months
... 16
19
Total
Percentage, 706.
65
92
(a) At 10, tests 2 and 3 were responsible for the downfall (drawing
from memory and absurdities).
(l>) Eighty per cent, of the tests for 12 are constructive. Hence the
failure.
(c) The children at 13 have no age test. They can generally do the
12, but 15 is too much for them. The children at 14 can generally
manage the 15 tests.
V. DISCUSSION FROM VAEIOUS ASPECTS.
(a) HEADINGS OF BINET.
On page 128 of “ Les Idees Moderates,” Binet speaks of the all-round
nature of the tests. In the following pages he classifies the tests under
certain headings. The tests, from their very nature,- may be classified in
various ways. In this portion of the essay I propose to take the classifica-
tion given by Binet, and find what percentage of successes were recorded in
each group.
The classification given by Binet is as follows; —
I. Information relating to practical life.
11. Instruction.
ITT. “Direction.” (‘Tin effort d’ attention.”)
IV. “Comprehension.”
V. “L’lnvention.” (Constructive ability.)
VI. “Censure.” (Practically the power of criticism.)
I took each of the above headings and placed the various tests under
them. (Of course one may quibble at the classification. Por example,
“ direction ”is required in some degree in all the tests.) Having classified
the tests, the number of successful attempts at the particular age was
.calculated.
Take, for example, the test of “ aesthetic comparison.” It is classified
under the heading “ compreliension.” It is found to be a test for 6 years.
The number of failures and of successes of children of 6 in that test was
obtained. Finally, the percentage of successes in all the tests falling
under the classification “ comprehension ” was calculated. The classi-
fication follows.


II.— Instruction .
Tears
Test.
Successful.
Total attempts.
5
(4) Counting four halfpence ...
... 3
3
6
(4) Counting thirteen halfpence
10
11
7
(4) Counting in halfpence
16
18
(5) Naming four colours
22
23
8
(2) Counting from 20 to 0
... 15
19
9
(1) Change out of Is. ...
12
15
Total...
Percentage, 87-6.
... 78
89
III. — Direction.
Years
Test.
Successful.
Total attempts.
4
(3) Three numbers
• ••
1
1
5
(2) Copy of a square
...
2
3
(3) Repetition of ten syllables...
...
2
3
6
(3) Copy of a diamond ...
9
13
7
(3) Commission ...
18
18
8
(5) Five numbers
14
16
10
(1) Arranging five boxes
12
16
(2) Copying figures
—
7
17
Total...
Percentage, 74'7.
65
87
Ye irs.
IV.— Comprehension.
Test.
Successful.
Total attempts.
4
(4) Cf. two lines ...
1
1
5
(1) Comparison of two boxes ...
3
3
6
(5) Esthetic comparison
14
14
8
(1) Cf. wood and glass, <fec.
17
19
«
(2) Features missing in faces ...
12
16
9
(5) Easy questions
19
19
10
(4) Difficult questions ...
12
17
Total
Percentage, 87’6.
78
89
V.— Invention.
Years.
Test.
Successful.
Total attempts.
5
(5) Two pieces of cardboard ...
1
3
6
(2) Definition by use ...
10
14
7
(2) Description of a picture
24
25
9
(2) Definitions more than use ...
13
19
10
(5) Form two sentences
12
17
12
(2) Form one sentence ...
14
17
(3) Saying words
8
16
(4) Abstract definitions
10
16
(5) Arranging words in order ...
14
20
Total...
P(rc"n f age, 72T.
100
147


VI.— Censure.
Years. Test. Successful. Total attempts.
10 (3) Absurdities , ••• ••• it) 17
12 (1) Suggestions made by lines ... ... 9 14
Total.... ... ... 19
..Percentage, 61 - 2 per cent.
31
Various Groups and Percentages.
Instruction m ... ... 87'6 per cent, successful.
Comprehension ... ... 87'6 „ „
Direction ... ... ... 74'7 „ ,,
Invention ... ... ... 72T ,, ,,
Practical Life .., ... ... 70’6 ,, „
Censure ... ... ... 6D2 „ ,,
It would not be wise to draw any definite conclusions from the above
table. Yet, with all its defects, it is very suggestive.
The power of “ censure ” appears weak. A test for 15 should have been
included in this group. -It will be seen, however, that I omitted all the
15 tests. The reason will readily be seen by glancing at the 15 table. Taking
this test that was omitted, and’reckoning the number of successes of 12, 13,
14, and 15 year children, the percentage given is 52.
It is hard to account for the position of “Practical Life Tests.” Perhaps
the “ milieu ” is responsible. The test for the date, too, is responsible for
a low percentage.
It will be seen that the tests are fairly well distributed, except in two
cases. Those tw r o cases are “Censure” and “Invention.” The latter
classification calls for special attention. Four of them are set down for 12
years. Four out of nine—nearly 50 per cent.! Perhaps the censure tests
are rightly placed at the later ages. It would seem advisable, however, to
distribute the invention tests more evenly.
(b) MEMORY TESTS.
Owing to the numbers of the tests for 15 being so inadequate, I am not
able to draw any general conclusions about purely memory tests. And in
leaving out the 15 test for the repetition of a sentence, the whole situation
would bo artificial. It was in that test that so many proved weak.
By glancing at the tests classified under “ Direction ” it will be seen that
they readily fall into two groups, viz.;—
(a) Purely memory tests, and (&) memory tests, plus something else.
Under (a) will fall 4/3, 5/3, and 8/5. Seventeen were successful
out of twenty in these—that is to say, 85 per cent, were successful.
There must be something radically wrong with the 15 test, judged
from the point' of view of successes at the earlier ages.
(h) Taking the remainder of these tests, together with that of compar-
ing two things from memory, we find sixty-five succeed out
of eighty-six who attempted the tests (for the particular age of the


test) —that is to say, in tests involving memory and some other
faculty, 75-5 per cent, were successful. This ranks high in com-
parison with the previous classifications.
(c) SEX DIFFERENCES.
From the results obtained no striking sex differences are in evidence.
This is not to be wondered at, seeing that only at two ages (7 and 14)
were the numbers of each sex tested at all approximate.
Girls tested ... 44
Retarded ... 15 =34 per cent., approximately.
Normal ... 11 = 25* „
Advanced ... 18 =4l „ ~
Boys tested ... 94 „ ~
Retarded ... 25 =27 ■,, ~
Normal ... 14=15 ~ „
Advanced ... 55 =5B ~ „
Average ages of all in above tables :
Girls ... ... ... ... ... ... 9-7 years
Boys 9-5 „
Total tested = 138.
( d ) FAMILY GROUPS.
In revising my lists, I was struck by the fact that names were repeated.
This led to the idea of comparing the different members of a family.
(i) B.
Three members. Two were retarded one year, and one three years. Two
boys and one girl. One boy and one girl failed in tests of direction and
invention. The other boy failed in a test of training, and in one of
comprehension. Evidently direction and invention are weak. These
similarities may denote some family failing, perhaps hereditary.
(ii) M.
Boy and girl; both normal. Both failed in practical life tests.
(iii) T.
Two boys. One retarded ( —1), one advanced (+1). The retarded hoy
was 13, and was only retarded, in my opinion, because there was no tost
for 13. He could not accomplish the 15 tests. The younger boy did a
memory test the older boy could not do. (Is this an echo of the assertion
that memory is stronger at certain of the younger ages?)
(iv) E.
Girl, normal; boy, retarded ( —1). Similar to preceding case.
(v) C.
Two boys. One retarded ( —1), one advanced (-j-1). Striking differ-
ences exist between the two —one bright, the other sullen. Both failed in
the suggestion tost.


(vi) B.
Two boys. One normal, one advanced one year.
(vii) B.
One girl, one boy. Both advanced one year. An intelligent family.
I think the above facts are suggestive, and may lead to further work in
this direction.
(e) REASONS FOR RETARDATION.
I am indebted to the teachers of North Newtown Practice School for the
following particulars. I sent to each a slip headed as follows:
Name.
Other Schools (Private and Public).
Age at Entry on School Life.
Phj'sique, Defects, e.g., Adenoids.
Serious Illnesses.
Economic Condition of Parent.
Attendance-
fa) Regular.
(6) Punctual.
Estimate of Intelligence.
I had time to inquire into the case of about twenty only.
I found that six children had been to one other school, two to two other
schools, and two to three other schools; one child had come from New
Zealand and one from Tasmania.
Two entered late on school life. One, the Tasmanian girl (who showed
—3), began school life at 10, having previously been taught by her father.
She failed in three of the four tests of invention at 12, and in one of in-
vention and one of censure at 12.
The other child was very delicate till 9. .Henqp she did not attend school
till that age.
In five cases were evidences of adenoids.
In two cases I found poor nutrition a factor; in one tonsilitis, inducing
deafness; and in another there had been an attack of diphtheria.
In two cases I found the economic condition of the parents poor, and in
two cases was the attendance irregular.
In fourteen cases the results agreed with the teacher’s estimate; in six
they did not.
(f) SOME BEARINGS ON INSTRUCTION.
(i) Just a few thoughts on this point. Looking at Table 111, it would
appear useless to try to teach the date before 8 or 9 years. The child
appears to have no appreciation of such an exact allotment of time.
(it) It would seem wise to continue picture talks a little later than is
done; otherwise the good results of the infant school will be lost.
(Hi) From the coin tests, and also the change out of a shilling test, one
received the impression that even now there is not enough realism in
arithmetic. The actual figures do not show it; but the slowness in arriving


at the names of the coins, and the even slower process of giving change,
are not shown in the statistics. One expected the replies to be given
almost simultaneously with the end of the question. More lessons of the
“ shop ” type are evidently needed.
(iv) And now I shall express an opinion. I have no figures in support.
I can simply say what my experience in these tests has been. There
seems to me to be something radically wrong with the education of
lower primary children. The children at the kindergarten and sub-primary
stages are bright and spontaneous. But these very characteristics seem
lacking when one reaches the second class in the primary school. The
children seem less bright and less spontaneous in their answers.
My belief at present is, that there is too big a change in method. The
child finds himself in an entirely new world. It takes him some time to-
adapt himself to it, and, the process completed, his spontanioty seems to
have lost by the change.
VI. SUITABILITY OF TESTS.
(a) Binet appears to have been right in his reorganisation of the tests,
with the following exceptions:—
(i) “ Exact information as to date ” should have been left where it
was.
(ii) “ Features missing from faces ” should have been left where it
was.
(Eighteen out of twenty-one did it at 7 —now. an 8 test.)
(in) “ Repetition of five numbers ” should have been left where it was..
(Sixteen out of twenty-one successful at 7—now an 8 test.)
(h) Glancing over the results of retarded children, I find in about ten
instances they are considered retarded because they have failed in a test of
instruction. They have failed in two tests. One of these has been one
of instruction or one of practical life. It seems to me that this is a
matter for future consideration.
VII. SUGGESTED 'REARRANGEMENT OF TESTS.
On the total figures obtained in the two series of tests I am suggesting
a rearrangement of the tests. It is to be remembered that they are merely
suggestive.
The tests for 3,4, and 5 years I would leave untouched.
Tests for 6 Years.
I would cut out the counting of thirteen half-pence. There are already
two similar tests. Ten out of eleven succeeded with the test. I would
replace it by 7/2 —description of a picture. (Twelve out of thirteen
successful in latter at C.)
Seven Years.
I would cut out s—the5 —the naming of four colours. There was not much
test about this. The children were too well drilled in it. Replace by
8/5 —repetition of five figures.


Eight years.
Replace 8/5 by 9/3* (Eleven out of twelve successful at 8.)
Cut out 8/4 —date —and place it in the 9 series.
Ten Tears.
Cut out 2 and 3, putting the former to 12 years, and the latter to 11.
Twelve Tears.
Cut out 4, and place it in 13 series. Replace 3by 15/2 (rhymes).
Thirteen Tears.
Tests for this age will now consist of —(1) Abstract definition; (2) saying
words; (3) interpretation of a picture (formerly a 15 test).
One needs to read Table 111 in connection with the above facts. It will
be seen that I have put tests down to ages that previously had no tests. It
will be seen, too, that there are not five tests for each age in the suggested
arrangement. I hope to be able to suggest new tests after a little more
experience.
The series of tests I would suggest is as follows: —
Three, four, and five years—
The same.
Six years —
1. Distinction between morning and evening.
2. Definition by use.
3. Copy of a diamond shape.
4. Description of a picture.
5. /Esthetic comparison.
Seven years—
1. Right hand, left ear.
2. Performance of three simultaneous commissions.
3. Counting in half-pence.
4. To repeat five figures.
Eight years —
1. Comparing two things from memory.
2. Counting from 20 to 0.
3. Features missing from a face.
4. Replying to easy questions.
Nino years —
1. Giving change of a shilling.
2. Definition superior to use.
3. Naming all coins.
4. Enumeration of the months.
5. Exact date.
Ten years—
1. Arranging five boxes in order.
2. Replying to difficult questions,
3. To put two words into three sentences.


Eleven years—
1. Criticisms of sentences containing absurdities.
Twelve years—
1. Rejection of the suggestions made by lines.
2. To put three words into one sentence.
3. Rhymes.
4. Copying figures from memoty.
5. Arranging words in order.
Thirteen years—
1. Abstract definitions.
2. To say more than sixty words in three minutes.
3. Interpretation of a picture.
Fifteen years—
1. Cutting out.
2. Differences.
3. Pensee d’ Hervier.
VIII. CONCLUSION.
A perusal of the preceding pages will readily show the amount of work
entailed in writing this paper. Much time has to be devoted to testing,
much time to classification and to statistics, and much time to writing up.
Throughout the whole of the work, and especially in the testing, the
investigator must be very patient.
I hope to persevere with these tests.
The children themselves are very interested in the work. Wherever Igo
I am met with the cry, “ When are you going to take me again ?” The
bond of secrecy which is imposed on the child after the preliminary chat
makes the child feel quite an important being in the eye of the investigator.
Let me conclude with reiterating Goddard’s advice to investigators*;—
“ While examining the child forget all your preconceived ideas. Regard
him as an unknown quantity, an x that is to be determined.”
Bibliography.
Books found useful: —
“ L’Annee Psychologique,” 1908, 1911.
“ Les Idees Modernes sur les Enfants ” (Binet).
Myers’ Introduction to Experimental Psychology.
Manual of Mental and Physical Tests (Whipple).
An English Version of M. Binet’s Tests for the Measurement of In-
telligence (Johnston).
Journal of Experimental Pedagogy. Yol. 1, Nos. 1 and 2.
School World-. October, 1910 —
(1) Article by Miss Johnston.
(2) Article by Dr. Lipmann.
• Whipple, 517.


*[OAO'I
HrtHHHHHH tjHM
4 | 4 j +44+}?; C + +
rH rH
44
•PAO-I
NHr< yHM . HriH {J H U
rM
1
«
a
4
£
4
to
1 : 1 : ; ; : ;
to
no
4
1 -1 *
C5
CO
1 : 1 :::::::: : : ;
Cl
TM
CO
CO
CO
44 4
Ol
1 : I
'
IN
01
4
+ + II 1 :
rH
1 -I
m
to
+ :+ : : | + | | | + +
44
iO
+ ::::::: | | | : + +
1 : 1 : : 1 [ II • * •
I I
I : : : 1 : : : + + I :+ 1
~—
t-
CO
r*
(N
CO
CO
4!4!I44|j444 ||
rs
CO
i | :
I
+ 1
4
C-J
1 : 1 : : 1 1 II 1 II II
01
1 | ;
+
44
4
1 :+:: + +|| : : :
l +
+ : : : + + : : + 1 + : + +
—
rj»
rH
co
CO
»o
+ :+:+|++| + + +
44
tO
+++:++::!+! :++
Ol
1
I
i
I
+ :+; + + + | | : : :
+ 1
-*
1 1 1 : M :: 1 II : I f
M
(-H
H
«
rH
!
I
i
4
4 ’.44 + 44+ [ 444
1 + 1 : I + : :+ 1 1 Ml
—
r/j
tO
I
«• i
4
l
g
CO
+ I
03
rt
CJ
r*
4
s ++
4
ei
a
>,
Ol
4 : 4 4 4 4 4 4 | 444
44
rt
Ol
+ : + + + : | |
to
CO
4
r + 1
4
CO
+ :+ : I + + + + | + +
44
+ 1 + ; 1 II
—
H
Ol
•
rM
4
44
4
to
444444444444
44
»o
+ | + : + + | : + + + + + +
4
"*
4
4 4
4
•**
+ + + |+ + + + + : : ;
44
M*
1 1 1 : 1 I 1 : 1 M : 1 I
E
4
”
4
4 4
4
CO
| 444 + 44 + 4 j |
1 +
09
CO
4 + 4 ! 4 + 4 ! 4 4 4 4 4 4
—
(M
44
44
co
o
4
-
4
4
01
+ ii++++ i+ i++
44
01
+ || : | + | ; + + + | + |
4
ifl
4
44
4
-
+++ i++++++++
44
-1
444 ! 4 4 + ; 4 4 4 4 4 4
4
4
4 4
4
444 1444444 4 444
—
CO
CO
nO
• +
to
Cl
4
44
4
■m*
:4 :4 ::::::: : : :
rt-
444 .4444
1
rM
4
44
4
to
CO
:4 :4 ::::::: : : :
t-
CO
444 : 4 44 4 : : : : : :
4
Q
M
MM
M
Ol
: :
Ol
44444444444444
4
rH
+ 1 i | ++ |+::::: ;
1
n
ft
t*
5
II
II
rj
(HHU(wt-ik-iMMuCCCp
HM
CO
Cm
w
£
o
-1
M rH
■p<
a
Pm
>.
O
Wr-IOlS^'^tO'Pt-XOOFMCI
Girls
1
2
‘R.
a
Pm’
>,
O
rt rt rt H rl H
t-


7 years.
6
7
8
8
o
i U^IUO.
I
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
a
4
6
Girls.
1 .
41
h
_
IT
2
41
41
3
41
41
4
41
4-1
5
41
4-
4-
4
4-
4
4-
4-
4-
4
4
41
6
2A
?N
7 .
21
4-
4-
4
4-
4
—
4-
—
4-
—
4
N
8 .
21
N
0
11
4
4
4-
N
5
yea
rs
10 .
21
-
—.
—
—
4-
t-
-
_
-
— j
—
/—
J —
+ -
|
—
,
4 years
|
(
I
(
|
|
1
| 4
4
” 1
—3
8 years.
8
9
10
12
15
Pupils.
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
£
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
i
4
B
•J
Boys.
1 ....
2B
+
h
4
4
+
—
—
4-
4-
-
N
2 ....
2B
-}-
+
+
4
4-
4-
—
4-
4-
4
4
—
—
—
4
—
—
4
—
41
S ....
2B
4
h
+
4
4-
4-
—
4-
—
4-
•
4
—
4
—
—
—
—
—
4-1
5 ....
2B
4
h
-
+
4-
4-
4-
4-
—
4-
4-
4
4
—
—
—
—
—
—
-
—
+i
6
2B
4
4
4-
4-
4-
4-
+
4-
4-
4
4
—
+i
8
3A
4
-
■
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
—
—-
—
41
9
41
+
4-
4-
10 ....
1
4
1-
-
4-
—
4-
—
■—
4-
H
4-
—
—
—
4
—
—
+
—
+i
11 ....
2B
+
h
-
—.
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-1
12 ....
2B
4
f*
4-
4-
—
4-
Inc.
12
2B
+
4-
4-
4-
Inc.
14 ....
2A
4
4-
—
—
4-
4-
4
4-
4
4-
—
—
—
4-
4-
?+i
7
years.
4 ....
2B
+
+
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
—1
7 ....
2B
—
4
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
—i
7
8
9
10
12
Girls.
1 ....
2A
4-
4-
4-
—
4-
4
4
—
4-
4-
—
—
—
—
N
2
41
4
+
4
4-
4-
—
4-
—
4-
—1
8
41
+
4
H
4-
4-
—
—
—
—
—
—1
4
21
4-
H
4-
4-
4-
4-
—
—
4-
—1
5
21
4-
4-
4-
—
4-
.N
9 years.
8
9
10
12
15
Cl.
7S
Pupils.
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
£
3
4
6
>
s
Boys.
1
4A
4-
4-
4-
—
4-
+
4
-
4-
.4
4
4
4-1
2 ....
3A
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
-
4
4
—
4
4'
—
—
•
4-
—
+i
3 ....
3B
4-
—
4-
4*
4-
4
4-
-
4-
4
—
—
—
4
4
4
4
4-
4
+ 6
4 ....
3B
4-
—
4-
4-
4-
4
—
4
4
—
4-
—
4
—
+ 1
5 ....
4B
4-
4-
4-
—
4-
4
4-
4-
4
4
—
—
4
-
—
+ 1
6 ....
3A
4-
—
4-
4-
4-
4
•
4-
4-
—
—
4-
—
—
-
4-
+
41
7 ....
3A
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
h
-
4-
4-
—
4
4
—
4
-
4-
—
41
8 ....
2A
4-
4-
—
4-
4-
4
4*
4
—
—
—
—
—
f
4
—
—
+i
9 ....
2A
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4
4-
4
—
4
—
—
—
.—
41
10 ....
2A
4
h
-
4-
—
—
4-
4-
4-
—1
11 ....
2B
4-
4-
4-
—
4-
I-
4
4
4
—
Inc.
12 ,...
2A
4-
4-
—
4-
+
-
4
4-
4
—
—
—
-
+
4-
Inc.
13 ....
3A
4-
4-
4
4-
4-
4
4
4-
4-
4
—
4-
+i
14
5
4-
4-
4-
4-
4-
4
+
4-
4
4
4-
+
1-
4
—
+i
Table ll— continued.


Boys.
1
2
Girls.
1
2
Pupils.
11 years.
W M M M *
O' I* CO tO M 09 09 t« M O CO 00 O' 09 to M
O td
Pupils.
10 years.
O' 09 t® M
O
Pupils.
9 years.
CO CO CO to to to CO CO to 4* to O' to CO
fcO »► >• fco CO W >■ >• to >• tdtdW
Q
(-+
co
rft CO CO CO to
n
(nc« O' O'
; +: : + +
to
: +: : + +
1+++I
M
CD
CO
: +: : + +
+ 11++
to
: | ; :
M
o
: +: : + I
+ + + + +
09
: + : :
: + 1
O'
+ + + + +
:++++ |
I : : 1 : +: 1 : :
-
CO
: + : :
CO
: 1 1 1 + 1
+ ; : |; 1 : +: :
to
+ + + + +
O'
: + : :
Ift
:+++||+
+ ; ; |;+:+::
CO
+ + + + j
M
u
+ + : :
O'
: |++ | + +
+ : : +: | : 1 : :
*•
1 + 1 + 1
to
:++++ + +
+;!+;+! t ■ •
O'
1 1 + 1 1
09
: 1 + +
H*
b9
O
++ i++ +
i+ ii++++++
++++ i
**
+ + + +
to
to
1 1 + 11 i
+ 1 ++ 1 | 1 + I+ +
+ 1 ++ 1
O'
09
: + + +
09
+ + 1: + | ++ 1++ I + 1+i + 1
11 + 11
-
to
+ + + : | | ++1++1+ + +1+ +
; + +1
+ 1 ++ 1
to
+ 1M+ + +
i i ++++++++
O'
1 1: 1 1
09
+ + + +
O'
+ : : : : + „:
INI: 1 : 1
b»
11 + 11
rft.
: + + +
M
cn
+ III: +1 +
| + + + : + 1+ +
to
1 : : : : +J 1
| | | +: +; + |
CO
+ 1111
O'
+ 1 ++
to
1 : : : : +FI
1 1 1 1 : 1 : 1 1
M
N*
on
: 1 II
09
+ | ; : ; +1
1 + 1 1 : + : + +
O'
to
09
| + + +
*>
+ : : : : :
+ 111: 1 : + 1
-
O'
+ : : : ; :
++++; |:++
to
: 1 +1
O'
| : : : : :
1 1 1 1 : 1 : 1 1
09
O'
£+ + +
e> m h*
Level.
+ : ; : ; :
| + + + ; +: + I
1 : : : : :
1 II l: +: +1
O'
+ 5j++!*i
I Ht 1— > M
Level.
+ MII | &5 1 | 'tajizi 1 •H\ + 1 + *
tOtOMMtO 09 to totototo
Level.
Table ll— continued.


12 years.
9
10
12
15
Adults.
Pupils
Cl.
o
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
£
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
Boys.
1
5
+
H
+
+
—
+
—
+
-
N
2
5
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
—2
3
5
-1-
+
H
+
+
—
+
—
+
■
N
4
6
+
H
+
—
+
+
—
+
■
+ 3
5 ....
6
■h
+
H
+
+
+
—
—
+
-
N
6 ....
4
+
+
.—•
+
H
+ 3
7 ....
6
+
+
+
+
+
H
+
—
+
—
—
+
—
—
—2
8
6
■1-
+
H
+
+
—
+
—
+
-
+
—
9 ....
5
+
—
—
Inc.
10
5
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
.—•
—
—2
11 ....
4
h
+
+
+
+
—
—
—
+
—
+
—
—
Inc.
12 ....
4
h
+
+
—
+
+
+
—
+
—
—
—
Inc.
13
6
+
+
+
.—.
+
—
+
—
—
Inc.
14
6
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ 3
15 ....
6
+
+
+
•f
+
—
+ 3
16 ....
6
+
+
+
—
+
—
—
Inc.
12 years.
9
10
12
15
Adults.
T* *|
Cl.
p
x upus.
t>
1
2
i
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
1
1
2
3
H]
Girls.
1 ....
5
+
+
+
+
+
-
—
+
+
+
+
+ 3
2
5
+
+
+
—
+
-
-
+
—
+
+
—2
3
5
-
-
+
+
+
—
—
h
iN
4
5
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
—
+
+
+
+
—2
5
5^
+
+
H
+
+
—
—
—
+
—3
6
5
+
+
—
+
+
-
—
+
+
—2
7 ....
6
+
+
+
—
f
—
—
Inc.
13 years.
10
12
15
Adults.
Pupils.
CL
p
r.
1
£
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
hi
Boys.
1
5
1
3
5
+
I-
+
+
—3
4
6
-t_2
5
6
6
0
+ 2
7
6
8
6
+
+
■f
+
+
+
+
+
—3
9
+
+
—
+
+
—
+
—
-
Inc.
10
6
11
6
12
6
13
6
14
6
-b2
15
4
16
6
17
6
18
5
19 ......
5
20
6
21
6
22
6
+
—
+
+
—
+
—
4
Inc
Table ll— continued.


* JOAO'J
1 —3
—3
Inc.
+ 2
Inc.
Inc.
Level.
OJOlrHrHi-lrH OHH W
| | ++++=++fl
>
O
rtHHHcJo'rtOtludo
j-j.j-4.cac34.aficica
'HMHMM
* OAD'I
Inc,
Inc.
Inc,
(-3)
Inc.
Inc.
ITS
: « :+ *: : : :
wo
: : : : : :
M
h*
: • + . • : : :
g js
HO
WO
J
s
: : : : : :
"3
•w
CO
lit 0 -+9 : : 1 1
>> -o • ‘ i
T*
CO
1 1 1 II 1
<
eg
: + + +
eo
■ 1 1 1 I II 1 II
—
I 1 I 1 | [ 1 | [I I 1
<
eg
+I+++ |
: - : 1 :+ 1 1
s
• 1 1 t I 1 M 1 1
a
1 1 M 1 II 1 11 II
+ M 1 1 1
<
:+ 1 | + + + + | |
<
++ i i+++++++i
ITS
1 II ++ 1 1
wo
: : : | : +
: : : : + + +
rH
:+ 1 1 1 1 1 1 II
rH
+i+i +++ i+ ii i
+ ; : | : |
WO
CO
; ••ll
wo
| |+ + + + + + + :
WO
+ + + + : :+ | + | | |
no
TH
CO
| ; :+ :
(M
1 : 1 + + + +
T*
++++++| +++
+ + + + : : + + :+ : +
eg
+
+
+
: : : : + + +
+ : : | : +
MO
CO
1 1 1 + 1 1 1 1 1 :
CO*
1 1 1 1 : : II : | : |
co
1x0
i +i ++++
£
g
05
wo
;+■.+ : |
CM
(N
>>
1 [ : : : : :
>»
'Jl
so
rH
eg
CO
| + : ; : : :
I|++++++++
rH
+ + + + : : + + :+ : +
rH
eg
eo
: : :+ : :
+ +| + : : :
no
+
WO
: : : : : : + + + + + +
: : :+ : :
-
+ 1 ; : ; ; ;
•^1
rH
wo
+ ++ + : : ;
CO
: : :
03
CO
...... j ....
WO
+ +| : : : :
o
CO
+ II : : : :
CO
rH
•f ,
rH
Ol
+ +| : : ; :
eg
rH
+ ++ : : ; ;
WO WO WO 10<0©0
o
® C© • • CO
CO
a
1 • • ....
m
a
4 :
s
jo • • • • • _3 •
.ij •
=h
a<
qp. •• ....
3
o
3
• • • • • fHl »
(
U
H 04 CO 'tfWOCOtr
PH
rHMeo^woect-oocto
rH
Ph
rHMCO^iOSOtrOOaCn-*©*
Ph
rH
Table ll— continued.


Table III.
Tins Table shows the (otal number of passes and failures for each Test at each
age.
Ages.
Tesla.
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
+
-
[ +
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
0 Years.
1. Distinction between morning and afternoon .
13
1
2
0
2. Definition bv use
10
4
1
1
3. Copy of a diamond shape)
9
4
1
1
4. Counting thirteen half-pence
10
1
1
1
5. .(Esthetic comparison
14
0
1
1
7 Years.
1. Right hand, left ear
10
2
12
7
5
0
]
o
2. Description of a picture
12
1
24
i
4
1
1
o
...
3. Performance of three simultaneous commis-
11
• 2
18
0
5
0
1
0
sions.
... ...
* *
4. Counting in half-pence
0
3
10
2
5
0
1
o
5. Naming four colours
10
2
22
1
5
0
...
1
0
...
...
8 Years.
1. Comparing two thing* from memory
4
4
17
4
17
2
1
0
6
0
2. Counting from 20 to 0
0
11
8
13
15
4
1
0
6
0
**'
3. Features missing in faces
- 7
4
18
3
12
4
1
0
0
0
4. Exact information as to date
0
8
0
20
5
14
4
1
5
1
**•
5. Repeat five numbers
7
4
16
5
14
2
1
0
5
1
...


Tests.
Ages.
6
7
8
9
13
11
13
13
14
15
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
9 Years.
i.
Giving change out of Is
0
2
6
8
7
3
12
3
5
4
i
0
0
1
2.
Definitions superior to use
0
2
6
4
9
4
13
C
3
6
0
1
1
0
3.
Naming all the coins
0
2
6
12
7
5
17
2
7
3
3
0
1
o
4.
Enumeration of the months
0
2
0
18
6
6
16
3
0
4
3
0
1
0
5.
Replying to easy questions
0
2
15
3
11
1
19
0
9
1
3
0
i
0
10 Years.
1.
Arranging five boxes in order
7
1
8
3
14
4
12
4
0
1
7
0
5
0
2.
Copying figures from memory
o
2
3
4
a
g
7
10
I
Q
3.
Criticism of absurdities
o
2
9
7
0
12
If)
4.
3
4
0
3
IB
2
1 9.
5
5.
To put three words into two sentences
3
3
i
8
16
2
12
5
2
0
9
1
7
0
12 Years.
1.
Rejection of the suggestion by lines
3
3
i
4
4
10
1
7
2
i
9
5
8
1
i
0
2.
1
o
1
6
12
0
8
5
4
o
14
3
3.
To say more than sixty words in three minutes
2
5
6
10
3
6
3
0
8
8
7
7
2
2
1
0
4.
o
6
4
14
o
9_
2
x
10
0
7
5.
Arranging words in order
0
4
6
ii
5
5
4
0
14
6
15
0
9
0
2
1
Table III — continued.


Affea,
Testa.
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
+
-
15 Years.
1. Repetition of seven numbers
0
1
4
3
9
5
3
5
3
0
1
0
1
2
2 Rhymes
4
7
7
1
3
IB
3. Repetition of a sentence of twenty syllables
o
6
1
u
e
8
0
6
2
8
2
3
2
14
1
1
20
1
i
i
i
4. Interpretation of a picture .
3
?
6
3
3
15
i
6. Problem of incidents
I
4
0
1
Adults.
1. Outline out
I
2. The reversed triangle
3. Differences
4. The question of the president
6. Pens£e d’ Horvier
...
•**
...
Sj<!iirj- : William Applegate dullick, Government Printer.— 1913.
