

I hi h Ak r
TRANSPORTATION QUESTION;
WHY WESTERN AUSTRALIA
SHOULD EE MADE A REFORMATORY COLONY
INSTEAD OF A PENAL SETTLEMENT.
MATHEW B. HALE, M.A.
OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE : LATE ARCHDEACON OF ADELAIDE ;
BISHOP DESIGNATE OF PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
“ AND TO SHOW THY PITV
UPON ALL PRISONERS AND CAPTIVES."
tf amtoity*:
MACMILLAN AND CO.
1857.
Price Two Shillings and Sixpence.








TEAN SPOETATION QUESTION


PRINTED BY R. CLAY, LONDON,
MACMILLAN & CO. CAMBRIDGE.
lonium: BELL AND DALDY, 186, FLEET STREET.
Uufiltn: WILLIAM ROBERTSON.
©Uiniurßi): EDMONSTON AND DOUGLAS,
ffilasgoto: JAMES MACLEHOSE.
©Ifoto: J. H. AND JAS. PARKER.


TRANSPORTATION QUESTION;
WHY WESTERN AUSTRALIA
SHOULD BE MADE A REFORMATORY COLONY
INSTEAD OF A PENAL SETTLEMENT.
MATHEW B. HALE, M.A.
OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE ; LATE ARCHDEACON OF ADELAIDE ;
BISHOP DESIGNATE OF PERTH, WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
“ AND TO SHOW THY
PITY UPON ALL PRISONERS AND CAPTIVES.”
tolling:
MACMILLAN AND CO.
1857.




PREFACE.
It is proper that the writer of the following pages
should offer some apology for entering into the discus-
sion of a subject so largely mixed up with questions of
a secular kind as that to which he has here endeavoured
to call attention.
No one can feel more strongly than he does, that it
Is the duty of every Clergyman to confine his attention,
so far as he possibly can, to matters purely spiritual, or
connected immediately with his sacred office.
It has, therefore, not been without deep searchings
of heart, much prayer for guidance, and a grave sense
of the responsibility incurred, that he has permitted
himself to draw up this Essay for publication : but,
having once resolved upon the task, he has happily
never been troubled by any doubts or scruples of
conscience as to the propriety of the course he has
engaged in.
The reader who carefully peruses these pages, will
determine for himself whether he can or cannot coin-
cide with this view. The writer, however, is sanguine
in his belief that every candid person will coincide with
him, and will join him in returning an affirmative
answer to the question, “ Is there not a cause ? ”


It is also right that he should explain how it comes
to pass that he makes his appearance at this time in
England as a Presbyter, whereas it was supposed that
he had received consecration at Sydney, and was, long
before this time, engaged in the duties of his new
Diocese.
The explanation is this. On the 16th of May,
1856, being then at his missionary station at Port
Lincoln, in South Australia, he received information
that his appointment to the See of Perth, Western
Australia, had been notified in the London Gazette, in
the month of January preceding.
It being imperatively necessary for him to pay a
visit to England, before entering upon his future
duties, both on account of certain arrangements which
he knew to be necessary in connexion with his epis-
copal functions in Western Australia, and also on
account of family business, he proceeded without delay
to the Colony destined to be the scene of his future
labours, in order that he might there judge for himself
of the existing state of affairs. Within a month from
the time he received the first definite intimation of his
appointment, he was on his voyage to Western Aus-
tralia, and reached that colony on the 11th of July.
He had been more than two months in the Colony, i. e.
until September 19th, before he received any informa-
tion of the commission for his consecration, which had
been transmitted by his Grace the Archbishop of
Canterbury, to the Bishop of Sydney. On the day
just named, however, he received a letter from the
Bishop, informing him of the receipt of this comrais-


PREFACE.
sion; and, in an invitation couched in the kindest
terms, bidding him hasten to Sydney.
Inasmuch, however, as a visit to England was
quite unavoidable, and a visit to Sydney could only
be accomplished by means of a great sacrifice of time
and much delay (there being no direct communication
between New South Wales and Western Australia,
and the intercourse between the last-named colony and
any of the other Australian colonies, being very irre-
gular and uncertain), he, in answer to the Bishop s
letter, very respectfully requested his Lordship to
pardon his departure from the plan laid down for
him ; and expressed his intention to proceed direct to
England. In accordance with that intention, he em-
barked from Swan River on the 2d of last March.
It may perhaps occasion some surprise that no men-
tion is here made of anything which has taken place
lately in connexion with the Transportation Question.
The fact is, that these pages were written on board ship,
and the writer found that, upon his first arrival in
England, his time and attention were so much engaged
that it would have been quite impossible for him to have
made himself properly acquainted with all that has been
said and done in connexion with this important question
up to the present time. He therefore considered it best
to let the pamphlet remain in the shape in which it was
originally drawn up.
With respect to some of the remarks upon the
Colony of Western Australia, the writer is quite aware
that, in the hands of persons disposed so to interpret
them, these remarks are quite capable of being repre-


PREFACE.
sented as if written with a view to depreciate the
Colony. But when the impossibility of conceiving any
motive which could induce him to entertain this design,
his connexion with the Colony, the deep interest which
he is known to take in its welfare, and the sense which
he must needs have of that which is due to the high
and responsible office to which he is called in it are
considered, he trusts that he will not be thought
capable of saying, wilfully or even wantonly, a single
word calculated to lower the Colony in public estima-
tion.
But if there be any persons who will, nevertheless,
hold him blameable for the course he has now taken, he
trusts that he may be enabled, by God’s grace, to
carry himself patiently and meekly under such censures
as he may incur. And he will hope, moreover, that,
if it be God’s pleasure that his day of labour be yet
prolonged upon the earth, he may, by his zealous
exertions in the service of the Colony, and his un-
wearied endeavours to promote the welfare and happi-
ness of all classes of the inhabitants, succeed eventually
in effacing unfavourable impressions from all minds, if
any such shall unhappily continue to exist even for a
time.
Cambridge, July 2d, 1857.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.— Page 1.
Two Systems of treating Criminals —Proper distinctions.
Thankfulness for improvement in the vipws entertained by the
country.
The public has pronounced against one of these Systems.
And Transportation is included also in this condemnation.
No reason why Transportation should not form a part of the
Reformatory System.
CHAPTER ll.— Page 4.
The System in operation in Western Australia is the old System.
The experiment there is not altogether successful.
Men are not becoming domiciled.
They neglect public worship.
Habits of intemperance prevail very much amongst them.
There are many reconvictions.
The population question.
Atrocious Crimes.
CHAPTER lll.— Page 10.
CHAPTER lll.— Page 10.
Nature of the sentence of condemnation pronounced against the old
Transportation System.
Sir William Molesworth’s Committee.
Opposition in the colonies.
Opposition in the mother country.
Argument used to defend the System—lts alleged success in New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land.


CHAPTER IV.— Page 18.
The case of the Colony of Western Australia is an exceptional case.
Special circumstances which have retarded the progress of this
Colony.
Country not well adapted to pastoral purposes.
System of large grants of land.
The early settlers.
No good harbour.
Colony has now fallen into the rear of the other Australian
colonies.
To what extent these influences still continue to operate pre-
judicially.
Country.
Grants.
Settlers.
Harbour.
Two subsidiary reasons for taking effectual measures to put Western
Australia into a healthy social condition —Possibility of the discover}’
of gold fields—Consideration for the other colonies.
CHAPTER Y.— Page 32.
CHAPTER Y.— Page 32.
The Reformatory System is that which is now required in Western
Australia.
This System has hitherto been applied only to the Reformation of
juvenile offenders.
These are only beginnings.
Sentiments expressed by Lord Brougham.
Difficulty of applying the System to adult criminals.
The Reformatories for juvenile offenders illustrate the nature of the
System.
The movement is progressive.
Ticket of Leave experiment in England has afforded valuable ex-
perience. .
Scope is required to test the principles of men and the reality of
their reformation.
Intermediate stage between imprisonment and entire freedom—As-
sistance to prisoners.
Prisoners cannot be assisted advantageously in the mother country;
and a colony appears, therefore, the natural alternative.


CHAPTER YL— Page 43.
Western Australia is thought of as a Reformatory colony.
Measures necessary to render Western Australia suitable for a Re-
formatory colony.
The inequality, in point of numbers, of the two sexes.
Mr. Dixon and his views upon this question.
Female convicts.
Female convicts to be sent out as probation prisoners.
Benevolent point of view.
Mismanagement in the other Colonies.
Convicts’ wives.
Single women with the wives of convicts and the wives of pensioners.
Immigration of single women.
Remedies for drunkenness.
Colonists ought to render all assistance.
The men must have religious instruction brought effectually home to
them.
Want of clergy.
Ship chaplains, or religious instructors.
Education—Religious instruction in schools.
Other measures of detail similar to those proposed in England.
Letters.
Farms—Allotments of land—Other rewards besides the shortening of
the sentence.
Marks for industry and good conduct—Mr. Dixon’s experiment in the
use of marks.
Alleged objections to farms.
Inquiry,—What encouragement have we to hope that adequate re-
sults would follow the adoption of Reformatory measures in Western
Australia 1
Dr. Browning—Mrs. Fry.
All who expect fruit must labour in their spirit.
The Government officials should be selected for their special
fitness for their work.
General prospects of the Colony.
Other Colonies fast filling up.
Western Australia, a mineral country.
Remedial measures urged not on the ground of bright prospects, but
on the ground of duty.




TRANSPORTATION QUESTION.
It will be observed that in the following pages a wide
distinction is drawn between two systems of dealing with
criminals. That which constitutes the difference between
these two systems is, the object which is kept in view,
or the result which is aimed at, in the adoption of either
the one system or the other. Mere accidents of treat-
ment do not constitute essential differences of systems:
accidents, for instance, of locality, whether the place of
punishment be in the mother country or in a colony,
whether on land or on board ship, &c.
The two systems are —
Ist. The old system, under which the object aimed
at was “to get rid of the Criminal.”
2nd. The Reformatory system, under which the object
aimed at is the reformation of the men.
We cannot be sufficiently thankful to Almighty God
for His goodness and mercy, that the views and feelings
of the country have undergone such a change during the
last few years, that the Reformatory system is now, we
hope, and indeed we believe, rapidly taking the place of
the old one, and will soon be universally adopted in our


treatment of the Criminal Class. That we are able to
indulge this hope, is to be ascribed solely to the good-
ness and loving-kindness of God: and, in order that this
hope may be realized, we must continue to put up our
earnest and persevering prayers to Him for a continuance
of His favour.
The old system is but too well known to us, and too
closely connected in our minds with the hulks of former
times, with Norfolk Island and the chain-gangs of New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land; and upon that
system an earnest and unequivocal sentence of con-
demnation has been pronounced, almost unanimously,
by the whole civilized world.
But because that system is so intimately connected in
the minds of men with the removal of criminals to the
colonies, or Transportation, this, which happened to be
merely an adjunct of the system, has come to be looked
upon as an embodiment of the system itself; and the
cry of condemnation has taken the shape of an indis-
criminate cry against the removal of convicts to the
colonies under any circumstances.
But Transportation is no more the system, than impri-
sonment in loathsome and pestilential dungeons is the
system. We cannot look into the reports of Howard or
of any other visitor of the prisons of England, as they
existed within the last thirty years, without being con-
vinced that the old system was capable of making itself
felt, by its frightful consequences, within prison walls
no less than in the colonies or the hulks. Now, how-
ever, when, thank God, a different and more merciful
system is in operation, it is found that in the present


day a prison is as capable of ministering to the purposes
of Christian philanthropy and benevolence, as it was in
former times of being turned into a pest-house or a
nursery for crime.
Now not only is there no reason whatever why the
removal of convicts to a colony should not form a part
of the Keformatory system; but there are requirements
for a full development of that system which the mother
country cannot furnish, and which can be furnished in
a colony in an advantageous and efficient manner.
The evils which have arisen in the colonies in con-
nexion with transportation have arisen from the false
principles upon which it was conducted, and because
little was thought of in the mother country except
getting rid of criminals. The men were uncared for
and neglected. The same line of conduct was pursued
towards those in the majority of the English prisons,
and monstrous evils arose there also from the same
cause; and a general indiscriminate outcry against
prisons would not be more unreasonable, than a general
indiscriminate outcry against each and every method of
removing criminals to a colony.
So decided and all but universal is the feeling of
opposition to the practice of Transportation, under any
modification of the old system, that the wonder is that
any attempt should have been made of late years to
continue that practice.


CHAPTER 11.
It will, probably, be well known to every person
who will take the trouble to read these pages, that
Western Australia is the only colony to which convicts
are now sent. That the scheme of transporting crimi-
nals to this colony was adopted with the deliberate
intention of assimilating the system there to be carried
out to the system which has been so universally con-
demned, can hardly be supposed. Certain changes and
modifications are, indeed, introduced in that colony,
and perhaps the system there in operation was at first
looked upon as essentially different from the old system ;
but, unhappily, it appears in the working that it is not
essentially different.
The modifications are just such as are calculated to
stave off, for a time, the more flagrant evils of the old
system, and to make superficial observers satisfied, for
the present, with its operation. But the evils of the old
system are not removed or remedied. There may appear'
to be in the present practice some of the characteristics of
the Reformatory system; but these characteristics are
not real or operative. The system, as hitherto exem-
plified, is, in effect, the old system of getting rid of
the criminals. Indeed, we are justified, by an answer
(183) given by Mr. Waddington before the Parliamentary
Committee on Transportation, in asserting that hitherto
the Reformatory system has not been adopted by Her
Majesty’s Government in connexion with Transportation.
“ 183 Q. That if the worst characters were retained


here for life, instead of being, as they are under the
present system, transported for a period of ten or fifteen
years, it would be possible, even with the present outlets
which we have, to send those persons abroad in whom
there is a hope of reformation, would it not ?
“A. It might be done, certainly ; but that is regarding
Transportation in a view which has not been generally
taken of it. The great object of Transportation, no
doubt, has been to relieve this country of the worst
offenders.”
I shall proceed hereafter to point out some of the ele-
ments which are wanting in tire system in operation in
Western Australia, and which must be introduced into
it before it can pretend to any conformity to the Reforma-
tory system. But I will first show the necessity of
bringing about such a change upon this ground; viz.
that the present system does not hold out any fair or
reasonable hope that it will accomplish even the lower
purposes which it aims at; that, to use the expression
of Mr. Elliot, “ our experiment has been anything but
successful.” The answer in which this expression
occurs runs thus: “A. 371. The evidence which I
have just submitted to the Committee about Western
Australia may probably have produced the impression
that, even there, with all the advantages of twenty years’
previous settlement, and of having a free population,
although a small one, our experiment has been anything
but successful. The establishment has been enormously
costly in proportion to the relief which this country has
enjoyed. But all these difficulties would be far greater
in an entirely new country,”


But neither does the system appear to he more suc-
cessful in its operations as regards the benefit intended
to he conferred on the colony itself. The presence of so
many additional persons in a small colony, and the
expenditure of very large sums of money from Imperial
funds, must needs increase the value of property and
infuse a spirit of activity into business of every kind.
But there are already influences at work which must
prevent the system, as it is now in operation, from being
eventually such a source of wealth and prosperity to the
colony as it has been expected to become.
It appears that the process of settling the men down,
and amalgamating them with the rest of the community,
is not, by any means, going on in a satisfactory manner.
The number who have been, or still are, in a penal con-
dition and now scattered through the colony (and, as
regards the expense of maintenance, off the hands of the
Imperial Government), is, no doubt, considerable when
compared with the whole population. The late Governor,
Captain Fitzgerald, in his examination before the Com-
mittee of the House of Lords, stated the number of this
class to be about one thousand, or eleven hundred, when
he quitted the colony, the latter part of the year 1855.
The Convict system had then been in operation some-
thing more than five years.
The feature in the case, however, which is so exceed-
ingly unsatisfactory, is that by far the greater number
of the men composing this class have no settled or per-
manent employment. They may not remain for any
length of time actually out of work; but they change
masters very frequently, and, as I have expressed it,


they are not undergoing the process of becoming domes-
ticated or amalgamated with the rest of the community.
I desire to be properly understood in making this
assertion; Ido not make it with respect to all, but with
respect to the majority, the bulk of the convict popu-
lation. I rejoice in being able to state that many of
this class have settled down and are doing well, several
have married and have made themselves comparatively
comfortable and happy in their new homes; some have
continued for years in the same places of service, others
have themselves become employers and are rapidly
acquiring property. But the fact, I repeat, as regards
the mass, is but too apparent; they are not amalgamating
with the community.
Again, as a general rule, these men live without any
perceptible regard for the outward observances of religion.
The majority are compelled, in order to obtain work, to
locate themselves in the country districts; and in most
of these districts there are neither places of worship nor
ministers. In the towns and larger villages, where op-
portunities are afforded to those living therein to attend
public worship, it is found that the proportion of these men
seen at any time within the House of God is very small.
On the other hand, they have great facilities for
obtaining intoxicating drinks ; and, unhappily, too many
of them make free use of these facilities. Drunkenness
assists, in no slight degree, in keeping them in the
unsettled condition already referred to; to many of them
it is the immediate cause of their being suddenly stopped
short in a course giving fair promise of improvement,—
of being cast down from a position in which they were


Original Population on the arrival of
Convicts. .
6,000
Convicts, to December 31st, 1855 . .
3,661
Pensioners and their Families . .
1,476
Sappers and their Families .
244
Private Emigrants, including the
Wives and
Families of Convicts ....
2,310
4,030
Total . .
13,691
maintaining themselves by their own labour, and of
being thrown back again upon the hands of the Imperial
Government.
Frequently, under the influence of drink, the men
commit some offence against ticket-of-leave discipline,
and are committed again to the Establishment; and
after another incarceration, come forth again from prison
probably in a state of mind less hopeful than when they
were liberated the first time. Some of the men are
imprisoned again and again, not in consequence of any
criminal act, but in consequence of breaches of discipline
committed under the influence of drink. I feel that it
is quite impossible to overrate the pernicious effects
which arise from the existing facilities for obtaining
intoxicating drinks.
If we inquire how the experiment has worked as
regards the increase of population, we find that the result
here is no less unsatisfactory than elsewhere.
When convicts were first sent to the colony, in 1850,
the population was estimated at about 6,000. Since
that period the Imperial Government has sent to the
colony the persons enumerated below:—
Actual Population of the Colony, December 31st, 1855 . 12,838
Difference. . . 853


It appears, therefore, that although the population has
indeed been increased from about 6,000 to 12,838, there
remain from those previously in the colony, and those
carried into it, 853 souls missing and unaccounted for;
the whole of the natural increase is also missing and
unaccounted for, and the same is the case with all those
who have come to the colony on their own account, or
who have been sent (together with their families) to fill
the higher offices in connexion with the convict estab-
lishment.
Another fact which indicates with very fearful cer-
tainty that the moral and social condition of the colony
is in a most unsound condition, is the number of atro-
cious crimes which have been committed of late, for
which the perpetrators have suffered the extreme penalty
of the law. During the two years last past, prior to my
departure from the colony in March, 1857, there had
been no less than seven people executed, being at the
rate of three and a half in the course of each year. Now
it may serve to illustrate how fearful a state of things
is indicated by this fact, if I observe that if, in London,
executions occurred as frequently in proportion to the
population, the inhabitants of the metropolis would be
appalled by seeing some ten persons led out to execution
in the course of every week! i. e. taking the population
of London at two millions, and that of Western Aus-
tralia at thirteen thousand. Of the seven persons thus
executed, five had been found guilty of murder, one of
attempting murder, and one of rape.
But I must notice not the fact only that such crimes
and executions have occurred, but also the revelations


which have been made at the trials of some of the
culprits—the glimpses which we catch of the state of
mind in which some of these men live, their tone of
thought, their topics of conversation. Indeed, I cannot
conceive that any one can have risen from the perusal of
the published reports of some of those trials, without
having painfully impressed upon his mind the dreadful
conviction that there are men scattered, as it were,
broadcast through the colony, who would shrink from
no atrocity to which their fiendish minds could tempt
them, if they could only feel that time and opportunity
favourable to the perpetration of crime were afforded to
them.
CHAPTER 111.
It is impossible to enter into these details, or, indeed,
to dwell at all upon the subject, without recalling to
mind the fearful state of things which prevailed in those
colonies to which convicts were formerly transported.
The evils which there arose were so fearful, that the
colonists, notwithstanding the many and great advan-
tages which they derived, in regard to their worldly
affairs, from the presence of convicts, peremptorily
refused any longer to receive them. The system was
denounced, with an earnestness, a vehemence, and
unanimity rarely witnessed, from one end of the world
to the other.
This having been the case, it must needs excite no
little astonishment in the minds of most thinking people


to find that system again resumed, and put into opera-
tion in another colony, without any essential or funda-
mental changes either in principle or practice.
We thankfully acknowledge that there appears to be
every disposition on the part of the authorities to
abandon the old principles, and to adopt others of a
nobler and more elevated tone; nevertheless, we find
that the old system is not yet abandoned, and therefore
it may be useful to call to mind the nature of that
uncompromising hostility which was manifested towards
it, and the just and reasonable grounds upon which that
opposition was maintained.
It might have been supposed that the Report of that
Committee of the House of Commons, called Sir William
Molesworth’s Committee, which was published in 1888,
would have been sufficient, almost by itself, to seal the
fate of that system. Mr. Elliot, in the course of his
evidence lately given before the Committee of the House
of Commons, Q. 272, gives this testimony in favour of
that Report, and the pains which were taken in prepar-
ing it: “Their Report is a monument of industry and
systematic inquiry.” This Report, then, contains the
following sentence of condemnation against the system
of Transportation. “ That the two main characteristics
of Transportation as a punishment, are inefficiency in
deterring from crime, and remarkable efficiency, not in
reforming, but in still further corrupting those who
undergo the punishment; that these qualities of ineffi-
ciency for good and efficiency for evil are inherent in
the system, which therefore is not susceptible of any
satisfactory improvement; and, lastly, that there belongs


to the system, extrinsically from its strange character as
a punishment, the yet more curious and monstrous evil
of calling into existence, and continually extending,
societies as the germs of nations most thoroughly
depraved as respects both the character and degree of
their vicious propensities.”
In the condemnation here pronounced the Report goes
indeed further than lam prepared to follow it. I think,
as I have already stated, that the more just view of the
matter is to say, that under the old regime the cause of
the evils was not that the criminals were located in one
place or another place, but that the principles which
were acted upon in their treatment were, in all places,
unsound and vicious.
If the principles which have obtained favour of late
years could by any possibility be now again abandoned
in this country, such noble establishments as those of
Pentonville and Portland would soon fall into a con-
dition little better than that of some of the gaols of the
last century. There would be no power in the mere
material buildings, however admirable their construction,
to guard themselves against becoming dens of disease
and nurseries of crime, if they were left to the keeping
of rapacious gaolers, compelled to obtain a living from
their prisoners by means of cruelty and extortion, and
to traffic, as it were, in the crimes and debaucheries of
their wretched victims.
On the other hand, as English prisons, when ruled in
conformity with benevolent and Christian principles,
may become reformatories, so may a colony, ruled in
the same way, become a reformatory also. It is granted


that it is vastly more easy to secure a general leaven of
right principles amongst the religious and moral agents
in a gaol, than to obtain that result in a colony. But it
must also be considered that a colony is capable of
affording a development and completeness to a system of
reformation which cannot be obtained within the walls
of a gaol, and are not obtainable even within the limits
of the mother country.
But to return again to the history of the opposition
to the Convict system. It would appear that inquirers
into the operation of that system, who are not mixed up
with the affairs of the Penal Settlement, are in a more
favourable position for detecting the evil tendencies at
work that even the colonists themselves, around whom
those evils gather very gradually, and to the great
majority no doubt almost imperceptibly. Mr. Elliot
informs the Committee, “ That the first effect in
Australia was great annoyance at seeing the terras in
which Transportation was described in that Report.”
Yet, within a comparatively short period, i. e. when
the lapse of a few years had served more fully to
develop the evils which were at work, we find that, in
those very colonies where the feeling of annoyance was
felt so strongly, the inhabitants rose up to echo almost
with one voice the sentiments of that Report, to con-
firm its sentence of condemnation on the Convict
system, and to oppose that system with the most
determined and uncompromising hostility. In this
movement the lead was taken by those colonies which
had experienced the working of the system, and the
sister colonies joined no less vigorously in the contest.


Mr. Elliot, referring to this determined renunciation of
the system, says (Q. 442), “ But as I should always
prefer resting on some strong fact rather than merely
offering my opinion, there is this circumstance which it
is material to mention, that in the colony of Victoria,
so strong is the abhorrence of convicts, that they are
continually passing hills, which at home appear of the
most oppressive character, to prevent convicts, whose
sentences have been remitted, from finding their way
to the colony. They actually throw the onus probandi
upon a man to prove that he ought to he free : if they
suspect him of being a convict, the onus probandi is
thrown upon him, and unless he can at once prove his
free character, he is shipped off or imprisoned, and put
to hard labour.”
A circumstance which is scarcely less deserving of
being characterised as a strong fact, is that which took
place at the Cape of Good Hope some eight or nine
years back, when a number of convicts were sent there
in the ship Neptune. For a period of nine months the
colonists there continued in an attitude of determined
opposition to Her Majesty’s Government on the question
of the reception of these men; and at length, in order
to bring the contest to a close, and to make the speedy
removal of the ship a matter of necessity, physical
force was resorted to to cut off her supplies; the roads
were guarded to prevent those who would have fur-
nished her with stores from accomplishing that object.
Nor did the measures stop here, but provisions were
even withheld from some of the Government officers,
whose duties brought them into communication with


the hateful ship. Her Majesty’s Government was
compelled eventually to give up the contest, and the
Neptune sailed from the Cape with her convicts still on
hoard. Such were the demonstrations of feeling made
in the colonies; and these feelings were participated in
very generally in the mother country. Men of the
highest character for philanthropy and wisdom pro-
moted the assembling of public meetings; the sole
object of those meetings being to give expression to
feelings of hostility to the Convict system, and to
dissuade people of all classes from emigrating them-
selves, or consenting to the emigration of their rela-
tives, to those colonies where that system continued in
operation.
I must not pass over without notice an argument
which is occasionally put forward in defence of that
system, even as it has hitherto prevailed. It is alleged
that, because New South Wales and Tasmania have
grown up into great and powerful countries under
its operation, therefore their present prosperity must
sufficiently attest the beneficial effects of the system.
I am quite willing to admit that the system, even as
carried out half a century ago, afforded very great
assistance to the settlers in the task of occupying a new
country. I will go further and admit that the settle-
ment of those countries could not have been accom-
plished without such assistance from the mother country
as was then afforded, unless the mother country had
afforded adequate assistance in some other shape. But I
am most firmly of opinion that if the suras which have
been expended in maintaining the convict establishment


in those colonies had been spent in promoting emigra-
tion, in providing for the religious and moral instruction
of the people, and in furnishing the means of education
for the young, the progress of those colonies would have
been far more rapid, and the world would have been
spared the recital of those scenes of crime and depravity
which have sent a thrill of horror to the very extremities
of the earth.
Is it nothing, in weighing the merits of the old Convict
system and in inquiring how far it may be considered
as a suitable handmaid in the formation of new coun-
tries, to reflect that there are deeds connected with its
early history which must remain, for ages to come, a
foul blot on the history of our colonial policy ? Is it
nothing that our posterity, even to the latest genera-
tions, will never be able to peruse the pages which
shall even hint at those deeds, without experiencing
intense feelings of distress and shame? That which is
passed is, indeed, enough. Surely it is ten thousand
times more than enough. Let not another colony be
exposed to even the hazard of the repetition of such
fearful scenes. Henceforth, for whatever evils may
occur, there shall not even be the shallow excuse of
ignorance or inexperience.
If we compare New South Wales and Tasmania with
the other Australian colonies, we find every reason to
feel convinced that if sums, far less than those which
have been expended on Transportation, had been spent
upon other measures, those colonies might still have
attained to at least their present standard of prosperity
and wealth.


We may regard those two colonies as forming a
group together with Victoria and South Australia; these
two last-named never having received convicts; and, if a
comparison must be made, we may safely affirm that
the progress of the two free colonies has been more rapid
than that of the two penal settlements. The free
colonies have, in a very short period from their first
foundation, attained to a remarkable standard of matu-
rity, a ripeness in their social and political institutions,
and to a state of great completeness in the leading cha-
racteristics of powerful and well organized communities.
In each of these four settlements colonization has
been conducted on somewhat different principles. Some
people believe one set of principles to have been the
best; others prefer another set. Some people pronounce
the progress of one colony to have been the most rapid,
others give a different judgment; but they have, in fact,
all prospered. The force of circumstances tending
towards their prosperity has been so great, that nothing,
except some special and peculiar retarding circum-
stances, could have kept either of them in the back-
ground. They all possessed, in large measure, the
necessary qualifications to fit them for the purposes of
colonization; and the tide of emigration from the
mother country set in strongly in their direction. And
to this measure of prosperity they had attained alto-
gether independently of the discovery of the gold-fields.
Wealth and population have, no doubt, poured in upon
them with a greatly accelerated speed since those dis-
coveries ; but they were all firmly established and pros-
pering before those discoveries were made. They had


got well through the precarious and uncertain stages of
first formation before gold-digging afforded occupation
to a single individual.
CHAPTER IV.
The case of Western Australia has been widely dif-
ferent from that of the other colonies: and as Ido not
believe that the prosperity of New South Wales or
Tasmania can be mainly attributed to the presence of
convicts, so neither do I believe that the slow progress
of Western Australia can be attributed to their absence;
nor again do I believe that their presence now in this
last-named colony can so alter its condition as to put it
upon anything like a level with the other colonies.
In this case there have been, and still are, special
retarding circumstances ; and I proceed now to specify
what I believe those special retarding circumstances to
have been.
And first, as regards the country. Any country which
does not afford to the first settlers remarkable facilities
for following pastoral pursuits must, for many years,
labour under great disadvantages. It seems almost as
much in accordance with the laws of nature and the
experience of mankind, that the first stage of a newly-
settled country should be the pastoral stage, as that
man’s first condition in life should be a condition of
infancy. The consequences, therefore, must be most
disastrous to all concerned, if early colonists are, in the
first instance, compelled to hurry their country prema-


turely into a stage of existence which ought to belong to
it at a later period.
Western Australia is affected by some very serious
disqualifications for its occupation by flocks and herds.
There is much good land in it; but these patches of
good land are separated widely from each other by large
tracts of forest and barren land, -which are not available
for pastoral purposes.
Again, throughout the colony, except in a tract very
much to the north of Swan River, and occupied only of
late years, poisonous plants of different varieties are
found; and some or others of these are exceedingly
destructive to the different kinds of live stock. The
early settlers, circumstanced as they were then, were ill
able to contend with these formidable impediments.
Everything was new, and every arrangement was im-
perfect. The settler’s homestead was nothing but a
hut; labour was scarce ; the country and the herbage
were unknown and strange to the master, the shepherd,
and to the flocks. The destruction of a large portion of
a flock of sheep, or of many head of cattle, was a calamity
which might happen at any time in the course of a few
hours: the proprietor might perhaps be ruined, and
many other settlers might be paralysed in their move-
ments, and alarmed at taking any decisive steps to esta-
blish themselves as squatters, lest a similar calamity
should befal them. The first efforts of squatters in the
other colonies afford a most complete contrast to this
picture. There perhaps 1000 or 1200 sheep would be
taken to an out-station, and put in charge of two men ;
these men, with some trifling assistance, would put up a


little temporary hut for themselves; and the owner of
the sheep would be at no further expense than for their
wages and rations. Perhaps ten or fifteen sheep might
be destroyed by wild dogs, or other accidents, in the
course of the year; but by the time the year had expired,
the sheep would be driven in to be shorn, and would
yield fourteen or sixteen bales of wool. It cannot be
matter for surprise that colonies favoured with such
facilities for squatting should have left in the rear one
labouring under such serious disadvantages as Western
Australia.
Secondly; the system upon which the land was
granted by Her Majesty’s Government to the first settlers.
Whatever may be said about the respective merits of
the different systems which prevailed in the other colo-
nies, unquestionably no system of granting land prevailed
elsewhere so bad as that which was adopted here.
Upon the first formation of the colony, the grants were
entirely free; and, when free grants were no longer
made, the land was sold at a very low rate indeed.
Occupiers, consequently, became possessors of tracts of
land so large that they could themselves use but very
small portions of them; and much of the country was
thereby closed against the settler of more humble pre-
tensions. He must either be content to be a mere
tenant, or he must go to some locality inconveniently
distant from his market and his store; and where, to
the ordinary difficulties of settling, would be added the
special difficulties of an out of the way situation.
Thirdly; the class of persons who became the first
settlers in this colony. Mr. Elliot says of them,


(Q. 494), “ They were settlers in a very favourable posi-
tion in life. Many of them received enormously large
grants of land, upon condition that they should cultivate
them : Tout the land was given in such profusion that
nobody would labour. Every one sought to turn land-
owner on his own account, and nobody would work.”
Certain it is, that hundreds of thousands of acres, then
taken up, some twenty-seven or twenty-eight years ago,
have never, from that day to this, yielded a shilling of
revenue either to the owners or to the government.
There are many particulars in which this colony forms
a striking contrast to the other colonies ; but in nothing
is this contrast more striking than in the very different
ideas which prevailed with respect to the acquisition of
large tracts of land. There are few mistakes more fatal
to early settlers than the notion that they must needs
purchase large properties.
The fee-simple of much land is perfectly unnecessary
in the early stages of settlement. A lease from the
Government of just so much as may be required to
depasture his flocks and herds will answer the purpose
of the squatter quite as well as the fee simple. In
South Australia, for instance, there are many sheep-
farmers owning from ten thousand to twenty thousand
sheep, and selling annually wool to the value of 2,000?.
or 3,000?., who possess no more land of their own than
perhaps one or two eighty-acre sections.
It is quite certain that these large properties in
Western Australia have had a most prejudicial effect
upon the interests of the colony. They have been the
means of debarring many industrious men from estab-


listing themselves upon small farms of their own ; and
they have also heen the means of occasioning wide
separations between some of the little settlements which
have been formed. A considerable distance between
little settlements, with a difficulty of communication from
one to the other, retard the settler’s progress, and
impede his operations to an extent which can scarcely
be imagined except by one who has seen practically its
effects.
Fourthly ; the absence of a good harbour is another
cause which has tended to retard the progress of Western
Australia. The anchorage closely contiguous to Fre-
mantle is so exposed that vessels are prohibited from
remaining there, except during the summer months.
During the winter they are compelled to anchor under
the shelter of Garden Island, at a distance of fifteen
miles from the port, Fremantle, at which place they
must land their goods. The cargo-boats which ply to
and fro between the vessels and the landing-place have
to make the passage in the open ocean. This want of
a good harbour, in the first place, causes serious incon-
venience and heavy additional expense in the case of
those vessels which load or discharge at this port. And
it also prevents vessels from calling, which might other-
wise put in on the chance of picking up freight or pas-
sengers. Fremantle might become a very convenient
place of call; there is a considerable traffic up and down
this coast between the other colonies and Singapore,
Ceylon and the ports of India. The occasional visits of
vessels so trading would be a great advantage to the
colony in stimulating trade and facilitating intercourse


with the rest of the world ; hut such visits very rarely
occur. The harbour is not in good repute, and the rate
of insurance upon vessels bound to Swan River is un-
usually high.
Many shipwrecks have, from time to time, happened
upon the coast: though happily such occurrences have
been less frequent of late years.
These are what I designate the “ retarding circum-
stances,” which have operated prejudicially upon the
colony of Western Australia on its first formation.
Owing, as I believe, principally to these causes, the
colony fell very decidedly into the rear of the others in
population, prosperity, and wealth: and, this result
having been produced, the result then became itself a
cause, which has operated to the disadvantage of the
colony, perhaps, of late years, more powerfully than all
the other causes put together.
It cannot be supposed that people will connect them-
selves with a colony, or continue their connexion with
it, without making comparisons between it and others;
and the result of their comparisons would be, they would
be informed that people were prospering and getting rich
in the other colonies at a much more rapid rate than in
Western Australia. In certain cases, there would be
some peculiar circumstances or some special connecting
link, which would direct the minds of intending emi-
grants to this colony; but it is quite natural to suppose
that, in the absence of any such local attraction, people
would prefer the colonies which were more prosperous
and attractive. The prejudicial effects of the proximity
of the other more prosperous colonies were so very


discernible and striking, that, when visiting that colony-
in 1848, being myself at that time connected with South
Australia, I met with people who firmly believed that
there was a powerful and organized party in the last-
named colony, which was actuated by feelings of hostility
to Western Australia, and that this party deliberately
employed means to prevent people from going thither.
With one gentleman in particular, I had a long conver-
sation. He was one of the leading men in the colony,
and a well-informed and intelligent person. I endea-
voured to convince him that the preference showm to the
other colony was the natural result of the relative posi-
tions, in regard to circumstances, of the two colonies ;
but in vain; he was firmly persuaded that that preference
resulted from the machinations of a regularly organized
party hostile to the interests of Western Australia.
It is now time that I should go on to the question—
whether these adverse circumstances still continue to
operate against Western Australia?—and if so, how far
it may be possible to apply remedies ?
The circumstance that the country is not well adapted
to pastoral purposes must always operate very preju-
dicially ; but, inasmuch as a good footing has been
obtained in the country, ways and means can now be
used to overcome or escape the evil to which the first
settlers were quite unable to resort. The settler is now
acquainted with the localities in which the poisonous
plants are found. He knows -where those grow which
are more fatal to sheep, and w'here others prevail which
destroy the horned cattle. He can take care to employ
careful shepherds who will feed the flocks in the safe


places. The sheep, having been bred upon his run,
have also become acquainted with the herbage, and will
themselves pass by the poisonous plants, unless they are
heedlessly driven upon them when in a hungry state.
I recently spent a day with a sheep farmer in the neigh-
bourhood of King George’s Sound, who has seventeen
thousand sheep (I believe there is no other person in
the colony who owns above half that number); he told
me that, although patches of poisonous plants are to be
found in various places upon his runs, it is a very rare
occurrence for him to lose sheep from that cause. Similar
to this is the case of those who own horned cattle. Many
of them have their cattle herded during the day and
driven home to their stock yards at night. The home-
stead of the settler is now furnished with conveniences
for all his farming operations, and has about it such an
air of completeness that it affords a most striking con-
trast to the small lonely hut which scarcely served as a
shelter from the weather to the settler of former years.
It is true that, with all these advantages, some losses
will occasionally occur; but they cannot be put for a
moment in comparison with the wholesale and ruinous
losses of the first settlers.
The evils of the large grant system still continue to
press heavily upon the energies of the colony. As a
matter of course, these grants have been taken where
the land is best, where the features of the country indi-
cate the proper position for settlements, where water is
most accessible, or where other natural advantages are
most conspicuous; and the evil consequences of this state
of things are most manifest. Moreover, many of the


proprietors of these large grants are absent from the
colony, and, indeed, have not set foot in it for years;
residing elsewhere, and occupied in other matters, some
of them apparently take little or no interest in their
colonial possessions. In other cases, where portions of
the property have proved productive, the absentee land-
lords content themselves with drawing their rents
annually, and spending the money some thousands of
miles from the colony. In the meantime, the occupiers
of their farms feel that they are but tenants, and they do
not feel that interest in the welfare of the colony, or that
attachment to the soil, which they would have felt if
greater facilities had been afforded to them for settling
upon farms of their own. Many persons of this class
have departed, with their families and their little pro-
perty, to add to the wealth and strength of the other
colonies.
At the present time the upset price of crown lands
is twenty shillings per acre, and this has been the case
for a length of time; and lam not aware that land has
been purchased in any very large quantities for some
years. There is a very general desire now throughout
the colony to reduce the upset price; and it is supposed
that Her Majesty’s Government is not unwilling to
accede to this desire, with a view of holding out greater
inducements to intending settlers to direct their steps to
this colony. There prevails, also, a very general con-
sciousness of the evils of the large grant system ; and a
proposition has lately been put forth for the imposition
of a Land Tax, to act as a check upon that system. I
do not apprehend that purchases of extravagantly large


tracts would in future be made from the Government
even without this check ; but, if any measure could be
adopted which would act as a remedy for the evil as it
now exists, it would be a great boon to the colony.
Whether this end could be accomplished by the im-
position of a Land Tax, or by the resumption by the
Government of some of these lands upon equitable
terms, or by any other means, I cannot pretend to say;
but I certainly do think that, until the evil shall be
remedied, there will still exist great and serious impedi-
ments to the progress and prosperity of the colony.
The class of men wanted in the colony are steady-
going, industrious farmers, who can settle upon their
own farms with the feeling that there they are to make
homes for themselves, their children, and their children’s
children. Any measure which will have the effect of
attracting to the colony persons of this description, or—
(and this is perhaps even more to our present purpose)
—which would have the effect of creating a class of this
description out of those who are already in the colony,
would be a measure calculated in a high degree to
promote the prosperity of the colony.
I will here mention a circumstance which has assisted
to confirm me in the opinion I have just expressed, that
probably the purchase of extravagantly large tracts of
land would not follow as a consequence of a very con-
siderable reduction in the upset price. When I
was in the colony in 1848, a property of about twelve
thousand acres was for sale at two and sixpence per acre.
This estate, in comparison with others, may fairly be
said to be a very good property. It has a fine stream


running through the midst of it, and a more than average
proportion of good land, and has also upon it five small
farms or homesteads. It remained, however, without a
purchaser. In the meantime, the value of property-
increased in the colony, and in 1854, five shillings per
acre was offered for this estate and refused. It has now,
within the last few months, been actually sold at six
shillings per acre.
No doubt a good deal of land has been purchased
from the Government in the meantime; but the cir-
cumstances I have just related, would seem to indicate
that there is, at the present time, no great avidity
to purchase land in very large quantities.
Thirdly ; the class of persons who became the first
settlers. I have nothing to add, under this head,
to that which I have said already.
Fourthly ; the absence of a good harbour. It must
appear a mere truism to assert that a colony without
any better harbour accommodation than that which I
have described above, must labour under very great
and grievous disadvantages. It is no less notorious
as a fact, that the formation of an artificial harbour
is an undertaking of vast cost. I need not say that the
question of the possibility of accomplishing this very
necessary work has repeatedly engaged the serious
attention of the colonists and the colonial govern-
ment ; but I am not able to state whether any parti-
cular measure is at the present time in contemplation.
Such a work seems a most appropriate one for the
employment of the convicts ; and, inasmuch as all the
labour connected with it would be most conveniently


near to the prison at Fremantle, it would afford suit-
able occupation for a large number of men for a
considerable length of time.
Amongst other reasons which may be put forward
in favour of taking effectual measures for settling down
the convict population in Western Australia, and
putting the colony altogether into a sound and healthy
condition, are two which I will here mention. They
are quite different in kind from the other arguments
which I have used, but appear to me to be not without
considerable weight.
The first is, the possibility of gold fields being sooner
or later discovered in this part of the continent of
New Holland. There appears to be no reason to con-
clude that the whole of this division of the great
continent, at present so little known, should be desti-
tute of this metal, which has been found so abundantly
in the other divisions since they have become over-
spread with European inhabitants,' The possibility of
such an occurrence as this seems to supply a very
strong reason, not only why the moral condition of
the colony should not be neglected, but why its founda-
tions should be well and wisely laid, and every means
taken to secure to it health and strength as to its moral
and political action, so that it may be prepared for any
crisis or emergency which it may be called upon to
pass through.
The second consideration which I would here throw
out, is the question, whether the adoption, in Western
Australia, of measures calculated to reform the convicts
sent there, and to settle them down in that colony, would


not tend very greatly to produce a better state of feeling,
on the subject of convicts, between the mother country
and the other Australian colonies.
A state of things such as that referred to by Mr.
Elliot as existing between the home Government and
the colony of Victoria (see page 14) is, to say the least,
very greatly to be lamented. The feature in the case
which is so extremely galling to these colonies, is the
apparent selfishness of the policy pursued by the mother
country. It would seem as if little or no concern were
felt about the men, beyond getting them away from
England; no care as to what becomes of them, or to
what part of the world they go to follow up their deeds
of violence, and to plunder the honest man of his pro-
perty. The only restriction which Great Britain places
upon that numerous body of men, who are at large with
a conditional pardon, is, “ See to it that you do not
trouble this country ; go any where else, plunder where
you please, murder where you please, but do not let us
be troubled with you.” The other colonies are always
complaining of the intrusion of these men; and from
the number missing from Western'Australia, together
with the testimony of the late governor and the comp-
troller general, we are justified in believing that these
complaints are not made without cause. The complain-
ants feel that the mother country has no right to scatter
these pests of society about the world, without making
proper and reasonable efforts to reclaim them. Nothing-
can be more true than this remark of Lord Brougham :
“ Each convict, leaving the gaol unreclaimed, became
the teacher, by'precept and example, of others. The


patient discharged from the moral hospital uncured
carried with him a contagious disease which threatened
the existence of society, and from which, unhappily,
society could not escape,”
Now, surely, the way to beget a better feeling amongst
the colonists is, for the mother country to set an ex-
ample of better feeling on her part. Let her adopt
all reasonable methods for reforming the men ; when
they are sent to Western Australia let proper means be
used to induce them to remain there; and then we may
reasonably hope that the other colonies will relax from
their extreme jealousy. When the parent who has
brought up these men is seen to show some care and
consideration for her own offspring, care and considera-
tion may possibly also be manifested towards them in
other quarters. Victoria and South Australia are both
so young, that a very small portion of the criminals
within their boundaries can have been nurtured on their
own soil. The latter colony, especially, has not yet
attained her majority; and it is, therefore, scarcely
probable that she can be the real parent of any adult
criminals; nevertheless, she manifests so strong a deter-
mination to repress crime, that she maintains a police
force, which costs ten shillings per annum per head
upon every inhabitant of the province. When her
population, at the last census, was something over
80,000, the police force cost 40,000/. per annum. Can
we wonder that, when there exists so strong a desire to
keep the country free from criminals as is indicated by
this fact, some feeling of vexation should be produced
by the apparent insensibility of the mother country,


with respect to the feelings and wishes of the colonists.
The convicts are, it is true, conveyed to Western Aus-
tralia ; hut so long as no proper and reasonable measures
are taken to reform the men and settle them down in
that colony, there is surely a want of good and decisive
evidence that the mother country is really sincere and
earnest in the desire that they should remain there.
It is most devoutly to be wished that the present
misunderstanding about convicts should assume the
shape of a laudable emulation in courtesy and mutual
concessions, and in acts of benevolence aiming at the
reformation and recovery of these fallen men. The con-
test, if maintained in its present shape, must necessarily
operate injuriously upon that feeling of cordiality and
good-will which ought to hold together, in a bond of
the closest union, the whole brotherhood of British
subjects, whether inhabiting one side of the globe or the
other.
CHAPTER V.
Haying now stated my reasons for thinking that the
convict system, as at present in operation in Western
Australia, does not seem likely to answer the purposes
which it aims at; and having also represented, accord-
ing to the best judgment I have been able to form in the
matter, some features in the present condition of the
colony (without special reference to the convicts) which
act prejudicially upon its progress, I now return to the


question of the treatment of the convicts. It is scarcely
necessary for me to repeat, that there is but one mode of
treatment which I conceive holds out any reasonable
prospect of bringing the convict experiment to a success-
ful issue, viz., the Reformatory system, in the fullest
sense of this expression.
Happily, the last few years have afforded many
examples of what the Reformatory system is, as applied
to juvenile offenders. A great effort has been made
throughout the kingdom to deal with criminals of this
class upon principles in conformity with our blessed
Christian faith; and this is a circumstance for which
every person with feelings of religion, or even of common
benevolence, must be truly and deeply thankful.
But, hitherto, we have seen this system applied only to
a very limited extent to adult criminals. When, how-
ever, we compare the treatment which now prevails in
many of the prisons of the United Kingdom with that
which prevailed thirty years ago, we cannot but feel
that we have cause for the deepest gratitude to God for
this improvement. No reasonable man can expect that
our criminal institutions should spring up to maturity in
a few years, from the low and degraded position which
our prisons occupied even during this present genera-
tion. God be praised, a commencement has been made,
but still it is only a commencement. Those who have
really connected themselves with the movement are
evidently fully alive to the fact that this is with them
but the day of small things, and that a wide field con-
tinually opens before them.
I could easily multiply extracts from the writings and


speeches of those noble-minded men who have striven
to rouse the attention of the country to this subject, but
I content myself with quoting one man only. There
are many able and benevolent statesmen of the present
day, who have given the best proofs that they have an
earnest desire to ameliorate the condition and increase
the happiness of the people; and amongst these, certainly
Lord Brougham is not the one who has least claims
upon the gratitude of his country. It must therefore
appear a matter for sincere rejoicing to every well-wisher
to the great cause of Criminal Reformation, that his
Lordship has expressed his views in no uncertain
language.
“ His Lordship observed that the education and
moral training of the people, and the making punish-
ment subservient to the reformation of offenders,
offered the best means of saving society from the pollu-
tion it is exposed to from the ignorance, the immoral
habits, and the neglect of those who have fallen into
criminal courses. There could be no doubt that, while
the very existence of society was threatened by the
frightful progress of crime, the inefficiency of the laws
for its restraint became every day more deplorably
manifest. The opinion of every person of experience
was, that punishment, by itself, had no steady effect in
deterring criminals.
“ It was, however, the duty of the Government to
provide more ample means for reforming criminals.
The gaol must be considered as a moral hospital, and
its inmates treated rather as patients than as criminals.
After referring to what had been done with this object


at Shetton-on-Dunsmore, Horn near Hamburg, Lyons,
Bordeaux, Bouen, Orleans, and at Mettray, and giving
statistical results of the success which had attended
the establishments at those places, the noble Lord
proceeded to remark that, in contrast with these pleasing
details, they could only reflect with pain and shame
upon the rude and barbarous method hitherto pursued
with our convicts. He need hardly ask, was this
wicked system to be continued; or were they to amend
it only with respect to the young? Nothing could be
more unreasonable than drawing a line of demarcation
between youthful and other offenders; for they had no
more right to imprison a man and then turn him loose
on society, as bad or worse as before, than they had
to perpetrate the same offence with a boy or a child.
In truth, we were guilty of a less offence by liberating
a boy, than discharging an accomplished malefactor.
After quoting the opinions of Bentham, Maconochie,
and other writers upon the subject of punishments, the
noble Lord observed that how grievously lawyers,
magistrates, and speculative reasoners had erred, in
bestowing so little attention upon a reformatory process,
must be plain to every mind. Each convict leaving
the gaol unreclaimed became the teacher, by precept
and example, of others. The patient discharged from
the moral hospital uncured carried with him a con-
tagious disease which threatened the existence of
society, and from which, unhappily, society could not
escape. How should this mischief be prevented ? By
taking care that the patient should not be sent forth
uncured It is our highest duty to rescue the
people from ignorance and vice by giving them the


inestimable blessing of a sound, moral, and religious
education; to prevent their growth in crimes, while
we provide for reclaiming, from their vicious courses,
those who have been led astray —a cure only to be
effected by making the punishment of criminals the
instrument of their reformation. That duty we have
not discharged.” *
We must not attempt to disguise from ourselves the
fact, that to apply the Reformatory system, in all its
length and breadth, to adult criminals, must prove a
task of infinitely greater difficulty than to apply it to
juvenile offenders.
It is, unhappily, too true, that even amongst offenders
of the latter class, instances of youthful depravity are
sometimes met with which amaze even those who are
most conversant with criminal statistics. Still it must
needs be the case, from the nature of things, that, as a
general rule, the mind in youth must be less hardened
in crime, less accomplished in the arts of wickedness,
and less seared as to the conscience, than the mind of
the adult criminal. But the greatest obstacle to the
success of the system, as applied to adults, must arise
from the loss of that freshness of feeling, that sensitive-
ness of mind, that capability of being worked upon
by sympathy - and kindness, which are so especially
characteristic of youth.
Perhaps, in nineteen cases out of twenty, the young
offender has never known the real blessings of the
family circle ; he has never known what it is to have
* This extract is copied from the “ Times" of August 22, 1856. It
is an abstract of a paper read before the “National Reformatory
Union,” at its first meeting.


those about him who sympathise with his troubles,
who are solicitous for his welfare, who bear with his
faults in a Christian spirit, and encourage with kindness
the attempts which he makes to return to the paths of
virtue.
Upon his entrance into a Reformatory institution, the
young offender finds himself received into a social
circle, he becomes a member of a family, he lives with
those who are to him in the place of a father and
brothers, and mutual sympathies are drawn forth
throughout the little community. Each individual
feels that he has it in his power, by means simply of
his own docility and good conduct, to contribute effect-
ually to the happiness and well-being of those with
whom he dwells. The system, while it faithfully and
lovingly instils Christian principles into the mind by
precept, endeavours to fasten those principles upon the
affections by exercise and daily practice. Neither is
the family link broken when the time arrives for the
youth once more to make trial of the world ; the sym-
pathies of the family still go with him ; the father and
brothers whom he has left expect with anxiety, from
time to time, tidings of his welfare and success. The
thought of the manner in which every account con-
cerning him will be received at his late home, does not
easily depart from his mind, but this recollection
serves him as a friend and monitor upon many trying
occasions.
Such is the Reformatory system as applied to juvenile
offenders, and it must be quite obvious, that to apply
that system, thus developed and enlarged, to the case of


adults, must be an undertaking vastly more difficult
and complicated than to apply it to the young. But
we may feel the utmost confidence that, sooner or later,
the day will come when we shall see this noble task
accomplished. We may exclaim with Lord Brougham,
“ Shall civilized, shall free, shall Christian rulers any
longer pause in the discharge of the first of their
duties ? ” And we may confidently indulge the hope
that they will not pause in the performance of this
great obligation.
The movement which is now going on in favour
of the treatment of criminals has been going on for
many years, but it is going on perhaps more rapidly
at the present moment than at any period which can be
fixed upon since its first commencement. An attentive
observer of the signs of the times will, I am persuaded,
find much to encourage him in the hope that the
movement will not come to a stand-still until principles
have been worked out, and a system very generally
adopted, perhaps, far in advance of anything which the
boldest philanthropist would now dare to contemplate.
Who that compares the Government prisons of the
present day with those which were visited by the
noble-minded Howard will despair of a further change,
when he knows that that change is dictated by
common humanity no less than by the obligations of
Christianity. The inquiries which were made, during
the last year, before the Parliamentary Committees,
afford the fullest evidence that there is, in the minds of
those enlightened officers and public men who have
turned their attention specially to this subject, an


earnest desire to bring the Reformatory system into
operation wherever they find that this can possibly
be done.
They were doubtless influenced by this desire, when
they determined to establish the ticket-of-leave system
in England; and, although that experiment has not
been attended with the measure of success which was
hoped for, one cannot but rejoice that the experiment
has been tried. It is only by means of repeated
experiments that difficult questions can be solved and
great pux-poses accomplished; and it may safely be
asserted that, by means of that experiment, we are
brought nearer to the solution of difficulties and the
accomplishment of purposes connected with criminal
treatment than we were before.
It was previously admitted that a man’s reformation
could not, with fairness, be said to be properly tested or
proved, so long as he continued under constant restraint,
and was at every hour of the day coerced into com-
pliance with stringent rules and a strict routine of
discipline. Some probation in connexion with the
world without is required for him, and the recent
experiment has shown that he cannot be exposed to an
out-door probation in the mother country, without
being also exposed to special and peculiar temptations,
which he is not in a condition to resist.
The great majority of persons under punishment in
prisons are persons who have had no previous experience
whatever in the virtuous habit of resisting temptation
for conscience’ sake. All the lessons of self-restraint
and propriety of conduct which the prisoner may have


learnt during his imprisonment come to him in a form
and shape altogether new and strange when he goes
forth to mix with the world. They are to him almost
as lessons which he may have learnt theoretically from
the pages of a book; but he finds himself sadly at a
loss when he comes to put those lessons into practice.
Nothing can be more obvious, then, than that the
great desideratum, in order to establish the reformation of
the well-intentioned prisoner, is an intermediate stage, in
which, during the early period of his renewed intercourse
with the world, he may receive help and assistance in
his endeavours to profit by his newly-learned lessons,
and to apply them to his daily practice. Colonel Jebb,
in his evidence, alludes, in several of his answers, to this
want. (A. 1144), “ Unless a prisoner has some assistance
on discharge, such as that which has been extended by
many benevolent persons to prisoners released on licence,
he is placed in the greatest possible difficulty; and Ido
not feel a doubt that the number of recommittals to ordi-
nary prisons, which reach a far larger number than those
of the licence holders, is due to that cause of the men
being discharged perfectly friendless into their old
haunts, where they are obliged to fall back upon crime
for a means of subsistence.” Again (A. 1488), “We
found that men discharged out of the prisons in the
ordinary way were perfect children; they did not know
what to do, they had not been thinking for themselves
for years, and were dependent upon every person they
came near; and, whatever might have been their inten-
tions to reform, the moment they were outside the prison
hey fell into their old evil associations again, and were


quite astray as to what they should do. This was
partly what induced us to recommend a system of inter-
mediate establishments.”
And all these old associations, let it be remembered,
link the mind of the ill-fated prisoner to something
which militates against his virtue; numberless objects
which surround him.every hour of the day, serve to
recall to his imagination scenes of revelry or vicious
indulgence, in which perhaps, upon many occasions, he
has found a brief respite from the pains of a troubled
mind and a weary spirit. Upon such a fearful precipice
indeed does the unhappy man continually pursue his
way, who is thus surrounded on every side by incen-
tives to vice, and has no friend or monitor at hand to
aid and counsel him in the performance of his difficult
task.
The absolute necessity, then, as well as the Christian
duty, of affording assistance to prisoners on their first
discharge, is one fact which has been most prominently
brought out and impressed upon our minds by means
of the recent experiment of giving tickets-of-leave in
England.
But, unhappily, it has been demonstrated no less
plainly that the requisite aid and assistance cannot be
afforded to criminals, as criminals , in England, to any
useful or beneficial extent. No sooner does it become
known that such men are the objects of special attention
as criminals , than this circumstance in itself places them
in an invidious position, a position of suspicion and dis-
trust ; which not only prevents them, in many instances,
from obtaining situations and maintaining themselves


by honest labour, but must also operate most injuriously
upon their minds. And again, it does not seem right
that they should be placed in a situation in which they
must betake themselves to a variety of shifts, devices,
and semi-deceptions, in order to conceal their inter-
course with their benefactors, or the agents of patronage
societies.
Since, then, released prisoners must be assisted; and
since they cannot be assisted with advantage to them-
selves or others in the mother country; what course can
be adopted, except that of affording the necessary assist-
ance in a colony, where special provision may be made
for affording that assistance in the most effectual manner ?
In such a colony there would be nothing to prevent the
arrangements which might be made from being most
complete and efficient in their character. Every kind of
assistance which the released prisoner might require
could be provided for ; and here he would not find him-
self under a constant temptation to assume a character
which did not belong to him, and to plot how to avoid
or avert suspicion. In such a colony, the facilities for
knowing whether a man is or is not a ticket-of-leave
man are so great, that the men do not attempt conceal-
ment. In such a colony, also, it is so thoroughly under-
stood by employers, that they are and must be dependent
chiefly upon ticket-of-leave men for the performance of
their work, that there is not the slightest danger that a
man would be avoided and shunned simply because he
was a man in this position. Indeed, his being a parti-
cular object of interest to any patronage society or
reformatory agent would be decidedly in his favour; it


would be some sort of evidence that he was endeavouring
to conduct himself well. Patronage societies or agents
would soon become sources of information to which
employers would apply, in order to have creditable and
well-conducted men recommended to them.
CHAPTER YI.
Now, although it does not appear that any specific or
definite plan has been proposed for the adoption of the
Reformatory system in connexion with Transportation,
yet we find sentiments expressed by men of the greatest
weight in these matters, from which we gather that such
a design is contemplated, and that it is regarded as one
which it is highly desirable to put into execution.
Earl Grey says, (A. 1696) —
“ That it is when they come out of these establish-
ments, when they are to be once more their own masters,
that the colonies possess so great a superiority to this
country for receiving convicts. That superiority entirely
depends upon the demand for labour which exists in the
colonies, and the facility of finding them employment
under free masters.” And his Lordship then continues,
with reference to the proposition to found an entirely
new colony for the reception of convicts:—“ Now, in
an absolutely new colony no such means whatever
would exist. If they are to be employed, it must be
entirely by the Government. There is also a free
society to neutralize the effects of the association of
convicts; the difficulty and expense therefore of employ-


ing these men, and the moral disadvantages, would be
very great indeed. On the other hand, in an existing
colony (take Western Australia for instance), there is
no doubt that the demand for the labour of discharged
convicts can, in a territory of that kind, be increased
precisely in proportion to the amount of expenditure
which the Government thinks fit to incur; and that
expenditure would be infinitely less if you were to work
upon the foundation of the existing establishment in
Western Australia, than if you were to found any new
colony.”
Colonel Jebb says (A. 1549) :
“It is with regard to the class of criminals that
are sent to the colonies. I had just commenced by
saying that I never inspected a prison without large
numbers of the prisoners wishing to be sent to the
colonies ; and I want to show that, so far from trans-
portation having a deterring effect with regard to them,
they treat it as a boon. It is a question whether it might
not be taken into consideration that it should be really
made so, and that we should send our selected men to
the only colony which is left to us.
“Q. 1550. Western Australia?
“A. Western Australia. And I believe, by so doing,
we should do justice to the colonists; and, at the same
time, ease ourselves of the very class of men, who,
although they have not committed the gravest crimes,
are the most troublesome class to us, from want of
employment in this country. Such a man would be
likely to relapse into crime, perhaps, in this country,
though he would, in a new field, in a colony, and with


plenty of labour, be a reformed man. I believe that we
might make even the small opening left us in Western
Australia , a very important element of reformation , both
as regards our prison discipline and the ultimate reform-
ation of the men”
Presuming then that the formation of Western Austra-
lia into a strictly reformatory colony is a scheme, not
only in contemplation, but looked upon as a very desir-
able measure, I proceed now to speak of some of those
means which appear to be necessary in order to adapt
the colony to this purpose. Some of the measures
however, which I am now about to dwell upon, are
undoubtedly necessary to put Western Australia into
possession of even the ordinary requirements of society.
I begin with that evil which is the most glaring and
flagrant, the operations of which are so powerful upon
the convict class that it is, in itself, quite sufficient to
defeat all the designs at present entertained of settling
these men down permanently as a part of the population
of Western Australia, and of inducing them to become
incorporated with the rest of the community.
The monstrous evil which I now refer to, is the in-
equality, in point of numbers, of the two sexes. Under
existing circumstances the men are, except in some
particular cases, absolutely shut out from the possibility
of acquiring homes and families and the comforts of
domestic life. None of those attractions which attach
men to a new country, and enable them to feel at home
in a land of exile, are within their reach.
Colonel Jebb refers to this subject. He says (A. 1574),
“ I see that the Governor of Western Australia, the clergy-


men and others, complain of the great paucity of females
there, as being perfectly demoralizing to the well-being
of the male prisoners who are sent out. They complain
that female emigrants do not come; and it does appear
to me to be worthy of consideration whether, with regard
to women thoroughly reformed, something could not be
done in sending them to Refuges in Western Australia,
and introducing them there.
Mr. Dixon, the very able Superintendent of the Convict
Establishment at Fremantle, has stated the case very
forcibly in his half-yearly Report, dated January, 1857.
There is no man whose opinion on such a subject
is entitled to more weight than Mr. Dixon. He may be
regarded as an authority of the highest importance in
all matters relating to convict management. His know-
ledge of the men, his intuitive insight into their state of
feeling and mental condition, are truly wonderful. These
qualifications, which (with others no less conspicuous,
which I need not specify in this place) have enabled Mr.
Dixon to fill that difficult position which he has occupied
with (so far as regards everything within the Prison) such
great success, since the first formation of the establish-
ment, are the result of many years’ experience, combined
with a large amount of that peculiar kind of talent which
fits a man to-exercise a great and beneficial influence
over the minds of others.
When, therefore, we find Mr. Dixon holding language
such as he makes use of in this Report, hinting very
intelligibly at demoralization of the darkest and most
terrible kind, and uttering ominous words of caution and
.warning, we may be well convinced that the evil is of


no unreal or Imaginary kind. The following is the
paragraph in Mr. Dixon’s Report, referring to this
subject:—
Half Yearly Report, dated 10 th January , 1855.
(P, 103.) “In my last half-yearly Report, I alluded to
the great existing inequality of the sexes in the Colony,
and expressed an opinion that the occasional importation
of a limited number of female convicts could be absorbed
in the community as domestic servants, and thus
gradually, in some slight degree, ameliorate the state of
things arising from the inequality referred to. Although,
indeed, the Imperial Government should continue
annually to import of free emigrants a number equi-
valent to that of the male convicts yearly transmitted
hither, still, from the fact of a very considerable portion
of those emigrants being themselves males, and the
female portion of them not being all adults, but many
of them in infancy and childhood, there still remains no
sensible diminution of the evil; and year after year,
unless the number of adult females eligible for intermar-
riage with persons who had been in a penal condition
should be raised to a positive equality with that of the
unmarried portion of the convict population, there would
be perpetuated the same relative inequality of sexes as
at present exists. The total number of females in the
colony on 31st December, 1855, was 4.282; the total
number of males, bond and free, 8,556, being in the
proportion of about two males to one female. But as
this number of females doubtless embraces a very large


proportion who would be unwilling to enter into the
married state with persons of the convict taint, the in-
equality of females, regarded in relation to the convict
population, is greatly increased. The inequality, there-
fore, of females in relation to them, is probably as at the
ratio of one female to about five males. In attempting
to place this subject in a more forcible point of view, it
is impossible to develope circumstances of immorality,
doubtless numerous, and of daily occurrence, which
never present themselves to public observation. Yet
experience warrants us in assuming their existence, and
it must, therefore, be a most important matter of policy
on the part of the State at once to diminish the tendency
to existing immorality, and guard against the possibility
of such tendency arising in future years. The principle
of selection, applied to female convicts, would send a class
in all respects equal to the general class of female emi-
grants usually forwarded to Western Australia; and,
as previously remarked, since it is the advantage of
England with respect to her offenders of whatever sex
to send them beyond her pale, it is not less the advan-
tage of this colony to receive, in addition to males, as
many females as circumstances will permit her easily
to absorb into domestic industry, and whose presence
wjll impose a -check on evils pregnant with daily mis-
chief to the community. It may be beyond my pro-
vince to proceed with these remarks further than simply
to indicate the necessity of some course being adopted
to promote the good order and permanent well-being of
the Colony; and I will only venture to add it as my
opinion, that two hundred and fifty females forwarded


annually from England soon after trial, and subjected
on the spot to a certain discipline directed specially to
the formation of proper habits of industry, would result
as signally in generating a new social character within
them, as the same discipline has already resulted in, in
the case of by far the greater majority of males hitherto
transported to Western Australia, and now constituting
the great mass of its industrial population. lam glad
to observe that the subject of the transportation of
females was referred to in the investigations before a
Committee of the House of Lords in July last, convened
for the purpose of inquiring into the operation of the
Penal Servitude Act; and that the views above, and
previously expressed by me, were corroborated by the
evidence of witnesses who had watched the beneficial
results arising from it in Tasmania and in New South
Wales, and, who, in consequence, consider it as a neces-
sary adjunct of a proper system of penal colonization.”
No one who gives serious attention to this most grave
and important question can hesitate for a moment to
admit that here is an evil which positively must be
remedied. At the same time, experience has now
proved that the evil cannot be remedied by means of
free emigration. We are, therefore, compelled to turn
our minds to the subject of female convicts, as the only
method which now appears to offer a reasonable pros-
pect of extricating the social and moral condition of
a large portion of our colonial population from its
present degrading and unnatural state. I believe that
the unwillingness which has been expressed by the
inhabitants of Western Australia to receive women of


this class was strengthened very much by the suppo-
sition that a sufficient number of females could be
introduced into the colony by means of free emigration:
since, however, it is found that there is no prospect of
this hope being realized, it is reasonable to suppose that
their feelings must undergo considerable change.
I think they were even more influenced by the idea
that the intention was to land these women with their
tickets of leave, so that they would have been set at
large immediately on their arrival in the colony. I
think this method of proceeding would be highly
objectionable. Ido not pretend by any means to affirm
that this was the proposition with respect to female
convicts. Ido not know whether it was so or not; but
I do know that this was the idea very generally enter-
tained, and that from this idea arose the strong feeling
of repugnance to the reception of these women. Very
different from this is the plan recommended now by
Mr. Dixon, viz, that of receiving the women as proba-
tion prisoners, having to perform a short period of the
penal portion of their sentence after their arrival in the
colony.
This appears to be a matter of very great importance.
It has been found by experience that, in the case of the
male convicts; those who have served a time in the
colony as actual prisoners have done much better than
those who have landed with their tickets of leave.
I am enabled to state upon the best authority that the
average number of reconvictions has been ten per cent,
greater from the latter class than from the former. The
idea that they were still, to all intents and purposes,


prisoners, must needs, both during the voyage and also
for some time after landing, have a salutary effect upon
their conduct, and tend to sober and subdue their
minds. On the other hand, we can easily conceive that
the expectation of being liberated immediately on land-
ing might, in many cases, induce the women to indulge
in extravagant hopes, and to form visionary projects,
and that the exaggerated ideas so indulged in might
exercise a very prejudicial effect upon the commence-
ment of their new career. Besides, it seems very
desirable that they should, during the voyage and on
their first arrival, be placed in circumstances such that
they will be made very sensibly to feel the effects of
their conduct, whether good or bad. The trial of the
outward passage, together with a probation of three or
four months in the colony, would, when combined, form
a most valuable test of character, and a guide which
would be extremely useful in the subsequent treatment
of the individuals. On the other hand, the difficulty,
I may almost say the impossibility, of employing any
large number of women in confinement, is a strong
reason why the females should not be retained as pro-
bationers for a longer period than is absolutely requisite
for guarding against the evils of a too speedy discharge
in the colony. Perhaps if none were released till they
had been three months in the colony, and if they were
then discharged according to their conduct and the demand
for their services, this rule might answer every purpose.
I think it would be much better that the women
should be retained at head quarters, where they could
be immediately under the eye of the superintendent,


than that they should be disposed of in Eefuges, as
hinted at by Colonel Jebb; and lam under the impression
that for their reception it would not be necessary to
form any establishment locally separate from the present
one. I believe it is, in some instances, the practice in
England to confine criminals of different sexes in
prisons closely contiguous to each other; and, obvi-
ously, it must be quite as easy to keep them effectually
and permanently separate by means of walls as by
means of so many miles of mere distance. Such a
proximity would be attended with many advantages
as regards the management of the establishment and the
treatment and supervision of the women.
To return again to the general question of the intro-
duction of these women into Western Australia. Let it
always be borne in mind that at present a monstrous
evil is in existence, which must be remedied.
Undoubtedly, the introduction of female convicts would
be an evil. So also, undoubtedly, the introduction of
male convicts was an evil; but in this latter case evils
existed before, and it was supposed that the evils ema-
nating from the reception of convicts would be less than
those previously existing. When the reception of con-
victs was resorted to, the evils proposed to be remedied
were simply those of depression, or want of prosperity;
such as we may fairly call negative evils. Now we
have to deal with a great and frightful positive evil;
not merely an evil which is inconvenient and unpleasant,
but an evil which throws our whole social condition out of
joint. If we oppose a reasonable remedy for this evil,
we become accessory to keeping a large portion of the


community to which we belong in a position to which
the laws of God and man forbid us to condemn our
brother, except when the necessities of the case afford
us no alternative. During the time that a man is under
restraint for his crimes, it is obvious that there is no
alternative, he must be limited to the companionship of
persons of his own sex; but the men who are at large
in Western Australia with their tickets of leave, are set
at large in that colony for the express purpose of amal-
gamating with and becoming an integral portion of the
community. And to expect that they can become so
amalgamated, whilst virtually banished from female
society, is as unreasonable as to compel them to continue
in such a position is unchristian-like and cruel. Besides,
no plea of principle can be set up for the exclusion of
female convicts where the introduction of male convicts
is hailed as a boon.
But although, looking at the matter as Colonists, and
considering only ourselves and the interests of the
colony, we may look upon the reception of female con-
victs as an unpleasant and hurtful alternative, there is,
happily, another view which we may take of the matter.
And this view, which has reference to the women them-
selves, and their requirements, I cannot put forward in
any better way than by using the words of some of the
witnesses examined before the Parliamentary Commit-
tees. Mr. Waddington says :
111. “ Colonel Jebb, who will be before the Com-
mittee as a witness, will state fully and in detail the
extreme difficulties that the directors of convict prisons
have met with in dealing with these unfortunate women;


but the first great difficulty is this, that there are no
means of employing them at hard labour in association
. . . . therefore it is necessary to keep them within the
walls of the prison ; and the difficulty, under these circum-
stances, of doing any good either to their minds or to their
bodies, is extreme Now, for these transportation
was an un mixed good; they very frequently retrieved
their position, and led a decent and respectable life.
It would be of immense importance, undoubtedly, if, by
either the establishment of a new penal colony, or in
some other way, we could get an outlet for these unfor-
tunate females. In Western Australia they cannot
be received; it is an extremely small colony, and at
present they have no means of employing them, and
have declined altogether to receive them; and lam
afraid there is no prospect of their being able to do so.
We have made frequent applications to the Colonial
Office to endeavour to get them to do so, but at present
unsuccessfully.
Q. 112. “ Then at present there is no outlet whatever
so far as they are concerned? A. None whatever.”
Colonel Jebb says, 1,152: “There will, however, be
many women, who, though they might not be able to
withstand the temptations of London and other large
towns, would do well, if placed under more favourable
circumstances for entering on a new course of life. In
any general arrangements, therefore, with respect to
the disposal of females, I would again earnestly impress
the importance of sending a proportion (if it were only
150 or 200 in Ihe course of the year) to Western
Australia.”


When we thus find that those who are most concerned
for the welfare and reformation of these unhappy
beings look anxiously to Western Australia as a place
affording them the means and opportunity of again
retrieving their position, a fresh light breaks in upon this
otherwise gloomy question; and the scheme assumes an
aspect altogether different from a scheme of mere self-
interest and expediency.
I quite believe that the reception of a number of un-
happy beings into the colony, in a spirit of benevolence
and compassion, would be attended with many effects
which would be positively good. The effect on the tone
of mind of a community undertaking, in the genuine
spirit of Christianity, the task of endeavouring to reform
a number of fallen fellow-creatures, would be most
beneficial. The kindliness of spirit, the charitable feel-
ing, the forbearance of mind, which would be generated
thereby, would far more than compensate for any leaven
of laxity of morals which might come in with the
objects of this benevolent feeling. Let us, for instance,
imagine any two extensive private establishments, in
one of which we will suppose to exist a good deal of
scrupulous feeling with respect to the previous character
of the persons admitted ; but in which very little care is
taken of their habits and morals after they have been
received ; and where there is very imperfect and inade-
quate provision for their moral and religious instruction.
We will suppose that the other establishment offers
admission to those who have fallen into crime, and
receives them with the avowed intention of endeavour-
ing to reform them, where scrupulous attention is given


to their treatment and habits, and efficient provision
made for their moral and religious instruction. The
establishment last described might, it is true, be trou-
bled with occurrences of a painful and damaging charac-
ter, such as the other might be free from; but we cannot
help feeling that there would be in its moral condition a
vitality and vigour altogether wanting in the establish-
ment first supposed. There must needs be a want of
soundness at heart, and consequent feebleness of consti-
tution, constantly preying upon the energies of any
community, whether large or small, which is greatly
deficient in the means of grace, and where flagrant
moral evils are permitted to remain without remedy.
In the case of Western Australia, I find it quite im-
possible to reason myself into any other view of the
matter, except this, that there is already existing in its
social condition such an unsoundness as must produce
the most disastrous results at no distant period , unless
vigorous and decisive measures he adopted to restore
health. But I believe that if such vigorous and deci-
sive measures be adopted, they will more than neutralize
the deleterious effects of any of the remedies which may
be applied in the course of treatment.
Indeed, I will go so far as to express my belief (and
I am confirmed in this belief by finding that the same
view of the matter is taken by Earl Grey himself) that
if, in the old penal settlements of New South Wales and
Tasmania, proper care had been taken of the habits and
morals of the people, and if they had been adequately
and efficiently furnished with the means of grace, those
abuses would never have sprung up which have rendered


Transportation so odious to tlie whole world; and we
should never have heard of that opposition to the practice
which has carried people to such extreme lengths. The
state of crime and practical atheism into which the
convicts fell in those colonies, we must ascribe to the
manner in which their moral and spiritual condition was
neglected. The expression to which 1 allude as having
fallen from Earl Grey, was elicited by the following
Question.
Q. 1,772. “Is your Lordship of opinion that the
repugnance which now exists to the reception of convicts,
in those colonies which are at present closed against
convicts, arises not so much from a dislike to the people
themselves as from the mismanagement, so to speak, of
the mode in which they were transported there ?
“A. I think it was originally created by that misman-
agement ; it certainly did not exist twenty years ago.”
Let it be remembered that the public mind has now
tacitly consented to see the Transportation System once
more put upon its trial. If well and wisely managed it
is unquestionably capable of being made productive of
much good, not only to the mother country, and a
colony fitted for its operation, but also to the unhappy
convicts themselves; but if another period of mis-
management is permitted to ensue, and the old scenes
of the penal settlements acted over again, we shall
assuredly find that the whole system will be con-
demned more loudly and vehemently than ever; and
all the advantages which might be obtained from it
will be hopelessly and irretrievably lost.
But to return to the question of the inequality of the


sexes in Western Australia. Not one method only-
should he resorted to for remedying this evil; hut an
eye should he kept upon every method hy which the
balance of the sexes may he adjusted.
Many of the convicts are already married; and obvi-
ously, it is a primary duty to prevent, if possible, the
sacred tie of matrimony from being severed hy the con-
victs’ sentence. Unhappily, it is too well known, that
in a great number of instances the man’s sentence does
produce this effect. Mr. Elliot, in answer to a question,
(Q. 498,) on the subject of convicts’ wives, states as
follows : —“ But the difficulty is this, that some of
these women themselves belong to depraved classes of
society. Even their abode cannot be discovered. Some
of them again have taken another husband, and are not
willing to go out. The result is, that inasmuch as it is
only a portion of male convicts who are married at all,
and then there is a large proportion of their wives who
are either not to be found, or are not willing to go out,
we get but a small contribution of free women from this
source.”
How very necessary is it, then, to endeavour, if pos-
sible, to find some means of checking this fearful dese-
cration of the marriage bond !
I am under the impression that it is intended that,
when a criminal is sentenced who is meant eventually
for transportation, his sentence shall, at the time,
declare such to be the case. I imagine, then, that it
would be quite practicable to put the wives of the
married men of this class under a species of charitable
surveillance, from the period of their husband’s sen-


tence. Many of them might, perhaps, by this means
be preserved from falling into that state of vice and
immorality which Mr. Elliot describes, and, being kept
in sight, might eventually join their husbands in the
colony.
Thank God, there are now in, I trust I may say,
every considerable town in the kingdom, persons of
both sexes whose piety and charity prompt them to
devote much of their time to visiting people in the
lower ranks of life. lam sanguine enough to believe,
that in a great majority of cases, the local machinery
would be found, in the different places, all ready, and
in working order, —that voluntary associations, whether
called Visiting Committees, or distinguished by other
appellations, would be prepared at once to undertake
the duties which would be required of them. In such
cases, all that would be necessary would be that Her
Majesty’s Government should open a communication
with these benevolent associations ; and that, imme-
diately upon sentence of eventual transportation being
pronounced upon a married criminal, information should
be sent to the association of the locality where the wife
was residing. At the same time the association might
be informed what hopes or prospects it was permitted
to hold out to the bereaved woman. The influence for
good which would be produced upon her mind by the
intercourse thus opened would mainly depend upon the
promptness with which it should be entered upon, and
the judgment and Christian kindness displayed in
carrying it on. And I cannot help thinking, that if a
visit of sympathy and proffered assistance could be


made to the poor woman almost simultaneously with
the first information of her husband’s doom; and if a
prospect could be set before her, that by a course of
good conduct she might secure to herself the privilege
of rejoining him at a future time, and under circum-
stances more favourable to his morals and manner of
life, the happiest results would often ensue.
Those who have not lived amongst the ignorant and
neglected portions of our English population imagine
that such people have no feelings; that their hearts can
never be touched, their sensibilities never awakened;
but those who have lived amongst them have been often
themselves amazed at the readiness with which the
hearts of such people will respond to the voice of kind-
ness. The voice of kindness, of anxious solicitude, of
Christian sympathy, may be a voice to which they have
been too little accustomed; and its very strangeness
may serve to awaken emotions which, perhaps, have
not been felt for years, if, indeed, they have ever been
experienced at all.
Sorrows and afflictions soften the heart, and often
dispose it for the reception of divine truth; and who
shall say but that the Christian conversation of a kind
visitor at such a moment might kindle up hopes and
better feelings in the mind of the bereaved woman,
which might lead her to pursue thenceforth a reformed
and Christian course of life? Nay, we may extend our
hopes even further yet. The husband himself might
derive an indirect or reflected benefit from the new
sentiments awakened in his wife’s bosom; and, cheering
himself in his lonely cell with the prospect of being


again surrounded by bis family, and of commencing
anew a better and happier mode of life, might see the
folly as well as the wickedness of his lawless and
criminal habits, might become a true penitent, and a
creditable member of society in his new country.
And, with a view of acting beneficially upon the
husband, the friendly visitors would do well to render
assistance to the wife in keeping up her correspondence
with him. I am persuaded that this is a most impor-
tant point, and I think it very probable that in many
cases conjugal fidelity and affection might be kept up
by means of a little assistance or urging with respect
to letter-writing, in minds which would otherwise
lapse into apathy and recklessness of living. I would
venture to make a still further suggestion. I think,
as an additional motive to good conduct, the privilege
might be granted, in some cases, to these married
women, to nominate each one young woman (of course
subject to approval), to go out to the colony in the
same ship, and to be allowed (again subject to
approval) to go with her into the country or else-
where, upon their arrival in Western Australia. In
the present state of things, I repeat, no channel
should be lost sight of or neglected, by which young
women can with propriety be introduced into the
colony; and I think this method is well worthy of
attention.
The option of nominating a young female companion
might also be given to the wives of the pensioners. I
should mention that these pensioners go out as guards
in the convict ships, and are themselves introduced into


the colony with a view to their permanent settlement
in it, as a balance against the convict element. The
difficulty of obtaining female emigrants for Western
Australia was stated in very explicit terms by some of
the witnesses before the Parliamentary Committees. In
the case of those young women proposing to emigrate,
who have no further desires or more definite purposes
with respect to emigration than simply to go out to
Australia, it ought not to surprise us if a preference is
given to those colonies which are more prosperous,
and which appear to hold out greater attractions. But
if a friend were going to Western Australia with her
husband, or to rejoin her husband, and a young woman
should be urged by that friend to bear her company in
her undertaking, here would be a definite proposition,
and a definite motive for going to that particular colony.
This connexion might also furnish a motive to the young
woman to remain in the colony, whereas a considerable
portion of those who go out as emigrants do not remain
there. In fact, the circumstance which tends as much
as anything to defeat the attempts whicli are made
to equalize the sexes, is that so many of the females
who arrive in the colony go away again. It has become
now a fashion amongst the class of servant-girls to go
to the other colonies. They come out, many together,
with no other ties except to their shipmates; and
this constitutes a sort of sisterhood amongst them.
Judging by the results, it would appear that a removal
to Adelaide or Melbourne must be their common topic
of conversation, and the thing uppermost in their minds.
It is a common thing for those who have gone to send


funds to their friends to enable them to follow, and thus
a sort of chain of migration is kept in motion, the links
in advance drawing on those in the rear. Certainly
some of these girls marry in the colony; but a great
many go away in the manner I have described. These,
as I am informed, all assign much the same reasons for
their removal, viz. that the colony is too dull, they
wish to go where there is more going on. Not a few
also avow their unwillingness to marry and settle down
with husbands who have been in a penal condition.
The next moral evil of very serious character which
we have to consider, is the facility afforded to the ticket-
of-leave men, as well as to the rest of the labouring
population, for indulging in habits of intemperance,
and the fearful extent to which they avail themselves
of this facility. Earl Grey (A. 1,738) makes particular
mention of the unhappy prevalence of intemperance in
the colonies generally. I lament to say that Western
Australia by no means forms an exception as regards
this vice. In fact, I have been informed, by very excel-
lent authority, (although I have not examined the sta-
tistical returns myself,) that, as regards the importation
of intoxicating drinks, those returns show that there is
a larger consumption in Western Australia, in propor-
tion to the population, than even in the other colonies.
The following is a portion of Earl Grey’s answer;—
“ A very large majority of free labourers in the colonies,
I am sorry to say, get very low-priced spirits, and, with
the high wages which they receive, the change from
their former life is too great for them; and the habits
of drunkenness which they adopt in consequence are


very bad. We have only to look at the return of the
quantity of spirits consumed in the Australian colonies,
in proportion to the population,'to be convinced what
frightful habits of drunkenness must prevail.”
To this large consumption of intoxicating drinks may
be attributed, in no little degree, the present unsettled
state of the convict population. The statistical returns
of crimes committed by these men after their liberation
in the colony, prove that the great majority of those
crimes are committed under the influence of drink. It
is by means of drink that a certain number of them are
kept continually going in and out of the establishment,
being recommitted for offences against discipline and the
regulations imposed upon them as holders of tickets of
leave. The effect of this frequency of reconvictions
must be, in many ways, most detrimental. Not only
must it have a most pernicious effect on the minds of
those individuals who are themselves frequently sent
back to the prison; but their going in and out must also
exert a very injurious influence upon the long-sentence
men who remain within the prison walls. Colonel Jebb,
in his answer to Q. 1,431, dwells particularly on the evil
effects of mixing men undergoing short sentences with
those who are imprisoned for long periods.
And, although the evils of this practice would, no
doubt, be felt more sensibly in England than in the
colony, yet its evils must even here be very serious
indeed. Now it is my firm belief, and I have arrived at
this conclusion from an examination of the statistics of
reconvictions, together with information acquired in the
towns and country districts; it is, I say, my firm belief,


that if a strong preventive check were imposed upon the
use of strong drinks throughout the colony, the recon-
victions to the establishment Avould be speedily reduced
by at least one-half of their present number.
His Excellency the Governor has done something
toward remedying this evil; and he desired to do, and
would have done, more; but, unfortunately, great oppo-
sition was shown to his Excellency’s measures by a sec-
tion of the colonists. The measures which have been
enacted fall, in my opinion, very far short of the require-
ments of the case.
It ought to be remembered by the colonists, that the
experiment which is now being tried amongst them is
one which is regarded by, I may say, the whole world
as a most hazardous and perilous enterprise. The case
of Western Australia, in being now a penal settlement,
is altogether an exceptional case, and one would suppose
it would at once be conceded, by all persons concerned
in it, that the case must be dealt with by a special and
exceptional course of treatment. Let us suppose a man
to have entered upon a task which all beholders had
pronounced to be most difficult and dangerous, a task
which would tax to the utmost every power of mind
and body. Would that man, if he possessed even a
moderate share of wisdom and prudence, suppose, that
he could accomplish that task without submitting to cer-
tain privations, and placing himself under restraints and
regulations which might not be so imperatively neces-
sary under other circumstances? Assuredly not. He
would at once perceive that his safety, perhaps life
itself, might depend upon the prudence and sell-denial


which he might display, and upon the restrictions which
he might be willing to impose upon himself, until his
task should be accomplished.
Such a spirit of self-denial, and such a willingness to
bear with cheerfulness restrictions and restraint which
might occasionally be attended with inconveniences,
is, undoubtedly, necessary to enable the colonists of
Western Australia to accomplish the task which they
have in hand, and to use the presence of the convicts to
the real and permanent advantage of the colony.
To take care that this class of men should not be
subjected to powerful temptations to intoxication, is
a measure which would seem to be dictated by common
sense. The number of public-houses should be greatly
limited, stringent rules should be imposed upon those
allowed, and a rigorous surveillance exercised over
them. It may be quite true that these measures would
sometimes occasion additional trouble to persons who
might really require the convenience of a public-house ;
but, I say again, we cannot have everything which
might be convenient to us at the same time. We must
balance our advantages and our inconveniences one
against the other. If we choose to have convicts, we
cannot have at the same time those things which are in
a high degree calculated to make those convicts a
scourge to the country instead of a benefit. If Her
Majesty’s Government goes to a heavy expense in
sending these men to the colony, and further incurs
heavy expense in making provision for their moral and
spiritual improvement, surely the Government has then
full right to require that the colonists should submit to


certain restraints and inconveniences, such as may be
found absolutely necessary, to prevent the attempts
which may be made for their reformation from being
neutralized or rendered altogether abortive.
Although the Government, in transporting men to
Western Australia, has regard, no doubt, to the advan-
tage of getting rid of the men, yet it is evident that, at
the present time, very little importance is attached to
this advantage, since it has been discovered that so
small a number can be thus disposed of, and that the
cost at which that advantage is purchased is so extremely
heavy. It is not less evident that transportation is very
little valued as a means of punishment. As a means by
which the men may be reformed and restored to society,
it is valued. And increased attention seems to have
been turned to it with a view to this end, since it has
been found that a discharge in the mother country is
peculiarly unfavourable to their reformation. If, how-
ever, it should be found that the men are in the colony
exposed to special and powerful temptations to vice,
scarcely less formidable than those which they have to
contend with at home, transportation will lose, in the
eyes of the authorities, the only value which it appears
now to possess. Earl Grey let fall some very weighty
remarks upon this subject. Answer to Q. 1,696. “ I do
not think the colonies by any means a good place for
the strictly penal part of the sentence passed upon con-
victs. All experience is against them in that respect.
You have much greater difficulty in getting trustworthy
officers to watch over the convicts at a distance than at
home. Abuses may go on for very long periods in


those situations, which you cannot discover. Therefore,
so far as the more strictly penal part of the sentence is
concerned, my belief is that convicts cannot be too
closely under the immediate superintendence of the
Government. And they are as completely separated
from the rest of the population at Pentonville and at
Portland as they would be at Norfolk Island. But it is
when they come out of these establishments, when they
are to be once more their oAvn masters, that the colonies
possess so great a superiority to this country for receiving
convicts.”
In speaking of measures which appear to be necessary
for Western Australia in order to adapt that colony for
the treatment of convicts upon the principles of the
Reformatory system, I have dwelt at length upon two
great evils which, in a very manifest manner, threaten
the community with demoralization, viz. the inequality,
in point of numbers, of the two sexes; and the great
facilities which are offered to the convicts and persons
of other classes to indulge in habits of intemperance.
But we must go much further than merely to place
checks upon the progress of one or two of the most
flagrant evils. We know that, in every community,
there is a widely spread leaven of evil at work, which
requires to be restrained by a strong and vigorous
counteracting power. We know that, in Western
Australia, this general leaven of evil has been fearfully
aggravated by that peculiar class of men which has
been added to the population, and that therefore the
general or constitutional remedial measures which are
necessary in all communities, are still more urgently


demanded in this instance. Carrying on the figure
which I have already employed with reference to the
condition of the colony as being morally unsound, I
would here remark, that for all moral unsoundness,
whether of individuals or communities, we have one,
and one only, specific remedy offered to us; viz. the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. In subordination to the appli-
cation of this remedy there are certain particular methods
of treatment, which are most important to aid and assist
the effect of the sovereign remedy. But the remedy
itself occupies a lofty pre-eminence high above all
things which aid and assist it, and is entirely distinct
from them. He who made the minds of individuals and
of multitudes, has put this remedy into our hands for
the healing of those minds when out of health; and if
we refuse to use that remedy, in conformity with his
instructions, or if we put it into a second place, when
He has told us it must occupy the first, we have no
right whatever to expect that our ignorant tampering
with unsound constitutions will succeed, or that the
moral disease will give way under such treatment. If
we reject the prescribed remedy to betake ourselves to
others of our own choosing, we imitate the presumption
of the haughty Syrian of old; we retort against the
instructions of the Almighty, “Are not Abana and
Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters
of Israel ?” I believe, then, that we have no warrant for
expecting success in any attempt to bring about a moral
reformation in Western Australia, unless we make deli-
berately and avowedly the Gospel of Jesus Christ the
groundwork of all our proceedings. It must be the


groundwork of our teaching to the young as well as to
the old. It must take its place as the subject of primary
importance, not only in sermons in our churches, but in
the classes of our schools; in our discourses in the
establishment, our exhortations under the trees of the
forest, our lectures in the depot, our expositions in the
bush hut, and our close and earnest appeals to the
conscience of the individual in the solitary cell or by
the highway side.
I have already stated that by far the larger propor-
tion of the men who have been in a penal condition,
live without any manifestation whatever of even respect
for the outward duties of religion. It is absolutely
necessary that these men should have the claims of
religion brought home to them, and pressed upon their
attention much more closely and more frequently than
can possibly be done under existing circumstances.
For my own part, I shall never feel that we are in a
position to combat the mighty evils which encompass
us, to any advantage, until it is possible for every
ticket-of-leave man to be known to one or other of the
clergy. I have already expressed the opinion that in
this colony, circumstanced as it is, arrangements of a
special and peculiar character, having reference to those
same special circumstances, are needed, which may be
dispensed with in other communities. And this remark
applies with particular force to the question of the
strength and efficiency of the clerical body. At pre-
sent, however, the clergy, instead of being unusually
strong in point of numbers, are not numerous enough to
supply the ordinary spiritual wants of the colonists ;it


is therefore quite impossible for them to give anything
like the requisite attention to the convict population.
Indeed, the central establishment itself has never been
adequately provided for in this respect. For a short
period of about eighteen months, it was blessed with
the services of a chaplain who was qualified in a
high degree for the arduous and difficult duties of his
position. But the work, undertaken as he undertook
it, and as every man whose heart is really in the work
would undertake it, was too much for his health and
strength. He made application for assistance, in very
touching terms, but no assistance came, and his powers,
both bodily and mental, soon gave way under the
heavy pressure of anxiety and toil which continually
weighed upon him. He was compelled to resign the
situation more than two years and a half ago. It
appears that difficulties and disappointments have
occurred at home with respect to tile appointment of a
successor; and the establishment (the duties of which
are quite sufficient to give full occupation to two able
men) has, during the whole of the period just men-
tioned, been dependent for the ordinances of religion
upon such provisional arrangements as could be made
for it from the straitened resources of the colony.
It is supposed that the delay in filling up this impor-
tant post has arisen from the difficulty which Her
Majesty’s Government has experienced in finding any
clergyman at the same time competent to fill it, and
willing to undertake it. If so, surely it is a circum-
stance which one cannot reflect on with much satisfac-
tion. Thank God, there are hundreds of devoted men,


giving themselves up with heart and soul to the work
of the ministry, both in the mother country, and in all
parts of the world. May God help and strengthen
them for their work, and give them, in his own good
time, a reward for their labours, far higher than all
earthly rewards. We desire, not to diminish their
ranks, but rather would earnestly pray that the Lord
God might add unto them a hundredfold, how many
soever they be. But are there not also hundreds of
other men in Holy Orders, who have no work on hand
so pressing but that they might very well be spared to
devote themselves to the Lord’s work amongst the lost
and misguided criminals ?
Assuredly, that was a solemn act which each clergy-
man performed when, in the sight of God and man, he
declared that he trusted he was moved by the Holy
Ghost, and called, according to the will of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to the ministry of the Church. We should,
indeed, all see well to it, that we rightly interpret what
are the indications of our Master’s call. He, who Him-
self had not where to lay his head', does not point out
the path of duty to his servants by means of places of
ease or comfortable positions. He who came to seek
and to save that which was lost, does not use objects
such as these, as the beacons by which He directs his
ministers in their course. He will have his faithful
servants dedicate themselves to the same work of mercy
wherever that work is in most urgent need of their
labour—where lost sheep are wandering for want of
shepherds.
But, to return to the case of the Establishment at


Fremantle. In consequence of that establishment
having been, for so long a time, without the services of
an efficient chaplain, we have lost advantages for
dealing with a large body of the inmates, which can
never be recovered. The clergy located about the
colony cannot, as I have already stated, make personal
acquaintance with more than a very small proportion
of these men. But, if there had been a sufficiency of
clerical strength within the walls of the prison, a con-
necting link would have been formed with a very large
number of them, which might have led to further inter-
course, and formed a basis for highly important opera-
tions. The acquaintance which a clergyman is able to
form with the men while they are within the establish-
ment, although in most cases it may be but a slight
acquaintance, is, nevertheless, a commencement of no
little importance. The man, while in the prison, feels
that his pastor is his friend—that he wishes and ear-
nestly seeks his welfare. He goes forth from that
prison to endeavour to make his way in the world.
The country is new, the people are strangers ; and there
is every inducement to him to lean towards any friend
from whom he had previously experienced kindness;
and to follow suggestions which that friend might make
to him. If, at this critical period the clergyman in the
country could be enabled, through the intervention of
the chaplain, to offer himself promptly to the notice of
the liberated prisoner, and urge him affectionately to
enter upon a better course of life, a most important step
would, in many cases, be gained. The man would feel
that he was indeed an object of interest and sympathy—


that he had been made the subject of communication
between one clergyman and another: he would feel that
he had a friend to whom he might apply for counsel in
a time of need. If it please God so far to favour us as
to give us numerical strength, both within the prison
and without, to act upon the convict population through
an agency of this description, I believe it will be pro-
ductive of results more important and beneficial than we
can now possibly conceive.
But the consequence of the present supply of clergy
being, in point of numbers, so unequal to the wants of
the colony, is that some of them, and these the very
men whose services are of the greatest value, are visibly
giving way in health and strength; and, unless help
speedy and efficient is afforded to them, it is much to be
feared that they will be obliged to abandon their posts,
or that their health and usefulness will be really and
permanently impaired. During my late visit to the
colony, I took every opportunity of impressing upon the
minds of the colonists the great duty of doing their part
towards providing maintenance for more clergymen.
The Local Government has enlarged considerably this
item in the Colonial Estimates. And lam very san-
guine in my hope, that not only will Her Majesty’s Go-
vernment sanction an enlargement of the grants from the
imperial funds in aid of religious instruction and educa-
tion In the colony, but I trust that considerable assis-
tance will also be afforded by private charity in the
mother country ; for surely there is no cause which has
a stronger claim than this upon the good offices of those
who feel that God has laid upon them an obligation to


strive to promote the welfare and happiness of their
fellow-men. But funds alone will not accomplish the
object. The grand requisite is a supply of self-denying
and devoted men. May it please God to move the
hearts of some men of this mind and character, to give
themselves to this work. It is a work of absorbing
and intense interest to the pastor who engages in it with
his whole heart; and to him who does thus enter upon
it, with a firm faith in the power and efficacy of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, it will doubtless be found to be
a work which will yield a blessed and abundant harvest
of souls, yes, of the souls even of poor, depraved, de-
graded men, rescued from the snares of Satan, and
enabled to rejoice in hope of the glory of God.
Closely connected with the subject of clergymen in
the colony is that of the care and instruction of prisoners
during the passage out. It does not appear that suf-
ficient attention is paid to them at this most critical and
important period. A long voyage must needs be attended
with many peculiar trials and temptations to voyagers of
every description, unless the time be diligently occupied
and carefully improved. In a convict ship this must be
more especially the case. What fearful opportunities
have the evil-disposed and profligate to dwell upon the
scenes of vice in which they have taken part, and for
leading on beginners in wickedness to a still further
acquaintance with the paths of vice. It must be most
important, on this account, to decrease as much as pos-
sible the time for idle and unprofitable talk; and this
even if there were little reason to expect any considerable
amount of positive improvement amongst the men. But


there is every reason to believe that a very large amount
of positive improvement would result from the zealous
and self-denying labours of a devoted Chaplain or reli-
gious instructor. No doubt it would be difficult to find
upon all occasions men well qualified for this work, and
willing also to undertake it. But would it not be worth
while to retain a sufficient staff of such men constantly in
the service of the Government ? Very great and heavy
expense is incurred in providing means for the improve-
ment and reformation of prisoners before they leave
England. But who can tell how much of that which is
done before embarkation is undone again in the outward
passage in those cases where full advantage is not taken
of the long period of leisure time on board the ship?
If Chaplains, or competent religious instructors, were
retained permanently in the employ of the Government,
they would be available for affording assistance in the
Government prisons in England, when not absent on a
voyage. And if they could have those prisoners, des-
tined to be their future flocks across the ocean, under
their particular charge for a period previous to embarka-
tion, this would give them a very great advantage on
entering upon their duties in the ship.
The results which have been produced by the devoted
labours of such men as Dr. Browning, as detailed in his
most interesting book, “ The Convict Ship,”* show
what may be accomplished, in even a single voyage,
when a man devotes himself with Apostolic zeal to the
holy work which he undertakes.
* This book cannot be too highly recommended to all who take an
interest in the work of criminal reformation.


The question of Education is one which should by no
means be passed over in an enumeration of remedial
measures for the social evils of the colony. Not only is
it necessary that there should be throughout the colony
schools well organized and efficient in the work of com-
municating knowledge and inuring the pupils to habits
of industry and order, but it is necessary that these
schools should be efficient in imparting a knowledge of
the blessed truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
I have already expressed my opinion with respect to,
not only the futility and folly, but even the presumption
and impiety of devising schemes for the reformation of
adults, without giving primary importance to the remedy
which God Himself has prescribed in this case. Equally
vain and presumptuous are all devices for forming the
mind of youth, without making that same blessed Gospel
the foundation of the whole structure. If mere secular
education could avail to keep men in the path of virtue,
a large number of those who have come to Western
Australia in a penal condition, would have been living
as virtuous men at this moment, instead of being poor
degraded criminals. Many of them are educated men,
in the full sense of that expression, as commonly under-
stood by the world. But, unhappily, the instances are
too numerous, in these days, which prove that no
amount of education, no advantages of position in
society, are able to preserve a man from falling in the
hour of temptation. So all-powerful in my own mind
is this feeling of the necessity of teaching Jesus Christ
as the foundation of all other instruction, that I take no
interest in teaching anything, if I am compelled to


separate that teaching from the one topic which to me
is all in all. My profession, my calling, the task to
which I have solemnly dedicated myself, is to teach
Jesus Christ. All my experience has taught me, that
this teaching, and this alone, has power and efficacy to
heal the moral diseases of mankind : and this experience,
no less than the obligation of my vows, confirm me in
my resolution to make Him the Alpha and Omega of
my instructions even unto the end.
Certainly, I can imagine a state of things so happy,
that the pastor, while day after day imparting secular
instruction to the lambs of his flock, could feel assured
that full and ample means were also used, if not by him-
self, yet by others, for bringing them up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord. I can conceive, that with
such a delightful assurance upon his mind he might
cheerfully, and with a conscience free from trouble, dili-
gently devote himself to their instruction in the things
of earth. But where shall, we find the privileged pastor
enjoying so enviable a field of labour ? The stern reality
with the pastors whom I have met with, whether at
home or abroad, is that the majority of the children in
their parishes are the offspring of parents who require
to be themselves instructed in the first elements of divine
truth. Their lives and conversations, their daily habits,
tell but too plainly that they have no love for the things
of God. Some never enter the House of God, others
attend but rarely, and when there, indicate by their
manner and demeanour that they take little or no in-
terest in the service of the sanctuary. It must be a
very thinly veiled deception which we practise upon


our consciences, when we can cheat ourselves into the
belief that parents so unconcerned about their own sal-
vation are fully performing their Christian obligations
towards their children.
But again, we are told the Sunday-school fills up that
which is lacking on the part of parents ; and that the
children are fully evangelized in these institutions.
I answer in a similar manner, there may be such happy
instances ; but I know that those pastors whom I have
met with, who have been most successful in their Sunday-
schools, have been the most ready to admit that, although
their schools were productive of a vast amount of good,
they were still very far from being all they could wish
them to be, and very far indeed from accomplishing all
that was requisite with respect to the majority of the
children in their parochial districts. And if this is the
case with the best and most efficient of these institutions,
what must it be with the great crowd of inferior schools,
where the very short time during which the children
are assembled, the irregular attendance of teachers, the
imperfect state of discipline, the limited portion of time
which the minister himself can spare on the Lord s-day
from the cares of his public duties, reduce sadly the
amount of positive good which can be done by this
means ? And if these causes are powerful enough, even
in the mother country, to mar so greatly the efficiency
of Sunday-schools, what must be their effect on a colony
circumstanced as Western Australia is? The question,
as regards teachers, especially in the country districts,
is not so much whether they would be more or less
efficient, or more or less regular in their attendance, but


whether it would be possible to procure the assistance
of teachers at all. The minister himself would, in all
probability, have to perform services in different locali-
ties on the same day, and would have no time whatever
to render assistance in the schools. The pastor must
indeed draw largely upon his imagination, and must
content himself with a very loose scrutiny of the facts of
the case, if he can persuade himself that, under such
circumstances, the children scattered through his district
are being taught all that it is requisite for them to know
of the Christian faith. No : let us rest assured that we
cannot depart from the great apostolic rule for all Chris-
tian teaching, “ I determined not to know anything
among you save Jesus Christ and Him crucified,” with-
out utterly destroying the efficacy of our ministrations,
and compromising our character as faithful shepherds of
the sheep, and tender nurses of the lambs of the flock.
If schools, therefore, are intended to counteract the
natural evil tendencies of the human mind and to
form the foundation of virtuous characters, the blessed
truths of the Christian faith must be taught as the
principal and most prominent feature in the course of
instruction.
There are many plans of more minute detail con-
nected with the treatment of liberated prisoners, which
would have to be considered if the Reformatory system
should be adopted in Western Australia. But Ido not
know that any good would result, as matters now stand,
from entering into such details more particularly at the
present time.
Many of these plans have been spoken of with


approbation in connexion with the recent ticket-of-leave
experiment in England; such as lodgings where the
well-disposed might keep themselves, to some extent,
apart from the more vicious criminals, lending libraries,
occasional lectures, branches of a Savings Bank, &c.
There is, however, one matter of detail which, I think,
might be made a most important engine of good ; and I
do not remember to have seen any reference made to
this subject. I mean assistance rendered to the men in
writing and keeping up a correspondence with their
friends at home. I have already touched upon this
subject, when speaking of convicts’ wives. Our great
aim, in dealing with these people, must be, to recover
them to a healthy and humanized tone of mind, to give
play to the affections, and to call into action their better
and more elevated feelings. While lately performing,
temporarily, the duties of chaplain at the establishment
at Fremantle, a great many convicts’ letters came before
me for perusal, and it struck me very forcibly how
powerful an instrument the correspondence between
them and their relations at home might be made, under
the judicious guidance of kind and sympathizing friends,
for awakening those better and higher feelings within
them. The correspondence which I perused included
both coming in and going out letters. There were not
many between husbands and wives ; but amongst them
were some of a most touching character, and indicating
much tender and excellent feeling. A large number,
how'ever, were between mothers and sons, and sisters
and brothers. What can be more natural than that the


young man who has "brought disgrace and shame upon
the other members of his family, should be afterwards
careless and backward in keeping up an intercourse
with those whom he has thus wronged? And what
more natural than that a mother’s love should still
yearn over the fallen child? or that the sister’s affec-
tionate heart should long for some tidings of the mis-
guided playmate of her childhood? And there was
abundant proof, in some of the letters of the unhappy
men, that tender appeals from relations are, in many
instances, by no means thrown away. It will, perhaps,
be said, impressions made upon such minds are not
deep—they are not permanent. Still, that they are
made at all is an encouraging and hopeful sign ;
and one cannot help ejaculating mournfully, as one
reads these expressions of regret and sorrow, “Would to
God that there were outward influences at work to
cherish and confirm these better feelings ! Would that
there were kind and Christian friends at hand, to
sympathize with the outcast in the hours of his sadness,
and to lead his mind to deeper feelings of repentance
and sorrow for sin.” I must again very emphatically
express my opinion, that in very many cases the result
might be most beneficial, if this matter were made a
subject for ‘careful and unremitting attention; and I
think it would be well worth while to make special
provision for such a performance of this duty as would
turn it to the best account.
I have already stated that there were many very excel-
lent and touching letters amongst those which I had to
peruse in the regular routine of duty at the establish-


ment at Fremantle. If time had permitted, I would
gladly have copied several of them ; one, however, I did
copy. I think no one can read it without feelings of
deep interest. I give it in its genuine form, with all its
had. spelling and inaccuracies. It passed through the
Chaplain’s office, February 25, 1857. I have the names
at full, and also the full direction of the letter; hut, for
obvious reasons, I withhold these particulars.
“ Dear Parents,
“ I hope that you and my brothers and sisters are
in good health, as this leaves me. Give my love to all
inquiring friends. I received your letter of the 26th of
July, 1856, and I was very sorry to hear of my father’s
sickness; but happy to hear that your circumstances was
better than I anticipated.
“You requested me to send you the particulars of this
country and my circumstances, but my present possion
will not permit me to do so, and in fact I know but
very little of the country, I can only state that lam
drafted up the country to the distance of 18 miles, and
am as comfortable as can be expected.
“ I have one request that I wish you to communicate
to my brothers and sisters ; for I expect in the course of
16 months to go out on my ticket of leafe, and I have
not a friend in the country as I know of, and as my
future success much depends upon first setting out,
therefore I will be much oblidge to them if they will send
me a Pound or two for to git me a few tools, such as
planes and chisels, &c.
“ I hope that in the space of a few years I shall be


able Utterly to sit beneath my own vine and fig-tree;
which animates me to meet with courage the inconve-
nience and privation of my present possion.”
To E. c. a
“ My dear Nephew, —You are now attaining to the
years werein the mind of youth aspires to objects to
gratify the humane passion different to what early
years require. Therefore I beg of you to ponder well
the advice of your Parents and Grandparents, whose
years and experience has rendered their jugment suppe-
rior to our own; for rest assured that they will not
advise you to any think that will be injurious to your
welfare. I have known them in your infancy to wach
by your couch day and knight, anxious for your health
and welfare; therefore comply with their wishes as far as
you possible can, and render their old age as happy as
you possible can.
“ It is but natural for youth to look around them to
better their condition in life, but unfortunly a great
majority of us set out with a rong step to accomplish our
fondest wishes. The best and only w T ay to succeed through
life that I can recommend to you is to take the Bible to
be your gide, study it and imbibe its principles, wich is
more svvite than the showers of spring: and it will
enable you to meet the storms wile sailing down the
little stream of life towards the vast ocean of eternity
for our longest voyage through life is but short. I often
ask myself one question—that is, if I had taken it to be
my guide, should I been in the possion that lam now


placed in out here, to suffer hunger and meny other
hardships that is not convenient for me to mention, and
to be torn from the embrace of kind parents and every
bosom friend.
“ Let my circumstances be a warning to you, and try
to do better than I have done.
“ I remain, yours, &c.
I ought to mention that I made inquiry about the
writer of the above letter, and ascertained that he is a
well-conducted, orderly man, and there is every reason
to believe that the sentiments expressed in the letter are
the genuine sentiments of his heart
It would be a very excellent thing if some means
could be devised by which the men could become
accustomed to agricultural work, and to a greater
variety of out-door labour, before they finally go forth
to make their own way in the colony. Farming
institutions of some kind, in which the men might be
kept for a time, and gradually worked off thence to
occupy allotments on their own account, would not
only answer this purpose, but they would also answer
these further purposes: —a number of men might be
passed through them and absorbed in the country
districts, over and above the limited number which can
be absorbed by passing through the hands of private
employers. And, again, in locating them upon allot-
ments of their own, a means would be adopted extremely
well calculated to settle the men down and to supply
them with strong motives for steadiness and good con*


duct. This would be especially the case with respect to
the married men, who might be looking forward with
anxiety to the arrival of their families to join them in
their new position. In connexion with any plan of this
kind, also, the men might have some other objects of
desire set before them, as rewards for good conduct,
besides the abbreviation of their sentence. It may
easily be conceived that, to many men, it would have
been an advantage if they had not been thrown so soon
upon their own resources, but had been kept for a longer
period under a sort of tutelage and mild restraint. On
account of the very limited experience which the greater
proportion of these men have had in habits of self-
control, they ought to be looked upon and dealt with,
in many respects, as boys or persons with very little
acquaintance with the world. Colonel Jebb’s expres-
sion, which I have already noticed, is, that they are,
as regards their experience, “ perfect children,” and
therefore to be subjected, for a certain period, to some
kind of discipline and a routine of regular habits,
between the periods of actual imprisonment and entire
release, might be a great benefit.
A system of marks (some modification of Captain
Maconochig’s system), by means of which the men
might day by day turn their industry and good conduct,
in some definite and tangible manner, to their own
advantage, would undoubtedly assist them very greatly
in their endeavours to reform themselves. And, if they
were encouraged to look forward to being located on
allotments of their own, the marks might be regarded
and received as a kind of purchase money for such


allotments, or for other privileges and advantages con-
nected with their first occupation of their land. Objec-
tions appear to be entertained to allowing men to
shorten their own sentences beyond a certain limit;
but by this means they might earn good conduct-
marks to any extent, and have a method open to them
by which all such marks might be turned to good
account.
Mr. Dixon has lately introduced a very excellent and
simple system of marks amongst a body of men em-
ployed in forming a road in the northern districts of
Western Australia; and I heard, from several different
sources, of the excellent effect of the experiment, which
was manifested by the rapid progress of the work, the
industry, the spirit of content, and the good humour
of the men. One or two letters from men in this party
passed through my hands, and the writers expressed, in
warm terms, their satisfaction with the position in which
they were placed. On the other hand, when men are
kept at work without having any motive to be smart
and active in their labour, they must inevitably acquire
habits of listlessness and indifference which will remain
with them during their subsequent career. And no one
who has seen the gangs at work upon the roads in
Western Australia can shut his eyes to the fact that
the men do fall into such habits. However anxious the
sapper or instructing may be to keep the men
actively at their duties, he cannot, even by calling to
them and talking at them from morning till night,
induce men to lay out their strength upon their labour
unless there be some further motive operating upon


their own minds. It must be remembered that a large
number of these men have never been in the habit of
working, men from the large towns who have main-
tained themselves by thieving, &c., or otherwise lived
by their wits. It is of the utmost importance to the
men of this class that they should have every possible
stimulus applied to their minds to become industrious
and diligent, before they go forth again upon their own
resources.
I have heard it alleged that some of the settlers in
the colony look upon any scheme of public farming
with suspicion, fearing that such a system might have
the effect of injuring the market for the sale of their
produce. lam happy to say I never heard any settler
object to such a scheme on these grounds, nor can I
think it possible that any person, reflecting upon the
subject with an unprejudiced mind, would object to the
measure on such grounds. In the first place, any person
who will seriously consider the project in its different
bearings, will soon satisfy himself that the additional
expenditure of Government money, which such establish-
ments would occasion, would be an advantage to the
colony which would far more than outweigh any possible
disadvantage to individuals.
But it mitst be borne in mind that, if the colony is to
be a reformatory colony, every class of the inhabitants,
and every individual in each class, ought to feel bound
to give a ready and cordial support to all measures
which may be resolved upon by Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment, for the purpose of promoting the reformation
and welfare of those misguided men whose guardianship
the colony has been so desirous to undertake.


I am well aware that the formation of such establish-
ments will be attended with considerable difficulty; but
I cannot help thinking that those difficulties might be
overcome, and that such a measure would be attended
with great advantages.
While upon the subject of the employment of men, it
may be well to make mention of that species of timber
peculiar to Western Australia, which, on account of
its durability, and the resistance it offers to the attacks
of the white ant, dry-rot, &c., is said to be equal, for the
purposes of ship-building, railways, &c., to any other
wood in the world. The exportation of this timber
for the construction of the railways of South Australia
has afforded employment to a considerable number of
men during the last three years. It is much to be
wished that Her Majesty’s Government would, at any
rate, make trial of a ship-load or two of this material in
the dockyards of England, that its merits might be
fairly tested. It is to be obtained in any quantity.
It is very important that there should be, by some
means or other, full occupation given to the men who
are at liberty in the colony. If they are under any
necessity of wandering about much, going from place to
place looking for work, this must militate very greatly
against the acquirement of settled habits. And this is
a state of things which requires to be guarded against.
Upon different occasions, during my late visit to the
colony, I met men travelling and asking for employ-
ment; and I was informed by several settlers whose
houses are near the principal roads, that they had many
visitors of this description. The evidence also given


by some of the witnesses before the Parliamentary
Committees sufficiently proves that it is no new occur-
rence for the number of labourers in the colony to be
considerably in excess of the demand for their services.
But we now come to the inquiry,—What encourage-
ment have we to hope that any commensurate amount
of success will attend measures such as these, if they
should be put into operation, with a view to constitute
Western Australia a Reformatory colony in the full
sense of that expression ?
Unhappily, the generality of people have acquired
a habit of looking upon criminals as a class of persons
altogether irreclaimable; about whom the only question
which concerns us is, What is the method which we can
pursue with them which will occasion the least trouble
to ourselves ? Such persons think that it is right and
proper that prisons should be constructed with a due
regard to decency—that discipline and order should be
maintained within them—that the inmates should not
be treated with any unnecessary cruelty or harshness.
But sentiments of pity or compassion towards prisoners
are deemed to be quite out of place; and as for enter-
taining feelings of love towards such men, for Christ’s
sake, or treating them with tenderness and gentleness,
in order to win them back to the paths of righteousness,
this is looked upon as a line of conduct suitable only to
enthusiasts and pursued only by persons whose zeal
carries them beyond the bounds prescribed by reason
and good sense. Persons who entertain these views
will give no encouragement to the idea of a Reformatory
convict colony. But, God be praised, we believe


views such as these are rapidly passing away. Men
are discovering that such views are as unphilosophical
as they are un-christianlike. Day hy day some new
recognition is given in of the criminal’s claim to he
regarded as a brother, although a fallen brother—an
heir of eternal glory, although, for the present, in peril
of losing that inheritance—as a soul for which Christ
died, although for the present perverting that death of
Christ only to his own condemnation. In these days
we cannot believe that the idea of establishing a Refor-
matory for criminals, upon a scale worthy of this
great country, will be treated as visionary and chi-
merical.
And if the criminal is not beyond the pale of reforma-
tion, if his recovery is possible, why has this country
not laboured for his reformation in days past ? Let it
never be put out of mind how heavy a crime Great
Britain has now to atone for. Let us never cease to
think, with shame, of the dens of iniquity which have
been maintained at the public expense in past years.
And let us, by our promptness and decision in adopting
a more righteous system, endeavour to place something
on the page of the history of our criminal treatment
which may, if possible, tend to efface the stains by
which that page is now so fearfully defiled. The words
“Norfolk Island,” “the hulks,” “the chain-gangs” of
New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, the English
prisons, as visited by Howard, Sir Fowell Buxton, Mrs.
Fry, and others—are associated in our minds with such
deeds of darkness, such scenes of misery and vice, that
even the very mention of those names awakens painful


sensations in our minds. They are names which we
would never willingly permit to pass our lips, except
in the hope that the feeling of shame thereby called
up, may act as a spur upon our sluggish efforts to offer
some atonement to the great cause of humanity for
the prodigious outrages which have been committed
against humanity in times past. But to return from
this digression to our inquiry. What encouragement
have we to hope that some measure of reformation
amongst these unhappy people may reward the labours
bestowed upon them ? I answer, if we had no encourage-
ment beyond that afforded to us by the experience of such
a man as Dr. Browning, and such a woman as Mrs. Fry,
relying upon the faithful and never-failing promises of
the gospel of Jesus Christ, we should have, even then,
ample encouragement; but the experience of many,
many other noble hearted labourers in this portion of
the Lord’s vineyard, has also been such as may give us
every encouragement. But every labourer who would
gather fruit in this field must labour in the same spirit
in which they laboured, with love and tenderness, and
a self-sacrificing spirit. Reasoning however clear,
arguments however conclusive, will not penetrate the
hardened heart and the seared conscience of the criminal.
But prove him with kindness and affection; let him
feel, as your words fall upon his ear, that in your
inmost soul you are weeping over his lost condition;
let him feel that your love is only a faint reflection of
that love of overpowering splendour which beams con-
tinually in the heart of the Redeemer—then it will be
found that even the criminal, when he is dealt with in


this manner, is capable of experiencing thoughts, and
sensations, and hopes, which have indeed long been
strangers to his breast.
But while on the part of those whose special vocation
it is to minister to the spiritual wants of these men,
there must be this large measure of apostolic zeal and
love; there must also be, on the part of those who are
set over them, and have the care of them, a large mea-
sure of, at least, benevolence and Christian kindness.
The necessity of having persons of this character engaged
in connexion with criminals is implied in an answer
given by Colonel Jebb, (1,466).
Colonel Jebb, speaking of plans for rendering assist-
ance to these men on their release, says, . . . . “ much
more favourably worked out by individuals who really
take an interest in the work than by any Govern-
ment officials appointed to such duty. It can only he
carried on effectually from a pure love and desire of
doing good to their fellow-creatures .” Most striking
indeed is the truth of this observation. In fact, in that
sentence is contained a most important axiom in the
science of doing good to the minds of our fellow-crea-
tures, When the Government officials, and especially
those in positions of power and authority amongst con-
victs, are persons who take no interest in the reformation
of those men, not only does Her Majesty’s Government
(as their employer) suffer total loss as regards active
aid or assistance from these persons, but both the
employers and the cause suffer loss and diminution,
through their means, from the services and labours of
the earnest and conscientious agents. Manifestations of


apathy and unconcern on the part of one section of
officials cannot fail to damage the influence and counter-
act the efforts of the other section.
The real and deep interest taken in the welfare of the
criminals by Colonel Jebb and his able and efficient co-
adjutors, and their earnest desire to see the unhappy
men returning to the paths of virtue, are sufficiently
known and acknowledged; but from the expression
quoted above, as made use of by the gallant Colonel,
one would be almost tempted to infer that, as a general
rule, Government officials are persons who do not take
a real interest in their work, and who are not actuated
in their conduct by the “ desire to do good to their fel-
low creatures.” But we must needs hope, for the credit
of our country, that there is no real necessity for the
employment of such men in such positions. Surely
there are to be found in Great Britain some few persons
with the requisite qualifications; the number required
cannot be extravagantly large. We have heard much,
upon recent occasions, of the wisdom, and indeed the
economy, of selecting men for particular positions on
account of some special fitness for those positions. Let
us trust that this principle will be acted upon in the
selection of all persons connected with the criminals.
To maintain, at a heavy expense, one body of men
whose duty it is to labour for the reformation of these
men, and to maintain also, at still heavier expense,
another body, the tendency of whose whole demeanour
is to cast a slight on the profession of earnest piety, to
deaden the influence of religion, and to chill the whole
Spirit of reformation, is a plan even more unwise and


infinitely more fatal in its effects than to employ, in
connexion with the men on their public works, one set
of officers to stimulate them to diligence and activity,
and another set to encourage them in idleness and sloth.
I have now only to add some few observations with
respect to the general prospects of the colony, and the
expectations which may reasonably be formed with
respect to its future prospects. And I add this ex-
pression of my opinions on this head, because I am
anxious not to be misunderstood; because I do not
wish it to be supposed that I advocate these measures
on the ground of any brilliant results which I expect to
follow. The most important of these measures I urge on
the ground of positive and peremptory necessity; and I
have expressed, with sufficient plainness, what I believe
will be the consequences to Western Australia if these
measures, or others equivalent to them, are not adopted.
I have expressed, also, my opinion with respect to
what I may call the physical causes which I believe
retarded the progress of the colony in the first instance.
I cannot conscientiously say that I believe that any
artificial means can effectually remove these obstacles.
The colony, moreover, as I have also observed, has
fallen decidedly into the rear of the other Australian
colonies; and the fact that this is the case must tend
most powerfully, for years to come, to keep her in that
position. I look upon it as altogether beyond the
bounds of human possibility to force this colony, by
any artificial means, into a condition to vie with them
in population, prosperity, or wealth. My opinion is,
that the increase in the population will not go on at by


any means tlie same rate that it has gone on in the
other colonies; because I believe that many persons,
both of those already in the colony, and those yet to
go there, will yield to the temptation to try their
fortunes in a wider field than Western Australia affords.
Nevertheless, I believe that, if the religious, moral, and
social condition of the colony be attended to with un-
remitting care, there will be a gradual and steady
improvement; that the value of property will rise, and
the revenue and resources be augmented. Knowing
the rapidity with which the other colonies are being
filled up, and the lands in them purchased and occupied,
I am of opinion that, before many years have passed
away, persons emigrating from the mother country,
for the purpose of obtaining little properties for them-
selves, which they may settle upon and cultivate, will
find some difficulty in obtaining the object of their wishes
in those colonies; and that then Western Australia will
begin to attract considerable attention.
Moreover, we must not lose sight of the fact, that this
province is a mineral country. Already, there are two
mines in work, which appear to pay their expenses and
yield a profit—and, as the country becomes more peopled
and more closely examined, other mines will no doubt
be discovered and opened up: and copper and lead will
hereafter form important items amongst the exportations
of Western Australia.
In this attempt to form an estimate of the probable
future of the colony, I might, perhaps, have drawn my
picture in brighter colours, without laying myself open
to the charge of extravagance. If I have erred on the


side of caution, it has not been altogether without design.
I would rather err on this side than on the other. I
have already stated that the ground which 1 take, in
pleading that effectual measures may be taken to remedy
the evils at present existing in the social condition of
the colony, is not the anticipation of great results, as
regards material progress and a rapid advancement in
prosperity and wealth. I plead for remedial measures,
upon the ground of duty—positive imperative duty—duty
which no excuses can put away from this country, and
which no sophisms can conceal from the mental sight of
any British subject who will permit his conscience to
show things to him in their true light, and who does not
deliberately shut his eyes, not only to his Christian
obligations, but to the obligations which are imposed on
him by the claims of common humanity. The duty is
one which rests upon every British subject; upon some,
no doubt, it presses with a more fearful weight than
upon others; but none are exempt. Every Englishman
justly prides himself upon the freedom of the constitution
under which he lives, and boasts that the acts of his
Government are in reality the acts of the people. Surely,
those blessings and privileges which we enjoy, and
which extend their ramifications to every class of the
community, are linked inseparably with obligations
which extend no less widely than the privileges. In
Great Britain, if any public measures which ought to
be taken are not taken, it is because the country does
not entertain a proper sense of the necessity of such
measures, and does not pronounce, in a manner suffi-
ciently decisive, in favour of such measures.


It is in vain, therefore, for any individual who has
sufficient capacity to enable him to think and act for
himself, to attempt to elude this responsibility, and to
place it exclusively upon some ministers of the Crown,
whether of past or of present time. One method there
is, and one only, by which each individual may dis-
charge himself from this obligation; and that is, by
striving to bring about a correct course of action, and
by using his influence to cause those things to be done
which his conscience tells him are right.
But although I would studiously avoid putting expe-
diency in the place of obligation, or urging, on the
ground of probable present advantage, the performance
of that which cannot be neglected without guilt, yet am
I well satisfied that it is expedient —that it is for present
advantage—to rule society, and to order communities of
people in conformity with those great natural laws which
God himself has ordained for these purposes. Any
attempt to run counter to those laws, or even to lose
sight of them, in political and social arrangements, is
certain to be productive of confusion, and to give birth
to a numerous progeny of evils bearing every variety of
shape.
To follow strictly the guidance of those laws mani-
fests that spirit of righteousness which exalteth a
nation; to set aside those laws is that sin which is a
reproach to any people.
R. CLAY, PRINTER, BREAD STREET HILL.






Camtrfltge, April, 1857
A LIST OF
flelu fiflohs sift |Tclu Options,
PUBLISHED BY MACMILLAN & Co.
ALEXANDER SMITH,
Secretary to the University of Edinburgh, and Author of “ A Life Drama and other Poems."
A New Volume of Poems. Fcap. Bvo. cloth, In the Press.
GEORGE WILSON, M.D., F.R.S.E.
Regius Professor of Technology in the University of Edinburgh;
President of the Royal Scottish Society of Arts; and
Director of the Industrial Museum of Scotland.
The Five Gateways of Knowledge.
In fcap. Bvo. cloth, 2 s. 6 d. ; or elegantly bound in cloth, with
richly gilt back and sides, and with gilt leaves, suitable for Prizes
or Presents, price 3s, 6 d.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
“At once attractive and useful. . , . The manner is vivacious and clear; the
matter is closely packed, hut without confusion .” — Spectator, Nov. 8, 1856.
“An extremely pleasant little hook . . . entertaining and instructive; and may
be welcomed in many a home." — The Examiner, Nov. 15, 1866.
“ Dr. Wilson unites poetic with scientific faculty, and this union gives a charm to
all he writes. In the little volume before us he has described the five senses in
language so popular that a child may comprehend the meaning, so suggestive
that philosophers will read it with pleasure'' — The Leader, Nov. 23,1856.
“ Every page presents us with something worthy of being thought about; every one
is bright with the full clear light of the writer's mind, and with his genial
humour .” — The Scottish Press, Nov. 21, 1856.
A NEW NOVEL.
AN OLD BOY.
Tom Brown’s School-Days.
'ln crown Bvo. cloth, 10s. 6 d. Just published.
A


THE WORKS OF
THE REV. WILLIAIM ARCHER BUTLER,
'Late Professor of Moral Philosophy in the University of Dublin.
Uniformly printed and bound, 5 vols. Bvo. cloth, £2 18s.
“ A man of glowing genius and diversified accomplishments, whose remains fill
these five brilliant volumes — Edinburgh Review, July, 1856.
“ One destined, if we mistake not, to take the highest place among writers of our
English tongue." — North British Review, Eeb. 1856.
“ Poet, orator , metaphysician, theologian, ‘ nihil tetigit quod non ornavitf ”
Dublin University Magazine,
“Discrimination and earnestness, beauty and power, a truly philosophical spirit .”
British Quarterly.
“ A burning and a shining light." — Bishop op Exeter.
“ Entitled to stand in the front rank, not merely of ministers of the Irish Church ,
but of the wisest and best teachers of all denominations
Wesleyan Magazine, Feb. 1856.
ALSO SOLD SEPARATELY AS FOLLOWS.
AEourth Edition of Sermons Doctrinal and Practical.
First Series. Edited by the Very Rev. T. Woodward, M.A.
Dean of Down, with a Memoir and Portrait. Bvo. cloth, 12s.
“ Present a richer combination of the qualities for Sermons of the first class than
any we have met with in any living writer." — British Quarterly.
A Second Edition of a Second Series of Sermons,
Doctrinal and Practical. Edited from the Author’s
(MSS., by- J. A. Jeremie, D.D., Regius Professor of Divinity in
; the University of Cambridge. Bvo. cloth, 10s. 6 d.
“ They are marked by the same originality and vigour of expression, the same
richness of imagery and illustration, the same large views and catholic spirit, and
the same depth and fervour of devotional feeling, which so remarkably distin-
guished the preceding Series and which rendered it a most valuable accession to
our theological literature." —From Dr. Jeremie’s Preeace,
“ Distinguished by the point and vigour of their style, the happiness of the
illustrations, and the largeness of their views." — Athenrum, Feb. 9, 1856.
“ All exceedingly beautiful and valuable .”— Literary Churchman.


PUBLISHED BY MACMILLAN AND CO. S
REV. ARCHER BUTLER’S WORKS.
3. Letters on Romanism. A Reply to Dk. Newman’s Essay
on Development. Edited by the Very Rev. T. Woodward, M.A.
Dean of Down. Bvo. cloth, 10s. 6 d.
“ A work which ought to he in the Library of every Student of Divinity''
Bishop of St. David’s.
“ There are books which while elicited by temporary controversy become so rich in
genius as to possess a permanent value. The book before us is of that rare
class." —British Quarterly, Jan. 1855.
“ One of the ablest refutations of Romanism in its latest and most refined form''
—North British Review, Deb. 1856.
“ Deserve to be considered the most remarkable proofs of the Author's indomi-
table energy and power of concentration —Edinburgh Review, July, 1856.
4. Lectures on the History of Ancient Philosophy.
Edited from the Author’s MSS., with Notes, by William
Hepwoeth Thompson, M.A., Regius Professor of Greek in the
University of Cambridge. 2 vols. Bvo., £1 ss.
“7 have seen enough of them to be convinced of their great scientific value ; and
am much gratified in finding so important a subject treated with so much
learning and acuteness." —Sir Wm. Hamilton, Professor of Logic and Meta-
physics, Edinburgh, Feb. 27, 1856.
“ Many a good Greek scholar must have lived and died with less of a real know-
ledge of Plato after years of study, than a thoughtful English reader may receive
from this book in a week." —Examiner, April, 1856.
“ No man in England is more competent than Professor Thompson to pronounce
upon the value of any contribution to this branch of ancient learning; and
he says, —
“ * Of the dialectic and physics of Plato they are the only exposition at once full,
accurate, and popular, with which lam acquainted; being far more a xurate than
the French, and incomparably more popular than the German treatises on these
departments of the Platonic philosophy.
“We must not dismiss Professor Butler's Lectures without testifying to the
admirable editing to which they have been submitted."
Spectator, May 3, 1856.
“ We are confident that every intelligent reader will join in the high encomium
which the learned Editor has pronounced upon them."
Edinburgh Review, July, 1856.


LECTURES TO LADIES ON PRACTICAL SUBJECTS.
Third Edition, revised. Crown Bvo. cloth, 7s. bd.
Contents Introductory Lecture. Plan of a Female College for
the Help of the Rich and the Poor.—l. The College and the
Hospital. By the Rev. F. D. Maurice —11. The Country Parish.
By the Rev. C. Kingsley 111. On Over-work, Distress, and
Anxiety, as Causes of Mental and Bodily Disease. By George
Johnson, M.D., Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, Physi-
cian to King’s College Hospital—lV. On Dispensaries and Allied
Institutions. By Edward H. Sieveking, M.D., Fellow of the
Royal College of Physicians—V. District Visiting. By the Rev.
J. Ll, Davies, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and Rector
of Christ Church, Marylebone—Vl. The Influence of Occupation
on Health. By Dr. Chambers, Physician to St. Mary’s Hospital—
VII. On Law as it affects the Poor. By Fitzjames Stephen, LL.B.
of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-Law—VIII. On the Every-day
Work of Ladies. By Archdeacon Allen —lX. On Teaching by
Words. By the Very Rev. Dean Trench —X. On Sanitary Law,
By Tom Taylor, Esq., Secretary to the General Board of Health—
XI. Workhouse Visiting. By the Rev. J. S. Brewer —Postscript.
“A glance at the subjects treated of, and a bare enumeration of the names
of the gentlemen who delivered the lectures, should he enough to ensure
careful attention to them These men, themselves an honour to their
tines, do honour to woman hy giving her the benefit of the best thoughts of
manly minds." — Edinburgh Review, Jan. 1856.
“ We scarcely hnow a volume containing more sterling good sense, or a finer
expression of modern intelligence on social subjects!. — Chambers’ Journal,
Nov. 22, 1856.
BY THE LATE HENRY LUSHINGTON, AND FRANKLIN
LUSHINGTON.
La Nation Boutiquiere: and other Poems, chiefly
Political. With a Preface. By Henry Lushingxon.
POINTS OF WAR. By Franklin Lushingxon.
In 1 vol. fcap. Bvo. cloth, 3«.
“ Full of truth and warmth, and noble life In these few pages are contained
some of the last thoughts of a fine-hearted man of genius One of a class
ihat',mus( be ranked among the rarest of our time!' — Examiner Aug. 18, 1855.


BY JULIUS CHARLES HARE, M.A.,
Late Archdeacon of Lewes, and Rector of Herslmonceux, Chaplain in Ordinary to the
Queen, and formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
UNIFORMLY PRINTED AND BOUND IN CLOTH.
1. Charges to the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of
Lewes. Delivered at the Ordinary Visitations from the year 1840
to 1854, with Notes on the Principal Events affecting the Church
during that period. Witli an Introduction, explanatory of his
position in the Church, with reference to the Parties which divide
it, 3 vols. Bvo. cloth, £1 11s. 6c?.
2. Charges to the Clergy of the Archdeaconry of
Lewes. Delivered at the Ordinary Visitations in the years
1843, 1845, 1846. Never before published. With an Introduc-
tion, explanatory of his position in the Church, with reference to
the Parties that divide it. Bvo. cloth, 6s. 6d.
This is included in the 3 vols. of collected Charges, hut is published separately for
the sake of those who have the rest.
8. Miscellaneous Pamphlets on some of the Leading
Questions agitated in the Church during the last Ten Years.
° Bvo. cloth, 12s.
4. A Second Edition of Vindication of Luther against
his recent English Assailants. Bvo. cloth, 7s.
5. A Second Edition of The Mission of the Comforter.
With Notes. Bvo. cloth, 12s.
6. A Second Series of Parish Sermons
Bvo, cloth, 12s.
7. A Second Edition of The Victory of Paith.
Bvo. cloth, ss.
8. A Second Edition of The Contest with Pome.
A Charge, delivered in 1851. With Notes, especially in answer
to Dr. Newman’s recent Lectures. Bvo. cloth, 10s. 6 d.
This is included in the 3 vols. of Charges.


BY JOHN McLEOD CAMPBELL.
The Nature of the Atonement, and its Relation to
Remission of Sins and Eternal Life. Bvo. cloth, 10s. 6 d.
“ This is a remarkable book, as indicating the mode in which a devout and intel-
lectual mind has found its way, almost unassisted, out of the extreme Lutheran
and Calvinisiic views of the Atonement into a healthier atmosphere of doctrine,
.. . We cannot assent to all the positions laid down by this writer, but he is
entitled to be spoken respectfully of, both because of his evident earnestness and
reality, and the tender mode in which he deals with the opinions of others from
whom he feels compelled to differ — Literary Churchman, March 8, 1856.
“ Deserves wide celebrity .”— Christian Times.
THE REV. G. E. LYNCH COTTON, M.A.,
Master of Marlborough College, Examining Chaplain to the Bishop of London,
formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
Sermons : Chiefly connected with Public Events, 1854.
Ecap. Bvo. cloth, 3s.
“ A volume of which we can speak with high admiration .”
Christian Remembrancer.
THE RIGHT REV. JOHN WILLIAM COLENSO, D.D.,
Lord Bishop of Natal, formerly Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge.
1. Ten Weeks in Natal. A Journal of a First Tour of Visita*
tion among the Colonists and Zulu Kaffirs of Natal. With four
Lithographs and a Map. Ecap. Bvo. cloth, ss.
“ A most interesting and charmingly written little book.” — Examiner.
11 The Church has good reason to be grateful for the publication.”
Colonial Church Chronicle.
2. A Second Edition of Village Sermons.
Ecap. Bvo. cloth, 2s. 6d.
3. Companion to the Communion. The Communion Service
from the Prayer Book: with Select Readings from the Writings of
the Rev. E. 1). MAURICE. Fine Edition, rubricated and bound
in morocco antique, gilt edges, 65.; or in cloth, red edges, 2s. 6 d. ;
common paper, limp cloth, Is.
THE AUTHOR OF “VISITING MY RELATIONS.”
Waters of Comfort. A small Volume of Devotional Poetry of a
Practical Character. Ecap. Bvo. cloth, 4s. Just ready.
Depth of thought , closeness and force of expression call to mind the sacred
poets of the Ylth century." — Spectator.
“ A very beautiful little volume of verse it is, — meditative , spiritual, and prac-
tical.”—Nonconformist.


BY THE REV. CHARLES KINGSLEY, F.S.A.
Rector of Eversley, and Canon of Middleham,
1. A Second Edition of Two Years Ago.
3 vols. crown Bvo. cloth, £1 11s. Gd. Just ready.
“ Much the best book Mr. Kingsley has written ?'— Saturday Review.
2. The Heroes: Greek Fairy Tales for my Children.
With Eight Illustrations drawn on wood by the Author. Beauti-
fully printed on tinted paper and elegantly bound in cloth, with
gilt leaves, 7s. 6 d.
“ The fascination of a fairy tale is given to each legend — Examiner.
“ Mr. Kingsley has imbued his narrative with a classical feeling, and thrown
over it the glow of a rich imagination and a poetical spirit?' — Spectator.
“It is admirably adapted for the perusal of young people, who will grow both
wiser and merrier while they read.” — Morning Post, Jan. 4,1856.
“If the public accepts our recommendation , this book will run through many
editions ?'— Guardian, March 12,1856.
3. A Second Edition of “ Westward Ho!” or the
Voyages and Adventures of Sir Amyas Leigh, Knight, of Bor-
rough, in the County of Devon, in the reign of Her most
Glorious Majesty Queen Elizabeth. Rendered into modern
English. 3 vols. crown Bvo. cloth, £1 ID. 6 d.
“ Mr. Kingsley has selected a good subject, and has written a good novel to
excellent purpose?'— The Times, Aug. 18, 1855.
“ Noble and well-timed?' — Spectator.
4. A Third Edition of Glaucns; or, the Wonders of
the Shore. With a Frontispiece. Ecap. Bvo. beautifully
bound in cloth, with gilt leaves, 3 s. 6 d.
“As useful and exciting a sea-side companion as we have ever seen?' — Guardian.
“ Its pages sparkle with life, they open up a thousand sources of unanticipated
pleasure , and combine amusement with instruction in a very happy and unwonted
degree?' — Eclectic Review.
5. A Second Edition o/Phaethon ; or, Loose Thoughts
for Loose Thinkers. Crown Bvo. boards, 2s.
“ Its suggestions may meet half way many a latent doubt, and, like a light breeze,
lift from the soul clouds that are gathering heavily, and threatening to
down in wintry gloom on the summer of many a fair and promising young life?'
—Spectator.
“ One of the most interesting works we ever read?' — Nonconformist.
6. Alexandria and Her Schools. Being Four Lectures delivered
at the Philosophical Institution, Edinburgh. With a Preface.
. Crown Bvo. cloth, ss.
“ A series of brilliant biographical and literary sketches, interspersed with com-
ments of the closest modern, or rather universal application?' — Spectator.


LORD ARTHUR HERVEY, M.A.
Rector of Ickworth-with-Horinger.
1. The Genealogies of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, as contained in the Gospels of St. Matthew and St. Luke,
reconciled with each other and with the Genealogy of the House
of David, from Adam to the close of the Canon of the Old Testa-
ment, and shown to be in harmony with the true Chronology of
the Times. Bvo. cloth, 10s. 6 d.
“ The production of a thorough scholar."— British Quarterly.
“ An addition of mark to our Library of Biblical Criticism ."— Guardian.
“It seems to us that in view of the kind of criticism to which the Old and New
Testament records are now subjected, his work has special importance and
claims." — Nonconformist.
“ We commend Lord Hervey’s book to our readers as a valuable storehouse of
information on this important subject, and as indicative of an approximation
towards a solution of the difficulties with which it is beset." — Journal of
Sacred Literature.
2. The Inspiration of Holy Scripture. Five Sermons
Preached before the University in the month of December, 1855.
Bvo. cloth, 3 s, 6 d.
“ A valuable addition to his former excellent work."
British Banner, March 13,1856.
“ Seasonable and valuable — British and Foreign Evangelical Review.
“ Give good proof that the writer is himself a careful student of the sacred
volume." — Literary Churchman, May 3,1856.
THE RIGHT REV. CHARLES PERRY, D.D.,
Lord Bishop of Melbourne, formerly Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College, Cambridge.
Live Sermons, Preached before the University of
Cambridge in the month of November, 1855.
Crown Bvo. cloth, 3,?. Just ready.
“ These Sermons exhibit a serious earnestness, and the results of scholarly training,
showing themselves in a clear and forcible style'' — Spectator, March 8, 1856.
“ Catholic in spirit, and evangelical in sentiment''
Evangelical Magazine, May, 1856.
ISAAC TAYLOR, ESQ.,
Author of “ The Natural History of Enthusiasm.”
The Restoration of Belief.
Crown Bvo. cloth, Bs. 6 d.
“ A volume which contains logical sagacity, and philosophic comprehension, as well
as the magnanimity and courage of faith, in richer profusion than any other
work bearing on religious matters that has been addressed to this generation.
‘ The Restoration of Belief' may, in many respects, take a place among the
books of the nineteenth century, corresponding to that justly conceded by us
to the ‘ Analogy' of Butler in the literature of the last age, or to the ‘ Thoughts'
of Pascal in that of the age preceding."
North British Review, Nov. 1855.
“ A book which I would recommend to every student.” — Rev. C. A. Swainson,
Principal of Chichester Theological College.


BY GEORGE BOOLE, LL.D.,
Professor of Mathematics in Queen’s College, Cork.
The Philosophy of Logic. Bvo. cloth. Nearly ready.
BROOKE FOSS WESTCOTT, M.A.
Late Fellow of Trinity College, and
FENTON JOHN ANTHONY HORT, M.A.
Fellow of Trinity College.
The New Testament in the Original Greek:
,The Text Revised. Preparing.
CHARLES COLLIER, M.D. F.R.S.,
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians.
Aristotle on the Vital Principle.
Translated from the Original Text, with Notes. Crown Bvo.
cloth, Bs. 6d.
“ lias rendered the original into elegant and idiomatic English.. An im-
portant feature of the work lies in the notes, in which the learned translator
comments on Aristotle's physiological facts and conclusions, illustrating or
amending them by the results of modern science. The utility of the translation
is further enhanced by the addition of preludes to each chapter, in which the
scope of the argument is briefly stated .”— British Quarterly, Jan., 1856.
THE RIGHT REV. GEORGE AUGUSTUS SELWYN, D.D.,
Lord Bishop of New Zealand, formerly Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge.
A Third Edition of The Work of Christ in the World.
Four Sermons, Preached before the University of Cambridge on
the Four Sundays preceding Advent, in the Year of our Lord,
1854. Published for the benefit of the New Zealand Church
Fund. Crown Bvo. 2s.
J. LLEWELLYN DAVIES, M.A.
Fellow of Trinity College, and Rector of Christ Church, Marylebone.
St. Paul and Modern Thought: Remarks on some
of the Views advanced in Professor Jowett’s Commentary on
St. Paul. Bvo. sewed, 2s. C d.
“ We can heartily recommend Mr. Davies's Essay." — Spectator, April 26, 1856.
“ A piece of profound as well as genial criticism." — National Review.
“ Especially remarkable for philosophical depth and power of argument, “•
Christian Remembrancer.
A 3


BY REV. D. J. VAUGHAN, M.A.
Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, and Incumbent of St* Mark's, Whitechapel , London ,
Sermons Preached in St. John’s Church, Leicester,
during the Years 1855 and 1856. Crown Bvo. cloth, ss. 6 d.
Just ready.
MACVEY NAPIER, ESQ.,
Late Editor of the “ Edinburgh Review," and of the “ Encyclopedia Britannica."
Lord Bacon and Sir Walter Raleigh. Critical and
Biographical Essays. Post Svo. cloth, 7s. 6 d.
“ The Article on Bacon is clear, accurate, convincing, complete. The Article on
Raleigh is very valuable, first, because Mr. Napier has had access to many
documents unknown to former biographers, and next, because he completely
clears Raleigh from the old imputation of deceit about the Guiana mine, as well
as of the other minor charges .”— North British Review.
J. E. B. MAYOR, M.A.,
Bellow and Assistant Tutor of St. John’s College.
1. Lives of Nicholas Ferrar, of Clare Hall.
By his Brother John, and Dr. Jebb. Now first edited, with
Illustrations. Fcap. Svo. 7s. Gd.
2. Autobiography of Matthew Robinson.
Now first Edited. With Illustrations. Ecap. Svo. cloth, ss. 6 d.
Just ready.
JOSEPH FRANCIS THRUPP, M.A.,
Vicar of Barrington, Cambridgeshire, late Fellow of Trinity College.
Antient Jerusalem. A New Investigation into the History,
Topography, and Plan of the City, Environs, and Temple. De-
signed principally to illustrate the records and prophecies of
Scripture. With Map and Plans. Svo. cloth, 15s.
“He is calm and candid, and has a thorough acquaintance with all that has been
written upon his subject .”— Athenaeum.
“ A book of no ordinary value. Patient research, candour, and a reverence for divine
truth distinguish the whole volume.” — Journal of Sacred Literature.
“ A well-directed and able endeavour to throw additional light upon the history
and topography of the Holy City. Those who read it will find reason to be
grateful to the author'.’ — Literary Churchman.


BY X and Y (Two Unknown Quantities).
A Long Vacation Ramble in Norway and Sweden
“ STcaal to the Northland , Skaal! ”
“ And dark , and true , and tender is the North."
In crown Bvo. cloth, 6s. 6i. Just ready.
THOMAS RAWSON BIRKS, M.A.,
RECTOR OP KELSHALL, FORMERLY FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE,
Author of “ The Life of the Rev. E. Bickersteth."
The Difficulties of Belief, in connexion with the
Creation and the Ball. Crown Bvo. cloth, is. Gd.
“ Without Unding ourselves to the immediate acceptance of this interesting
volume , we may yet express our hearty approbation of its tone
Christian Remembrancer, April, 1856.
“ A profound and masterly essay." —Eclectic, May, 1856.
« flis arguments are original , and carefully and logically elaborated. We may
add that they are distinguished by a marked sobriety and reverence for the Word
of God.” —Record.
“ Of sterling value.” —London Quarterly.
THE HON. HENRY E. J. HOWARD, D.D.,
Bean of Lichfield.
1. The Book of Genesis, according to the Version of
the LXX. Translated into English, with Notices of its Omis -
sions and Insertions, and with Notes on the Passages in which it
differs from our Authorized Yersion. Crown Bvo. cloth, Bs. 6 d.
“ The Work deserves high commendation; it is an excellent introduction to the
comparative study of God’s Word, in these three languages with which an
ordinary English student is mainly , if not entirely concerned.” —Guardian.
2. The Books of Exodus and Leviticus.
Crown Svo. uniform with the above, cloth, 10#. 6 d.
THE REV. C. A. SWAINSON, M.A.
Principal of the Chichester Theological College.
A Handbook to Butler’s Analogy ; with a few Notes.
Crown Bvo. sewed, I#. 6d.


BY CHARLES HARDWICK, M.A.
Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge.
Christ and other Masters: An Historical Inquiry into
some of the chief Parallelisms and Contrasts between Christianity
and the Religious Systems of the Ancient World; with special
reference to prevailing Difficulties and Objections. Part I. intro-
duction, Part 11. Religions of India.
In Bvo. cloth, 7s. Gd. each.
CHARLES MANSFIELD, M.A.
1. Letters from Paraguay, Brazil, and the Plate.
By the late Charles Mansfield, M.A., Clare Hall, Cambridge.
With a life by Charles Kingsley, Rector of Eversley. Post Bvo.
With a Map, and a Portrait, and numerous Woodcuts. 12s. Gd.
Just ready.
“ An interesting and instructive volume .”— Morning Post.
“ A delightfully written book.” — British Quarterly.
“ Full of varied matter and earnest thought .” — New Quarterly.
2. On the Constitution of Salts. Edited from the Author’s
MS. by N. H. S. Maskelyne, M.A., Wadham College, and
Reader in Mineralogy in the University of Oxford. In the Press.
C. MANSFIELD INGLEBY, M.A,
Of Trinity College, Cambridge ;
Teacher of Logic in the Industrial Department of the Birmingham and Midland Institute.
Outlines of Theoretical Logic.
Founded on the New Analytic of Sir William Hamilton.
Designed for a Text-book in Schools and Colleges.
In Fcap. Bvo. cloth, 3s. Gd. Just ready.
THE LATE HENRY MACKENZIE, 8.A.,
Scholar of Trinity College.
The Christian Clergy of the Pirst Ten Centuries;
their Beneficial Influence on European Progress.
Crown Bvo. cloth, 6 s. Gd.
’*lie has shown considerable research into the History of the early Clergy, and
expresses himself with a facility and force which many an experienced writer
may envy. He has displayed in this essay a sound judgment, a freedom from
prejudice, and a conscientious endeavour to reach the truth, which convinces us
that an able and excellent man was lost to the world by the untimely death of
Henry Mackenzie.”— Jan. 12, 1856.
“ We rarely meet with a prize-essay of so much general interest.”
Guardian, Peb. 6,1856.


BY DAVID MASSON, M.A.,
Professor of English Literature in University College, London .
Essays, Biographical and Critical: chiefly on English
Poets. BVO. cloth, 12s. Qd.
OPINIONS.
“ Mr. Masson has succeeded in producing a series of criticisms in relation to
creative literature, which are satisfactory as well as subtile, —which are not only
ingenious, hut which possess the rarer recommendation of being usually just...
But we pass over these Essays to that which is in the main a new , and, according
to our judgment, an excellent biographical sketch of Chatterton. . . This ‘ Story
of the Year 1770,’ as Mr. Masson entitles it, stands for nearly 200 pages in his
volume, and contains, by preference , the fruits of his judgment and research in
an elaborated and discursive memoir. . . Its merit consists in the illustration
afforded by Mr. Masson's inquiries into contemporary circumstances, and the
clear traces thus obtained of Chatterton's London life and experience, . . .
Mr. Masson unravels this mystery very completely .”—Times, Nov. 4,1856.
“ No one who reads a single page of Mr. Masson will be likely to content himself
with that alone. He will see at a glance that he has come across a man endowed
with a real love of poetry ; a clear, fresh, happy insight into the poet's heart;
and a great knowledge of the historical connexion of its more marked epochs in
England. He has distinct and pleasant thoughts to utter ; he is not above doing
his very best to utter them well J there is nothing slovenly or clumsy or untidy
in their expression ; they leap along in a bright stream, bubbling, sparkling, and
transparent.” —The Guardian, Nov. 5,1856.
“ Worthy of being ranked among the very foremost of their class, . . The longest
Sind finest composition of the work—a gem in literary biography—is its ‘ Chat-
terion, a Story of the Year 1770.’ . . . This singularly interesting and powerful
biography fills up this sad outline as it never was filled up before.”
Edinburgh Witness (edited by Hugh Miller), Aug. 23,1856,
“ His life of Chatterton is a complete, symmetrical and marvellous work of art
. . . a classical biography .”—The Glasgow Commonwealth, Aug. 16, 1856.
“ Will secure both attention and respect.” —Examiner, Sept. 6, 1856.
“ Very admirable criticisms, which shoio not only a thorough acquaintance with
the works he criticises, but a deep sense of poetic beauty.”
Daily News, Aug. 5, 1856.
“ We know not where to find a larger amount of discriminating, far-seeing, and
genial criticism within the same compass.”
British Quarterly Review, July, 1856.
“ Here is a biography (the essay on Chatterton) told without exaggeration,
without unwarranted use of hypothetic incidents, yet surpassing the most
highly-wrought fiction in its power over our emotions .”
The Westminster Review, July, 1856.
“ Not only a series of biographical studies, but in some sort a philosophical history
of English poetry from Shakspeare to Alexander Smith.”
The Leader, June 4,1856.
“ Distinguished by a remarkable power of analysis, a clear statement of the actual
facts on which speculation is based, and an appropriate beauty of language.
These Essays should be popular with serious men.
The Athenlum, May 24,1856.


BY JOHN HAMILTON, (of St. Email’s,) M.A.
Of St. John’s College, Cambridge.
On Truth and Error: Thoughts, in Prose and Verse,
on the Principles of Truth, and the Causes and Effects of Error.
Crown Bvo. bound in cloth, with red leaves, 10$. 6 d. Just ready.
THE REV. F. D. MAURICE, M.A.,
Chaplain of Lincoln’s Inn.
1. The Gospel of St. John. A Series of Discourses.
Second Edition, Crown Bvo. cloth, 10$. sd. Just ready.
2. The Doctrine of Sacrifice deduced from the Scrip-
tures. Crown Bvo. cloth, 7s. 6 d.
8. Learning and Working. The Religion of Rome,
and its influence on Modern Civilization.
In 1 vol. Crown Bvo. cloth, ss.
4. Lectures on the Ecclesiastical History of the First
and Second Centuries. Bvo. cloth, 10$. 6 d.
5. Theological Essays. Second Edition. Crown Bvo. 10$. 6d.
6. Patriarchs and Lawgivers of the Old Testament.
Second Edition. Crown Bvo. cloth, 6s.
7. Prophets and Kings of the Old Testament
Second Edition. Crown Bvo. cloth, 10$. 6d.
8. The Unity of the New Testament.
Lectures on the Gospels of St. Matthew, St. Mark, and St. Luke,
and on the Epistles of St, Paul, St. Peter, St. James, and St. Jude.
Bvo. cloth, 14$.


REV. F. D. MAURICE’S WORKS-continued.
9. Christmas Day, and other Sermons. Bvo. cloth, 10s. 6 d.
10. On the Religions of the World. Third Edition.
Ecp. Bvo. cloth, ss.
Contents: Mahometanism—Hindooism —Buddhism—The Old Per-
sian Faith —The Egyptian—The Greek—The Roman —The Gothic
The Relation between Christianity and Hindooism, &c.
11. On the Prayer-Book. Second Edition. Ecp. Bvo. cloth,
5«. 6c?.
12. The Church a Family. Ecp. Bvo. cloth, 4s. 6c?.
13. On the Lord’s Prayer. Third Edition. Ecp. Bvo. doth,
2s. 6 c?.
14. On the Sabbath, and other Sermons. Ecp. Bvo,
cloth, 2s. 6 d.
15. Law on the Fable of the Bees. Ecp. Bvo. cloth, 4s. 6d.
The Word “Eternal” and the Punishment of the
Wicked. Third Edition. Is.
Eternal Life and Eternal Death. Is. 6c?.
The Name Protestant. Three Letters to Mr, Palmer. Second
Edition. .3s.
Right and Wrong Methods of Supporting Pro-
testantism. Is.
The Duty of a Protestant in the Oxford Election.
1847. Is.
The Case of Queen’s College, London, is. 6c?.
Plan of a Female College. 6c?.
Death and Life. In Memoriam C. B. M. Is.
Administrative Reform. 3c?.


PROSPECTUS OF A SERIES
MANUALS FOR THEOLOGICAL STUDENTS
NOW IN COURSE OF PUBLICATION.
It is now about four years since the Prospectus of this Series was
first issued. Four volumes have now been published, and several
others are in an advanced state. The reception which the volumes
already published have met with, has fully justified the antici-
pation with which the Publishers commenced the Series, and
warrants them in the belief, that their aim of supplying books
“concise, comprehensive, and accurate,” “convenient for the
professional Student and interesting to the general reader,” has
been not unsuccessfully fulfilled.
The following paragraphs appeared in the original Prospectus, and may
be here conveniently reproduced:—
‘ The Authors being Clergymen of the English Church, and the Series
being designed primarily for the use of Candidates for office in
her Ministry, the books will seek to be in accordance with her
spirit and principles; and therefore, (because the, spirit and
principles of the English Church teach charity and truth,) in
treating of the opinions and principles of other communions,
every effort will be made to avoid acrimony or misrepresentation.
“ It will be the aim of the writers throughout the Series to avoid all
dogmatic expression of doubtful or individual opinions.”
THE FOUR FOLLOWING VOLUMES ARE NOW READY:—


THEOLOGICAL MANUALS-continued.
1. A General View of the History of the Canon of the
New Testament during the FIRST FOUR CENTURIES.
Crown Bvo. cloth, 12s. 6c?.
BROOKE FOSS WESTCOTT, M.A.,
Assistant Master of Harrow School, formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge.
OPINIONS OP THE PRESS.
“ A work which forms one of the invaluable series of Theological Manuals now in
course of publication at Cambridge
British and Foreign Evangelical Review, July, 1856.
“ The Author is one of those who are teaching us that it is possible to rifle the
storehouses of German theology, without bearing away the taint of their atmo-
sphere : and to recognise the value of their accumulated treasures, and even
track the vagaries of their theoretic ingenuity, without abandoning in the pursuit
the clear sight and sound feeling of English common sense . ... It is by far
the best and most complete book of the kind; and we should be glad to see it
well placed on the lists of our examining chaplains.” — Guardian, Oct. 3,1855.
“ Learned, dispassionate, discriminating, worthy of his subject and the present
state of Christian Literature in relation to it.”
British Quarterly, Oct. 3, 1855.
“To the student in Theology it will prove an admirable Text-Book: and to all
others who have any curiosity on the subject it will be satisfactory as one of the
most useful and instructive pieces of history which the records of the Church
supply .”— London Quarterly, Oct, 1855.
“ The Author carries into the execution of his design a careful and painstaking
scholarship .... Considered as a list of Testimonials in favour of the canonical
writings, our Author's work deserves the praise of great diligence and manifest
conscientiousness'' — National Review, Oct. 1855.
“If the rest of the series of manuals, of which the present volume forms a part, are
as ably executed, the Christian public will he greatly indebted to the projectors
of the plan." — Literary Churchman.
“ There is nothing, so far as we know, resembling it in the English tongue ... We
have here presented to us a striking and luminous view of a very broad and
comprehensive subject, marked throughout by rich and copious erudition.
A volume which we consider a most valuable addition to the literature of
Revelation. Scripture Expositors, of whatever name, will acknowledge that they
have been laid under deep obligation by the work of Mr. Westcott.”
British Banner, Jan. 4,1856.
“ The conception of the work, and the discrimination and learning with which it is
executed, adapt it most thoroughly to the present state and forms of controversy
on the subject to which it relates'' — Nonconformist, Jan. 23, 1856.


THEOLOGICAL MANUALS—continued.
2. A History of the Christian Church during the
Reformation. By CHARLES HARDWICK, M.A., Fellow
of St. Catharine’s College, Cambridge, Divinity Lecturer of King’s
College, and Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge.
Crown Bvo. cloth, 10s. 6 d.
OPINIONS OP THE PRESS.
“ The whole volume displays a profusion of learning, great accuracy and honesty
in collecting and collating authorities, a clear as well as a concise narrative of
events ; and it always refers to the authorities on which the history is grounded .”
Christian Remembrancer, April, 1856.
“ Exhibits a deep comprehension and a firm grasp of his theme, with the ease and
mastery in treatment which such qualities generally impart The utility
of Mr. Hardwick’s work consists in bringing the greater and minor histories
connected with the Reformation into a single volume of compact shape , as well as
presenting their broad features to the student. The merit of the history con-
sists in the penetration with which the opinions of the age, the traits of its
remarkable men, and the intellectual character of the history, are perceived, and
the force with which they are presented." — Spectator, March 15, 1856.
* A more satisfactory manual than England has hitherto produced. He has
laboured learnedly and diligently, at first hand , among the sources and autho-
rities for the ecclesiastical history of the period of which he writes; and has
produced a work really original, as far as such a work can be; independent
in its judgments ; written with taste and feeling; and offering , in its large
body of notes, aids and guidance to the fullest investigation the subject can pos-
sibly receive.” — Nonconformist, April 16,1856.
“ His readers will find him a lively, a luminous, and interesting companion, as
well as a generally trustworthy guide?' — British Banner, march 13, 1855.
“He enters fairly into the questions of which he speaks , and does not attempt
to evade their difficulty by vague statements ... We cordially recommend
this work to those who desire an orderly and lucid summary of the leading
events of the Reformation . . . We may also observe, that Mr. Hardwick
has availed himself of the latest German authorities
" Literary Churchman, May 3, 1856.
“ The style is lucid and the plan comprehensive. The facts are well arranged ,
and their relations ably brought out . . . Will be esteemed by most students
as judicious, helpful, and suggestive."
Evangelical Review, May, 1856.
“He writes from genuine and independent sources. Though his work is short,
it partakes in no respect of the character of a compilation."
The Press, July 12,1856.
“ It is impossible to speak too highly of the extensive and careful research the
book everywhere manifests .” — Baptist Magazine, Aug. 1856.


THEOLOGICAL MANUALS—continued.
3. A History of the Christian Church from the Seventh
Century to the Reformation. By Charles Hardwick, M.A.,
Bellow of St. Catharine’s College, Divinity Lecturer of King’s
College, and Christian Advocate in the University of Cambridge,
Author of “ A History of the XXXIX Articles.” With Four
Maps constructed for this Work hy A. Keith Johnston.
Crown Bvo. cloth, 10$. 6 d.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
■‘lt is full in references and authority, systematic and formal in division, with
enough of life in the style to counteract the dryness inseparable from its brevity,
and exhibiting the results rather than the principles of investigation. _ Mr.
Hardwick is to be congratulated on the successful achievement of a difficult
task.” —Christian Remembrancer, Oct. 1853.
“He has bestowed patient and extensive reading on the collection of his materials;
he has selected them with judgment j and he presents them in an equable and
compact style.” —Spectator, Sept. 17, 1853.
11 This book is one of a promised series of ‘Theological Manuals. In one
respect , it may be taken as a sign of the times. It is a small unpretending
volume in appearance, hut it is based on learning enough to have sufficed, half a
century since, for the ground two or three quartos, or at least for several
portly octavos. For its purpose it is admirable, giving you a careful and intel-
ligent summary of events, and at the same time indicating the best sources of
information for the further guidance of the student. Among the authorities
thus referred to, we find the most modern as well as the most ancient, the con-
tinental as well as the English?'— British Quarterly, Nov. 1853.
“It is distinguished by the same diligent research and conscientious acknowledg-
ment of authorities which procured for Mr. Hardwick’s ‘ History of the
Articles of Religion’ such a favourable reception .”
Notes and Queries, Oct. 8, 1853.
“ To a good method and good materials Mr. Hardwick adds that great virtue,
a perfectly transparent style. We did not expect to find great literary qualities
in such a, manual , hut we have found them; we should be satisfied in this
respect with conciseness and intelligibility ; but while this book has both, it is
also elegant, highly finished, and highly interesting .”
Nonconformist, Nov. 30, 1853.
“As a manual for the student of Ecclesiastical History in the Middle Ages, we
know no English work which can be compared to Mr. Hardwick’s book. It
has two great merits, that it constantly refers the reader to the authorities, both
original and critical, on which its statements are founded; and that it pre-
serves a Just proportion in dealing with various subjects.”
Guardian, April 13,1854.


THEOLOGICAL MANUALS-continued.
4. A History of the Book of Common Prayer,
together with a Kationale of the several Offices. By the Rev.
.Francis Procter, M.A., Yicar of Witton, Norfolk, formerly
Fellow of St. Catharine’s College, Cambridge. Second Edition,
revised and enlarged. Crown Bvo. cloth, 10s. &d.
“ Mr. Procter’s ‘ History of the Book of Common Prayer ’ is by far the best
commentary extant Not only do the present illustrations embrace the
whole range of original sources indicated by Mr. Palmer, but Mr. Procter
' compares the present Book of Common Prayer with the Scotch and American
forms; and he frequently sets out in full the Sarum Offices. As a manual of
extensive information, historical and ritual, imbued with sound Church princi-
ples, we are entirely satisfied with Mr. Procter’s important volume .”
Christian Remembrancer, April, 1855.
"It is a resume of all that has been done in the way of investigation in reference to
the Prayer-Book .”— Athen.eum, Peb. 17, 1855.
“ We can have little doubt that Mr. Procter’s History of our Liturgy will soon
supersede the well-known work of Wheatly, and become a much-used hand-
book beyond the circuits of the University for the more immediate use of which
it has been produced .”— Notes and Queries, March, 1855.
“ Although very decidedly anti-Roman in its tone , we gladly accept it as a substitute
for the dull and dreary dogmatism of Wheatly. It presents, in a popular and
agreeable narrative, the history of those variations to which so much attention
has been directed during the late eventful controversies ; and while it contains a
very careful, learned and scholarlike exposition of these changes, it also furnishes
a most valuable commentary on the successive texts of the formularies themselves,
as they are exhibited either in the original editions, or in the useftd manuals of
Bdlley and Keeling.”—Dublin Review (Roman Catholic), April, 1855.
rt We can speak with just praise of this compendious but comprehensive volume., It
appears to be compiled with great care and judgment, and has profited largely by
the accumulated materials collected by the learning and research of the last fifty
years. It is a manual of great value to the student of Ecclesiastical History and
of almost equal interest to every admirer of the Lturgy and Services of the
English Church .”— London Quarterly Review, April, 1855.
“It is indeed a complete and fairly-written history of the Lturgy; and from the
dispassionate way in which disputed points are touched on, will prove to many
troubled consciences what ought to be known to them, viz.:—that they may,
without fear of compromising the principles of evangelical truth, give their assent
and consent to the contents of the Book of Common Prayer. Mr. Procter has
done a great service to the Church by this admirable digest .”
Church of England Quarterly, April, 1855.
FOR A LIST OF THOSE IN IMMEDIATE PREPARATION, SEE NEXT PAGE.


Cjjtolojjital Hhmtsk
THE EOLLOWING WORKS OE THE SERIES ARE IN PREPARATION.
An Introduction to the Study of the Old Testament ,
with au Outline of Scripture History.
Notes , Critical and Explanatory, on the Hebrew Text
of the Prophet ISAIAH.
The New Testament in the Oriyinal Greek : a revised
Text.
An Introduction to the Study of the Gospels.
[ln the Press.
Epistles.
Notes, Critical and Explanatory , on the Greek Text
of the POUR GOSPELS AND THE ACTS OP THE
APOSTLES.
Notes, Critical and Explanatory, on the Greek Text
of the CANONICAL EPISTLES AND THE APOCALYPSE.
A History of the Christian Church duriny THE PIRST
SIX CENTURIES.
A History of the Christian Church from the Beginning
of the XYIIth CENTURY TO THE PRESENT TIME.
An Historical Exposition of the Apostles, Nicene,
and Athanasian CREEDS.
An Exposition of the Articles of the Church of
England.
Others are in progress, and will be announced in due time.


THE JOURNAL
CLASSICAL AND SACRED PHILOLOGY.
Nos I. to X. price Is. each. Yols I. 11. and 111. in cloth, 12s. 6<7. each.
This Journal has been established as a medium of communication
between Scholars and others interested in Classical and Sacred
Philology. The first number appeared in March, 1854; and it is
proposed to continue the publication of three numbers, forming a
volume yearly, in March, June, and December.
A FEW COMPLETE COPIES IN 9 YoLS. 8 VO. CLOTH, PRICE £7 45.,
CAN STILL BE HAD OF
THE CAMBRIDGE AND DUBLIN
MATHEMATICAL JOURNAL.
WITH AN INDEX OF SUBJECTS AND OF AUTHORS.
This important Work was commenced in 1846, and the last volume
was completed in 1854. During these nine years, it received
original contributions on almost every branch of pure and applied
Mathematics, by many of the most distinguished British Mathe-
maticians, and also by several of the most eminent Foreign. It
may, therefore, justly claim a place in every Scientific, Public, or
Private Library.
“ Another instance of the efficiency of the course of study in this University, in
producing not merely expert algebraists, but sound and original mathematical
thinkers, {and, perhaps, a more striking one, from the generality of its con-
tributors being men of comparatively junior standing'), is to be found in this
Journal, which is full of very original communications' ' — Sir J ohn Herschel’s
Address at the British Association.
A work of great merit and service to science. Its various contributors have
exhibited extensive mathematical learning and vigorous originality of thought —
Sir W. Rowan Hamilton.
A publication which is justly distinguished for the originality and elegance of
its contributions to every department of analysis' ' — Rev. Prof. Peacock.


MATHEMATICAL CLASS BOOKS
COLLEGES AND SCHOOLS.
Professor Boole’s Treatise on Differential Equations.
[Nearly ready.
Mr. Cooper’s Geometrical Conic Sections. [ln the Press.
Mr. Drew’s Geometrical Conic Sections, [lmmediately.
Mr. Frost’s Newton, Sections I. 11. 111, With Notes and
Problems. 10s. Gd.
Mr. Godfray’s Treatise on the Lunar Theory. ss. Gd.
Mr. Grant’s Plane Astronomy. 6s.
Mr. Hemming’s Differential and Integral Calculus.
Second Edition. 9s.
Mr. Parkinson’s Elementary Mechanics. 9s. 6 d.
Mr. Parkinson’s Elementary Treatise on Optics. [Preparing.
Mr. Pearson’s Treatise on Finite Differences.
Second Edition. ss.
Mr. Phear’s Elementary Hydrostatics. ss. 6d.
Mr. Phbar’s Elementary Mechanics. 10s. Gd.
Mr. Pucklb’s Elementary Conic Sections.
Second Edition. 7s. Gd.
Mr. Barnard Smith’s Arithmetic and Algebra.
Fourth Edition. 10s. Gd.
Mr. Barnard Smith’s Arithmetic for Schools.
Fifth Thousand. 4s. Gd.
Mr. Barnard Smith’s Key to the above. Bs. 6d.
Mr. Barnard Smith’s Mechanics and Hydrostatics.
[Preparing.
Mr, Snowball’s Plane and Spherical Trigonometry.
Eighth Edition. 7s. 6 d.
Mr. Snowball’s Introduction to Plane Trigonometry.
Second Edition. ss.
Mr. Snowball’s Cambridge Course of Natural Philosophy.
Fourth Edition. ss.
Prof. Tait’s and Mr. Steele’s Treatise on Dynamics. 10s. Gd.
Mr. Todhunter’s Treatise on Differential and Elements
of Integral Calculus, Second Edition. 10s. Gd.
Mr. Todhunter’s Treatise on Integral Calculus and its
Applications. [Just ready. 10s. Gd.


MATHEMATICAL CLASS BOOKS—continued.
Mr. Todhunter’s Analytical Statics. 10s. 6<L
Mr. Todhunter’s Conic Sections. I Os. 6 d.
Mr. Todhunter’s Treatise on Algebra. [ Preparing.
Mr. Todhunter’s Algebra for Beginners. [■ Preparing.
Prop, Wilson’s Treatise on Dynamics. Os. 6d.
Cambridge Senate-House Problems, 1848 to 1851. With
Solutions by Messrs. Ferrers and Jackson. 15s. 6 d.
Cambridge Senate-House Riders, 1848 to 1851, With Solu-
tions by Mr. Jameson. ‘ 7s. 6d,
Cambridge Senate-House Problems, and Riders for 1857.
With Solutions by the Moderators and Examiners. [ Nearly ready.
Cambridge Senate-House Problems and Riders. 1854. With
Solutions by the Moderators, Messrs. Walton & Mackenzie. 10s. 6d.
GREEK AND LATIN CLASS BOOKS.
Mr. Drake’s EumENIDES OP zEsCHYLUS. with English Notes.
- 7s. 6d.
Mr, Drake’s Demosthenes de Corona. With English Notes. ss.
Mr. Frost’s Thucydides, Book VI. with English Notes. 7s. 6d.
Dr. Humphreys’ Exercitationes lambics. Second Edition. 6s. 6d.
Mr. Mayor’s Juvenal, with English Notes. 10s. 6d.
Mr. MerivaLE’s Sallust. With English Notes, ss.
Mr. Thring’s Construing Book. 2s. 6d.
Mr. Wright’s Hellenic a, with English Notes, 3s. 6d.
Mr. Wright’s Help to Latin Grammar. 4s. Qd.
Mr. Weight’s The Seven. Kings op Eome ; a First Latin
Construing Book, with English Notes. 3s.
Mr. Wright’s Vocabulary and Exercises for the above.
[Just ready. 2s. Qd.
ENGLISH GRAMMARS.
Mr. Thring’s Elements op Grammar.
Mr. Thrinq’s Child’s Grammar.
New Edition. 2s.
New Edition. Is.
Mr. Parmintbr’s Materials for English Grammar. 3s. 6d.
LATELY PUBLISHED.
Mr. Swainson’s Handbook to Butler’s Analogy. 2s.
Mr. Crosse’s Analysis of Paley’s Evidences. 3s. 6d.
Mr. Simpson’s Epitome op Church History. New Edition. ss.
R. CLAY) PRINTER, BREAD STREET HILL.




' • ■




