

“Oh, ‘Law,’ fair form of Liberty, God’s light is on thy brow !
Oh, ‘Liberty,’ thou soul of Law, God’s constant smile hast the
THE
AMERICAN WAR
CONSIDERED SPECIALLY
WITH REGARD TO
SLAVERY.
“ God gives us Law in Liberty ! and Liberty in Law!”
“The sacred grace of Liberty is the majesty of Law."
pat II.
BY T. HALLIWELL,
Head Master of the Central District School,
Dunedin.
Dunedin.
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY G. WATSON,
MACLAGGAN STREET.
1865.
Vox libertaris est box Dei.




” A day, an hour of virtuous liberty
Is worth a whole eterm.iv of bondage,”
THE
AMERICAN WAR
CONSIDERED SPECIALLY
WITH REGARD TO SLAVERY.
** j-.u>eny, — *s u t,.—^ — —-
Gift, which lost, makes life not worth keeping.”
“ liberty, —When liberty is gone,
Life grows insipid and has lost its relish/’
Part XX,
BY
T. HALLIWELL,
Mead Mazier of the Central District School, Dunedin.
is Nothing debased—no slave of monstrous birth,
A blighted manhood, and a shame to earth,
Emancipate the slave, annihilate the wrong,
Make Justice bold, and truth —liberty strong."-
Pope.
Bunrtitn;
FEINTED AND PUBLISHED BY G. WATSON,
MACLAGGAN STREET.
1865.




“ Triumphant Justice, pure and grand,
Ho! all ye nations of the earth,
And thou, America, nohle land.
Art struggling to freedom’s second birth.”
PREFACE.
If there be one thing more than another that I am anxious to
establish in this pamphlet, it is, that God is in America's
calamities.
“ We cannot lift the veil that hides the future from our view,
Yet guerdons bright await the brave, who honor’s path pursue.”
And it is wonderful, when we reflect, how notably the moral
world regulates itself, and how successfully God’s laws man-
age to get themselves executed in spite of men’s infirmities and
petulent protests.
It used to be the fashion among people who considered their
opinions of considerable value, to speak of human slavery as of a
political and social necessity; not, indeed, to be defended upon
the highest grounds, but nevertheless to be tolerated; and doubt-
less the abolitionists might have gone on several centuries longer
discussing the constitution, and pleading for compromises—extenu-
ating, sophisticating, and droning drearily in pulpits, and pleading
double in synods, exenterating tracts, and giving themselves up to
the slave powers. Ah, into what still profounder depths might
they not now have been weltering, if events had not so shaped
themselves, that really the question resolved itself into one not of
the goodness or the badness abstractly of slavery, but of the possi-
bility of ridding themselves, of what in their bereavement, every-
body admitted to be an unfragrant nuisance.
Twenty years ago, a man who talked of prohibiting slavery by a
clause in the Constitution, and of thus making the same to
square with the words of the Declaration of Independence, was
usually regarded by his friends as a lunatic, and by his enemies as
a scoundrel. Now, an Amendment securing this most desirable
harmony between the American fundamental law, and national
practice of America, passes the Senate, will doubtless be approved
by the States, and will thus save America in the future from an
inconsistency both lamentable and ludicrous. And thus Mr. Seward
might safely state that Slavery will not need be a future issue
of the war. States now returning to the Union, necessarily accept
the laws which have been enacted since the secession. This
measure will no doubt cause considerable snarling and venom.
The rebels have no concealments. They state to the world, that
they are in arms to defend the right of owning men, of selling
women, and of buying children—that they can conceive of no
possible society fit for a gentleman, in which two-thirds of the


members are not held in bondage—that nature lias established the
servile relation—that God smiles upon it—that the Bible sanctions
it, and that they are therefore determind fiercely to fight for it. The
rebels are certainly candid in openly declaring their policy, and only
give them all their premises, and nobody can find fault with their con-
clusions, just as the devil is considered to be pleased when he has
all his own way.
Well, if traitors fight for slavery, why should not loyal men fight
for freedom. Logically it is very clear, that the abolitionists can-
not damage their enemies, without damaging the cause for which
they are contending. If the Confederates find good in slavery,
then, of that good, must they be remorselessly deprived, by its
stern and speedy abolition. Although the liberating armies so far
damage the slaveholders, yet at the same time, they, by the same
process, succour the sorrowing, and rescue the oppressed, and this
shews how, in God’s economy, all things work together for good.
As James the Second, by absconding from England, saved the
Wigs an infinite degree of trouble, so the slaveholders have facili-
tated the purgation of the country, by acts which of themselves
legally operate against the existence of slavery. Substantially
the slaveholders have abolished slavery for the abolitionists;
The hands that bound have loosened, and those who purloined
the strength and manhood of a race, have been forced, by the ope-
ration of very simple laws, into acts of involuntary restitution.
Let us then be thankful that a wiser power than any belonging
to our finite nature, sways the destinies of the world, and saves us
from the worst of evils at a time, and in a manner, we do not anti-
cipate. Our extremity being often God’s opportunity, and we an
led sometimes to exclaim, “We will trust Thee even where w
cannot trace Thee. One thing we know that to raise the humh!
to protect the weak, to redress the wrongs of the injured, is th
true end of Christian life. It is found wanting, when weighed ,
the balance of Eternal Justice, if it fails in this duty.
“ Hope of the world! on thy mission sublime,
When thou didst hurst on the path w ay ot lime,
Millions from darkness and bondage awoke ;
Music was born when liberty spoke.”


I propose to treat the subject as follows :
Chap, I,—l. Ought the Slaveholders be let go ?
2. Confederate Aristocracy.
3. Case of the Confederates as given by themselres.
4. Success of the North.
5. The North justified in entering upon defensive war, and
liberating the slaves, ;
6. God on the aide of the North.
Chap. II, —1- Progress of Sentiments and Sympathies.
2. Brief summary of the case of the North.
3. Influence of the "War,
4. Conclusion.
CHAPTER I.
First.—Ought the slaveholders he let go ?
“While Justice lives and God maintains his throne
Evil-doers shall be cast out, ' Not let alone.’ ” ’
To those who justify the rebellion on the plea that the North
should let the South go with Slavery, it may be submitted that the
North is in this respect just acting the noble part that Sir H.
Fowell Buxton did when he evinced such courage in stopping the
career of a mad dog. It is recorded that on the occasion referred
to, a huge favorite dog was seized with hydrophobia, and was rush-
ing into the street in a state of raving madness, when with wonder-
ful courage Sir H. Fowell Buxton, seized the creature by the neck
and collar, and against the animal’s most desperate efforts dashino-
hither and thither against the wall and fence up the 'crowded
street, held him until help could be got. Thus, rather than let the
mad animal go about biting children, women and men risked his
life, and prevented the dog from doing evil.
In like manner the abolitionists of America have resolved not to
allow that “ hell hound of slavery,” mad, Ina d as it is ; go biting
millions in the future, and they are prepared in like manner to
peril life, and limb, and all for their noble cause.
True Americans further regard this war as part of that awful
yet glorious struggle which has been going on for hundreds of
years in every nation, between right and wrong, between virtue
and vice, between liberty and despotism, between freedom and
bondage. They consider that it carries with it the whole fixture
condition of their vast continent, its laws, its destiny. And standing
in view of these tremendous realities, they have consecrated all
they have—their children, their wealth, their national strength,
and lay them on the altar and say, “It is better that they should
ail perish, than that the North should falter and betrav this trust
of God—this hope of the oppressed—this Western civilization.
And if they say this of themselves, are they to say less of the
slaveholders ? If they say this of themselves, are they to have
more pity for the rebellion—for slavery seeking to blacken the
whole continent with its awful evils ? desecrating the social phase
of national independence, by seeking only an independence that
will euable them to oppress four millions of humanity!


A further reason why the Northerners see it their duty not to
let the slaveholders to go is, because they do not wish to become
a military people. And nothing can be more certain than, that if
the division were to be allowed, and so to separate, the South
would become a military nation, and the North would be compelled
to become the same. Along a line of some 1,500 miles, the North
would be compelled to have forts and men to garrison them.
Before the war, the national army of America was not more than
18,000. The American newspapers were frequently setting forth
that the army was useless in the nation ; while, if the country be
divided, the two great military nations would necessarily have to
take their place, and instead of the 18,000, there would be some
200,000 on each side. It is better then for the country itself,
and for the world, that that nation should be united, and that it
should be under the control of that part of America, that has
always been for peace, and that it should be wrested from the con-
trol and policy of that part of the nation, that has always been for
increasing territory, for filibustering and slavery.
The religious-minded among thepeople of the North feel too,thatin
the territory committed to them, there is a high and solemn trust —-
a national trust, These people send their ships round the globe,
carrying missionaries to the Sandwich Islands, to the Islands of
the Pacific, to Asia, to all Africa, and yet when the work of
redeeming their own country from the heathendom of slavery is in
earnest undertaken, there are persons to be found who wish to
counsel, to give it up to the devil. But independent of all these
merely material considerations, there is doubtless pressing on every
conscientious Northerner’s mind, this highest of all considerations,
their special duty to God, to save that country from the blast and
blight of slavery,
If the South were to prevail, (which God forbid, and which
doubtless he will not permit) the slaveholders would carry their
institution of slavery to the utmost bounds, without regard to
opinions, while the victory of the North will be a victory of liberty.
But it is insinuated, that if the South were independent, slavery
would die more speedily, than if they were allied to the North, for
it is asserted, Her strength has been in the North, and she has
repaired the wastes of the slave system, by the fresh made free
people of the North.” Having possession of the Government as
the South has had, she has a heart that could drive the good blood
made by the North into the paralized limbs that she had by virtue
of slavery, and it is said, give her national independence, and she
will have no such recuperative power from liberty. No, nor would
she have such a conscience as would be infused into her by the
free institutions of the North, She had passed through that period
in which the Northerners nourished her, and had just come to that
period in which they were to kill her by kindness,
The Southerners knew as well as the Northerners, and Northern-
ers as well as the Southerners, that the fundamental elements
of the free institutions of the North, long suppressed, had at last
struggled into power; and that from that time forward the govern*


ment of tbe nation was to be administered according to free ideas,
and not according to slave ideas; and that the South was not
thereafter to have the advantages that it had had, Moreover there
Was to be a long period, no one can tell how long, of the dominion
of the slave policy, and the only answer to the idea that they
would by any alliance with, or bribery of Foreign powers, emanci-
pate their slaves, was a laugh, —lt was preposterous. So that,
instead of there being a prospect of emancipation through Southern
independence, there was a prospect of a new dynasty of a long roll
of years of internal oppression, and of an endless series of disas-
ters both to themselves, and to those who had the misfortune to be
their neighbours.
It is true, indeed, that the Confederates were in every way pre-
pared for the rebellion, having been getting in readiness for the
same for years; and had up to that nick of time, namely President
Lincoln’s election, full control of the reins of government, which
gave them every possible advantage to develope and carry out their
Guy Fawkes’s design.
They had put the command of the army and fleets into the hands
of Southern officers- —distributed the resources of the country into
the hands of the Southern people—had their Generals reared at
West Point with everything that prestige could give them as
soldiers—had contracted large debts, and left their successors
to pay them-—had placed traitors in every corner, and in
every important position in the Government offices, and made
their plot so complete, that they boasted that there would be little
fighting, it would soou be over; feeling no doubt, that they had
the Federate in a most helpless condition. The very property,
arms, and defences which they held in trust, they thus turned
against the Government they !hd pledged themselves to support i
and in every way resorted to the most treacherous means in carry-
ing out their plot.
In the Northerners there was the absence of military spirit 5 the
Abolitionists having especially been trained in the arts of peace,
not in the military school; and thus they were like so many help-
less men against disciplined forces, and feeling conscious of the
right, almost rejected discipline. This absence of a military disci-
pline among them arose from the nature of their education, aud a
desire to conciliate the South on the principles of peace.
But some blame the North for fighting at all, and say, that it is
not right to seek emancipation, and the maintenance of the Union,
by arms, and that it would have been better to give up all instead
of defending themselves by arms. And then justify this view by
declaring that war is terrible! Well, war is terrible, but not more
terrible than slavery, We would rather fall in with the motto,
“ That it is better to die free than live a slave.” War is doubtless
very terrible in some respects. Fire is terrible! but it burns out
the dross, and gives us the fine gold; and war, as a medicine, is
going to cure slavery. That portion of the North known as
Democratic, may not cherish very anxiously this idea, as their one
concern is the preservation of the Union even with Slavery. But


the vital portion of the North, namely, the Abolitionists, are im-
bued with one idea, namely, a belief in the ultimate and complete
emancipation of those benighted beings now' in bonds, and that by
the means of the present struggle. But the South is not divided
in their war ideas. The one policy is, “We cannot long maintain
slavery without separation, and we will fight for it! Still there
are persons who wash to hide this plain declaration, and adopt
various apologies to screen themselves, and to make a commendable
reason for the sympathy they manifest for the Confederates.
Ever since slavery infested the American people—sat upon its
brain—domineered over its heart, and held control of its govern-
ment ; the nation has been wandering, cutting itself, and breaking
all the restraints and chains of decency, propriety, right and
justice, and has caused the whole American community to suffer.
But it has pleased God in his Providence to pass by that way, and
he has rebuked the unclean spirit of slavery, and has commanded
it to come out of the people, and it has obeyed ; and slavery, if
not dead, at least has come out from the Government, as well as
the people, and four millions of men are touched with the
light of the rising glory of liberty.
Many think that America with slavery in it, and commercial pros-
perity, is better than it will be with slavery cast out, and some trouble
endured for the sake of having it cast out. But it is well that
there are others who nobly feci and act from a belief and convic-
tion, that for the sake of having America free from slavery, there
can be no price too great, no suffering too much. But after all,
what is the suffering, compared with the suffering of those whose
hidden sorrows have for so long gone up before God. Oh, let all
men, and especially Christian men, think of the mother’s broken
heart, of the old patriarch’s tears, and of the worse than unutter-
able anguish of those who have been sacrificed for their beauty to
the lusts of their oppressors! Let us all reflect of the complica-
tions of sufferings of those that have been dumb, and who have
had none to speak for them. Doubtless the sufferings through
which America is now going, are not only atonements for sufferings
that have for so many years gone up before God, but they are the
remedies of suffering. And oh, how self-evident it is, that by the
mischiefs that are caused by setting America free, what would
have been its condition if the work had been delayed much longer ?
In a few years more, the monstrous slave oligarchy, like a brood
of demons, would have gone on multiplying in a manner that
would have rent the life of the nation far more sorely than it is
now being rent. The American people would then have been a
pitiable disheveled and destroyed people. But now happily the
people have life enough to bear the strain occasioned by emancipa-
tion. And though for the present there is a seeming waste of
industry, after all there is a great and good work being accom-
plished.
Even commercially speaking, it is now demonstrated beyond doubt
that the benefits of free labor, as shown by results in the emanci-
pated plantations, will soon pay back both principal and


interest of the great debt incurred by the war, and will soon make
bp for the industry that has been interrupted in the South. When
it is considered what the effect of .slavery has been upon the ele-
ments of justice, humanity, and religion—that it has struck down
the whole Southern Church in slavish chains—that it has aposta-
tized even the Southern ministers of the gospel—that it has
perverted and corrupted the whole Southern States to this extent,
and when these things are considered in the light of the future,
emancipation from the evils to which the people were, and would
have continued to be subjected, though so many fall in the struggle,
and though so much money be spent, it will be an emancipation
most cheap. Is it better to sit down and morn over commerce,
instead of being thankful that a higher and more beneficial, and
lasting consideration is involved.
Do not look on the visible side only. The number Slain and
wounded in the battle is not alone the history. That is the acci-
dent—the mere external shell. Let us look inside of that, to the
progress of right thought—to the progress of right feeling—to the
progress of religion, which is, humanity, purity, justice, truth and
love.
No blots on the banner of light!
No slaves in the land Of the free!
No wrong to be rampant where all should be Eight,
No sin that is shameful to see!—
America,—show the wide world in thy strength
How sternly determined thou art
To cut from thy soil in its breadth and its length
The canker that gnaws at thy heart.
Still move bn and try with by thy might,
This evil no longer shall be;
For all men are brothers—the black as the white.
And sons of one Father are we.
America,—now is the perilous time,
When safety is solely decreed
to ridding the heart of old habits of crime,
And simply repenting indeed.
Away to the bats and the moles
With the lash, and the goad, and the chain i
Away with the buying and selling of soulsj
And slavery toiling in vain.
America, this is thy chance—now, at length—
Of crushing—while so troubling thee—
Those rebels and slaveholders,— slaves to thy strength—
The curse and contempt of the &fee!
M. F. Tupper
Second. — Confederate Aristocracy. The time will do«0$&
eome when it will he difficult to comprehend why so inBis per-
sons were williag to adopt So ihany strange reasons for sym-
pathizing with thb slaveholdihg aristocracy, as Well as the many
B


extraordinary things that were recognised as constituting aristocraev.
There are many persons to be found now, especially a certain
portion of fashionable society, who declare their preference for the
Southerners, because they fancy them more aristocratic than the
Northerners, without, it is feared, seriously considering why they
do so.
It is quite certain, however, that Southern Aristocracy is not
synonymous with comfort, thrift, cleanliness, usefulness, honesty,
decency, or common humanity, and those who know Southern
aristocracy best, only recognise it by the very opposite of these
traits. The war has come like a rain to melt the covering ; and
behold, accumulated filth and every impurity are left upon the
disclosed surface.
These slaveholding lords, who began the war with embezzling
public property, in order to destroy the people’s government, and
who abided by an oath of allegiance only until their schemes of
treason were hatched, are likely enough to end in atrocities such
as have characterised them from the outbreak of their attack upon
the North.
There have been many very elaborate disquisitions, written by
those who deem the laborer unworthy of his hire, to justify the
claims of Southern aristocracy to their positions as lords of un-
happy serfs, and masters of industrious freemen. Mediterranean
blood has been supposed to have a large share in conferring these
extraordinary powers. It is easy to prove that as many nation-
alities were mingled in the original colonies of the Southern States
as of the Northern ; and equally so, that the scum of Europe
drifted south of the Delaware, and round to the mouth of the
Mississippi. The aristocracy, says the London Daily News, main-
tains its descent from brothels and bridewells, and that the newer
members of tbe order will not be in haste to expose their genealo-
gies. A correspondent of the British Standard, whose oppor-
tunities for observing Southern society since the rebellion has been
surpassed only by bis keenness of observation, communicates to
that paper the result of recent investigations. He declares that
the Southern oligarchy is a contemptible aristocracy. Prominent
among the Southern pretenders to aristocracy, are many of the
lowest lived and lowest horn blackguards in the community ; and that
a large proportion of them were raised to distinction by success alone
in the slave trade. Such, he states, was the late Isaac Franklin, a
resident of Tennessee, but notorious as a partner of Armfield in
the slave trade, at Alexandria. Franklin’s widow, by ber ill-
gotten wealth, made a Nabob of her second husband, Joe Acklin,
“altogether” a man of very low degree. Their baronial estate
was in the neighbourhood of Nashville. Gen. Harding, who lived
upon his 5000 slave acres, until he sat upon the rebel board of
war, and followed the fortunes of the Confederacy beyond the con-
fines of Tennessee, was the son of John Harding, the negro trader.
In the same circuit, flourished John Thompson, a negro trader,
rich in half a million dollars and 1500 acres, also a traitor.
W. Woodfolk, a proprietor of a well-known rebel establishment in


Nashville, repaired his infirm finances by speculation in infirm
negroes, acquiring a fortune for himself and family. General
Forrest is cited as having turned negro trader from “ river
gambler,” grown rich, and obtained a commission in the Confederate
army. Here, then, is an instructive glimpse of the tendency of
Southern society.
However, there is not much fear that the chief magistracy will
ever again be a slave driver, dealer, or owner, but it is well to
know the meaning of Southern aristocracy, and to thank God for
the escape of America from the rule of a base-born, and deeply
rooted horde of inhuman tyrants.
“la there aot some chosen curse,
From hidden thunder hi the stores of Heaven,
Bed with uncommon wrath to blast the man
Who gains his fortune from the blood of souls.”
Cowper.
“ Let Slavery—clog of death—to wrath be hurled,
Then Freemen’s willing hand will clothe the world,
Freemen will fight full in their might
For justice and freedom, for God and the right.
“ May never a cloud overshadow thy face,
While the slave flies before his pursuer;
Gleam steadily on to the end of his race,
Till his body and soul are secure.”
M. A. Denison.
Happily, however, there are exceptions among the slaveholders
-—for example, Edward W. Gantt, who has been, until lately, a
general in the Confederate Army, and owner of a very large
number of slaves. He fought two years with the rebels, and bad
risen to the rank Fof Brigadier-General. But experience and
reflection have at length convinced him that he was wrong, and he
has taken a noble stand, and made a solemn resolve never again to be
concerned in the attempt to overthrow the Federal Government.
He has felt it his duty to his country, his family, and his neighbours,
to take open and decided ground against the cause of all their woes
—namely. Slavery; and he has fully, together with his other
fellow-citizens, declared for “ Reconstruction,” on the basis of Union
and Emancipation. There he stands now.
Mr Gantt unequivocally maintains that slavery is the sole cause
of the war, and that its eradication is the one and only indispen-
sable condition of Reunion and lasting peace. His words are :—“ I
know what made me a rebel—namely, slavery: and I know the same
influence was operative with my neighbours. I know, too, that
whoever ceases to be at heart a rebel, becomes inevitably a foe to
slavery, the sole source of treason. I know from positive knowledge,
that the non-slaveholding tillers of the soil of the South were never
at heart Disunionists, and that a large portion of them cannot be
awed or cowed into sympathy for Secession;—and I know
equally well that it is possible to reconcile the North and South.


There are thousands in the South who love their country, her
Union, and her Flag.” He further states —“ Much is said of the
impolicy and mischief of subjugation ; how it will make the South
hate the North, &c.; well, lam a specimen of the article in ques-
tion, —a subjugated rebel —but I have no hatred to the North. One
thing more I can unhesitatingly state, that the President’s procla-
mation of freedom has saved the South from negro insurrection and
massacre ; that, but for the knowledge that they were, ere long, to
be freed by the Government, the slaves would have risen at several
points.” |le concludes —“ God be praised that America is now on
the high road to immediate and universal Freedom.
Third —The case of the Confederates as given by themselves—.
“ Great God, ’tis not from Thee that spring
Oppression, hate, and deadly strife.”
It is generally acknowledged, that persons best know their own
case, and can most feelingly set forth their own grievances. Well,
let the Confederates submit their’s, from which, I think, it
must be self-evident to the most prejudiced, that slavery is behind
the scene, and connected with every link in the chain. .
The following is the Confederate declaration of causes for re-
bellion, as given in their own words, in their own public journal,
the Richmond Examiner, immediately after the election of Mr.
Lincoln—
-Ist.—The Presidential Election has now resulted in the triumph
of Abolitionism, and Slavery fanaticism, and has lifted to the Chief
Magistracy, a man pledged to carry on, and if possible to complete
the warfare of free labour against our own divine rights of slave
labour.
2nd.—ln the pause after the struggle, and before the enemy
takes the posessiqn of the Government, it now behoves us to strike
the blow, and not oply look the danger in the face, but in the spirit
of men who know their rights, dare now maintain them at any and
all hazards, and happily we are prepared to do so.
3rd, —Being now convinced that our rights cannot be maintained,
if the Union be preserved, we are now bound to choose between a
submission, and a separation from those who persistently seek to
violate our interests.
4th.—The president elect will now claim to abolish slavery in
the new territories, and other places ceded to the United States.
To abolish United States slave-trade, and thus cut off the Northern
slave States from their profits of production, and the Southern from
their supply of labour.
sth.—He will seek to repel qll further submission of the slave
states, and will still advocate negro equality, and doubtless make it
the ground of positive legislation, hostile to the Southern States.
6th.—He is opposed to protection to slave property on the high
•ess, and he has justified the same as piracy, and he will now be in
s’povitidu *n give effect to his views.


7th.—He will permit, in our midst, emissaries of incendiarism
to corrupt our slaves, and induce them to run off from their owners
to the free states.
Bth.—His views will.have a tendency to extend fanaticism in our
own borders, and by aid furnished by emigrant aid societies under
state patronage, and by funds furnished by foreign enemies in
Canada and Great Britain, will perpetually interfere with our
rights.
9th.—He has doubtlessly a plan for the abolition of slavery
everywhere. To rescue slaves at all hazards; form associations
to establish presses, to use the vote and ballot, to appeal to non-
slaveholders, and detach them from slave-holders in slave states,
to communicate with the slaves, to encourage anti-slavery emigrants
to the south and west, to seize other property of slaveholders, to
compensate for the cost of running off their slaves, to force emanci-
pation by all means; especially by limiting, harrasing, and frown-
ing upon slavery in every mode and form; and finally by the
Executive, by Congress, by the postal service, and in every way to
agitate without ceasing, until the Southern States shall be aban-
doned to their fate, and worn down, shall be compelled to surrender
and emancipate their slaves.
10th.—The abolitionist cause, assails us from the pulpit, the
press, and the school-room ; it divides all sects and religions, as
well as parties, it denounces slave-holders as degraded by the
lowest immoralities, insults them in every form, and holds them up
to the scorn of mankind. It has now a majority in the Congress,
and will soon have by the new census, a majority of the Senate, and
will thus obtain the chief executive power. It has positively
announced its purpose of total abolition in the States and every-
where ; as well as in the territories and districts and other places
ceded.
11th.—For twenty-four years this agitation has been steadily
increasing, until it has now secured to its aid, the power of the
common government. They who have elected such a man to the
high office of President of the United States, have long encouraged
and assisted thousands of our slaves to leave their owners; and
those who remain, have been incited to continue discontent, by
emissaries, books, pictures, and the like, The man they have
elected is to be intrusted with the administration of the govern-
ment, because he has declared that the government cannot endure
permanently, half slave, and half free; and that the public mind
must rest in the belief, that slavery is in the course of ultimate
extinction.
12th.—It thus seems that the declared policy is a settled and
determined hostility to our social fabric.
13th.—The time therefore has now come to stand by our arms,
and not to give the enemy time to collect their strength, and wield
the powers of government against us, by waiting for any further
“ overt act."
Therefore, be it thus resolved :
' Ist. —That the election of Abram Lincoln to the presidency upon


the principles avowed by the black abolitionist party, is in our
opinion, a virtual overthrow of our social, legal, and Divine
rights.
2nd.—That the idea of submission by the South to the rule of
such a man and such a party, should be repudiated from one end of
our borders to the other, and now let it be so.
Such are the causes of the rebellion as given by the Confederates
themselves, from which I trust all persons will see irrefragable
proof of what the real point at issue is.
But some persons, without assigning any reasons or proofs,
assert that the war was forced upon the South. If these persons
will be only at the trouble to examine the foregoing declaration of
Confederate policy, and the testimony of H. S. Stephen, as
here submitted, they will surely see the case in a new light.
The following remarks of Alexander H. Stephen, were made to
the Georgia Convention, called to take into consideration the
secession of that state from the Union. Mr. Stephens opposed
secession until his State went for it, when he ceased opposition,
and supported the rebel cause. Mr. Stephens was among the
ablest statesmen of the South. His views against secession mark
the ability of the man, and brand with falsehood the charge often
made that this war was forced upon the South, and that they had
to fight to maintain their rights under the government; —
“ When we and our posterity shall see our lovely South desolated
by tbe demons of war, which this act of yours will inevitably
invite and call forth ; when our green fields of waving harvests
shall be trodden down by the murderous soldiery and fiery car of
war sweeping over our land ; our temples of justice laid iu ashes ;
all the horrors and desolations of war upon us; who but this con-
vention will be held responsible for it ? and who but him who shall
have given his vote for this unwise and ill-timed measure shall be
held to strict account for this suicidal act by the present generation,
and probably cursed and execrated by posterity for all coming time,
for the wide and desolating ruin that will inevitably follow this act
you now propose to perpetrate.
Pause, I entreat you, and consider for a moment what reasons
you can give that will even satisfy yourselves in calmer moments —
what reasons you can give to fellow sufferers in the calamity that
it will bring upon us ? What reasons can you give to the nations
of the earth to justify it ? They will be the calm and deliberate
judges in this case ; and to what cause or one overt act can you
point, on which to rest the plea of justification ? What right has
the North assailed ? What interest of the South has been invaded ?
What justice has been denied ? and what claim founded in justice
and right has been withheld ? Can either of you to-day name one
governmental act of wrong deliberately and purposely done by the
Government at Washington, of which the South has a right to
complain ? I challenge the answer ! While on the other hand,
let me show the facts, (and believe me, gentlemen, I am not here
the advocate of the North, but I am here the friend—the firm friend
and lover of the South and her institutions, and for this reason I


speak thus plainly and faithfully to yours, mine, and every other
man’s interest, the words of truth and soberness,) of which I wish
you to judge, and I will only state facts, which are clear and un-
deniable, and which now stand as records authentic in the history
of our country.
When we of the South demanded the slave trade or the importation
of Africans for the cultivation of our lands, did they not yield-tlio
right for twenty years ? When we asked the three-fifths represen-
tation in Congress for our slaves was it not granted ? When we
asked and demanded the return of any fugitive from justice, or the
recovery of those persons owing labor or allegiance, was it not
incorporated in the Constitution ? and again ratified and strength-
ened in the Fugitive Slave Law, of 1850 ?
Do you reply that in many instances they have violated this
compact, and have not been faithful to their engagements ? As
individuals and local communities they may have done so; but not
by the sanction of Government, for that has always been true to
Southern interests. Again, gentlemen, look at another fact; when
we have asked that more territory should he added, that we might
spread the institution of slavery, have they' not yielded to our
demands, and given us Louisiana, Florida, and Texas, out of which
four States have been carved, and ample territory for four more
to be added in due time, if you, by this unwise and impolitic act
do not destroy this hope, and, perhaps, by it lose all, and have
your last slave wrenched from you by stern military rule, as South
America and Mexico were; or by the vindictive decree of a
universal emancipation which may reasonably be expected to
follow ?
But, again, gentlemen, what have we to gain by this pro-
posed change of our relation to the General Government? We
have always had the control, and can yet, if we remain in it,
and are as united as we have been. We have had a majority
of the Presidents chosen from the South, as well as the control
and management of those chosen from the North. We have had
sixty years of Southern Presidents to their twenty-four, thus
controlling the Executive department. So of the Judges of the
Supreme Court, we have had eighteen from the South, and but
eleven from the North; although nearly four-fifths of the judicial
business has arisen in the free states, yet a majority of the
Court has always been from the South. This we have required
so as to guard against any interpretation of the Constitution un-
favourable to us. In like manner, we bave been equally watchful
to guard our interests in the legislative branch of government.
In choosing the presiding Presidents (pro tern) of the Senate, we
have had twenty-four and they eleven. While the majority of
the Representatives, from their greater population, have always
been from the North, yet we have generally secured the Speaker,
because be, to a great extent, shapes and controls the legislation
of the country. Nor have we had less control in every depart-
ment of the General Government. Attorney-Generals we had
fourteen, while the North had hut five. Foreign Ministers we had


eighty-six, and they but fourty-four. While three-fourths of the
business which demands diplomatic agents abroad is clearly from
the North, from their greater commercial interests, yet we have
had the principal embassies so as to secure the world’s markets for
our cotton, tobacco, and sugar, on the best possible terms. We
have had a vast majority of the higher offices of both army and
navy, while a larger portion of the soldiers and sailors were drawn
from the North. Equally so of Clerks, Auditors and Comptrollers
filling the Executive department; the records show that fox the
last fifty years of the three thousand thus employed, we have had
more than two-thirds, while we have had but one-third of the
white population of the Republic.
Again, look at another item, and one, be assured, in which we
have a great and vital interest; it is that of revenue, or means of
supporting government. From official documents, we learn that a
fraction over three-fourths of the revenue collected for the support
of the Government has uniformly been raised from the North.
Pause now, while you can, gentlemen, and contemplate care-
fully and candidly these important items. Look at another neces-
sary branch of Government, and learn from stem statistical facts
how matters stand in that department. I mean the Mail and Post
Office privileges that we now enjoy under the General Government
as it has been for years past. The expense for the transportation
of the mail in the Free States was, by the report of the Postmaster-
General, for 1860, a little- over 13,000,000 dollars, while the
income was 19,000,000 dollars. But in Slave States the transporta-
tion of the mail was 14,716,000 dollars, while the revenue from the
mail was 8,000,265, leaving a deficit of 6,715,735 dollars, to be
supplied by the North for our accommodation, and without which
we must have been entirely cut off from this most essential branch
of the Government.
Leaving out of view, for the present, the countless millions of
dollars you. must expend in a war with the North; there will be
thousands and tens of thousands of your sons and brothers slain in
battle, and offered up as sacrifices upon the altar of ambition, —and
for what, we ask again ? Is it for the overthrow of the American
Government, established by our common ancestry, cemented and
built up by their sweat and blood, and founded on the broad prin-
ciples of Right, Justice and Humanity ? And as such, I must
declare here, as I have often done before, and which has been
repeated by the greatest and wisest statesmen and patriots of this
and any other lands, that it is the best and freest Government—the
most equal in its rights—the most just in its decisions—the most
lenient in its measures, and the most inspiring in its measures to
elevate the race of men—that the sun of heaven ever shone upon.
Now, for you to attempt to overthrow such a Government as
this, under which we have lived for more than three-quarters of a
century—in which we have gained our wealth, our standing as a
nation, our domestic safety, while the elements of peril around us,
with peace and tranquillity, accompanied with unbounded prosperity
and rights unassailed—is the height of madness, folly, and wicked- 1
ness, to which I can neither lend my sanction nor my vote.’’


Notwithstanding this unequivocal declaration of the policy
and incontestable evidence of the Confederates, in which any other
cause but that of slavery is unmistakeably repudiated, there are
persons who attempt to make an apology for the slaveholders
—even apologies which the Confederates themselves disown.
That the issue of slavery is alone involved in the present struggle,
I may add, also, the testimony of Mr Dicey, the recent eminent
European traveller in America. He says, “ The thing that sur-
prises me most in England, is to be told that slavery has nothing
to do with the American war. Why, from the day I set foot in
America, to the day I left it, I never heard of anything except the
question of slavery, and every traveller must confirm this opinion.
During my whole stay in the United States, I never took up a
newspaper—and, sure enough, I took up many—without seeing
the slave-question, in some form or other, discussed, and showing
clearly that the Confederates feel that slavery is doomed, unless
they can get power to extend slavery beyond the Gulf States, by
obtaining possession of the Border States, and the territories
west of the Mississippi.”
Well, it would evidently appear that if the war has done no
other good, it has effected this much, that the case of the slave
has been forced upon the conscience of the people, and that crimi-
nal apathy, which acquiesced merely in the existence of
an admitted evil, has received its deathblow. Stories about
tariff grievances about aristocratic- incompatibility to put
up with democratic institutions about difference of race
and political government, are mere inventions to suit a certain
portion of the public, at which their authors must have
laughed inwardly, to see the ruse swallowed so willingly.
Dicey says, also, “It was my fortune to see a good deal of
Southern men and newspapers in the States, and the one cause
of complaint against the North, was always, and alone, the
slave-question! If, then, slavery was not the cause of secession,
it is impossible to explain the limits of the secession movement,
Massachusetts is not more different from Georgia, in geographical
position, commercial interests, and social character, than Ten-
nessee is from Louisiana, or Virginia from Alabama. Every
Free State is loyal to the Union. Every Slave State where
slavery is nominal, has been disloyal, openly or covertly. The
inference is obvious and undeniable.”
Now, the Southern leaders have shown too much acuteness,
to make it probable that they risked everything to avoid an
imaginary danger. They seceded from the Union, solely and
avowedly because slavery was in danger from the North, and,
doubtless, they knew the real state of affairs much better than
those partizans who assert that slavery had nothing to do with
the secession. They understood the position fully. They knew
perfectly well that the Republican party had no intention of inter-
fering with slavery as it existed; but they knew also, that, to
secure the permanent existence of slavery in the Union, two things


•were essential—tlie supremacy of the slave power iu the central
government, and the power of indefinite expansion, and that unless
these two objects were kept secured, the extension of slavery would
be prohibited, and would thus be doomed. The system of cotton
production, under slave labor, exhausts the soil so rapidly, that
slavery would be starved out, without a constant supply of fresh
ground to occupy.
Dicey says, “ I hear constantly that the South only wants to
establish its independence. If the European powers could offer
to-morrow, to guarantee the independence of the Gulf States, the
offer would be rejected without the slightest hesitation, unless the
Confederacy could be secured also the possession of the vast
regions that lie west of the Mississippi, whereon to ground new
slave states and territories.”
The North is fighting against, and the South is fighting for,
the power of extending slavery across the American continent.
And if this was all that could be said, it is clear on which side
must be the sympathies of anyone who really and honestly believes
that slavery is an evil and a sin. But this is not all that can be
said. The present war is working directly for the overthrow of
slavery where it exists already, and this must be evident to all,
ever since the war commenced, if facts are only looked at.
Fourth.—The Success of the North. At the present, we find that
the Northern armies hold complete possession of Maryland and Mis-
souri, with great portions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee.
They hold the greater part of Mississippi, with all the towns and
forts on the great river, from the Gulf of Mexico to its source.
Sherman holds the capital (Atlanta) of Georgia, and a great por-
tion of that state ; Grant is securely entrenched in Eastern Virginia,
and is busily engaged cutting off the railways which bring supplies to
the cities of Petersburgh and Richmond. There are Federal armies
and fleets at Charleston. Beaufort, Mobile, Newburn, and on the
coast of Florida; and the whole Confederacy is blockaded, from
the River Grande to the Potomac. The South has now, happily,
very little more to lose, and if it continues the struggle much
longer, it will have to abandon Texas, and its hope of the vast terri-
tories that lie beyond the Mississippi. The progress of the anti-
slavery movement has been marvellously rapid.
Slavery is abolished once, and for ever, in every inch of ground
now occupied by the North, and every plantation that comes into
the control of the North, the negroes are free, and now there are
upwards of one million and a half of negroes working under free
labor, and free soil, and the result has proved, in every' particular,
perfectly satisfactory, both to the employed and the employer.
The negroes do their work better, and more of it, and the planta-
tions realise higher returns than slave plantations ever did. By
the proclamation, the Federal Government has done everything
that it could legally do, with reference to slavery.
But whoever yet has heard or seen any address or proclamation
of the Southern leaders, in which the possibility of emancipation
was even hinted at, in which, on the contrary, the indefinite


extension of slavery was rather held forward as the reward. That
the social system, based on slavery must fall to pieces, is obvious
enough. If a new lease of existence had been given to slavery,
and vast additional territories added to the dominions of the
South, the cause of slavery would have spread its roots over
the width and length of the new world.
Those, then, who wish the South to succeed, wish slavery to
be extended and strengthened. There is no possibility of avoiding
this conclusion, and, therefore, we ought to spurn the idea that
the South deserves our sympathy.
One word in reference to the charge made by Southern sym-
pathizers, that the Northerners themselves, do not admit the
negroes on an equality with themselves. Dicey, to whom we have
before referred, very properly puts the case thus—“ Anybody who
knows England and Englishmen, must be awmre that if we had an
immense foreign population among ourselves, belonging to an ignorant,
half savage, and inferior race, too numerous to be objects of sentimen-
tal curiosity, too marked in form and feature to be absorbed gradu-
ally, our feeling towards them would be very much that of the
Northerners towards the negro. The sentiment which dictates the
advertisement so common in our newspapers, of No Irish need
apply, is, in principle, very much the same as that which, in the
North, objects to the contact of the negro.
Moreover, in all the Northern States, after all is said and done,
the negro is treated like a man, not like a beast of burden. The
black man has exactly the same legal rights and privileges as the
white, and the growth of public opinion is in favor of a more
kindly treatment of the negro. Certain it is, that the men of color
in the Free States prefer their treatment, however inconsiderate,
to the considerate care of slaveowners.
There is nothing easier than for an emancipated or runaway
slave, who has experienced the vanity of freedom, to recover the
joys of slavery. He has only got to appear as a vagrant in a slave
state, and the state will provide him with a master, free of expense;
yet not a single instance is known of a slave availing himself
of this privilege. Admitting the very worst that could be said of
the condition of the Free negroes in the North, a humane man will
sure enough conclude that, on the whole, it is better for the world,
the American negroes should die out like the Indians, than that
they should go on increasing and multiplying under slavery, and
thus perpetuating an accursed system to generations yet unborn.”
Well, liberty has, in the past history of the world’s battles,
triumphed over oppression, and ever since the attack by the South,
on Fort Sumter, the Northern frontier has advanced, and the
Southern receded. The progress of the Federal armies has been
slow enough, but all they have taken they have kept. Not a
single town, of any importance, has been permanently recaptured
by the Confederates; not a single victory has ever been followed
up by the Confederates; and no Southern army has ever succeeded in
occuping any portion of the Free State soil. The forte of the Con-
federates has been, from the commencement, in making sudden


dashes, with fiendish ferocity, but, like Apollyon, has in each
struggle been forced to flee.
'There can he no peace till the cause of tear is removed. The
South must be reorganised and reconstituted. The slaveowners—-
some three hundred thousand in all—must be virtually removed;
■ —whether to ruin, exile, or confiscation, matters little. Their
place must be supplied by capitalists from the Free North, and,
slavery onee abolished, labor will cease to be dishonorable in the
South. Emigration will pour in. A social revolution must be
accomplished, and a new system of society constituted in the South
in which slavery has no part or share. This is now the motto of
the North, and if the war continues, it must continue as a war for
emancipation.
“ God, to the human soul,
And all the spheres that roll,
Wrapped by Ilia spirit, in their robes of light,
Hath said : 1 The primal plan
Of all the world and man,
Is forward ! Progress is yuur law—your right.’
“ God, all the orbs that roll
Binds to one common goal—
One source of light and life —his radiant throne.
In one fraternal mind
All races would he hind.
Till every man in man a brother own.”
Fifth. — The North iustified in entering upon defensive war, and
liberating the slaves.
‘ 0 God, accept, and let thy mercy crown
This contest, holy in thy sight,
And thine be all 'he vast renown
And America the victory of right.”
Strange to say, whenever the sympathisers of the South
are unable to deny the probability of emancipation being
brought about by the war, they immediately begin to lament
the horrors of “ this wicked contest”. Now, that all war is an
awful thing, and that a war amongst kinsmen is the most
awful of wars, must be fully admitted. But, supposing war
is justifiable when the cause is good, and admitting that the cause
of the North is good, to emancipate those that are in the bonds of
slavery, it is clearly pretence to maunder about the lamentable
miseries and horrors of this particular war, as if every war had
hitherto been exempt from them. There has been no national
demand for vengeance, such as was raised in England at the Indian
mutiny. ExPresident Buchanan now lives atVv’heatlands, unmolested
and unnoticed. Avowed secessionists now reside in New York
and Boston, with as much security as though they were in Paris or
London.
Never, since the revolt of Lucifer, has there been a more
causeless rebellion against a justly constituted and beneficial


government. Never has civilization known a more reckless abuse
of its prerogatives to demoralise and cripple its own development.
It wag openly asserted by Southern sympathizers, that the
abolitionists believed that the slaves would rise upon their masters,
as soon as a proclamation of freedom was issued, but which asser-
tion 'has been unequivocally demonstrated, as being perfectly
erroneous. The abolitionists never believed anything of the kind.
Their estimate and belief were Just the opposite, for, after the first
outbreak of the slaveholders’ rebellion, the abolitionists, and all
other sensible people, advised the emancipation of the slaves as an
expedient and needful war measure, they were answered by the
Southern sympathizers, that emancipation would produce insurrec-
tion ; that the slaves, once freed, would straightway kill, burn,
and destroy their owners —and that pillage, bloodshed, and riot
would prevail throughout the whole of the plantations.
But the abolitionists knew, and said, that whatever else might
produce slave insurrections, emancipation never would nor could.
For while the world stands and human nature as God made it,
nothing that can ever be done to a slave will be half so safe as the
act of setting him free.
Insurrections against slavery have been many; insurrections
against liberty, none , except the insurrection of the slaveholders.
If the slaves have for so many long years born their wrongs
patiently, will they not boar their rights as patiently ?
The dictum that emancipation conduces to insurrection was
proved a fallacy thirty years ago. For when Great Britain was
shaken with the question of emancipation in the West Indies, and
when a bill had passed Parliament fixing Ist August, 1834, as the
glorious day, the freedom of England was made thick with clamor-
ous action of the enemies of freedom, who predicted that, the
moment the slaves were free, the islands would quake with tumult,
and the freed men would wreak a sudden and bloody vengeance
upon their life-long oppressors. It was a fortnight before the
doings of that memorable day could be reported back to England.
At length, when Fowell Buxton, on going to the Post Office, found
that the mail had arrived from Jamaica, he took his packet of
letters, papers, and reports, and hastened with them into the woods,
where, with no one but God to be witness of his emotions, he tore open
the seal and read, with tears in his eyes—not a record of fire and
slaughter—but the beautiful story of the slaves who, filled with
gratitude for their freedom, assembled in their chapels on the night
before emancipation, spending the hours in religious exercises until
the clock struck twelve, when, in a spontaneous impulse, whole
multitudes fell upon their knees, and with sobs and tears, and joy
unspeakable, gave thanks to God for that liberty which is sweeter
than life.
Well, happy reflection, the British slaves and the American
slaves received, and are now receiving, their boon of freedom in
one and the same spirit of gratitude, which will be for the purifica-
cation of America, like England, from slavery, the greatest of
national sins.


All true Americans know well that slavery has ever been the
cause of discord and contention between the North and South, and
that slavery has too often menaced the integrity of the States, and
at last has rent those States in twain ; —and all know equally well
that no solid peace or future union, or any quiet and durable
nationality can exist, while slavery remains—that it has ever made
merchandise of the bodies and souls of men, women, and children
—that however man may endeavour to guide this war to the
advantage of a favorite idea or sagacious policy of slavery, the
Almighty is directing it surely and steadily for the purification of
America, and all true Britons, I trust, will soon know and believe
that in the interest of humanity,—in the interest of America —in
the interest of England, all Europe, and the world—the success of
the North is the grand end for which all should hope.
“ They know not fear, for what have they to fear
Who all have counted, and have all resigned,
And laid their lives a solemn offering down
For laws, for truth, for freedom, —for mankind.”
“ Let freemen’s banner wave
Till there be not a slave—
Show thyself strong and brave
Unto the end.”
Sixth.—God on the side of the North.
“ Thine is the battle, mighty Lord ;
The skill, the wisdom, all are Thine.”
God never took the side of oppression and iniquity yet; will he
do it now ? He never forsook men that were giving battle for
liberty and righteousness ; will he do it now ? Moses, from the
shores of the Red Sea, and beside the smitten rock, testifies to the
constancy of the Almighty arm. From out of the lion’s den, at
Babylon, comes the same inspiring testimony; the barren solitudes
of the Brook Cherith, and the crags of rocky Patmos are vocal
with it too. “ The Lord stood with me,” echoes Paul, in the
Judgment Plall. “ And with me,” re-echoes Martin Luther, from
the Imperial Diet. “ And with me,” responds John Bunyan, from
Bedford Gaol. “ And with me,” whispered Halyburton, from his
couch of suffering. “ And with me,” sounds from the tent of
Havelock, that man who was every inch a soldier, yet every inch a
Christian. “ And with us,” respond the noble army of martyrs,
confessors, missionaries, reformers, and heroes for the truth and
liberty. And is it not equally certain that God will be with the
sacred cause of freedom of the abolitionists of North America?
Can there be a more sublime spectacle than a nation that is
being disenthralled from the demon of slavery ? Can any person
imagine anything more noble to one who is solicitous for a nation’s
freedom—than the spectacle of four millions of men groping their
way towards the rising light of liberty ? Some men look upon
these benighted beings, only as compared with themselves, and say
that they are an inferior race ; that they are beneath them, and it
would never be possible to bring them to industry and culture, and


self-care. Whether they can be made equal with them or not, we
do. not care. It is of little consequence whether a man is of a
higher or of a lovver class. A man is not to be judged by his
position in society. The question is simply this : Is he a rational
being ? —ls he he a free agent ?—ls he accountable ?—ls he im-
mortal ? Has he the ordinary motives of thrift ?—ls he tending
toward a home of immortality and glory in the world to come ?
This is the question ; not whether he is inferior to us or not; but
whether he has before him a sublime destiny, which entitles him
to the same consideration which is due to any other of God’s
creatures. It does not hurt us if another man knows more than
we do, or is superior to us in other respects. There are many men
who are richer than we are, and may continue to be so, but we
have no cause to envy them. There are thousands of men who are
superior to us in intelligence, skill, &0., but none need be dis-
content on that account. We know our own rank and position,
but we need not feel that we are hurt because it is lower than the
position and rank of some others. And if these poor slaves are at
the bottom of society, and if they are to abide there by reason of
their inferiority, yet, since they are the children, they are entitled
to the rights of manhood, and this is all that is asked. But this
they have been denied, and that not in the sneering infidelity of
the individual, but by the formal enactment of law itself.
By the statutes of the Slave States they are denied the attributes
of manhood, and are declared to be, to all intents and purposes,
Cattle. Is it not a sight that inspires every heart with joy and
gladness to see a prospect of four millions of men finding their way
to liberty and manhood ; and shall we not be filled with gratitude
on beholding the realization, of the promises of the Gospel, in
seeing the poor and unfriended African redeemed and brought out
into the light of liberty.
Oh ! what must be that man’s inferior condition who sits by,
carping, ridiculing, and grudging such a glorious result.
Could an event be more full of good, more auspicious with hope
for the future, more significant for the world’s progress, than the
spectacle of four millions of men sitting at the feet of liberty,
clothed in their right minds.
“ Thou Son of Afric, toiling sad and slow,
Beneath the load thou wert compelled to share,
In that faint hour, how little didst thou know
The meaning of the burden thou didst hear.”
“ Walk they in darkness where Christ’s feet have led ?
And in his suffering have they fellowship ?
Patience, ye weary, cross-worn sons of woe,
Ye may be nearer to him than ye know.”


CHAPTER II.
First.—Progress of sentiments and sympathies.
'* Look, all Britons, who are wont to sneer,
And Europe now behold;
See in America, patriotic zeal
That Sred the men of old.”
Revolutions are not always ushered in with heat of drum and
blare of trumpets, nor accompanied by salvos and shotted cannon,
and volley's of deadly musketry. Though they never come absolutely
“ without observation,” some of the greatest in history have been of
the victories of peace, though “ not less renowned than war.”
Such was the carrying of the Reform Bill in England, by the
will of the English people, over the heads and in spite of a rotten
borough House of Commons, and a borough-mongering House of
.l ords. Ever since 1832 the House of Lords has been virtually
deposed from its pre-eminence as a co-ordinate branch of the Govern-
ment. It can no longer block the wheels of Reform when the
nation is determined upon one—it can only act as a drag.upon them.
When King William IV. consented to create eighty peers in one
batch, and the Lords permitted the Reform Bill to pass, that they
might avoid being thus defeated, the independence of the Upper
House ceased to exist. The Lords know, and the people know,
that when the nation is resolved upon any change in the essence of
the Government, or in any of its incidents, they can only protest
against, and delay what they cannot hinder from coming to pass.
This principle is equally applicable to America. The agitation for
freeing the long oppressed negroes has fairly established itself, and
no power on earth can prevent its onward progress and speedy con-
summation, and which must, in the same manner as in England,
gradually but effectually modify the aristocratic system of Southern
society, and which will diffuse the general prosperity of the nation.
The people of the Free States are now thoroughly imbued with
sentiments of liberty for the slaves, and what can hinder its onward
march. Now they see more than ever the revolting deformity of
slavery, and the sin and folly of slaveholders, and at last the long-
oppressed and down-trodden poor white trash of the Slave States
are calling for redress.
There are now unmistakeable signs of a gathering storm, which
will sweep the last vestige of slavery from the land. And, oh !
what can be more desirable in seeking to carry universal liberty
throughout the world, than that there should ever be a full and
cordial alliance between England and America.
England, because she is a Christian nation, and has the
guardianship of the dearest principles of civil and religious liberty,
ought to be friendly with every nation, and with every tongue.
America is the proper and natural ally of Great Britain. England
finds in America, in greater extent than in any other nation in the
world, her own blood, her own language, her own children ; and in
the great conflicts of the future, when civilization is to be extended,


•When commerce is to be free round the globe, end to carry with it
religion and general progress, the two flags should be flying
from every ship, and if Britons and Americans are one in civilization,
one in religion; and one substantially in faith, by all means let them
be one in national policy, and one in every enterprise for the further-
ance of the gospel, and for the happiness of mankind.
It has been very difficult for many persons to understand why it
is that all Europe does not promptly and earnestly enter their pro-
test against the rebel movement of the slaveholding States of America,
and why every Briton does not enthusiastically show the fullest
sympathy for the Federal or Free States.
Well, American sentimehts have had powerful influence on the
large masses of Europe ih the past, and have equally so at present,
and must act an important part in the future. It may be well, then
to consider what American sentiments are, as distinguished from
European. We ihay observe that we shall not look for the dis-.
tinguishlng sentiments in the material aspect of the nations.
The climate, soil, mines, rivers, harbors, &c., are happy gifts of
nature. The people had nothing to do in making them, except Only
in inheriting their blessings. American industry and wealth are
marked by characteristics, but they do not distinguish them, fof
other nations are industrious, and other people are wealth-making,
and we ire not to look to American material prosperity for
American sentiments,- since they divide these things with all nations,
of the civilized world.
American mechanic' arts, discoveries, ingenuities, and baild skills,
do not either characterise them. We must look for American
Sentiments as distinguished from continental European, nearer to
the sources of their national life, than any external and material
prosperity. What then are the distinguishing sentiments ?
\Ve believe they are the radical sentiments held by Americans,
and incorporated into society, and into Civil Government—radical
sentiments of the nature of man, of the nature of his rights, and of
the nature of the Society which he forms. Americans hold fast to
liberty, civil and personal, of the individual man ; but not as
something for which he may be prepared, for liberty is not an
attainment; not as a reward of conduct; not as an honor conferred
by society, nor as a prerogative given by Government.
Americans hold to the right of liberty in the individual as
Something inherent.
“ Man must be than in all that makes a man—
The crowning Work of God’s Creative plan.”
Liberty is not merely a right, but a necessity. With leas thaiV
liberty, man is le-s than man, and ho is man as Gnd thought of
him when he meant to create him, only when he has been
thoroughly developed and rounded out in all his attributes in the
atmosphere' of liberty. It is that without which nature cannot
evolve symmetrically and perfectly.” Liberty i« the rue-
diuaa of human existence. The soul made to
w


be hr'althy and harmless, powerful and benignant in all
its powers, and developed in full regulated liberiy.. Libtlriy
is required for it, just as light is lor the eye structure,
just as sound is for the ear, just as food is for the tongue,
jtist as air is for the lungs, and although there organs may exist
without their appropriate element and medium, they exist imper-
fectly so, and though roan may exist without liberty, he is but, in
Such a sta'e, a fragmentary man ; whereas the perfect and ideal
man cannot exist without these, and these from Childhood.
“ The God of mind made all minds free,
Its birthright then, is liberty.”
Liberty, then, is the normal condition of every faculty, and of
the whole soul of man. It belongs to all who inherit a moral
nature, and to withhold it, is to defraud a man of his nature, since
it is a part of him. Eelow this there is nothing. This is funda-
mental, and from this arrived at principle, fundamental to the naturg
iif roan, and derived historically and philosophically from the teach-
ing of Christianity, sprang the American first government, and this
Principle is the seminal point ot American institutions. American
governments were the first, I believe, in the history of human
governments, which weie deduced legitimately and logically front
a foregoing principle. Other Governments were clustered eXpedi-
ents atid experiments, one added to anoiher, as men found thbir
way along. It was for the American ancestors to strike out d
theory of hutnah nature and human rights, and then come across
the sea to encase that theory in institutions, and fiom it to deduce
a government, and they did it. The Ameiican Government was
then deduced from 0 foregoing principle, and 1 believe it is the only
one of the sort that has been known in the history of mankind,
springing from the idea of human right belonging to the individual,
as a part of his creative nature. It is the great Ameiican doctrine
that civil society must be organised, so as to secure and defend the
rights and the attributes df its individual citizens, and that a state
iS strong in the degree in which its private citizens are strong, and
that a state is weak in proportion as its intregal parts are deprived
of liberty.
The European doctrine in the main, makes the state strong
•through its government members. The European sentiment bolds
that the state is the great end ; men are the bricks that, with trowel
and mortar, are put in to nmke the slate strong. The American
sentiment is, that the state is but a servant, and that it serves the
individual citizens. For that it exists, and it is strong and good,
just in the degree in which it defends the immunities and privileges,
and rights, and dignities, and purities of the individual citizens*
; who are the ends for which it is created, and all the laws, and all
the institutions, and all the economy' of civil society is but in
blessed servitude for the civil man; and ih this is the strength of
society in America, that it takes care of, and nourishes the indi-
vidual man, and makes the state strong; while the European


*entim«its neglect, or but little attend to the man, in its anxiety to
make the state strong, which is exactly reverse to that of America.
The next American sentiment is, that civil governments derive
their powers directly from the citizens, and are . held directly
responsible to the people for the exercise of these powers, and
have to exercise those powers purely and simply in the interest of
those from whom they are borrowed. The well-being of society
and government, according to these views, demand that the people
shall be morally and intellectually educated, so as both to know
what things are the best and wisest, and how the best and wisest
things may be secured and maintained.
These are American sentiments, not because Americans dis-
covered them, but simply because they adopted them and clothed
them with political power, and because they have, more than any
where else, been successful there. Americans claim them because,
to a greater extent, they are recognised and employed in America
than in any other country.
“ The love of liberty with life is given,
And life itself the inferior gift of heaven.”— Drydm.
Now, in order to understand European feeling, it Is indespen-
?ably necessary to consider what the relation of these ideas is to
the structure of European society, to the principle of absolute
governments, and to the position of parties of Europe. And it is
eeough to say that if Americans are right, the principle govern-
ments of Europe are wrong. Europe may be divided into two
parts ; the upper and the lower. The upper part represents the
dynasties. They hold the wealth and, the power, and perhaps, for
the most part, the intelligence. The lower hplds neither the
wealth nor intelligence, comparatively speaking. They hold the
masses of men; and throughout Europe the masses of men are
Struggling for a higher manhood, and for political power; not that
they may be crowned and coroneted, but simply that they may have
room and influence to become more like men than they have been
permitted to be. And thus Europe is divided, if it may be so said,,
with one-fifth above the surface and four-fifths below. Well, the
upper fifth is against the free states, socially and politically at
least, while the lower four-fifths, as fast as they are instructed,
will be in favor of the free states. And why ? Because American
sentiments are radically subversive of monarchical sentiments ; and
because they are in affinity and sympathy with the real wants and
desires of the great mass of the struggling population of the con-
tinents.
It is not then surprising at all, that men who believe in thrones
and absolute governments, that men who believe that the people
were made to serve the government instead of the government the
people—that men who believe that God ordains kings and priests
to govern with hereditary and transmissible power—it is not sur-
prising that men who believe these things cannot accept American
sentiments. How, indeed, could they accept such sentiments
without being false to their own ? We have seen that material


health does not make a nation rich. The power of men to pro*
duce material wealth may make a nation rich; but material wealth
itself does not, and military power does not necessarily make a
nation strong. The power of citizenship to generate military
power may make a nation strong; but the mere existence of armies
does not. The triumphs of art and ingenuity do not necessarily
make a nation conspicuous. The living power of art and ingenuity
among the masses of men may make a nation conspicuous ; but
the triumphs of art and ingenuity do not. It is the living force,
and not the products of that force, that gives strength. It is not
so much what the hand does as what the hand has in it, the re-
served force to do, that makes the state strong. In short, it is the
wisdom, the virtue, the power, and the efficiency of the individual
citizens that make the state strong.
The individual citizens without wealth, without military power,
without the fruit of art and ingenuity, may generate these forces,
and then these exponents of power, with a living force behind
them, make the state strong. We are taught by Christianity to
take care of the individuals of society, and all of them beginning at
the bottom where the masses are, We are not to take cognizance
simply of the better specimens,—the better classes of men ;we are
to take cognizance of mankind. It was to the myriad masses at
the bottom of society that the gospel was preached, and was there
not philosophy in it, Divine philosophy,
For Christianity, in attempting to rebuild the world, atid
rebuild nations, act on the doctrine that the elements of strength
are in the individuals of the masses of men ; and it regards men as
dangerous, just in proportion as they are undeveloped; and as safe,
just in proportion as they are powerful, provided the power is that
which comes through intelligence and Christian virtue. And here
lies the difference between what we have named the American
sentiments of society, and the European idea of society; not that
part of the European idea of society which is now struggling for a
hearing and for influence—the reformatory part; but the ordinary
sentiment, and that which is embodied in thp prevalent govern-
ments abroad. We hold that the masses of men beipg thoroughly
educated, are the most trustworthy, and the easiest to govern.
The people of America trust men, and have founded their govern,
ments on trust; and they educate them that they may trust them,
Trust is the very root of their system of government. They take
all laws and say—“ They are safe with the masses of the people.”
They take all institutions, and say—“ They are safe with the
masses of the people.” The welfare, not only of civil life, but of
the framework of society, they regard as safer in the hands of the
common people than in the hands of the most select, refined, and
intelligent classes. The European sentiment says, these things
would not hp safe with the masses of men, and yet class govern-
ment has not been better in Europe or elsewhere. All that the
wisest men have been able to devise, has not been equal to the
instincts of the great masses of men in respect to those subjects
which belong to the great masses of men. Christianity tcacbe'a


,-us to trust men, and we trust them, by educating them in Chris-
tian principles; but monarchism, which is unchristian, teaches us
to distrust the people, and to attempt to govern them by keeping
.them in ignorance. We do not easily understand what is tire
strength that comes to the state from giving each one of its citizens
■ a well developed man.
As the fibres of the oak are formed from day to day, there is
the sound of the builder’s hammer, as the sap goes up and leaves
.its pulpy deposit, there is no sign of what this process means ; nor
could anyone, as the oak grows, particle by particle, fibtffeby fihufe,
and inch by inch, tell the strength of it; but by-and-bye, when the
storms come and reach out airy arms to wrestle with it, passing by,
bowling thronght it, and leaving it undisturbed, then we see the
proof of all the silent work that has been going on, in the tough-
ness and irresistible power of the oak. And though America takes
the Christian truth that the power of the state lies in its individual
citizens and makes the most of them, educating them, building them
up, and teaching them to present to the states the best gift which
it is in their power to bestow in their present position, their own
selves, equipped and armed with intelligence and virtue, that is
not understood till the test comes. And in this may be seen the
difference between society in the North, and society in the South.
It is not a difference between individual bravery ; it is not a differ-
ence between individual specimens of men; for the educated of
the South compare favourably with the educated in the North.
But in the North, society is educated and made strong, clear down
to the bottom, so that, on the day of trial, it fills the world with
astonishment by its resources. In the South, the bottom of society
is undeveloped, and fragile, and its resources are such that must
come to grief, and eternally perish.
Second. — Influence of the War.
“Emancipation sweeps swiftly o’er the land,
Sweeps o’er the bounding sea;
It echoes from each mountain top,
The anthem of the free ;
It snaps the chain which sin has forged,
It sings for liberty.”
America has been reared up in the sight of Europe, which it may
he said now, is not more than a hand’s reach from it. and all
that Americans do, and all that they are. and all that they intend
to become, is perfectly well understood to the common people, but
pestiferous to many of their rulers. For the realization of good
government among the people that govern themselves is a very
dangerous thing for Europe to behold. It is dangerous for Spain:
it is dangerous for Austria; it is dangerous for Prussia: it is
dangerous for Russia: it is dangerous—though less in some of
its developments there than elsewhere—in English society, to have
it not only suspected, and known, and proved, that there is no
jjovernment so stable, and so fruitful of good, as that govern nrent
'which spring* from the people. If oveithrow s their foundations.


Americans then, need not be surprised at all at England, not*
being in sympathy with them, especially if they remember that
their sentiments are really a chronic assault upon European senti-
ments.. Their very society life is a perpetual demolition, or a per-
petual tendency toward their foundations. The maintenance of a
Vast government so cheaply as theirs has been maintained is itself
a damaging thing. It is true that Americans do not interfere with
Britain, or any part of Europe directly ; they do not meddle with
European politics directly; yet every state in the American Union,
meddles with European politics indirectly, but not consciously.
They send no emisseries;—they promulgate no theories ;—but
they set an example. Summer meddles with winter, and liberty
meddles with oppression, all the world over. And can it be said
from year to year, from ten years to ten years, and from scores of
years to scores of years, to all the overtaxed and burdened people
of the continent, they are squandering millions'on governments,
that oppress them, while the Americans have 'only to pay a few
cheap thousands for a government that enriches them; can it bp
said that they do this and not affect Europe ? Is there one thing
that can be said to the common people of Europe that is so effica-
cious as this ? They point to that great nation which" is governed,
with so much justice, and at so little cost. This is an argument
that everybody understands, and nobody is able to answer. The
security of property, and the safety of the people, in a self-governed
community, are also vindicated by the example of the American
nation. One of the reasons-why the Americans are so mUqfa mis-
represented in this respect, is, that the Aristocracy of Europe are
willing that America shall not be understood to be happy and
secure. It is for their interests to represent that America is not
well governed, and that life and prosperity are not secure there.
The dignity and safety of making every American citizen an elector,
and a candidate for any office in the gift of the people, is most
potent moral influence, adverse to the dynasties of Europe. The
power of the American nation to defend itself, both against foreign
and civil war is likewise sharply inveighing against European
sentiments. No wonder that the advocates of absolutism
take sides against the free states of America; for just as time,
as prophecy, or fate, just as sure as there is a Providence or a God,
the continued example of the American people, in their prosperity
.under their government and under their American ideas, will com,-
pel Europe, from end to end, to reform. America, whose pros-
perity and peace, and wealth and power, have been a perpetual
commentary upon the government, and the condition of the
people, is at last under revolution. And why? Because it was
necessary for God to teach the people throughout the world one
lesson more—that a free, self-governed, virtuous people, can go
through a revolution and come out of it stronger than they went
into it.
America is not alone engaged in a contest for national existence,
and for the maintenance and potency of those progressive senti-
ments on which the American Government is founded, but the free


states of America are engaged in a conflict for principles. They
are engaged in a moral conflict. It is no small thing for a nation,
like America to stand for the world—for the common people of
every civilised nation on the globe, although they do not represent
the interests of the world. They are, however, identified with the,
struggling masses everywhere. And only against dynasties are the
free states arrayed in antagonism and prejudices. The free states
are, nevertheless, unconsciously; by a Divine Providence, made to
he witnesses and actors, not only in behalf of the whole American
continent, but in behalf of all civilized people of the earth. They
are standing for Poland as much as America; they are stand-
ing for Eussia ; they are standing for France ; they are standing
for Italy; they are standing for Prussia; they are standing for
Austria; they are standing for Hungary. The fate of the masses
generally is intimately associated with the fate of America.
These principles, though called American, are Divine and uni-
versal ; and they belong to America because they belong to all
mankind.
Now, the conduct of the people of the free states of America
■will have the most important effect, not alone upon themselves, hut
upon the whole world. Should the people of these free states
prove unable to hear the responsibilities of the great conflict now
going on; should factions break out, and divisions ensue, and
selfishness undermine patriotism; should they show themselves
unworthy of the great Cause which God has devolved upon them,
they would only be a great part of the sufferers. Should the
republican form of Government find iself unequal to the functions
of Government; should it Say to the world—“ The wisest, the best
conducted, and the freest people are capable of maintaining a
free government,” the world would have the shadow of a hundred
years of darkness fall upon it and the hopes of mankind indefinitely.
On the other hand, the power of the people, to make and administer
a government for themselves being proved in America, never
Would stop there.
No part of the American example has been more
admirable, or, where it has been known, more efficacious, than
the simple, ready obedience, which has been rendered throughout
all the free states to law and magistracy. For it has been
important to answer the slanders of European detractors, by
showing that republicanism does hot lead to anarchy, and that
self-government is a better government than any which is enforcd
against the will of the people ; and has not this been done ? It
may be safely said that there has not been another people on the
globe, probably, so thoroughly committed by their feelings and
their pride, to their side of the case, that, when their magistrates
and officers decided against them, would have given up, and swal-
lowed their pride and their feelings without a word of complaint,
and said—•“ If the Government SO determine, the people so deter-
mine.


The power of the American Government against external*
dangers is not doubted, but it is vehemently doubted whether the
American people have power to bear up against internal corrup-
tion. They are to prove whether they have power or not. This is
a part of the great experiment which they are now making—the
testing of the power of the Government to develope wealth and
knowledge, and a high Christian civilization, under such institu-
tions as it has. The testimony of fact, that all the great ends
which are supposed to be gained by patronage, and special loyal
favor, can fee better gained by the people, and from the people,
will go a great way toward settling world questions.
Let it, then, not be forgotten that while the dynasties and
monarchical interests are against the free stales of America, the
popular interests of Europe are with them. The people of America'
are a great people, because they are a common people. The'
masses of Europe are struggling for their rights, as the free states
of America are for .theirs, and are yearning for that manhood which
the people of America have inherited.
“ Almighty God, who seekest life,
Uphold the right in this mortal strife. 1 *
Third. —A brief Summary of the case of the North .
Ist. That the present American war was only an overt and
warlike form of a contest between liberty and slavery, which has
been going on, politically, for the past half century.
2nd. That the condition or labor necessitated by any profitable
system of slavery, brings labor into* contempt, and fixes it to the
badge of degradation; and that the struggle to extend servile labor
across the American continent, interests every free working-man
on the globe; and that the Confederate or slave cause, is the
natural enemy of free labor and the free laborer, all the world
over.
3rd. That out of the separate colonies and states, intensely
jealous of their individual sovereignty, there grew up, and finally
established, a nation, and that, in that nation of united states, two'
distinct and antagonistic systems Were developed, and strove for the
government and control of national policy ; and that the struggle
at length so came to pass that the North gained the control, and
the South abandoned the union, simply and solely because the
government was in future to be administered by men who would
give their whole influence to freedom.
4th. That slavery, in the long run, is as hostile fo commerce
and manufacture, all the world over, as it is to all interests in
human society; and that a slave nation must be a poor customer,
buying the fewest and poorest goods, and the least profits pay-
ing ; and that it is the interest of every manufacturing country to
promote : freedom, intelligence, and wealth, amongst all nations ;
■and the attempt of the slaveholders to cover one of the fairest por-
tions of the-earth with a slave population, that buys nothing, and a
degraded white population that buy next to nothing, should array
against it the sympathy of every true political economist, and every


thoughtful and far-seeing manufacturer, as finding that the vital
want of commerce is not the want of cotton, but the want of cus-
tomers.
sth. That the States of the Union, hating slavery, having rid
themselves of it at their own cost, and longing for its extinction
throughout America, were unable, until this war, to touch slavery
directly. That the North could only contend against slave policy,
not directly against slavery—that slavery was the creature not of
the national law, and therefore not subject to national jurisdiction,
but of state law, and subject only to state jurisdiction ; and that a
direct attack on the part of the North to abolish slavery, previous
to the war, would have been revolutionary, and would have been a
violation of a fundamental principle of state independence.
6th. That the fidelity of the North to the great doctrine of
State rights, which was born with forbearance under wrong,
insult, and provocation ; her conscientious and honorable course,
in not directly meddling with the evil which she hated, and which
she saw to be aiming at the life of the Government, and at hfr
own life ; her determination to hold fast, pact and constitution, and
to gain her victories by giving the people a new national policy,
will yet be deemed worthy of something better than some are
willing at present to accord.
7th. That the North alloW'ed perfect freedom to the Southern
States, previous to the war. Tes! Dicey, the British traveller
through America, has it “ freedom as full and as untrammelled as
the Northerners enjoyed themselves.” The North not only
did not interfere with their peculiar institution—namely. Slavery,
but granted them every constitution facility they claimed for its
maintenance. They permitted the South to have more than its
share of power, and to fill up the Government with Southern men.
There was one thing only they objected 10, and that was to the having
slavery forced upon the Free Territories of the North. They
objected to this legally and constitutionally, and by legal and cotr-
stitutional measures, they expressed the will of the nation; The
American Government, like all free governments, rest Upon the
principle that the will of the majority must decide. The
South revolted at once, because it was defeated by the vote of the
majority, and if the Government had acquiesced in that revolt, the
vital principle of the Government would have been overthrown,
and for that vital principle they are fighting. It is said a man is a
coivard who will himself be robbed of all that makes life valuable
without an effort to resist. Well, is not this principle equally
applicable to a nation; and what would Europe and the world
have thought and said of the American Government, if it had sub-
mitted placidly to its own dismemberment ? The North is
fighting too, not only for abstract constitutional principles, but for
clear matter-of-fact interests. The American Government was so
far good, that the people prospered under it incomparably. The
people enjoyed more of freedom, order, and happiness, beneath the
Union, than any people had ever enjoyed before, and this is gene-
rally admitted. From the Atlantic to the Pacific, from Maine to
E


the Gulf of Mexico, the people of the United States were one
people, dwelling under one government, speaking one language •,
without custom houses, or passports, or frontier lines to separate
them; without the fear of invasion and war; without the need for
standing armies, and camps, and fortified cities ; free to carry on.
Unmolested, their great mission of reclaiming the vast wilderness.
Well, the South demanded of the North to abandon all these, and
some, strange to say, wonder that the Northerners refused to do
so, without striking a blow in defence of their rights. But it was
not only the present, but the future, that was then, and is now, at
stake.
Suppose, for instance, that the North had acceded to the
proposals of tame submission, what would have been the inevi-
table result ? The Northerners would have had upon them a
hostile power, to whom their free institutions were then, and must
have remained to be, a menace, and to whom extension of territory
was a necessity of political existence. War must have come,
sooner or later, and in the interests of their future peace, it was
better, doubtless, to fight, and that at once.
Bth. That on the same principle that Europe applauds Italy,
for endeavouring to become one people, under one government, the
Americans cannot be blamed because they declined to be reduced
into the same political condition as Italy was, before the revolu-
tion. The North, then, has a cause worth fighting for, and,
whether successful or unsuccessful, it will be better for the North,
and for the world at large, that a great cause has heen fought for
gallantly, and must, it is hoped, ultimately completely succeed,
and then will every oppressed negro go free. May Providence
bless and prosper the liberating armies of the North, and hasten
the happy period when there shall be universal liberty.
“ The thoughts of men no power can bind,
Limbs may be chained, but not the mind."
The British Standard gives the following graphic definition of
the present aspect of the rebellion: —
“ The Confederates are now making their last struggle in their
mighty and venomous rebellion, based on human slavery, and having
for its object the justification, extension, and perpetuation, of the bar-
barous injustice, which degrades the image of God into merchandise,
and sells wife from husband,child from parent,at theback of another’s
avarice or lust. This confederacy is still boldly defying the con-
stitutional authority of the Federal Union, covering the land with
carnage, agony, and desolation, and no longer daring to meet the
national forces in open field, cowers and dodges behind formidable
earthworks and battlements, whence it hurls death with fiendish
impunity, upon the heroes who struggle and die, that their
country may live. Yet the good time is coming, and slavery must
once and for ever, be banished from America.”
“ Let tyrants seem, while tyrants dare,
The shrieks and writhings of despair;
The end will come, it will not wait,
Bonds, yokes, and scourges have their date;
Slavery itself must pass away,
And be a tale of yesterday.”


The most sublime aspect of this war is the influence it must
have on oppression against liberty throughout the world. From
the commencement of the conflict, may be seen what leaves of
God’s book have been opened, and what pages of the Divine
science the civilized world has been taught. The clearing-up that
there has been of things there were vague; the correcting that
there has been of conceptions that were false; the unfolding that
there has been of principle, and of the want of principle ; the test-
ing that there has been of the characters of England and America.
These have seemed like anticipations of the judgment.
Sure, indeed it is, that the liberating armies of the North
have had many disasters, but not more than necessary to work out
the purposes of God. There has been one disaster after another,
what the world calls bad luck. The North has had bad luck,
certainly, in some respects. Some times in generals, sometimes in
one way, and sometimes in another. But there has been a deep
reason underlying this bad luck, of the nature of what theologians
call final causes. There has been a necessity for it. It must needs*
have been. For by this prolongation of the conflict, God has been
educating America to the full recognition of the unity of the
humane race ; he has been educating the people to the full recog-
nition of the principles on which their institutions of government
are founded ; he has been educating them, withal, to a righteous
abhorrence of that type and style of Christianity which undertook
to make the gospel sanction one of the. vilest forms of oppression.
They had a Christianity in that country, dominant in some parts of
it, which made Christ the minister of sin. They had Christian
ministers writing books and essays, and dissertations, to show that
Christianity was better than infidelity, because it required a
positive relation against the natural instincts, and the natural con-
science of mankind to justify slavery.
That while infidelity could not justify slavery, Christianity
could, was a regular piece of instruction in the churches of the
Southern States—and not in the churches of one denomination
only, but in the churches of all the denominations that were formed
there. The question being, which was most loyal and orthodox
to the grand institution of slavery. He who frames ingenious
arguments for slavery, out of the dislocated teachings of Scripture,
and who tortures the commandments of God into extenuations of
diabolical cruelty and sheer dishonesty, may not be outside the
pale of Christian charity, but he is surely outside of the Christian
Church, by whatever name he may be called. His natural assimu-
lations are with heathenism of the lowest type, historic or con-
temporary ; while all good men, whatever may be their creed, are
united in unanimous fraternity.
Every church exists there on the condition of their swearing
allegiance to slavery, and proving, by holy texts of Scripture, that
God had created the accursed race of Ham to be slaves of the
white man, and expressing devout thankfulness to God for his
benevolence in creating negroes for white men’s convenience.
Now, when God had permitted this war to begin, was it possible


for it to end, till such time as the entire nation should have been
educated into an intense and everlasting abhorrence of that kind of
Christianity. This war will, doubtless, last, whatever the cost,
whatever the sacrifice, till God has taught the whole nation effec-
tually, the great lesson in which he is instructing them. This war
was the voice of God to the churches, it was the voice of God to
the people, it was the voice of God to the enslaved millions, that
spoke from the mouths of the rebel cannon, when they opened on
Fort Sumter. God took that matter in hand that day. He whom
the wrath and wickedness of men shall praise—.-He, who in his
mysterious longsnffering had waited and waited, then took the-
matter in hand, letting loose the elements of destruction, that are
now, like a stormy wind, fulfilling his word. We have heard of
the progress of the work, the world is waiting for the result, and
as surely as we know that God sees the end from the beginning,
and that He having begun a good work, will carry it on to its con-
summation, so surely do we know that he is finishing it, and
bringing to pass, in his own method of working, the ends for which,
iti his Providence, this great and wicked rebellion was permitted to
take place.
“ Faint not; the end shall be
Triumph for liberty,
Forward! march to victory.”
Fourth. Conclusion. The London correspondent to the-,
“Daily Mail,” writes thus in November last:—
“.Now, there are only two ways in which the American war can
he satisfactorily terminated —lst. By a separation, which would
Innyp th,e South without support, or interference from the North,
to try ifs grapd experiment with its favorite institution of slavery ;
and, 2nd, By the triumph of the North, with the abolition of
slavery throughout the Union. If the Union be tinkered up again,
with slavery preserved-7-that institution being at the root of the
social differences -which make it so difficult for the two sections to
work together—-there will be simply a new growth of the elements
of discord, followed doubtless by a more perpetual war. The
Southern leaders see this, and are' determined not tp return to the
Union on any terms.”
This we accept as a very lucid, and fair way of putting the
case, and surely it must be considered by all as an undeniable
conclusion. Well, if the Otago press endorse the case of the
North and South as here set forth, our earnest hope is, that our
editors will before long use their pens in advocating the fullest
sympathy', for one of the noblest objects, namely, the emancipation
of the slave ; and then there will be little need of humble efforts,
being made to further the good work by means of pamphlets.
And if also the ministers of religion of the different denominations
accept this view of the London correspondent, we fervently trust
that the poor slave may be remembered by them in their suppli-
cations to heaven. Let all indeed pray, that God may speedily


“ loose the bands of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, let the-
oppressed go free,” and break every yoke, that there may be
secured out of this mighty Struggle, permanent peace ; that God’s
kingdom may be promoted, and his will done throughout the whole
earth. And if our aspirations are of this kind, our prayers for
the fulfilment of the words, “ Glory to God in the highest, peace
on earth, and good will to men,” will have a fuller meaning, and,
will be more likely to be answered fully. It is well that “ Peace on
earth” is joined with “ good will to men.” Oh, that those ministers
who seem to omit to include the down-trodden millions of slaves
in the words —good will to men, would respect the words that
follow, namely, Good tidings of great joy to all people .’ ’
They indeed should know what a laud of slavery is : certainly
not a land of peace—but
A land where laughter is not mirth, nor thought the mind,
Nor words a language; nor e’en men mankind,
Where cries reply to curses, shrieks to blows,
And each is tortured, in, his separate hell.”
May the holy emotions of Christians of every denomination In
every sanctuary, lift up to God the souls of these neglected and
benighted creatures; as well as for the souls of those brave men
of America, who are so nobly struggling for their liberty and
amelioration. It is a lamentable fact, that there are ministers of
religion, who take but a superficial view of the American war, and
quite omit to put in the scale of evidence, the removal of un-
describable miseries from millions of beings in slavish bondage and
heathen darkness. There are those who say, “ That going to war
is doing evil that good may come ; ” thus overlooking the greater
evils of slavery, and forgetting that history is not barren of such
events and their consequences, as oppression waging war against
liberty.
The deliverance of Rome from the tyranny of the Tarquins,
followed as a consequence the dishonor of Lucretia. An insult
offered to the daughter of a blacksmith, in the 14th Century, re-
sulted in a popular tumult, which led to the abolition of personal
slavery in England. They also omit the consideration of the
established fact, that slavery bewilders and maddens its devotees.
That it blinds them to reason, as well as to right and justice.
They know how to use nothing but brute force, and no other kind
of force reaches them, for they are susceptible of feeling no other.
If they would tolerate others in their opinions, they might be
safely tolerated; but this they will not do, but in a most malignant
spirit, seek to Lord it over God’s heritage unhindered. Let us,
then, hope in the right, tor we know it must prevail. The people
that determine to be free can never more be enslaved. The free-
dom of the negro is a foregone conclusion, and the freedom of the
white race of the Confederates follows as the day the night, and
doubtless the slaveholders themselves will, at least be benefited
morally, although at present they appear to be blinded by
their own passions, prejudices, cupidity, and love of dominion,


and seem determined to lay the last feather on the camel’s back,
and by this means are inviting their own destruction. And oh !
terrible thought is that, of the moral condition of the Southern
churches. It is, I regret to state, an undisputed fact, that no
power has been so successful in precipitating this rebellion—in
infusing the slaveholding zeal to fiercer heat—in sustaining it
when it was discouraged, as that of the churches of the Confede-
rates. They made haste to sunder the bonds between North and
South. They have systematically perverted the Holy Scriptures,
to prove that slavery is a Divine institution. They have continu-
ally used every art and.etfort to keep the passion and hatred of the
South a flame! Surely the time is not far distant when
every minister and Christian shall openly declare themselves deep-
ly anxious for the removal of such a state of things, and when all
shall fervently unite in persevering supplication to heaven for the
regeneration of these Southern churches, and that the long crushed
negro may be lifted up and made free, that God on his magnifi-
cent back-ground may exhibit to the nations of the earth, what is
the power of tbujb Christianity.
And, in order to unfold these sentiments of liberty, let us pre-
pare ourselves, and not be ashamed of liberty, but be willing to
take her with all her responsibilities. Let us be willing to take
our own convictions, and our own ideas, and consecrate them, and
live by them and for them, and be found ready to present to God,
to angels and to men, the world over, the example of true Britons,
and be in constant, persevering earnest, for justice, liberty, and
Christian civilization throughout the world.
O ! God we look to thee,
It is only by thy power
That the people can be free.
Be this our watchword—let the nations hear—
Slaves never more shall breathe our atmosphere ;
And let America’s boast (the boast of Britain) be—
The slaves that touch the Federal soil, are free !
O, WATSON, FMNTEIt, MACLASOAN STREET, DUNEDIN.


Educational Works by T. Halliwell.
LONDON: Jerrold & Sons, St. Paul’s Churchyard, and London-st., Norwich,
The Comprehensive Class Book of English Grammar.
DEMY 12MO, PRICE 1s.
“ Elementary Works on the several branches of education are not only
rapidly increasing in number, but also materially improving in their general
character and adaptation to the purpose intended. The department of
English Grammar has been as well supplied as most with elementary
works. During the latter part of the last century, Dr Ash’s ‘ Institutes '
were very generally used. Then we had Murray’s School Grammar and its
Abridgement, with a host of others more or less popular. Among these we
may mention the admirable little work of Ingram Cobbin, entitled Grammar
lor Children. And still more recently, Allen and Cornwell’s new English
Grammar, an excellent work of its kind. Indeed, all the works we have
alluded to have their excellencies. As an elementary work adapted to the
junior classes in schools, and for conveying the knowledge of first principles
of the language, the ‘ Comprehensive Class Book ’ of Mr. Halliwell, is sur-
passed by none of those we have mentioned. The Author’s design in this
email production is thus stated :— ‘ The following pages are constructed so
as to be suitable for junior assistants in schools, and for the use and ease of
persons wishing to instruct themselves in English Grammar j the informa-
tion being given in a series of questions, with their answers affixed.’ For
this purpose the work is well adapted; indeed we know of none better.”—
Christian Advocate, Nov. Ist, 1849.
“ The young men and women who attend the People’s Colleges and
Mutual Improvement Societies, are often staggered in their attempts at
composition, for want of grammatical knowledge; the sound of ‘ Grammar ’
has heretofore been anything but music to their ears; but now their mental
scales are falling off, they begin to find it is a necessary acquisition, and are
ready to welcome any friend who will give them a speedy introduction to its
mysteries. Happily for those whose means are small, and whose time is
short, elementary works of a superior mould are rapidly multiplying, and
the ‘ Comprehensive ’ work of Mr. H. is one of those we can heartily recom-
mend. Our toilers, aiming at a correct expression of their thoughts, and
having but few moments to devote to this study, will do well to act upon
our advice, and patronize the Multum in Pakvo.” — Mechanics’ Organ,
January Ist, 1850.
“ The present decade of the 19th century, is particularly noted in liter-
ature, for its multiplication of elementary works. To every branch of
learning, and almost every department of science, the simplifying process
has been applied; and truths and principles which, in the days of our boy-
hood, were locked up in unintelligible technicalities, or only unfolded in
the voluminous pages of elaborate treatises, are now to be met with in many
a cheap and simple class book, brought down to the apprehension of the
most ordinary capacity, and placed within the reach of the humblest
aspirant after knowledge. English Grammar, among other studies, has
had its full share of simplifiers and expostiors, who have done much in
elucidating its principles, and in recovering the pedantry and irrelevant
matter in which they were imbedded. Ash, Murray, and Lennie, rendered
important services in this department of literature ; and Cob, in Cornwell,
and later writers, have profitably availed themselves of their labors. None
of these works are without their peculiar excellencies ; but in none that we
have seen are clearness of exposition, simplicity of arrangement, and con-
ciseness of style, so happily combined as in the publication under notice,
from the pen of Mr. HaUiwell, one of the masters of the People’s College,
in this city. It contains the essence, though not the details, of many a
larger volume; and its adoption in junior classes will greatly facilitate the
labors both of the student and the teacher, and prove a most useful
assistant in the acquisition of grammatical knowledge.”—Nokfolk, News,
November IBth, 1849,


Youth’s Book on Natural History. Demy 12mo, 1s.
“ Here we have a little work upon an important branch of study with
which all ought more or less to be familiar. It contains a compendious
description of the grand divisions of Nature, and withal, written in such a
lucid and perspicuous style as cannot fail to interest the youthful reader,
•and even those of matnrer age. At the end of each chapter or section there
is a series of questions, by which the facts given in the text are more firmly
fixed in the mind. The book is not only highly creditable to the Author
as a scientific work, but we admire the spirit which pervades its pages ; the
wisdom, power, and goodness of the Deity are everywhere recognised. The
author, evidently, is not one who ‘regards not the work of the Lord, nor
considers not the operation of His hands j ’ but who duly reflects that the
works of the Lord are great, and sought out of all them that take pleasure
therein. The book merits, and we hope will have, a wide circulation.”—
Tub Christian Advocate, October Ist, 1849;
“ This small book is a compendious description of the three great divisions
of Nature, written in a lucid style, and contains a list of Questions written
at the end of each chapter, by which the reader may ascertain and confirm
his attainments* The whole book is so scientifically and devotionally
written as to afford edification and instruction, and is well adapted for the
use of schools. The Author, is. we understand, one of the Masters of the
People’s College, and we feel quite sure that the spirit of his book is a good
omen for the Institution.” — Tub Norfolk News, October 2fith, 1849.
“ This clever little book has just made its appearance, and is precisely
the kind of work which is wanted as a class book for schools. The plan is
simple and indmetive, and the system of questions is of great importance in
leading the youthful mind to the acquisition of knowledge. We recommend
the ‘ Youth’s Book of Natural History ’ to the attention of parents.”—
People’s Journal, November ‘24th, 1849,
“ This book is calculated to be very Useful to the youthful or less instruc-
tive leader, exhibiting as it does the great facts of this Very great subject,
and founding upon them a very lengthened series of Useful questions.”—
British Banner, January 2nd, 1850.
The Comprehensive Chart of the Leading Branches of
Human Knowledge. Price 1s.
“ Correct and well arranged elementary aids to knowledge are quite as
correct as finished treatises, and perhaps more needed ; and it is one of the
peculiar features of the present day to be rapidly supplying these desiderata.
The old method of appealing to the mind almost exclusively through the
ear, is now' greatly improved by means of Charts, or Diagramatic forms,
displaying a science, as to its leading structure, at one view, in a manner
which is more easily and effectually impressed on the memory. We have
great pleasure in recommending to the attention of our readers the chart
described above, drawn by Mr. Halliwell, one of the Masters of the People’s
College, which fully sustains its designation, and exhibits an admirable
view of the leading branches of education. The classification is strictly
scientific, and the explanations of the various terms are at once critical and
familiar. The chart cannot fail to be exceedingly useful to teachers and
families. It is equally recommended by its execution and convenience.”
NORFOLK NEWS,
January Hth, 1851.
An Examination and Refutation of Phrenology.
DEMY 8VO. PRICE 1s.
“ This little work of Mr. Halliwell is worthy the attention of the public,
and both pleasure arid benefit will be derived from its perusal, and we
cordially recommend it to our readers.” — Dunedin Evening Star.


“ Tell me not of rights —talk not of the property of the planter
in his slaves. I deny this right, I acknowledge not the property.
The principles, the feelings, of our common nature, rise in re-
bellion against it. Be the appeal made to the understanding, or
to the heart, the sentence is the same that rejects it. In vain you
tell me of laws that sanction such a claim. There is a law above all
the enactments of human codes—the same throughout the world—
the same in all times-—it is the law written by the finger of God
on the heart of man, and that law, unchangeable and eternal,
while men despise fraud, and loathe rapine, and hate blood, they
shall reject with indignation, the wild and guilty phantasy, that
man can hold property in man. In vain you appeal to treaties and
to covenants. The covenants of the Almighty, whether the old
covenant or the new, denounce such unholy pretensions—
Lord Brougham.




“ Tell me not of rights—talk not of the property of the planter
in his slaves. I deny this right, I acknowledge not the property.
The principles, the feelings, of our common nature, rise in re-
bellion against it. Be the appeal made to the understanding, .or
to the heart, the sentence is the same that rejects it. In vain you
tell me of laws that sanction such a claim. There is a law above all
the enactments of human codes —the same throughout the world—
the same in all times—it is the law written by the finger of God
on the heart of man, and that law, unchangeable and eternal,
while men despise fraud, and loathe rapine, and hate blood, they
shall reject with indignation, the wild and guilty jthantasy, that
man can hold property in man. In vain you appeal to treaties and
to covenants. The covenants of the Almighty, whether the old
covenant or the new, denounce such unholy pretensions*—
Lord Brougham
