

THE PRESENT
DEPRESSION IN TRADE:
ITS CAUSE AND REMEDY.
Hit It'uqxtirn
Into the cause of the present stagnation of all Commercial
Industrial and Agricultural Pursuits, with suggestions for
a speedy remedy , ..and some observations on the political
career of
SIR HENRY PARKES,
A Nit OTHER MATTERS BY
C. O. WALDOW.
Pro bono
jnitrite.
Price
SYDNEY': *
JAUHETT & Go., General Printers, 229 Sussex Street..
1887. •




THE PRESENT
DEPRESSION IN TRADE:
ITS CAUSE AND REMEDY.
flu tyzix^ixxxvyy
Into the cause of the present stagnation of all Commercial
Industrial and Agricultural Pursuits, with suggestions for
a speedy remedy , and some observations on the political
career of
SIR HENRY PARKES,
AND OTHER MATTERS BY
C. O. WALDOW.
Pro bono
patriae.
Price Sixpence.
SYDNEY:
JARRETT & Co., General Printers, 229 Sussex Street.
1887.




INTRODUCTION.
In offering this little pamphlet to the public for
perusal and careful consideration, I am conscious of the many
difficulties surrounding me. I have no mystic letters attached
to my name, am known but to a few friends, and my sentences
may often appear stilted and wanting in polish. For I have,
during a long residence in the colonies, followed a diversity of
occupations, I have used the pick and shovel, and the axe,
more than I have the pen, and I have oftener camped in a
gunyali than behind bricks and mortar. My past career has,
however, enabled me to gather a mass of information and
practical experience, which entitles my opinion to some slight
respect, and I may state with confidence that there are not
many who have a better knowledge of the requirements and
future prospects of the country.
I have always looked upon those who have to labour
with their hands as worthy of first consideration by the
state, being quite convinced that, as they form the majority
and the foundation of society, their welfare will have a direct
influence on, and form an index to, the wellbeing of all the
rest of the people. Though it is probable that owing to many
years of hard delving on the goldfields and the scorched plains
of the Western interior, my sympathies may have been
strengthened in this direction.
In writing this, I have been actuated by a sincere desire
to benefit this land of my adoption, firmly believing, that
faulty legislation is the chief cause of want and misery ever
having found a place here. Many of the tenets and ideas
dealt with are held by the clearest intellects, and the most
generous and patriotic men in the community, who for years past
have been vainly trying to impress them upon those who have
the power, but not the will, to give them effect.
I am desirous of circulating these ideas in every part of the
colony ; I would have this little work read in every settler’s


house, in every miner’s cabin, in every labourer’s humble
home, as well as by every artisan and man of business, over
the length and breadth of the land, so that when the time
comes, it may have a practical effect at the ballot box.
I have yet to mention that several subjects commented
upon, have already been treated by me at various times
in letters published by the local press, and as these were
favourably noticed by men who have the welfare of the country
at heart, I thought it my duty to enlarge upon them.
10 Cornwallis Street,
C. O. WALDOW.
Redfern, Sydney,
16th August, 1887.


THE PRESENT DEPRESSION IN TRADE.
ITS CAUSE AND REMEDY.
The stagnation which at present affects all kinds of
business and industrial pursuits, is so general that it shows a
marked effect upon the whole community. Long lists of
insolvencies and assignments meet the eye every succeeding
week ; rumours of old established houses being “ shaky ” are
continually afloat ; rents of stores, shops, and warehouses have
in many cases come down 50 per cent. ; suburban lands have
fallen in value considerably, and in some cases are worth now,
only from one half to one third of their former value ; shops
in some of the best business localities have been tenantless for
weeks and even months, whilst dwelling houses in the near
suburbs can now be had in scores where formerly hardly
ever a tenement was empty. The suffering among the work-
ing classes is intense. There are hundreds of good steady
mechanics, men, who even in England could readily command
a regular wage of two pounds per week, glad to earn a few
shillings at the charity works established by government, while
others working only half time, are lucky when they get enough
to keep the “ wolf from the door.” The total number of the
men at present without work can hardly be ascertained, but as
there are over 4,000 on the Government relief works alone,
besides different batches employed by neighbouring munici-
palities, whilst large numbers with provident habits have been
living on their savings for many months past, we may roughly
estimate that 10,000 of the working population of Sydney and
suburbs representing with their families, about 30,000 people,
are idle and produce nothing ; and as it is reported from all
parts of the country that the roads are lined with, and the


towns full of men in search of work, I shall be within the mark
when I say that 25,000 able-bodied men, or nearly one fourth
of the effective population, are at present out of work and
therefore non-producers. Of course, when shearing is in pro-
gress it will help some thousands out of their difficulties, but
as this kind of work, like harvesting is only temporary, it can
have no permanent influence.
Various are the causes to which this state of affairs has
been ascribed by the different sections of the community. The
Freetraders readily account for it, by holding a continuation of
bad seasons and consequent losses to the settlers responsible ;
or they tell us, that we are merely receiving an impress of that
wave of depression, which is just now passing over many parts
of the world ; but as it cannot be denied, that we have had two
good seasons in succession far above the average, and as it is
well known that overproduction has been the sole cause of the
stagnation in older countries, whilst we here, produce but a
very small proportion of our daily requirements, and further as
we have enjoyed prosperity at the time when depression in
other parts was at its height, we can dismiss both these
reasons as untenable, without hesitation.
When England prospered under a freetrade policy, it was
owing, not only to her favourable position, forming as it were
the advanced post of Europe, through which a large share of the
tropical produce had to pass ; but chiefly and principally, to
the enormous beds of coal and iron, from which for many years,
the requirements of nearly the whole world were derived.
Millions thus poured into the country, and labour was at a
premium. As soon, however, as other nations open up their
dormant resources, stagnation ensues, and the foreign manu-
factures, assisted by a carefully arranged tariff and all kinds of
enactments, expressly framed for the purpose of favouring the
producer, are not only driving English manufactures out of
the markets of the world, but actually landing certain goods
in England at a lower rate than they can be made there :
Like England, we in this country have prospered immensely,
but it was never owing to any freetrade policy, nor to the wise
legislation of our statesmen, —It was due wholly and solely to
our inherent resources. Whilst gold was getting everything
flourished, money was plentiful, wages were high, and every-


body was making money. In 1862 Robertson’s free selection
Act came into force with all its drawbacks and thousands of
the men who had made their little pile on the diggings or
saved sufficient from their high wages, made a rush to make
homes for themselves on the lands of the country. Things at
this time were extremely brisk, the coffers of the Treasury
were overflowing, employment was plentiful and wages rose to
the maximum rate. Prosperity reigned supreme in the land
for many years, every individual in the country receiving a
share of the general expenditure. The selectors being obliged
to make improvements, an active demand for labour continued,
wages kept high in consequence, and enabled men to save
enough to select in time on their own account, thus keeping
the ball rolling.
It was about tins time that the squatter, who had never
been troubled by any interloper, and had been leading quite
an unprogressive, sleepy existence far removed from the busy
world, was suddenly aroused from his lethargy, as the energetic
selector took slice after slice from the best part of his leasehold,
and to keep the intruder out, he in self-defence, was obliged
either to make improvements, or to employ dummies to take
up land on his account. Tanks and reservoirs were then sunk,
woolsheds, yards and dams were erected, and water was sup-
plied in places where there was none before, and as wages still
remained high, some of the Crown lessees hit upon the lucky
idea to fence in their runs, divide them into paddocks, and turn
their sheep or cattle into them, to roam about at their own
sweet will. This proved a tremendous success. It had hither-
to required two men, a shepherd and a hutkeeper, to look
after about 1,500 sheep, and a squatter, having say, 100,000,
had to pay quite a little army of shepherds, besides ration-
carriers all the year round, to keep them in safety, whilst now by
the aid of fencing some half-a-dozen boundary riders can do
all the work necessary.
Thus it came to pass that the whole of the western part
of this country, grew into a huge checkerboard, traversed and
crossed by fences in all directions, and every paddock which
did not contain water naturally, was carefully provided with tanks
or reservoirs. The capital thus invested must be immense ;
the whole of that vast tract lying between the Darling.


Bogan, Lachlan and Murrumbidgee, and beyond the
Darling up to our western boundary, where, away from the
rivers, formerly not a goat could exist, carries now, thanks to
the squatters improvements, millions of stock, and money has
been spent like water to make the wilderness productive.
Yet beyond an occasional boundary-rider cantering along on his
pony , or some hapless tramp in search of worlc, the country is
deserted, and a human being is but rarely seen in the far
interior.
The effect upon the labour market, and every kind of
industrial pursuits, whilst all these improvements were in pro-
gress, was extremely beneficial. Towns and hamlets sprang
up in all directions, and many hundreds of our settlers have to
thank the squatter for the opportunity he gave them, to earn
sufficient for making homesteads for themselves. But now, as
the improvements are nearly all finished, or as many of them
as the squatters’ means will allow, this opportunity no longer
exists, and now comes the tug of war. Therein lies the chief
cause of our present depressionthis is the reason wdiy so
many of our strong men look in vain for work. The shepherd
and his bulky cheque are things of the past; the sturdy bush-
men, who used to wend their way with well-lined purses and
big cheques, earned by really hard delving on the blazing plains
of the interior, are but sparsely represented, for the old em-
ployers of labour are exhausted. There are still crowds of men,
but instead of turning into the store to buy, they go there to
beg, and the storekeeper thus finds business slack, and he is,
if he has not laid money by in the good times, in the awkward
predicament of not being able to meet his liabilities. Then
the merchant, who supplies him, suffers, and in turn will have
to make an assignment, throwing his own hands out of em-
ployment. There is no use, our merchants who form the back-
bone of the Freetrade party, and whose efforts on behalf of
Freetrade, amount almost to fanaticism, may as well face the
evil, and admit that there is something radically wrong in our
present condition, and that there is no hope for an improve-
ment, until our laws are framed in such a manner as to give
profitable employment to the starving masses of the people. Call
into existence and foster every kind of industry possible and
all will be right ; arrange every enactment carefully


with this view and you will prosper. All the most beautiful
theories of Cobden and Bright are valueless in removing the
present dearth of employment.
The laborer is the most important individual in the com-
munity ; in this I include, of course, every man who works
with his hands. He is the real producer, and forms the
foundation of society ; every day when he is idle, is not only a
loss to himself but to the whole country, and the higher the
rate of wages he receives, the greater will be the profits accru-
ing to the tradesman, and the higher will be the price realised
by the farmer for his produce. Let this be distinctly under-
stood by every one : the rate of wages paid to the labourer is a
fair index to a country’s prosperity.
The doctrines of Malthus, which for nearly a century
have formed the groundwork of all political economy, have
been sent skyhigh by Henry George ; the theories of Cobden and
Bright do not stand a practical test, and have always been dis-
regarded by every statesman outside England and her colonies.
In every country of continental Europe, they are just now en-
gaged in carefully revising the tariff so as to husband the
resources, protect the industries, assist all kinds of manufac-
turing enterprise by legal enactments, and, in fact, solving the
great problem, namely, to find employment for the ever-in-
creasing masses of the workers, who, being driven, either by
foreign competition or various inventions from one branch of
industry, are compelled to seek for work in another. Norway
and Sweden wish to tax imports of agricultural produce ;
Italy has denounced her treaty of commerce with France and
Austro-Hungary, and is seeking to reserve her markets for
home production ; Russia is augmenting her tariff on im-
ported luxuries, cutlery, ironware, &c., chiefly manufactured
in protective Germany ; Roumania seeks to protect her own
industries against competition from Austro-Hungary ; Switzer-
land is protecting herself against German importations ; Austro-
Hungary is revising her commercial treaties on the German
protection basis ; Greece is raising her tariff ; Belgium wants
high duties to protect her live stock interests ; in fact every
country of continental Europe is contemplating improvements
in its fiscal laws in order to have the bulk of the daily require-


ments of the people manufactured within its own boundaries,
and encourage domestic industries by all means possible.
The English alone, true to their instincts, unwilling to
see the sign" of the times, and trusting that the proposed
federation with the colonies, will enable them to secure the
whole of the colonial trade, are still committed to a freetrade
policy. Yet, it is an open secret that many of the leading
manufacturers, John Bright, the great freetrade apostle among
the number, are investing hundreds of thousands in the estab-
lishment of factories and workshops in the protected countries
of Europe and America, from whence they swamp their own
country, with foreign made goods, to the detriment of their own
starving poor.
And our own so-called statesmen stand idly by, still look-
ing to England, with her great riches, and the most wretched
squalor the world has perhaps ever seen, as the grand example
for us to follow ; and thus we have distress and extreme
poverty already in our midst. Though we have the principal
minerals, coal and iron, in abundance, millions of. acres of
magnificent land still in its virgin state, a genial climate, en-
abling us to grow almost anything, and thousands of men vainly
clamoring for work, we have to import the common necessaries
of life. Foreign nations send us the stuffs we wear, our
hoots, hats, pianos and furniture, carriages and buggies, im-
plements and machinery, in fact, every article, on and around
us, is made by foreign workmen, brought here by subsidized
steamers and admitted free into the country, whilst thousands
of our own brother-workmen are glad to earn a crust on the
charity works. Where is the statesmanship in this ?—Where
is the comfort, happiness and sturdy independence almost in-
variably found in a new country ?—lt is centred and focussed
in the few merchants, who rule the whole of the import trade
and who like some of the best men of England, are beginning
to find out, that when the people have no money to buy, their
own profits must suffer.
If ever there was a country mismanaged and misruled, it
is New South Wales. It is being driven headlong to ruin by
pedagogues and humbugs, who are called our statesmen, not
one of whom can point to a single Act of note, the creation of


his own brain, that has benefitted this country. We have
politicians enough, though but few statesmen and patriots.
Were our resources not so great as they are, we would have
filed our schedule long ago ; it is hard to kill the young giant.
Even when times were good and everything flourished,
our pseudo statesmen could not make ends meet. They parted
wholesale with the land, the patrimony of the people, and
borrowed money besides, some of which has been disgracefully
used to pay the current expenses ; and so extensive has been
this borrowing, that at present our public debt is (in proportion
to the population) larger than that of England ! Everywhere
we find incapacity, procrastination, stupidity, mismanagement,
and worse than all—jobbery and corruption.
In the days of Wentworth, there were a few men worthy
of being remembered ; and there was a parliament worthy of
being called by that name. But ever since, we have been go-
ing slowly down the hill, so that now there remain but a
handful of honest, patriotic men, vainly struggling to reverse
the present state of affairs and bring good Government and
prosperity back to us. Every thoughtful and intelligent man
must confess with sorrow, that constitutional Government,
such as ours, has been, as far as we are concerned, a signifi-
cant and dismal failure.
It is now about three years ago, that a capitalist, one of
those who have no thought beyond his narrow-souled self,
after dilating upon the high rate of wages he had to pay,
spoke to me thus : “ When I want a man to do an odd job
for me, the first question is : ‘ What wages do you pay ? ’
/ hope to see the day yet , when men will come to me with hat
in hand and say: ‘ Please , sir, will you give me a job ?’ ”
This day has now arrived ; if that capitalist wants a man, he
can get fifty to take the place, with hat in hand and glad to
get work at any price. But, mark you, the yearly rents of this
man's warehouses have fallen fifty per cent.
We often hear from the mouths of the Freetraders, that
wages are too high in this country, and that they must be
reduced, until we can compete with other nations. This forms
the groundwork of the Freetrade doctrine ; it levels every-
thing ; they always buy in the cheapest market, are still


thorough believers in the cold-blooded theory of the “ survival
of the fittest,” and look upon the worker as of no consequence,
who might flourish or starve, just as the exigencies of the
time may demand. This doctrine carried out would, of course,
compel our artisans and labourers to work for the same wages
as the English, Germans, or even Chinese do ; and as the
products of those countries are being admitted free, the con-
dition of our workers, instead of being still further elevated,
would necessarily have to be lowered to that of the workers of
those countries.
The Protectionist on the other hand looks upon the
workers, the real producers, as the most important, as they
are, the most numerous body in the State ; he wishes to enact
laws, that will enable our men to compete with the foreigner
without lowering his condition almost to that of the. brute
creation 5 he wants them to do the work and retain in our
own country the money, which at present flows into the pockets
of the foreigner ; he believes that the welfare of the working
classes produces a direct and corresponding influence on the
whole community, and that, therefore, every Act should be
made expressly with the view of securing the welfare of the
majority, namely the workers, and with them that of every one
else. In support of this, it must be remembered, that every
individual here owns a share of the public estate : it is the
people’s property, for which the representatives are the trustees.
There is, then, a wide difference in the position of our work-
men and that of the workmen uf older countries, where their
only share in public possessions consists of their interest in
their taxes for the public debt.
The duty of our representatives, is on no account to follow
slavishly in the footsteps of any country, as they have hitherto
done ; on the contrary, they should take advantage of the
errors and follies committed by other States, and make this a
real Australia Felix, where there should always be full and
plenty for every one. The means are at hand i all that is
necessary is to frame the laws to take advantage of them.
And is there any man of generous instincts among us,
any man whose existence is not entirely wrapt up in himself,
who would wish to have the low wages and long hours of the


older countries, with all the attendant vice, misery, and degra-
dation introduced here ? If there be, do not let him follow
me any further ; I have done with him. But yet, this is
exactly what our present policy is driving us to ; no country
can prosper that does not manufacture at least the bulk of its
requirements ; and the issue is plain, —we must either lower
our rate of wages and the condition of the workers to the
standard of the foreigner, and entirely abolish the eight-hour
system as an unsightly blot on the pages of any freetrade
country ; or we must alter our fiscal laws in order to protect
our people against competition from abroad.
Hitherto every Act appears to have been framed for the
express purpose of driving every kind of home industry out of
the country, and damaging our own people. In the coach-
building trade, for instance, the raw material is taxed, whilst
the manufactured article is admitted free, thus giving our own
men not even the chance to compete on even terms. Such
legislation has been condemned even by the foremost advocates
of the freetrade party as impolitic. Again, the squatters,
who after all are at present the mainstay, and, (if they get the
chance,) the largest employers of the country, and who, in
many cases, have expended every shilling they possessed, or
could conveniently borrow, to improve their holdings to their
utmost carrying ’ capacity, are beginning to feel the iron heel
of our beautiful Freetrade Government. Overladen with a
heavy burden of debt and harassed by all kinds of pests,
every penny is being squeezed out of them by a continual
raising of rents, in order to enhance the revenue ; and these
rents are settled not by land-boards, as the Act intended, but,
mark you, by the Minister for Lands in person, and by such a
Minister as the “ Honorable” Thomas Garrett :—I also see no
reason why distilleries should be banished from the land by a
heavy excise duty. Our yearly liquor bill is enormous, and
the amount sent home for brandy alone is almost incredible.
How this latter liquor being made exclusively out of the refuse
of the grape, it appears to me inexplicable, that our vignerons
should be compelled to throw it away, whilst the French distil
it into liquor for our use. _ %
The moment Protection becomes the law of the land, this*
will become a busy workshop, and the question of the unem-


ployed will speedily become a thing of the past. IsTo longer
will our upper classes drive about in buggies and carriages
built by prison labour in America or England ; our skilled
artisans who now only too often are glad to find employment
on the charity works, will once more be able to hold up their
heads ; the millions which now for want of better investments
are carefully hoarded up in banks, will be profitably used in
various protected industries ; English and German houses will
find it to their advantage to erect workshops here for the
manufacture of pianos and furniture ; railway iron and stock
will be made from Australian iron ; a portion of our wool will
be made up into blankets, tweeds, etc., for our own use ;
saddlery, boots, and leatherware, earthenware and china, jewell-
ery, iron and brass castings, of which we possess the raw
material in abundance, will no longer be imported ; in fact
everything would liven up, the value of land and property
advancing correspondingly, and this would become once more
the land of unexampled prosperity, where no industrious
man need be in want.
Having gone so far I must draw attention to a very im-
portant question which the Freetraders, who are catching at
every straw to make their case good, are never tired of quoting
against the Protectionists. This is the indiscriminate taxa-
tion of every article imported. ISTow, there is no Protectionist,
no matter how earnest, who would demand that a duty should
be placed on any article the raw materials of which are not
produced in this country or that requires more skill or tech-
nical knowledge than is obtainable here at present. Cotton
goods, for instance, we shall not be able to manufacture for
many years to come, without imposing a heavy duty, and as
these are chiefly used by the poorer classes, this would be inju-
dicious, especially as there would be so many other branches
of industry open. Silks, velvets, plushes, laces, etc., we can
also not hope to produce at present, but as these are articles of
luxury, used only by the rich, a duty for revenue purposes
alone would be desirable.
Before I leave this subject, I must add a few words on the
labor question, which is intimately connected with Protection,
is in all parts of the world forcing itself to the front, and
which engages just now the attention of all thoughtful states-


men and philanthropists. Invention has followed invention
so rapidly that work, which formerly took hundreds of people
years to accomplish, is now, by the aid of machinery, done in
a few days and even hours, and no one can foresee what the
ingenuity of man will at any moment bring forth. It is gene-
rally admitted that these improvements and the lightening of
labour by machinery have not benefitted the working classes ;
on the contrary, they have assisted in making the capitalist
and employer more independent of the worker, and in still
further enslaving the latter. In an ably written pamphet,
“ Adam’s Curse,” Mr. Copeland has dealt with this question
exhaustively and fairly ; I would recommend every lover of the
human race to note and study his ideas.
In all the old thickly populated countries of Europe, the
rates of wages are entirely regulated by supply and demand,
and the employer has by far the best of the bargain ; in this
country, owing to the magnificent system of trades unionism,
which does not, it must be remembered, owe its origin to any
action on the part of government, the capitalist and workman
meet in most of the industrial branches on even terms, and
the rates of wages and hours of labour are fixed by mutual
agreement. The arrangement is strictly fair, even and just to
both j arties ; still there is reason to fear, that if the Freetrade
policy be continued much longer, and with it the overcrowd-
ing of the labour market, a breaking down of the labour com-
bination must necessarily follow. Already there is a weakness
observable in the ranks of several of the unions ; it is hard for
a man to refuse work at a lowered rate of wages when half-
a-dozen children are crying for bread at home ; and we can
excuse him when he throws principle and the rules of the
union overboard for the sake of his starving family. Now,
every man has a right to get a living, which in a young
country like ours, need not be a mere existence either, for there
is room and plenty for all ; and this right is already recognized
by all the great statesmen of continental Europe ; hence every
country is hedging itself in against foreign competition, mak-
ing the most of its resources, and exerting itself to find
employment for the ever-increasing masses. England alone
does not recognise the claims of labor ; she is blind to her own
interests, and instead of following the example of other nations


adheres religiously to the belief in the survival of the fittest,
and is just now vainly trying to ship the unemployed portion
of her people to any country willing to receive them.
Here, in this country where we are laying the foundation
of what with proper management will some day become a
populous nation, it is the first duty of our rulers to avoid by
far-seeing enactments, the misery and wretchedness invariably
accompanying the working classes of Europe. We should
model this young country on a new basis, enabling the indus-
trious classes to lead a life of permanent comfort and happi-
ness, unattained hitherto in any other part of the world.
Though we may look to Protection as the main factor in
giving employment to our people and the most ready instru-
ment to restore confidence, there are several other industries,
now neglected, which require to be carefully dealt with and
encouraged by the State in order to stimulate private enter-
prise. One of the first among these is mining for all kinds of
minerals, especially gold and silver.
It is a well known fact that year after year thousands of
tons of ore are sent for treatment to England, and Freiberg, (a
town in the centre of Germany,) simply because w r e do not
possess machinery, appliances and sufficient technical know-
ledge for treating these ores, and to obtain every particle of
metal they contain. Now any practical man who has followed
the diggings for 10 or 20 years, knows that there are hundreds
of reefs in the country, which according to the local mint assay
should give a return of from 1 to 5 ounces of gold per ton.
As soon, however, as the stone is submitted to the rude appli-
ances in vogue here, which, by the way, are too often entrusted
to men who have not even an idea of what an intricate science
metallurgy has become in older countries, the yield is reduced
to a few pennyweight. This is especially observable in ores
that contain, besides gold and silver, a quantity of different
minerals, pyrites, etc. On the other hand it is a notable fact
that any ores sent to Freiberg for treatment give a return
strictly in accordance to our local mint assay, and frequently
over. The difference in the result is so marked, that it is time
to appoint a commission, constituted of practical, intelligent
miners to enquire into the matter, and if this be done, it will


be found that our people are half a century behind other
countries in the science of metallurgy.
A few months ago, the writer addressed a letter to the
gentleman, who at present is head of the mining department,
pointing out the present unsatisfactory state of this, the most
important subject in our mining industry, but beyond for-
warding thanks for the suggestion, no further notice was
taken. A deputation also waited upon him for a similar purpose
and was informed that any action on the part of the Govern-
ment in this matter would be very reprehensible, as it would
interfere with private enterprise. Now, the works at Freiberg,
which cover many acres of ground, are Government property ;
they give employment, directly and indirectly, to tens of thou-
sands of men, and are besides a handsome source of revenue to
the State. Such a result, according to our sapient Minister
for Mines, is very undesirable here.
I now come to that question, which is by far the most
weighty in our political economy, namely, settlement on the
lands of the colony for the purpose of cultivation. Our
Premier is never tired of boasting at every opportunity
what a prosperous and happy community this will become, and
how in time it will teem with, and support many millions of
the sturdy yeomanry, all owing to our magnificent soil and
climate. Like Montague Tigg, he has a particular forte, in
making promises clothed in the most grandiloquent language,
which he never makes the slightest effort to redeem. And I
now take the opportunity to inform him that unless some
more practical and abler man, dealing more in actions than in
words, takes charge of the helm, this country will never support
one fourth of the population to the square mile, that England
does. This is owing chiefly to the deficiency in the rainfall,
and the uncertainty of the seasons in the interior ; and to
counteract these drawbacks, and make a decent harvest almost
a certainty to the agriculturist, is the problem which our
statesmen will have to solve, and the sooner they start at it,
the better for all.
The farther one travels west, the lower becomes the rain-
guage, until towards our western frontier, the average yearly
fall amounts only to some 8 or 9 inches. The land in the


interior is almost without exception of excellent quality ; it
consists of red o* rich brown chocolate-coloured loam with
heavy black soil near the rivers and watercourses, and under
favourable conditions would grow almost anything. For hun-
dreds of miles it rolls away in gently undulating hills and
sloping plains, with here and there a solitary rocky mountain
rising perpendicularly out of the plain, thus forming a very
paradise for the former, if the rainfall could be depended upon
or water supplied for irrigation. I believe I was the first who
attempted cultivation in the distant interior. It is now some
13 years ago, and the season looked promising, when I planted
about 20 acres with oats. Hay brought at that time £4O a
ton in Bourke ; of course this was before the railways reached
that town, and I looked upon my labours as a gambling trans-
action, being well aware that only in the event of the season
turning out well, would I net a handsome profit. It rained
copiously in the beginning of June, but from then until the
following April, there fell not a drop more. Had I had at
this time an abundant supply of water at hand, I would have
saved the crop, as a small patch of sorghum on the river bank,
for which I had sufficient, grew tremendously.
The only use the land of the far interior can at present
be put to, is to feed sheep and cattle. It supports stock at
the rate of one sheep to every 4 to 8 acres ; and this is on land
which under a well devised system of irrigation, would pro-
duce wheat and corn enough to feed half the universe. The
most reckless waste, want of forethought and enterprise has
been evinced in connection with this matter for many years
past. A Royal Commission lias been appointed to inquire in-
to it, but its valuable and expensive labours were shelved as
usual. We could afford to spend half a million upon an exhi-
bition, that only benefitted the foreigner by showing him our
wants ; we could spend a similar amount upon a foolish and
almost criminal. Soudan expedition ; and now, in these hard
and unprogressive days, we can find the money to erect a
State House Heaven only knows how a majority could be
found to carry out such a preposterous measure—which will
cost a million before it is finished ; yet not a shilling can ever
be spared to conserve that most precious, and to us most
necessary element-—water. Money can be spent recklessly


and without thought or practical benefit on Sydney, but the
country is allowed to perish ; it is like benefiting the head at
expense of the body ; but as the latter withers, the former
is bound to follow suit, as soon as the borrowing powers fail.
There are five great watercourses which during floodtime
carry enormous volumes of water uselessly away to the ocean,
namely, the Murrumbidgee, Murray, Lachlan, Bogan and the
Darling. The latter is, for my present purpose, the most im-
portant, as it takes a long sweep west into the interior, and
as nature appears to have fitted it admirably for the \ery pui-
pose for which ultimately it must be used. It drains a larger
area than any other river in Australia and forms the most im-
portant artery in a dry and sun-parched region. Having a
very slight fall, it is intersected every few miles by narrow
rocky bars or necks which appear to have been placed there by
Providence, for the particular purpose of forming the founda-
tions of dams or weirs at small expense, and thus malie the
river not only permanently navigable, but chiefly to retain the
water elevate it to the level of the banks and send it back into
the numerous branches, which for miles traverse the country
in every direction. £IOO,OOO would go a long way towards
attaining this primary object, and on the principle that water
creates water, it might fairly be assumed, that the creation of
a large and permanent body in a dry country would have a
marked influence on the climate, enhance the rainfall, and
make the land more productive and fit to carry a large num-
ber of stock. When once this work is accomplished, upon
which we may look as the easiest, as well as the most directly
beneficial, shallow canals should be constructed for irriga-
tion purposes, ultimately to connect the Darling with the
Lachlan or Murrumbidgee, both of which rivers ought m time
to be treated in a similar manner as the Darling. Farmers
should then be encouraged to settle near the watercourses
where, by the aid of irrigation, they would be independent of
the seasons.
We are very conservative ; it is hard to change old cus-
toms and ideas ; and so it happens that, like the people of
England, we, in this sun-dried country, still depend upon the
natural rainfall to supply our crops with moisture, and when


this fails, our crops perish. The Americans are more practi-
cal ; in all those regions where the seasons are irregular like
ours, canals and ditches have been constructed for many miles
from the nearest brook or river available, and water has been
laid on to the land to be used whenever necessary. But run-
ning streams are not as plentiful here as there, and it is on
this account, that the whole irrigation scheme must be taken
in hand by the Government, so as to make the most of the
supply available. In time, the possession of a water-right, or
a piece of ground easily commanded by a neighbouring
watercourse, will be as good as a fortune to a man.
Hitheito farming has not been a favorite occupation
amongst us, which is due as much to the want of protective
legislation, as to the irregularity and uncertainty of the sea-
sons ; and as agriculture is a pretty good guide to the country’s
position, it is clearly the duty of the Government to obviate as
far as possible, the existing difficulties. With tins view, irri-
gated model farms could be established in different parts of
the parched interior, say at Wilcannia, Bourke, Brewarrina or
Deniliquin, in order to illustrate to the people the enormous
advantages of the system. Such farms would, after the first
expense, not only be self-supporting, but under good manage-
ment yield a revenue.
I am aware that many of my suggestions will be met by
the usual answer that it is undesirable for the State to interfere
in anything that can be carried out by private enterprise ; but
let us look abroad. As I have shown, every country is hedging
itself in against competition from its neighbours, find employ-
ment, settle the people to industrious pursuits, and make the
most of the resources at hand. Over 100 years ago, the great
Frederic of Prussia erected dykes along the banks of the
lower Vistula, to prevent the annual flood-water inundating
the low-lying lands adjoining the river, and after reclaiming
and making fit for agriculture, some hundreds of thousands of
acres, he invited French Huguenots to settle on them, who have
made this the most prosperous portion of Eastern Prussia.
Similar works have been carried out in Flanders and Holland.
At this moment, there are immense tracts of good land available
for settlement in Southern Russia, which the Government


sells on a land of deferred payment system, advancing suffi-
cient funds to carry the settler over the first years of difficulty.
Algeria and several of the South American States offer
equally favourable conditions, all showing that they are eager
to have people cultivating the soil, and as in our own case the
opportunity for a man to secure sufficient funds to make a
home for himself on the land, is getting extremely rare. I
see no reason, why we should not assist industrious men to
settle down, and am confident, that with proper management
this would prove a great success. In our northern, as well as
our southern coast districts, there are still tens of thousands of
acres of magnificent land open for settlement; the means
alone are wanting to convert them into prosperous homesteads.
Surely it would be better to assist men in cultivating their own
land, than set them to work, where their labour will not be of
benefit to anyone.
In the foregoing I have endeavoured in the first place to
trace the cause of the present widespread depression, and I
have stated the remedies, which to me appear the readiest at
hand, and the only ones to bring prosperity back to us. To
recapitulate, these are :
Ist. A judicious and discriminating readjustment of the
tariff, with the view of employing our artisans and workmen in
producing as far as possible our own requirements, thus re-
taining the value in our own country, finding an outlet for the
produce of the coal mines, and a ready market for the
farmers.
2nd. The appointment of a commission, constituted of
intelligent practical miners, to inquire into the extent and
treatment of our mineral ores, and comparing the lattei
with that in operation in other countries, especially at Freiberg
in Saxony. There are men in this country, who could give
valuable testimony on the subject.
3rd. The inauguration of a comprehensive system of
irrigation, for the purpose of counteracting the pernicious
effects of the droughts. The system to be started on the
Darling, as that river offers the greatest facilities and the
advantages would be immediate and of immense benefit to the
whole of the surrounding country.


But although I am convinced that the carrying out of the
above suggestions, would be an incalculable gain to everyone in
the community ; though lam certain that the finances would
soon be ni a sound and healthy condition, and that the labour
market in every department could not possibly be over crowded
tor the next century, provided always that assisted immigration
is never resumed ; there is yet a subject of even greater im-
portance *o which I must allude before I close the question,
it is the difficulty, that exists in procuring honest, patriotic
representatives to assist in carrying out any measure calculated
to benefit the majority of the people.
Look into the private lives and character of the men who
are sent year after year into the House, to manage our public
allairs : I here are some, who after having been guilty of cor-
rupt practices, are again and again returned at the head of the
poll; there are others, who though blameless otherwise, have by
scheming, log-rolling, and an undivided support of the Govern-
ment, no matter what its policy, contrived to get a few
thousand pounds placed yearly on the estimates for bridges and
courthouses in their own electorates, without any thought for
tbe whole, and these men are sure to be returned ; and there
are again others, whose great wealth and consequent influence
in their own districts has landed them in Parliament, where
their presence is of no use to anyone, while their bumptiousness
and readiness to defend the rights of property, is almost cer-
tain to do mischief. Ability, honesty of purpose, and patriot-
ism seem to count for nothing, the past doings and public
character of the man do not seem to be considered, it is
sufficient for the average elector, if the candidate can talk well,
make plenty of promises to get certain work done in the
electorate, throw ridicule upon his honest opponent, or if he
olds power and influence in the district where he resides.
I have never placed high value upon public opinion,
me cry of “JNo monopoly,” which was raised by the Free-
traders during the last election, was a bait thrown out to catch
the working classes, who greedily swallowed it, not thinking
that no monopoly could be greater than that exercised by the
halt-dozen large import-houses, who at present regulate the
whoie of the import traffic. I have listened to a candidate
telling the intelligent electors, that boots which now cost ten


shillings would, with a twenty per cent, duty, be sold for a
pound ; and they seemed to believe him. I have heard a
silvery-haired man, whose boast it was, that he had giovn grey
in the service of the country —ah, and what a service ! telling
the most barefaced falsehoods, and making the most outrageous
misstatements from the hustings, and they cheered him for it.
In fact, any charlatan can work up the feelings of a crowd
with boundless success ; and if he has a decent flow of lan-
guage, can garnish his remarks with a few well-cliosen phrases,
or intersperse them with witticisms, he will have the majority
with him. They do not seem to think, nor weigh the words,
they cannot shake off prejudices, generally acquired through
reading trashy and .interested newspapers, —it is enough for
them, that he can orate well and illustrate the benefits, small
and insignificant though they be, already conferred upon the
people. These are the class of men, who are always ready to
join the side that pays best ; possessing no principle, nor the
wish to benefit any one bnt themselves, they aie, as a mle, the
chosen representatives. Working men appear to forget, that
the price of their own labour, and the condition and piospects
of their own families are of as much importance to themselves,
as the thousands, turned over yearly, are to the merchant
living in his palace at Potts Point. A. mans worth should
never be calculated by the weight of his money-bags ; I have
seen more generous manly actions among the poor and lowly,
I have heard more sensible, sympathetic words amongst
humble artisans than amongst the gilded few. Money, gene-
rosity, and good sound principle seldom go together ; it is the
want 'of the latter qualities, which only too often increases a
man’s bank account and lifts him into position.


MR. E. PULSFORD’S PAMPHLET.
.1 have read eminent Freetrade apostle’s latest pro-
duction, bearing the singular and curious title : “ Freedom in
JNew South Wales versus Oppression in Victoria,” and am
glad to see that the author is besides champion of the Free-
trade clique, honorary member of the Cobden Club. The
pamphlet seems to have been published in answer to a collec-
tion of. ably and conclusively written articles which appeared
some time ago in the Melbourne Age, and which proved that
Victoria had advanced and outstripped New South Wales in
the race of progress, chiefly on account of her protective tariff
and m the very teeth of the latter’s immense natural advan-
tages. It must be admitted that Mr. Pulsford had a hard
task set before him, and that it is difficult to contradict facts
which are staring us in the face on all sides. Yet to the un-
observant reader, he appears to get through it well, and by
ignoring some facts altogether, and laying stress upon others
that are not affected by either a protectionist or freetrade
poiicy, he lays a fair case before him.
As usual, he parades carefully chosen statistics, with
which he thinks to smite the Protectionists hip and thigh,
statistics, especially when carefully selected, are, however, of
little alue, unless the surrounding circumstances are taken
into consideration. Thus when quoting exports and imports
and joyously comparing oqr exports, of which wool is the
principal item, he takes care not to allude to the fact, that
owing to our great territory the people in the little cabbage
garden, can never hope to come within reach of us in this
matter. Nor does he think it fit to point out, how our Sydney
merchants, though staunch Freetraders in other matters, are
distinctly protected by a low railway carriage on wool, which
was expressly reduced that they might get their pickings.


Neither does he make any decided allusion to the monopoly
we possess in great beds of coal and shale, nor does he say a
word about the sugar and kerosene industries, though he
includes them in the statistics, both of which have risen to
their present important position, owing solely to a highly pro-
tective import duty. Take them away, and the scouring and
fellmongering establishments, (where the squatters’ wool,
brought there partly at the people’s expense, is prepared for
market,) and what becomes of our manufactures ? However,
under the heading of Manufactures, Works, &c., Mr. Puls-
ford presents us in the surprising position of being almost on
a level footing with Victoria. There are well-founded doubts
upon the reliability of these figures, even if we leave the natural
advantages possessed by us over our neighbours and the
interests already created here under a protective tariff, entirely
out of the question, and compare our condition as resting upon
a purely Freetrade policy, which, certainly, it is not, to that
of Victoria, where every industry, skill and ingenuity is pro-
tected. If, for example, the collector of these figures goes
into a tailor’s shop, where some dozen men are making up
clothes for our daily wear, or into a cobbler’s, where 4 or 5
men are soleing and heeling boots, or a woodyard, where a
dozen men are engaged cutting up and carting away firewood
for our daily use, and quotes all these, as has been done , as so
many manufactures, it is plain, that it would be easy to bring
our statistics up to the Victorian standard. Let any man go
out to some of the suburbs of Melbourne, and look around at
the numberless tall chimney stacks rising up in every direction
and he will require no statistics to convince him which
colony has the advantage. Why, it was only the other day
that certain Victorian woollen manufacturers complained that
the ad valorem duty in New South Wales, had partly closed
this market against their goods.
Agriculture, which since Protection became the recognised
policy, has made such tremendous progress in the neighbour-
ing colony, is but lightly and apologetically dealt with ; nor
will I farther comment upon the figures presented, as I hear
that Mr. John Osborne, the able and conscientious advocate
of the people’s, and not the importer’s, cause, will shortly take


the pamphlet in hand, and put quite a different aspect upon the
matter.
Before however I conclude these notes, I must call atten-
tion to a very weighty item which the champion very wisely,
of course, never thought to enlarge upon. It is the financial
position of the two colonies.
Whilst Victoria can point with pride and satisfaction to a
surplus of over half a million for the financial year, and can
rub along easy and comfortable under her protective tariff, our
Treasurer is vainly battling with an ever-increasing deficit,
amounting to some millions. It is already understood
that the estimated surplus for the current financial year will
be converted into another deficit before it is ended, and it ap-
pears to me that the abilities of our different Treasurers have
of late been chiefly exercised in hiding the real state of affairs
from the public, and trusting to Providence for something to
turn up, to stop the ever-increasing downward tendency.
On the whole, I am satisfied that Mr. Pulsford’s efforts
are more calculated to damage the cause he advocates, than to
promote it ; he is paid to support the principles, the ideal
theories of Cobden, which are condemned as impracticable in
every country outside England and this colony, and he makes
the most of it; as every discerning reader can see at a glance that
he has been careful to lay great stress upon the advances,
created either by the natural advantages possessed by us over
our neighbours, or by the distinctly protective tariff, under
which in this Cobden-ridden country, certain manufacturing
interests have arisen and are prospering immensely. Let this
latter system be widened and extended, and we shall soon leave
our poorly provided but enterprising little neighbour, leagues
in the rear.


SIR HENRY PARKES.
What I am going to say about this statesman, will sound
like heresy to the ears of many of my readers ; but as Provi-
dence has supplied every one of us with a certain amount of
brain power, I would merely ask, nay entreat them, to exercise
it on their own account and draw their own conclusions, inde-
pendent of anything they may have heard or read, or of the
glamour which at present surrounds him.
In private life, he has failed in everything he undertook ;
everything he handled, every venture he assisted, has been a
dismal failure. Time after time he has resorted to the Insol-
vent court, and appealed for protection against his clamorous
creditors* His latest achievement, however, when he started
a life insurance company in conjunction with the present
speaker of the Assembly and several others, is perhaps the
worst and most ill-advised of all his previous speculations.
This company was advertised with a capital of £25,000, but
had in reality no funds whatever, Sir Henry, as chairman of
directors, having actually to borrow a few hundred pounds to
start business on. They commenced operations among the
poorer and most gullible classes of the community, and in a
few months, found themselves in the position of not being able
to meet a paltry claim. This is perhaps the most glaring
blunder of all—if it does not deserve a much stronger name—
in the chequered and varied existence of this remarkable man.
But reprehensible and far from exemplary as has been
the life of Sir Henry as a private citizen, his political career is
even more so. Starting his early public life in England as a
Chartist, he was a Radical among Radicals and worked hard
on behalf of the great majority of the people. It was the
most creditable period of his existence. Had he continued in
his labours as he commenced, there would now be tens of


thousands willing to do well deserved homage to the man who
had given his time and talent, for the benefit of his fellowmen.
However, by degrees as his undoubted oratorical powers lifted
him into the front rank of colonial politicians, he became dic-
tatorial, if not despotic, in his actions ; and deserting the
cause of the people, he developed distinct Tory principles,
which culminated in the disgraceful passing of the Treason-
Felony Act, a measure which was rushed through both Houses
in a single night, and resulted in its being condemned, even by
the Tory press of old England, as the most scandalous and
tyrannical piece of legislation ever enacted in any democratic
community.
From that time forward he has abandoned in his actions,
(though he does not admit it,) all pretence to patriotism and
advocating the interests of the people. He joined the ranks of
the Colonial nobility by accepting knighthood at the hands of
the Sovereign, thus still widening the breach, until now,
he is but the mouthpiece and unscrupulous tool of a few rich
importers and capitalists, at whose bidding he is a willing
slave, and to whose interests he makes that of the whole com-
munity subservient.
Sir Henry is an anomaly. He posseses no ability beyond
the power of representing the most glaring falsehood as tho
purest of truths ; his wonderful power of oratory, his ready
wit and venomous attack upon his opponents, sway the masses
to and fro ; so that even now, there are still thousands who look
upon him, against all reason, as the only man fitted and able
to save the country. Of course, these are men, whose intel-
lects are clouded, or blinded by an intense hatred towards a
section of their own fellowmen—a wretched sectarian feeling,
which Parkes has always taken care to keep kindled and ready
for use, whenever the occasion required.
To gain the love, the goodwill, the approbation of his
fellowmen, to devote his time, labour and ability, to improve
the condition of the people and to bring happiness and com-
fort where there was none before, is a noble object and
should be the highest aim, of every politician. True, there are
but few men of this class ; human nature is selfish and only
too apt to climb the ladder of fame, to seize and retain power.


regardless of all honest principle, and all suffering and hard-
ship around it. Sir Henry is a shining example of this class.
No man had ever greater opportunities to confer lasting bene-
fits ;no man has abused them more. So that now, after a long
political carreer, we cannot point to a single Act worth re-
cording and the outcome of his own brain, from which the
people have derived any profit whatever. The Education Act,
upon which he bases his reputation, is but a copy of a similar
one existing in the neighbouring colony years before it was
introduced here.
Four years ago he was pelted and hooted wherever he
showed himself ; he was defeated for East Sydney by such a
man as Mr. McElhone and scrambled into a seat with the greatest
difficulty. Five months ago, he posed as the saviour of the
country, proclaimed a Freetrade policy, with a consequent
banishing of all industries, as our only salvation, the only cure
for present depression, and. was returned triumphantly. Sixty
per cent, of the candidates, who stumped the country and
supported Parkes in his madbrained policy, were returned
also—all the long-eared electors voted for him then to a man. A
change has already set in, and before a year is over, Sir Henry
Parkes will again be the best-hated man in the country.
All his talk has turned into vapour, all his actions into
blanks ! When will the day come that, consigns all men
like him to obscurity for ever ?


GERMANY UNDER PROTECTION.
Among all the great nations of the earth, there is none
which has benefited more by considerate, thoughtful and far see-
ing legislation, than Germany. Nature has not endowed that
country with any conspicuous advantages. Its soil is in many
places indifferent, if not actually poor, the metals and minerals
lying under it, are limited in extent and its seaboard is insignifi-
cant. The great Chancellor who guides its destinies has, how-
ever, contrived to weld the heterogeneous mass of small States
into a mighty Empire, the friendship of which is courted by
every power and which is ready and prepared at any moment
with an army, the most perfect piece of machinery the world
has ever seen, to dictate peace, or hold its own against any
other.
But great and momentous as these achievements un-
doubtedly are, they pale into nothingness before Bismarck’s
successes in home legislation. Thirty years ago Germany
was scarcely a manufacturing power, its transatlantic commerce
was not worth mentioning and seventy per cent, of the woollen
and cotton goods, iron and steelware, cutlery, cement and even
chinaware required in the country, were the produce of foreign
workmen. Now, she has trading stations in all parts of the
world, her flag is to be found everywhere, she is building
ships for foreign powers, the home and manufacturing in-
dustries are in a state of activity never before witnessed, and
the price of labour has advanced from fifty to one hundred per
cent.
In former days, many of the articles of daily use, if not
of English manufacture, would not be considered worth buy-
ing. Now she is a heavy exporter of these same goods to
England and her colonies, and in the markets of the world.
Germany is England’s most formidable rival.


This remarkable change has come about and is due not only
to the frugal and industrious habits of the people, but chiefly
and principally, to the wise and careful legislation of the great
Chancellor.
Bismarck has long since recognised the mighty issue in-
volved in the question of labour and employment ; he has
recognised the danger there is to existing institutions, in the
presence of large bodies of hungry and unemployed men, the
right of any man to get a living, the duty the State owes to
him to give him the opportunity, and with all this in his
mind’s eye, he has placed a protective duty upon every article
that it is possible to produce within the boundaries of the
fatherland, and carried measures to stimulate industry and
enterprise in every direction.
Already most other nations are following in his footsteps
and copying German institutions. His workman’s Insurance
Act deserves to be placed on the statute book of every civilized
country under Heaven. It is distinctly socialistic in its ten-
dency, and took years before it was forced through the German
Parliament, which as here, is constituted chiefly of capitalists
and employers of labour, men who will fight tooth and nail to
preserve their interests. This Act compels every employer of
labour to pay weekly a small amount for every man he em-
ploys into a certain State fund, which insures the employees
against want, when incapacitated through age or accident. The
best and most generous among the working classes are as a
rule, the most improvident, and only too often find themselves
in their old age, helpless and unprovided for. Anyone can see
what a great blessing this arrangement must be to men of this
class, and recognise the generous and humane feeling which
prompted the measure.
The question of the sugar bounties, which lately has
attracted a good deal of attention in these colonies, simply
because it touches the pocket of many of our capitalists, and
threatens to bring ruin upon every sugar-planter outside Europe,
pourtrays the drift and meaning of Bismarck s intentions. After
stimulating the manufacture of this article under a protective
tariff to the utmost requirements of the home market, he re-


solved to pay a bounty upon all sugar exported. Already
the price has fallen considerably in all parts, many of the
planters have stopped growing, and still the production of
sugar from beetroot is on the increase, promising to replace
the produce of cane everywhere and entirely ruining the latter
industry. It remains to be seen, whether the bounty system
applied by Bismarck in his eagerness to furnish employment
to his people, will prove a success ; our Mr. Pulsford, the
Freetrade apostle and member of the Cobden Club, has declared
against it. Yet as Bismarck’s ideas have almost invariably
been crowned with success, there is good reason for believing
that this will prove no exception.
CONCLUSION.
My task for the present is ended, and I leave my readers
to think over and digest tvhat I have said. Constitutional
Government has not been a blessing to us ; no country has
ever been governed worse !—the free and democratic institu-
tions, the privileges given to every man—manhood suffrage—
have been, and are being used, by designing knaves to forward
their own ends and the interests of the few, regardless of the
welfare of the great majority.
Let every man wake up ! —endeavour to think for him-
self, draw his own conclusions, and above all, shake off all
prejudice and sectarian hatred towards his brother-man ; and
when the time comes round again, let him vote according to
his conscience and the duty he owes to this country alone,
Nations are like families, each member working into
each other’s hand and guarding each other’s interest.
National wealth is no value to the people, if only held by
a few.


