

IST Ministers will please invite Young Men to peruse this Pamphlet
The Claims of the Ministry
The Youth of the Church.
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE FEDERAL ASSEMBLY,
In St. Stephen’s Church, Sydney, on September 13, 1898,
BY THE
Right Rev. the Moderator of the Queensland General Assembly,
A. Mo WATT ALLAN.
PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE FEDERAL ASSEMBLY.
SYDNEY :
S. E. LEES, PRINTER AND STATIONER, 81 CLARENCE ST.




H 3 VSS / r •’
O -
THE CLAIMS OF THE MINISTRY ON
THE YOUTH OF THE CHURCH.
A Paper read before the Federal Assembly on Sept. 13,1898.
by the Right Rev. the Moderator of the Queensland
General Assembly, A. McWatt Allan.
Before I proceed to deal with the subject proper, I shall offer a
few remarks on two points upon which I have been asked to touch,
namely, “ the advantages of a native ministry,” and “ the steps
ministers and others might take in seeking out suitable candidates
for the holy office.”
As to the first:—Among the “ advantages of a native ministryf
I name the following : (1) They do not come as strangers, with the
feeling that they are looked upon by not a few as some kind of
speckled birds (2) They do not come with old country notions, and
with the determination to carry these out at all hazards in this new
land, where the people live for the most part under quite different
conditions. (3) They will not be disappointed with the freer and
less conventional modes of colonial life. (4) They do not require to
become acclimatised, either to the country, the bush, or the saddle,
(5) They are not likely to become home-sick and despondent. (6) Their
knowledge of colonial life and ways, and also modes of thought, fit
them for the ministerial office in this country in a way much superior
to that which is acquired, generally at least, after much toil and
costly experience by the recruit from the old land.
Second :—As to “ the steps ministers and others might take in
seeking out suitable candidates for the holy office." Perhaps ministers
might do more than they have done to encourage and direct the
minds of young men towards the ministry. While it is njt to be
supposed that any undue influence should be used in the way of
seeking to force them into this work, yet they ought not, without
sufficient reason, to be discouraged. Ministers might watch the
young men of their flocks, and, as far as possible, advise and direct
them to such books and subjects as would turn their minds towards
this high and holy calling ; they might also, with advantage, point
out that there are higher and nobler careers than those which aim
merely at money-making, amassing large fortunes, and the attainment
of place and power among men. And surely that of the ministry is
pre-eminently such a career. Undoubtedly, the effort to save a soul
from death, andcover a multitude of sins, is one which, for dignity,


glory, honour and reward, infinitely surpasses all others. When we
are told, on the authority of the greatest Teacher, that the world
itself is totally inadequate to render as an equivalent for the human
sou), we may form some faint estimate of the incalculable loss
sustained by the death of one. Could this only be realised in any-
thing like its full sense by our Christian young men, surely they
would be only too eager to step forward and, if possible, prevent
such a calamity. And the fact that the Christian ministry presents
a career with opportunities for the prevention, not of one such
calamity, but many, is certainly one that ought to speak very loudly
to our young men. And they ought to be very careful how they
refuse to hearken to such calls. To give heed to them will bring an
eternal crown of rejoicing and joy ; to turn a deaf ear to them may
bring everlasting misery and gloom. Perhaps if greater facilities
were placed before our young men —not by way of inducement, but
by way of making it possible for them to offer themselves—in the
shape of bursaries or positions as student-missionaries, we might
have more offering themselves,* How many now in the ministry in
the old country woo'd never have been there at all but for the help
they enjoyed either through a bursary or the position of a student-
missionary ?
Sometimes very silly remarks are made by parents in the hearing
of their children—such, for example, as this : “ I am sure he will
never be a ministeror, “I would never advise one of mine to be
a minister.” Though the young people hearing these expressions
may not fully understand them, yet they cause doubts and question-
ings to atise in their minds, and these gradually develop into a
confirmed, though unaccountable, prejudice against the office of the
holy ministry. It is clear that such parents fail to apprehend the
true character of this sacred office ; otherwise they would be glad
to have every son whom God has given them engaged in this heaven-
given calling.
Coming now to the main question before us, we ask—What is
the design of the Christian ministry ? Is it not to bring men to
God, to deliver them from darkness to light, from the thraldom of
Satan into the glorious liberty of the sons of Cod ? Then, what
work on earth can compare with it ? In what higher, nobler, grander
enterprise can the energies of the human mind be engaged? Why,
then, should there be difficulty in getting volunteers for it ? Is it
because some of the other learned professions present more tempting
inducements for the display and exercise of the intellectual gifts of
the young enthusiast? The fascinating interest and excitement
attending the exploration of unknown regions of science powerfully
attract some minds. The office of the statesman, wielding great
power and influence over men, moulding and guiding a nation’s
* Noth.— The writer was unaware, until after bis paper was written, that there existed
so many Bursaries for Students in the N.S.W. and Victorian Churches.


destiny and policy,—such work, we know, is most necessary, and it
appeals with great force to others. The sphere of the physician
presents rare opportunities for the alleviation of human suffering
and the promotion of human well-being, and has attractions for not
a few. The departments of philosophy and literature cffer induce-
ments which appeal with great strength to some.
But what are all these when placed beside the lofty and sublime
theme of the Christian ministry ? They all deal more or less ex-
clusively with matters pertaining to this present sphere, and hence
are as much inferior to that subject as the things of earth and time
are subordinate to those of the immortal soul. These things may
bring fame and renown; they may also bring exalted honour and
position, as well as many rich earthly emoluments. And the young
man who cares more for such rewards than for those assured to the
Christian minister had certainly better pursue the former, for such
as he is not likely to find a congenial sphere in the latter. He who
enters the ministry with the expectation of enjoying a life of ease
and comfort, and one devoid of care and anxiety, will be sadly
mistaken. Rather may he expect difficulties of no ordinary kind,
and be prepared to encounter hardships which men of the world
know not. Only he, therefore, who has been not only reconciled to
God by the death of His Son, but is also fired with a holy, un-
quenchable zeal for His cause, is fit to enter upon this great work,
which, being essentially spiritual, can only be done by Spirit-filled
men. Sinners can only be led to the Saviour by those who are
themselves saved men—men imbued with the Spirit of God,,prepared
to endure suffering, shame and persecution for His name.
Again, we ask, why should it be necessary to appeal to young
men so strongly to induce them to give themselves to this career ?
What will young men not face and endure in the shape of hardships,
dangers and difficulties with the view of achieving for themselves
fame and renown? What risks they will run! What daring
adventures they will encounter! What privations they will
endure !—And for what ? For that which will neither perma-
nently benefit themselves nor their fellows, but which will
perish in the using. Were an appeal to be issued now by the
Governor of this colony for 1000 young men to embark on
some daring and venturesome undertaking—the more daring and
venturesome the better—within a week probably more than the
required number would have declared their willingness—yea, their
eagerness—to enter upon it. Yet, when we want ten men for an
enterprise that is second to none in the universe—which is so high
and honourable that the angelic hosts themselves long to engage in
it—we are met with all kinds of flimsy excuses, instead of willing
volunteers. What does this mean ? Is it because they are afraid
of the difficulties of the work? We cannot say tha f , as a rule,
young men shrink from difficulties; but perhaps it may be because


they imagine that those pertaining to the Christian ministry are of
a peculiarly trying character ; or, it may be, they do not quite com-
prehend the nature and scope of the ministerial office.
Is it possible that they are deterred by “ filthy lucre V’ Have
the materialistic tendencies of our time, the overweening desire for
riches, so taken possession of them that they are thereby prevented
from giving themselves to this work, which is supposed by some to
be ordinary and common-place ?—this work which many ignorantly
imagine to be mere child’s play ! Have our young men come to
entertain a view of the ministry which is so degenerate and imperfect
that they deem it unworthy of them and their talents ? If so, we
can only pray that the Spirit of God may open their eyes, that they
may be led to see it in such a light that they shall regard their
highest powers and talents as altogether too mean and unworthy of
such a high and holy enterprise.
Again we ask why it should be necessary to appeal for recruits
for such a calling as this ? Why should there be such an unwilling-
ness among young men to offer themselves for it ? Is it because of
the long period of training ? This may deter some, but surely rot
those who realise the vast nature of the undertaking, and the urgent
need for the best possible equipment therefor. Again, some may be
hindered by what they may consider the too rigid character of the
preliminary training. These forget that this work calls for the
very best that human workers can give, with all the training that
their powers can obtain.
Is it because they give credence to that notion which we see some-
times paraded in certain journals , that the press has superseded the
pulpit ? If so, the sooner they abandon it the better, because the
press, no matter how excellent, can never take the place of the living
voice of man. Is it possible that they are being influenced by the
absurd caricatures of the parson which now and again appear in the
pages of the serio-comic and would-be clever press ? Surely they
have more judgement and sense than to allow such travesties to
block them. Is there any work worthy for a moment to be compared
with that of the Christian ministry? Is there any undertaking
of such vast account as the salvation of the human soul ?—the soul,
whose redemption the whole world is utterly inadequate to purchase!
—the soul, whose salvation nothing that man can procure or devise
is sufficient to obtain ! But the fact that its redemption has been
secured is the glorious news that the Christian ministry is charged
with proclaiming. Could any commission be more God-honouring
and God-glorifying? Could the human faculties be better employed
than in fulfilling such a behest ? Could any employment be higher
in dignity, more honourable or honouring, when faithfully executed,
more worthy to receive the noblest and best that a young man has ?
The Christian minister is Christ’s ambassador, Christ’s representative :
he receives His instructions from Him ; he speaks in His name | —


Had so long as he does this the whole court of heaven is behind him.
Thus his success is guaranteed. A call, therefore, comes to those
who know Christ to advance and dedicate themselves to His cause
by becoming ministers of His truth. The needs are as great as ever ;
in fact, never were the needs for an earnest and faithful ministry
greater; “ the harvest truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few.”
“ Follow Me,” He says, “and I will make you fishers of men.” The
heart that truly realises its indebtedness to its Master will regard it
as an honour to be asked, and will be ready for any sacrifice or
emergency, however great, that the work might entail. He will be
ready to endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. The
vision of God will come to him, and also of the needs of His cause,
as to Isaiah of old, with such overpowering, constraining force, that,
like him, he will be compelled to say—“ Here am /, send me !” The
Gospel ministry has urgent claims upon our Christian young men—
(l) because of the sublime nature of the work , than which there is no
higher, more glorious or more honourable on earth. The Christian
minister is the ambassador of the King of kings. There is no
sphere in the greatest of earthly empires to be for a moment com-
pared to it. The office of the minister is pre-eminently great—the
greatest in which mortal man can engage on this earth. (2) It has
a claim upon them also because of the scope which it affords for the
exercise and development of the highest intellectual powers, and the
moulding of a high-toned, manly Christian character in themselves
and others. (3) It has a claim upon them, too, because of the wide
and favourable sphere which it opens for the benefiting, in a moral
and social sense, of our fellow-men. The moral and spiritual up-
lifting of the race is largely in the hands of the Christian ministry
(4) And shall we not say that a strong claim rests upon them on
account of the Master’s unspeakable redemptive love, by which they
have beeu made heirs of eternal life, and through which they are
being sanctified ? Since He gave Himself for them, is it unreason-
able that they should devote to Him and the advancement of His
cause their heaven-given powers? (5) We think, also, that in view
of His urgent and specific farewell command—“ Go ye, ... . and
preach the Gospel to every creature /”—our Christian young men ought
seriously to consider to what extent they are fulfilling the demands
of this injunction; and they ought especially to consider whether
the obligation does not rest upon them individually and personally
to dedicate themselves to this service. (6) Further, just because of
the great needs and the peculiar difficulties of the work, surely it
presents special claims upon our Christian young men, among whom
there is surely enough of grit and go to prevent them from being
debarred by obstacles which, at any rate, are not greater than those
attending the average earthly calling. (7) Then, surely the high
honour and the glorious privilege of being co-workers with God
ought to induce our young men to devote themselves to this high


and holy enterprise. The heaven-sent minister occupies a position
from which even the angels are debarred, though the work is
eminently worthy of their powers, and, though they long to be
employed in it, yet the Great Proprietor of all preserves it for men.
Again, therefore, we would earnestly plead with our young men to
ponder over this matter with all seriousness ; to think of the work
itself, in its profound nature and unlimited scope; to think of the
joys and rejoicings which, in spite of its difficulties, attend it; the
priceless and unfading reward that will follow ; and then let them
say whether they ought to withhold themselves from this great
and glorious work !
