

DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
MEMOIRS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
E. F. PITTMAN, A.R.S.M., UNDER SECRETARY AND GOVERNMENT GEOLOGIST.
ETHNOLOGICAL SERIES, No. 2.
I.—THE CYLINDRO-CONICAL AND CORNUTE STONE
IMPLEMENTS
OF
WESTERN NEW SOUTH WALES
AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE.
II.-THE WARRIGAL, OR “DINGO,” INTRODUCED
OR INDIGENOUS?
BY
R. ETHERIDGE, JUNR.,
CURATOR OF THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM, SYDNEY.
ISSUED BY DIRECTION OF THE HON. JOHN ESTELL, M.P., SECRETARY FOR MINES.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
35317 a
1916.
[78 6d]




DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
MEMOIRS OF THE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
E. F. PITTMAN, A.R.S.M., UNDER SECRETARY AND GOVERNMENT GEOLOGIST.
ETHNOLOGICAL SERIES, No. 2.
I— THE CYLINDROCONICAL AND CORNUTE STONE
IMPLEMENTS
OF
WESTERN NEW SOUTH WALES
AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE.
II- WARRIGAL, OR “DINGO,” INTRODUCED
OR INDIGENOUS?
BY
R. ETHERIDGE, JUNR.,
CURATOR OF THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM, SYDNEY.
ISSUED BY DIRECTION OF THE HON. JOHN ESTELL, M.P., SECRETARY FOR MINES.
SYDNEY: WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1916.
[7«. C</.]




CONTENTS.
CYLINDRO-CONICAL AND CORNUTE STONE IMPLEMENTS.
I.—lntroduction ... 1
}II. —Assigned Uses 3
A.—UTILITARIAN PURPOSES.
1. Seed-grinder Theory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3
2. Grave-marker Theory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4
3. Records of the Dead 11
4. Challenge Stones ... ... ... ... 12
5. Bora Message Stones ... ... ... ... 12
B.—MAGICAL OR CEREMONIAL PURPOSES.
6. Rain-making Stones ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
7. Tooth-avulsion Theory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
8. Fetish to Procure a Good Supply of Snakes ... ... 14
9. Phallic Theory ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 16
10. Death-bone Pointer Theory ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
111. —Distribution and General Details—
1. New South "Wales... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
(а) Localities well-defined ... ... 19
(б) Localities ill-defined ... ... ... ... 29
2. South Australia ... ... ... 32
3. Queensland 33
IV. Analysis ... , 35
THE WARRIGAL, OR ''DINGO.”
L—lntroduction . ... ; 43
ll.—Geological History .. 44
lll,—Wellington Caves Teeth ... ... 52




LIST OF PLATES.
PART I.
Plate X. Map of portion N.S. Wales, South Australia, and Queensland, showing
distribution of Cylindro-conical and Cornute stones,
Plate ll.—Fig. I—The Cuttaburra country.
Fig. "2 „ »
Plate lll.—Cylindro-conical stone from Darling River.
Plate IV.—lncised stones from Popilta, Wentworth, and Mount Murchison,
Plate V.—lncised stone from Kallara Holding.
Plate Vl.—lncised stone from Curranyalpa Holding, Darling River.
Plate Vll.—lncised stone from Yandella Selection, Darling River.
Plate Vlll.—Stones from Teryawynia Holding and Nelurigaloo.
Plate IX.—Fluted stone, Caledonia Holding, Queensland; stone from Cooper’s Creek;
Hughenden stone.
PART 11.
Plate . X.
Plate XI.
Plate XII.
Teeth of Cams, sp. Wellington Caves and of Canis familiar is, Thylacinus
spleens and Sarcophilus ursinus for comparison.




LETTER OF JRANSMITTAL.
Department of Mines,
Sydney, 23rd December, 1915.
Sir,
I have tbe honor to transmit for publication a Memoir,
No. 2 of the Ethnological Series, by Mr. Robert Etheridge, Curator
of the Australian Museum, Sydney, and formerly Palaeontologist on
the Geological Staff of this Department.
The Memoir treats of two subjects, viz.:—
1. The Cylindro-Conical and Cornute Stone Implements of
the. Australian Aborigines, and the purposes for which
they were probably used; and *
2. A discussion as to whether the Warrigal or Dingo was
introduced into Australia by man, or was indigenous.
All the known geological evidence in regard to this latter,
interesting question is cited by the Author, but no definite conclusion
is arrived at.
We are indebted to Mr. Etheridge for a long list of valuable
publications on Palaeontological and Ethnological subjects, and I am
glad to have the opportunity of drawing attention to an additional
work from his pen.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
EDWARD E. PITTMAN, A.R.S.M.,
Government Geologist.
The Her, John Estell, M.D.A.,
Minister for Mines,


CYLINDRO-CONICAL AND CORNUTE STONE
IMPLEMENTS.
I.—INTRODUCTION.
It is not my intention to describe these peculiar Aboriginal imple-
ments in detail, this has already been done by Mr. W. R. Harper 1 .
Sufficient information has now accumulated to, in a great measure, trace
their distribution throughout Western New South Wales, and to some
extent contiguous areas also. One explanation of the use of
remarkable objects has also certainly been recorded on reliable
authority.
It may be stated in passing that four different types, or forms,
are known, viz.—(l) the elongate cylindro-conical, 2 comprising two
varieties; (2) the medium cylindro-conical, 3 also of two varieties; (3)
the short (or dumpy) cylindro-conical; 4 and (4) the more or less
cornute/’
Sundry uses have been suggested, but exception can be taken to
most of them when submitted to critical examination. The more im-
portant of these suggestions are—
A. Utilitarian
1. Seed grinding top stones 0 (3).
2. Grave-markers or tombstones (4).
3. Records of the dead 8 (11).
4. Challenge stones (p, 12).
5. Bora message stones (p. 12).
B. Magical
6. Rain-making stones (p. 13).
7. Tooth avulsion (p. 14).
8. Snake-producing fetishes (p. 14).
9. Phallic emblems 9 (16).
10. Heath-bone pointers (18).
A
1 Harper—Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, XXIII, Pt. 3, 1898, p. 420.
2 Harper— Loc. cit., Pis. xii, xiv, fig. 1.
3 Harper— Loc. cit., PI. xvi, fig. 1.
4 Harper— Loc. cit., PI. xvii, fig. 1.
5 Harper— Loc. cit , PI. xvii, fig, 2, PI. xviii, fig, 2.
B Harper— Loc. cit., p. 430.
1 Harper— Loc. cit., p. 436.
8 Harper— Loc. cit., p. 436.
9 Harper— Loc. cit,, p. 434.


Nos. 1,2, 3 and 9—were reviewed by Mr. Harper and practically
rejected from the want of reliable evidence in support, be remarking;
‘ ‘ I regret to say I have been unable to discover satisfactory reasons for
their existence.’ ’
It has been found extremely difficult to obtain any reliable infor-
mation as to the use of these stones. In the words of Mr. E. Milne, a
well-known collector of Aboriginal stone implements, “ reticence on the
part of old Blacks, ignorance on that of the later generation, and off-
hand opinions of careless and often ignorant white observers is the
cause of this.”
With the view of endeavouring to obtain facts in general relating
to these implements I paid two special visits to the Darling River
Country. The first was in 1903 with Mr. A. W. Mullen, of the Western
Land Board Commission, from Bourke to Kallara and westwards to the
desolate and weird region of the Cutaburra branch of the Paroo River;
during this journey we made a traverse of over 400 miles through the
pastoral holdings of Toorale, Dunlop, Newfoundland and Kallara. We
experienced great attention at the hands of Mr. and Mrs. Robinson at
Toorale, Mr. and Mrs. Vincent at Dunlop, and the late Mr. Graham
Officer at Kallara; these ladies and gentlemen did everything in their
power to aid us in our search for information and specimens.
My second visit was in 1904 on the southern side of the river
through the pastoral holdings of Murtee and Cultowa when I was most
hospitably entertained by Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Johnston and Mr. A.
Wilson respectively. On this occasion, in company with one or the other
of these gentlemen an in and out course was followed around Lakes
Wongalarra and Poopelloe. The whole of this country from Bourke
southwards must at one time have been a great stronghold of the Blacks.


II.—ASSIGNED USES.
Befoee discussing the magical or “ ceremonial ” phase of the sub-
ject it may he well, as a means of clearing the path, to first pass in
i
review the more utilitarian purposes to which these stones have been
assigned. The term 11 ceremonial ” covers a wide range of investiga-
tion, and with the exception of such uses as “ seed-grinders,” “ tomb-
stones,” “ records of the dead,” &c., would embrace most of the sugges-
tions offered. The difficulty, hitherto, has been to obtain any reliable
evidence of a ceremony applicable to these cylindro-conical and cornute
implements.
A. HTILITAEIAN.
1. Seed-geixdee Theoey.
So far as I can gather, the late Dr. J. 0. Oox was the first, in
1884, to suggest the application of these stones to the preparation of
meal, 10 when Mr. A. J. Brook’s specimen was exhibited before the
Linnean Society of New South Wales. Of the series examined by him,
Mr. Harper remarked that only one had ‘ ‘ undoubtedly been used as a
grinder of some sort,” 11 and suggested that it owed its present appear-
ance to use as a scythe sharpener.
We are sufficiently well acquainted with the seed-grinding methods
of the western Aborigines, and both the nether and top stones used, not
to include those now under discussion as a part of the necessary para-
phernalia.
In the Museum collection are several stones that have evidently
been used for grinding or pounding purposes, but it is clear from their
appearance that this was not the primary but rather a secondary use;
originally cylindro-conical stones, pure and simple, they were subse-
quently adapted to a more casual purpose. A stone found by the late
Mr. Graham Officer, in a hollow log on Kallara Holding, has the apex
worn, blunted and bruised as it would be in use as a pounder. Another
10 Cox—Abst. Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, 25th June, 1884.
11 Harper— Loc, cit., p. 426, PI. xvi, fig. 1.


obtained somewhere in the neighbourhood of Wilcannia has been suffi-
ciently worn down on one face to suggest its use as a pounder. Another
of which the locality is unknown, presents the appearance on one face of
having been used as an anvil stone or chopping block for smashing or
fracturing other objects on. The same remark applies to another speci-
men, collected by myself at Lake Wongalarra. A fifth, locality unknown,
presented by the Rev. J. M. Curran, has certainly been used asa“ top ”
grinding stone. Now, as these five stones, out of a series of more than
one hundred, are all that exhibit any trace of secondary use, I think the
“ grinder theory ” may be dismissed as unproven, if not untenable,
2. Grave-marker Theory.
This was held at one time by Mr. Officer, with whom I had many
opportunities of discussing the matter. In a paper, 12 descriptive of a
grave on Curranyalpa Holding, he unfortunately included in one classi-
fication stones of two entirely different types, but separated them as
types A. and 8., those of the A. type 15 being the commoner of the two-
round in section, of quartzite or “ kopi,” and invariably hollowed or
slightly concave at the base. His section 8., compressed objects,
“ invariably made of kopi,” oval in section, broader and flatter than
those of the first group, convex on one face, flat on the other, and some
with a slight bend.
“ There can be no doubt but that the ‘ stones ’ of the A. type
were placed over graves,” said Mr. Officer, He, however, admitted to
never having seen a grave so indicated, but quoted the authority of Mr.
I). W. T. Hatten of Yanda and Mr. S. E. Goddard of Yandilla. Mr.
Officer then described the grave referred to found by Mr. Goddard on a
sand hill about three miles back from the Darling River. It was sur-
rounded by two circles of the B. type stones, and others were met with in
the grace itself, in all thirty-nine kopis. He further informs us that the
Rev. Mr. Morgan, of Bourke, on the authority of an old Black, told him
the A. type stones were placed on the graves of men, and the B. type on
those of women.
Mr. Officer concluded his paper by saying, “ I am thus inclined
to the tentative conclusion that the peculiar objects under discussion
have a phallic significance.”-
12 Officer—Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, XXVII, 2, 1901, p. 238.
A* This includes those figured by Mr. Harper.


Male {large) —
Yandella
Length.
9| in.
Greatest Bectional
diameter.
... 4* in.
Tankarooka
.. , ...
9 „
... 4 „
Newfoundland ...
8 „
41 „
Marra
8 „
H „
Male (small) —
Tara
... ...
5 „
...
H „
Mt. Murchison ...
44 „
H „
Female —
Length.
Breadth.
Thickness.
Murtee ...
14 in.
5 in.
2| in.
Tara
H ,,
5| „
... 3 „
Marra
m „
3 j „
... 2 „
Curranyalpa
10 „
44 „
• -. 2i „
Now, these “ kopi stones ” (Officer’s type B.) are of two forms.
Some are irregularly oval, or egg-shaped, large or small, others are
more or less depressed, but still plano-convex, oval cake-shaped. The
first are most certainly placed on men’s graves, as I have proved by
personal investigation, and I believe the second denote female inter-
ments. The following are a few measurements taken at random:—
The mineral composition also varies to some extent. Dr. C.
Anderson has examined several and finds that one ovo-lenticnlar
“ stone ” from Marra is clay simply, and another is clay with a slight
admixture of gypsum. Of the female examples, one from Curranyalpa
consists of gypsum with a little clay only, another from Marra is nearly
pure gypsum.
No doubt a widespread belief exists in the use of the cylindro-
conical stones (Officer’s type A.) as grave-markers, but those who
support this theory have advanced no proof in confirmation. The
principal evidence is hearsay, or the testimony of the oldest inhabitant,
both equally unreliable.
Mr. Officer, when he wrote his paper in 1901, was clearly of opinion
that the grave marker theory was the correct one, but the following
extract from a letter, dated ‘ ‘ Kallara, 11th May, 1903, ’ ’ is significant:—
“ I do not now think the ‘ spindles ’ (type A.) are grave stones, never
having found one in association with a grave but almost invariably on
clay-pans at the feet of sand hills, ’ ’


The ovo-lenticular and cake-shaped “ kopis ” are the grave-
markers or “ tombstones,’ ’ the “ spindles ” are not. The nature of the
former was pointed out years ago by Mr. F. Bonney, one of the early
European settlers on the Darling River, who lived there from 1865 to
3880. When describing the interments 14 of the Bungyarlee and Parkungi
tribes about Mount Murchison, on the northern side of the river, and
near what is now Wilcannia, he said “ large egg-shaped pieces of white
plaster ” were laid around the grave between the low mound and a
brush fence constructed thereat. Dr. A. W. Howitt records the same
custom of surrounding a grave with a brush fence by the Tongaranka, a
tribe living immediately to the south of the Barrier Ranges. 15
In Mr. Officer’s letter already referred to occurs the following
passage:—“ In the other [box] is a collection of grave-stones. The egg-
shaped ones (intended I believe to represent Emu eggs) came from a
grave at Tankarooka, about twenty miles down river from here
[Kallara], and were sent to me by Mr. J. Mungovan. The others,
flatfish ones, are those from the Curranyalpa grave.”
The use of the ovo-lenticular, or egg-shaped “ kopi ” balls, as
grave markers, I am able to confirm by personal observation, and also
the fact that cylindro-conieal, or “ spindles,” are not, so far as a close
examination of a wide extent of country on both sides of the Darling
permitted me to form an opinion.
In 1903, in company with Mr. A. W. Mullen, of the Western Land
Board and Mr. Hubert Murray of Tara, examination of an extensive
burial ground was made on Newfoundland Holding close to the river.
Most of the interments were found on the red sand hills in various stages
of decay and disruption; in a space of about thirty yards square wo
found six burials, and on one we counted fourteen of the ovo-lenticular
balls. On a contiguous sand hill was an interment in an excellent state
of preservation consisting of a long enclosure, thirteen feet in diameter,
and within, a smaller space three feet square containing thirteen of these
same markers, and the remains of a “ widow’s-cap.” At four feet from
the surface we found a skeleton, with small portions of a ’possum cloak
14 Bonney—Journ. Anthrop. Inst., XIII, 1883, p. 136.
15 Howitt—Native Races of S.E. Australia, 1904, p. 451.


wrapping still remaining. The deceased had been placed on his side in
the contracted position, lying in an east-north-east and west-south-west
direction, and facing the west.
This interment is of particular interest from the occurrence of the
fragmentary “ widow’s-cap ” in conjunction with the ovo-lenticular
balls. The skeleton exposed was that of a fine man, and the depository
of the widow’s offering was quite in accord with custom as so frequently
pointed out by writers from Mitchell and Eyre onwards I *. It further
lends support to my contention that the ovo-lenticular balls are mascu-
line. On the Cattle Run Sand-hills on Murtee Holding I saw a grave
with the small ovo-lenticular “ kopis ” arranged in a zig-zag manner;
in this neighbourhood the graves not infrequently occurred on the sand-
hills surrounding clay pans.
Mr. Officer suggested the Curranyalpa interment to have been
either that of a woman, or a young man, from the appearance of the
fragmentary remains rescued. He subsequently forwarded portions
of the skeleton to me, and as already stated some of the markers. I also
came to the conclusion that the deceased had been a young person and
probably a woman. All the markers sent to me were of the flattened
cake-like or B. type, indeed this ,is quite apparent in the plate accom-
panying his paper. If, therefore, I am correct in surmising that this
form of marker is female, then the latter and Mr. Officer’s type B. are
synonymous. Wherever I investigated this subject along or contiguous
to the Darling I did not see any evidence of the commingling of the two
varieties of type 8., always one or the other, and I did not in a single
instance see a cylindro-conical stone in conjunction with a grave.
I forwarded photographs of some of these cylindro-conical stones
to Dr. W. Macgillivray of Broken Hill for information. In his reply he
was good enough to furnish me with an additional locality, and at the
same time wrote thus; “ I have not been able to get any definite infor-
mation concerning their use; the present remnant of the Aborigines know
nothing about their use or meaning. The oldest inhabitants amongst
the whites are equally as ignorant. From .enquiries I have made they
are usually said to be found in connection with graves, stuck upright and
18 Summarised by me in a paper, The “ Widow’s Cap ” of the Australian Aborigines. Proc,
Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, XXIV, 2, 1899, p. 333.


in pairs, sometimes standing on the surface, at others buried with only
the tips visible.” Dr. Macgillivray says he has found these stones bn
old camping grounds.
I am able to distinguish four chief forms of the cylindro-conical,
“ spindle-shaped,” or type A. stones, two of these having each two
variants. These are—
1. Long cylindrical, slender, 14 indies and upwards.
a. straight
b. curved.
2. Medium cylindrical, stout, 8 to 14 inches long.
a. straight
b. curved.
3. Conical, short or dumpy, 7 inches, or less.
4. Cornute, section usually oval.
Section round
or oval.
The material selected by the makers was either slate, fine-grained
soft sandstone, fine-grained hard sandstone almost passing into quartz-
ite, clay, ironstone, or “ kopi.” There are several almost pure clay
stones in the Museum collection, but few of “ kopi ” only. For instance,
there is a long incised clay cylindrical from Lake Poopelloe; an unincised
medium clay cylindrical from Yandella; a dumpy speckled clay conical
from Marra, and portion of a cylindrical from the same holding which
is almost pure kopi-gypsum, in fact free plates of this mineral are visible
on a fractured surface of the specimen. For comparison sake the com-
position of a <! Widow’s-cap ” was investigated, which proved to be a
mixture of clay and gypsum, the former substance predominating.
How do these cylindro-conical or “ spindle ’’ stones occur at the
present day ? Mr. Harper remarked “we have practically no detailed
record of their discovery.” It will not be unprofitable if we first briefly
consider the general appearance of at least one part of the country
yielding them.
The geological features of that portion of the Darling River area
known to me from north of Bourke to near Wilcannia, and for many
miles back on either side of the river, may be summarised as — (a) the
grey (so-called *'*' black ”) soil, formings belt in places with an average


width of from eight to ten miles; (b) red soil plains, often pebble covered ;
(c) red sand hills; (d) clay pans; (c) circular or oval depressions (so-
called 11 lakes ”), mud encrusted (possibly enlarged clay pans in other
words), and mostly carrying water only in wet seasons; (/) similar
depressions, salt encrusted (so-called “ salt lakes ”); ( g ) isolated low
hills of sandstone, quartzite, or quartz-porphyry.
a. Grey Soil. —This is the alluvium deposited by the river and
must be of considerable thickness. Wherever the friable surface is
removed after destruction of the vegetation a hard clay surface is ex-
posed. It is either treeless, but with patches of scrub and Polygonum,
or bears a Eucalypt locally known as “ Coolabah ”; in the former con-
dition it becomes soft and boggy ground after rain, and in suitable
seasons is richly endowed with green “ herbage,” and at its best with
grasses.
h. Red Soil. —This deposit extends over a vast extent of country
beyond the boundaries of the grey' soil and forms either level or slightly
undulating ground, bearing a luxurious growth of small trees and
shrubs of various kinds such as ‘ ‘ Bibble ’ 1 or Eound-leafed Box, Mulga,
Leopard-tree, “ Budda ” or Turpentine, Hop-bush, “ Taiwan,” War-
rior or Currant-bush, &c. It is composed of similar red sand to that
forming the red sand hills proper 17 in combination with a due amount of
earthy matter; the surface is in places quartz and iron-stone pebble
strewn. Wherever this covering of red soil is removed by wind, aided
by the combined effects of the rabbit pest, drought, and the destruction
of the native vegetation by reckless “ scrub-cutting,” a hard clay surface
is exposed locally known as “ scalded ” ground, on which it is difficult to
induce vegetation to again grow.
; c . Red or “ Shifting ” Sand Hills (PI. ii). —These run in sub-
parallel lines, and in the distance appear as low, rounded undulating
rises. On a nearer approach, however, they are found to consist of
hummocks, usually with a steep face on one side and a gradually declin-
ing slope on the other often of considerable extent; they are separated
by miniature valleys of variable width. Some of the finest are to be seen
on the Cuttaburra branch of the Paroo Eiver, where Mr. Mullen and
myself found they attained a height of fifty feet. This lightly deposited
sand, varying in colour from a yellowish tint to that of a deep brick-red,
B
17 No better idea of these sand hills can be conveyed than by the two views shown in PI. ii,
taken by Mr. A. W. Mullen.


is much disturbed by wind which travels it onwards from the periphery
of each mound, hence the name “ shifting ” sand hills applied to them.
The component particles are pure silex, each particle with a coating of
iron-oxide. These “ hills ” occur both on the grey soil and red soil
ground, but more extensively and of larger size on the latter.
d. Clay-pans. —Shallow depressions, more or less oval or circular
in outline, large or small, distributed throughout the red soil country,
treeless, often bearing a copious growth of grass, particularly {( Cane-
grass,” and various kinds of “ Salt-bush.” These pans are water-
bearing in wet seasons, but otherwise dry, and in flood time many of
them, no doubt, communicate with one another. Of this nature appears
to be the Cuttaburra branch of the Paroo River, an indescribable flat and
weird surface of great extent.
The remaining physical features are the so-called “ lakes,” and
isolated hills. The former may be either fresh or salt, very few of th 6
former, and the latter dry and saline encrusted; they do not appear to
have any direct bearing on the present subject other than that scattered
implements are found around the margins of the fresh water depres-
sions just as they are about the “ clay-pans.” The isolated hills
whether of sandstone or quartzite are of interest because it is from them
the material of which a large proportion of the stones in the Darling-
Lachlan area, at any rate, is derived.
It is on the sand hills and around the clay-pans that the cylindro-
conical stones, as well as mill-stones (nether and top), and axe-heads
(“ tomahawks ”) are scattered, either entire or broken. There does not
appear to be any rule now governing their occurrence, several of one
kind or the other may be reposing close together, or they may be widely
•scattered. On the sand hills the various implements may be lying flat,
or the larger, such as the cylindro-conical stones and nether mill-stones,
may recline at an angle half buried in the sand, the angle of inclination
being against the direction of the prevailing wind, with miniature
mounds of sand gathered behind their protecting surfaces. The nether
grindstones are often accompanied by their top-stones or “ rubbers,” or
,the latter may occur singly or in small groups; they are usually of the
same fine-grained sandstone as the nether, but occasionally harder and
more quartzite-like material was used. The cylindro-conical stones are


more often found broken than whole, and generally much weather worn.
They certainly appear to be of more frequent occurrence on the hills
than around the pans, and in the latter position they impart the idea of
having been so left by the gradual removal of the wind-borne sand.
Nor does there appear to be any restriction of one variety to any
particular locality, but they occur indiscriminately, and judging by
the Museum collection, numbering upwards of eighty odd specimens,
the unincised Seem to be far more common than the incised. I did not
observe one on the “ black ” soil ground.
Small temporary £ ‘ ovens ’ ’ or cooking-places are common around
some of the larger clay pans, swampy depressions, and dried-up lakes.
There are circular patches of hard-baked nodules of clay, but few stones,
from eighteen inches to three feet in diameter, and indicate the time
when the various basins were water covered, and the “ ovens ” were
used for cooking food as the fresh-water mussel, bullrush root, 18 &c.
These small fires were evidently not permanent camps but merely tem-
porary cooking-places.
The information gleaned in relation to the “ grave-marker
theory ’ ’ of the cylindro-conical stones summarises thus:—
v 1. In Mr. Harper’s paper no evidence of such an application is
afforded.
2. Mr. G. Officer propounded the 11 grave-marker theory, ’ ’ but
subsequently abandoned it.
3. Confusion has arisen in distinguishing between the cylindro-
conical stones and ovo-lenticular kopi balls.
4. The latter have been demonstrated to be grave markers by
actual observation.
5. Current report ascribes a “ tombstone ” significance to the
cylindro-conical, but no actual proof is forthcoming so far.
3. Eecoeds of the Dead.
I have no information to offer under this heading beyond a state-
ment made by a Mr. W. Freeman, that on an incised stone found at
Budda Lake, Darling River, the markings were a record of the burial of
forty-nine adults and twelve children. IBa
18 Gr. Krefft described the method of roasting “ typha ” or “ wongal ” roots in the neighbourhood
of the Murray-Loddon Junction. “ The roots are roasted in a hollow made in the ground, and either
consumed hot, or taken as a sort of provision upon hunting excursions.” (Trans. Phil. Soc, N.S. Wales,
1862-65 (1866), p. 361).
J»a Freeman—Proc. Austr, 4ssoc. Adv, Sci., IX, 1902 (1903), p. 539.


4. Challenge Stones.
1 mention this theory because it is additional to those touched on
by Mr. Harper. In a letter to me, written from “ Yandilla,” and dated
16th August, 1903, Mr. J. E. Goddard stated that the cylindro-conical
stones (Officer’s type A.) were, he was informed by the “ oldest living
Aborigine ” in his district, a means of communication between two
hostile tribes, the one challenging the other to fight. “ Hence,” re-
marked the writer, “ the two concave marks at the base end, all the
others [stones] possessing only one.” As a matter of fact I have never
seen but one of these stones with this double basal cupping, and lacking
confirmation I do not place any great reliance on this explanation.
5. Boea Message Stones.
This view was communicated to me recently by Mr. E. Milne who
received it from Mr. T. Vincent of Dunlop. The latter, who has devoted
much patient enquiry to the subject, was informed by an aged Black
that the stones in question were called “ yurda,” and the marks ex-
pressed the number of young men to pass through the ordeal of the
(< bora.”
There is more than one cogent objection to this explanation, to
wit: (1) There are more stones found plain and unincised than there
are bearing incised motive; (2) this motive is of a very varied nature;
(3) the number of stones to be found in any one locality; (4) the dif-
ferent types do not appear to be in any way restricted to given areas,
but occur indiscriminately. A glance at the Distribution section of
this paper will render these objections obvious.
The principal types of incisions are the following:—(1) Broad-
arrow marks or “ Emu-feet,” single or many; (2) short transverse
incisions, single, in groups of two, three, or even more, scattered irregu-
larly, in parallel longitudinal lines, or the incisions of one line alternat-
ing with those of the next, and so on; (3) circumferential grooves, one or
several, when one usually close to the apex, when more than one, either
median or scattered; (4) when at the apex the area within the ring-
groove in two instances bears radii; (5) continuous longitudinal groove
with lateral grooves proceeding at right angles from it; (6) scattered
Greek crosses; (7) parallel, longitudinal lines of piftings; (8) spiral


incision at the apex (only one instance recorded); (9) cupped base with
radiate incisions; (10) faint lines crossing one another repeatedly and
forming rhomboidal figures.
B.—MAGICAL OR “ CEREMONIAL.”
We may now consider those theories to which the term “ cere-
monial ’ 1 can be more strictly applied.
6. Rain-making Stones.
In a letter, addressed to the before-mentioned Mr. Bonney, a copy
of which the latter obligingly sent me, Mr. Officer, under date 31st
August, 1909, written at Kallara, said he had heard the cylindro-conical
stones were u stuck on the sand hills, pointed downwards to bring rain.”
Mr. Officer then proceeded to state how the Blacks of his neighbourhood
proceeded in their rain-making efforts in the past, as related to him
by an old blackfellow, one “ Zarrie.” Without transcribing all the
details given in this letter suffice it to say that the stone employed was a
flat one, or preferably one slightly hollowed or concave. On this stone
was placed hair from the head or beard, and blood allowed to flow over
it, then the whole contrivance was encased in clay, and finally sunk in a
deep waterhole. From this Mr. Officer surmised that the conico-
pyramidal stones might have been used as a variant of the flat stones
mentioned by “ Zarrie,” and that the Shallow cup-like depression so
generally present at the base of each one was for the reception of the
blood.
Now, be this as it may, phlebotomy in connection with “ rain-
making ” is known to have been practised by many tribes, 1 * as well as
the use of stones, but as yet I have not found any published reference to
the use of these cylindro-conical stones for such a purpose. On the
other hand round flat stones are recorded, and again quartz crystals.**
Although we are in the presence of hearsay only as regards these asso-
ciated Weyneubulckoo 21 speaking people, we have on record, from per-
sonal experience, the proceeding adopted and substance employed by the
19 e.g., the Dieri (Gason—The Dieyerie Tribe of Australian Aborigines, 1874, p. 24; Howitt—
fJourn. Anthrop. Inst., XX, 1891, p. 91).
20 Cameron—Journ. Anthrop. Inst., XIV, 1884, p. 362.
P 1 Bonney—Journ, Anthrop, Inst, XIII, 1883, p. 122.


neighbouring and allied tribes of Mount Poole and Mokely away in the
north-west corner of New South Wales. At a “ rain-making ” cere-
mony attended by the late Mr. W. H. J. Slee, for many years Chief
Inspector of Mines, fibrous gypsum or “ satin-spar ” was used.”
“ After a great deal of talking, dancing, singing, and mystical perfor-
mance had been gone through by all the natives, the old chief produced
the ‘.rain stone,’ which had been carefully kept wrapt up in leaves and
a piece of rag, and showed it to Mr. Slee, but would not let him touch it.
He then buried it in the sand.” A variant of this, with powdered
gypsum made to the consistency of thick paste, is described by Dr. A. W.
Howitt 53 as occurring on the Darling River. He also says the Dieri
“ gathen gypsum, pound it fine and throw it into a water hole.””
To sum up, therefore, the ‘ ‘ rain-making ’’ • theory promulgated
By Mr. Officer is just as conjectural as that of the seed-grinder, or the
l ' l challenge stone ” suggestion previously referred to.
7. Tooth-avulsion Theory.
In his letter to me of 6th September, 1912, Mr. F. Bonney
wrote: “ One of the oldest Blacks in our district told me it [the
cylindro-conical stone] was once used to remove the tooth in the cere-
mony of initiation into manhood.”
I do not think it probable so clumsy an implement could or would
be used for such a purpose. It could only be so employed to strike
another and lighter implemenPplaced against the tooth to be extracted,
Mr. Bonney,* 5 in his published account of the Buhgarlee and Parkungi,
says a small hard wood wedge was placed on each side of one of the.
initiate’s upper incisors (“ front teeth ”) and the latter forced out by a
downward stroke with the pointed end of a throw-stick. I believe this
supposed application of a cylindro-conical stone may be dismissed from
further consideration.
8. Fetish to Procure a good supply op Snakes.
We now come to the first definite explanation of at least one use
for these interesting relics of the past. Prof. J. W. Gregory in his
interesting work ‘ ‘ The Dead Heart of Australia ’ ’ so ' a tells us that when
22 Wilkinson—Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, VIII, Pt. 4, 1884, p. 436.
28 Howitt—Native Tribes of S.E. Australia, 1904, p. 396.
24 Howitt—Journ. Anthrop. Inst., XX, 1891, p. 92.
28 Bonney—Journ. Anthrop. Inst. ? XIII, 1883, p. 127.
284 Gregory —1906, p, 74.


journeying along Cooper Creek towards Lake Eyre, and after passing
Palankarinna, his party left the country of the Dieri” and entered that
of the Tirari. He had with him as guide one ‘ • Emil, ’’ a member of the
latter tribe, who on arriving in his own “ country ” proceeded to dig
up “ a conical piece of yellow sandstone (PL ix, fig. 2) from the foot of a
box-tree, and then presented it to me, saying sadly that it would never
be wanted again. He explained that it was a Wommagnaragnara, which,
being interpreted, is ‘ The heart of the snake.’ It was used at cere-
monies to make the dark olive-brown carpet snake, known to the natives
as “ Womma,” i.e., to increase the supply.
Emil it appears was one of the last five survivors of the Tirari, a
sub-tribe that once lived on the eastern shore of Lake Eyre. ‘ ‘ The only,
occasion when he showed any sign of grief, at the changed condition of
his tribe, was when he presented me with their sacred, snake generating
stone.’ !
I have been favoured by Prof. Gregory with photographs of the
Wommagnaragnara, one of which I now take the liberty of reproducing
(PI. ix, fig. 2). To any unprejudiced mind there can be no possible doubt
of its similarity to the cylindro-conical stones of the Darling-Lachlan
area.
Now, although in the accounts of the Dieri Willyaroo ceremony*
u to procure a good harvest, supply of snakes,” &c., there is no mention
of one of these stones, still the tribe possessed a conical magical stone.
Dr. E. Eylmann, in his “ Die Eingeborenen der Kolonie Sudaustralien, ”
says: “ I obtained from the Dieri on Cooper’s Creek a stone fetish of
quite unusual shape, which is believed to have reference to a Murra-
murra 28 and to have great magical powers. It has the shape of a bolt,
weighs 1,320 grams, and consists of grey fine-granular sandstone. It
26 The Dieri, according to Mr. S. Gason, occupied the country east of Lake Eyre from Pirigundi
Lake south to Mount Freeling, around Lake Hope, and 'about eighty miles west thereof (Gason —The
Dieyeri Tribe of Australian Aborigines, 1874, p, 11); this western point would approach very near to
Gregory’s locality.
27 Gason— Loc. cit,, p. 19 ; Woods-Native Tribes of South Australia, 1879, p. 270.
28 Eylmann—l9oB, p. 195. According to Gason, the “ Mooramoora ” amongst the Dieri
ate good spirits (Gason in Taplin—Folklore, Manners, Customs, and Languages S. Austr. Aborigines,
1879, p. 73, and Gason in Woods—Native Tribes of South Australia, 1879, p. 267, f.n.). According
to Dr. A, W. Howitt, the “ Mura-mura’’ were some of the former inhabitants of the earth now living
in constellations, beneficent or otherwise, as the case may be (Howitt —Native Tribes of S.E. Austr..
1904, p. 475).


has a length of 39 centimetres [= 154 in.] and a circumference at tli6
blunt end of 14 centimetres.” Eylmann gives a figure of this stone
(PI. xxxi, fig. 10) clearly showing it to be of the cylindro-conical type
with a rounded non-cupped base. It is much to be regretted the learned
doctor tells us so little about this “ fetish,” even a definite locality
would have been welcome.
9. Phallic Theory.
I believe I was the first to apply a phallic significance to these
stones and then only as a suggestion conversationally. In using this term
I merely intended to imply that, as a possible remnant of a belief long
forgotten during their wanderings, the “ conical-stone ” people looked
upon these remarkable objects as fetishes possessing magical powers
capable of assisting to bring to a successful issue the designs of the
possessors in a generative sense. This suggested phallicism appears to
have struck both Professors E. C. Stirling and J. W. Gregory. The
former, in a letter to me dated 20th December, 1911, said: “In my own
mind I am satisfied that the long stones have a phallic significance.”
The latter correspondent under date 14th September, 1911, remarked:
“ Until some better explanation is forthcoming, I think they [the
stones] may be regarded as phallic.” Again on 2nd June, 1913, Prof.
Gregory wrote “ that the shape is intended to be phallic I think there
can be no doubt. "When the Aboriginal gave it [the Wommagnaragnara]
to me with the explanation of its use that idea at once suggested itself
to me, although this view of the shape of the stone is inconsistent with
the theory that the Aborigines have no idea of male parentage,” that
is, the male plays no part in generation.
The form of the strictly cylindro-conical stones is, to say the
least, very suggestive, more particularly in the case of those examples
with their apices cut off by one or more incised rings. Several of these
are in the Museum collection, and on first examination the thought
struck me that perhaps these rings might be fatuous additions on the
part of a European. Careful examination, however, has dispelled this
Idea, more particularly in the light of the subject of PI. iii, fig. 2. Here
there is not only a well executed ring, but longitudinal grooves radiating
from the apical centre to the circumferential groove; it is only necessary
to say that in those stones bearing these grooves the resemblance to a


phallus is very remarkable. If the diversified motive scattered over the
surface of many of the cylindro-conicals had any meaning then equally
must these apical rings have had also.
In India the linga is the emblem of the fecundator, the generator,
the creator in fact, and is generally represented by a smooth, round,
perpendicular, black stone. 23
It must not be forgotten that the information communicated by
Emil was voluntary, and thereby of value; it was not the result of cross-
examination or suggestion as is so often the case on the part of the
questioner when seeking information from the Aborigine. It is clear
the stone, in this particular case, was employed in some way or another
in the production {i.e., propagation) of snakes, and it would seem as if
the linga-like outline of the “ Wommagnaragnara ” was recognised as
emblematic of the generative principle without in the slightest degree
thereby implying any knowledge of phallic worship. After all, it is
curious that a stone of so suggestive a shape should have been selected
for a snake-making ceremony when we remember the intimate relation
that existed in the minds, not only of many races of prehistoric man, but
still in those of a few semi-civilized peoples, between serpent reverence
and that for the symbols of human reproduction. A belief is said to
exist amongst some of the Aborigines that human generation is not the
result of a conjunction of the sexes, but is due to the influence of some
natural spirit on the fecundatory susceptibilities of the aboriginal
woman.
If I understand the remarks of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen**
correctly some such belief in spirit children is held by the Arunta and
other Central Australian tribes, and also by certain more northern tribes,
amongst whom ‘ ‘ every individual is regarded as the reincarnation of an
ancestor.” 31 Moreover, Dr. W. E. Roth mentions the belief held by the
Tully River natives and other contiguous peoples in Northern Queens-
land that conception is not necessarily due amongst themselves to the
ordinary ordinance of nature, as we understand it, but to the mysterious
c
29 Sellon—Phallic Worship of India (Mem. Anthrop, Soc., 1863-4 (1865), I, p. 327).
80 Spencer and Gillen—Native Tribes of C. Austr., 1899, p. 124.
81 Spencer and Gillen—Northern Tribps qf 0. Austr., 1904, p. 606.,


influence of “ some natural spirit ” operating on the (reproductive
capabilities of the mother to be. 82 Paradoxical as it may seem, however,
the necessary union is * f admitted as true for all other animals. ’’"
We know nothing of the views of EmiPs people, the Tiari, on
these matters, but if one may be allowed to speculate on the possibility
pf'their belief tending in the same direction as that of the Tully men,
we have, to say the least, a possible reason for the explanation given
to Prof. Gregory by his guide,
10. Death-bone Pointer Theory.
Mr. Milne has comparatively recently conveyed to me some
information he derived from a very old half-breed, one “ Tom Sullivan,’’
of the Myro or Mulga tribe inhabiting a portion of the dry country
between the Rivers Darling, Lachlan and Bogan, and noted as being the
outlaw tribe of the Western Aborigines.
According to Sullivan the stones were made by the “ doctors ”
or “ medicine men ” of the tribe, and by whom these implements were
secreted with great care until at a Bora they were brought to the noticie
6f the initiates as the work of the “ bad spirits,” were “ magic,” and
capable of causing death to anyone divulging the tribal secrets com-
municated during the initiation ceremonies. The broad-arrow marks
indicated the pointing of the death-bone, and the ring markings and
broken incisions referred to the well-known ceremonial ground rings of
the Bora. On receipt of this information I again communicated with
Mr. Milne asking did the Mulga people also use the ‘ ‘ death-pointer bone, ’ ’
and in reply was informed they did. To my mind, putting aside Prof.
Gregory’s story, this is the most fitting explanation yet advanced,
although there are just two weak points in it. In the first place the
narrator, although a very old man, is a half-breed; in the second place,
if the broad-arrow marks indicate the pointing of the death-bone, why
do these incisions look some towards the stone’s apex (as one would
expect them all to do), some in the direction of the base, and others
across a stone, at right angles to its longer axis? To fully sustain this
theory every cylindro-conical should be incised with broad arrows, which
is very far from being the case. Putting these objections aside we can
quite imagine the cylindro-conicals at least being exhibited by the
“ doctor ” as symbolical of the death-bone.
* 2 Roth—North Queensland Ethnography, Bull. 5, 1903, pp. 22, 23, sect. 811 82.
» Roth— lbid., sect. 81, .


III.—DISTRIBUTION AND GENERAL DETAILS.
The marginal numbers refer to the localities shown on the accompanying
sketch map (PL i). The details of the specimens are given in each
instance in the following order:—
Type (as outlined on p. 8). Length (in round numbers). Diameter
(only given in some cases). Base (cupped or flat). Material
(composition of rock). Motive (nature of the incisions).
The name of the contributor, whether of specimen or information, is
given after the locality, followed by that of the depository of the object.
1. New South Wales — a. Localities tv ell-defined.
1. Gondablui Holding, between the Narran and Barwon Rivers
(A. G. Brook —Australian Museum) —This is the most northerly record
in New South Wales. The stone was found by Mr. A. G. Brook of
Gondablui, “ embedded in the soil on the plains near the Queensland
border,” and was exhibited at a meeting of the Linnean Society of New
South Wales, 25th June, 1884, by Sir W. J. Macleay on behalf of Mr.
jO. S. Wilkinson. 34 The stone was presented to the Mining and Geological
Museum and subsequently transferred to the Australian Museum.
Type la —Length 17 inches and incomplete—diameter 4 inches —
soft white sandstone —unincised.
2. Armatree, Bullagreen Creek, south-west of Coonamble (E.
Milne —Sydney)—Pound on digging out a rabbit burrow in the territory
of the former Castlereagh tribe.
Type 2 a —Length 11 y 2 inches and very much worn —clay-—unincised.
3. Nehmgaloo, Goobang Creek, about ten miles south-east of
Parkes (Australian Museum)—This stone was turned up in a second
ploughing at a depth of eighteen inches. It bears the marks of the
plough-share, and when received still bore particles of adherent red soil.
This locality is the furthest eastward, and according to the 1893 edition
M Macleay—Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, IX, 1884, p. 507.


of the “ Geological Map of New South Wales” is within the boundaries
of the great Cretaceo-Tertiary formation that covers so vast an extent
of the western portion of this State.
Type 2 a —Length 1414 inches—base cupped and radiate (PI. viii,
fig. 2) —sandstone —5 apical longitudinal series of transverse
incisions, with irregularly scattered longitudinal liens of 1,2, 3
or 4 incisions respectively.
Betiveen Trundle and the Lachlan River (J. Milne Curran —
Australian Museum) —Dug up in a garden. The area referred to is a
comparatively limited one, and the locality is therefore sound; it is
comprised within the same geological formation as No. 3. It was figured
by Mr. Harper. 35
Type 2 a —Length 9% inches—base cupped and radiate—sandstone
—on one face or aspect 4 rows of “ broad-arrows ’ points
downwards, two regular and two irregular; on a second face 2
similar incisions point upwards; on a third face 3 longitudinal
series of transverse incisions.
0. Gumi Gumi Bolding on Baronne or Wamhelong CreeJc, a*’
branch of the Castlereagh Eiver, near Coonabarrabran (W. M. Thomas
—Armidale) —Pound and apparently hidden in a hollow stump.
Type 3—Length 5 y 2 inches—base flat —pipeclay—unincised.
G. Peak Hill, south of Narroutine (J. Mitchell—Technological
Museum, Newcastle) —Found during ploughing operations.
Type la —Length 18 inches—argillaceous sandstone—unineised.
7. Woodlands, near Vandaloo, Bogan River, ivest of Narromine
(E. Milne—Sydney)—A very stout stone.
Type 2 a —Length 1114 inches—diameter 314 inches—base slightly
cupped—sandstone—unincised.
8. Byerock (J. Milne Curran—Technological Museum, Sydney)—•
There is some doubt as to the exact locality of this specimen. It is
figured by Harper, 30 and said to have been obtained at Coolabah between
Nyngan and Bourke, at a depth of six feet from the surface in sinking
35 Harper—Proc. Linn. Soc, N.S. Wales, XXIII, 3, 1808, p. 427, PI. xvii, fig. 1 (No. G).
86 Harper—Proc. Linn. Soc, N.S. Wales, XXIII, 3, 1898, p. 428, PI. xviii, fig. 1 (No 7).


a well. In an editorial postcript, however (p. 436), is a-quotation from
the 11 Abstract ” of the Linnean Society’s meeting on 26th September,
1888, wherein it is said this stone was found at Byerock in sinking a
tank at a depth of seven feet. • Mr. 11. T. Baker, Curator of the
Technological Museum, informs me that the locality of the specimen is
definitely recorded in the books of that Institution as Byerock. It is of
considerable interest from the depth at which it was found below the
*
surface, indeed, it is the only stone of the whole series possessing any
stratigraphical data with the exception of No. 3.
Type 2 a —Length 11 Vj inches—base cupped—clay—l 3 pairs' of
transverse incisions, and five consecutive faint circular
groovings.
9. Yallock Holding, about eighty miles south-ivest of Cobar (E..
Milne—Sydney)—The locality is between the Rivers Lachlan and
Darling; the stone is very rough and much knocked about.
Type 2 a —Length 914 inches—oval in seciton—base cupped—slate
—unincised. ■
10. Ivanhoe, Ticehurst Holding, north-west of Mossgiel (H. K.
Bennett—Australian Museum) —The locality “ Ivanhoe ” is given by
Mr. Harper, 37 but how he obtained this information I do not know, for
Bennett in his Catalogue 38 simply said ‘ ‘ Lachlan River. ’ ’ However, the
fact that the specimen was obtained by H. K. Bennett, one of the closest
collector-observers we ever had in this State, in the Lachlan area is
sufficient. The stone is slightly curved, and is described by Bennett as
a‘ ‘ rudely carved stone implement, use unknown. ’ ’ This is an excellent
illustration of how difficult it is to obtain information about the esoteric
aboriginal productions, the collector having resided in the western
portion of the country for many many years.
Type lb—Length 1614 inches—base cupped—sandstone—motive on
one face consists of a long longitudinal groove bordered on each
side by a row of transverse nicks in pairs; also two broad-
arrows, one pointing upwards, the other transverse to the
longer axis of the stone.
81 Harper—Proc, Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, XXIII, 3, 1898, p. 426, PI. xvi, fig. 2 (No. 5).
88 Bennett —Descrip. List Austr. Weapons, &c., 1879, p. 3.


11. Coronga Peak, about eighteen miles south-south-west of
Byerock —A stone was seen here some years ago by Mr. R. Grant, of the
Australian Museum, but I am not in possession of details.
12. Gunderhooka Mountain, Gundabooka Holding, about forty
miles south-south-ivest of Bourke (E. Milne—Sydney)—Stone slightly
flattened on two opposite faces.
Type 2 a —Length 13 inches—base cupped—sandstone—incised with
4 broad-arrows.
Type 2 a —sandstone—much weathered.
13. Lake Poopelloe, Cultoioa Holding, east side of Darling River
(E. Etheridge—Australian Museum)—Several imperfect stones were
obtained on the sandhills surrounding the “ lake ” as well as the fol-
lowing;—
Type 2 a —Length 9 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 7 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
14. Lake Wongalarra, Cultowa Holding, east side of Darling
River (R. Etheridge—Australian Museum).
Type 2 a —Length 9 inches—base flat—sandstone—unincised.
Type 2b —Length 8% inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 7% inches—base flat—sandstone —unincised.
15. Petyuna Outstation, Murtee Holding, east side of Darling
River (R. Etheridge and A. J. Johnston—Australian Museum) —From
clay-pans in the sandhills.
Type lb —Length 16% inches—oval in section —base flat—sand-
stone—unincised.
Type 2 a —Length 11 y 2 inches —base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 7% inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 6% inches (imperfect)—base flat—sandstone—
unincised.
Type 4—Length 10% inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
16. White Tank Paddock, Murtee Holding, east side of Darling
River (R. Etheridge—‘Australian Museum) —specimen from a clay-pan.
Type 2a—Length 11% inches—base flat—quartzite—unincised.


17. Cattle Bun Sandhills, Murtee Holding, east.side of Darling
River (R. Etheridge—Australian Museum) —These sand hummocks
form an enormous expanse of red-soil ground, about ten miles long by
two and a half miles wide. When I saw the locality there was no other
vegetation than “spinach,” with here and there a few clumps of grass
and widely scattered half-dead bushes.
Type 2 a —Length 10y 2 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
17 a. Moira Plains Holding, about fifty miles south-east of Wil-
cannia (R. H. Mathews).
Type la —Length—base cupped—soft sandstone —incised on one
face with five pairs and one single transverse incision and on
the other with twenty-one “ triplets, pairs and single cuts.”
18. Darling River, fifteen miles above Wilcannia (J. Milne Curran
—Australian Museum) —Sandhills about one mile west of the river and
at a point nearly opposite to Murtee Homestead. A large bent stone
when perfect.
Type 2 b —Length 7% inches (broken) —base flat—sandstone—
incised with a longitudinal groove on one face, and Greek
crosses scattered all over.
19. Darling River, thirty-eight miles above Wilcannia (J. Milne
Curran—Australian Museum) —a spot on the river about half-way
between Murtee and Cultowa Homesteads —a plano-convex, medium
cylindrical stone.
Type 2 a —Length inches —base cupped—slate—incised all over
with transverse notches in groups of 2,3, and 4 respectively,
with a medium circumferential ring, and a similar apical
(“ preputial ”) incision.
20. Teryawynia Holding, south of Wilcannia (H. Holcombe—■
Australian Museum).
Type la—Length 18y> inches—base cupped—sandstone—incised
with a few double and treble transverse nicks.
Type lb —Length 1 6y 2 inches—base flat—sandstone—a curved
stone incised on the convex face with three parallel longitudinal
lines of pittings; another irregular series on one side of the
concave face, with irregular transverse incisions all over (PI.
viii, fig. 1).


21. Lake Woytchugga, about seven miles tvcst of Wilcannia (H.
Holcombe—Australian Museum).
Type la —Length 23 inches—base flat —sandstone—incised with
three parallel circumferential rows of simple nicks a little below
the apex.
Type 2 a —Length 10% inches—base slightly cupped—sandstone—
unincised.
Type 3—Length 7% inches, plano-convex strongly cornute stone —
base cupped—sandstone—incised on flat face with a median
longitudinal groove, and transverse grooves from it on each
side; on convex face a longitudinal groove only.
21 a. Culpaulin Holding, about sixteen miles south-ivest of Wil-
cannia (E. H. Mathews).
Type 2b —Length 11% inches—base cupped—fine grained sandstone
—unincised.
22. Lake Menindie, Kinchega Holding, at Menindie (South Aus-
tralian Museum, Adelaide) —This stone was figured by Harper’ 9 ; it
appears to have been found in 1889 and broken.
Type 2 a —Length 13 inches (approximately)—slate—incised with
“ long gashes running parallel to the base ” and “ ill-defined
cuts scattered about the lower half of the object ” ; also a
“ spiral incision which winds three times round the top.” This
spiral motive is unique.
23. Darling River Anna Branch, near Lake Popilta, Avoca Hold-
ing, near Wentworth (J. C.-McMaster—Australian Museum) —In com-
mon with the next record (No. 24) this is the furthest south-west locality
known to me.
Type 2 a —Length 15% inches—long oval—base flat—slate—incised
on the two flat faces with 2 sets of deep transverse grooves
arranged in sets of 3; on the two narrow faces notches in groups
of 2 and 3.
Harper—Prpc, Linn. 89c, N.S. Wales, XXIII, 3, 1898, p. 425, PI. xiv, fig. 2 (No. 3).


24 . Popilta Outstation, Avoca Holding, Wentworth (J. Granter—
Australian Museum).
Type 2 b —Length 10% inches—long oval —base cupped—slate—with
incisions in various directions but all more or less transverse;
also a “ preputial ring ” (PL iv., fig. 1).
25. Mount Murchison, Momba Holding (J. Milne Curran —Aus-
tralian Museum) —Sand hills about five miles west of the Darling.
Type 2a—Length 12V-> inches—base cupped—sandstone—a remark-
able stone bearing broad-arrows directed upwards and down-
wards; transverse in pairs, each arrow pointing in opposite
directions, when in pairs the apices directed towards one-
another; two conjoined by their shafts with the apices pointing
in opposite directions; also scratches generally over the sur-
face (PI. iv., fig. 2).
Type 2b —Length 12y 2 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 7 inches—base cupped—sandstone—incised with
transverse grooves, and others longitudinal in pairs.
26. Glenlyon Holding, between Broken Hill and Darling River (J.
L. O’Donahoo—Australian Museum).
Type 2a —Length 7 inches (apical portion)—quartzite—unincised.
27. Toomberah Waterhole, Goorimpa Outstation, Kallara Holding
(Graham Officer—Australian Museum).
Type 2 a —Length 10 y 2 inches —flattened oval—base flat—clay—■
incised with transverse notches along the oblique edges of the
stone.
27 a. Tongo Lake, Tongo Holding, tuest of Warramutty Tank,
Paroo River (R. H. Mathews).
Type 2a —Length 10 inches—base cupped—soft sandstone—marked
with a “few scattered incisions.”
28. Cut pool Waterhole, near Lake Fiery, Paroo River (F. Bonney
—Rugeley).
One of the smaller stones, iy 2 inches long. 40
D
40 Said to be “ used in tooth removing ” (Bonney).


29. Kallara Holding, Barling River (Graham Officer —Australian
Museum) —Various unlocalised spots on this immense pastoral holding.
Type la —Length 14% inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type la —Length 16% inches—base cupped—soft sandstone —in-
cised with vertical grooves from apex, and “two slightly curved
parallel incisions” on both sides at four and a quarter inches
from the same (R. H. Mathews). 40 *
Type 2 a —Length 10% inches —base cupped—sandstone—unincised
—found in a hollow log and had been used as a pounder.
Type 2a —Length 9% inches—base cupped—sandstone—incised on
both faces with a longitudinal groove and transverse grooves
proceeding from them at right angles, each motive bounded
below by a semicircle (PI. v).
Type 2 a —Length 8% inches—a more or less flattened stone —base
cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 2 a —Length 9% inches (incomplete)—base plain—clay-r
incised with stray broad-arrows apex down.
Type 2 a —Length 10 inches—base plain—sandstone—unincised.
Type 2a —Length 13 inches—base cupped—sandstone—incised with
a ‘ 1 preputial ring. ’ ’
Type 2a—Length 12% inches —base cupped—*soft sandstone—
incised with one “ broad arrow ” upwards (R. H. Mathews). 40b
Type 2h~ Length 12% inches—base cupped—clay—cross incisions
in various directions.
Type 2 h —Length 10% inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 4% inches—base unincised—a flattened dumpy
stone incised with transverse grooves, irregularly distributed.
Type 4 —Length 8% inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
29a. Curranyalpa Holding, east side of Barling River, opposite
Newfoundland (L. V. d’Apice—Australian Museum).
Type 3—Length 6% inches—base flat—sandstone—deeply incised
with four longitudinal series of broad-arrows of 2 each, apices
directed downwards, the series separated by transverse grooves,
all very deeply cut; a very remarkable stone (PI. vi).
<o» Not in Australian Museum.
«b Not in Australian Museum.


30. Yanclella Selection, Curranyalpa Holding 41 (S. E. Goddard —
Australian Museum).
Type 2 a —Length IS I inches—base cupped—kopi—unincised.
Type 2 a —Length 10 1 inches—base cupped—sandstone—incised
with irregular transverse grooves, also a “preputial ring”
(PI. G).
Type 2 a —Length 12 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 10 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 6% inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 4—Length 10 y> inches—base flat—sandstone—unincised.
31. Marra Holding, west side of Darling River (E. M. Perrott—'
Australian Museum).
Type 2 a —Length 12 inches—base cupped—slate—incised with
scattered double transverse grooves, and one broad-arrow apex
downwards.
Type 2 a —Length 9y 2 inches—base flat—sandstone—transverse
incisions arranged in longitudinal series and broad-arrows
generally distributed with all apices directed downwards.
Type 2b —Length 14 inches—base cupped—slate—unincised.
Type 3—Length 7 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised—a
very dumpy stone. t
Type 3—Length 6 % inches—base fiat—sandstone—unincised..
Type 4—Length 9*4 inches—kidney-shaped—base cupped—sand-
stone —unincised.
31a. Tanlcerooh Holding, opposite Marra, east side Darling
River (R. H. Mathews).
Type 2 a—Length 12 inches —plano-convex—tri-cupped—freely
incised with transverse, oblique, and irregularly longitudinal
cuts, with a spiral incision “ which extends quite round the
implement in a little over three folds ” at about one-third
length from the apex.
41 The specimens from this locality thosg terme_d “ challenge stones ”by Mr. Goddard.


52. Buckamhee Holding, east side Darling River, opposite Marra
(A. Kirkpatrick—Australian Museum).
Type la—Length 19% inches—base cupped—slate—incised with
the “ preputial ring ” and vertical cuts within towards the
apex.
Type la—Length 18% inches—base cupped—clay slate —incised
with transverse and oblique cuts “ about one hundred and
forty ”in number. In the middle is an encircling groove, the
two ends overlapping, and at the apex a “preputial ring”
(B. H. Mathews).
33. Dunlop Holding, Darling River (A. W. Mullen—Australian
Museum).
Type 2a —Length 14 inches—base flat—sandstone—a series of
double incisions below 3 “ preputial rings.’ 9
Type 2a—Length 10 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 2a—Length 7% inches (imperfect)—base flat —sandstone.
33a. Tara Selection, Dunlop Holding (H. Murray—Australian
Museum),
Type 3 —Length 4% inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
34. Toorale Holding, Darling River (E. Milne—Sydney).
Type la—Length 15 inches—base cupped—“ soft grey stone ”
“ traces of incised rings and faint traces of longitudinal
marks.”
34 a. Codor’s Tank, Toorale Holding, Darling River (J. Granter
--Australian Museum).
Type 2a —Length 12 inches—base flat—sandstone—unincised.
35 . Ford's Bridge — Warrego River, north-west of Bourke (W,
M. Thomas—Armidale).
Type 2a —Length 13 inches—base slightly concave —reddish-browp
ferruginous sandstone—unincised.


36. Belali, Warrego River, north-west of Bourkc (A. Qsohatj:—
Australian Museum).
Type la —Length 14% inches—base cupped—sandstone—incised
with a few transverse cuts.
Type 2a—Length 12% inches—'base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
37. Multagoona Holding, Warrego River, north of Bourke (E.
Milne—Sydney),
38. Bancanya Lake, Nundoro Holding, one hundred miles north of
Broken Hill (W. MacGillivray—Broken Hill).
38a. Lower Budda, Barling River, about one hundred and fifty
miles below Bourke (W. Freeman).
Type la —Length 17 inches—base (?) —incised, “ markings on this
stone are stated to be a record of burials of 49 adults and 12
children”; it is termed a “horn record stone.” 41 *
39. Palgamurtie, south of Gobham Lake, south-east of MUparinka
(B. H. Mathews).
Type 2a—Length 9 inches—“ short symmetrically conical ” —base
cupped—sandstone-—incised with transverse lines, some in
pairs.
1. New South Wales — b. Localities ill-defined.
A. Lachlan and Darling Rivers, country between (H. K. Bennett
—Australian Museum) —One of the specimens of the Bennett Collection,
but without history or locality. In the “ Catalogue ” it is described as an
‘ ‘ implement of red clay, studded with chips of quartz, and burned,
carved, and tapering at both ends.” As-a matter of fact, it is not studded
with quartz, has not been burnt, nor does it taper at both ends, but only
at one in the usual manner. It was figured by Harper. 43
Type 4—Length 12 inches—base cupped—incised with “ preputial
ring.”
u Freeman—Proc, Austr. Assoc. Adv. Sci., 1902 (1903) IX, p. 539,
42 Harper—Proc, Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, XXIII, 3, Is9B, p, 430, PI. xvii, fig. 2 (No. 8).


B. “ Wentivorth ” (W. Baldwin Spencer—Melbourne)—ln the
possession of Prof. W. Baldwin Spencer, who informed me it came from
Wentworth, but without any further details. It is figured by Harper. 48
Type la—Length (?) —base cupped and 11 traversed by four faintly
marked ridges ’ ’ —slate—incisions consist of broad-arrows, the
most conspicuous being a group of three joined by their apices
in the form of a star.
B. li Wentworth ” (Ethnological Committee—Australian Museum)
—A quadrangular semiprismatic stone resembling the supposed
“ Kanowna ” specimen.
Type la —Length inches (imperfect)—slate—incised on one
face, with two longitudinal series of transverse nicks; on
opposite face are horizontal and oblique lines crossing and
recrossing to form rhomboidal figures; on the sides, a con-
tinuous series of horizontal incisions.
C. “ Wilcannia ” —(Australian Museum).
Type la —Length 17*4 inches—base cupped—slate—incised with
four broad-arrows at intervals below one another and directed
downwards; a ring at about one-third from the base, and long
transverse scratches irregularly distributed (P. E. Williams).
Type la—Length 21 inches—base cupped—sandstone—incised with
transverse lines of short grooves in pairs over entire surface'
(Ethnological Committee) (PI. iii., fig. 1).
Type lb—Length 18 inches—base cupped—slate—unincised (Eth-
nological Committee).
Type 2a —Length 11 inches—base flat—sandstone —unincised (has
subsequently been used as a stone chopping-block) (Ethnologi-
cal Committee).
Type 2o—Length 9 y 2 inches—base cupped—ironstone—unincised
(Ethnological Committee).
Type 4—Length 13 inches—base flat—sandstone—unincised (J.
Milne Curran).
** Harper-Proc. Linn, Sop, N-S r Wales, XXIXI, 3, 1898, p. 422, PI. xii (No. 1).


C. ** Wilcannia ” —(Technological Museum, Sydney).
Type 2h —Length 10*4 inches—cornnte—base flat—sandstone—tin-
incised. Figured by Harper. 4
Ca. Barling River, “ above Wilcannia ” (H. Gilliat) —Exhibited
at a meeting of the Linnean Society of New South Wales, 24th
September, 1884. 44a
Type la—Length 17 inches—base slightly cuppeu
D. “ Lower Warrego River ” (D. W. T. Hatten—Australian
Museum).
Type 2a—Length 11 inches—base cupped—sandstone—uninciaed.
Type 2a—Length 14 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 2a—Length 10 inches—-sandstone —incised with herring-bone
motive, both single, and two conjoined; also broad-arrow, apex
down.
Type 3—Length 5 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised.
Type 3—Length 5 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised
Type 3—Length 7% inches—base cupped—sandstone—uninoised.
Type 4—Length 9y 2 inches—base cupped—sandstone—unincised,
E. “ Between Bourke and Louth (C. J. McMaster and L’. V.
d’Apice—Australian Museum).
Type la—Length 18y 2 inches—base flat—clay—incised with trans-
verse lines and a “ preputial ring ” with radii (PI. iii, fig. 2).
Type 2o—Length 1114 inches—base flat—sandstone—incised with 3
deep longitudinal lines, a circumferential groove at about the
centre, and a “ preputial ring ” with radii.
F. “ Cuttahurra Creek, Paroo River ” (E, Milne—Sydney).
Type 2o—Length 13 14 inches—base cupped—sandstone—motive
of short nicks in pairs arranged in 7 alternating longitudinal
series, also one broad-arrow, and a circumferential ring at 3 y 2
inches from the apex.
♦* Harper—Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, XXIII, 3, 1898, p, 430, PI. xviii, fig. 2 (No. 9).
* 4 * Gilliat—Proc. Linn. Soc, N.S. Wales, IX, 4, 1885, p. 94 6,


Gr. “ Paroo River ,} (E. Milne—Sydney)—A slight tapering stone,
very pointed.
Type 2 a —Length 12 inches—flattened—sandstone.
H. “ Breivarrina ” (Ethnological Committee Australian
Museum).
Type 2 a —Length 11% inches—base cupped—slate—incised with
double and treble short transverse nicks, more or less in longi-
tudinal series, the double predominating.
I. “ Unknown ” (A. K. Mackenzie—Australian Museum).
Type la—Length 14 inches—base sandstone—on lower half are
paired furrows, transverse or oblique. Figured by Harper. 45
2. South Australia.
For the details of Nos. 39-411 am indebted to Prof. E. C. Stirling,
M.D., &c.
39 . Outalpa Holding, twenty miles north of Manna Hill (South
Australian Museum, Adelaide).
Type la —Length 16 inches—base cupped—slate—incised with cir-
cumferential grooves, two complete at about 5y 2 inches and 6y>
inches from the apex, and two incomplete at about 4 inches
and 7% inches from the same respectively; also irregularly
arranged short scratches, and slightly ruddled.
40. Bimbowrie Holding, a little north of No. 39 (South Aus-
tralian Museum, Adelaide).
Type lb —Length about 14y 2 inches, slightly curved and one side
flattened—base cupped—clay-slate—a complete “ preputial
ring ” at about 2 inches from apex, with 2 parallel imperfect
rings below, the upper at 3% inches and the lowest at 4 inches
from apex respectively; also numerous, short, straight, trans-
verse or oblique scratches, and ruddled.
4 * Harper—Proc. Linn, Soc, N.S. Wales, XXIII, 3, 1898, p, 425, PI. xvi, fig. 1 (No. 4).


41. Calanna Holding, south-ivest of Hergot (South Australia
Museum, Adelaide).
Type la—Length I Gy* indies, straight, and tapering slightly to
both ends—base flat or very slightly cupped—crystalline sand-
stone with a few minute garnets embedded—unincised.
42. Palankarinna, Cooper Creek, near Lake Eyre (J. W. Gregory,
Glasgow)—The “ Wommagnaragnara,” or heart of the snake, taken
from its sacred hiding place by the guide u Emil” and given to Prof.
J. W. Gregory. The stone is i i of local origin. It could have come from
some of the beds of sandstone in the younger rocks which form the
cliffs beside the Cooper or Diamantina .... that the shape is
intended to be phallic I think there can be no doubt. ’ ’ 4O This is the
most northerly locality known ivith certainty . 4T
Type 2o—Length 8 inches —base slightly cupped —banded ferrugi-
nous sandstone —unincised (PI. ix, fig. 2).
3. Queensland.
43. tl Kanoivna, ,> east of Jnnamincka, Barcoo River (South Aus-
tralian Museum, Adelaide) —This is the locality assigned by Mr,
Harper 47 ® to one of the stones described by. himself. After diligent
search, and a good deal of trouble, entailing correspondence with Prof,
E. 0. Stirling, and Mr. B. Dunstan of Brisbane, I have failed to trace
this locality. The stone in question was, it appears, presented to the
Museum by a Mr. 0. F. Murray, but no locality whatever is recorded in
the Institution’s books; therefore it is unlocalised and may come from
anywhere. As to the name u Kanowna,” Prof. Stirling informs me
there is a place called “ Kanowinna ” in the Barcoo district, east of
Innamincka, and he adds—“ if the accent be placed upon the second
syllable the word becomes ‘ Kanowna,’ and probably this is the explana-
tion of the locality name attached to our specimen ” by Mr. Harper,
‘ ‘ but where the latter obtained this locality for the specimen in question
I do not know.” If Kanowinna mentioned by Prof. Stirling could be
dfsdsd
46 Gregory—Letter dated 12th June, 1913.
47 During his recent visit to Australia as a member of the British Association for the Advance-
ment of Science, Professor Gregory presented this specimen to the Trustees.
47a Lign, Sjoc. N.S. "VyaleSj XXIII, 3, 1893, p. 423, PI. xiv, fig. 1, PI. xv. (No. 2).


proved to be the “ port of origin ” of the specimen, it would extend
the range of the conical stone cult to the eastward of Prof. Gregory’s
locality into the geographical entity we now call Queensland.
Type la —Length 21% inches—quadrilateral—base cupped—slate
—transverse incisions on the edges.
44. Caledonia Holding, Kensington Doiuns, near Muttahurra
(Australian Museum) —In May, 1906,1 received from the late A. J.Ewen,
of Beaconsfield, Kensington Downs, a curious cylindrical stone, thirteen
and a half inches long, round in section, apically pointed, and flat based;
it is composed of limestone, fluted longitudinally like so many limestones
are by weathering, and naturally in this condition without any trace of
motive (PI. ix, fig. 2). I know nothing of its mode of occurrence, and as
my brother-in-law has passed away to the realm from which there is no
return, its history beyond the mere locality is lost for .all time. Its
remarkable resemblance to a “ cylindrical ” induces me to notice it,
but whether fashioned by the hand of man, or whether its origin
be fortuitous, I am unable to say. If the former it must be very
old to allow of the necessary weathering requisite tq produce the
flutings so characteristic of many of our Australian limestones. If the
latter, then its accidental resemblance to a cylindrical stone is very
remarkable. Were it of the latter nature, the occurrence would extend
the area of distribution farther to the north than we at present have
any record of.
The absence of all record of the occurrence of cylindro-conical Or
cfirhUte stones in Queensland is very curious. It can only be the out-
coihe of want of observation, as it is too ridiculous to suppose that ah
artificial geographical boundary would by chance coincide with the ex-
tinction of a deeply seated cult. The geological and ethnological condi-
tions were the same on both sides the dividing line between the twei
States, and the stones have been found so close to the border that their
occurrences may be fairly assumed beyond it.
45. Hughenden, Flinders River (A. S. Kenyon—National Museum,
Melbourne) —After the completion of this Memoir, I received from Mr.
A. S. Kenyon, of Melbourne, through Prof. W. Baldwin Spencer, a most
symmetrically proportioned stone, deposited by the former at the above


Museum. Its history is as follows:—During the progross of the Inter-
state Artesian Water Commission in 1914, consisting of Messrs. E. P.
Pittman, H. H. Dare, B. Dunstan, R. P. Jenkins, H. Oldham, and A. S.
Kenyon, the stone was presented to Mr. Pittman by Mr. Thompson, of
Pairlight Station, Hughenden district, and by the former handed to
Mr. Kenyon. It was said to have been found at, or near, Hughenden.
Neither Messrs. Pittman, Dunstan, nor Kenyon are able to give me any
details of its discovery, but the first-named informs me that it was pre-
sented to him “in good faith as a genuine aboriginal production.” It
is one of the most remarkable cylindro-conical stones I have seen, and
from the nature of its composition (diorite) must have taken a long time
to prepare.
The stone is of the extreme cylindrical form of type la, sixteen
and three-quarter inches long, obtusely pointed at the apex, with a very
even diameter of two inches, but narrowing towards the base; at one
and a half inches from the latter again commences to enlarge, or swell
out, into a miniature pedestal, two and five-sixteenths inches by two and
one-sixteenth in cross diameters; the base, which is perfectly flat, is,
therefore, not quite round. There is no trace of motive of any kind. The
workmanship really appears to be too finished for that of an aboriginal
hand, but if there be no mistake as to the locality, its occurrence near
Hughenden lends strong support to the genuineness of the other Queens-
land specimens, and definitely extends the range of these cylindro-conical
stones far into that State (PL ix, fig. 3).
Addendum. —Mr. A. M. S. Thompson, by letter dated 2nd November, 1915, says this stone was
found by him in 1887 in an old black’s camp a few miles south of Mount Desolation, on Fairlight
Holding. No other stone of the kind has been found in the district so far as Mr. Thompson knows.


IV.—ANALYSIS.
In all, I have records of one hundred and five of these stones of
one kind or another (omitting the Queensland doubtful ones), eighty-
one of which are in the Australian Museum. Of the remaining twenty-
four, I have examined seven through the courtesy of their owners, and
for information as to the balance I am indebted to various correspon-
dents.
The first point to strike one in the “ Distribution ” List is the
preponderance of plain or unincised stones, more than half the total
number examined—to be exact, fifty-four—being devoid of any motive
whatever.
Simple incisions, transverse or longitudinal as the case may be,
are present on thirty-four, broad arrows, or “ Emu-feet ” on thirteen,
simple pittings on one only, feather or herring-bone figures on one,
whilst five stones were longitudinally divided by a deep groove on each
face, the groove bordered on either side with either single or double
transverse incisions. In one instance the face of the stone was covered
with small Greek crosses, whilst two beautiful instances occurred in
which the cupped base was radiately grooved.
Five stones exhibit more or less median encircling or circum-
ferential rings, and nine presented the apical ring I have termed ‘ 1 pre-
putial.” One example has three of these apical rings closely following
one another, and in two instances the surface within the ring, i.e. } between
it and the apex, is radiate from the apical centre. In only one ease
has any attempt at a spiral been made, Mr. Harper stating that the
Lake Menindie specimen in the South Australian Museum exhibits
u an irregular sjDiral incision which winds three times round the top,
and thus accentuate the resemblance of the ‘ stone ’ to a lingam. ’ ,4S
As regards the condition of the base in the whole series, sixty-
eight were found to be cupped, twenty-five flat, and the remainder either
fragmentary or doubtful. Mr. R. H. Mathews has recorded atA cupped
base.
48 Harper—Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, XXIII, 3, 1898, p. 425.


Several other interesting facts present themselves—the motive
on a stone may be uniform over the whole surface, or it-may consist of
a combination of figures. Again, in some the delineation is clear and
cleanly executed, in others it is rough and indistinctly portrayed.
It is also interesting to note that no one motive is restricted to a
single locality, incised stones occurring with unincised, “ emu-feet ”
decorated with plain, or variously incised specimens, and so on; the
same remarks also apply to the shape and size of the stones. From
these facts I think we may infer that neither the design of the motive,
shape, nor size, were of tribal inrport, although it is possible these
details may have borne some reference to their respective uses.
It is remarkable that both the implements with radiate cupped
bases come from the south-eastern end of the culture area, just as do
those with the “ preputial rings ” chiefly from localities contiguous to
the immediate course of the Darling Biver.
From these records, so far as they go, it is evident the culture of
the cylindro-conical stones centred in the valley of the Darling between
a little above Bourke on the north, and the Murray Junction on the south
—I have no record of any “ find ” south of the Murray Biver, a very
curious fact; nor south-west amongst the tribes constituting the Narran-
yerri nation. On the other hand, it extended westwards into that portion
of South Australia more or less contiguous to the New South Wales
border. From here northwards there is a considerable hiatus until
Hergott Springs and Cooper Creek are reached, and, so far as I at
present know, this is the limit of extension in a north-westerly direction.
Neither Messrs. Spencer and Gillen, in either of their works; nor Prof.
E. C. Stirling, in the “ Anthropology ” of the Horn Expedition, make
any mention of these cylindro-conical stones amongst the Arunta of
Central South Australia, whose southern boundary is approximately
between Charlotte Waters and Oodnadatta; and so the country of the
Dieri appears to have been the northern limit of occurrence. There is a
remarkable absence of reference to implements of this nature by all the
Old explorers who traversed this western country—Mitchell, Eyre,
Sturt, Oxley, and Howitt —although the Kopi grave-markers were seen
by Mitchell on a grave near Fort Bourke. 4 *
19 Mitohell—Three Expedns. Discov. E. Austr., 1838, I, p. 252.


The Queensland locality ‘ ‘ Kanowna, ’ ’ given by Mr. Harper, may
be temporarily dismissed, for reasons already stated. Dr. W. E. Both,
whose researches extended as far south as the country of the Pitta-pitta
speaking blacks, above the junction of the Middle Georgina River (Eyre
Creek) and King Creek, makes no mention at all of the occurrence of
cylindro-conical stones either in his “Ethnological Studies” or
‘ ‘ Bulletins. ’ ’
In reviewing the distribution of these stones, whether cylindro-
conical or cornute, two facts stare us in the face:—(l) The main area of
distribution is to a great extent coincident with that of the “ Widow’s
Cap. ” “ From what I have been able to learn, this custom appears to
have been common to the Aborigines inhabiting the Murray River
Valley from near the mouth of the river to its junction with the Darling,
thence up the latter as far as Fort Bourke, and possibly beyond.
Returning to the junction, it is traceable along there in New South
Wales and Victoria; but how far it extends in that direction there is not
sufficient evidence to show.” 50 True, I have no record of the finding of
a stone from the Murray mouth 51 upwards until the parallel of
Wentworth is reached; nor, still following the eastward course of the
stream, has any occurrences come under my notice beyond the above.
On the other hand, along the Darling and its affluent billabongs and
semi-creeks, including also the Lower Warrego and the Paroo, certainly
as far as the Queensland border we find a most marked commingling of
the custom of wearing the Widow’s Cap, and the cult of the cylindro-
conical stones. (2) The combined distribution of the stones and cap is
to all intents and purposes that of the oval ‘ ‘ Kopi ’ ’ grave-markers also.
As to the people who used these remarkable implements, at the
outset we are met with the varied areas ascribed to different tribes by
authors. Mr. F. Bonney,' 2 who was one of the earliest settlers to reside
in the district, from 1865-1880, gives the local tribes as follows:
Bungyarlee, to the north of Mount Murchison (to the north of the
present town of Wilcannia); Parkungi, along the Darling, above and
60 Etheridge—Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, XXIV, 2, 1899, p. 340. Mr. K. H. Mathewa
(Proc. Austr. Assoc. Adv, Sci., 1911 (1912), XIII, p. 445, PI. xli) has figured similar caps, but in so
doing did not think fit to pay me the compliment of referring to my paper.
61 At Lake Froome, Rivoli Bay, G. F. Angas saw a “long white stone” in a dilly-basket
(Savage Life and Scenes, 1847, I, p. 173), but on turning to Angas’ magnificent folio work this is seen
to be a long dumb-bell-shaped stone, probably a pounder (S.A. Illustrated, 1846, PI. xxx, fig. xii).
* 2 Bonney—Journ. Anthrop. Inst., XIII, 1883, p. 122.


below Wilcannia; Baroonge, on the Lower Paroo River; Mullia-arpa, of
the Yencanyah District (north-west of White Cliffs); Wombungle, 'of
the Port Bourke district; Boarlee of the Barrier Ranges; and the Tun-
garlee of the Lower Darling. Now, we have evidence that all these were
cylindro-conical stone people.
On examining Dr. John Fraser’s map 53 we find the Barkanji
(= Parkungi of Bonney) occupying the whole of the country from
beyond the Queensland border between the Paroo and Warrego
Rivers, south to the, Lachlan at Booligal, following the river to the
Murrumbidgee Junction, up the latter to Yangar, and thence direct
south to the Murray. On the west this immense tribal territory ex-
tended well into what is now South Australia, but in a northerly direc-
tion stopped short of Milparinka; this area will be found to include the
whole of Mr. Bonney’s subdivisions. To east of the Barkanji eastern
boundary is another large territory occupied by the Wiradhari, from
the Murray on the south to above Nyngan on the north, and in an
easterly direction as far as Bathurst. To the north and north-east of
the Wiradhari are the three subdivisions of the great Kamilaroi people
-—the Kamilaroi proper, to the north-east, the Gaiamba immediately to
the north of the Wiradhari, but south of the Darling River, and the
Walarai north of the latter and the Barwon River.
In the latest distribution map of our New South Wales Aborigines,
that of Dr. A. W. Howitt 54 we find his Barkinji (= Parkungi of Bonney
and Barkanji of Fraser) confined to the immediate southern side of the
Darling, between Menindie and Bourke, the remainder of Fraser’s
Barkanji country being divided between two other tribes, the Berfiait
UUd Wohghibon; east of the Lachlan River are again the Wiradjuri
(—Wiradhuri of Fraser). The positions of Kamilaroi and Wollaroi
(as Dr. Howitt spelt them) coincide fairly well with those two sub-
divisions as given by Fraser.
Now, the sum of this tribal distribution in New South Wales, if
we follow Fraser, and I am inclined to adopt his for preference, amounts
to this: —The Barkanji (Parkunji or Barkinji) were the great exponents
53 Fraser—Aborigines of N.S. Wales, 1892, frontispiece.
54 Howitt—Native Tribeg pf S.b}. 1901, map opp. p. 50.


of the cylindro-conical stone culture, followed by the Wiradhari
(Wiradjuri) to the eastward. The occurrence at Gondablui, that at
Byerock, and Mr. Milne’s records of the Bullagreen find in the Castle-
reagh Eiver country would appear to indicate that all three branches of
the Kamilaroi were cognisant also, to some extent at least, of this par-
ticular cult.
It is to be regretted that so little definite information is forth-
coming about these cylindro-conical and cornute stones, certainly the
most interesting of all the Australian stone implements. It will not be
wise to generalise for the whole on the strength of Emil’s revelation to
Prof. Gregory, for it is quite conceivable that whilst the stones as a
whole were almost certainly esoteric their application may have varied
amongst the different sections of the people using them. The information
obtained through the zealous inquiries of Mr. Milne is well worthy of
serious consideration, and, if the statement of the half-breed
Sullivan ” can be relied on, throws an entirely new light on the
significance of the broad-arrow markings we have been in the habit of
terming ‘ * emu-feet, ’ ’ a significance that would be much stronger did the
broad-arrows always point towards the apices of the stones.
The fact that so large, a proportion of these stones are absolutely
plain and unincised casts grave doubt on the probability of the
‘ * Record 5 ’ theory in any form.
Mr. B. H. Mathews, 53 who has figured a number of these peculiar
objects, gives some traditional history conveyed to him by an old black
to the effect that they were 11 employed in ceremonial observances con-
nected with the assembling of the people at the time the nardoo seed was
ripe ..... in incantations for causing the supply of game and
other food to increase, for the making of rain, and other secret cere-
monies the stones in question were kept by the headmen,
or ‘ doctors ’ on the death of the owner they were hidden
in the ground near an old camping place of his, or else near his grave.”
The substance of these remarks accords perfectly well with the general
possible esoteric nature of the cylindro-conical and cornute stones I
have endeavoured to portray in previous pages. As I have already
65 proc. Austr. Agsoc. Adv. Sci., 1909 (1910), XII, p, 495, figs., and Pppc, American Phil.
f3oc., XLVJII, Xo. 191, 1909, p. 1, ' ■ • '


pointed out, the first author to lay the foundation of the study of these
stone implements was Mr. Walter Harper, whose interesting paper is
calmly dismissed by Mr. Mathews in these words; “ In 1898, W. R.
Harper described some similar stones ”!
Finally, to sum up on general lines, it may be said broadly of the
cylindro-conical and cornute stone cult that—
1. The area of distribution was coexistent in a great measure with
the south-east development of the Cretaceo-Tertiary formation.
2. Concurrent with the habit of wearing the Widow’s Cap, and
use of the lenticular Kopi Grave-markers.
3. Esoteric in character and application, but the nature of the appli-
cation probably varied with locality and community.
4. Two applications may be tentatively accepted; one indicating a
phallic, the other a symbolic, tendency.
I am under great obligations for assistance in various ways whilst
engaged in this investigation to many gentlemen, prominent amongst
whom are Messrs. T. Vincent, of Dunlop; Robinson, of Toorale; the
late Graham Officer, of Kallara; A. J. Johnston, of Murtee; J. Wilson, of
Cultowa; Prof. E. C. Stirling, Adelaide; Messrs. E. Milne, Sydney; 0. J.
McMaster, A. W. Mullen, and J. Granter, of the Western Land Bard;
Profs. J. W. Gregory, Glasgow, and W. Baldwin Spencer, Melbourne;
Dr. R. Hamlyn-Harris, Brisbane; Messrs. P. Bonney, Rugeley (Stafford-
shire) ; Dr. C. Anderson, Australian Museum; and Mr. A. M. Thomas,
Armidale. I need hardly add how much lam indebted to my assistant,
Mr. W. W. Thorpe, for his cordial and ready help.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE I.
Portions of New South Wales, South Australia, and Queensland, showing the
distribution of Cylindro-conical and Cornute stones so far as known to the writer.
The numbers correspond to those given under “Distribution and General
Details.”


MEM. CEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES, ETHNOL. NO. 2
Plate I.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE II.
Fig. 1. —The Cuttaburra country: in the foreground a clay-pan; in the distance,
typical red-sand hills.
Fig. 2.—Summit of the central hill seen in Fig. 1.


M EM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES, ETHNOL. NO. 2.
PLATE II.
A. W. Mullen, photo.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE III.
Fig. I.—A typical cylindro-conical stone of Type la, 21 inches in length. The
motive consists of deep transverse nicks in pairs arranged in longitudinal series—
sandstone. —“ Wilcannia.”
Fig 2.—Upper or apical half of a large stone of Type la, 18£ inches in length,
with a deeply incised “ preputial ring.” The motive is complex and confused, but there
are three, and perhaps four, downwardly directed broad-arrows, an eccentric longi-
tudinal groove, one perfect and one incomplete transverse groove almost median in
position, and sundry transverse short grooves, one below the other,' within the preputial?
ring are grooves radiating from the immediate apex—clay,
Darling River, between Bqurke and Louth,


MEM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES, ETHNOL. No. 2.
P LATE III.
H. Barnes, Junr., and C. Clutton, Austr. Mus,, photo.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE IV.
Fig. I.—An incised stone of Type 2 b, 10£ inches in length, and long oval insec-
tion, flattened on both sides. The flat faces are incised with transverse grooves roughly
arranged in two longitudinal series; there is also a preputial ring—slate.
Popilta Outstation, Avoca Holding, Wentworth.
Fig. 2.—A deeply incised stone of Type 2a, 12£ inches in length. The motive
consists chiefly of broad-arrows; near the apex is one directed forwards, at about the
centre another directed backwards, and joined by a longitudinal groove to a third; and
rather lower, one directed forwards; at the mid-right is a short transverse arrow point-
ing inwards. In addition to these incisions are short transverse grooves in pairs—sand-
stone
Mount Murchison, Momba Holding.


MEM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES, ETHNOL. No. 2.
PLATE IV.
C. Glutton, Austr. Mus., photo.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE V.
A stone of Type 2 a, 9i inches in length, and like that represented in PI. iv., Pig. 1,
oval in section. The motive on both faces is similar to this figure, but the transverse
grooves are more regular and distinct, and are divided by well-marked longitudinal
grooves extending nearly to the apex and base respectively; below the last grooves are
semi-circular incisions—sandstone.
Kallara Holding, Darling River.


MEM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES. ETHNOL. No. 2.
PLATE V.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE VI.
A “dumpy” stone of Type 3, C| inches in length, and 3J in diameter, very
deeply incised. There are two of four large broad-arrows visible, one apical, the other
basal, both pointing backwards; these are supplemented by long, transverse grooves one
beneath the other—sandstone.
Curranyalpa Holding, east side Darling lliver.


MEM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES. ETHNOL. No. 2.
Plate VI.
C. Glutton, Austr. Mus., photo.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE VII.
An imperfect stone of Type 2 a, 10i inches in length. This is an excellent example
of the manner in which incisions are crowded together on some stones, apparently with
little arrangement or meaning. There is a well-marked “ preputial ring,” and some little
distance below it an even more strongly incised ring—sandstone,
Yandella Selection, Darling River.


M EM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES, ETHNOL. No. 2.
PLATE VII.
H, Barnes, Junr., Austr. Mus., photo.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE VIII.
Fig. 1. —An example of the curved form of Type 1 (16), 16£ inches in length.
The motive consists of fine transverse scratches in vertical series, and a row of punc-
tures along the convex side of the stone; there is also a double “preputial ring”—
sandstone.
Teryawynia Holding, south of Wilcannia.
Fig. 2.—The cupped base of a stone of Type 2a, 14J inches in length, displaying
incised radii; only two examples of this motive are known to me—sandstone.
Nelungaloo, Goobang Creek, near Parkes.


M EM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES, ETHNOL. No. 2.
P LATE VIII.
H. Barnes, Junr., and C. Glutton, Austr. Mus., photo.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE IX.
Fig. I.—The fluted limestone, 13| inches long, found on Caledonia Holding,
Kensington Downs, Queensland, apparently very old, but whether of the nature of a
“ cylindro-conical ” there is not sufficient evidence to say.
Fig, 2.—Prof. J. W. Gregory’s “ Wommagnaragnara,” from Palankarinna,
Cooper Creek.
Reproduced from a photograph kindly supplied by Prof. Gregory.
Fig. 3.—The stone, presented by Mr. Thompson, of Fairlight Station,
to Mr. E. F. Pittman, and by him handed to Mr. A. S. Kenyon; 16| inches long.


M EM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES. ETHNOL. No. 2.
PLATE IX.
C. Glutton, Austr. Mus., photo.




THE WARRIGAL, OR “DINGO,” INTRODUCED OR
INDIGENOUS ?
I.—INTRODUCTION.
The question is often asked did the Native Dog, the so-called
“ Dingo ” (Canis dingo, Blumenbach) exist on this Continent as an
indigenous sjjecies previous to the advent of man, or, was our canine
acquaintance subsequently introduced by one or other of the successive
waves of human migration to and over Australia f
If it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that a dog’s remains
have been, and are to be found in any of our younger Tertiary or Post-
Tertiary deposits, then one of two postulates must be accepted as proven,
viz., either a dog was an indigenous member of our pre-existing mam-
malian fauna; or, if introduced, we possess at least one starting-point
from which to trace man’s advent, and as a corollary to the second of
these postulates that man was existent in Australia with a mammalian
fauna now extinct.
I used the above expression, “ the so-called ‘ Dingo,’ ” because
In reality this name was originally an aboriginal one of contempt for
the white man’s cur, the native dog being known to many of the Abori-
gines as the Warrigal. 1 That this animal was domesticated by the
Aborigines, so far as the term 11 domestication ” can be applied in this
instance, was testified to by Mr. G. F. Angas'; and confirmed by Mr. P.
Beveridge, 3 even to the extent of the women suckling the pups. 4 “ The
remoteness of the first domestication of animals,” said Mr. J. Orawfurd,
“ must be considered as evidence also of the antiquity of man himself.” 5
The case for the antiquity of the Warrigal rests entirely on
geological evidence supplied by two well-known investigators—Prof.
Sir P. McCoy and Mr. G. Kretft, the latter at one time the Curator of
this Institution. Now, let us examine the evidence adduced by these
gentlemen.
1 Warrigal iu most pu ts of New South Wales, Dwarda in some portions of Western Australia.
See Kreff't—Mam. Australia, 1871, expl. PI. 2; Fraser Aborigines of N.S. Wales (World’s
Columbian Expos. Chicago,"lBl/3), 1892, p. 50.
2 Angas—Waugh’s Austr. Almanac for ISoS, p. 57-
* Beveridge—Journ Roy. Son. N.S. Wales, xvii, 1884, p. ,78.
4 Mitchell—Three Exped, Int. E. Australia, ii, 1838, p. 341.
5 Crawfurd—Trans. Ethnol. Soc. ii, 1803, p. 393.


II.-GEOLOGICAL HISTORY.
In the course of the prosecution of the Geological Survey of Victoria,
under Dr. A. B. C. Selwyn, in 1857, a cave was discovered by
Mr. C. D’Oyly H. Aplin in basalt on Toolern-Toolern Creek, five miles
south-east of Gisborne, in the above State, and very often spoken of as
the “ Mount Macedon Cave,” from its proximity to the hill of that name.
Dr. Selwyn said: “In it [ i.e ., the cave], embedded in light powdery and
perfectly dry soil, we found great quantities of the osseous remains of
Birds and Mammals; the most remarkable being perfect skulls of the
Dingo, the Devil of Tasmania, and other carnivorous animals.”'
A year later (1861) Prof. McCoy, writing on extinct vertebrates
of Post-Tertiary age in Victoria, said: “ With these, in some of the
caverns as at Mount Macedon, are found the remains of recent species
. . . the carnivorous Dasyuri and the Ganis dingo or native dog,
the recognition of which latter, I think, settles the point of its being
truly an indigenous animal.”' McCoy elsewhere* gave a list of the
animal remains found with those of the dog, the principal forms
being—
Diabolus ursinus, Karris.
Dasyurus affinis, McCoy.
Hypsiprymnus trisulcatus, McCoy.
„ viverrinus, Shaw.
Macropus, sp.
Phalangista vulpina, Shaw.
A year or two later McCoy repeated his statement in these
words: “ We find with the living dingo, or native wild dog, inhabiting
the neighbouring localities at present, skulls and teeth of Sarcophilus
ursinus, or ‘ Tasmanian Devil/ which now is only known to exist in
Tasmania, and has never been known on the mainland. ’ ’ 9
6 Selwyn—Quart. Journ. Geol. Soc., xvi, 1860, p. 145.
7 McCoy—Victorian Exhib. Essays, 1861, p. 168; Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ix, 1862, p. 145,
8 McCoy—Geol. Survey Viet. Notes attached to Quarter Sheet, vii, N. W.
• McCoy—Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., xx, 1867, p. 191.


To clinch the matter McCoy figured the cranial remains from
Lake Colnngulac and Mount Macedon Cave, and in doing so remarked
as follows:—“ The remarkable absence of the higher orders of the
mammalian quadrupeds in Australia was supposed to render it highly
probable that the Dingo, or Australian Dog, was not really a native of
the place, but was brought at some remote period from some other
country by human savage races arriving to constitute the population
of Australia. Taking the case of the Dingo, it was certain that the
native Dogs of continental Asia were not clearly related to the extent of
specific identity, with the Australian one, nor could any near analogies
be found anywhere; while, on the other hand, the facts are beyond
dispute: Ist, that the Dingo is singularly averse to domestication and
man’s society when compared with other dogs; 2nd, that it is extremely
abundant, with little or no variation, over the whole of Australia; and
3rd, that the further you go from human haunts, near the coast, into the
desert interior, the more numerous do the Dingoes appear, indicating
that the species was a really indigenous one. Our present species,
although still living in great numbers, I have no doubt dates from the
Pliocene-Tertiary time.” 10 McCoy further remarked: 11 One of the
most ancient of the indigenous mammals of the country, and abounded
as now most probably long before man himself appeared.”
Lake Colnngulac, near Camperdown, and Gisborne or Mount
Macedon Cave, already referred to, are the localities mentioned. At
the former remains of Thylacoleo carnifex were also discovered. It
would also appear that McCoy had determined the remains of a dog
from alluvial deposits at Lake Timboon, Co. Heytesbury, Victoria. 11
With regard to this Timboon locality, Mr. R. B. Smyth 11 * states
that in company with the dog remains were found those of the Tas-
manian Devil ( Sarcophilus ursinus, Harris) two species of gigantic
and extinct Kangaroo ( Macropus titan, Owen, and M. atlas, Owen) as
well as those of Nototherium and Diprotodon. “ The dingo was alive
and well when the now extinct marsupial lion ( Thyacoleo) roamed
through the forests of Australia; when the huge Dromornis fed peace-
fully on the plains; and when the volcanoes, now cold and smokeless,
10 McCoy—Prodromus Pal. Viet., Dec. vii, 1882, pp. 8 and 9.
11 Wilkinson—Zeits. Ethnol. (Verhandl.), 1879, p. 190.
Ua Smyth—Aborigines of Victoria, i, 1878, pp. 149-50.


sent forth clouds of ashes and pillars of fire.” Smyth also states
that in sinking a well at Tower Hill, near Warnambool, through volcanic
ash, the remains of dry grass was struck at sixty-three feet, possibly
an old land surface. Below a further thickness of sixty feet of blue and
yellow clay were found the skull and bones of a Dingo. llb Doubt, how-
ever, has I believe been thrown on the authenticity of this statement,
but I cannot place my hand on the reference.
So ends the Victorian story. Let us now see what is to be gleaned
on behalf of New South Wales. Mr. Gerard Krefft in a paper “ Verte-
brated Animals of the Lower Murray and Darling,” &c., remarked:
“ A question has been raised as to the origin of the Dingo in Australia,
and several high authorities are of opinion that the dog was introduced
there by man; if so this must have been at a very remote age, as the
first molar tooth of a dog has been found with other fossil remains in
the breccia of the Wellington Caves.” 1 ' Again: “In those days of
Diprotodons, not only did the Dingo exist, but also some of the animals
now restricted to the island of Tasmania, as Thylacinus and Sarcophilus,
teeth of which I have discovered in the same breccia ” {i.e., of
Wellington Caves).
Mr. Krefft made several other subsequent allusions to the same
subject, which an chronological roi*der are as follows:—In 1865, in
“ Notes on the Fossil Mammals of Australia ” 13 he observed: “ A
conglomerate mass of bones and red gravel , . . was found to
contain the first two molars of the lower jaw of a dog; it is possible
that this dog was similar to the Dingo of the present day. The left
canine of the lower jaw of a dog was also obtained,” accompanied by
portions of Diprotodon. Another notice says: “ The dingo existed, in
Australia during the time of Diprotodons. Fossil teeth of a species of
dog will be found in the collection [Australian Museum] from the
Wellington Caves, representing all known up to the present time.” 14
Krefft even recorded the Warrigal as an extinct Tasmanian species, M
but this statement he afterwards withdrew, saying: “ In Tasmania
no Dingos have been observed by the first settlers, nor have fossil
remains of dogs been found there.” 10
llb Smyth— Loc. cit., p. 149.
12 Krefft—Trans. Phil. Soc. N.S. Wales for 1862-05 (1866), p. 3.
18 Krefft —Geol. Mag., ii, 1865, p. 572.
11 Krefft—Australian Vertcbrata (Recent and Fossil), &o. (Cat. Nat. Indnst. Products
N.S. Wales, 1867, p. 92.)
15 Krefft—Trans. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales, i, 1867 (1868), p. 32.
1,5 Krefft —Australian Vertebrata, Fossil and Recent, Industrial Progress N.S. Wales—
Internat. Col. Exhib. Sydney, 1870 (1871), p. 703.


Two more quotations and Krefft’s evidence is complete. In liis
“ Guide to the Australian Fossil Remains exhibited by the Trustees
of the Australian Museum,” 11 he remarked: “ Remains of the dog
are scarce in every part of Australia where fossil bones occur; there
can be no doubt, however, of the presence in this country of a dog
during the Post-Pliocene period. A few teeth obtained at Wellington
are exhibited, and with them the teeth of the common Dingo of the
present day.” Lastly, in his unfinished work, “ Mammals of Aus-
tralia,” 1S occurs this passage: “ A species of dog existed in Australia
many years ago. Fossil remains of dogs have been discovered at the
Wellington Caves, and in other localities, and it must therefore be
accepted as a fact that the Dingo is indigenous.”
Confirmation of Krefft’s discoveries was afforded by Mr. C. S.
Wilkinson, who said; “ I have myself examined the deposits in the
Wellington and other bone caves in New South Wales, and feel con-
vinced that Canis dingo is indigenous to Australia, and existed on this
continent in the Post-Pliocene period.” 1 * Although at first inclined to
believe that the dog followed the advent of the black, Mr. J. Gould 10
summed up the question thus: “ It may be affirmed that late geological
discoveries will set aside the idea of its being a mere variety and tend
to prove that this dog existed in Australia even prior to the Aborigines.”
The value of the opinion of so eminent an authority is of the utmost
importance as confirmatory of the view later expressed by Mr. C. M.
Woodford on the specific status of the Warrigal.
It will be seen from these references that the concensus of opinion
as to the antiquity of the Warrigal is a very strong one. It was accepted
by Mr. F. G. Waterhouse, 11 a former Curator of the South Australian
Museum, Adelaide, who added his testimony in these words: “ The
dog was, no doubt, a very early introduction, because fossil remains
were discovered contemporaneous with the great extinct marsupials
of Post-Pliocene times.”
17 Sydney, 1870, Bvo. ; also Australian Vertebrata, Fossil and Recent. Industrial Progress
N.S. Wales—lnternal. Col. Exhib., Sydney, 1870 (1871), p. 715.
38 Sydney, 1871, folio, expl. pi. 2.
39 Wilkinson—Zoitsch. Ethnol. (Verhandl,), 1879, p. 190.
20 Gould—Mammals of Australia, iii, 1863, p. 52.
23 Waterhouse in TTarcus—S. Australia ; Its History, Resources, and Productions, 1876,
p. 191. ' '


On the other hand, amongst those who took an opposite view
was Dr. George Bennett, who argued that because “ all other genera
peculiar to Australia are found in Tasmania, and not the Warrigal,
therefore the latter was not indigenous to Australia.”” At the time
Dr. Bennett wrote, the former union of Australia and Tasmania was
not grasped. The absence of the Warrigal in Tasmania simply implies
that its appearance on this Continent was subsequent to the formation
of Bass Strait and the destruction of the Tasmanian land bridge,
but before the total extinction of Thylacinus and Sarcophilus . 22a
Mr. A. Oldfield evidently grasped this fact by saying that Tasmania
must have been inhabited “ before the Dingo had time to spread as far
as the shores of Bass Straits. 22b On the other hand, had he been aware
of the discoveries of McCoy and Krefilt, he would hardly have added
that “ the whole Continent from north to south must have been peopled
prior to the general introduction of the dog.” Even so eminent an
authority as Count d’Archiac held there was nothing to prove that the
dog was introduced by the first men to arrive*
Coming to more recent times we find Prof. E. Tate on the side
of the objectors, who, whilst admitting the contemporaneity of the
Warrigal and Diprotodon," 11 whose remains are found beneath the
ashes of the Mount Gambier volcano,” appears to doubt the dog’s
introduction in advance of man’s advent. “ The dingo is an alien; he
forms no part of the Australian fauna; and his introduction by man,
as a companion and assistant in the chase, can only satisfactorily explain
his presence in this continent, as in some of the Pacific Islands.”
My co-writer Dr. E. L. Jack 1 * has sufficiently answered the above
by saying that the Warrigal arrived “ by some chance means of convey-
ance without assistance, or may have simply walked overland. It is
quite possible, therefore, that he may have been contemporary with
the Diprotodon
22 Bennett—Wanderings in New South Wales, i, 1834, p, 231.
22a Hewitt—Proc. Austr. Assoc. Adv. Sc., 1898 (1899), p. 754.
* 2b Oldfield—Trans. Eth. Soc., iii (n.s.), 1865, p. 217.
21 D’Archiac—Lefons Faune Quaternaire, 1866, p. 271.
24 Tate—Trans. Phil. Soc. Adelaide, 1878-79 (1879), p. Ixx.
36 Jack—Geol. Pal, Queensland, 1892, p. 623.


The li walk overland ” is by no means, in all probability, far
from the truth. We know that an approximate elevation of the Torres
Strait bottom of 7-10 ftbs. would result in the above union of
'Australia and New Guinea. This union has been pointed out 26 by Mr. C.
Hedley, who also wrote: “ Further to the westward the coasts of
Australia and New Guinea again converge, being separated by an arm
of the Arafura Sea, which gradually shoals from a central depth of
forty fathoms and stretches for about a hundred and fifty miles between
Cape Wessel in the Northern Territory and Cape Valsche on the;
opposite shore of Dutch New Guinea.’ ’ But long before these remarks
were written Prof. J. Bete Jukes penned the following advance note 27 :
<( If the fact of depression of the north-east coast during the formation
of the great coral reefs [i.e., the Barrier, &c.], be held as proved, it
follows that during the early part of the period of their formation,
Torres Strait, and the shoal seas on each side of it, were dry land, and
Australia connected to New Guinea,” a view later supported by Mr.
C. S. Wilkinson 23 and Prof. A. Agassiz. 23
Commenting on the early researches of Sir F. McCoy, Prof. St.
G. Mivart was in doubt whether the Warrigal “ was introduced by man,
or (if it was introduced by him) as to whether it was a race formed in
Australia from domesticated breeds, such as now exist in adjacent
regions, or whether such latter breeds are themselves derived from the
Dingo on its march towards the Australian continent,” 50 Mivart went
on to state that certain regions of the world are conspicuous by the
absence of the Canid*, except the Dingo, “ but if we exclude it, then in
the whole continent of Australia, the vast island of New Guinea, with
Tasmania, New Zealand, Celebes, the Philippine Islands, and Ceylon,
no members of the family are naturally indigenous.”'" 1 A well-known
traveller and naturalist, Mr, C. M. Woodford, who possesses a wide
knowledge of the Pacific region, remarked 32 : I think that the dingo
is probably the progenitor of the domestic dog of all the Pacific
Islanders.”
G
25 Hedley—Proc. Jinn. Soc. N.S. Wales, vi (2), 1892, p, 694 ; also in Jack .and Etheridge—
Geol. Pal. Queensland, 1892, p. 644.
27 Jukes—Voy. “ Fly,” i, 1847, p. 34J.
23 Wilkinson —Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S. Wales, I, 1876, p. 113.
22 Agassiz—Bull. Mus. Comp, Zool. Harvard, xxviii, 1898, page 142; see also Haddon—
Trans. Roy. Irish, Acad., xxx, 1894, p. 422, and Hedley—Proc. Linn. Soc. N.S, Wales, xxv, 1899,
p. 397.
30 Mivart—Mon. Canidte, 1890, p. 157.
31 Mivart— lbid., p. viii.
82 Woodford—Naturalist among the Head Hunters, 1890, p. 54,


Sucli is the history of the Warrigal so far as known to me. On
more than one occasion I had searched amongst our Wellington Cave
specimens for any trace of the teeth so frequently referred to by
Mr. Krefft, but until quite recently my efforts were unrewarded. A
more critical search amongst a quantity of Thylacine and Sarcophaline
jaw pieces and loose teeth resulted in the discovery of certain molar
and canine teeth certainly not appertaining to either Thylacinus or
Sarcophilus. I believe the teeth in question to be the right lower and
left upper “ flesh-tooth ” {m. 1) and the left upper canine of a dog
somewhat superior in size to the Warrigal. Of the right lower m. 1
there are two examples, and also two of the left upper m. 1 ; the canines
are represented by three examples which I believe to be left upper
teeth. Of these seven teeth four bear evidence of having formed a
portion of Krefft’s collection.
We are acquainted with the existence in Post-Tertiary times of
several marsupial carnivores’* appertaining to both the genera pre-
viously mentioned. Sir Richard- Owen recognised remains of the
Tasmanian Wolf {Thylacinus cynocephalus, Harris) 54 and an extinct
form to which he applied the name of T. spelmus , or “ Cave Thylacine ”; 85
according to Krefft there are also others, 58 all from the Wellington
Caves breccia. Of Sarcophilus Owen again recorded" the living species,
Tasmanian Devil ( 8 . ursinus, Harris), and an extinct form {S. laniarius,
Owen), 58 whilst to these Krefft added one or more species, but unnamed."
Now, accounting for these, the only other possible carnivore of any size,
whose remains would be found with the foregoing fossils would be a dog.
The molar and canine teeth of these pouched animals are so clearly
distinct from those of the Canis tribe as to hardly need demonstration,
but to render the matter clear, I have given on Pis. x-xii a series of
comparative figures. In each instance the three top figures are what I
believe to be the Canis teeth from Wellington. The second row are
ss I omit- from consideration the debatable question of the sarcophagous or pcephagus habit of
Thylacoleo.
S 1 Owen —Osteol. Cat. Roy. Coll. Surgeons, i., 1853, p. 347.
15 Owen —Descrip. Cat. Mam. and Aves. Roy. Coll, Surgeons, 1845, pp. 335-6, Nos. 1548-9,
»* Krefft—Geol. Mag., ii, 1865, p, 573.
* 7 Owen—Osteol. Cat. loc. cit., i, p. 346 {Dasyurus).
88 Owen— Dasyurus, Descrip. Cat. loc. cit., pp. 334-5, Nos. 1543-7,
89 Krefft—Geol. Mag., ii, 1865, p. 573.


similar teeth of a large domestic dog; the third represent those of the
extinct Thylacinus spelceits, and the fourth series corresponding teeth
of the form I have always identified as Sarcophihis laniarius ,
In connection with this last animal is the remarkable discovery of
a living female in a hollow log at Tooborac, beyond Kilmore, Victoria.
The animal was captured and sent to the National Museum, Melbourne,
and there identified. 391 The question raised by Mr. J. A. Kershaw
whether this is actually a living remnant of the species in Victoria, or
an escapee from confinement, is not easy to answer, but if the former,
there must have been other individuals associated with it thereabouts.
s9a Kershaw—Viet. Nat., XXIX, 1912, p. 75.


III.—THE WELLINGTON CAVES TEETH.
In the lower molars of a Thylacine (PI. x, figs. 7-9) there are
three well-developed lobes of the blade —sharp, trenchant, and upstand-
ing, but there is no inner, or lingual, cusp attached to the second lobe.
On the other hand, in a dog’s lower “ flesh-tooth,” the two lobes and
heel of the blade are certainly less pointed than in that of a Thylacine,
and not so separately “upstanding furthermore there is a well-
developed inner cusp attached to the second lobe. Again, the heel of
the blade in the dog’s m. 1 is divided on its sub-truncate upper surface
into two cusps, an inner or lingual, and an outer or labial, separated
by a groove-like longitudinal valley (PL x, fig. 5), but this is not the
case in either Thylacinus or Sarcophilus, so far as I have examined
the dentition. The “ flesh-teeth ” from Wellington are 21 m.m. in
longitudinal measurement, those of a large domestic dog used for
comparison, 21% mm., but even this, small difference is perceptible to
the naked eye.
The left upper molars referred to Cams (PI. xi, figs. 1-3) are
unfortunately worn, but I believe it possible to demonstrate their canine
affinity. In a Thylacine an upper molar (PI. xi, fig. 8) is roughly speaking
irregularly triangular in outline when viewed from above transversely.
There are three lobes, or cusps, which may possibly be termed labial,
and a very pronounced inner or lingual. The anterior labial cusp is
small, the middle one high and pointed, the posterior large but more
obtuse, and united to the middle cusp by a trenchant edge, with a
'distinct labial inclination. The inner, or lingual cusp is at a much
lower level, strong, and obtuse, projected in its entirety somewhat into
the palatal cavity.
In the dog, on the other hand, there are two labial and conical
lobes (PI. xi, fig. 2) in the same alignment, but separated by a sharply
defined transverse sulcus, or groove. The inner, or lingual, lobe is
complex, placed at a lower level, and more or less “ tabular,” i.e., table-
like, and its surface more or less horizontal (PL xi, figs. 1 and 3,4 and 6);
it is divided into three small component lobes. The root is three-fanged,


the two labial fangs corresponding to the two conical lobes, and of the
usual elongate root-like form, but the third fang, or talon, supporting
the table, is of considerable size and resembles a buttress. The twd
teeth I regard as the upper left m. 1 of a dog are, as I have previously
said, Worn by use, but it is possible to recognise the two labial lobes,
the strong encircling ring at the junction of the roots and crown, and
the third cusp, or lobe, sloping .inwards with an almost plafie surface
arising from wear and tear, but supported by its buttress-like fang.
An examination of the figures of these teeth (PI. xi, figs. 4-6 aiid 7-9)
in the Thylacine and dog will exemplify these differences.
We may now consider the left Upper canines I ascribe to a dog
(PI. xii, figs. 1-3). In the canines of a Thi/lacinus and Sarcophilus,
whether upper or lower, the transverse section of the crown is evenly
continuous and uninterrupted, but in all dog canines examined I find
the cross-section is interrupted by a posterior, sharp, longitudinal earina,
or ridge (PI. xii, figs. 2 and 5). Owen noticed this earina in the canines
of the dog, but confined his remarks to the upper teeth. 40 In all dog
canines examined I find this earina to be present more or less; it is
again the case in the Pox, and to some extent in the Wolf also, and I
have observed it in some canines of Sarcophilus, but not in all examined.
The smooth enamel-pointed crown in a dog occupies from one-third to
one-half the total length of the tooth, but in both marsupials under
consideration, it varies from one-third to one-fourth.
The root in both Sarcophilus and Thylacinus (PL xii, figs. 7 and
8, 10 and 11) is roughened with longitudinal anastomosing stria? and
corresponding grooves, but in that of a dog it is smooth, and such is
the ease in those teeth I ascribe to the canines of the latter animal
(PI. xii, figs. 1 and 2). Again, the root of a dog canine presents the
same laterally compressed oval cross-section, as in the crown, through-
out its whole length. On the other hand in the canines of the two
marsupial carnivores here used for comparison, immediately below the
neck the diameter of the root is much increased, presenting a generally
inflated appearance (PI. xii, fig. 7). In the Canidse the junction of the
enamel and cementum in a canine is far more defined than in that of
either the Thylacine or Sarcophile, and at times, in fact often, is marked
40 Owen—Odontography, 1845, p. 476.


by a narrow encircling ‘ 1 collar. ’ ’ This is particularly noticeable in the
dog, but less perceptible in the Wolf and Fox. In neither of the
Australian genera is there any collar, the cementum simply overlapping
the enamel (PI. xii, figs 7,8, &c.) in a very irregular encircling line.
The three upper canine teeth from Wellington in every way coincide
in their form and details with those of a dog and not with the characters
displayed by the marsupial teeth.
The foregoing details, I think, fully warrant me in supporting
the opinion expressed so many years ago by Mr. Krefft, that a dog did
exist in New South Wales in Post-Tertiary times, although he did not
demonstrate the truth of his opinion in the complete manner adopted
by Prof. McCoy in the case of the Victorian occurrence.
Which of the postulates advanced in the second paragraph of
this paper the reader is prepared to adopt must be left to his inter-
pretation of the facts stated.


EXPLANATION OE PLATE X.
Canis, sp
Pig. I.—Right lower “ flesh-tooth ” (m. 1.), lingual view.
Pig. 2.—Crown of same tooth.
Pig. 3.—Labial view of the subject of Pigs. 1 and 2.
Wellington Caves.
Canis fatniliaris, Linnceus,
Pig. 4.—Right lower “flesh-tooth” (m. 1.) lingual view.
Pig. s.—Crown of the same tooth.
Pig. 6.—Labial view of the subject of Figs,,4 and 9,
Recent.
Thylacinus speleeus, Owen,
Pig. 7.—Left lower molar (m. 1.), labial view.
Pig. B.—Crown of the same tooth.
Pig. 9.—Lingual view of the subject of Figs. 7 and 8.
Wellington Caves.
Sarcophilus laniarius, Owen.
Pig. 10.—Left lower molar (m. 1.), lingual view.
Fig. 11. —Crown of the same tooth.
Fig. 12.—Labial view of the subject of Figs. 10 and 11.
Wellington Caves.


M EM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES. ETHNOL. No. 2.
PLATE X.
Phyllis Clarke, Austr. Mus., del.


EXPLANATION OE PLATE XI.
Canis, sp.
Fig. l.—Left upper “flesh-tooth” (m. 1.), much worn, anterior side view.
Fig. 2.—Crown of the same tooth.
Fig. 3.—The posterior side view of the subject of Figs, 1 and 2.
Wellington Caves.
Canis familiaris, Linnreus.
Fig. 4.—Left upper molar (m. 1.), anterior side view.
Fig. s.—Crown of the same tooth.
Fig. 6.—The posterior view of the subject of Figs. 4 and 5.
Recent,
Thylacinus speheus, Owen .
Fig. 7.—Left upper molar (m. 1.), lingual view.
Fig. B.—Crown of the same tooth.
Fig. 9.-—Labial view of the subject of Figs. 7 and 8.
Wellington Caves.
< Sarcophilus laniarius, Owen.
Fig. 10.—Left upper molar, lingual view.
Fig 11.—Crown of the same.
Fig. 12.—Labial view of the subject of Figs. 10 and 11.
Wellington Caves,


M EM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES, ETHNOL. No. 2.
PLATE XI.
Phyllis Clarke, Austr. Mas., del.


EXPLANATION OP PLATE XII.
Cards, sp.
Pig. I.—Left upper canine, side view • the ridge shown is simply the edge of an
abrasion area caused by working against the lower canine.
Fig. 2.—lnner or posterior view exhibiting the longitudinal ridge or carina.
Fig. 3.—Transverse section of this tooth.
Wellington Caves.
Canis familiaris, Linnoeus.
Fig. 4.—Left upper canine, showing proportion of crown to root; the ridge
shown is similar to that seen in Fig. 1.
Fig. s.—lnner or posterior view exhibiting the longitudinal ridge or carina.
Fig. 6.—Transverse section of this tooth.
Recent.
Thylacinus spelseus, Owen.
Pig. 7.—Canine, side view, showing proportion of crown to root, and increase in
the diameter of the latter.
Fig. B. —Posterior view of Fig. 7 and absence of a ridge or carina.
Fig.' 9. section of a canine.
Wellington Caves.
Saroophalus laniarius, Owen.
Fig. 10.—Left upper canine, side view.
Fig. 11.—The same tooth seen from the posterior. Here is seen a longitudinal
ridge as in Canis.
Fig 12.—Transverse section.
Wellington Caves,


M EM. GEOL. SURVEY N. S. WALES. ETHNOL. No. 2.
PLATE XII.


MEMOIRS OE THE GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
PUBLISHED ;
GEOLOGICAL SERIES.
*No. 1. Report on the Vegetable Creek Tin Mining District. By T. W. E. David, 8.A., F.G.S.
No. 2. The Iron Ore Deposits of New South Wales. By J, B. Jaquet, A.R.S.M., F.G.S. (4to, Sydney,
1901.)
No. 3. The Kerosene Shale Deposits of New South Wales. By J. E. Came, F.G.S. (4to, Sydney, 1903.)
No. 4. Geology of the Hunter River Coalfield. By T. W. E. David, B. A., F.R.S. (4to, Sydney, 1907.)
No. 5. Geology of the Broken Hill Lode and Barrier Ranges Mineral Field, New South Wales.
By J. B. Jaquet, A.R.S.M. (4to, Sydney, 1894.)
*No. 6. Geology and Mineral Resources of the Western Coalfield. By J. E. Came, F.G.S. (4to, Sydney,
1908.)
No. 7. The Geology and Mineral Resources of the Southern Coalfield. By L. F. Harper, F.G.S.,
Geological Surveyor. (4to, Sydney, 1916.)
PALAEONTOLOGICAL SERIES.
♦ No. 1. The Invertebrate Fauna of the Hawkesbury-Wianamatta Series of New South Wales.
By R. Etheiidge, Jun. (4to, Sydney, 1888.)
*No. 2. Contributions to the Tertiary Flora of Australia. By Dr. Constantin, Baron von Ettingshausen.
(4to, Sydney, 1888.)
*No. 3. Geological and Paheontological Relations of the Coal and Plant-bearing Beds of Palieozoic and
Mesozoic Age in Eastern Australia and Tasmania, with Special Reference to the Fossil Flora.
By Oitokar Feistmantel. (4to, Sydney, 1890.)
No. 4. The Fossil Fishes of the Hawkesburv Seri, at Gosford. By A. S. Woodward, (4to, Sydney,
1890.)
No. 5. A Monograph of the Carboniferous and Permo-Carboniferous Invertebrata of New South Wales,
Part I: Ccelenterata, Part II E« hinodeimata, &c. By R. Etheridge, Jun. (4to, Sydney,
1901-2.)
Vol. 11, Pelecypoda, Parc I, Palseopectens. By R. Etheridge and W. S. Dun (4to, Sydney,
1906.) Part IT, Tim Genus Eurydesma. (4to, Sydney, 1910.)
*No. 6. Descriptions of the Palaeozoic Fossils oi Nev. South Wales. By the late L. G. de Koninck ;
translated by 'W. E. David, Mrs. David, and W. S. Dun. (4to, Sydney, 1898.)
No. 8. Coniribcftions to a Catalogue of W '-as, Reports, and Papers on the Anthropology and
Geological History of the Australia;! Aborigines. Parts I-lIL By R. Etheridge, Jun.
(4to, Sydney, 1890-95.)
No. 9. The Fossil Fishes of the Talbragar Beds (J urrssic). By A. S. Woodward. . (4to, Sydney, 1895.)
No. 10. The Fossil Fishes of the Hawkesbury Series at St. Peters. By A. S. Woodward. (4to, Sydney,
1908.)
No. 11. A Monograph of the Cretaceous Invertebrate Fauna of New South Wales. By R. Etheridge, Jun.
(4to, Sydney 1903.)
No, 13. A Monograph of the Silurian and Devonian Corals of N.S.W. Part I : The Genus Hatysites.
By R. Etheridge, Jun. (4to, Sydney, 1904). Part II: The Genus Tryplasma. By
B. Etheridge, Jun. (Bvo, Sydney, 1907.)
No. 14. A Monograph of the Foraminifera of the Permo-Carboniferous Limestone of New South Wales.
By F. Chapman and W, Howchin. (Bvo, Sydney, 1906.)
ETHNOLOGICAL SERIES.
No. 1. Aboriginal Carvings of Port Jackson and Broken Bay. By W, D. Campbell, L.S., F.G.S.
(4to, Sydney, 1899.)
* Out of Print.
