



(The Superb
PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE "SUPERB " DURING HER OUTWARD VOYAGE TO MELBOURNE.
It was resolved at a meeting held on Friday, 17th March, 1882, that the following gentlemen form the Editorial Staff:—
Mr. W. Routledge, Mr. H. Alderton, Mr. H. Gaillard. The paper will appear fortnightly.
Hon Sec.: Mr. Stephens.
No. 1.
MAECH 24, 1882.
INTRODUCTORY.
After the favour with which the project for a Superb Gazette
was received, we have little hesitation in launching our first
number, trusting that our literary infant (like all good babes)
will improve as it gets older. This will very much depend upon
the hearty co-operation of our fellow-passengers, to whom we look
for contributions to help to fill our columns, and keep the Gazette
going swimmingly on the tide of prosperity until we reach our
journey’s end; we hope by that time to have compiled a readable
volume, and a most interesting memento of one of the greatest
events in our lives—a journey to Australia in one of the most
comfortable of marine homes.
There will be no favour shown by the Editors in the insertion
of contributions, merit and space being the only considerations.
A record of all entertainments will be given, and anything of
importance not chronicled by the Gazette will be inserted in the
next number if attention be drawn to the fact. We hope to
have showered upon us poems, short tales, parodies, songs
(original), double acrostics, &c. ; in fact, any novelties calculated
to make our paper instructive and amusing. With these few
words, we now present to you our first attempt, with a sincere
wish that after its perusal you will look forward to the issue of
the second number of the Superb Gazette.
LIST OP OFFICERS, PASSENGERS, AND CREW ON
BOARD THE “SUPERB.”
Berridge, Henry ... ... Commander
Barker, D, W., F.M.S. ... ... Ist Officer
Yale, F. Y. ... ... ... 2nd do
Jones, M. A. ... ... ... 3rd do
Mann, K. ... ... ... 4th do.
Midshipmen. —Messrs. F. W. Simms, D. 0. Hills, 0. S. J.
Mackenzie, F. M. R. Carter, M. J, R. Seaver, C. S. C. Hurrell,
G. E. Wilmot, G. Baertsoen, T. R. Carter.
Dr. Connor ... ... ... Surgeon.
Saloon Passengers. —Mrs. Berridge, Mrs. Smith, Misses P.
and K. Shelley, Miss Sutcliffe, Miss E. Sutcliffe, Mr. Clifford,
Mr. W, K. Stephens, Mr. J, D. Ridley, Mr. W. Routledge, Mr.
H. Smith, Mr. G. Fox, Mr. W. W. Paterson, Mr. T. W. Webb,
Mr. D, Love, Mr. R. Pratt, Mr. H. Pratt, Mr. H. Gaillard, Mr.
J. W. Kennedy, Mr. H. Alderton, Mr. H. R. Tenney, Mr. T.
Cook, Mr. A. Cook, and Mr. F. A. Dawson.
Second Class Passengers. —Miss Ward, Miss Gisborne, Miss
Wood, Mr. and Mrs. Millard and child, Mr. Symons, Mr.
Oxenbold, Mr. C. House, Mr. T. House, Miss House, Miss
Whitehead, Mr. J, Mather, Mr. and Mrs. Allen, two children,
and an infant, Mr. Dodd, Mr. Higgs, Mr,, Mrs., and Miss Baker,
and Mr. Bickle.
Third Class Passengers. —Mr. Taylor, Mr. Hayward, Mr.
Mathews, and Mr. Street.
Crew.—Twenty-three able seamen, two ordinary seamen, one
carpenter, one sailmaker, one boatswain, one cook, one baker, one
butcher, one engineer, one chief steward, and four saloon
stewards.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Friday, 10th March.—After an enthusiastic cheer from an
assembled crowd, accompanied by numerous wavings of hands
and pocket-handkerchiefs, we left the East India Docks punctually
at 3 o’clock p.m., and proceeded in tow of two tugs to Gravesend,
which port we reached about 6 o’clock, and anchored for the
night. Sleep was out of the question. The noises on board were
of a most varied description, what with the trampling of the
watch overhead; and the live stock on board, doubtless torn
ruthlessly away from friend and kindred, showed their indignation
at such a proceeding in a variety of noises. Add to this list of
midnight horrors the many steamers introducing at intervals
shrill and agonizing screams, and you have a full category of our
first night’s experience on the water.
Saturday, 11th March.—A very dull morning, everything
bustle and confusion, and all look miserable and seedy. Waiting
for the remainder of passengers who embark here, or impatiently
expecting the arrival of friends to bid a parting farewell. Tender
came alongside about 1 o’clock ; the captain and Mrs. Berridge,
who were lustily cheered, arriving soon afterwards. Weighed
anchor at 3 o’clock, and proceeded down the river as far as the
Nore, where we anchored until 4 o’clock the following morning,
Sunday, 12th March.—Our first day at sea. Pleasant weather
and smooth water. Passed through the Downs in company with
many other ships. Sighted Margate at 9 o’clock—a familiar spot
to many of us. Tug left in the evening, off Beachy Head. The
river pilot went ashore at Dover, taking the letter-bag with him.
Passengers rather quiet, feeling shy of each other.
Monday, 13th March. — Dead calm; still off Beachy Head;
found the tide had drifted us some distance in the wrong way.
A French fishing-boat came alongside, and our steward procured
fish in exchange for some biscuits. Several fowls, evidently
disgusted with their treatment, quietly gave up the ghost during
the night.
Tuesday, 14th March.—The weather is still very similar, with
a bright sun and clear sky ;in fact, it is more like a July day.
Still making very slow progress, going only two knots an hour.
Up to the present we have gone about 170 miles.
Wednesday, 15th March.—Weather the same; passed the
Isle of Wight during the morning. At night songs and
recitations were given by several of the passengers, who were now
beginning to feel more at home with each other. Found we had
plenty of musical talent on board,
Thursday, 16th March.—Continued calm. At 10.30 we
neared Start Point. The letter-bag was made up, and the pilot
left us, accompanied by Mr. Fish. We were very sorry to part
with the latter, as during our short acquaintance we had found him
a pleasant companion ; in fact, he had become quite popular. A
hearty cheer was given him and the pilot as they left the ship,
Mr. Fish receiving musical honours.
LIFE AFLOAT AND LIFE ON SHORE.
While meditating on the various moods of the sea, I was led to
make a comparison between the life we are now leading on board


the Superb and that which we have just left in old England.
What a delightful thing is life at sea when the weather is fine,
the ship sound, and the company pleasant. The sea is calm, and
we are reclining on deck, “ basking in the sun.” We have left
all our cares and worries, whether of business, professional or
domestic life, behind, and, with minds perfectly at ease, are able
to enjoy the beauties of nature and the pleasures of social com-
panionship. There are no letters to write, no calls to make, no
creditors to get rid of, and no detective officers to evade; besides,
we have a variety of amusements to help the time away. For
those who are musical we have on board a piano, a banjo, a
tambourine, &c.; and that finest of all musical instruments, the
human voice, is not neglected. At the same time we have a
variety of games at cards, such as Whist, Nap., and Newmarket,
and quoits on the poop deck. Most of us have also laid in a stock
of books, principally of light literature, so that our minds may
not altogether lie fallow during the voyage.
Now let me for a short time draw your attention to the other
side of the picture, when the wind is blowing a gale, the mighty
deep is raging, and all those who are unaccustomed to the rocking
of the ship on a stormy sea are suffering from the agonies of
mol de mer. This may be very pleasant to the experienced
seaman, who delights in braving the storm and feels all the better
for a breath of wind, but to the novice it is simply detestable.
Who among the sufferers would not then prefer to be on terra
Jirma, seated by thir own firesides.
In addition to the sea-sickness, I may mention some other dis-
advantages of life afloat. First, the limited space which necessarily
is allotted to each individual on board ship. Second, being cut off
from supplies and being left altogether to our own resources.
Third, in a long voyage like the present one, you are bound to
associate for a certain time every day with a number of people
whom you may or may not like ; there is no such thing as telling
your neighbour to take the right hand and you will take the left,
as all must go in the same direction. However, I hope we shall
all be good friends, both during the voyage and afterwards.
Fourthly, I may state the difficulty in dressing, walking about,
&c., when the ship is rolling. To conclude this small scrap, we
have all had some experience of the sea both in calm and storm,
for the first week we had beautiful weather, but during the last
few days the weather has not been quite so pleasant. Now I
leave with each individual to decide for himself whether he
prefers Life Afloat or Life on Shore? There is just one thing I
wish to say before ending, viz., we should all be thankful that our
voyage is in the good ship Superb , and with as jolly a captain
as anyone could wish to have.
HIBERNIUS.
AN AWKWARD MISTAKE.
At a dinner-party in “ town ” last August there were two sisters
present —one a widow who had just emerged from her weeds, the
other not long married, whose husband had lately gone out to
India for a short time. A young barrister present was deputed to
take the widow in to dinner. Unfortunately, he was under the
impression that his partner was the married lady whose husband
had just arrived in India. The conversation between them com-
menced by the lady’s remarking how extremely hot it was. “Yes,
it is very hot! ” replied the young barrister. Then a happy
thought suggested itself to him, and he added, with a cheerful
smile, “ But not so hot as the place to which your husband has
gone.”
LIFE BELOW.
I am not going to write a diary, as I can’t, but I do intend to
bother you with some of my troubles, &c., on board—that is to
say, if you take pains to read them. I started from Gravesend in
a small boat, although I have some faint idea of being in a railway
carriage, and the first person I saw on boax-d told me he had pro-
cured my insurance ticket, for which he charged me fifty shillings.
I don’t care if they throw my luggage overboard—l think they
had better, as it probably contains gunpowder, lam not sure
what next happened, but, after having interviewed the steward, I
turned in. I know we passed Beachy Head some time, as they
told me it was foggy, and I fully believe them. Got rid of the
pilot in due time, and an agreeable change in the weather soon
ensued. I don’t know what his leaving had to do with it; he told
me, on the only occasion that I liquored up with him, that the moon
would bring a change. The change came, and the pilot departed;
that’s all I know. Settled down to cards, &c., in the usual manner,
and, consequently, am now fully engaged. Of course we kept St.
Patrick’s day, particularly Pat, our ’tween-deck steward, who,
after having come to grief, and upsetting a table with all the
concomitants of a decent tea, regretted, in a most doleful manner,
the fact that a bottle of whiskey had been broken on the upper
deck, and he not at hand. Rats are rather disagreeable companions
on board, but why some people have such a great dread of them
I don’t know. One of our passengers, after having expressed his
great contempt for them just before turning in, suddenly made
his appearance, minus his hat, and could not be induced to return
to his bunk without a strong escort. He had to fee this escort. I
wish there were more rats. We are pretty lively between decks.
The mids. gave us a concert the other night. The ladies, like the
Peri at the gate of Paradise, had outside seats. By-the-by, did
anyone ever see a Peri inside a middy’s berth ? I am afraid she
would have a rough time of it. On the same evening the
gymnasium was well patronized on the other side, and there was
a slight noise below. We had a sad accident the other night—
one of our crowd hung his continuations over a candle, which did
not tend to improve either their appearance or usefulness. The
other morning I visited the sailors at their devotions —that is, holy-
stoning the poop. The service seemed very impressive, although
the bibles were somewhat peculiar; but Mr. Barker explained to me
that they were written in Sanscrit. I know that the ashes were
plentiful, although the language was certainly expressive, if not
quite orthodox. Sackcloth was of a very varied description. I
thought of the resources of Manchester, until I saw the portly
form of our quartermaster ahead of me, and felt satisfied. If I
see anything next week, I will let you know.
QUESTIONS FROM CORRESPONDENTS.
“ Busybody,” —Has the gentleman called Uncle a nephew on
board ?
“ R.”—Where can you procure pickled eels’ feet ?
“A Friend.” —ls Melbourne a cheap town to live in?
“ Middy.” —Kindly let me know the most soothing medicine
for a baby ?
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“ Pat.” —Yes, the cuckoo is a migratory bird, visiting the
shores of England about this season. It is very probable that we
shall meet some of them on their passage. Ask the carpenter.
“Jane.” —We never tell gentlemen’s ages. We believe he is
not married.
“ X.Y.Z.”—Ask the doctor.
“ An Enquirer.” —Five feet eight and a half.
“ W. Jones.”—We do not pay for contributions.
“ May.” —Consult a lady. We believe they call them plaits.
Divine service was held on Sunday morning at 10.30 in the
saloon. Prayers and lessons were read in a most impressive style
by Captain Berridge; Mr. Webb presided at the piano, and a
promising choir, organized among the passengers, sang the chants
and hymns in a satisfactory manner.
Owing to the prevailing mal de mer , evening service was not
held.
An entei'tainment will be given in the saloon as soon as the
weather permits.
Sweepstakes are now got up every day. The passengers take
great interest in the daily run of the vessel.


OUR PUZZLE COLUMN.
DOUBLE ACROSTIC.
I.
Borne by my first, from second far to roam;
For many weeks we make my first my home.
1.
A shortened Christian name — guess me you can’t;
You throw sticks at me, tho’ I am your Aunt!
A letter take from “ union,” then you’ll find
My second light to all is left behind.
2.
3.
A tiny thing—’tis pointed, bright and cheap—
4.
Makes an impression if inserted deep*.
Come to by all ; arrived at every day ;
5.
This line possesses it, so you will say.
You walk on me in Yenice, and ’tis said,
That we, to walk on several are led.
6.
Ask J umbo if he knows the precious light ?
He’d answer “ Yes ! they spoil my appetite.”
n. ,
BOUTS—RIMES.
know
all
show
tall.
Explanation.— A Bout-rim6 consists of filling up the lines
so as to form a verse of poetry ; the ending of each line must be as
above.
. in.
When was Joshua like a schoolmaster?
IV.
A snail climbing up a long pole twelve feet high, managed to go
up two feet a day, but slipped back one at eaich attempt. How
many days did it take him to reach the top 1
My first you find near a door, my second is a grain, and my
third is what all like to possess. My whole is one of the United
States,
Prize Competition.—A portrait of the Queen, in handsome
black frame, will be presented by the editorial staff for the
best answers to the following questions ;
1. Your idea of misery ?
2. Your idea of the height of embarrassment?
3. Fault to be most tolerated in a wife?
4. The chief failings of husbands (three examples to be given) ?
5. What to say to a lady if you tread on her pet dog when
entering the room ?
6. Your idea of the summit of bliss?
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Friday, 17th March.—Navigation commenced in earnest; by
12 o’clock we were 52| miles off Start Point, a slight breeze having
sprung up; there was also a little roll of the vessel, which had the
usual disagreeable effect on several. After tiffin a little excite-
ment awaited us : four stowaways came out of the coal-hole, and
were immediately christened Zulus, from their black and grimy
appearance. Quoits were played to-day for the first time. Meet-
ing on the poop deck was held this evening to Start Superb
Gazette. An Entertainment Committee was also formed.
Saturday, 18th March.—Sighted two brigs, a steamer, and a
schooner. Choir practised at 2 p.m. Day’s run, 47 knots.
Sunday, 19th March.—At 10.30 divine service was held in
the saloon. Made our first acquaintance with “ Fiddles ”at
tiffin; scanty attendance at dinner. As the day advanced
the breeze freshened considerably. No evening service, in conse-
quence of weather. Day’s run, 92 knots.
Monday, 20th March.—Yery rough; abreast of the Bay of
Biscay ; rolling and pitching to any amount. Yery few passengers
to be seen, vial de vier in the ascendant; only seven sat out
dinner. Small schooner on the port side passed. Day’s run, 133
knots.
Tuesday, 21st March.—Weather about the same; motion of
the vessel a trifle more easy ; the sea somewhat subsided ; several
porpoises were seen round the bows at noon, and a barque was
sighted on the starboard, homeward bound, staggering under
close-reefed topsails, but making very fair weather of it. During
the forenoon a slight accident occurred; one of the foretop &
gallant backstays was carried away. Day’s run, 217 knots,
Wednesday, 22nd March.—Weather fair. We are now out
of the Bay of Biscay, and about 500 miles from Madeira; hope
soon to have warm weather. We now have sweepstakes on the
distance run by vessel every day; this always creates a little
excitement when the board is put up. Passed a full-rigged out-
ward bound ship with the greatest ease; we also passed a barque
in the afternoon, and some floating wreckage, evidently long in
the water, it having a large number of barnacles upon it. Day’s
run, 220 knots.
Thursday, 23rd March.—Wind still in the same favourable
quarter—if anything, freshening a little—so that we make capital
progress. Run, 254 knots.
Friday, 24th March.—Beautiful morning, strong breeze, all
sails set. Sighted western extremity of Madeira about 9,30 a.m.
Day’s run, 260 knots.
TO THE EDITOR.
Shi,—Have you heard whether or not it is true that whenever
land is sighted a mess of fresh meat is to be served out to the
second cabin passengers ? If so, one is now due; and Ido hope
we shall make Canaries, Tristan d’Acunha, St. Paul’s, Otway,
&c. Perhaps Mr. Hopper won’t see it in my light.—Yours, <kc.,
’TWEEN DECKS.
Dear Sir,— Ever since I have been on board the ship I have
had a serious grievance, in the shape of an old goose cooped on the
deckhouse, and I hope you will do your best to have it—l mean
the goose—removed. It is probably that my share of it will be
only that which I have already had, its constant quacking. I
hope you will now take your share of it, and get it cooked. As
I have no husband on board, I hope you, who from you philan-
thropy have already gained the soubriquet of ship’s “ Uncle,”
will interview the butcher. Besides, if by chance we should meet
on the main deck, how disagreeable it would be for you to be, as
you certainly would be, “ booed by a goose.”—Yours hopefully,
SELINA.
We are pleased to announce that an entertainment committee has
been formed, consisting of Mrs. Berridge, Messrs. Clifford, Barker,
J ones, and Dawson. It is proposed that this committee arrange
and carry out all amusements during the voyage. They will
endeavour, with the assistance of their fellow-passengers and
officers of the ship, to provide a concert or dramatic entertain-
ment, if practicable, every week. A concert will be given next
Wednesday, in the saloon, at 7.30 p.m.
A chess tournament will be arranged as soon as names are
received. Names to be given in to the entertainment committee
as soon as possible.
A midshipman was seen to fall at the feet of two young ladies
the other morning. We are glad to hear he is none the worse for
the misfortune.


APRIL 7, 1882.
No. 2.
INTRODUCTORY.
Our first number, we are pleased to say, has met with general
approval, and we trust our second may prove equally satisfactory.
We have much more to chronicle this time—what with dancing,
cricket, Aunt Sally, running and walking races, whist, draught,
and chess tournaments; and last, but not least, “ Crossing the
Line.” All these have helped to fill our columns with interesting
matter. We regret to say that our Puzzle Column does not seem
to be appreciated; it is continued this week, but will cease if
more answers are not sent in. We have to thank many kind
*riends for contributions, and hope their number will increase.
ENTERTAINMENT IN THE SALOON.
The first of a series of entertainments was given on Friday
evening, 29th March. At eight o’clock, the hour for com-
mencing, the room was crowded, showing the interest taken in
the affair; most of the passengers and many of the crew were
present. Captain Berridge occupied the chair, and in a short
opening speech expressed his pleasure at being present, and
trusted that many similar meetings would be arranged before the
voyage was completed. The programme opened with a piano
solo by Mr. Webb, which was well received. Miss Kate Shelley
then sang “ Alice, where art thou 1” very sweetly. Mr. Gaillard
followed with a recitation, “ The Lord of Burleigh,” by the Poet
Laureate, and was loudly applauded. Captain Berridge next
appeared; his rising was greeted with tremendous cheering, which
was renewed after he had given a very feeling interpretation of
“Home, Sweet Home.” An encore was insisted on, and he
favoured the audience with “Juanita,” a pretty song, which he
sang with much pathos. He was followed by Mr. Mackenzie (a
young midshipman), who, after one or two false starts, gave
“We Tars” in a very fair voice, and seemed nothing daunted in
coming forward. Another piano solo followed, by Miss Shelley,
called “ Dewdrops.” This was very prettily played. The next
item excited much interest, as it was by a notable character; I
allude to “ Uncle”—l beg pardon, Mr. Routledge. This gentle-
man sang a song (written by himself) called “Sherborne Sam”
in a most laughable manner. His audience were literally con-
vulsed with laughter, and clamoured loudly for an encore, which
was readily accorded. Mr. Routledge accompanied himself to an
exceedingly droll song called “ The Convict,” which also caused
great amusement. Mr. F. Carter then sang the popular song
“Polly” in good style. Then followed a reading by Mr. Allen,
the well-known “ Address of Sergeant Buzfuz,” which was read
with considerable humour. Mr. Barker (our first officer) then
brought the programme to a close by singing “ Beautiful Nell.”
It was redemanded, and he kindly gave the last two verses again.
The National Anthem was then loyally sung by the audience.
The accompanists were Mrs. Berridge, Miss Shelley, and Mr.
Webb, and they acquitted themselves in a very creditable manner.
On Wednesday, sth April, the next entertainment will be given,
when fresh talent will be brought before the public.
OUR SPORTING COLUMN.
Races.
Dr. Connor v. Mr. F. Dawson.— This match took place on
Monday, 27th March, and was witnessed by a large number of
passengers. At starting the betting was on the “ Bradford
Chicken,” but the man of pills ultimately won, owing to his
superior staying powers. The course was once round the ship,
Mr. Cook v. Mr. F. Dawson.— Another race took place on
Thursday, 30th March, over the same course. This race was
easily won by Mr. Cook, otherwise known as “ Belay.” The
“ Bradford Chicken ” took his beating very good-naturedly. As
the poet observes, “ Use is second nature.”
Grand Walking Match.
To finish the month with a little amusement, a mile walk took
place between Mr. Stephens and Mr. Tenney, Mr. Stephens was
the first to start (betting even) and did the mile in 14 minutes 45
seconds. The “ Nephew ” was loudly cheered at the finish. The
long-legged ’un then showed his form and beat the time of his
adversary easily ; his time was 10 minutes 40 seconds. A good
deal of money changed hands on the event. The long-legged ’un
was trained by Captain Berridge, and did him great credit.
The result of the first fortnight’s drawings of the ship’s daily
runs is as follows :—0 has won six times, 3 once, 4 four times, 8
once, 6 once. It will be seen that up to Ist April 1,2, 5, 9
have not won yet.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Friday, 24th March.—At 11.45 a.m. sighted a vessel, some
considerable distance ahead ; much diversion was manifested as to
how soon we should overtake her. Sweepstakes were got up as
to nationality, and also what time she would be alongside of us.
At 3.40 p.m. she was off the beam, and proved to be a French
barque, called Fegase, of Bordeaux, bound for Senegal. Signals
were exchanged, and after wishing each other a pleasant voyage,
she gradually dropped astern. In the evening first number of
Superb Gazette was read in the saloon by Mr. Routledge.
Saturday, 25th March.—A beautiful morning ; sighted one of
the Canary islands, Palma. Saw a number of Portuguese men-of-
war (physalia) ; they present a very pretty appearance floating on
the water. Choir practice in the saloon. A few large seagulls
were seen. Day’s run, 234 knots.
Sunday, 26th March. —A very quiet day. Splendid weather,
satisfactory wind, heat rapidly increasing; once more dead-lights
open. Divine service was held in the saloon both morning and
evening. Day’s run, 200 knots.
Monday, 27th March.—We are nowin the tropics ; awning put
up on poop deck to shield us from the sun’s burning rays. A most
varied description of hats and clothing appear with the warm
weather; such a change can only be seen in a voyage like the
present. Three whales were seen, also flying-fish. A race
between Dr. Connor and Mr. Dawson was run round the ship,
which caused some excitement. Cricket was played for the first
time on quarterdeck. In the evening a most enjoyable dance by
moonlight took place, Quartermaster Mersey performing on the
fiddle with great zest. Day’s run, 144 knots.
Tuesday, 28th March.—Weather still delightful, with pleasant
breeze. Whist, draught, and chess tournaments commenced. Some
bo’sun’s-birds and Mother Carey’s chickens seen flying round the
ship. Dolphin and bonito have been seen at the bow. Day’s
run, 168 knots.
Wednesday, 29th March.—Sweepstakes are still patronized
with great vigour, and form one of the chief features of the day.
Weather still delightful. Whist and chess tournaments still
being played. In the evening a concert was given with great
success in the saloon. Day’s run, 170 knots.
Thursday, 30th March. — One of the greatest treats on board
ship is the morning bath. The salt water is pumped up, and there
is plenty of it. t We are very fortunate in having two such nice
bathrooms, and as each passenger is allowed a certain time every-
body can enjoy a dip before breakfast. At twelve o’clock we
were almost abreast Cape Yerde islands. A shark was seen; also
a number of flying fish. A race took place, before numerous
spectators, between Mr. Dawson and Mr. Cook, sen.; there being
ladders to run up and down, it made great fun. The sailors made
an Old Aunt Sally, and stuck her up on the main-deck, allowing
three sticks to be thrown at her for the price of one penny. The
whist tournament was finished this evening ; Messrs. Clifford and
T. House proved the winners. Day’s run, 174 knots.
QUESTIONS FROM CORRESPONDENTS.
“Jane.” —Where is the maintopgallant halyard?
“ A Mother.” —Will anybody teach me to waltz; also, the
hornpipe 1
“ Gambler.” —l am very fond of “ Nap.” Who are the worst
players on board ?


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
“ Busybody.”— “Uncle” has no nephew onboard. One passes
himself off as such when he is thirsty.
“ R,”—Pickled eels’ feet can be procured at the same place
where you purchase strap oil. They have been chaffing you.
“ A Friend.” —To live in Melbourne cheaply, help yourself to
somebody’s watch. Residence is then found economical.
“ Middy.”— The best soothing medicine for a baby is the
simple device of treacling its fingers and giving it some feathers
to play with.
WHIST COMPETITION.
First prize
Second do
Twelve shillings.
Eight shillings.
FIRST HEAT.
Captain Berridge ) , j Miss Shelly.
Mr. Oxenbold ) ea ( Mr. Alderton.
Mr. Stephens i J Mr. Dawson.
Mr, Gail lard ( ” ( Mr. Mather.
Mr. C. House [ j Mr. R. Pratt.
Mr. Cook f ” | Mr. Hills.
Mr. Bickle 1 ( Mr. Pratt.
Mi*. Jones j ” | Mrs. Berridge.
Mr. T. House ) j Mr. Yale.
Mr. Clifford ) ” [ Dr. Connor.
SECOND HEAT.
Captain Berridge 1 , . f Mr. Jones.
Mr. Oxenbold J >ea | Mr. Bickle.
Mr. C. House 1 j Mr. Stephens.
Mr. Cook f » | Mr. Gaillard.
Messrs. Clifford and T. House, a bye.
THIRD HEAT.
Mr. Clifford 1 , J Mr. Cook.
Mr. T. House f ea | Mr. C. House.
Captain Berridge and Mr. Oxenbold, a bye.
FINAL HEAT.
Mr. Clifford 1 , j Captain Berridge.
Mr. T. House J Jea ( Mr. Oxenbold.
ALL-FOOLS’-DAY ON BOARD THE “SUPERB.” -
There is a good deal of uncertainty respecting the origin of “ All-
fools’-day; ” but having become a custom, it is rigidly observed
throughout England and by all people who love fun. No better
opportunity could be found for this than on board ship, and
perhaps not the least on the Superb, which carries a set of good-
tempered passengers. As early as one minute after 12 (midnight)
the fun began. Three gentlemen were chatting together in a
cabin, when one jumped up and said, “ Look at that rat!” Of
course, the rat could not be seen ; but having been bitten them-
selves, these gentlemen soon decided to make fools of their fellow-
passengers. So up on deck they go, and one after another falls
a prey to their jokes. Nor did it stop there; for first one and
then another was disturbed from his rest and hurried on deck to
see either a ship homeward bound or a cabin-mate who was taken
very ill. One was enticed up to see an eclipse of the moon, which,
by-the-by, was beautifully clear and bright on this night. How-
ever, he stood and gazed at it for about twenty minutes.
Another passenger had fallen asleep on a seat, and was tied down
with ropes. At 6 a.m. some one rung the bell as it is usually
done at 8, and as some of the ladies do not keep their watches
going, the consequence was' their appearance on deck two hours
before breakfast and plenty of laughter at their expense. We
cannot be surprised that some were annoyed at being disturbed
so early, and think it a great shame ; but on the whole it was
taken as it was meant, and enjoyed by all. One young lady was
asked to fetch the kelson keys. She applied to one officer, who
sent her to another, and so on, until her eyes were opened.
Several were seen with pieces of paper pinned on their backs,
with the word “ fool” written on; to finish, the wrong figures
were put on the board which tells the day’s run, so that those who
had drawn the number expected to get the sweepstake, and were
disappointed at being made fools of. It was a relief when the
clock struck twelve, and those who had been up nearly all night
were glad of a nap in the afternoon.
Scandal and deceit are rife even on board the Superb , or, at
least, so I presume ; but they suffered an awful rebuff one day last
week in the following verses (evidently original), and which I
accidentally found on the deck.
SONG.
He never has deceived me yet,
I’ve always found him true,
And when I prove him otherwise,
I’ll heed the story told by you.
Your good intention doubting not,
I thank you from my heart;
Until I find my lover false,
I will not from him part.
“ Seeing’s believing, and till I
Find him I love do wrong,
I’ll throw suspicion to the wind.
What think you of my song ? ”
AN AMUSING INCIDENT WITH A SHARK.
Some few years ago I had occasion to witness a rather laughable
scene. It occurred during our homeward-bound voyage from the
East Indies. We were lying becalmed off the Cape of Good
Hope, rolling heavily, anxiously awaiting a breeze, when the cry
of “ A shark ! a shark ! ” was heard. Of course a hook was got
immediately, a large piece of pork put on it, and it was lowered
over the stern. A moment after the huge monster turned lazily
over on its back, opened its mouth, and swallowed the bait. No
sooner had it felt the sharp point of the barb than it began to
plunge in a most frantic manner, but to no purpose, as it was
securely hooked. A bowline was lowered over its tail, and on
board it came, much to the amusement of the passengers. The
tail was cut off, which caused it to bleed rather freely. It
was then dragged along rather smartly to the break of the poop,
when the word “ Heave ! ” was given, and over it went. At the
same time an unearthly yell rent the air; everybody rushed to see
the cause, and there lay the ferocious shark in the embrace of a
black woman (an ayah). It appears that she was sitting in a
chair close to the saloon, when down came the shark in her lap,
throwing her on her hands and knees, with the fish underneath.
She was, I am glad to say, picked up more frightened than hurt.
It was a source of great amusement, and merry peals of laughter
resounded throughout the ship. 0. J. M.
TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, — There are some people who, during this oppressive
weather, are somewhat partial to indulging in the luxury of forty
winks ; others occasionally find themselves compelled to, through
illness. How can they accomplish this if the piano in the saloon
is kept going all day? Would it be too much to ask passengei’s
to give their fellow-travellers, one of the officers of the ship, and
the piano, a rest from tiffin until dinner time. This would give
the whole of the morning and evening for music, sufficient time
for the most enthusiastic of musicians. Who is it plays the
Dead March in “ Saul ” in the afternoon ?—very lively for all.
—Yours, SOMNUS.
Dear Sir, — In a letter in your last number, signed “ Selina,” a
grievance was made against a goose quacking. Was a goose ever
heard to quack ? I think not. I have never heard one, and
should very much like to see the vocal organs of this extra-
ordinary bird when it has passed through the hands of the
butcher. I think upon inquiry “ Selina ” will find that geese
generally gaggle. —Yours, &c,, JOPE.
Mr. Editor, — In reply to “R’s” question, as to where pickled
eels’ feet are to be procured, he is recommended to ask the cook,
—Yours truly, BERYL.


DANCING BY MOONLIGHT.
On Monday evening, 27th March, the first dance took place on
the poop deck, and proved a very great treat. It was a splendid
night, with a beautiful moon shedding its matchless rays, and the
bending heavens reflecting their host of stars. What a pretty
picture it was to those who had seen it for the first time, to watch
the dancers as they flitted to and fro, and to cast your eye on an
orchestra composed of only one figure—Quartermaster Mersey
fiddling away with the greatest enthusiasm to an admiring crowd.
What pleasant faces at every hand, and what merry peals of
laughter ever and anon rise on the air. The only cause of regret
was the scarcity of ladies. The lucky possessor of one of these
fair divinities was very much envied, and considered a fortunate
fellow. The dance opened with a quadrille, and, after various
other dances, concluded about 9.30 with Sir Roger de Coverley.
It was conducted with great spirit throughout. At the conclusion
a hearty cheer was given for the musician, and everyone expressed
the pleasure they had derived from the first moonlight dance.
CRICKET AND OLD AUNT SALLY.
These sports have both commenced. Cricket was played for the
first time on Monday, the 27th, on the main deck. A club has
been formed, of which Mr. Jones (the only Jones, in fact) is the
leading spirit. A small subscription of Is. fid. entitles one to
play throughout the voyage, and pays for the balls knocked over-
board. A good number of the passengers have joined, and almost
every night there is a game being played. Some of the players
are getting professional, and make runs in a very daring way, to
the amusement of the spectators.
An Old Aunt Sally has been rigged up by some of the sailors,
and is a very grotesque figure. For the trifling charge of “ three
shies a penny ” you can throw away to your heart’s delight, and
when the pipe is knocked out of her mouth a loud cheer is the
result of the feat. Many joined in this popular sport; some
shots were rather wide of the mark, and seemed more intended
for the geese and pigs than the venerable lady. It was, however,
very amusing, and we hope to assist at another game of “ Old
Aunt Sally.” b
A quoit competition will soon be organized by the entertain-
ment committee.
Divine service was held on Sunday morning at 10.30 on the
poop deck. Evening service as usual in the saloon. Mrs.
Berridge presided at the piano.
ANSWERS TO PUZZLE COLUMN.
* 1. S a L
2. U ni (n) 0
3. P i N
4. E n D
5. R ialt 0
6. B u N
* “Aunt Sally.”
2. We have received no answers to our Bouts-rim6s. We
will ask our readers to try again.
3. Eleven days, because, having reached the top, he need not
slip down a foot again.
4. Mat-rye-money. We cannot award the prize offered in
our first number, as none of the answers are good enough.
Please try again. b
OUR PUZZLE COLUMN.
1. Make a magic square out of these numbers—l, 2,3, 4,5,
6,7, 8, 9 ; each line will then make 15, the diagonals ditto.
2. Why are matches like pyjamas ?
3. Why cannot a man marry his widow’s second cousin 1
4. My first I should be to cast my second at my whole. The
answei gives a celebrated statesman. (Not original.)
5. When is our captain most warlike?
6. Why should pancakes be made this week in preference to
any other 1
7. Which saloon passenger wears the largest hat ?
NOTICE.
A prize will be given for the best original riddle. A few of them
will be inserted in our next number.
THE SAILORS’ CONCERT.
Last night (Thursday), to finish up the day with eclat , the sailors
organized a coloured troupe of minstrels. The portly Mr. Bailey
was Masser Johnson, and he was surrounded by singers who did
their very best to render the evening’s entertainment most
enjoyable. Mr. Koeter opened the concert with “ Down by the
river side I strayed.” This gentleman is the lucky owner of a
beautiful baritone voice, and used it to such good effect that a
hearty encore was the result. Mr. Bailey next sang “ The skipper
and his boy.” Neptune was in great form (in more than one
sense), and brought down the house, fortunately not doing the
same to the deck; he was also encored and repeated the last
verse. Mr. Locke, having thrown off his secretarial duties, was
to the fore with a song called “ Thinking of Home,” He also
obliged the company with a song in the place of Mr. Lowes, who
was indisposed ; he narrowly escaped being asked to sing again.
Messrs. Coe, Oburn, Mersey, Armstrong, Butler, and Nelson all
contributed songs. Where all were so good it would be a waste
of time to particularize. As we have bofore mentioned, the
concert was most enjoyable, and everybody went away pleased.
After the national anthem three cheers were given for Captain
Berridge.
ENTERTAINMENT IN THE SALOON.
The second of a series of entertainments that are proposed to be
given—if practicable, weekly—during the voyage was held on
Wednesday evening, sth April, at 7.30 p.m., Mr. Routledge in
the chair. The weather was very hot and close, but a fair
audience was present nevertheless, who applauded several of the
items on the programme, or rather the performers of them, in
a most hearty and thoroughly English fashion. We were again
pleased with the assistance given by three of our ladies—Mrs.
Berridge and the Misses Shelley—and must compliment them on
the success that rewarded their efforts. Among the gentlemen
fresh talent had been unearthed. They were Messrs. Jones and
Mann, third and fourth officers ; Mr, Hills, a senior midshipman ;
Dr. Connor, the surgeon ; and Messrs. Clifford and Stephens, two
saloon passengers; the three first appeared in costume. Mr.
Jones sang “The Nautical Ballad” in a very amusing style;
Mr. Mann fairly fetched his audience by his effective singing and
capital get-up in a nursery song called “ Patrick, Mind the Baby,”
and, being encored, further pleased his audience in a curious
medley entitled “ The Hen Convention,” the crowing chorus
being exceedingly good ; and Mr. Hills gave great satisfaction by
his characteristic singing of the “ Muddle Puddle Porter,” and
was honoured by a recall. The well-known recitation, “ The
Wreck of the Hesperus,” was given by the doctor very patheti-
cally. Mr. Clifford sang “ Bradshaw’s Guide ” in good style;
and Mr. Stephens made his first bow before the public. He
possesses plenty of vocal power, has any amount of confidence,
and bids fair to ripen into a good singer. Last, but not least,
must be mentioned “ Uncle,” who this time favoured us with a
reading. He related a funny story of a young man who took his
sweetheart to a menagerie, and the conversation that ensued
between them ; it was very droll, and caused considerable mirth.
“ God Save the Queen ” was sung by the audience on leaving, and
altogether we think the second entertainment has been a success.
CROSSING THE LINE.
Owing to to-day being Good Friday, we were obliged to anticipate
by a few hours our “ Crossing the Line.” The day commenced
steamily, but cleared up in time for Neptune to appear, with his
good lady, Amphitrite, at a little after 10 a.m. His Majesty's
suite consisted of four policemen, four bears, a bear-driver, a
doctor with attendants, Billy Buttons, and the well-known barber,
Sweenie Todd, with his latherer, Mr. Gearey. The first to undergo
the operation was Mr. F. Carter. He was most conscientiously
put through the ceremony, and received a thorough good ducking.


Then followed in rapid order Messrs. Clifford, Stephens, Rout-
ledge, Dawson, Fox, Gaillard, Alderton, R. and H. Pratt, Tenney,
Love, Webb, Kennedy, T. Cook, and several others. A. Cook
caused much amusement by pulling the barber into the bath with
him. For this offence he got greater attention shown him by the
bears, and will not soon forget the day on which he was made a
“ Son of the Sea.” The whole pageant reflected the greatest credit
on the sailors. The dresses were really very good, and Neptune
might well be proud of his wife’s good looks. The monarch looked
well ;in fact, robust. For the curious we give a few facts about
Neptune :
Waist ... ... ... 53| inches
Chest ... ... ... 49 „
Round the arm ... ... 16 „
Height ... ... ... 5 feet 7 inches
Weight ... ... ... 21 stone 1 lb.
These figures will show that the Sea-King was fully represented.
The sailors cannot be too highly complimented upon their beha-
viour, They were as gentle as could be with any of the passen-
gers whose health would not permit them undergoing the ceremony
in the usual manner. Those even who owned to being in a state
of sound health were treated in a rough but good-natured way
that could not possibly give offence, or cause them to regret having
gone through the ceremony. Thursday will be x-emembered as a
red-letter day in the life of all the passengers, and it certainly
proved itself to be the most laughable we have experienced during
our voyage.
At 1,30 in the afternoon, after the more important proceedings
in connection with “ Crossing the Line ” had been so well gone
through, it was a nice change to witness the sports organized by
Mr. Bax-ker (the enei’getic first officer) for the benefit of the crew,
A subsci’iption had been got up among the passengers for the
prizes, and a good round sum was soon collected for the purpose.
The following is a list of the events, and winners :
Climbing the greasy pole ... Laws
Carrying balls ... ... Moon
Mast-headrace ... ... Laws (time, 2 min. 9 sec.)
Sack race ... ... ... Gearey
Three-legged race ... ... Bennett and Poynter
Skipping race ... ... Armstrong
Smoking ... ... ... Nelson and Stock (tie)
Grinning through the buoy ... Locke (ugliest face)
Steeplechase ... ... Gearey
Hand-over-hand race ... ... Carlson
Cockfighting ... ... Locke
High jump (3 ft. 4 in.) ... Laws
A prize of ss. was given to each of the winners. The sports
wei'e finished about 4 o’clock, and had been a source of much
intei*est and considerable amusement to the spectatoi's. We trust
they were equally enjoyable to those who took part in them,
losers as well as winners. May the former not be discouraged ;
we hope the next time they compete success will crown their
efforts.
CHESS COMPETITION,
7s. 6d.
2s. 6d.
First prize
Second prize
first heat.
beat Mr. Dawson
Mr. Patex-son
Cook
„ Captain Berridge
Mr. Routledge beat Mr. Webb
R. Pratt „ Mann
A. Cook „ Gaillard.
SECOND HEAT.
Mr, A. Cook beat Mr. R. Pratt
Routledge „ Cook.
Mr. Paterson, bye.
THIRD HEAT.
Mr. Routledge beat Mr. Paterson,
Mr. A. Cook, bye.
FINAL.
Mr. Routledge beat Mr. A. Cook.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Friday, 31st March. —A flying-fish flew on board, and was
caught. Large quantities of blacktish seen. A mile walking race
took place between Mr. Tenney and Mr. Stephens. Second whist
tournament commenced. Day’s run, 120 knots.
Saturday, Ist April (All-fools’-day).—Plenty of fun. At
10 a.m. a homeward bound vessel was sighted; hopes were
entertained that letters might be exchanged, but were without
foundation. Some hundreds of porpoises and dolphins, also
bonitos and flying-fish, followed the ship. In the evening some
capital dancing took place on the poop deck. Day’s run, 116
knots.
Sunday (Palm), 2nd April.—Divine service held on deck in
the morning, and in the saloon in the evening. Weather delight-
fully fine ; most lovely sunset. Sunday on board is a peculiarly
quiet and peaceful day, but very tiring. Day’s run, 110 knots.
Monday, 3rd April. —It is so hot to-day that very little
clothing can be worn. Nothing of importance occurred. Day’s
run, 103 knots.
Tuesday, 4th April.—Weather rather close and cloudy. In
the evening, a cricket match between midshipmen and passengers
took place, the former winning easily. Draught and whist
tournaments going on. Dancing on poop deck by moonlight.
Sunset most magnificent. Day’s run, 134 knots.
Wednesday, sth April.—Very hot. Sighted a vessel. Two
sharks seen ; also a black bird, called Cinerous shearwater. Second
saloon concert held in the evening. Neptune’s secretary came on
board about 8.30 p.m. with letters and telegrams ; his departure
was watched with great interest. Day’s run, 144 knots.
Thursday, 6th April.—Heavy rain, with tlxunder and lightning,
during the night. Usual homage shown to Neptune, and
passengers passed through the shaving and ducking operations.
Capital sports in the afternoon, and a concert was given by the
sailors in the evening. Everybody was pleased with the day’s
amusements. Day’s run, 104 knots,
Friday, 7th April.—Squall in the night. Overtook a ship
sighted yesterday. Plenty of bonitos and dolphins round the
bows this morning. We crossed the line during the night.
Several ladies were shown the line through a telescope, and were
gratified at the sight, although in reality it was a piece of thread
across the glass. Day’s run, 88 knots.
ADVERTISEMENT.
LOST, a CUSHION, which was last seen on the poop deck.
Whoever returns it to 8., 16 Cuddy-square, will be liberally
rewarded.
No. 3.
APRIL
21, 1882.
INTROU OTORY.
We are afi’aid this number will not equal in interest its pre-
decessors. There has not been so much going on; and beyond
“ The Burial of the Dead Horse,” a concert, and last, but by no
means least, a “ Christy Minstrel ” entertainment, we have little to
record. Our ship still makes good progress, and many on board
think the end of May will bring us to our journey’s end. The
concert last night realized twenty-seven shillings towards the
printing fund of the Superb Gazette, and the promoters of the
concert are entitled to our hearty thanks.
BURYING THE DEAD HORSE.
This interesting ceremony was observed on Monday evening,
10th April. It takes place on most of the Australian ships dui’ing


their outward passage on the twenty-eighth day after their
departure from port. Sailors, before leaving, have an advance
note given them for a month’s wages, which, we are afraid, is
generally reduced considerably, if not entirely spent; consequently
they symbolize their first month at sea “ dead horse,” as they are
receiving no wages. Therefore it is not to be wondered at that
the sailors look forward to this burial with great pleasure and
satisfaction.
We will now try and give a short description of what took
place on board the Superb. At 7 o’clock all the passengers were
collected on deck, and soon their curiosity was gratified by seeing
a pageant wending its way from the break of the fo’castle towards
the saloon. It was headed by the Dead Horse, and followed by a
string of mourners. On the air came a curious refrain, chanted
by the sailors, W. Lowes being the principal singer :
“ Poor old man, your horse will die ;
They say so, I hope so.
If he dies, I’ll tan his hide,
If he lives, I’ll ride him again. ”
As they approached, we were able to distinguish the actors in
this memorable scene. The most important one, of course, was
the Dead Horse. He was a very remarkable animal indeed, with
a lovely head and an arched neck. The thing that struck us
most was his eyes ; they were staring in a peculiar manner, and
were dilated and swollen to an alarming extent. But, taking
him altogether, he was a splendid creature. The jockey was
Gearey—or Fx-ed Archer, as he was soon chx-istened by the lookers-on.
After parading him up and down the main deck several times, he
was put up for sale by Stock, the auctioneer, and a very animated
bidding was the result. It started at five shillings, and, after
reaching two pounds ten shillings, was knocked down to a
lady. The burial then commenced in earnest. A rope was
suspended from the main-yard-anm, and horse and rider were
hauled up. As they performed numerous curvets in the air,
Quartermaster Bailey robustly sang—
“ Whiskey is the life of man,
Whiskey, Johnny. I’ll drink whiskey while I can,
Whiskey for my Johnny.
Whiskey killed my sister Sal,
Whiskey killed my poor old dad ;
Whiskey made me pawn my clothes,
Whiskey gave me a broken nose.”
Hadley, who was seated on the yax'd-arm, then lit a blue light,
which throw a beautiful colour over all the ship, illuminating
every surrounding object. At last the poor old horse reached his
destination. Geary sprang on the yard-arm, the rope was cut,
and down fell the “ Dead Horse,” with a loud splash, into his last
resting-place, amid a tremendous cheer from the beholders.
Three hearty cheers were given by the sailors for the captain
and Mrs. Berridge, and then three for the lady who bought the
horse. This terminated the cei’emony, which was well conducted
throughout, and reflected great credit upon all concerned. We
must not conclxxde without a word ixi praise of the boatswain
(Corbett); he has taken a great deal of trouble in this, as well as
in “ Crossing the Line.” In fact, he has been the chief worker,
and we must congratulate him xxpon the success that has rewarded
his efforts on both occasions. We may add that the fifty shillings
that purchased the horse was subsci’ibed for by saloon passengers.
MADEIRA.
To make the Superb Gazette both interesting and instructive, we
propose to survey and give, as far as we can, a short account of
those islands, and any place of interest which we may pass.
On Friday, 24th March, we sighted Madeii’a. The first appear-
ance of it looked to us a mere cloud ; but let us go a little nearer.
Even then we see nothing but what looks like a bare and broken
rock of high dimensions, which, though grand axxd imposing, is
peculiarly dark and gloomy. We will now go nearer still, and are
rewax-decl by a most lovely sight. We see green patches scattered
everywhere on the dark-red soil, even to the tops of the highest
peaks. This green consists of groves of heath and broom, which
grow to an extraordinary height, aspiring to the stature of forest
trees. In addition to these groves, the terraced acclivities,
covered with a luxuriant tropical vegetation, change, on a closer
approach, its distant barren aspect into one of extreme beauty and
fertility. In the island may be found almost every European and
tropical luxury—the myrtle, geranium, rose, and violet may be
seen on every side; the geranium, in particular, is so common
that the honey of the bees is strongly impregnated with its odour.
The shores of this island are mostly lofty cliffs, occasionally
facing the water with a perpendicular front one or two thousand
feet in height; the cliffs are interrupted by a few small bays,
where a richly cultivated valley approaches the water, between
abrupt precipices, or surrounded by an amphitheatre of rugged
hills. The narrow bays are the sites of the villages of Madeira.
The climate generally is delicious, and has a peculiar charm to a
stranger, who finds himself escaped from the chill and gloom of
England to the finest climate in the world. The nights, too, are
delicious—soft and balmy, with the moon shining in summer
brightness ; and, the orange trees in flower, the air is loaded with
perfume. Space will not allow more to be said on this subject, but
we can assure our readers that they will be well repaid if they
take the trouble to read any book on Madeira.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Friday, 7th April.—Good Friday. Spoke ship on port side—
Jorawur, of London, bound to Algoa Bay, twenty-four days out.
Bonito caught by Mr. Matthews, off the bows, weighing about ten
pounds. The Gazette read by Mr. Gaillard on poop deck in the
evening. Day’s run, 88 knots.
Saturday, Bth April.—Most oppressive weather; close and
sultry. Sighted French barque, homeward bound. Day’s run,
124 knots.
Sunday, 9th April.—We are now south of the equator; never
experienced anything so oppressive as the weather. Heavy x’ains
and squalls. Divine service in the saloon morning and evening.
Day’s run, 95 knots.
Monday, 10th April.—A large bonito was caught, weighing
17 pounds, by a sailor named Locke. Sighted a homewax’d
bound ship about 1 o’clock. Weather a little cooler, with
more breeze. Burial of the “ Dead Horse ”in the evening. Day’s
run, 75 knots.
Tuesday, 11th April.—Passed a barque. Draught tourna-
ment being played. Day’s run, 173 knots.
Wednesday, 12th April,—Fine breeze. Signalled a full-rigged
ship, but could not get her name, owing to squall. Day’s run,
192 knots.
Thursday, 13th April,—Fine breeze. Day’s run, 192 knots.
SECOND WHIST TOURNAMENT,
First prize
Second do
Ten shillings.
Five shillings
Short whist. Honours not to count.
FIRST HEAT.
Mr. Mann | , J Mr. Mackenzie.
Mr. Jones j ea \ Dr. Connor.
Mr. Hill ; j Mr. Bickle.
Mr. T. House ) ” ( Mr. Oxenbold.
Mr. Pratt, jun. ) j Mr. Hopper.
Mr Gaillard j ” | Mr. Baker.
Mr, Carter ) ] Mr. Baertsoen.
Mr. Symons J ” \ Mr. Stephens.
Mr. Fox 1 J Mr. Cook, sen.
Mr. Mather J ” ( Mr. Alderton.
Mrs. Berridge i J Mrs. Millard.
Mr. Love j ” \ Mr. Pratt, sen,
Mr. Dodd j j Captain Berridgev
Mr. Taylor { ” \ Mr. C. House.
Mrs. Baker 1 l Mr. Clifford.
Mr. Dawson ) ” j Mr, Street.
’’ j Mr. Street.
The last quartette did not play, owing to Mr. Street’s indis-
position. Mrs. Baker and Mr. Dawson claimed the heat.


Mrs.-Berridge )
Mr. Love j
Mr. Dodd )
Mr. Taylor j
Mr. Hills (
Mr. T. House j
Mr. Pratt, jun. )
Mr. Gaillard J
THIRD HEAT. M Berridge.
beat j Mr. Love.
Mr. Dodd 1
Mr. Taylor j
Mr. Hills )
Mr. T. House J
( Mr. Pratt, jun.
” / Mr. Gaillard.
FINAL HEAT. r '
Mr. Hills
) . " /Mr. Dodd.
| b eat -[ Mr Taylor>
Mr. T. House
TRINIDAD.
On Sunday, 16th April, the island of Trinidad was in sight
all day ; it was first visible at a distance of about thirty-two miles.
Towards noon, its outline was very distinct, and, coupled with
the clear, fine and cairn day, we venture to think, in the minds
of all on board the Superb , it will be a lasting memory. There
are some interesting facts connected with the island, which stands
a mere speck in the vast Atlantic. It was first discovered in
1700, by Captain Edmund Halley (of the Faramore Pink), who
took possession of it in His Majesty’s name, leaving the Union
Jack flying. He put on some goats and hogs for breeding, also a
brace of guineafowl. In 1781, the English tried to make a
settlement there, but failed, after a survey of two months.
Yarious roots were planted; these soon perished for want of
water. The island is six miles in circumference; the land very
unequal, and at best no more than a cluster of rocks, with some
shrubs in the valleys ; its highest point, according to Captain
Trollope, is 2,020 feet above the sea. Trinidad is surrounded by
sharp, rugged coral rocks, with an almost continual surge
breaking on every point; the surf has been seen, during a gale
at S.W., to break over a bluff which is 200 feet high. The
island is supplied with very good water from two small streams.
The Portuguese once had a settlement, and have done touch work
in making streets and roads over the valleys, levelling down
small hills to make the roads good. All the south side of the
island is indented with small bays; but the whole is so iron-
bound a shore, and ever a swell surging against it, that it is
almost impossible to land a boat without great danger of staving
it. At the present time there are plenty of goats and hogs; the
latter are very shy; there are also a number of cats. We will
now leave Trinidad and look over our port bow. Here we see
two high black rocks—these are the Martin Yas rocks; the
largest is about 300 feet high, and may be seen at a distance
of 25 miles. These rocks are very remarkable, and lie north
and south from each other, the distance from the outer being
about three miles. The central rock has tufts of withered
grass scattered over its surface; the other two are entirely
barren. In clear weather, Trinidad is distinctly seen from
the rocks of Martin Yas, and may be descried sixteen leagues
off. As night comes on we could see on our right hand
Trinidad, and slightly on our left the Martin Yas rocks; but
during the night a breeze sprang up and quickly carried us away,
and may be many of us will never see them again. Let us hope
that this short account will, when read at some future time,
bring nothing but pleasant recollections of our Sunday in sight
of Trinidad.
ANSWERS
TO OUR PUZZLE
COLUMN.
3VV .CiXVO ±UUJtX JTUZjZjIjJIi UUIj L
L
6 1 8
7 5 3
2 9 4
SECOND HEAT. Mann<
beat Mr. Jones.
/ Mr. Fox.
( Mr. Mather.
J Mr. Dawson.
( Mrs. Baker.
/ Mr. Symonds.
( Mr. Carter.
2. Why are matches like pyjamas ? Because they are loose
affairs (lucifers).
3. Because he must be dead if his widow existed.
4. Glad-stone.
5. When he is boxing the compass.
6. Because there is a good Fri-day in it.
7. The one with the largest head (not original).
Correct answer of the first received from “G.A.L.,” “ Blue-
jacket.”
The draughts tournament is not yet settled, there being a slight
dispute as to the actual winner; we hope, however, to give the
result in full in our next number.
The quoit tournament is still progressing; one round has been
played off.
Answer's to coi'respondents will appear in our next.
We shall be glad to receive the name of any gentleman who
will act as correspondent to the Gazette in the intei'ests of the
non-saloon passengers.
As we have not received any original conundrums for our prize
competition, it will remain open until the next number*.
The editor of the Superb Gazette will be pleased to receive the
names of any gentlemen or ladies who wish to join a sweepstakes
for “ the date of our arrival in Melbourne.” The entrance fee
will be five shillings each person, and names will be received up
to Ist May. The sweep will be drawn Monday evening (Ist
May), at eight o’clock. It is computed that the prize will amount
to at least five pounds, depending, of course, upon the number of
names received. The ticket bearing the date on which the pilot
steps on board will win the prize. All names and subscriptions
to be sent to the editor.
There will be a concert in the saloon to-morrow, weather per-
mitting.
A very good rule has been made in the saloon. All card-players
making “ Nap.” give the captain a penny for the Merchant
Seamen’s Orphan Asylum, London.
SUN SPOTS.
Observing the surface of the sun the other day, I found it thickly
covered with spots, no less than twenty-five being plainly visible,
three of them to the naked eye. Thinking it possible that a few
words on their history, as at present known, might be interesting
to the readers of the Gazette , I have ventured to occupy a little
space on them.
It is only since the invention of the telescope that they have
been particularly noted; and now, in nearly all observatories,
photographs are taken daily of the surface when visible, and will
no doubt in time furnish some valuable information as to their
cause, and the influence, magnetic or otherwise, they exert on our
earth. The most probable theory of them seems to be that they
are cyclonic disturbances, generated in the intensely-heated
gaseous envelope of the sun, and which, by their gyrations, show
the true surface of the sun as a central black spot. Outside this
black centre there is one less black, and outside that another grey
sort of fringe. At times there is no central black spot, when we
probably only see a little way down. That wonderful instrument
the spectroscope tells us that in these spots there is a general
absorption of vapours, increasing towards the blackest part, and,
in places, a special selective absorption of some particular vapours.
Now, this shows that the pressure must be much greater at the
bottom of the spot than at the edges, or on the surface of the sun,
and this is of course to be expected, for as the centre is approached
the condensation must be enormous. From numbers of observa-
tions recorded, it seems that they have a period of maxima and
minima, occurring about every 11.1 years, and the time of maxima
is also marked by a corresponding increase in magnetic activity
on the earth. This is a remarkable fact, and may help in time to
explain some of the phenomena of magnetism now unaccountable.
Some spots last for a considerable time, and the measurements
are enormous; they have been seen 50,000 miles across and
30,000 deep. Some remain stationary for a long time, while


others show considerable activity, both in their movements and
variations of form. Besides the black spots are sometimes seen,
in the neighbourhood of the same, brilliant streaks of light called
fnculce, and seem to be caused by large waves of the atmosphere
raised by the disturbance ; there were several outside the largest
spot before mentioned, and the surface also looked otherwise
disturbed. There is no doubt that the sun spots, aurora, and
other phenomena of the like nature are intimately connected with
that mysterious agent, magnetism, which, in its turn, exercises a
great influence on the state of the atmosphere, and possibly
through the whole of space. But the subject now is being well
taken in hand, and in the course of a few years we may be able to
have some idea as to its influence.
PROTOPLASM.
LIFE BELOW.
Why will passengers leave their chairs on deck instead of taking
them below of an evening 1 The other night, when the ship was
rolling rather heavily, I had the misfortune to come on deck after
dark, and the first thing I met was one of the chairs. At the first
encounter we both fell to the deck, and I found out the tempera-
ture of the water thoroughly ; in fact, I could have saved Mr.
Barker some little trouble that morning. In endeavouring to rise
I caught the brute by one of its lower projections, and the back
immediately flew up, and the whole heavens were suddenly illumi-
nated ; the stars, however, all seemed falling ones. I made up my
mind to consult Mr. Barker about the phenomena in the morn-
ing, but afterwards thought it would be more advisable to
insinuate a chair in his way on a dark night, and possibly he might
discover a “ Superb ” planet. By this time I was thinking of giving
up the encounter, but in my endeavours to rise I caught the
enemy somewhere, and found that it was suddenly sitting on my
back, caused no doubt by my having grappled with it in some
sensitive place. However, I at last got on my feet, and deter-
mined to make short work of it, by shutting it up—a rather
complicated job at any time, but more particularly on a dark
night. After many vain efforts, the thing suddenly snapped too,
and I found that all my fingers were fixed just about as tightly as
old “ Steam” could join them in his vice. lam afraid that some
not very choice selections left my lips; but with assistance I was
at last released. I saw a chair being mended in the morning by
placing its legs in brackets and splints; I, however, held my
tongue, as I had heard that a petty complaint had been made
to the captain because a chair had been found in the mizen-top.
The next one I come across I will hand over to Mr. Jones, to
place in his locker, and all appeals will be unavailing. We have
been getting along pretty warmly lately ; nothing particular that
you do not know about has happened. We passed one of the
Canary Islands the other day. It is said that on this island the
celebrated ruby mines are situated. I looked round to see if I
could recognize anyone who had been on these diggings, and
thought that one or two had been there lately. Did you notice
any, Mr. Editor ? Poor Pat was tried by judge and jury. The
judge, counsel, &c., were well got up, and considerable amuse-
ment caused; but owing to a flaw in the indictment, Pat was
acquitted, but immediately after ought to have been re-arrested
for contempt of court for some curious language he made use of.
But we are very lenient to Pat below, as he makes himself so
very agreeable. We are going ahead with cards and other abomi-
nations to raise a trifle at each other’s expense ; but of course we
cannot afford the luxuries of “ Fox, and Geese,” as played in the
saloon. How is it that the geese generally win the game, no
doubt to their satisfaction, but to the chagrin of the proverbially
wide-awake fox. It is too hot to write any more, and as no one
suggests a cooling beverage I will conclude.
NAUTICAL INFORMATION.
Mark Twain, in his “ Pleasure Trip,” says : —“ As is always the
fashion at sea, passengers shortly began to pick up 1 sailor terms,’
a sign that they were beginning to feel at home. Half-past 4 was
no longer half-past 4, but ‘ one bell.’ They spoke glibly of the
after cabin, the for’ard cabin, port and starboard, and the fore-
castle.” My experience in our present trip exactly coincides
with Mark Twain’s. The passengers have all shown a desire to
know something about the structure and management of a ship.
To gratify this laudable desire, I shall endeavour to write an
article on the same. With regard to the structure, it will
probably neither be interesting or instructive to my readers to
give a full, detailed account of all the various parts of a ship,
which could no doubt be obtained with much greater accuracy
from Captain Nares’s “ Seamanship.” But, I think, were Ito
write an article on the management and general everyday life
aboard ship, I might in some way enlighten those who have never
had any connection with the sea. I will first explain the
divisions of time and watches at sea.
The nautical day is synonymous with the astronomical day, and
begins at noon one day, ending at noon on the following.
Thus, at noon eight bells are struck, and the new day begins;
at half-past 12, one bell is sti’uck ; at 1 o’clock, two bells, and
so on, increasing one bell every half-hour until 4 o’clock, when
eight bells are again struck, and the afternoon watch is over.
Then the first dog-watch commences. One bell is struck at half-
past 4, and so on till 6 o’clock, when it is four bells; then again
the watch changes, and the second dog-watch begins. One, two,
three bells are struck respectively for 6.30, 7, and 7.30, but at
8 o’clock, eight bells are struck, and the night watches of four
hours’ duration begin. The first, from 8 till 12, is called the first
watch; the next, from 12 till 4 a.m., is called the middle watch ;
and from 4 till Bis called the morning watch; then the only four
hours remaining is called the forenoon watch, and at noon, of
course, a new day begins. Thus it will be seen that there are two
bells struck every hour, the odd numbers being at the half-hours,
and the even ones at the hours.
All meals are announced by the boatswain’s pipe or whistle.
Breakfast is piped at 8 o’clock in the morning, and again, at
noon, dinner follows; then at 5.30 p.m. comes tea or supper—so, as
will be seen, sailors can hardly be deemed gourmands, since
virtually there is no recognized meal between 5.30 in the after-
noon and 8 o’clock in the morning of the following day (this, of
course, is only the crew). Since I do not wish to trespass too
much on your valuable columns, I will at once proceed to
give an account of the various duties of the officers. The
captain of course reigns supreme aboard his ship, and his word
is on all occasions law. He does not assume the command of
the ship until after the departure of the pilot. He keeps no
regular watch, but in case of necessity, or should occasion demand,
he will of course be on deck to superintend the work carried on
by the officer of the watch. Of the latter I might make a few
remarks. At all times when the captain is not on deck the
command of the ship is entrusted to the officer of the watch,
who is at liberty to set or take in sail at his own discretion, and is
also responsible for the sails being trimmed. It rests on his
shoulders to protect the welfare and safety of the ship and those
on board. His orders have to be obeyed just as strictly as the
captain’s. In cases where he does not like to act on his own respon-
sibility it will be his duty to summon the captain on deck. The
chief officer has, practically, charge of everything aboard the ship,
and he attends to all matters relating to the day’s work carried
on aboard the ship. He keeps the morning watch (from 4 till 8
a.m.), and is constantly on deck during the day to superintend
the work. When all hands are out tacking ship, shortening sail,
or for any other manoeuvre that requires all hands, the chief
officer will take the command, and will issue all the orders,
though the captain may be on deck to superintend the pro-
ceedings. The second and third officers form the navigating
members of the ship’s company. They both keep their watches
during the day and night, as well as doing the navigation of the
ship. The second officer keeps the middle watch at night, from
12 till 4 a.m., while the third keeps the first watch, from 8 till 12.
At times, when the hands are out, the second officer takes the
command forward, though of course he takes all his orders from
the chief officer. The third also looks after the various duties in
the waist of the ship, in order to assist the chief. In cases of


shortening sail, the third goes aloft on the mainmast. The fourth
officer is the only one who does not keep a watch by himself. He
keeps the middle watch with the second officer, and in the daytime
it is his duty to find work for the midshipmen ; or, should it be
necessary, to give them lessons in practical seamanship. When
all hands are out, the fourth officer is stationed on the poop to
assist the chief, and he, like the third, goes aloft, but on the’
mizenmast. The midshipmen make themselves generally useful,
keep watches, ring the bells, carry orders from the officers to the
men, and rouse the former from their slumbers. The carpenter
is the senior petty officer forward. He, of course, takes all his
orders from the officei’s, but beyond that he is independent of
everybody. He keeps no watch, but he comes out to assist in
cases of all hands; in fact, he is one of the most important
working hands. The boatswain comes next on the list; he is
really the foreman of the sailors, and during the daytime he
personally superintends all practical work, under the super-
vision of the chief officer. When all hands are out, he goes aloft
on the foremast. The sailmaker, like the carpenter, carries on
his work in accordance with his orders from the officers, but he is
independent of the rest of the ship’s company. Lastly, I
will comment upon the duties of the quartermasters. These
are the three sailors who steer the ship, relieving one another
every two hours. The rest of the crew form the two watches,
port and starboard. One watch is always on deck, day and
night, relieving one another every four hours—except, of course,
the dog-watches, when they each have two hours. They do all
the rough work of the ship, and at all times obey the orders of
their officers. T. 0. J.
ENTERTAINMENT IN THE SALOON.
The third of a series of entertainments took place on Tuesday
evening, 18th April, Dr. Connor in the chair. The programme
opened at 7.30 with a solo on the piano by Miss Shelley. Mr.
Jones then sang the “ Slave Chase,” but his risible faculties
proved detrimental to his song, and, consequently, was not one of
his happiest efforts. Mr. Mann followed with “Nancy Lee,”
and gave the song in a praiseworthy style. The audience pressed
him to return, so he repeated the last two verses. A recitation
by Mr. Gaillard was the next item, and caused some amusement.
Mr. F. Carter gave a tolerably good rendering of the song, “ I
never was meant for the sea,” and, on being recalled, sang again.
It would have been much more enjoyable, however, if this gentle-
man had faced his audience instead of looking at the piano.
Another piano solo followed, by Miss Shelley. Mr. Barker
appeared next, and gave the “Harmonious Shoeblack.” We
cannot speak in high praise of this performance. We now come to
Mr. Sellen (one of the stewards). We must certainly say that this
gentleman’s singing deserved the highest praise. Possessed of a
well-cultivated voice, and knowing how to use it, he well merited
the encore he received. Mr. Routledge then brought the enter-
tainment to a close by singing a humorous song, called “ Walk
up ! ” He was recalled twice, and on each occasion caused great
laughter by an amusing ditty. The National Anthem finished
the proceedings, followed by a vote of thanks to the chairman.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Friday, 14th April. — During the night we passed a homeward
bound ship. For four days now we have had very good runs.
There is a little more sea on, and everyone enjoys the beautiful
sunshine and breeze after the close, hot weather. Day’s run, 231
knots.
Saturday, 15th April.—Some birds called gannets seen.
Dancing on poop deck in evening. Day’s run, 155 knots.
Sunday, 16th April.—Sighted Trinidad Island, also the Martin
Yas rocks. The sea is quite calm, and the weather delightful.
Service was held on the poop deck in the morning, and in the
saloon in the evening. A hammer-headed shark was seen around
the ship, and some very fine Portuguese men-of-war. Day’s run,
66 knots.
Monday, 17th April.—Heavy rains, with head winds. A large
bird, known as a booby, came on deck. Day’s run, 59 knots.
Tuesday, 18th April.—A bright, fine morning; much cooler;
ship pitching a good deal. Concert in the saloon at 7.30 p.m.
Squalls all the evening. Out of tropics at 10 o’clock p.m. Day’s
run, 164 knots.
Wednesday, 19th April.—Fine weather. Passed ship on lee
side homeward bound. Quoit tournament commenced on main
deck. Day’s run, 158 knots.
Thursday, 20th April.—Weather very much cooler, and alto-
gether life is more enjoyable. Cribbage tournament commenced.
One of the saloon passengers was lashed to the forestays, and had
to pay his footing. Day’s run, 129 knots.
Friday, 21st April.—Three whales seen close to the ship.
Entertainment given by the Superb Delaware Minstrels. Day’s
run, 124 knots.
LETTER TO THE EDITOR.
Sir, —ln your last issue you take me to task for applying the
word “ quack,” relative to tbe noise made by geese; and say that
the correct word is “gaggling.” Please look to your dictionary—
Routledge’s edition of Nuttall—and you will find “Gaggle, to
cackle like a goose ; ” “ Cackle, the voice of a hen or goose; ”
therefore, to gaggle is to imitate a goose, which Trope seems well
able to do. The signature is well selected, and is the only thing
creditable about the letter. “Nuttall’’has it—“ Trope, a figure
of speech, as ‘ the clouds foretell rain ; ’ ” and unless Trope stops
gaggling, he will have no sympathy from me, but cold water.—
Yours, &c. SELINA.
TOPICAL ALPHABET.
A stands for Australia, the country we seek,
Let’s hope to be there in a month and a week ;
B is for Bailey, a corpulent party,
C is our captain, so good and so hearty,
D stands for Doctor, and also for Dawson,
E is the letter I fear I must pause on,
F is for Fox, a marksman so true,
G the glass bottle he nearly shot through,
H is for Hopper, our excellent steward,
I are the islands we’ve left far to leeward,
J was the joke perpetrated one night,
K is the X Jack, the cause of the plight,
L is for Love, well known in his sphere
For practical jokes and consumption of beer ;
M represents Mann, a practical joker,
N is the nephew, a riotous croaker ;
O is the only —Jones I might add,
Whose intention is good, but his harmony bad ;
P are the passengers, fifty in all,
Q is the query on the Dead March in “Saul,”
R is for Ridley, whose nickname is Bill,
Let’s drink to his health when our bumpers we fill;
S stands for Shelley, and also for Simms,
T is for Tenney, wdth spider-like limbs,
U is for “ Uncle ; ”* I’ll give him a verse,
Though his gaming propensities fill up his purse ;
Y is for Yale, who shoots at the sun,
Works out the sights, and posts up the day’s run;
W the wind that bowls us along,
And with X, Y, and Z will I finish my song.
M. A. J.
* An action for libel is pending. The Avuncular One.
THE DELAWARE MINSTRELS.
This entertainment, after being postponed on account of the
weather, came off last night (Friday). The stage was most admir-
ably arranged, and reflected great credit on those who were
responsible for its construction. The bunting was festooned in
very good taste ; and when the curtain rose and discovered the nine
minstrels, everybody looked forward to a pleasant evening. Nor
were they disappointed, the programme having the fullest justice
done to it by our sable friends. The opening chorus over,
“ Little Mike ” (Mackenzie) sang “ The Old Folks at Home ” in
good style, and then came the comic song, “8.R.0.W.N.”


“ Tambo ” (Mann) was responsible for this, and narrowly escaped an
encore. “Snowball” (Carter) followed with “I love to think.”
He possesses a very pretty voice, indeed—the best in the troupe.
“ Kentucky Home,” by “ Cfesar” (Stephens) was the next song.
The “ Nephew ” was in good form and sang well; his dance at the
end of the song was an occupation after his own heart (that is, there
was plenty of noise to be made). He was liberally applauded at
the finish. The “Belle of the Ball,” by “Beeswax” (Vale),
pleased the audience. “ Ring the Banjo,” though well sung by
“Bones” (Hills 1, was rather stale, and did not produce much
effect. “Still I Love Thee” introduced us to “Pompey”
(Clifford). Pompey has a good voice, but wants a little more
animation in his style of singing. “ Quips the Quaker ” showed
“ Massa Johnson” (Jones) in his true colours. Massa Johnson
was well up to the mark, and deserved an encore. The first part
was brought to a conclusion by the “ Skedaddle Walk Round.”
This wanted more rehearsal, but the minstrels can very well be
excused, as they never had a rehearsal on a large stage. The second
part commenced with a Stump Speech by “Caesar” (Stephens).
He was assisted by “ Snowball ” (Carter). Caesar proved himself
a first-rate nigger; in fact, he and “Tambo” had the best idea
of the true nigger accent. “ The Zoological Duet,” by “ Gumbo ”
(Webb) and “ Little Mike,” pleased fairly well. The whole enter-
tainment concluded with an original farce, “Uncle Pete,” written
by Mr. Routledge. This was well acted all round, and was brought
to a finish by a topical alphabet, written by M. A. Jones. It was
so good that we give it in full. All were pleased with the enter-
tainment, and great credit is due to everybody concerned for
the trouble and pains they had taken.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE Gentleman who was seen to take a cribbage-board off
the standard compass on the poop deck is particularly
requested to return it, or place it on the cuddy table.
FOUND, a Lady’s FAN, of rather a sombre colour, with two
birds painted on one side. The owner can have the same
by paying expenses of advertising.
Apply to the Editor.
Five pounds reward.—lost, a badge cap.
When last seen, it was floating towards Trinidad. The
above reward will be paid by Dr. Connor, 5 Cuddy-square.
No. 4.
MAY
5, 1882
INTRODUCTORY.
We alluded in our last number to the prospect of reaching Aus-
tralia by the end of May. At the time of writing (Saturday,
11.30 a.m.) we have, in round numbers, about six thousand two
hundred miles to traverse. This, at an average speed of two
hundred miles a day, would require thirty-one days ; so that our
friends who have drawn May tickets in the Superb Gazette sweep
have not a very rosy chance. We still keep up plenty of amuse-
ment on board, the two latest novelties being a tug-of-war and a
mock trial. All continue in good health ; and what we require
now is a fair wind, to bring to a termination as pleasant a journey
as one could desire.
Next Wednesday there will be a concert in the saloon. We
hope some fresh talent will appear.
A full account of the mock trial will be found in our
columns.
On Saturday an albatross was caught by Mi\ Hills. Its
measurement across the wings was ten feet two inches, and its
weight eighteen pounds. It was captured by a line belonging to
Mr. Gaillard.
The draughts tournament is not yet settled. Is it not time
that the first and second prizes should be awarded 1
NEW SAILING ORDERS.
The Darkest Night.— Any man not knowing when the
darkest night is will be discharged. Inquiries can be made any
day at the Admiralty from 10 till 4, excepting from 1 till 2, when
all hands ai’e piped to luncheon. The rule of the rowed at sea is
similar to the rule of the sailed. No ship must come into collision
with another.
If two steamers are on the starboard tack, they must return
to the harbour and begin again.
Any steamship likely to meet another steamship must reverse
and go somewhere else.
Nobody, however high in command, can be permitted to sit on
a buoy out at sea for the purpose of frightening vessels. If two
vessels are meeting end on, take one end off; the other loses, and
forfeits sixpence —From Punch.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Saturday, 22nd April.—Strong breeze, heavy sea, squalls and
rain. Winter clothing being put on. Day’s run, 163 knots.
Sunday, 23rd April.—Fresh breeze, squalls, heavy seas.
Divine service held in saloon morning and evening. Day’s run,
223 knots.
Monday, 24th April.—Strong wind, heavy sea, and squally ;
deck very wet. Albatross seen for first time this voyage. Day’s
run, 225 knots.
Tuesday, 25th April.—Very heavy seas and strong breeze ;
waves washing over the decks ; those in the deck-house are having
a very bad time of it. Superb Gazette read in saloon by Mr.
Stephens. Day’s run, 250 knots.
Wednesday, 26th April.—Fine breeze ; ship in sight on star-
board side ; plenty of birds about, including some large albatrosses.
We are now about 6,000 miles from Melbourne. Day’s run, 250
knots.
Thursday, 27th April.—Splendid cold weather, and a large
quantity of birds flying around us. Mr. Clifford shot two molly-
hawks, both of which dropped into the sea, and were immediately
pecked at by their fellows. Day’s run, 199 knots.
Friday, 28th April.—Strong wind ; squalls, with hailstorm.
In the evening a concert was given in the saloon. Day’s run,
248 knots.
CONCERT IN THE SALOON.
On Friday evening, 28th April, at 7.30 p.m., the fourth concert
was held in the saloon. Mr. Dawson occupied the chair, and
there was a good attendance. The programme opened with a
piano solo, “ Beatrice,” by Mr. Webb, which was played with
considerable skill. Next Miss Katie Shelley sang “ The Blue
Alsatian Mountains ” in a charming manner, and was loudly
applauded. Mr. Jones then made a successful hit in the hunting
song “ Drink, Puppy, Drink,” and was vociferously received ; he
was missing for a minute or two at its conclusion, but returned at
last armed with the favourite banjo, and gave an amusing ditty,
“ I’ll bet you a dollar you don’t,” which Was thoroughly
enjoyed, the chorus being taken up with great spirit, Mr.
Alderton then read “ The Death of Paul Dombey,” Mr. Alderton
is not particularly fond of reading prose, but proved in this
instance that he was amply able to do justice to Charles Dickens’s
most touching death scene. The next item was by our genial
captain, who gave a novel song, called “ The Whale,” in his usual
taking style. It was greatly cheered and redemanded, so he
kindly sang it again. Mr. Mann followed with “ The Midshipmite,”
but was hardly up to his usual good form. Mr. Stephens next
appeared and sang “ That’s what puzzles the Quaker,” with


sufficient humour and without the least hashfulness. Another
reading followed by Mr. Aldei'ton, entitled “ Somebody’s Darling.”
This piece he recited with great effect, and was rapturously
applauded. Mr. Mackenzie then gave the pathetic ballad, “ The
Empty Cradle,” very fairly, and received an encore. The
programme wound up with an original song by Mr. Routledge,
“ And so says Mr. Jones,” an exceedingly clever and amusing
versification in answer to the alphabet recently composed, and
published in our last number. The forcible and witty replies it
contained evoked great laughter, and at its conclusion the song
was deservedly cheered and recalled. Further on we give it in
full. “God Save the Queen” and a vote of thanks to the
chairman concluded the evening’s amusement, which we think
was a very happy and enjoyable one. We may add that Mr.
Webb, with his usual kindness, accompanied the songs, and was
thanked by the captain for so ably presiding at the piano.
FACTS.
We have collected together a few facts that might have happened—
in truth, some of them did.
A blind man was once boasting of his wondrous sense of touch.
He gave out that he was able to tell if a man was handsome or
the reverse by his extraordinary sense of touch. The village
Adonis, who fancied his good looks, was the first to undergo the
ordeal. A large audience assembled, and the blind man com-
menced operations. All of a sudden he was heard to exclaim,
“ This is too bad, ladies and gentlemen, to give a blind man a
Dutch cheese to feel, and call it a human being.” The man was
not so blind as he had given out, and Adonis soon remembered
he had an engagement to take Mrs. Yenus out shopping, and
kept his appointment to the minute.
A poet was one day twitting a friend on his unpoetical nature.
“ How beautiful to be able to throw off your feelings in poetry,”
he said, “ without having to descend to mere prose. Try a line
or two like this, for instance,” said the poet :
“ I wander from my native hearth,
No doubtful fears disturb my path.”
“ I’ll have a shake up,” said the unpoetical —
“ Whilst you are wandering from your home,”
(“ First-rate, old chap ! Go it,” said the poet.)
“ I kiss your wife as often as I like.”
“ That’s not rhyme,” said No. 1. “ No; but it’s true,” said No. 2,
as he made good time through the door.
Two well-known London sharpers once played a game at Nap.
Each thought he had caught a flat. No 1 dealt himself two,
three, four, five, and six of hearts ; and dealt No. 2 ace, king,
queen, knave of hearts, and the ace of clubs. He wanted No. 2
to go Nap. The guileless one did. He led out the ace of clubs as
trumps, then the rest of the hearts, and asked for the money.
Sterne’s “recording angel,” of “Tristram Shandy ” celebrity, was
busy that day.
A man once played Yankee grab with Saint Peter. He threw
two sixes and a four, took up the four and threw a fpur again ;
once more took up the four, and threw a six. He thought he had
got the Saint on toast, but Peter, at the first throw, cast two sixes
and a seven. This was too much. “ Hang it all, - ” said the
gambler, “ play fair ; but if you come to your miracles, I’m
off!”
“ My loved one,” sighed the artist, as
He put his palette down,
“ My work for once I’ll overlook,
So cast away that frown.
Tell me you love me—only me !
Oh, tell me that is true ! ”
“ I will, Alphonso ! Also this—
Your palette’s under you !”
W. R.
CORRESPONDENCE.
A Strange Effect Fresh Meat had upon a Deck-house
Passenger.
Dear Sir, —The other morning a gentleman in the deck-house
managed to get hold of a very small piece of fresh mutton, in the
shape of a chop. He not having had any for upwards of forty-
five days, ate it with great relish, saying that he would keep the
bone to suck occasionally. The effect it had upon him was mar-
vellous. He jumped up from the breakfast-table and declared
his intention of scrubbing out his cabin. Nor did he stop there ;
he, “according to his own account,” scrubbed every square inch
of it, and afterwards rigged up a doormat, and fined every one
who went in without wiping his shoes a bottle of beer. After he
had finished, he declared that he had never worked so hard in his
life but once before, and that on that occasion he had two days
digging up potatoes. Now, if such a small piece of fresh meat
has such a great effect upon one passenger, what would be the
effect produced upon of them if they had a fair dinner off
it for once in a way 1 You have only got to try them.—Yours,
&c., - AN EYE-WITNESS.
Dear Sir, —“ Selina,” in her last letter, alluded to a goose
quacking. As a goose was never yet heard to “ quack,” I took
the liberty of correcting her, apd suggested “ gaggle.” “Selina”
does not seem satisfied with this suggestion, and tries to get out
of the difficulty by bringing in the word “cackle,” which has
nothing at all to do with the question raised. “ Quacking” was
the word found fault with, and I still maintain that word cannot
be applied to the noise made by geese. As regards “ Selina’s”
attempted fun about the signature “Trope,” it signally fails, as
the letter was distinctly signed, yours truly, JOPE.
“AND SO SAYS MR. JONES.”
Last week’s Gazette contained, you know, a little song by one,
A Mr. Mervyn Jones, who in an alphabet made fun
Of most of us, and told us, in a very clever way,
Our little eccentricities ; ’bout these I’ll have my say.
He called some fat, he called some good, he said some drank much
beer,
That some were flirts, most liked their jokes, and some were
marksmen queer ;
And like the famous “ Tommy,” for his uncle he room made,
Declaring that this poor old chap at Nap. made quite a trade.
CHORUS.
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N,
O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, Y, double you, X, Y, Z ;
We all were chatted at, all were laughed at, everybody owns,
That what Jones says it must be true, and so says Mr. Jones.
With Australia he commences, and asserts A stands for it ;
We do not doubt he’s quite correct, and knows his alphabet,
But when we get there, will they over us make lots of fuss 1
Then if they do, we’ll want to know what they will stand for us.
The corpulence of Bailey then forms Jones’s favourite theme,
Tho 'fat he may be, still I’ve seen him ’gainst the wheel lean ;
Our captain follows ; he’s described as Captain Berridge should be,
“ So good and hearty,” but I’ll add, as popular as could be.
Jones quite forgets, in letter B, about Barker to tell—
A popular young officer, that all of us like well ;
And overlooked that 0 for Clifford—best of fellows—stood,
Who both, when night begins to dawn, are in one neighbourhood ;
The man of medicine comes next, the Bradford Chicken, too ;
He hasn’t, tho’, about them both made very much “ to do ; ”
So let me add, the Doctor plays a prudent game of Nap.,
Whilst Dawson plays on many games, a reg’lar larky chap.
E found poor Jones completely floored, and caused him hours to
“ pause on,”
Because a man would have the inconvenient name of Dawson,
But soon he found a Fox, and with the F he made some slaughter,
But Fox, fox-like, does not approve of having to take water ;
Then G he tackled ; next came Hopper, always found so willing
To let you have your morning beer —that’s if you had your shilling.


J for joke, and K for X Jack ; why ’bout Love’s beer Jones bawl ?
For well we know that poets always say, “ Love levels all ; ”
Then Mann’s his butt, he’s but a man —we do not mean sells butter —
Tho’ Mann when in his Sunday clothes is really too, too utter !
Then N, the Nephew, quite recovered from his main deck blows,
Who philanthropically for a penny showed his nose.
O the only Jones, then quickly follow P, Q, R ;
R stands for Ridley ; he’s a bill we honour above par ;
Though peaceful with his calumet, he’s full of war with rope,
The middies underrated when he tried with them to cope.
S for the Misses Shelley, who do not require our praise ;
T for Tenney ; what a shame, facetious Jones, to raise
The question as to lengthy legs ! but Tenney is so good,
He’s well supported by his legs, that’s highly understood ;
U for “ Uncle,” he’s defended ; next we come to Yale,
Now, he’s the man that fills his purse ; each day he tells the tale,
How far we’ve got. —How far have I ? to V—l’ll end my song,
Cut X, Y, Z all very short, or I shall be too long.
THE SUPERB MYSTERY.
TRIAL OF D. S. FOR ATTEMPT TO POISON MR. G. F.
This curious case arose from the following mysterious circum-
stances : On Tuesday, 25th April, during dinner, the prose-
cutor surprised everyone present by jumping up from his seat in
a most excited manner, charging the prisoner with giving him
water that was poisoned; he then rushed to the doctor, and in a
piteous voice asked if he should die. The doctor, of course, took
him to his cabin, where he kept his bed for about two days, but
appeared on deck on the third day, seemingly quite recovered.
This affair engrossed so much attention that it was thought advis-
able to institute proceedings. A very able judge was soon found,
and counsel to champion the causes of plaintiff and defendant
readily offered their services.
The trial took place on Wednesday, 3rd May, at 7.45 p.m.
The Lord Chief Justice (Mr. Dawson) took his seat on the bench.
The counsel for the prosecution was Mr. Routledge, instructed by
Mr. Kennedy ; and for the defence Mr. T. Dawley, instructed by
Mr. Gaillard. Mr. Clifford acted as clerk of the court, Mr.
Stephens was usher, and the jury was composed of the following
gentlemen : Mr. Ridley (foreman), Messrs. Tenney, Cook,
Bickle, Oxenbold, T. House, A. Cook, R. Pratt, C. House, and
Taylor. After congratulating his lordship upon his safe arrival
and recovery from rather a dangerous fall on the main deck, Mr.
Routledge opened the case. Doffing his professional garb for a
moment, he addressed the audience, and said they were about to
commence a trial which they would endeavour to make as real as
possible ; but at the same time they wished it clearly understood
the whole thing was only to cause an evening’s amusement.
Captain Henry Berridge was the first witness. He caused
much amusement by refusing to give evidence without being paid.
He had come over six thousand miles, and would the court
guarantee his travelling expenses % After he had worried both
judge and counsel for some time, he was promised a safe passage
to Melbourne, and has since been amply paid for his services.
He said : I am master of the ship Superb. Started on
10th March. I remember Mr. G. F. and the circumstances.
One day at dinner heard the prosecutor say he was poisoned
by the steward (the prisoner). I remember him saying,
“ Doctor, I’ve taken some poison ; Doctor, dear Doctor, shall I
die 1 ” Cross-examined by Mr. Dawley.—Had noticed something
eccentric in his manner. He stayed in his cabin two days. Did
not think he was compelled to through illness.
Dr. Samuel Connor. —Plaintiff had consulted him on several
occasions. Had not known him to touch any intoxicants. Was
well enough to walk into his cabin. Assisted him to bed, but had
no difficulty. He seemed to be suffering acute pain. Attributed
it to poison he had drunk in the water. He showed symptoms
which might have been the result of poison in water. Was the
first complaint of the water be-ing bad. Had tasted it himself,
and found a peculiar taste. Supposed it to contain chlorides of
nitrium and potassium, together with some bromides, which are
poisonous. He left his cabin after three days. Was low-spirited
during his confinement, and complained of pain on second day.
Cross-examined by Mr. Dawley.—Did not analyze the water.
Had tasted some from the same bottle. The irritation might not
cause vomiting. By a juryman.—Would this poison affect the
brain 1 Yes.
Daniel Love. —Sat opposite the prosecutor. Thought there
was some difference between the plaintiff and prisoner. Heat'd
prisoner say he would have his revenge. Cross-examined. —Could
not say what he ate for dinner.
Robert Bailey was called for the prosecution. What are you ?
I expect I shall be an old albatross some day (loud laughter).
Knew Mr. G. F. Frequently spoke to him. He had a remark-
able appetite. One day saw him eat about three pounds of duff.
Had heard of a slight difference with the prisoner.
This concluded the evidence for the prosecution.
Harry Alderton sat next to the prosecutor on the day in
question. He had two plates of roast mutton, some gooseberry
tart, and drank about a tablespoonful of water. He, immediately
after drinking the water, jumped from his seat in an excited and
agitated state, and, pointing to prisoner, said he had been
poisoned by him. Saw prisoner afterwards drink some of the
same water from the prosecutor’s glass. Drank some himself,
and believed it contained a small quantity of sea-water. Had not
heard of any ill-feeling. Prisoner had always been most attentive
to the prosecutor.
Cross-examined by Mr. Routledge. —Would swear that pro-
secutor had two plates of mutton and gooseberry tart. Did
not usually see the quantity of food the other passengers
had. Saw him drink some water and get very excited. He
seemed to be in a great fright. Did not think it was caused by
the water being poisoned, but simply from a panic. Drank a
tumblerful of water from the same bottle. Re-called. —Thought
the prisoner drank more water than the prosecutor.
Mrs. Baker. —Knew the prosecutor personally. Went into his
cabin about two days after the rumour of his being poisoned.
Did not think he was ill. Told him to get up and go on deck, or
she would pull him out of bed. He got up in about three-
quarters of an hour, and seemed to be in perfect health. Said he
was much better.
Cross-examined.—Was aware there was a doctor on board, who
might be a better judge in these matters. Was asked to go to his
cabin. Would have had him out the next day if she had been
his nurse. Had had some experience in nursing. Believed his
illness was only laziness. Said he was much obliged to her for
getting him up.
Charles Ede (second steward) was then called, and stated that
sea-water very often got into the filter on the poop deck during
rough weather.
Kenneth Mann. —l am fourth officer on board the Superb.
Had conversation with Mr. F. relative to prisoner. He said that
no ill-feeling existed between them, also that he thought poison
had nothing to do with his illness. Would swear that he said he
believed he was not poisoned.
This witness caused considerable annoyance to the counsel for
the prosecution during the cross-examination which ensued.
When asked a question, he pretended not to hear it, and acted
altogether in a very mysterious way ; his deafness, however, was
mysteriously cured, as, on being asked how long he had been
deaf, he replied, “ all my life.”
Francis Y. Yale.—l am second officer of the Superb. Prisoner
waited on me at table, and was always very attentive. Heard of
no ill-feeling between him and the prosecutor. Drank two
tumblers of water from the same bottle as Mr. F. and felt no ill-
effect ; in fact, all the better.
Cross-examined.—Did not notice any particular mark on
decanter. Water tasted a little brackish. Would swear there
was no other taste. Had tasted the brackishness before in the
water. Saw prosecutor run to the doctor, but he required no
assistance Was much surprised at his behaviour. Would swear
that the water had nothing to do with it.
The trial was resumed on Saturday, 6th May, at 7.45 p.m.
Mr. Routledge addressed the jury for the prosecution. He called


upon them as men, perhaps men with families, with sons and
brothers of their own, to do their duty, and give a verdict for his
client. The case, he said, was very clear, and he did not see how
they could arrive at any other decision than guilty. After going
thoroughly into the evidence of the witnesses called on either
side, he concluded a most eloquent and forcible address. Mr.
T. Dawley then gave his closing speech on behalf of the prisoner,
and expressed his opinion that no case whatever had been found
to go to a jury, and that simple acquittal was not sufficient for his
client, after being accused of such a gigantic crime. He had
always borne a most exemplary character, and he trusted the jury
would discharge him without a stain upon it. He then criticised
the evidence on behalf of the prosecution in a very ingenious way,
and finished up by an exceedingly promising speech.
The judge having summed up and placed carefully before the
jury the depositions he had taken, the chief point, he thought, in
favour of the prisoner was that no one had seen him put poison into
the prosecutor’s glass ; while, on the other hand, the expressions
used by the prisoner respecting Mr. F. were certainly very
mysterious. He, however, must leave them to decide whether the
prosecutor was maliciously poisoned by the prisoner, or if it had
by accident got into the water. After complimenting the counsel
for the clever way they had conducted the case, he asked the jury
to give a verdict.
After consulting together for about ten minutes, they returned
with a verdict of “ Not guilty,” with a rider to the effect that the
prisoner “ leaves the court without a stain upon his character.”
Cheers, at the conclusion, were proposed by his lordship, and
heartily given, for Captain and Mrs. Berridge.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Saturday, 29th April.—Cold, strong winds. Temperature, 55°.
Seas continue to wash over the decks, greatly to the discomfort of
passengers in deck-house. Day’s run, 172 knots.
Sunday, 30th April.—This is the eighth Sunday on board.
Divine service was held in the morning only, on account of the
rough weather. There is a strong head wind blowing, and the
vessel rolling and pitching fearfully. At night we are tossed
about in our bunks until we feel quite bruised. Day’s run, 166
knots.
Monday, Ist May.—Heavy seas, squalls, and rain. This bad
weather has lasted now for nine days. Such a length of time of bad
weather has not been known before by the officers of the ship. A
sweepstake as to what day the pilot will come on board was drawn
this evening, A chair floated past on the water. Day’s run, 138
knots.
Tuesday, 2nd May.—Sea quieter, wind also. Very few
birds about. Mr. A. Cook shot a mollyhawk. Day’s run, 127
knots.
Wednesday, 3rd May.—Beautiful fine morning, with showers
during the day. Trial of F. and S. held in the saloon. Day’s
run, 139 knots.
Thursday, 4th May.—Most glorious day, sun shining brightly.
Wind in the wrong direction, as we are now steering for Cape
Horn. Day’s run, 54 knots.
Friday, sth May.—Most lovely weather, quite warm again.
Cape pigeons seen for the first time. Dancing on the poop in the
evening. Day’s run, 58 knots.
A spelling-bee will be held in the saloon on Friday next at
half-past seven; entrance fee, 6d. each. There will be three prizes.
Captain Berridge will be the interrogator. Twenty words will be
given out to write on paper, and the ten spelling them most
correctly will be left in for the viva voce examination. Routledge’s
edition of Nuttall’s Dictionary will be the only authority.
The decision of the umpires is to be final. The meaning of all
words will be given, if required.
No. 5.
MAY
1882.
INTRODUCTORY.
The spelling-bee, as announced in our last, came off' on Friday,-
the 12th. The words given were hard, but, considering the
spelling capabilities of the competitors, not unreasonably difficult.
The entertainment caused much amusement. There is some talk
of a fancy ball, to come off early in June. Extensive prepara-
tions are being made, and as it is full moon on Ist June it will
probably be about that date. We intend getting up a fine-art
gallery for the benefit of the printing fund. Also, in a few days,
we shall sound our friends as to their wishes of having the Gazette
printed. A committee will be formed to arrange as to expense,
tfec., and an estimate can be given in two or three days after our
arrival in Melbourne as to the probable cost. We hope to be
able to post it to our friends at about a charge of two shillings
and sixpence a copy, and trust they will give their names in as
subscribers for at least four copies each, as certainly ten or fifteen
pounds will be required, two pounds of which is already
collected.
CONCERT IN THE SALOON.
On Saturday evening another concert was given in the saloon.
It was rather shorter than most of the entertainments 'got up by
the committee, but proved itself to be very enjoyable. Miss
Shelley opened the concert with a pianoforte solo, entitled “The
Merry Peasant,” that was very well received. Then followed
Miss Katie Shelley with the well-known song, “ At the Ferry ; ”
and, to make a bad pun, she sang it “ferry” well. Mr. Jones
then gave “ The Pirate King ” with great spirit, and was encored ;
he then obliged with a most amusing song, “ Again, Again, and
Again,” that was heartily relished; and, upon being once more
pressed to sing, he gave the well-known song, “Josephus Orange-
blossom.” The captain followed with “ A Fine Hunting
Morning,” and favoured us with that popular song, “ The Whale,”
the chorus being taken up in a most spirited manner by the
company. Dr. Connor gave a recitation, “ The Night before the
Battle of Waterloo,” very effectively. Mr. Clifford was the next
on the list with a comic song, “Etcetera;” he was encored, and
sang an extra verse. Mr. Stephens sang “ The Tale of a Shah,”
set to a tune from that popular opera, “La Fille de Madame
Angot,” that greatly pleased the audience. Mr. Routledge sang
a song, “ The Awful Little Scrub,” and was encored ; he after
that sang a song of his own composition, “ The Masquerade
Ball; ” and the concert was brought to a conclusion by the usual
vote of thanks to the chairman (Mr. Clifford;.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Saturday, 6th May.—Fine weather, with occasional showers.
Ship on the lee side. Whale seen, and albatross caught. Quoit
tournament finished. Summing-up of trial F, v. S. Day’s run,
108 knots.
Sunday, 7th May.—Almost a calm to-day. Two vessels in
sight. A Cape pigeon caught by Mr. Cook. Day’s run, 96
knots.
Monday, Bth May.—Signalled British ship Fontenaye , of Lon-
don, bound for Otago, sixty days out. To-day we are off the
Cape, and have a fair wind. Mr. Alderton caught a Cape pigeon.
Day’s run, 147 knots.
Tuesday, 9th May.—Ship rolling heavily. Most of us had
very bad night, as the chairs, fiddles, &c., were rushing about.
Passed a ship in the night. Sea very heavy. A great number
of birds about. Day’s run, 229 knots.
Wednesday, 10th May.—Fair wind, ship more steady. There
is a wonderful difference in the temperature of the water, it being
seventeen degrees colder to-day than yesterday morning. In the


evening, the sixth of a series of concerts, arranged by the en-
tertainment committee, was given in the saloon at 7.30 p.m.
Day’s run, 226 knots.
Thursday, 11th May.—Fine weather, occasional showers, ship
rolling, and foul wind again. Day’s run, 242 knots.
Friday, 12th May.—A wet, nasty, cold day ; nevertheless,
fishers of birds were ready for sport. Mr. Hills caught a molly-
hawk weighing seven pounds, and measuring nine feet two inches
across the wing. Mr. Cook, jun., also caught a wedge-tailed petrel,
otherwise known as a mutton bird. In the evening a spelling-bee
was held in the saloon, an account of which is given in our
columns. Day’s run, 107 knots.
ACROSTIC.
(In imitation of Longfellow.)
Henry Berridge, Commander of the Superb.
H earty and hale stands he,
E agerly scanning th’ horizon,
N ought for the thunder he cares;
R egardless of storm or of tempest,
Y ou see him stand at his post, in calm, fine weather, or danger.
B orn as ’twere to the sea,
E arnestly trying to speed us,
R ightly also, to a far distant shore,
R emembering the while dear old England ;
I n health may God keep and guide,
D evoutly we pray to our Father,
G ood Captain Berridge so kind,
E ternal rest grant him hereafter, and calm, fine weather in heaven.
ACROSTIC.
Maud Berridge.
M ay happiness your life endow,
A nd care to you a stranger be ;
U nclouded be that placid brow,
D evoutly pray our Father we.
B enignly may your life glide on,
E ndeared to many hearts thou art ;
R emoved so very far from wrong,
R egretfully from thee we part;
I n more congenial spheres to move,
D elighting hearts unconsciously ;
G od spreads o’er thee that mighty love,
E xchanged but for eternity.
ENTERTAINMENT IN THE SALOON.
The sixth concert was held in the saloon on Wednesday even-
ing, 10th of May, at 7.30 p.m., Mr. Routledge in the chair. The
programme commenced with a solo on the piano, by Miss
Shelley. Mr. Vale followed with “Take back the heart that
thou gavest,” and sang with much feeling. On being recalled he
repeated the last two verses. Mr. F. Carter was the next per-
former, and made a decided hit in a lively song entitled “ Full
Inside; ” he was loudly applauded at its conclusion, but did not
respond by singing again. Captain Berridge, who is always to
the fore in these gatherings, and readily gives his valuable ser-
vices, next recited the very amusing poem, by W. S. Gilbert,
“The Yarn of the Nancy Bell;” it created quite a furore. The
Captain was then asked by the chairman, at the express wish of
many present, to sing “ The Whale,” a song he gave at the last
concert with so much success, and which has become very popular
with everyone on board. He consented, and sang with great
spirit, his auditory joining in the chorus with no little lung
power. Mr. Hills appeared next, and well sang a very clever
parody on “ Paddle your own Canoe.” “ The British Lion ” was
well rendered by Mr. M‘Kenzie, who pleased the audience.
Messrs. Alderton and Gaillard then gave a scene from “ Julius
Csesar.” Brutus, Mr. Alderton; Cassius, Mr. Gaillard. These
gentlemen acquitted themselves very well, considering the diffi-
culties they laboured under, the vessel rolling tremendously. The
last on the programme was Mr. Mervin Jones; this gentleman
accompanied himself on the banjo, and gave an original song. It
was a take-off on some of the passengers, principally addressed to the
“ Quaint old bird of Cuddy-square.” He was deservedly encored
at the finish, and on being recalled gave “ Jack’s Conversion of a
Jew,” an amusing song that caused roars of laughter, and one
that proved a good wind-up to a very jolly evening. “ God Save
the Queen,” with the usual compliment to the chairman, ended
the entertainment.
SPELLING-BEE.
The first spelling-bee was given under the presidentship of
Captain Berridge. He filled the office of interrogator, the
umpires being Messrs. Clifford and Routledge. Twenty words as
a test were fii'st given for the competitors to write on paper. The
following were the words :—Myrrh, parallelogram, embarrass,
chandelier, ichneumon, harass, bombardier, symmetry, manacle,
titillation, diocesan, metempsychosis, proselytism, ornithorhyn-
chus, manoeuvre, marcessible, contemptible, poniard, and mackerel.
The most successful competitor was Mr. Pratt, who only failed in
three words, but was unfortunate in the viva voce examination.
Mr. Stephens obtained the first prize, ss. ; Mr. Jones, 35.;
Mrs. Berridge, Is, which she kindly gave to the printing fund;
and Miss Ward the fourth, 6d. The entertainment was a great
success.
On the occasion of the Queen’s birthday, the 24th of May, a
patriotic concert will take place.
BIRD-CATCHING ON BOARD SHIP.
Tuesday, 16th May, was a red-letter day in one respect, as a
good day’s sport was indulged in with the birds. Previous to
this, the victims had been but few and far between, but the day in
question was an exception to the rule. It was a favourable
morning for the purpose, as the sea was perfectly calm, and the
birds migrated in considerable numbers to the stern, in hopes of
picking up any stray morsels that were thrown overboard.
Among the feathered tribe were mollyhawks, Cape doves, Cape
pigeons, whale-birds, &c., and it was surprising how close they
came to the ship. No one could help admiring them as they
swam leisurely upon the water, or flew gracefully over one’s head,
almost within arm’s length. The greatest favourite, perhaps, was
the Cape dove, a sweet little bird much resembling its namesake
on shore, though considerably larger. The whale-birds and Cape
pigeons were also admired for their pretty plumage. A great
many passengers stood watching them, and numbers of lines were
thrown in the water. After several vain attempts, and
considerable mirth at the audacity of some of the birds, and the
non-success of the sportsmen, Mr. Cook, sen., succeeded in
catching a Cape dove. Messrs. Clifford and Cook, jun, (who
were more ambitious), had for some time been unfortunate, when
all of a sudden a large albatross appeared on the scene, swooped
down upon their bait, and after driving all the small fry away,
made for it himself, and suffered for his greediness by being
securely caught, and quickly hauled on board amid general
rejoicings. The doctor was soon in attendance and gave him his
quietus. The weight and measurement were then taken ; they
were as follows :—Weight, 19 lbs. ; from wing towing, 10ft. Sin. ;
from tail to beak, 4ft. 2in. Soon after this had been performed,
a sooty albatross was caught by Mr. C. House, whose line from
the main deck was very ingenious. It was rather amusing, as
sometimes when his line became entangled with one of the others,
he thought a bird was caught, and pulled away with a will. But
a signal was adopted between one of the saloon passengers and
Mr. House, and when a bird was hooked, the word was passed
forward, which simplified matters considerably. Another dove
was caught later on, by Mr. Baertsoen, which finishes the list of
captures; innumerable had been the bites during the day, and
many a bird was within an ace of being taken. Several gentle-
men had shown exemplary patience and perseverance; but the
birds were decidedly too old for them, and managed, in a most
clever way, to purloin the pork without falling victims. Putting
this on one side, it was a very enjoyable time, and many on board
will remember this interesting day’s sport with the birds.


SOME WE KNOW.
Sailors are about the most jolly, good-natured set of fellows
one could possibly meet with. On board they are kind-hearted,
free and easy, and when in their element—a gale of wind blow-
ing, the ship lurching, and the decks running over with water—
they brave many dangers, and are as happy as can be; or so we
should judge by the cheery way they sing whilst working.
There are times when our midnight slumbers are disturbed by a
lusty chorus of “Haul away, Joe,” &c,, from the watch; we
know then that the wind has changed, and the sails are either
being taken in or trimmed. Then comes the gruff, straight-
forward order from the officer, and we turn over—so far as our
narrow bunks will allow—and, feeling ourselves in good hands,
fall asleep. Talking of sailors, those on board the Superb
possess a certain amount of talent beyond that of seamanship. A
short time ago one named Koeter carved two very pretty photo,
frames, and sent them into the saloon to be raffled for. They
were certainly very cleverly done, and found twenty-six members
at a shilling each, anxious to get them. We also find an artist in
Locke, who, with paper and pencil and a few water-colours, soon
showed us the ship Superb in a late gale. This painting was
raffled for by twenty members at one shilling each. It is not only
on paper that Locke has shown us his skill, for we have seen a
masterpiece in tattoo, and more than one on board will carry to
his grave a full-rigged ship on his arm pricked in by this sailor.
In this work Thompson is quite equal to Locke; we admire his
work, and the skilful way he throws in the red and blue. Villard,
or “ Frenchy,” as we call him, is quite a professional naturalist,
and skins and cleans birds wonderfully well. Gearey is winning
for himself the name of pugilist, as he is giving lessons in box-
ing to one of the saloon passengers. Laws can make rings out
of shillings, make a row, and is quite a chorus in himself with
his “ Bully Boys, oh !” There are many others, but at present
I do not know their names.
Before closing I should like to say a few Avords about our
quartermasters. During the voyage most of us have had some
pleasant chats with each of them. I believe it is a rule not to
speak to the man at the wheel; but in fair weather even that
rule is at times broken. Their manner could not be more
respectful, and the least I can say is that each of them is the
right man in the right place.
Silva is a very old servant of the company, having been in its
service for eighteen years—six voyages in this ship. He is also
the ship’s barber. What should we do without Silva 1 Why, he
shaves us and cuts our hair, does our washing, and is, in fact, a
very handy man; he also acts as servant to the first and second
mates and doctor during the voyage.
Mersey is the true type of the man at the helm, and, away
from it, looks after several of the young midshipmen, making
their berths as comfortable as possible. Mersey is a musical man,
and is A 1 at the fiddle when a dance is required on deck. In the
forecastle, too, many a hornpipe is stepped and a merry hour
spent when Mersey fiddles away. Then there is Bailey, one of
the oldest servants of the company. What a jolly Neptune he
made, and how well he looks at the wheel, in his coat of many
colours, like Joseph. Everybody likes Bailey, and calls him a
jolly good fellow. Boatswain Corbett bosses over all the sailors,
and is a man old in the service of the company, formerly in the
navy, on the ship Galatea. He afterwards served under Captain
Berridge in the Highflyer , and has made five voyages in the
Superb. He is ever ready in the interests of sport, as we
have seen, and is respected by both men, officers, and passengers.
This reminds me of the old saying, “ Like master, like man,”
and I think we might go on many a ship and not find a better
captain or a better set of sailors. H, G.
OTHERS WE KNOW.
Our voyage to Melbourne is fast coming to a close. Already
we have spent ten weeks together on board the Superb. All
strangeness has disappeared; we know every one of the ship’s
company, what they are, and their several duties, and in each we
find a man well worthy of his calling. Perhaps the one we are
most interested in as passengers, is our friend Mr. Hopper, the
head steward. He has been in the employ of the company for
seventeen years; nine voyages in this ship, five of which as
steward, and at a glance we can see a better or more able man
could not be found. His kind and attentive way, and his ever-
willingness to oblige, have won for him the esteem of all passen-
gers, We cannot but admire his patience on store day and his
general good temper. Gliding on from steward to cook, Ave find
in Alex. Gibbs an artist that satisfies the most critical palate.
Everybody speaks with praise of his efforts, and marvels how he
manages in rough weather,
G, Harrison, the butcher, is another very useful man on board.
He is very obliging, and if we want a piece of pork for bait,
“ butcher ” is the man.
Our friend “ Sails,” who sits aft in the saloon, “ stitch, stitch,
stitch,” puts in a good bit of hard work, repairing and making
sails. G. Matson is his name. He has been for five years on board
the Superb , and many a piece of ornamental work is due to his
skill. One can always enjoy a chat with “ Sails,” as he is a well-
read man, and somewhat of a poet.
John Yule, “ Chips,” the carpenter, is a man much sought after,
and well he may be, for there is nothing in his trade but Avhat he
can do in a good, workmanlike manner. We find him in the
cabins, fixing trunks, &c., ready for the rough weather, making
bookshelves, and doing anything in his power to oblige.
Richard Pyburn, the engineer, is quite a host in himself We
have seen him make many things which seem almost impossible
on board ship. Most of us carry a memento in the shape of a
ring manufactured by him out of a shilling. H. G.
THE “ LEGEND ” OF THE ALBATROSS.
Borne upon the southern breeze,
O’er desolate and desert seas,
O’er regions of eternal snow,
O’er realms of ice, where wild winds blow,
Where hoary waves their white heads toss,
Sails the silent albatross.
By day, by night, awake, asleep,
His way is on the mighty deep.
The Southern Ocean is his home—
Beyond its bounds he dare not roam.
Floats he where the scowling Horn
Mocks the blast with rugged scorn ;
Does his course to westward shape,
Round Agulhas’ stormy cape,
Still, the zone he may not cross
Checks the wandering albatross.
Ancient southern legends tell
How a wicked fiend of hell
Tempted once a Northern knight
In semblance of a lady bright—
Led him from stem duty’s path,
And drew upon him Heaven’s wrath.
Feathers grew upon his skin,
And, in punishment for sin,
Ages he was doomed to stay
Where the dog-star holds his sway,
Flying ’neath the holy cross,
In likeness of an albatross.
Floating, flying, sweeping, sailing,
Moaning, sighing, weeping, wailing,
Like a lost soul, wandering where
The midnight darkness of despair
Is rent by shrieks of maniac woe
And that remorse the guilty know.
In mercy, with the doom, was given
A promise by offended Heaven,
That from a quarter of the sun,
In days to come, there should sail one
Owning the form which Satan stole
To cheat his unsuspecting soul,
Should cleanse him pure from every stain,
And change him to himself again ;
Then, vesting him in armour bright,
Should claim him for her own dear knight,


And sail to where the weary rest,
Among the islands of the blest.
Flushed with hope, his spirit waits
TV unfolding of the pearly gates
Of orient morn ; he strains his eyes,
But no one comes from Paradise.
Wearily, heavily, flying low
O’er the deep with his load of woe,
Sails slowly and sadly, here and there,
The prisoner bird in his cage of air.
The sea may rise, the wind may blow—
He cares not ; but the ruddy glow
That sets the western heaven ablaze
Attracts anew his yearning gaze.
There, where the sun and waters meet,
He seeks the bark he fain would greet;
He seeks the form which, day or night,
Is never absent from his sight.
One glance from her he loved so well
Would turn into a heaven his hell ;
And cheaply would he deem the bliss
Purchased by pains e’en such as his.
Slow sinks the sun, a ball of fire,
But high above mount, dome, and spire,
And ivory palaces arise
On crimson meads, ’raid gorgeous skies,
And golden mountains lower beside
The margin of the opal tide,
That sweetly flows till lost to view
’Mid melting shades of fainter hue.
Alas ! ’tis but reflected light
From that bright land that knows no night.
No silver boat sails o’er the sea
With her he loves, to set him free.
Back again to his wretched doom,
O’er the waves in the midnight gloom ;
Sick with sorrow and hope deferred—
A wandering, weary, lonely bird.
Such the ancient tale, as told
By fathers to their sons, of old ;
Still he roams the ocean o’er,
Still he flies from shore to shore ;
Not a ship that passes by
Can escape his piercing eye ;
Watch with what majestic swoop
He dashes o’er the vessel’s poop ;
Or sailing in a graceful ring,
On slanting and unmoving wing,
He scans with more than mortal ken
The features of the sons of men.
Oh, solemn bird, where hast thou been 1
What hast thou heard ? what hast thou seen ?
He has been where the fierce gale
Has caused the boldest hearts to quail ;
He has heard the mother’s cry,
Awful in her agony ;
As, white-robed and with streaming hair,
With shivering form and bosom bare,
She clasped, with many a gesture wild,
Firm to her heart, her helpless child,
Imploring Him who rules in Heaven
To spare the life Himself hath given.
He has seen the seething sea
In its wrath rage mightily,
And, while loud the tempest roared,
Wash the seaman overboard ;
His eye has marked the man’s despair,
The stony, hopeless, bloodshot glare,
As, lifted on the billow’s height,
He notes his ship fly out of sight.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Saturday, 13th May.—Fair wind and very cold. Guns were
brought to bear on the birds, and several were shot. Only one fell
on deck; the rest served as food to their brothers and sisters.
Day’s run, 149 knots.
Sunday, 14th May,—Fine weather; quiet day, service morn-
ing and evening in saloon. Day’s run, 171 knots.
Monday, 15th May.—Fine, with occasional showers. This
cold weather cards are more than ever clung to as a source of
amusement. Day’s run, 182 knots.
Tuesday, 16th May.— A calm when least expected. Those
who have late numbers in the sweepstake are rejoicing. Good
sport with the birds to-day, some of all sorts being caught, the
latest arrivals being Cape doves. An account of the day’s sport
will be found in our columns. Day’s run, 124 knots.
Wednesday, 17th May.—After a calm has come a strong
wind, and once more we are rushing on towards our journey’s
end. A fine clear, cold morning. There is no scrambling for
the morning’s bath now. Day’s run, 159 knots.
Thursday, 18th May.—Blowing a moderate gale ; most un-
comfortable weather, deck very wet. Meat safe on poop deck
smashed in by a sea coming over; this is the worst day we have
experienced. Several slight accidents have happened through the
rolling of the ship. We may state that to-day we had dinner
by lamp light, and many of us tasted sea pie for the first time
in our lives. Day’s run, 145 knots.
Friday, 19th May.—Fine bright weather, with wind right
astern ; ship rolling heavily. Day’s run, 112 knots.
THE QUAINT OLD BIRD.
Strange facts have been heard, which a quaint old bird
Chirped forth in musical tones,
In a medly which moved upon, and otherwise improved upon,
The production of the only Jones.
I’ve a little more to mention, so I crave your attention
To listen while I declare
What we’ve not heard from that quaint old bird
Who dwells in Cuddy-square.
Now the first thing to record, much amusement did afford,
And unnoticed it shall not pass by,
For verily, forsooth, ’twas a dark-haired youth
Who thought that his end was nigh.
He announced it with a cry, and on him every eye
Gazed with a vacant stare,
Which we’ve not heard, &c.
When the laughter had subsided in the doctor he confided,
As he spake with a tearful eye :
“ Oh, doctor dear, I’m poisoned, I fear ;
Please tell me —Shall I die 1 ”
But they roared at his funk, and laid him in his bunk,
And bid him not despair,
And that we’ve not heard, &c.
The accused, one Sellen, an incorrigible felon,
Who swore ’twas gospel truth
That it wasn’t his fault that the water was salt
Which was said to have poisoned the youth ;
But they placed him in the dock, and a numerous flock
Came to witness him there
Be examined by that bird, &c.
So a trial was feigned, and the prisoner was arraigned,
Though the plaintiff wished to shirk it;
The case was read, and proceedings were led
By the judge of the ocean circuit;
But the plaintiff lost the day, and with damages to pay,
Reynard cried back to his lair.
And that we haven’t heard, &c.
I trust it won’t be wrong to give in my song
Our mutual friend a rap.
You’ll regret to your cost, when your all you’ve lost,
That you ever with “Uncle ” played Nap. ;
So, before I close, on your minds I would impose
A caution to have a care
How you deal with that bird, of whom you now have heard,
Who dwells in Cuddy-square.
ANOTHER TUG-OF-WAR.
After the first tug-of-war with the midshipmen, in which the
saloon passengers were easily beaten, they thought they would try
the stewards, and again found themselves defeated. The stewards’
team was as follows Messrs. Hopper, Ede, Harrington, Dawley
(Q.C.), Sellen, Nash, Cronin ; the passengers’—Messrs. Ridley,
Dawson, Cook, sen., Routledge, Clifford, Stephens, Matthews.


The umpire was Mr. F. V. Vale, who discharged his duties to
the satisfaction of all concerned. Messrs. Alderton and Mann
assisted. The first struggle resulted in the easy defeat of the
passengers, who avenged themselves in the next, but were easily
beaten in the final.
ADVERTISEMENT.
LOST, a Book called “ Out of the Hurly-Burly.” When last
seen it was in a brown paper cover, with name on, and
initials of owner, W.K.S.
No. 6.
JUNE
2, 1882
INTRODUCTORY.
We have two very sad events to record in this number. Mr. R. C.
Pratt died on Friday, 26th May, at 5.30 in the morning, of rapid
consumption. His brother was with him to the last, as was also
his cousin, Mr. H. Gaillard. The funeral took place on the main
deck ; and after the Union Jack was lifted, and his remains
lowered into the deep, his brother and Mr. Gaillard received the
sincerest sympathy from their fellow-passengers. Mr. Millard
died on Wednesday, 31st May. His funeral was attended by
most of the passengers. Captain Berridge performed the cere-
monies. Mrs. Millard received our greatest sympathy.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Saturday, 20th May.—Fearful night again, ship rolling heavily.
Saw a camp-stool floating on the water. In the evening a concert
was given in the saloon. Day’s run, 209 knots.
Sunday, 21st May.—Splendid breeze; all sail set. Divine
service morning and evening in the saloon. Day’s run, 221
knots.
Monday, 22nd May.—Almost a calm, and much warmer.
Ship again steady. Superb Gazette read in the evening by Mr.
Gaillard. Day’s run, 165 knots.
Tuesday, 23rd May.—Fair wind, smooth sea. Day’s run, 216
knots.
Wednesday, 24th May.—Fair wind, fine and sunshine. This
being the Queen’s Birthday, it was a gala day on board. An
account will be found in our columns.
Thursday, 25th May.— A very thin breakfast table, owing to
Queen’s Birthday. Surely her life should be a long one, if we
consider the way her health was drunk yesterday.
Friday, 26th May.—Moderate breeze, and cloudy, with mists
and rain.
MISS GISBORNE.
Perhaps the most noble occupation a woman can find is nursing
the sick \ to alleviate the sufferings of the dying is a grand work.
We are fortunate in having for a fellow-passenger Miss Gisborne, a
trained nurse. On a ship like the Superb, carrying a number of
passengers, many of them travelling for their health, such a
calamity as death will occur. The end of this voyage has been
saddened by two of our number departing this life. In both these
cases Miss Gisborne has rendered valuable assistance; also in many
cases of sickness her kind and skilful attention has gained for
her the esteem of all with whom she has come in contact. We
wish her every success in her undertaking in a new country.
ADVENTURES.
At about twenty minutes to seven on Monday morning (29th)
the heaviest sea that has been known for some time past broke
on board, doing a great deal of damage. Mr. Barker, the first
officer, who was on the watch, had a narrow escape of being
washed overboard, as he was lifted right over one of the sky-
lights. Part of the foremost settee, commonly known as “the
Captain’s chair,” was washed completely over the side, also one of
the gratings off the centre skylight; the water tank broke adrift,
chipping the decks up, as did also the hose and signal lockers. The
hen-coops broke away, and were washed down to leeward, where
they lay piled one on the other in wild confusion at the head of
the ladder 1 , but escaped with very little damage. The box of
thermometers, which is secured under the standard compass, was
washed away, and was saved from going overboard by Mr. Seaver,
The main-rail on the port side was torn up for several feet. Things,
however, were soon restored to order.
DRAUGHTS.
Dear Mr. Editor, —There are those who have asserted that
the game of draughts is a mere frivolous and childish pastime,
while others have stoutly maintained that it is a truly scientific
game, second only to chess in its complications and the scope for
thoughtful and constant study which it affords ; a third and less
extreme view which prevails amongst certain of our company is
that there is some skill required, but a brief practice, combined
with but a modicum of thought, is amply sufficient to unravel all
the mysteries of the game. lam anxious of saying a few words
on behalf of a too generally despised amusement, and hope, by
quoting the opinions of a few writers on the subject, to prove that
to regard draughts as child’s play is to betoken ignorance of the
subject, and to deem it a game easily mastered manifests a most
elementary, not to say ridiculous, idea of the game; while to
speak of it as a truly scientific game is alone to value it at its
proper worth. Perhaps it cannot be ceded that the poet is right
who says:
Chess as a showy game may claim the sway,
But draughts for depth will bear the palm away ;
Chess can be played by Philidor, though blind,
But draughts requires both calm and thoughtful mind
yet on behalf of a misjudged game it may safely be asserted
that it deserves to be more studied as one of the most rational
means for the employment of leisure hours, from the habits of
thoughtful and careful calculation which it fosters. Many
writers have held that it is the elder sister of chess. It dates,
according to some, 4,000 years back. On the score of age, then,
the recreation is one of no mean pretensions. In a book entitled
“ Savage Life and Scenes,” it is stated that draughts is played by
the savage tribes in the interior of New Zealand under the name
of “ Emu,” and that it is not probable they could have derived
their knowledge of it from any other people. It is not manifest from
any written record with which we are acquainted that the game
was much practised in Europe before the middle of the sixteenth
century. In proof that then it demanded and received the con-
sideration of thoughtful minds, which of itself is sufficient to
vindicate its character from what we must term the unjust
description of a “child’s pastime,” we find that in 1668 an
elaborate treatise upon it was published in Paris, written by a
celebrated professor of mathematics, N. Mallot. Nearly a
century later Mr. W. Payne, teacher of mathematics, published
his celebrated “ Introduction to the Game of Draughts.” In
1767 appeared a “ Companion for the Draught Player,” by W.
Painter. In 1800 Sturgess’s “ Guide to the Game of Draughts”
was issued. This has passed through several editions and is a
standard authority to the present time, and can be procured of
Bohn, Oovent Garden, either separately or with his “ Handbook
of Games.” “John Drummond,” the Scotch player, produced
nearly 800 original games in his book. In conclusion, a player
of ten years’ standing has only mastered the outlines of the
game. The question “What is there in draughts 1 ” clearly shows
a lack of knowledge of the game. If, dear Messrs. Editorial
Staff, you think this little paper worth insertion in the Gazette ,
pray do so.—Yours very truly, AMICUS.
On 24th May, Mrs. Berridge held an “at home” at 16 Cuddy-
square.


APROPOS TO SOMEBODY.
On the poop the other evening, I was aroused from the reverie
into which I had fallen by the advent of certain revellers, whose
conviviality put me in mind of the following passage : “ Man,
says an eminent philosopher, is by nature a bibulous creature’,
not merely as a beast would drink at a brook, to gratify the
cravings of nature, but with the higher view, to anticipate the
glorious commonwealth of brotherhood.” This is all very true,
no doubt; but since our eminent philosopher has quite omitted
to mention the consequences of the latter, I will undertake to
sum them up in the few following words :—ln the afternoon a man
is in a silvery state; in the evening a man is in a golden state;
and, as will generally be found the case, in the morning he is in
a coppery state.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Saturday, 2/th May.—A calm morning ; wet 5 dirty evening,
with breeze. Two mollyhawks and one sooty albatross caught.
Day’s run, 110 knots.
Sunday, 28th May. Strong breeze; decks very wet; divine
service held in the saloon morning and evening. Day’s run, 236
knots.
Monday, 29th May.—Blowing a gale; the “ captain’s chair,”
skylight, signal locker, and part of bulwark carried away ; the
first officer nearly washed overboard ; ship rolling heavily, and
very few managed to sleep. Day’s run, 212 knots.
luksday, 30th May.—Strong breeze; shipping seas fore and
aft all day. To-day we made the best run during the voyage
which was 304 knots.
Wednesday, 31st May.—To-day we are off Cape Leeuwin;
strong breeze, with spray coming over the decks. The last pig
killed to-day; made an awful row. Day’s run, 284 knots.
Thursday, Ist June.—Another bad night; ship rolling and
pitching ; a wet, dirty morning ; everybody longing to be on land
again. Sea having subsided, we had tea without fiddles. The
weather cleared up in the evening and several ladies and
gentlemen found their way on deck. Day’s run, 203 knots.
Friday, 2nd June.—Fine bright morning; air wonderfully
soft, and smooth sea. How loth passengers are to turn out of
bed in the morning now. Day’s run, 201 knots. A whale seen
spouting on the port side in the afternoon.
NOTES BY A NATURALIST.
The following are a few notes concerning the various forms of
life seen during the passage, taking them in order :
The Sperm Whale. —This animal is seldom seen, but when
it does appear it strikes the eye at once, on account of its
enormous size and remarkably shaped head. At times it may be
seen traversing the surface of the water at a great speed, its
peculiarly sharp, cutter-like nose being particularly adapted for
this. There is no fin on the back, but a hump over the base of
the tail. Colour, blackish grey. A whale much more commonly
seen is the Southern Rorqual, which is frequently mistaken for a
Grampus or Fin-back, on account of the large fin situated well for-
ward on the back. It is occasionally seen to leap right out of the
water. General colour, black above, white below. About 40feetlong.
Grampus. —A large, ferocious cetacean, attaining a length of
between twenty and thirty feet. They go in shoals, about twenty
and thirty, jumping out of the water, making a great commotion.
Colour, black above, white below; large triangular tin on back,
blunt nose.
We now come to the most graceful of the whale family, the
Dolphin, commonly called porpoise. This is a mistake, as the
porpoise is quite a different animal in colour, size, and shape.
The dolphin is about eight feet long, black back, grey sides, white
underneath; triangular-shaped fin on back, long sharp snout,
which at once distinguishes it from the porpoise, whose snout is
round and blunt. Its movements in the water are exceedingly
graceful, shooting along, with apparently scarcely any effort, at
the rate of fifteen or sixteen miles an hour, and every now and
then leaping into the air. They are seen at times in immense
shoals, so as to quite change the aspect of a considerable portion
of the visible sea surface into a mass of foam. It is to be met
with in all seas. Another variety of this, the Peron, black and
white, is frequently seen in high southern latitudes. There are
numerous varieties of the foregoing to be met with, but are rarely
seen in this passage.
We shall next speak of the birds.
The Storm Petrels are most commonly seen, as they accom-
pany the ship all the way. From England to the Cape there is
a small variety, all black except a white spot over the tail, which
is called “ Wilson’s Petrel.” It then leaves, and we are joined by
a larger variety, which has white underneath as well as on the
tail, which is divided by a black streak. These birds seldom
alight on the water, and then only in the calmest weather, but
are continually flitting about, just over the surface, every now
and then fishing a little zoophyte out of the water, and con-
tinually pattering with their feet.
Terns, or Sea Swallows, frequently seen in the tropics, more
especially off the island of Trinidad. They are very graceful -
looking birds, mostly white, with pink feet and beaks, and long,
sharp wings, with pointed tails. A black species, with white
scalp, is common, and is called a noddy.
Boobies are a species of gannet; they are so called from their
apparent disregard for the presence of men, and are often caught
on board ship.
The Tropic, or Bo’sun Bird, is particularly graceful in appear-
ance—white, with the two centre tail feathers produced to a
length of six inches beyond the others.
One Frigate Bird was seen—large, black birds, with forked tails.
We now come to the birds of the Southern Ocean, truly
inhabitants of the oceanic regions, as they never go to land
except to deposit their eggs. Whether they sleep in the air or on
the water is hard to tell; therefore, I am inclined to think they
do both Their wonderful way of flying, with apparently no
movement of body or wings, is astonishing. They may be
watched for a long time swooping round in all directions, now
high up, now just skimming the surface; but it may be seen that
when approaching or going directly from the wind, the wing-tips
are slightly curved downwards, while, when flying across the
wind, they incline them to an angle. The tail is used a good
deal in depressing or raising them, and otherwise directing their
flight. Their food consists of small squids and jelly-fish, as well
as dead animal substance, which their strong, hooked bills are
particularly adapted for tearing.
The Wandering Albatross is the largest, measuring, on an
average, ten feet three inches across the wings, and weighing
about eighteen pounds. Birds twelve and thirteen feet across
are reported as being caught; but this should be received with
caution, as it is very doubtful. The old birds are all white,
except black at the ends of the wings, while some of the younger
ones are almost all dark brown, and they may be seen in all
varieties between these two.
Sooty Albatross, or Stinkpot.— All sooty-brown or black.
Six feet across wings, and weighing almost six pounds.
Black-Eyebrowed Albatross. —Seven feet across wings,
weight about seven pounds, white with black wings, and a well-
marked small black streak over the eyes. Yellow bill and
feet.
There is a greyhead species, but it is very probably an imma-
ture specimen of the black-eyebrowed. These are all albatrosses ;
there are two other species but rarely seen.
Giant Petrel. —A large, heavily-formed black bird, with
stout, yellow bill. Wings spread, seven feet; weight about eight
and a half pounds.
Wedge-tailed Petrel, or Mutton Bird. —Grey bird, white
underneath ; seen in large numbers at times.
Broad-billed Prion, or W hale-Bird. —A beautiful, lavender-
coloured bird, white underneath, with sharp, quick flight. From
its peculiar colour it at times almost disappears from sight, then,
as it turns the under surface towards one, it flashes out again ;
there are several species. There is a curious fringe round inside
the bill, which is very broad,


The Cape Petrel, or Pigeon, is one of the most striking
birds seen, not only on account of its very pretty plumage, which
is black and white mottled, but also as it is frequently captured
by means of a piece of cotton hung loosely overboard, in which
it gets entangled. It reminds one very much of the common
magpie moth.
There are other birds, as the Cape Dove, a gull-like bird of
fine lavender plumage and slow flight; Cape Crow, or Mutton
Bird of the Australians; a black bird, and several others, but
those named are the most common.
Skua Gull, or Cape Hen, is common all over the world,
and is often seen dashing amongst the albatrosses and other
birds, and, though much smaller, yet making them give up
their food to it.
We now come to the fishes, few of which, compai-atively
speaking, are seen at sea.
White Shark.—A savage and always hungry monster, which
is sometimes caught by a large hook. In company with the
shark are to be seen several small striped fish of the mackerel
family—pilot-fish—and on the body of the shark are generally to
be found several suckers ( remoras, ), which stick on it by means of a
laminated plate in the back of the head.
Flying-fish, of which their are several varieties, are commonly
seen in large shoals, which seem at times to spring out of the
water as one, and, after a short skim, gradually fall in again.
They never flap their wings, as the muscles will not admit of a
flapping motion, but are enabled to keep in the air for some time,
and even raise themselves, by the large surface of the pectoral fins.
When skimming along the water a rapid motion may be seen of
the ventral fins, which is often mistaken for flapping. These
have numerous enemies both in the air and sea, particularly
albacore and coryphene, or, as it is commonly though erroneously
called, dolphin. This is a beautiful fish, displaying the most
beautiful colours with every movement of the body, and able to
take big jumps in the air. The colours are caused principally by
the interference of the I’ays of light on the finely-striated scale and
thin mucous all over the scales.
Portuguese Man-of-war, a brilliantly coloured, bladder-like
object, with very long tentacles, which hang down underneath,
and are very poisonous; continually seen in the tropics. The
bladder is full of air, and serves to support the body of the crea-.
ture, which is beneath. Its colour is purple and red.
At times the sea is full of jelly-fish, and, in fact, if a small net
be towed for a short time at any moment, and the contents care-
fully collected and put under a microscope, the sight will well
repay the trouble, for it will be seen that almost every drop con-
tains living things, all as perfect for their particular purpose as
the most highly developed animals.
The phosphorescence of the sea has long been a source of
wonder, and even now it is not at all satisfactorily settled as to
how it is composed. There is no doubt, though, that some, as the
Pyrosoma, a cylindrical mass of jelly, brilliantly phosphorescent,
are luminous from something they secrete, while in a great many
cases it may be caused by putrescent matter, and again in others
by stuff that may be capable of absorbing the luminous rays in
the daytime, to send them out again at night. Fishes are often
seen completely enveloped in a sheet of greenish-looking flame,
and their progress watched as they dash through the water.
PROTOPLASM.
PATRIOTIC CONCERT.
On the Queen’s Birthday (24th May) another novelty was intro-
duced, in the shape of a patriotic concert, which was given in the
saloon at 7.30 p.m., with Captain Berridge in the chair. The
programme opened with “ God Save the Queen ; ” the audience
sang the first and third verses, and the second was given as a solo
by Mr. F. Carter. Captain Berridge then gave a spirited render-
ing of “ The Englishman,” and was heartily cheered. “ Rule
Britannia” followed, by Mr. F. Carter, which he sang very fairly.
The next performer was a sailor named Koeter, who has a
splendid voice ; he sang “ The Anchor’s Weighed ” in fine style,
and, on being recalled, repeated the last two verses. Mr. H.
Gaillard next gave a reading from the “ Ingoldsby Legends,”
“ Netley Abbey,” which was much appreciated. Mr. D. Sellen
appeared next, and gave an exceedingly good interpretation of
“The Union Jack,” and, in response to a unanimous demand,
delighted his audience with two selections from “ H.M.S.
Pinafore.” By request, Mr. Alderton recited “ Somebody’s
Darling,” and it was rapturously received ; this gentleman gave
it better than ever. Locke (another sailor) then sang “ When
Parnell becomes King of Old Ireland.” Mr. Mackenzie fol-
lowed, and was successful in a song entitled “ The Red, White,
and Blue.” The last item was an original song, “Aunt Jemima,"
by Mr. Routledge ; this was not up to “ Uncle’s” usual form; he
was recalled, however, twice, and sang “ My Katty Kiss ’em ” and
(by request) “Where are you going to, my pretty maid.” The
favourite song “ Hearts of Oak” was capitally sung by Mr. Mann,
who was last but one on the programme ; he received an encore.
The National Anthem and a vote of thanks to the chairman
brought the entertainment to a close.
THE QUEEN’S BIRTHDAY.
We all meant, as loyal subjects, to keep this well, and so we did.
In the morning a muster took place of the Royal Marines, Field-
Marshal “ Uncle ”at the head. He rode a formidable steed, but,
thanks to his umbrella, survived the occasion. The field-marshal
wore his uniform of the 49th Superb, a ne phis ulster, a bath
towel, and a grand hat, kindly lent by the captain. The field-
marshal’s troop consisted of “Judge” Dawson, “Nephew”
Stephens, “Cassius” Gaillard, “Fresh-bearded” Webb, T, House,
of maindeck notoriety, “ Lord Dooke ” Alderton, “ Belay ” Cook,
and the band, well led by Messrs. Gaillard, Alderton, House, and
Webb, with fog-homs, metal of any quantity or quality, and the
rest. The row was indescribable as the promenade round the
ship commenced; fanfares of trumpets and melodious sounds re-
sounded on every hand, and it certainly showed that if ever
“ tinned-meat compressed” of loyalty was created it was on board
the ship Superb. As soon as Mr. Vale had by careful obser-
vation discovered the sun was on the meridian, the royal salute
was fired.
LINES
Composed on the death of a chaffinch, which flew on board while
going down Channel, and died in lat. 42 c S., long. 82° E.
Poor little bird, how sad a fate,
How sorrowful, how desolate ;
Far from green fields and pleasant lane,
To perish on the mighty main ;
No loving mate or kindred near,
But all so bleak, so cold, and drear.
My heart is touched to see thee lie,
An object of such sympathy ;
Thy plumage that was once so bright,
Is changed unto a wretched plight;
That drooping head and dull glazed eye ;
Oh, what a tale of misery !
Poor little bird, two months before,
Sweetly thou sang on England’s shore,
And hopping gaily all the day,
How happy passed the time away,
With sweet young mate to cheer the hours,
In hawthorn hedge or shady bowers.
But venturing upon the sea,
You fell into captivity ;
And on a ship far outward bound,
This luckless little bird was found ;
And torn from every earthly tie,
Was caged to pine away and die.
Week after week thy fragile form
Endured the tempest and the storm ;
Week after week ! oh, what an age,
Within a narrow prison cage,
With nought but bitterness and pain,
An aching heart and throbbing brain.
But Death at last, poor suffering bird.
Thy sorrowful lamenting heard,


Instrumental Trio
Messrs. Jones, Smith, and Webb
Song
“ The Tar’s Farewell ”
• Mr. Mann
Song
“The Stockman”
• Mr. Jones
Song
“ Isle of Beauty ” -
Captain Berridge
Song
“ The Judge’s Song ”
Mr. Dawson
Piano Solo
- “ The Fairy Harp ”
Mr. Webb
Song
“ Moods and Tenses ”
Mr. Clifford
Song - “
The Three Jolly Sailor Boys”
Mr. Hills
And touched thee with his magic hand ;
When nearer drew the distant land,
When hope beat high in every breast,
Thy weary spirit sank to rest.
H. ALDERTON.
There will be a concert on Monday, sth June, which will be
about the best of the whole series. A charge of threepence will
be made, the profits going for the benefit of the Merchant
Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.
The fancy dress ball may come off, but our rapid approach to
land leaves it an uncertainty.
A photographic group will be taken of the passengers. Those
who cai-e about the memento, please advise Mr. Clifford.
CRIBBAGE TOURNAMENT.
FIRST HEAT.
Mr. Taylor beat Mrs. Berridge.
Mr. Baker „ Mr. Hopper.
Mr. Mann „ Mr. Mather.
Mr. Matthews „ Mr. Mackenzie.
Mr. Hills „ Mr. Gaillard.
Captain Berridge „ Mr. Paterson.
Mr. Jones „ Mr. Alder ton.
SECOND HEAT.
Mr. Hills beat Mr. Mann.
Captain Berridge „ Mr, Baker.
Mr, Taylor „ Mr. Matthews.
Mr. Jones, a bye.
THIRD HEAT,
Captain Berridge beat Mr. Hills.
Mr. Taylor „ Mr. Jones
FINAL HEAT,
Mr. Taylor beat Captain Berridge.
First prize.
LAST READING OF THE GAZETTE.
On the evening of Saturday, the 2nd of June, the sixth and
final number of the Superb Gazette was read. Mr. H. Gaillard
stated, in the absence of Mr. Routledge, that owing to the cordial
way in which the Gazette had been received by nearly everyone
on board, it would, as they were perhaps aware, be printed on
their arrival in Melbourne. (Applause.) He now asked the
meeting to nominate two officers of the ship to act in con-
junction with the editorial staff, to see all the particulars
satisfactorily carried out. Mr. Ridley then proposed Captain
Berridge as one of the committee, which was seconded by
Mr. Kennedy. Mr Stephens proposed, and Dr. Connor
seconded, Mr, F. V. Vale, the second officer. Both these
names were received with enthusiasm, and were elected unani-
mously. Captain Berridge then rose, and after expressing the
great pleasure it was for him to serve on the committee, proposed
in his usual genial way a hearty vote of thanks to the editorial
staff. These gentlemen, he said, had spent a great deal of time
and trouble throughout the voyage in conducting the paper, and
he believed everyone felt thankful to them for their labours.
When they reached Melbourne, and the paper was printed, he
felt sure that all who had a copy would treasure it very much,
as a pleasing memento of a happy and successful voyage. This
was seconded by Mr. Dawson, amid general cheering, which was
renewed when Mr, Gaillard rose to return thanks as one of the
staff. He expressed the willingness with which he had filled his
humble capacity, but would state that undoubtedly Mr. Routledge
was entitled to the most praise. However, what little work he
had done towards the production of the paper was freely given,
and he thanked them most sincerely for their cordial vote of thanks.
Mr. Harry Alderton, who was also loudly cheered, next addressed
the meeting. Like his colleague, Mr. Gaillard, his work had
always been a “ labour of love; ” and although at times, par*
ticularly in the tropics, he felt rather lazy, he had always tried to
do his best. He was glad that the paper was so well received,
and was exceedingly obliged to the meeting for the hearty vote
of thanks that had been accorded him. The energetic hon.
secretary (Mr, Stephens), whose valuable services had always
been so much appreciated, was then thanked by the captain, in
which all present heartily concurred.
OUR LAST CONCERT.
On Tuesday, 6th J une, the last concert was given in the saloon
(Mr. Clifford in the chair), and proved a great success. All the
available talent had been got together, and everything passed off
with eclat. The programme, which was an unusually lengthy
one, was gone through in a most praiseworthy style ; each per-
former was heartily cheered—in fact, encores were the order of
the evening. Below we give the programme in full: —
Song - - “ Champagne Charley ” - Mr. Stephens
Piauo Duet - ■'Madame AngOt ” - {
Song - - “ Over the Garden Wall ” - Mr. Mackenzie
Song - “ Ten Thousand Miles Away ” - Mr. Vale
Song - • “ The Silver Cup ” - Mr. F. Carter
Duet - “ When the Wind Blows in ( Mrs. Berridge
from the Sea ” j Mr. Sellen
Song - - “ That Awful Little Scrub ” - Mr. Routledge
“ God Save the Queen.”
Where all were so good it is difficult to particularize, but we
must certainly say that the singing of Mrs. Berridge and Mr.
Sellen was the feature of the evening, as was also the piano solo
by Mr. Webb, played with considerable skill; nor must we omit
to mention the first appearance of Mr. Dawson.
After the concert was brought to a close, the chairman, as chief
of the entertainment committee, rose, and in a few words thanked
Captain Berridge for the kindly interest he had always taken
during the voyage in the series of entertainments that were now
brought to a conclusion. He then pi*esented him with an
address, signed by the whole of the passengers, which read as
follows:
“ Ship ‘ Superb,’
“ 6th June, 1882.
“ Captain Berridge.
“Dear Sir, —Before the termination of this voyage, which is
now so rapidly drawing to a close, we, the undersigned passengers,
think it but right that there should be some public and general
expression given to testify to you our warmest gratitude for, and
appreciation of, your unremitting kindness to us, your attention
to our comfort and many wants during the time the good ship
Superb has been our home, your entiring efforts to further our
concerts, entertainments, and general amusements, in which you
have been ever ready to take part when called upon, if your
many duties would permit. In after years, when recalling to our
memories the events of this period of our lives, we shall always
link you with our most pleasant recollections. In bidding fare-
well, we all unite in wishing you health and happiness, and that
you may long continue to fulfil the duties of the proud position
you now so ably occupy. We would tender, through you, our
cordial and sincere thanks to Messrs. Barker, Yale, Jones, Mann,
and Dr, Connor, the officers of the ship, for the kindness and
courtesy which have characterized our intercourse with them, and
for the valuable assistance they have given us in various ways.
“ Lastly, but by no means least, to Mrs. Berridge we desire to
express the pleasure we have found in her company ; she, with
you, has been indefatigable in her endeavours to promote our
happiness; and we trust she may long be spared to you in your
voyage through life.”


The Captain, in acknowledging the presentation, said :
“ Ladies and Gentlemen, —I must say lam a little taken by
surprise, though very agreeably so, by this kind expression of
your feelings at this time, which we pray God may be the safe
conclusion of our voyage. We met on board three months ago,
the majority of us strangers, and during that time we had our
share of fair weather and foul, joys and sorrows, clouds and sun-
shine, as is the case with the work-a-day world we left for a
time, but through all we have not broken the bond of good-fellow-
ship with which we started.
“ The captain of a ship has many anxieties into which few can
fully enter; but at such times, next to the efficiency and
co-operation of my officers and crew (in both of which I have been
particularly fortunate), there is nothing that could have so helped
to cheer me as the kindly feeling and good wishes of my passengers,
and in the name of my officers and myself I beg to thank you
most heartily, and hope you will remember your passage to Mel-
bourne in the Superb with pleasure. Permit me to wish you
every success in the several paths which you intend to pursue.”
A surprise was now in store for him. At the conclusion of
the Captain’s speech Mr. Clifford again rose, and stated that
the saloon passengers, wishing to show their appreciation in a
more substantial form, had got up a testimonial—amounting to
about eleven pounds. They should be very pleased when they
reached Melbourne to expend it in any article the Captain would
like, and they trusted he would accept it with their several kind
wishes.
shortly be reported in Melbourne. A pretty sight was to see the
Macedon , of Melbourne. No run recorded.
Friday, 9th June.—Light airs and calms all day. Saw Cape
Schanck. About 8 p.m. we hove-to outside the Heads. No run
recorded.
Saturday, 10th June.—-Pilot came on board at 8 a.m. and took
charge. At 10 a.m. sighted a vessel being towed out of the
Heads, which vessel left the tug about noon. We then signalled
for the tug, we having a head wind. She came to us and took us
in tow. We entered the Heads at about 1 p.m., and cast anchor
off Sandridge at 1 a.m. Sunday.
CONCLUSION.
The tug and pilot again met us at 6 a.m., and the pier was
reached at 11 a.m., when the passengers disembarked.
FAREWELL !
(Lines written for the last issue of the Superb Gazette.)
Farewell ! across life’s devious path
We wander, nevermore to meet,
And think of hours that pleasure hath
Endeared to us ; but oh ! how fleet —
So fleet, indeed, we did not mind
The trifles that sprung to disturb
Our little “ world” on tide and wind,
Our gallant Blackwall ship, Superb.
The Captain, who was evidently affected at this additional
proof of the good feeling that existed between himself and pas-
sengers, said that he and his wife would always treasure any
remembrance, be it ever so small, that would recall to their
minds the happy days that had been spent by all.
“ Auld Lang Syne ” was then given, and a vote of thanks was
tendered to the entertainment committee. This was proposed
by Mr. Gaillard, and seconded by Captain Berridge. Mr.
Routledge also eulogized their efforts in a few words.
Farewell ! my friends, the time draws nigh—
That time when we each other’s face
Shall see in tears, part with a sigh,
Those friends that did our pastimes grace ;
Whose kindness showed itself in deeds,
Deeds on our mem’ries deeply graven ;
In years shall spring up from the seeds
Thoughts that our firesides will enliven.
Farewell! we leave our “own” Superb
For other folks to travel by,
And pray that nought the heart will curb
Of him whose tact and careful eye
Guided our feet o’er oceans deep,
Regardless of the boisterous gale,
Whom idle eyes ne’er closed in sleep,
But careful trimmed to wind each sail.
OUR DAILY DOINGS.
Saturday, 3rd June.—A lovely day—fair!wind and smooth
sea. We are going along at a good pace; signalled a ship on the
port bow. Shoal of porpoises sported around us. Superb Gazette
read in the saloon by Mr. Stephens, Day’s run, 181 knots.
Sunday, 4th June.—Fine, moderate breeze. We are five
hundred miles away from Cape Otway, so all hope that this will
be the last Sunday on board. Divine service morning and
evening. Day’s run, 181 knots.
Monday, sth June.—Fine clear morning; late numbers in the
sweep looking up. Lots of birds about; Mr. Clifford caught
two albatrosses, one weighing eighteen pounds, measuring across
the wings ten feet one inch, and the second thirteen pounds.
Great preparations going on for landing; anchoi'S both made
x’eady to drop. Day’s run, 266 knots.
Tuesday, 6th June.—Fine clear morning. Everyone excited
more or less. Last concert was given in the saloon. Captain
Berridge was presented with an address. Day’s run, 140 knots.
Wednesday, 7th June. —Land ahead. Sighted Cape Bridge-
water about 9.30 a.m., and at about 1 p.m, Julia Percy island.
Great excitement prevails throughout the ship. Some rather
noisy. Many of us remained up until early in the nlorning to
see the light from Cape Otway. It was first seen at 1 o’clock
a.m. Wind fair. Day’s run, 153 knots.
Thursday, Bth June.—Off Cape Otway ; glorious sight; mag-
nificent sunrise. Sea quite calm. Signalled Otway, and shall
Farewell! “ another doth remain ”
To whom our gratitude we’ll prove,
Our chief-mate Barker—honoured name—
What pleasure ours with him to rove.
This pen I lay down with regret,
And pray nought will your plans disturb ;
In that strange land read our Gazette,
And think of days in “ our Superb
Farewell! my pen refuses yet
To leave this page on which is wrote
The little words “ you wont forget,”
That sounds, alas ! our parting note.
And if, perchance, we ever meet,
Our gains, our losses, to relate,
Let’s rest the wearied, tired feet,
And deeds of kindness emulate.
G. MATSON.
KM June, 1882.
ONE MORE FAREWELL !
If single you are, when afar,
Still think of me— double-you-are.
W. R.
Printed by Walker May and Co., 9 Mackillop Street, Melbourne.


:- fc
