

Z.uob




P 3
O
H
O
8
w
CO
O
W
w
W
H




THE
ECONOMY OF RAILWAYS
CONSIDERED CHIEFLY WITH REFERENCE TO
THE AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
TOGETHER WITH
REMARKS ON HORSE TRACTION, APPLIED TO
RAILWAYS AND TRAMWAYS.
WITH VARIOUS ILLUSTEATIONS.
Jxjebmck S. |jepmonu, C.(£.
u Prove all things: hold fast to that which is good.
SYDNEY:
GIBBS, SHALLARD, & CO., STEAM LITHOGRAPHERS, 108 PITT STREET,




TO HIS EXCELLENCY
Honorable tin 6ad jof gdmore,
GOVERNOR,
€omniander-in-Chief of the Colony of New South Wales, and
Vice-Admiral of the same :
THE FOLLOWING BRIEF ESSAY ON THE
“ECONOMY OF RAILWAYS,”
CONSIDERED CHIEFLY WITH REFERENCE TO THE AUSTRALASIAN
COLONIES, EMBRACING A SUBJECT OF
VAST IMPORTANCE TO THE FUTURE WELFARE AND PROSPERITY OF
THE COLONIES GENERALLY,
AND MORE PARTICULARLY OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
IS MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,
BY HIS OBEDIENT SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.
Sydney, January, 1870.




(L'k dtronomn of |lailtoans.
The writer of the following pages, when the first railway in
Australia, from Sydney to Parramatta, was in course of con-
struction, and before the railways of New South Wales had
been taken in hand by the Government, advocated, in the
columns of the Empire and of the Englishman a less costly
mode of construction for Australia than that which had been
adopted in the densely-populated countries of Europe, and
particularly in that of Great Britain, whose costly high speed
railways are the result of centuries of civilisation, of a ple-
thora of wealth seeking for profitable investment, and of an
overflowing population engaged for the most part in com-
mercial and manufacturing pursuits, whose time literally is
money. It may now, however, be fairly questioned whether
the stupendous system of inland transport at present in
operation in Great Britain, a system which extends over
upwards of 14,500 miles, which annually sends its trains
over more than 140 millions of miles, which carries about
300 millions of passengers each year, and which earns
upwards of 40 millions sterling per annum, has not been car-
ried out in too recklessly expensive a manner, and whether
the enormous sums which have been so lavishly expended
by many of the English Railway Companies, might not, to a
great extent, have been dispensed with, and an equally good
result obtained at a considerably reduced cost.
According to authentic returns, the passenger traffic on
the railways of Great Britain amounted, in 18G8, to ten
times the population; in other words, every individual
made ten journeys by rail annually, and was conveyed at three
times the speed, and at about one-third of the cost of travel-
ling by coach, whilst the cost of conveyance of merchandise,
* In 1853-4.


minerals, and agricultural produce has been reduced to about
one-fourth of the rates per ton charged on turnpike roads.
These results and advantages have, however, been obtained
at an enormous outlay of capital, as it appears that in shares
and loans a grand total of about 483 millions had been paid
up and expended on the 14,500 miles of railway then open.
The total receipts from all sources somewhat exceeded 38
millions in 1866, and the working expenses being nearly 19
millions, the net receipts amounted to £19,352,681, so that
the working expenses amounted to about 49 per cent., an
amount which might unquestionably be much reduced if
ruinous competition, with reckless and often useless outlay,
had not too often prevailed in the management of many of
the great English Railway Companies. The total number of
passengers travelling annually on the railways of the United
'Kingdom may at present (1869) be taken at 300 millions,
the actual number in 1866 having been 274,408,895, —to
convey these travellers the number of passenger trains in
that year amounted to 3,741,086, so that on an average each
ti'ain conveyed only 80 passengers ! There were more than
8000 locomotive engines, and about 280,000 vehicles of all
kinds employed on the railways in 1866, and besides the
interest on the capital represented by these (which certainly
exceeded 50 millions) the mere expenses and renewals
amounted annually to upwards of £1,500,000. The average
cost of British railways is estimated at £39,000 per mile,
while many of them have cost double this sum. In a coun-
try like New South Wales, which at present (1869) contains
about 470,000 inhabitants, of whom 115,000 are resident in
Sydney and its suburbs, and the remainder are scattered over
an area of 324,000 square miles (being little more than one
inhabitant to each square mile), it appears that the real
question at issue is, where the cost of constructing railways
is a matter of serious consideration, how to expend the
money required for these works in the most suitable and
advantageous manner. It certainly behoves the best inter-
ests of the colony to extend her railways throughout the
entire length and breadth of the whole country, and as a
great public benefit and convenience, it is only right that


they should be paid for by all the inhabitants, even although
many of them may not derive any direct or immediate benefit
from their construction. But, at the same time, it is abso-
lutely necessary that the cost should be kept down to the
lowest possible limit consistent with efficiency and safety.
We cannot jump at once from the lowest to the highest
point in the scale of improvement in internal communication
in a country possessing less than half a million of inhabitants
scattered over an area larger than that of Great Britain and
Trance combined, and in which the inhabitants are for the
most part engaged in pastoral pursuits, and the introduction
of the costly high speed railway, with all its attendant and
inevitable expenses in such a country, except for the great
leading arteries or main trunk lines, must involve an amount
of expenditure out of all proportion to the circumstances or
requirements of the country, and which no probable colonial
revenue could bear.
It appears from the abstract of the Estimates proposed
for 1870 by the Honorable the Colonial Treasurer of New
South Wales, that the sum of £470,000 is required to pay
the annual interest on colonial debentures ; also that the
sum of 2 millions will be required in that year for the exten-
sion and completion of colonial railways. Assuming that
debentures for this amount are issued, beai’ing interest at the
rate of 5 per cent., the sum of £lOO,OOO will be added to the
£470,000 now due annually, or a sum total of £570,000 at
the end of 1870, and as the present population of the colony
is 470,000, it follows that each inhabitant must be taxed to
the extent of about 245. per annum in* order to pay this
interest, assuming that the public works for which this
money is required are not productive of any profit. But as
the railways of New South Wales, according to the last pub-
lished returns, pay about 2 per cent, over and above their
working expenses, and taking the gross expenditure upon
them up to the end of 1869 at six millions sterling, there
remains a deficit of three per cent, upon this amount to be
made up in order to pay the interest, or the sum of £lBO,OOO,
which, on a population of 470,000, amounts to about Bs. per
head per annum for railways alone.


With her vast unalienatecl territory, the Colony of New
South Wales has an enormous estate to offer as a security
for her railway or other debentures, but if her railways do
not become more profitable, the amount of her indebtedness
on this score must go on in an annually increasing ratio with
every new line or extension of existing lines that is opened,
and will become an incubus weighing heavily on the colony,
and as the time is rapidly approaching when the first instal-
ment of her debentures will fall due, it behoves our legisla-
tors and financiers to look this question fully in the face,
inasmuch as a large portion of her railway and other deben-
tures will inevitably have to be paid out of the general reve-
nue. These considerations are of great moment to the inha-
habitants of this colony, while in the sister colony of Victoria,
affairs do not appear to be any better, inasmuch as the 25:1
miles of railway opened in that colony in 1869 have cost
something over .£31,000 per mile, or a gross sum of about
eight millions sterling, for which Victoria has become
indebted to the debenture holders. What the present value
of these 254 miles of railway may be, is a different question,
but it certainly does appear that the money has been most
recklessly expended, more particularly when the present
Engineer-in-Chief for Railways in Victoria estimates that
the sum of <£9ooo per mile is sufficient for the construction
of a single line of railway in that colony.
Speaking in round numbers, Victoria contains 55
millions of acres, of which 10 millions have been alienated, or
are dedicated to roads; 2 millions of acres are used as
commons; 27 millions are occupied for pastoral purposes; and
16 millions have not as yet (1869) been applied to any use.
If, therefore, we add the unalienated portions together, we
find that there are as yet unsold in Victoria about 43 millions
of acres, which represent the public estate of that colony
available as a security for her debentures.
The proposed North-Eastern Railway from Melbourne
to Albury, a distance of 186 miles, will shortly form another
link in the great trunk line from Sydney to Melbourne, the
whole distance between the two cities being, by this route,
506 miles, and as the railway to Goulburn (121 miles) is


now completed, there remains a gap in this line of about 200
miles to be constructed by New South Wales. There
certainly can be no reason why this portion of the Great
Southern line should not be constructed, with as little delay
as possible, in the same solid and substantial manner as the
line to Go alburn, and, assuming that the cost per mile,
inclusive of stations and rolling stock, will not exceed
£15,000, it will require three millions of money to complete
this portion of the line from Sydney to Melbourne. But if it
can be shown that the cost can be reduced to £IO,OOO per
mile, then this colony will save one million of money, and
there can be little doubt that a single line can be constructed
in the best manner for this amount, if extravagant bridges,
tunnels, viaducts, and other works of art are avoided. The
Yarna Railway, in Turkey, the greater part of which is on
an incline of 1 in 42, cost but half this sum, inclusive of
rolling stock and stations, and with rails weighing 681bs. to
the yard and engines of 30 tons weight, while Mr.
Higinbotham, the Engineer-in-Chief of Railways in Victoria,
estimates that the sum of £9OOO per mile is amply sufficient
for the construction of a single line of railway in that colony.
It is obvious that the inducements to expend capital and
labor on railways or other public works in any country, are
the fair and reasonable expectations that the money and
labor so expended will not only effect a great public benefit,
but will also yield a moderate return, by way of interest, on
the capital expended ; and in all such undertakings, whether
at home or in the colonies, it is a great mistake to suppose
that the cost may be left entirely out of view, or that the
construction of railways throughout all the colonies is only to
be limited to their ability to raise money by the Government
pledging the credit of the colony for such loans to the extent
which would be required in an extended scheme of railway
extension throughout the entire length and breadth of each
colony. A Government doing this must also be prepared to
make up any deficiency that may take place in the net
returns of such undertakings, which must necessarily be very
uncertain, and in this way the colonial “ budget ,” or in other


words, the community , would find itself charged with a new
annual item of expenditure of no trifling amount. Extrava-
gant expenditure in the construction of colonial railways
must ultimately be paid for by the public in some shape or
other, whether it be by a high rate of charges for the
transport of goods and passengers—because cheap fares and
moderate rates of transport must depend on the previous
conditions of moderate cost in the original construction and
in the subsequent working of a line of railway or by
increased taxation on articles of necessity, in order to pay
the interest on debentures. Whatever may be the amount
°f traffic on a railway, it is certain that its profits must be
determined by the ratio which the net proceeds of the traffic
receipts bear to the prime cost of the railway, and it is
equally certain that the rate at which goods and passengers
can be profitably conveyed will be as the interest on' the
whole capital expended, added to the cost of working the
line ; and inversely as the quantity of goods or number of
passengers conveyed.
But in all countries it has been found that expedi-
tion, safety, and cheapness are the great inducements for
travelling by railway, and that, according to the degree in
which these exist, will the travelling portion of the public
use the railway in preference to the road. It has also been
found that a very large proportion of railway travellers prefer
money to time, in other words that they will patronise the
cheapest conveyance, whether it be by coach or railway, and
that a small increase in the fares of a railway has generally
been found to be accompanied by a falling off in the receipts.
That a large proportion of the travelling public in New South
Wales consists of that class which prefers the cheapest mode
of travelling (by 3rd class) is apparent, from the fact that in
1862 the per centage proportion of each class of passengers
was as under Ist class, 4-91 ; 2nd class, 33-55 ; 3rd class,
61 - 54; while the amounts received in that year from each
class were as follows Ist class, 9-99; 2nd class, 27-07;
ord class, 62-93; —so that the third class travellers amounted
to nearly two-thirds of the whole. From 1857 to 1862


inclusive, there was a steady increase of the passenger traffic
on the railways of New South Wales, but there was a
decrease in 1863, in which year the third-class for passengers
was abolished, and the fares charged were at the rate of 3d.
per mile for Ist-class and l|d. per mile for 2nd-class passen-
gers. The English rates for passengers being usually at the
rate of 3d., 2d., and Id. per mile for Ist, 2nd, and 3rd
class passengers, there seems to be no reason why these rates
should not be maintained in the colonies. It is believed
that a third class of passengers, which experience has proved
to be the most numerous in New South Wales, should be
retained, and that it is bad policy in our railway magnates
to compel 2nd and 3rd class passengers to travel together in
very indifferent carriages, which offer little accommodation
and no comfort.
The present position of the colony of New South
Wales, as regards railways, appears to be simply this : the
colony possesses a vast inland territory, estimated at about
650 miles in length, from north to south by about 750 miles
in breadth from east to west. The greater portion of this
great tract is, however, only suitable for the depasturing of
sheep and cattle, the lands being generally unsuited for
agricultural purposes, but offering in fair seasons very
extensive pasturage, more particularly to the west of the
great dividing range, or Australian “ Cordillera,” where the
country is generally open, well grassed, and pervious in
every direction, whether for roads or railways, while
interspersed throughout the country, there are plains and
downs, with occasional rich alluvial flats. This vast
continent which has been somewhat quaintly termed a
country of “ imperfect development,” in which the
deposits have not been sufficiently up-heaved by volcanic
action as to produce that variety of surface, and that
perennial supply of water, found in most other parts of the
globe, promises but a small amount of cultivable land in
proportion to its area. It is generally dispersed here and
there, in areas of comparatively small dimensions, along the
borders of water courses, in narrow valleys separated by
large tracts of table laud, and in irregular spots on the


summits of the table land, affording a diversity of soil for
which it is difficult to account.
These peculiarities have since the first occupation of the
colony led to the wide dispersion of the inhabitants, whose
flocks and herds roam over an area of about 324,000 square
miles or 207,000,000 of acres. The riverless plains and
forests of the interior are, however, comparatively valueless
except for pastoral purposes, while the lands fit for agricul-
ture are nearly in the same category, until they are made
easy of access from the coast.
The question of Roads and Railways is, in fact, the great
question of the day in all the Australasian colonies, which
although making a steady and slow progress in material
prosperity, offer for the most part only the most rough and
primitive means of internal communication. The time
will no doubt come when the large and fertile plains of the
interior of this great continent will be occupied by an
industrious population, but the way must first be prepared
for it, by the formation of roads of some kind, whether they
be railroads, tramroads, or common roads. It becomes,
therefore, a question of great interest to investigate the
various methods that have been adopted in other countries
for the improvement of their internal communication. A
railway would certainly appear to be the very best descrip-
tion of road in a country like Australia, destitute as it is of
large navigable rivers, but it by no means follows that a high
cost and high speed railway is the best for such a country.
The enquiry is the more necessary at the present time, in-
asmuch as many circumstances combine to show that the
formation of railways in the Australian colones, must for
the future be conducted in a much more prudent and
economical a manner than has hitherto been the case, and
that in a country where both capital and labor are scarce
and dear, and where great rapidity of communication is of
far less importance than increased facility and cheapness, a
more economical form of railway is to be preferred to the
more costly mode of construction. These considerations
have largely influenced the construction of the American
railways, and the system which has grown up under them


appears to be well adapted to the wants of the Australian
colonies."''
The elements which combine to make up a properly,
constructed railway, may be easily determined. The con-
struction of the permanent way is of course an object of
great importance, but it is of far greater importance that the
laying out of the line should be performed by a thoroughly-
competent engineer, to the avoidance of a heavy outlay for
deep cuttings, high embankments, and costly works of art,
such as tunnels, viaducts, and high level bridges. In other
words, neither railway engineering, nor railway construction
should be performed by incompetent persons.
The difference between the expensive high speed rail-
way, costing in these colonies from £14,000 to £16,000 per
mile, and the light railway costing from £6OOO to £BOOO
per mile of single way, consists not so much in the reduced
weight of the permanent way materials and of the engines,
as in the reduced amount of earth-work in cuttings and
embankments, and in the reduced cost of the bridges and
viaducts required. It also consists in the adoption of steeper
gradients than are commonly employed on first-class rail-
ways, for although it is unquestionably true that the
locomotive engine employs its powers to the greatest
advantage on a perfectly level railway, yet every advantage
has its money value, and in some cases may be purchased
too dearly. Safety, regularity, and economy, in the trans-
port of goods and passengers, are the first requisites in all
railways together with the increased speed, but in a country
like New South Wales, possessing less than half a million of
inhabitants, it appears totally unnecessary to construct our
railways for travelling at express speed of 45 miles an hour,
and the travelling public should be well satisfied with a
maximum speed of 30 miles an hour. Now it has been
* It appears from the “Report on the Railways of the United
States,” by Captain Douglas Galton, that there were in 1857, about
26,000 miles of railway in operation in America, of which not more
than one-sixth was double line ; the average cost at that time is
stated to be about £7OOO per mile ; it has since increased to about
£lO,OOO per mile.


proved that rails weighing 60 lbs. to the yard are amply
sufficient to permit of a speed of 30 miles an hour, with
engines weighing 30 tons, and moreover that this speed may
be increased with perfect safety to 40 miles an hour, with-
out injury to the permanent way. In the United States of
America, where the great majority of the lines are laid
single, (although provision is usually made for their being
eventually laid with double lines,) the weight of the rails
varies from 45 to 60 lbs. per yard, and the engines as a rule
seldom exceed 30 tons in weight. The speed attained
averages about 30 miles an hour, but the express trains
travel at the rate of 40 miles an hour, and for these as well
as light goods trains, a lighter description of engine is used.
Accidents, when they do occur in America, are chiefly
caused by collisions, while the cost of maintaining the lines
in good working order, arises not so much from their mode
of construction, as from the heavy frosts and rapid thaws,
to which the American climate is liable, and from which we
in Australia are exempt. And in India, the branch rail-
ways, which extend over vast tracts of the Peninsula, carry
the same rolling stock as the main lines, but at only half the
speed, and without deterioration of the permanent way.
But if heavy trains are driven at express speed over lines
not intended to bear such weights, moving at a high
velocity, it is obvious that the permanent way will soon
suffer deterioration.
There can be no question, therefore, that what are
termed “ light railways ” will, if properly constructed, and
also properly used, last as long as any other railway, and at
present, both in Burope, America, and other countries, they
are generally taking the place of the heavier and more costly
mode of construction, as they are found to be equally ser-
viceable, and more economical. The experience of the last
lo years has shown that although it maybe, and no doubt is,
consistent with sound policy to construct our great trunk
Imcs of railway in the most solid and substantial manner, to
render them fitted for carrying a large amount of heavy
traffic; yet it does not follow that the same mode of con-
struction should be applied to the minor lines and branches,


intended to act as “feeders” to the main trunk lines. The
railway system, as it exists at present in all the colonies of
Australia, is necessarily limited and imperfect, forming only
links in a general chain of communication, which will no
doubt ultimately extend throughout the country. The great
trunk lines are the first links of this chain, and the branch
lines, or “ feeders,” have to be added, as, without these, the
main lines will be comparatively useless, for no system of
railways can be said to be complete which does not possess
its minor channels of communication spreading and ramify-
ing in every direction, and drawing produce from, or carry-
ing traffic into, every town, village, and hamlet in the colony.
This is what our railway system must become, or it will fall
short of its object, while to refuse to the outlying districts
of the interior the advantages to be derived from improved
means of transport would be equally impolitic and unjust.
The question is, therefore, how these minor and branch lines
are to be constructed at the least possible cost, and in the
shortest time: beai’ing in mind the fact that the present
traffic is insufficient to support the cost of a high speed rail-
way ; also, that any saving effected in the cost per mile adds
so much to the means available for the extension of such
lines. It is believed, therefore, that a cheap but substan-
tially constructed railway, although it may entail a slightly
increased cost for maintenance, is generally to be preferred
in Australia to a more perfect and costly structure, with flat
gradients and their general accompaniments, namely, heavy
earthworks, expensive viaducts, bridges, and tunnels—it
being considered inexpedient to expend more money in their
construction than will render them efficient for the work
before them. An allowance must no doubt be made, in
forming an estimate for a railway, for the increase of traffic
which always attends such works, caused by the increased
facilities offered by such improved means of transport; and
taking into consideration the powerful impulse which would
be given to the general industry of the community, a consi-
derable allowance would have to be made on this score, as
the increase of traffic on a railway has often been found to
be doubled, or even quadrupled, in a short time after its


opening. And although there certainly are cases where, in a
country as yet almost untouched by railways, like Australia,
a very small amount of actual traffic may be held to be suffi-
cient to warrant the construction of a railway in view of the
increase which is sure to take place, yet the fact should not
be lost sight of that a large and steady traffic is essentially
necessary to the financial success of any line of railway
worked by the steam locomotive. But where, as is the case
in Australia, a large extent of country lias to be traversed,
in which the population is small, and where both capital and
labor are scarce and dear, the chief object of railways is to
give access to the interior at the least possible cost, carefully
avoiding those ruinous expenses which have been incurred in
other countries by aiming at an imaginary standard of per-
fection in the construction of the line, which experience has
proved cannot sometimes be repaid even under the most
favorable conditions of an abundant traffic. The expei’ience
of all countries shows that improvements in the art of loco-
motion have been progressive, and that, together with in-
creased facilities of communication, there must exist the con-
ditions and the ability to profit by them ; and this, in a
country like Australia, can only be acquired by degrees.
It is believed that what is wanted is a permanent way,
which can be laid cheaply and expeditiously through the
forests and over the plains of the interior of this vast conti-
nent, and which shall provide a certain means of transport,
at moderate speeds and at low rates of conveyance. It is in
the great Riverine district, bordering on the Murmmbidgee
and Murray livers, that light inexpensive railways are essen-
tially required, and it is believed that the sum of £SOOO per
mile would be found to be amply sufficient to provide a single
line of rails, together with the rolling stock for this district.
Horse traction might in the first instance be employed, as in
South Australia, until the exigencies of the traffic required
the powerful aid of the locomotive engine. Indeed, it appeal’s
probable that some description of light railway, capable of
being worked either by horse power or by the steam loco-
motive, will eventually become the leading system of trans-
port in all the colonies, and there can be little doubt that if


a well arranged system of “ road railways ” were established,
giving ready access to every town and village of the interior,
and affording a cheap and expeditious means of sending pro-
duce to the coast, no circumstance would tend more to
develope the internal resources of tins great continent, and
to place its affairs on a basis of sound prosperity. In a great
commercial and manufacturing country like Great Britain,
where time, to the merchant and manufacturer, literally is
money, a costly railway policy maybe justifiable, but in Aus-
tralia these conditions do not exist, and can only be the result
of centuries of civilization, of a dense population, of cheap labor,
and of a great abundance of floating as well as of fixed capital.
JlaHtoiuis of JUto Scufjj Males.
It appears from the Report of the Commissioner for Rail-
ways in New South Wales, published in 1866, that up to the
end of 1864 there were (including the Pitt-street tramway)
145 miles of railway open for traffic, at a cost of £2,631,790,
being at the rate of .£18,150 per mile, inclusive of machinery
and rolling stock, while the cost of the 14 miles of the great
trunk railway from Sydney to Parramatta (including the
Darling Harbour branch) is stated to be £620,499, or at the
rate of £44,321 per mile. It also appears that the traffic
receipts in 1864 amounted to £145,653, while the working
expenses amounted to £103,714 or £715 per mile, leaving
the sum of £43,938 as the net earnings, and giving 1,669
per cent by way of interest on the capital of £2,631,790.
The number of passengers conveyed in 1864 is put down at
693,174, and the quantity of goods at 379,661 tons, so that
the working expenses absorbed at that time upwards of 70
per cent, of the gross receipts, an amount which appears
large as compared with 49 per cent on British railways.*
* The working expenses absorb at present it is believed about GO
per cent.


The railways of New South Wales, although essentially
one concern as the property of the Government, are naturally
separated into two great divisions, the one having its ter
minus at Sydney, and the other at Newcastle, upwards of 60
miles distant. The former consists of a great trunk line, two
main branches, and one subsidiary branch; the latter of a
great trunk line, with one subsidiary branch. The great
trunk line, from its commencement at Sydney to its junction
with the Great Southern and Western lines near Parramatta,
consists of a double line of way and works. The length of
this line is 13 miles, and the principal works on it consist of
the head station at Sydney, a viaduct at Long Cove, besides
various bridges and intermediate stations. Considering that
the large amount of £620,499 was spent upon this line
(including the Darling Harbor branch), it is remarkable how
little there is to show for this expenditure, the works gene-
rally being quite insignificant. In September, 1855, the
Sydney and Parramatta Pailway was opened to the public.
The Great Southern line commences at the Parramatta
Junction, and proceeds through Liverpool and Picton to
Marulan and Goulburn. From Parramatta to Liverpool
there is a single line of rail, with works for a double line,
and from Liverpool to Picton and Marulan the line of way
and works is single. The length of the section from Liver-
pool to Picton is 40 miles, and it was completed in 1863, at
a cost of £659,016, being at the rate of £16,475 per mile.
The extension of the line from Picton to Marulan was com-
pleted and opened for traffic in 1868, while the remaining
portion of the Great Southern line to Goulburn was opened
for traffic in May, 1869, the total distance from the Parra-
matta Junction to Goulburn being miles.
There are some expensive works upon this line, of which
a brief notice will be given. * The viaduct at Picton is built
in masonry set in cement, and consists of 5 spans of 40 feet
opening each. The arches are semicircular, and are on an
incline of lin 40. In consequence of its proximity to Pic.
* These particulars are chiefly taken from the Report of the Com-
missioner for Railways, published at Sydney in 1866.


Timber framing
... <£15,152
Masonry
... 46,195
Ironwork
... 33,214
Total...
... £94,561
ton station, it has been built for a double line of rails. Its
entire length is 276 feet, and its extreme height, from foun-
dations to rail level, is 78 feet. The total cost of this viaduct
was £10,437, being at the rate of £37 16s. per lineal foot.
The tunnel through the Redbank Range is 198 yards in
length, lined with brickwork set in cement throughout, and
is constructed for a single line of rail. In form it is ellipti-
cal, 15 feet wide in its widest part, and 17 feet high from
rail level to soffit of arch. The cost, including excavation,
which was to a great extent through hard shale, was
£10,653 15s, being at the rate of £53 16s. per lineal yard.
There is another tunnel 572 yards in length, where the line
crosses the Mittagong Range at Gibraltar Gap, the excava-
tion for which was through hard shale and sandstone. This
tunnel is of the same form and dimensions as that through
the Redbank Range. There is a very costly and handsome
wrought iron girder bridge over the river Nepean at Menan-
gle, consisting of three spans of 150 feet each, standing on
stone piers of solid masonry. The length of this bridge, as
originally designed, was 496 feet, but in consequence of the
unprecedented height of the flood of 1860, it was found
necessary to raise and extend the superstructure in order to
place it above the flood level, and its total length, as exe-
cuted, (including the timber approaches) is 1909 feet. In
this structure there are 5909 cubic yards of masonry, 1089
cubic yards of brickwork, and 935| tons of iron, and its total
cost was as follows, viz. :
The cost of this bridge, therefore, per lineal foot, and inclu-
sive of the timber approaches, is at the rate of £49 10s., and
if we omit the cost of the timber framing, and take only the
actual length of the bridge (496 feet) we find the cost of the
masonry, brickwork, and ironwork to be £79,309, being
within a fraction at the rate of £l6O per lineal foot.


The timber viaduct over the Wingecarribbee river near
to Bong Bong, consists of 38 openings of 26 feet span each,
and is 1048 feet in length. The greatest height from the
surface of the ground to rail level is 25 feet. There ai’e 10
more timber viaducts or bridges, three of which are on the
north, and seven on the south side of the Marulan station.
The whole of these viaducts are built of ironbark timber of
the best quality, the superstructure being carried on framed
timber piers formed by piling. There are also two timber
bridges for carrying the public road over the railway, one at
the Marulan station, and the other near to the second cross-
ing of the Wollondilly river. There are five viaducts, con-
structed with stone and brick piers, and wrought iron girder
superstructure, the first being that over Barber’s Creek, 3
miles north of the Marulan station. This viaduct consists
of 5 spans, of 60 feet each in the clear, and built on the
square. The piers are all of dressed freestone laid in Port-
land cement. The superstructure is composed of wrought
iron single plate girders, made in the usual way ; the main
longitudinal girders, which are fixed non-continuously, are
each 65 feet 8 inches in length, and of a uniform depth of
4 feet 7 inches; the width of the top flange is 15 inches,
and the bottom 20 inches, the centre web-plate varying in
thickness from 5-16ths to half an inch. Each cross girder is
constructed of a single plate 14 feet in length and 13 inches
in depth, the top and bottom flanges being formed of angle
iron. These cross girders are placed 3 feet apart from centre
to centre, and are firmly rivetted to the web of the main
girders. The width between the parapets is 15 feet 2 inches.
The second viaduct is that over the river Wollondilly,
8 miles from Marulan, and 12 miles from Goulburn. This
viaduct is built on the square, i. e., at right angles to the
course of the river. It consists of 7 spans of 60 feet each,
and of 1 span of 130 feet. This opening spans the main
course of the river, and the total length of the viaduct is 616
feet, the height from the ordinary surface water to the level
of the rails being 43 feet. There are 7 piers, and 2 abut-
ment piers, built of brick laid in cement, with dressed stone
imposts, pilasters, caps, &c., which carry the iron superstruc-


ture, composed of wrought iron girders. The main longitu-
dinal girders for the 130 feet span are what is termed “ box
girders they are 140 feet long, and of an uniform depth of
10 feet throughout. The plates forming the sides of the box
to each girder are single plates 3 feet wide, and those forming
the top and bottom flanges are each 30 inches wide and vary
in number, length, and thickness. The total cost of this
viaduct is £27,900, being at the rate of about £45 per lineal
foot.
The third viaduct, which also spans the Wollondilly
river about 12 miles from Marulan, consists of 6 spans of 60
feet each, and 1 span of 130 feet. It is of the same design
and material as the last, excepting that it is built on the
skew, forming an angle of 661 degrees with the line of rail-
way. Its total length is 606 feet, the height of the rails
above the water is 45 feet, and its total cost is <£30,000,
being at the rate of £49 10s. per lineal foot.
The fourth viaduct is that over Boxer’s Creek, at its
confluence with the Wollondilly river. It consists of 2 spans
of 60 feet each, built on the square, and of the same design
and material as those already described. The height of the
rails above the ordinary water level is 45 feet, the total
length is 205 feet, and its cost is £7150, being at the rate of
£34 17s. per lineal foot.
The fifth viaduct is that over the Mulwarree Creek,
near to the town of Goulburn. It consists of 12 spans of
60 feet each ; it has 11 piers and 2 abutments, built at an
angle of 481 degrees with the line of railway, and is of the
same design and material as those before described. The
height of the rails above the ordinary water level is 34 feet,
the total length is 862 feet, and its cost is £33,000, being at
the rate of £3B ss. per foot.*
At the distance of 91 miles from Sydney, the Great
Southern Railway attains its greatest elevation, the rails
being 2357 feet above high water mark- in Sydney Harbor.
The steepest gradient on the line is 1 in 30, and the smallest
* For these particulars the writer is indebted to a description given
of this part of the line by Mr. Mason, assistant engineer.


radius of a curve is 30 chains. The permanent way rests upon
broken stone ballast, fixed with a margin of stones on each
side. The sleepers upon which the rails are laid are chiefly
ofironbark and boxwood, each being 9 feet long and 10 x 5
scantling, the greater portion being rectangular. The total
width of the ballasting is 13 feet from outside to outside of
the border stones. The rails are 75 lbs. per lineal yard,
fixed in cast iron chairs, which are secured to the sleepers by
6-inch wrought iron spikes. The rails are fixed in the chairs
with compressed elm keys, and secured at the joints by fish
plates and bolts, the whole forming a sound and substantial
permanent way, and reflecting the greatest credit on the enoi-
neer for thisline as well as on the contractor.
The Great Western Railway starts from the Parramatta
junction and proceeds to Penrith, a distance of 21 miles,
with a single line of way and works. This section of the
line was completed in 1862, at a cost of £293,979, being at
the rate of £13,999 per mile. The short branch from
Blacktown to Richmond was completed in 1864, at a cost
of £68,861. Prom Penrith the line crosses the Nepean
River on a bridge constructed of three openings of 186 feet
clear span each. The four piers are built in ashlar masonry
set in Portland cement, and are carried down 6 feet below
the ordinary bed of the river, resting on a foundation of hard
shale. The total length of the bridge, exclusive of the
timber approaches on each side, is 612 feet j the height from
the foundations to the level of the rails is 65 feet, and the
width between the main girders is 25 feet 6 inches. The
superstructure is of iron and is designed to carry the Great
W estern Road, in addition to a single line of rails. The
total quantity of masonry in the bridge is 5529 cubic yards,
and the total weight of the ironwork, consisting of two main
gilders of the box form, each 594 feet in length, and of an
extreme depth of 13 feet, and of numerous iron cross girders
1 lnc bes deep, is 1100 tons. The cost of the superstruc-
ture was about £41,700, being at the rate of about £6B per
lineal foot.
The timber viaduct constructed on the east side of the
-Nepean to carry the road and railway, consists of 64 spans


of 26 feet opening, and is 1672 feet in length. The total
quantity of timber used in it was 35,627 cubic feet; the iron-
work in pile shoes, bolts, straps, and spikes was 38,531 lbs.;
and the entire cost, including painting in three coats, was
£8716.
The viaduct over the “ Knapsack Gully ” consists of
five spans of 50 feet each and two spans of 20 feet each. It
is built in masonry set in Portland cement, and is adapted
for single line of rails, on an incline of lin 30. The total
length of the viaduct is 388 feet, and the greatest height,
from the foundation to the level of the rails, is 126 feet.
The total quantity of masonry is 6713 cubic yards, and the
total cost was £22,724, being at the rate of £5B 11s. per
lineal foot,
The tunnel through Mount Clarence is 539 yards in
length, and is of the same form and dimensions as the Picton
and Gibraltar tunnels on the Great Southern line. At the
entrance to the Clarence tunnel, at a distance of miles
from Sydney, the Great Wfistern Railway attains its greatest
elevation between Sydney and Bathurst, the rails being 3658
feet above high-water mark in Sydney Harbor. The steepest
gradient on the line is 1 in 30, and the smallest radius of a
curve is 8 chains. The cost of the line from Penrith to
Bathurst, a distance of 111 miles, was originally estimated
at £1,110,000 or £lO,OOO per mile, but it is believed that,
owing to the engineering difficulties, the average cost will
be fully £16,000 per mile.
The Great Northern Railway commences at Newcastle
and consists of a double line of way and works to the
“ Wallsend Junction,” a distance of about 4 miles. From
this point to East Eaitland there is a single line of way with
works for a double line, and the extension from East Mait-
land to Singleton and Musclebrook has a single line of way
and works throughout. The short branch from East Mait-
land to Morpeth has also single way and works, and the rails
are laid on wooden cross sleepers, with the double-headed
rail, weighing 75 lbs. per lineal yard. The extension of the
line from Singleton to Musclebrook was completed, and the
line opened for traffic in 1869.


The railway bridge over the Hunter at Singleton
consists of five spans of 80 feet each, and of two openings of
14 feet span each. The piers and abutments are built in
ashlar masonry set in Portland cement. Its total length is
523 feet; the maximum height, from foundations to rail
level, is 80 feet \ and the width between the parapets is 27
feet 6 inches. The steepest gradient on the line is lin 23,
and the smallest radius of a curve is 20 chains.
The cost of the Great Northern Railway to Musclebrook
has been as follows :
Newcastle to West Mait-
land
£383,565
Cost per Mile
West Maitland to Sin-
gleton
jSingleton to Musclebrook
Singleton bridge and ap-
proaches
336,669
275,000
£19,178
51,300
Total.
£1,046,534
11,609
8,900
£13,081
These sums are exclusive of machinery and rolling stock,
for which an additional sum of £l5OO per mile may safely
be estimated, making the average cost obout £14,600 per
mile.
Mbtfj of (Mirage.
It is somewhat remarkable that although an Act was
passed in 1852, fixing the guage of all railways in Australia
at 5 feet 3 inches, on the recommendation of experienced and
unprejudiced engineers in England, yet in the following year
this Act was repealed, and the guage of the railways in New
South Wales was fixed at the old narrow standard of 4 feet
inches. It is much to be regretted that the particular


measure of feet, inches, and fractions of an inch, which con-
stitutes the English narrow guage, and which has nothing
to recommend it, unless it he the mere accident of its having
been originally adopted for British railways, should have
been sanctioned by the Legislature of New South Wales,
in opposition to the opinions of Captain Galton, R.E., and
other experienced engineers, who strongly deprecated its
adoption in this colony, and who recommended the 5 feet
3 inch guage as now used in Victoria, South Australia,
Canada, and Ireland. Mr. Wallace, however, who was the
Government Engineer for Railways in New South Wales in
1853, reports thus on the subject of guage:—“The narrow
guage has been found to combine, in a higher degree than
any other, the great commercial requisites for a railway,
namely, speed, safety, convenience, and economy. Eor these
reasons it has been adopted, with little exception, throughout
Europe and America, and in India and Egypt, where the
highest engineering talent has been employed. Had a wider
guage been considered an improvement it would, no doubt,
have been adopted, but such has not been the case. In both
these countries the narrow guage has been determined on,”
—(Note.)
These statements of Mr. Wallace, which no doubt
determined the Government of New South Wales to adopt
the narrow guage, require a little investigation. Thus India,
with 3943 miles of railway open in 1868, has generally
adopted the wide guage of 5 feet 6 inches, although there is
one instance of the, extremely narrow guage of 3 feet 6
inches having been adopted on a short line to act as a feeder
to the Madras railway, which has a 5 feet 6 inch guage.
And the Secretary of State for India has refused to sanction
the construction of any lines having a narrower guage. The
guage of American railways varies from 4 feet 8| inches to
6 feet, of which the New York and Erie line is an example.
The guage of the railways in Canada is 5 feet 3 inches, as in
Ireland. It is incorrect, therefore, to state that the narrow
guage has been generally adopted in other countries, while
Note. Vide Mr, Wallace’s Report of September Stli, 1853.


to speculate on the superior practical or “commercial”
advantages claimed for the narrow guage would only be a
waste of time, since it is obvious that all continuous exten-
sions of a railway system for the carriage of through traffic,
must be designed on the model of the original, whether it be
a 4 feet 8| inch or a 5 feet 3 inch guage; and that any
break of guage in a country in which railways are in their
infancy is not only highly objectionable but is opposed to
common sense. In such countries the question is not what
happens to prevail in other parts of the world, but
what is the best and most suitable guage for railways. * The
5 feet 3 inch guage has been adopted in Ireland, in Canada,
Victoria, and in South Australia, on the ground of its
combining in a greater degree than any other the requisites
of safety and efficiency; and it is much to be regretted that
the Legislature of New South Wales should on a one-sided
view of the question have been led to repeal the Act fixing
the guage of Colonial railways at 5 feet 3 inches, in favor of
another Act fixing it at 4 feet 8| inches.
With respect to the very narrow guage of 3 feet 6
inches which has been adopted in Queensland for the main
lines, all that can be said of it is, that it possesses the
advantage of superior economy of construction, in a colony
whose present means are inadequate to construct broad
guage railways. Independently of other economical con-
siderations, it was decided, after much discussion of the
mattei in Queensland, to adopt the very narrow guage of
3 feet 6 inches on the following bases, viz. :—the limitation
of speed to 25 miles an hour; the reduction of the weight
upon each pair of wheels in the train to six tons ; and the
construction of the line in a sufficiently substantial manner
to carry a limited amount of traffic. But it must be
apparent that the carrying powers of a railway so constructed
must necessarily be extremely limited, while the exigencies
of the traffic will be uniformly progressive. For minor
tributary lines and feeders to the great trunk lines of
railway the narrow guage of 3 feet 6 inches might in
certain cases be adopted with advantage; but for the main
arterial lines of a country in which all the appliances must


be adapted to suit an annually increasing traffic, the guage
should be such, as without increasing too much the cost of
construction, would admit of the employment of locomotive
engines, passenger carriages, and goods trucks of sufficient
capacityj and for this purpose the very narrow guage of
3 feet 6 inches appears to be unsuited.
(fittflenslanb llailtomps.
It appears that three classes of engines are used on the
Queensland railways ; —lst. Tender engines, weighing 15
tons in working order, upon six wheels, four of which are
driven. 2nd. Engines of a similar description, but upon
eight wheels, six of which are driven and weighing 20 tons
in working order. And 3rd. Engines with two bogie frames,
(on Fair lie’s principle), each supported upon six wheels, so
that there are in all 12 wheels. The weight of these bogie
engines is about 30 tons in working order, and it was calcu-
lated that they could convey 120 tons of gross load up an
incline 15 miles in length, having ruling gradients of 1 in
40, and frequent curves of six chains radius, at a speed of
15 miles an hour. The cost of these engines, free on board,
in England, is stated to be £25,000. In designing these
several classes of locomotives great care has been taken to
keep down the weights, to provide sufficient heating surface
and fuel and water space ; to have fire boxes to burn fuel,
consisting of |rds of wood, and Ird of coal, to supply great
break power, and to shelter the driver from the heat of the
sun. On the Southern and Western railway of Queensland,
one of the chief works is the bridge over the Bremer, close
to the Ipswich terminus, built for carrying a single line of
rails, and a public road 25 feet wide. The bridge has a
width of 35 feet between the parapets, and consists of three
openings of 150 feet span each. The super-structure is
composed of lattice girders 12 feet deep, the top flange being
of cast iron in a tubular form, and the bottom flange being


weight is only 12 cwt. per lineal foot of the bridge. The
height of the floor of the bridge over the foundations is 80
feet, and the cost of the bridge was as follows,
viz. :—
Stonework in abutments
£4,925
Ironwork, including erection in piers and
superstructure
12,415
Timber in flooring, <kc...
2,025
Total cost.
£19,365
of Howard and Ravenhill’s “ rolled links.” The total
It appears that the cost of the Queensland railways has
been under difficult circumstances, between £lO,OOO and
£12,000 per mile, and under ordinary circumstances from
£7OOO to £BOOO per mile, inclusive of appliances of every
description. This is equivalent to an average cost per mile of
about £lO,OOO, and considering that this sum is amply
sufficient to construct a single line of railway to a 5 feet 3
inch guage, exclusive of tunnels and similar costly works, the
advantage of the narrow guage of the Queensland railways
does not appear to be manifest on the score of economy of
construction.
Jnbian gailfamDS.
India, with a population of about 112 per square mile, has
constructed since 1852 to May, 1868, no less than 3943
miles of main trunk railways, with a 5 feet 6 inch guage, at
a cost of about £13,000 per mile. Seventeen years ago,
India had no railways ; in 1853, the first line was opened,
and by the end of that year, 22 miles were in working
order. Since 1860, the construction of railways in India
has been carried on with great vigor, for during the six
years ending in 1866, no less than 2735 miles were opened
for traffic, the average being 456 miles annually.
Contrasted with the net work of railways stretching
over England, Scotland, Ireland, and the Continent, the


1 stock ot these 1 i railway
Table of Indian Railways.
V.
Miles open
in 1863.
Locomo-
tives
1356
425
nsula
874
209
645
106
uid Central |
306
65
109
25
246
38
54
6
114
32
India
168
15
h Eastern ..
29
12
nd ..
42
4
3943
937
Railway.
East Indian
Indian railway system appears to be simplicity itself, the
lines being nearly all main trunk lines between prominent
towns and cities, but thousands of miles of branch railways
must be constructed before her cotton fields and rice fields can
be fairly brought within the range of commerce, resulting in
a well considered opening up of the whole country, and
forming a general chain of communication extending
throughout the Peninsula. Upwards of 75 millions have
already been expended on the Indian railways, nearly the
whole of which was raised in England by the sale of shares,
and of convertible and inconvertible debentures. The value
of the land granted by the Government to the different com-
panies is estimated at 2\ millions sterling, while the Govern-
ment director’s report of 1867-8 shewed that nearly all the
great cotton-fields of India were, at that time, connected by
rail with shipping ports.
The railways of India are in the hands of eleven com-
panies, and their relative importance is shewn by the figures
in the accompanying table, which gives the mileage, locomo-
tives, and rolling stock of these 11 railway companies up to
May Ist, 1868,
Great Indian Peninsula
Madras ..
Bombay, Baroda, and Central
India ..
Scinde
Punjaub
Delhi
Eastern Bengal...
Great Southern of India
Calcutta and South Eastern
Oude and Rohilcund ..
Totals
Passenger
carriages.
vehicles
including
waggons.
20,929


When the Indian railway system was in its infancy a
few years ago Sir Macdonald Stephenson saw the necessity
hat would arise for inexpensive ■< feeders,” or Cches in
Hue* ’ 1 and W n re ißMT ld / TOt S'* 7 to . great tmnfc
lines and in 1863, he formed an influential company in
England, under the name of the “ Indian Tramway Com-
pany, with a capital of one million sterling, which in 1864
in I ndia> and —tructed a short
line of about 18 miles in length, extending from “ Arconum ”
an important station on the Madras Railway, to “ Little
Conjeveram, the railway passing through a very level coum
try and spanning the river “ Cortelliar,” on a bridge 350
engt v‘ The lme WaS com P leted 1865, within one
year from its commencement, , the rails being laid on teak
sleepers, to a guage of 3 feet 6 inches, at a cost of about
£3500 per mile But it appears that the Secretary of State
for India objected strongly to the very narrow guage of
3 feet 6 inches, and insisted that on any other fine that
might be constructed, the Indian guage of 5 feet 6 inches
should be adhered to, Sir Charles Wood considering no
doubt, (and justly so) that all the railways of India should
d V th i T me gUage > and the soun dness
of this view is indisputable, although unfortunately it opposed
the objects of the Indian Tramway Company, which were to
construct cheap railways in India.
The late Governor-General of India, Sir John Lawrence,
( lan whom a more able man never held that high office) in
a despatch to the Home Government, thus enumerates his
views on the general utility of railways in India, together
with matters intimately connected therewith. He says •
a? 18 r rdl ? necessaiy for me t 0 do more th an to refer to
„ r/ alue ° f our * adw ays to the Government and people,
a tacts universally acknowledged. These works not only
„ h d Vast f to th® mailable force of the executive power,
« hut greatly conduce to improved administration, by expe-
„ d ; tlng P e -?- al intercourse among the officers charged with
“ rAr' dm mI St r atl 2. n ’ and between these officers and the
« pub l lC - Their eflfe ct on the commerce of the country is
most conspicuous, and extends, I am led to believe, far


“ beyond the limits commonly ascribed to it. It is a mode-
“ rate estimate to reckon that the construction of railways
“ has reduced the cost of transport one-half, that is to say,
“ that as much is saved to the public as is paid by them to
“ the railways. The saving to the traders and travellers of
“ India, caused by railway transport, may thus not unrea-
“ sonably be reckoned to amount, at the present time, to a
“ sum of more than 5 millions sterling in a year.”
Further on, Sir John says, in speaking of the financial
part of the question: —“ It is clearly proved by the experience
“ of the past, that railways in India, ij constructed with due
“ regard to economy, and under conditions which fairly
“justify such undertakings, may be commonly expected to
“ yield returns, sufficient to cover the interest on the capital
“ required for them within a period of from ten to fifteen
“ years from the time of opening their whole length. There
“ are certainly railways which do not now nearly pay the
“guaranteed interest, and which cannot be expected to do so
“ within any definite period. But it may be generally
“ affirmed that, excepting the lines which it was known before-
“ hand were not likely to pay, and which were undertaken
“on grounds of policy, the financial failure of Indian
“ railways will be found to be directly attributable to mistakes
“or mismanagement in construction, or to a line having
“ been constructed in defiance of what prudence dictated.
“ Nor is this all that can fairly be said of India in respect to
“ railways. It is not to be questioned that, if a more strict
“ economy had been exercised in the construction of some of
“ the lines, they would at the present time have been paying
“ a large dividend, and that, heavily weighted as some of
“ them are with excessive capital accounts, their ultimate
“ financial prospects are still good. But although it is
“ thus true that, as a whole, we may reasonably expect
“ railways in India to be eventually remunerative, if
“ prudently executed, it nevertheless is almost a necessary
“ condition of their construction that for many years after
“ opening, the net profits will not cover the interest on the
“ capital, and that the Government has to pay a considerable
“ sum to make up the full amount of interest guaranteed.


“ Hence it follows, that the questions likely to cause
“ hesitation in the extension of railways in India, refer
“ almost exclusively to the extent to which the public
“ revenues can be made to bear the charge for guaranteed
“ interest, during the first yeats after the opening of new
“ lines, when the net income is not sufficient to meet that
“ charge. This drain on the revenues will be continued for
“ the whole period during which construction goes on, and
“ until the last made lines become self-supporting. It is
“ evident!}’ only by gradual and steadily maintained action,
“ that the wants of so large a country can be supplied ; and
“ taking the most sanguine view of such matters, it seems
“ impossible to reckon the period required for the co-opera-
“ tion of the Government at less than 30 or 40 years, which
“ for all practical purposes may be regarded as an indefinite
“ term.”
Sir John Lawrence concludes his dispatch with the
following remarks as to the necessity for economy in a
country like India, whose population although large is
generally poor; he says ; —“There is only one other point to
“ which I wish to refer. If there is one thing which comes
“ out into more prominent relief than an other, in connec-
“ tion with railway construction in all parts of the world, it
“ is this, that those lines are financially successful in which
“ the capital accounts are kept down to a low amount, and
“ those are unsuccessful in which this has not been accom-
“ plished. The lesson w r e should learn from this is that the
“ character of the line, and the amount of expenditure upon
“ it should be regulated as far as possible by a proper con-
“ sideration of the probable returns, and not more than
“ is essential by any preconceived ideas of what is the best
“ standard form of railway to adopt. I regard it as the
“ extreme of infatuation to lay down any absolute rules to
“ regulate the modes of construction of railways in a
“ country so vast, so various in its natural features, and so
“ poor as India. Still more mistaken is it to apply to India,
“ rules essentially based on the wants of England, which is
“ probably the only country in the world from which India
“ most differs. England, of all others the richest, the most


“ populous, tlie most celebrated for its manufactures, the
“ most addicted to commerce, an island of small size in a
“ highly advanced state of civilisation, where despatch is of
“ extreme importance and time equivalent to money—
“ England of all countries, is the last which we should take
“as our model in these things. In one respect certainly,
“ but only in one, can I admit that English standards are
“ applicable ; let all workmanship be thoroughly good of its
“ kind, and every part of the construction permanent and
“ suited to what is required of it.”
In these remarks of Sir John, every unprejudiced
person must concur, as well as in those which follow, where
he says :—“ Skill in engineering work implies the successful
“ adaptation of the art of construction to varying circum-
“ stances. For a poor country, economy is one of the
“ essential conditions to be complied with, and its require-
“ ments may be as rigid as any of those imposed by physical
“ conditions. Wholly to reject railways for a country which
“ is not able to support lines of the most costly description,
“ is quite unreasonable ; and if on a further examination in
“ detail of the probable cost and returns of any of the lines
“ which otherwise seem desirable, the expense of lines of the
“ ordinary guage seems prohibitory, while lines of a narrow
“ guage would be financially practicable, I should consider
“ it a most mistaken view to reject the naiTow guage line.
“ And so with any other modification of ordinaxy practice.
“ For complete success in the great operations which the
“ Government of India has before it, broad views and a
“ ready adoption of all truly sound measures, whether oxxt of
u the usual course or not, are essential; and it will be a
“ source of lasting regret if the progress of this country,
“ which of all other’s most directly depends on the improve-
“ ment of its means of internal communication, should be
“ retarded by the weight of administrative prescription or
“ engineering prejudice.”
The broad and comprehensive views taken by Sir John
Lawrence on the subject of railway extension in India,
according to the wants of the country and to a definite
system, cannot fail to have their due effect on the pi’esent


Government of India, which, under Lord Mayo, has
adopted, and it is believed will act upon, the views of Sir
John Lawrence. The standard outlay per mile will there-
fore, in all probability, be reduced from an average of about
£13,000 to perhaps £9OOO, or even £BOOO per mile, and
this reduction in the prime cost is the more necessary in
India, where the requisite capital for railway construction
can only be obtained at the risk and under the guarantee of the
State. The same arguments used by Sir John Lawrence in
relation to Indian railways apply with equal force to Austra-
lian railways, and it behoves the Government of each colony
to consider this great question in all its bearings.
<Srabsmts.
When railways were in their infancy in Great Britain
30 or 40 years ago, it was thought by most Engineers that
the locomotive engine could not be made to ascend steep
inclines, owing to the want of sufficient adhesion between the
wheels and the rails, and numerous devices were proposed to
remedy this supposed defect, while enormous sums were
lavished in obtaining very flat gradients, so as to render the
lines mechanically as perfect as possible, and it was considered
that the gradients should range from 16 feet in a mile, or 1
in 330 to 20 feet in a mile, or 1 in 264, on all railways formed
to carry a large amount of traffic. Sir John Macneill, in his
Report to the Commissioners of the North Irish Railways,
published in 1841, submitted two series of gradients for their
consideration, and he thus remarked upon them : —“ The
“ maximum gradient of the first system is 16 feet in a mile
“ or 1 in 330, except in a single instance for a length of
“ 8 miles, in which the gradient is 17 feet in a mile, or about
“1 in 308. But being of the opinion that the cost of
“ construction of works of this nature should always be


Gradient ... ... 1 in.
20 25 30
35
40
45
50 60 70*80 90 100
Rise in feet per mile
Resistance in lbs per ton of
264211 176
151
132
117
10588756658 52
train ...
112 90 74
64
56
50
45 38,3228 25 22
“ proportioned as accurately as possible to the probable
“ traffic of the country, and fearing that this traffic might
“ not warrant such an expenditure as the above would
“ demand, I have assumed and laid down a second series of
“ gradients which are steeper than the first, and the effect of
“ which will be to reduce the items of expense in the land,
“ earth works, and masonry, but necessarily, on the other
“ hand, will increase the cost of working the line. That of
■“the second system is about 29 feet in a mile, or 1 in 180,
“ which I consider should never be exceeded except in
“ extreme cases.” *
The effect of a gradient in retarding the speed, or rather
in increasing the resistance due to gravity, and therefore
leading to an additional expenditure of power, varies with
the degree of inclination in direct ratio as the height of the
plane is to its length, and this resistance will be in pounds
per ton on any incline 2240 In ascending an incline
1 rate ot gradient. 0
therefore of 1 in 280, the resistance due to gravity is 81bs.
per ton, and, as on a well constructed railway, when the
frictional resistance is probably the smallest, the resistance
due to friction is also 8 lbs. per ton, the drawing power up
such an incline will be 16 lbs. The following table of
gradients exhibits the resistance due to gravity on various
inclines :
When the power is employed to convey a load up an,
incline, it has not only to overcome the surface or rubbing
friction of the rails, as well as the axle friction of the
carriages, but it has to lift the entire weight of the train
through the height which corresponds with the length of the
incline. The mechanical effect is precisely the same there-
* At the present day Engineers do not hesitate to adopt inclines
of 1 in 60, or even 1 in 20, while on the “Mont Cenis Railway”
the gradients vary from 1 in 20 to 1 in 10.


fore as if the load had been moved along a perfectly level
plane and then lifted perpendiculai’ly to that height. Any
incline will evidently be descended with a less power of
draught than a level plane, and ascended with a greater
power and on an incline of 1 in 280, the increase of tractive
power necessary in ascending it is precisely equal to the
decrease in descending it, and the descent of this incline
forms a perfect compensation for the ascent, the average of
the two being the resistance on the level plane. This
particular gradient, therefore, of 1 in 280, forms the boundary
between those inclines, in the descent of which a tractive
power is required, and those down which the load moves by
its unassisted gravity, and it may be shewn that on a line of
variable gradients it requires exactly the same amount of
mechanical power to convey a given load from one point to
another, provided that the gravity shall be equal to the
friction. It is evident that no gradient, compared with a
level, can save more in the descent than the entire power
necessary to draw the load on the level —it can do no more
than cause the load to descend. If, therefore, in the ascent
the total resistance be more than twice the resistance upon
the level, there will be more power consumed in ascending
than will be saved in descending such incline. In order to
take the simplest view of the case, let us suppose a railroad
A, B, C (Fig. 1), to ascend for 50 miles by one continued
incline of 1 in 280, and then to descend for another 50 miles
at the same rate of inclination. The tractive force in
ascending the incline A B will be 16 lbs. per ton, but the
resistance from gravity on the incline B C being nil, the
load will move down it without any tractive force. The
total force, therefore, necessary to transport—say one ton —
from end to end, or from A to C, surmounting the summit B,
will be precisely the same that is required to transport the
same load on the level from A to C, and the total expenditure
of power will be 8 lbs. acting through 100 miles, which is
mechanically equivalent to 16 lbs. acting through 50 miles.
In a railway to be worked by the steam locomotive, it
is obviously necessary to preserve as far as possible an
equality of velocity throughout; for if this be not maintained


it will be necessary to increase the speed on the descending
planes, in order to make up for the loss of speed on the
ascending ones \ and since the locomotive engine works with
the gi eatest efficiency when it has to encounter an uniform
resistance, it is evident that the nearer we can approach to
a level line, the more perfect, mechanically speaking, will be
the railway, as, independently of the disadvantage of making
the engine continually change its energy, the expenditure of
motive power on every incline must be in proportion to the
length and steepness of the incline ; from which it results
that the intensity of the heat generated in the boiler of a
locomotive engine must be in proportion to the resistance
encountered, and, therefore, that the destruction of the tubes
and the parts of the boiler more immediately exposed to the
action of the furnace will be greatest on the ascending planes.
Not only do gradients such as 1 in 30 or 1 in 40 greatly
retard the speed and increase the expenditure of steam, but
they have a still more injurious effect by limiting the amount
of load which the engine is capable of drawing. In ascend-
ing an incline of 1 in 100 the resistance due to the gravity
of the load is 22 lbs. per ton of train, which, added to the
resistance due to friction, or 8 lbs., gives 30 lbs. of total re-
sistance : while up an incline ol 1 in 50 the resistance due
to gravity is 45 lbs. + 8 lbs. =53 lbs; and up an incline of 1
in 30 the resistance due to gravity is 74 lbs. + 8 = 82 lbs. per
ton of train, or more than eight times the power necessary
to be exerted on a level plane. It is evident, therefore, that
the gradients must regulate the power, size, and weight of
the locomotive engine, the weight of the train, and the speed,
—at all events in one direction.
On the subject of “compensating gradients,” or gradients
which, theoretically, give out in their descent all the power
which has been expended in their descent, it is to be observed
that, supposing that the law which regulates the descent of
a weight on a railway incline, accords with that which is
established in mechanics, that “ the spaces passed over are
directly as the squares of the times of descent,” we should
on any inclined plane, acquire by the aid of gravity an
average velocity throughout the plane, which might be con-


sistent with the speed required ; but independently of the
power applied to the traction of the load, there is the power
which is absorbed in putting the train in a condition to move,
or otherwise in overcoming its inertia, and this is consider-
able. When a locomotive engine commences its motion, its
power must exceed the resistance ; and, therefore, the speed
continues to increase until the resistance becomes equal, or
nearly equal, to the power of the engine, when the speed of
the train becomes uniform, and in consequence of the
momentum acquired, a very small power is required to be
exerted by the engine in order to keep up a steady or an
uniform speed, which accounts for the superior economy of
working a line of railway with a heavy traffic and with good
gradients , by the locomotive engine. But the great weight
of a locomotive engine is a positive evil, because it has to
carry this unprofitable dead weight over every portion of the
line, and because the same weight not being required on the
more level portions of the line, the moving power is bur-
thened with an unnecessary load. The injury arising from
this is not only the expenditure of motive power required to
draw this unprofitable weight over every part of the line,
but the great weight of the engine and tender requires a
more solid construction of the permanent way and works,
with a corresponding increased weight of rails to resist the
concussion of so ponderous a weight, moving at high veloci-
ties. It also produces increased wear and tear of the rails
and of the engine itself. The weight of passenger engines
on narrow guage lines varies from 25 to 28 tons, —of goods
engines, from 2G to 30 tons—while the weight of engines
adapted for the extremely broad guage of 7 feet (as on the
Great Western Railway of England) varies from 35 to 40
tons. For such heavy engines large trains are also essential,
together with large stations and large establishments of every
description, with their necessary concomitants of heavy ex-
penditure under the heads of “ ways and works,” “ depreci-
ation,” and “ renewal.”
As a general rule in laying out railways in a new
country, the object should be to ascend and descend with as
much uniformity of gradient as the nature of the country


will admit of, with a due regard to economy, seeking the
lowest passes in the ranges and mountains, and surmounting
them with as little excavation as possible, and to limit, if
possible, the profile of the railway to gradients ranging from
20 feet in a mile, or 1 in 264 to 50 feet in a mile, or 1 in
105—rates of inclination which, for all practicable purposes,
are well adapted for being worked by the locomotive engine.
Curfa.es.
There can be no doubt that to have sharp curves on a rail-
way that is worked by the locomotive engine is, at the best,
an evil which should be avoided as much as possible ; for,
admitting the curve to be a true circular arc, and to have
been correctly set out, each carriage in the train will have a
tendency to leave the rails, and this tendency will be increased
in proportion to the smallness of the radius of the curve,
and to the velocity of the train. Curves of a quarter of a
mile radius are of very little moment, but when they are 6
or 7 chains only in radius they become objectionable, if not
dangerous, notwithstanding the precaution of super-elevating
the outer rail in order to balance the centrifugal tendency of
the carriages. The distance between the wheels on each side
of a railway carriage is necessarily a straight line, while the
wheels and carriage are forced to move in a curve;
the friction, therefore, between the wheels and the rails, in
an arc of small radius, must not only retard the progress of
the train, but wear the rails, strain the carriages, and greatly
increase the chances of accident: but there are very few
lines of railway so favorably situated as to be free from
curves of greater or less extent, and therefore they are an
evil which must be put up with, and as far as possible
remedied.


The method employed in America of supporting the
engines and carriages on two independent trucks or “ bogie”
frames deserves great consideration, as the carriages move
easily round curves with these appendages, and consequently
there is a diminution in the frictional resistance. Captain
Douglas Gal ton, in his able .Report on the Railways of the
United States, says that the bodies of the passenger cars are
from 30 to 45 feet, and even 60 feet in length, from 9 to 10 feet
in width, and from 6to 7 feet 6 inches in height; the body
of the car is carried by two four-wheeled trucks, one at each
end. The body is attached to these trucks by means of a
pintle in the centre, the ’weight resting on small rollers at
each side. The main framing of the truck is supported on
springs resting on the axles, and the pintle and rollers are
fixed to a cross beam, which is attached by springs to the
main framing, so that between the body of the car and the
axles are a double set of springs. India rubber springs are
in general use, but they often become hard, consequently
sometimes steel springs are used with great advantage
(Report, pp. 14).
On the Ohio and Baltimore Railway, on account of the
sharp curves, the cars are shorter than on many other lines,
viz., 40 feet in length; these cars will contain 60 persons,
and it is stated that they weigh about 7 tons. Asa general
rule, on English narrow guage railways, the same number of
second-class passengers would scarcely be accommodated
under a weight of 10 tons. Vehicles of this description,
therefore, are not only more convenient and safer than the
ordinary carriage, but they are also constructed on the prin-
ciple of diminishing the amount of useless weight carried in
a train. Whilst these cars have been designed with a view
to avoid every appearance of privilege or exclusiveness, or of
superiority of one traveller over another, they have been
constructed so as to secure to every traveller substantial
comfort and even privacy. The absence of compartments
facilitates ventilation, warming and lighting at night, and
they travel without accident over bad roads at velocities
when other carriages would probably leave the line. It is
much to be regretted that our railway authorities do not


adopt carriages of this description in Australia for second as
well as third class passengers; the accommodation now pro-
vided being of the most inferior kind, although as a general
rule it is the second and third class passengers who travel
most, and who pay best on our colonial railways.
The permanent way of a railway forms so serious an item,
both in its first cost and in its subsequent maintenance, that
any method by which it can be shewn that a saving can be
effected, in both directions, with undiminished durability and
stability, cannot be regarded otherwise than as a step in the
right direction in the art of locomotion. On a subject where
the conditions of experience are so varied, much diversity of
opinion must necessarily exist amongst engineers, but the
true final test of a sound system of permanent way is that it
shall be capable of carrying a large amount of heavy traffic,
at moderate speeds, with safety, and without a heavy annual
cost for maintenance, renewals, and repairs. If the track be
perfectly rigid, or non-elastic, the vibration of the load is
reflected back on the rails, to their manifest injury, as well
as to that of the rolling stock, hence the stone blocks that
were formerly employed as sleepers are now universally dis-
carded on account of their destructive rigidity, while the
important desideratum of elasticity is partially attained by a
longitudinal bearer of wood, placed on wooden cross sleepers,
which are themselves bedded in broken stone ballast, a mode
of construction which causes the train to glide over the track
with a smoothness which is delightful, and which reduces the
wear and tear to a minimum.
But the ordinary practice in the colonies is to bed the
sleepers in ballast, and to fix the rails in cast iron chairs
immediately on them, the sleepers being chiefly ironbark or


boxwood, each 9 feet long and 10x5 inches scantling, the
greater portion being rectangular. The rapid decay, how-
ever, of timber, whether “ creosoted ”or not, when placed
in the position of a railway sleeper between, as it were,
“ wind and water,” that is, neither in the free atmosphere,
nor yet entirely removed from atmospheric influences, is a
well-known fact, and a host of experiments have been tried
to obviate this tendency to decay, while nearly all of them
have been attended with uncertain or unsatisfactory results.
In England “ creosoting” the timber appears to be the
plan most commonly adopted for preserving it, while in
France, a process of driving out the sap of the green timber
by a solution of sulphate of copper is often employed. The
duration of a railway sleeper in the colonies, where the tim-
ber used is chiefly gum or boxwood, appears to vary from 7
to 8 years, but it is said that when the sleepers are split out
of large trees, their durability is considerably inci’eased, and
it is believed that such would be the case. In America, the
sleepers usually employed are of chesnut wood, and these,
when dressed with coal tar, will last from 7to 8 years. But
Australia possesses excellent timber for railway sleepers, the
“ ii’onbark” and “ bloodwood” being the most valuable and
durable, inasmuch as these woods are not affected by the
white ant, so that a good “ bloodwood” sleeper would proba-
bly last for 20 years.
But a still more valuable timber, if possible, for railway
sleepers appears to exist in the “ jarrah” tree of Western
Australia, and it is a remarkable and perhaps little known
fact, that the Great Indian Peninsula Railway Company has
commenced the importation of railway sleepers cut from this
timber, from Western Australia. India has hardly yet com-
pleted the main trunk lines of her traffic system, and many
thousands of miles of minor or branch railways have to be
formed in that country; and although the peninsula pos-
sesses coal, iron, and other valuable minerals and metals, it
does not possess a good timber tree for railway sleepers.
Thus the importation of foreign timber has always been a
large item in the cost of railways in India, as it has been
necessary to pay for the sea transit of numberless shiploads


of timber from the Baltic to Bombay, Kurrachee, and even
to Calcutta, cut into sleepers and “ kyanised” or “ creosoted”
to keep the white ant away. If the “ jarrah” wood of Aus-
tralia is so suitable for railway sleepers as to be employed in
India for this purpose, it is surely equally suitable for our
own railways, and even if we should have to send for it to
the west coast of the continent, the cost of the importation
would be amply repaid to this colony by securing a good and
durable timber for our railway sleepers.
According to the practice universally adopted in Eng-
land and on the Continent of placing the cross sleepers at
right angles with the rails, it has been observed that there is
a continual tendency to work the ballast forward from
underneath the sleepers in the direction of the running
trains, as shewn in the sketch (fig. 2). Hence the necessity
arises for continually lifting and packing or “ boxing up ”
the sleepers in free ballast, while there is a constant liability
to loss of guage by the bending of the sleeper in the middle.
For these reasons it would appear that a greater degree of im-
mobility would be secured by placing the sleepers diagonally
as regards the rails, thus: —.
by this method the weight of
the train in lieu of impinging
directly on the sleepers would'
impinge gradually upon them, and would reduce “ pro
tanto,” the tendency to displacement. The sleepers being
placed at an angle of say 45 degrees with the rails, would
certainly require to be longer than if placed at right angles,
but their increased length would be a positive advantage
from their having so much additional bearing to carry the
weight, thus approximating to the absolute continuity of
bearing attained by placing a wooden longitudinal bearer
under the full length of the rail, as on the Great Western
and Metropolitan Railways of England.
The rapid decay of wooden sleepers in a moist climate,
like that of England, has directed the attention of engineers
to the practicability of substituting iron for wood sleepers,
as an improvement both in durability and economy of
maintenance, and various methods were tried, until Mr.


Peter Barlow invented the ingenious form of rail known by
his name, being at once rail and bearer ■ the arrangement is
simplicity itself, the lengths being “fished” together by
being rivetted to a “ saddle” of the form of the rail under
the joint, while the only other pieces are tie bars to preserve
the guage, the ties being in some cases of the same form as
the rail and being rivetted to it. But after an extensive
trial of the Barlow rail on various railways, both at home
and abroad, it was found that the heavy traffic bore out the
head of the rail, (as shewn by the dotted lines in the sketch
% 3,) and forced the outer wing C. into the ballast, bend-
ing the ties and throwing the line out of guage ; then
ensued splitting of the rail along the head, and along the
concavity of the inner wing at 8., and the general result
seemed to indicate that the principle of a rail being its own
bearei, when subjected to the test of heavy weights passing
°vei it &t high velocities is essentially defective, being
totally inadequate to the work put upon it. On the Sydney
and Parramatta railway, the rails first used were of the
“Barlow” pattern, but having been found to be objection-
able they were removed, and the line was relaid with double
headed rails, weighing 72 lbs. per yard. It now appears
irom a paragraph in an English paper that Captain Mayne,
le colonial agent for New South Wales, is negociating in
London for new permanent way materials for this line ; and
the term “ permanent way,” when applied to this railway
appears a misnomer, for considering that the Sydney and
Parramatta railway has been open for traffic scarcely 15
years, it appears somewhat extraordinary that the line
should now require to be re-laid for the third time.
. r^ie various plans for a continuous rail bearer of rolled
iron, although displaying much ingenuity, are chargeable
with serious defects; thus in the first place they involve
mci eased outlay without any certainty of ultimate
economy. Secondly :—They require a fine quality of ballast
obtainable only in particular localities. Thirdlythe
bolting or rivetting, or both, which cannot be avoided,
render them difficult and costly to lay and repair, and must
be constantly working loose, and lastly so far from attaining


that smoothness in running; which is by common consent
the vital object of a continuous bearing; they are necessarily
hard and rigid, and set at defiance the fundamental condi-
tions of simplicity, elasticity, and economy.*
What has been termed the “ Macdonnell way,” is
shewn at Fig. 4. In this case a6B lb. bridge rail B. is
bolted down to a flat longitudinal wrought iron sleeper A.
weighing about 84 lbs. per yard ; the intervention of wood
(or felt) packing (C.) between the rail and sleeper destroys
the homogeneity of the structure, which is incontestably the
boldest and simplest type of permanent way yet ventured
upon. It is deficient, however, in stiffness, and in order to
remedy this defect it is proposed to add the vertical flange (D.)
to the sleeper, by which the requisite rigidity would be
secured. The additional cost of this would, however, be a
consideration, wdiich would nevertheless be counterbalanced
by the absence of cast iron chairs, and that these are not
absolutely required for the security of the rails is demon-
strated by the fact that on many of the continental lines of
railway the chair is not used ; the single headed “ Vignolles ”
rail being laid at once on wooden cross sleepers and held
down by dog spikes having projections on the head in order
to facilitate drawing for repairs. (See Fig. 5.) Care must of
course be taken that the bottom flanch of the rail be suffi-
ciently strong to bear the tension on it, when fixing it by the
dog-spikes, otherwise the destruction of the rail will ensue
by the splitting away of the flanch, and on the continent
where this form of rail is much used, the inward cant or
“ tilt,” which in England is given to the rail by the form of
the chair, is obtained by planing out a level space in the
sleeper, which is rapidly accomplished by a machine made
for the purpose. This form of permanent way appears to
answer well under a heavy traffic, and the argument in
favor of the chair that it permits the use of the double
headed rail will not bear examination when we take into
* The writer is indebted for several of the preceding observations
to an able paper, “On the Construction of the Track of Railways,”
by W. J. Cockburn Muir, C.E., read before the Royal Scottish
Society of Arts, March 25, 1867.


account the “jar” produced by its interposition, assisted as
it too often is, by the motion of imperfectly packed sleepers
causing not only the direct destruction of the rail, but the
positive alteration of its texture after long use, to say
nothing of the imperfect fit of a turned rail in the chair.
In Victoria, where the existing heavy rails have not been
laid down more than ten years, it has been found that they
show such signs of wear on the flange and the outside of the
rail, as to necessitate their being turned on many portions of
the lines, and it appears to be extremely doubtful whether
they will last another 10 years after this process, owing to
the texture of the rail having been injured by the jar
produced by the cast iron chairs. It is true that a wooden
cushion inserted under the bottom table of the rail, will
reduce to a certain extent this jar and will prevent abrasion
of the rail; but still the fact remains that the common cast
iron chair is open to many objections, not the least of which
is the undesirable complication and number of parts. From
this objection the “ Vignolles” rail is free, as it is designed
with a view to its being laid down directly on either longi-
tudinals or on cross sleepers vnthout chairs, and it appears
for these reasons to be well adapted for use in the colonies.
A section of this rail showing the dog-spikes is given in
Fig. 5, plate 2.
The form of rail with which we are most familiar in the
colonies is the double headed rail, weighing from 68 to 75
lbs. per lineal yard, having fished joints, and held by a
wooden key in a cast-iron chair, which is secured to wooden
cross sleepers by treenails or spikes, or spiked treenails, con-
sisting of a wood treenail with wrought iron spikes driven
through its heart. The chair is frequently held by two
spiked treenails at one end, and at the other by a bolt, which,
passing through the sleeper, screws into a “ fanged” washer,
which, biting into the under side of the sleepers, cannot
work off; biit nothing can prevent the screw-bolts themselves
from working loose. The tendency of the vibration is illus-
trated by the constant working off of the fish bolt-nuts,
which require frequent examination and screwing up. In
order to show the multiplicity of parts in a chair and cross


sleeper railway (amounting to no less than 22,800 per mile
of single way,) the following table is given, showing the
number of pieces, the weight of each piece, and the cost, in
England in 1868:
Table 1.
No. of
Pieces.
Wooden cross sleeper system.
Weights.
Prices
per ton
Cost per
mile.
502 Rails @ 751bs. yd. (punched ends)
3.840 Chairs, @ 201bs. each
1,004 Fish plates, @ 7 5 lbs. each
2,008 Bolts ) ~n ,
Nuts J@UlbB.each
7,680 Spikes, @ fib. each
3.840 Keys, @ fib. each
1,920 Sleepers, 9ft. long, 10x5(1201bs. ea.)
Laying 1760 yds. @ 3s. 6d. per yard
tons. cwt.
118 0
34 5
855 10
137 0
30 3
14 0
15 8
10 0
2G 0
14 0
16 2
103 0
@0 5
480 0
308 0
22,800
263 9
1868 3
To this must be added the cost of the freight and insurance
on 160 tons of iron work at 30s. per ton (to Sydney) or
.£24o—giving as the average cost per mile £2lOB of single
line.
It is obvious that one of the first qualities that a rail-
way track should possess in a country like Australia is sim-
plicity or fewness of parts, as the more parts or pieces there
are in a railway the more it costs to lay the track, and the
greater will be the loss and waste in the items of the smaller
parts, increasing pro tanto the cost of maintenance : since
the more numerous are the parts, the more difficult and
costly will be the renewals and repairs. The average cost of
maintenance per annum of the ordinary wooden cross sleeper
system may be averaged in England at £l7 5 per mile of
single way, and it requires constant and careful supervision
of the line, to prevent the rapid disorganisation of the whole
structure where cast iron chairs of the ordinary form are
used :it is indeed open to qiiestion whether the principle of
supporting the rails in this manner be not essentially vicious.


Facility and rapidity of repair are, in fact, so important con-
siderations on every railway, that any method by which these
conditions can be secured must be regarded as great desiderata
in the permanent way; and if to these conditions he added
a reduction in the cost per mile, contingent on a reduction in
the number of pieces, or parts of the superstructure, there
can be no doubt of the advantages of such a method.
A permanent way of an economic description, in which
nothing but rail, sleeper, wedge, and tie-bar are used, has
received some attention in the railway world, having been
tried with satisfactory results in England, France, Belgium,
India, Egypt, South America, Spain, and Brazil. Apart
from the saving in the first cost and annual maintenance,
the simplicity of this form of permanent way is its great
recommendation, nothing but cast-iron sleepers, comprising
chairs as well as sleepers, with the rails, wedges, and tie-bars
being used in this system, which is adapted to every form of
rail. A brief account of its special economical features and
advantages will therefore be given.
The “ chair- sleeper ” is shown in figs. 6 and 7 in eleva-
tion and section. The sleeper is in the form of a parallelo-
gram of cast-iron, of from 28 to 30 inches in length by 1G
to 18 inches in breadth, according to the traffic. The upper
portion resembles an ordinary chair enlarged, while the lower
portion has a double or return flanch, of which the horizontal
member bears flat on the ballast, and the vertical member
cuts into it. The whole casting is corrugated in order to give
it strength, and the sleeper is held to guage by a tie-bar
having return ends, so that no cotter is needed, and it is
inserted immediately under, but not in contact with the rail.
According to the nature of the traffic and of the ballast there
may be two tie-bars, or only one to each pair of sleepers, or
if the traffic will allow it, there may be only one to each
alternate pair of sleepers. The rail being then put in place
over the ties, these cannot be removed without first taking
out the rail, and this method is well adapted for securing
ease of laying and of repair when needed. The outer jaw of
the chair portion is the full length of the sleeper—the inner
jaw being about one-third the length and is in the middle.


The rail is held against the outer jaw by a key of either
wood or iron driven between it and the inner jaw. The
ordinary practice of keying is thus reversed and is done on
the inside instead of the outside of the track. In a hot and
dry climate like that of Australia, the iron key would seem
preferable to the wooden one, which would be liable to fall
out by contraction, and in order to prevent the disturbance
of the track by malicious loosening of the fastenings, there is
a contrivance which renders the drawing of the key impossible,
oxcept with a special tool. Where the traffic is heavy and
the foundation rigid, a quiet road may be obtained by using,
besides” the ordinary iron or wooden key, cushions of oak or
teak placed between the rail and the outer jaw, and securely
bedded in recesses in the casting, while still greater smoothness
is attainable by the insertion of another wooden cushion
under the rail. The packing of the sleepers is effectually
accomplished in “free ballast” by shovelling a quantity
underneath and then “ punning ”it with the common
tamping pick. In “ soil ballast ” (black soil or clay) the
sleeper is turned upside down, punned full, and then set in
place. Any ballast may be used which is mixed with earthy
matter or prone to disintegrate and become earthy, and this
is an important consideration in a country like Australia,
where hundreds of miles may be searched in vain for a porous
material suitable for ballast. The facility with which the
chair sleeper can be adapted to different circumstances by
change in its dimensions, renders it equally applicable to a
first-class railway or to a second-class railway, or to a
tramway; to the double or single-headed rail, and to free or
to compact ballast. A special rail has been introduced
for use with this sleeper in which the heads are brought
closer together by reducing the depth of the web, and is called
on this account the “ dumpy rail ” (vide Fig. 8). While
having the same bearing surface as an ordinary rail of 82 lbs.
to the yard, its actual weight is only 62 lbs., being a reduction,
of one-fourth. But besides the direct economy in weight,
there is the saving in wear of materials, thus giving a longer
life to the rail. With the dumpy rail, however, it has been,
found advisable to increase the bearing by using six sleepers


in the rail length where the traffic is heavy, although in cases
of moderate traffic five sleepers of 30 inches in length by 18
inches in the base to each 21 feet rail are amply sufficient,
as in this way out of the whole 21 feet no less than 12.1 feet
are actually supported, whereas in an ordinary wooden cross-
sleeper track, even when heavily timbered with nine sleepers,
there is an actual support of only 39| inches (or 4| inches at
each chair) in 22 feet.
The great reduction in the number of pieces not only
reduces the first price, as well as the annual cost for main-
tenance per mile, but it simplifies the operation of laying the
track, enabling us to do the work in much less time than
■with wooden cross sleepers.
By referring to the following table it will be seen that
on comparing a second class wooden sleeper railway with an
equivalent railway on the iron chair-sleeper system, there is a
saving of 8479 pieces per mile of single line and of .£lO5 in
the cost.
Table 2.
No. of
Pieces.
Iron Chair-Sleeper System.
Weights.
Prices per
Ton.
Cost per
Mile,
tons, cwt,
& s.
& s.
Rails at 60 lbs. per yard
equivalent with increase bear-
ings to 75 lbs. per yard
Chair sleepers (5 in a 21-foot
rail)
Fish plates, at 74 lbs, each ..
Nufa} Ulb. each
Iron keys, at 2 lbs. each
Guage bars, at 174 lbs. each ...
Wedges to ditto, at Jib. each
Laying 1760 yards, at 3s. 6d.
per yard
94 5
659 15
2,514
125 12
502 16
1,004
30 3
2,008
2,008
14 0
15 8
2,514
14 0
32 4
78 8
2,514
14 0
11 9
308 0
14,321
Total.
£237 7
£1638 3
Adding to the cost of freight and insurance from
on 237 tons of ironwork, at 30s. per ton, or £36 5
have as the cost per mile £2003, being £lO5
England
i 10s., we
less than


the wooden cross-sleeper system, and with this manifest
advantage that in the iron sleepers we have a durable
material, lasting about 24 years (and then good to remelt),
whereas with wooden sleepers about three renewals would be
required in the same period, allowing eight years as the
average duration of a wooden sleeper.
The annual saving, therefore, in the maintenance of a
line of railway fitted with iron chair-sleepers would be con-
siderable, for if we estimate this cost on a railway laid with
wooden sleepers at <£l64 per mile, then on a railway 100
miles in length this will amount to the large sum of £16,400
per annum, whereas on a similar line laid with iron sleepers
the cost of maintenance, it has been proved, will not exceed
£74 per mile per annum, or £7400 per annum for 100 miles
of railway, showing a difference in favor of the iron chair-
sleeper system of £BOOO per annum, a sum which might be
sufficient to turn the scale between a loss and a profit.
In order to show that this statement is not exaggerated,
Mr. Walker, the Chairman of the “ Madras Railway,” in
speaking in 1867 of the iron sleepers employed upon that
line, said :—“ The working of the south-west line shewed the
“ very remarkable economy of using iron instead of wood for
<£ sleepers. Even on the west coast of India, where
“ abundance of wooden sleepers could be obtained, the cost
“ of maintenance was £164 per annum, whereas on the
“ Baiyalore branch line, laid with iron sleepers, the cost was
“ only £75 per mile per annum for maintenance. On the
“ North-west line the maintenance was as low as £7l per
“ mile. It in fact made all the difference between a profit
“ and a loss.” Mr. Walker congratulated the proprietors of
the “Madras Railway” on being the first to adopt iron
sleepers in India on account of their simplicity and efficiency
as well as durability. They have now been employed on the
“ Central Argentine Railway,” where both labor, timber,
and transport are dear, as well as on the Pampas west ward
from the Parana River, where timber is not to be had at all;
for the “ Uruguay Railway,” and for others in La Plata, and
the system is gaining ground in Brazil, Egypt, Spain, and
India.


The only other method of employing cast iron sleepers,
which requires any notice, is that invented by Mr. Greaves
and known as the “ pot” or “ bowl sleeper” road, providing
a sleeper with which any form of rail may be used. This
sleeper is of cast iron, and has the form of an inverted bowl,
about 22 inches in diameter, on the top of which, and in one
piece with it, is the chair in which the rail is held by the
usual wooden key, and in order to gain additional bearing
for the rail, the sleeper has two shoulders cast upon it, one
at each side of the chair ; on these the bottom table of the
rail rests, as well as in the sole of the chair, and in order to
prevent abrasion of the rail, and effect reduction of the jar,
wood cushions may be laid under the rail. The guage is
maintained by cross tie bars going right through each of a°pair
of sleepers, and keyed on each side of each sleeper by cotters.
The packing is accomplished by filling and punning through
two holes left in the top of the sleeper, a process which occu-
pies much time, but it has been found that the sleeper is not
suited for a ballast containing loamy or calcareous elements,
as the wet entering the holes left in the top for packing
washes the oxide of iron into the ballast and forms an indu-
rated and cemented concrete, by which the elasticicity of the
road is destroyed, while the rigidity of the mass under the
sleeper renders it continually liable to fracture. This defect
has, however, been since removed by Mr. Greaves, who has
recently brought out an improved form of his sleeper, in
which the packing holes are dispensed with. The system
has been extensively adopted in India and Egypt, and has
also been tried in Brazil. In economy, it has an immense
advantage over the ordinary wooden sleeper track, in
countries where the sleepers are often found to be rotten
before the line is out of the contractor’s hands, but there
aie certain objections to Mr. Greaves’ system which render
it inferior in point of stability to the chair sleeper system
previously described, which appears to be peculiarly adapted
to the Australian colonies generally, and particularly to the
great Riverine district, comprising an immense block of
land, almost as level as the ocean, extending about 440 miles
in length from north to south, and about 350 miles in


breadth from east to west, and which is intersected by the
Darling, the Lachlan and the Murrumbidgee, all of which
rivers join the Murray. To the north of the Murrumbidgee
and of the Murray, and below their junction is a level block
of about 100,000 square miles, intersected by the Lachlan
and Darling only, which are rivers in winter, biit which in
dry seasons are only chains of ponds. These rivers cannot
therefore be depended upon for transporting the wool of the
interior to the coast, and the great want of this large district
is an economical form of railway, by way of Albury, Yass,
Gundagai, and Wagga Wagga to the Lower Murrumbidgee.
South of the Murrumbidgee to the Murray, the country is
intersected by a perfect net work of creeks and water
courses, the water crossing from one to another in every
direction. This district may be regarded as extending for
600 miles along the river, from 100 miles below the junction
of the Murrumbidgee with the Edward river, and is gener-
ally known as the Murrumbidgee district. One of its most
remarkable features is the immense extent of flat open marsh
land in the neighborhood of and for 20 miles below Swan
Hill, rendering it capable of supporting vast numbers of
either sheep or cattle. Near the Murray, about 350 miles
before reaching Albury, a manifest improvement takes place
in the character of the country adjoining the river; the
climate also changes for the better, being to a certain extent
within the reach of the coast, rains and breezes, and the
green open country in the back ground, especially on pass-
ing the junction of the Ovens river, about 160 miles below
Albury, gives promise of a good agricultural district. It is,
moreover, seldom visited by the hot winds so prevalent
during the summer all over the lower portion of the Murray
valley. That valley with the Murrumbidgee district, piay
be regarded as a great pastoral district, capable of support-
ing from two to three millions of sheep and cattle. Many
years will probably elapse before the rich alluvial lands
bordering on the Murray and its tributaries will be occupied
and cultivated to any extent, and it certainly behoves the
interest and should be the policy of the colony of New
South Wales, to hasten such an event as much as possible,


not only by a liberal land policy, but by the construction
throughout the Riverine district of cheap railways , as
nothing would tend more by this means to people these vast
solitudes now fed over by sheep and cattle only, with a
numerous and industrious agricultural population.
It is obviousfrom whathas been already said, how essential
it is to the financial success of any railway system carried out
as a whole, or on a large scale in Australia, that the cost of
construction should be kept down as low as possible, while
the main object of such an extended system should be not
simply an improved mode of transit between leading towns
and cities, but a well considered scheme of internal com-
munication having in view the opening up of the whole
country from north to south, as well as from east to west;
not so much with a view to rapid travelling as to the econo-
mical and safe transport of goods, passengers, and produce.
Almost eveiy new line constructed in this manner through a
thinly populated district, would attract settlers to its vicinity,
and a remarkable instance of this tendency is given by
Captain Galton, in his “report on the Railways of the
United States.” He states that the “ Illinois Central Rail-
way,” leading through Illinois from Cairo, to Dubuque on the
Mississippi, with a branch line to Chicago,—runs for the
greatest part through prairie land without trees and that,
when the line was opened, the country through which it
passed, was nearly uninhabited. Stations were however
placed at every 8 or 10 miles, round which villages and in
some cases towns sprung up in a very short time, while fields
of corn and herds of cattle are now to be seen on every side.
And in order to show the increased value of the land adjacent


to the railway, the Railway Company are selling their land,
consisting of 2,345,000 acres granted to them to aid them in
the construction of the railway, at prices varying from 5
to 25 dollars an acre, although the ordinary upset price of
land in the United States is 1| dollar an acre. The method
by which the State Government of the United States induces
a company to construct a railway, by liberal grants of land
in States where the waste lands are valueless without means
of communication, is one which has worked well in America,
and would no doubt work equally well in the Australasian
colonies, where, as a general rule, railways made by the Go-
vernment have not been successful, in a financial point of
view, while the encouragement given to private companies
in America for the construction of railways by means of
grants of land, has proved eminently successful. It has not
only directly benefited the different States through which
the lines run, by enhancing the value and the price of land,
but it has also facilitated the rapid settlement of the country
as well as the development of its resources, particularly in
those localities where the land is suitable for agricultural
purposes. In all new territories in America, the land is sur-
veyed in blocks, each containing one square mile ; the rail-
way company, to whom land is granted, is allowed to take
(in addition to the actual land required for the line), a
specified quantity, in alternate lots, on each side, within a
certain distance from the line, and this system gives good
security to capitalists for their investments in railway shares.
It appears that in South Australia, an Act was passed in
December 1867, to guarantee any company that would con-
struct a railway from Port Augusta northward. 200 miles,
interest at the rate of 5 per cent, per annum, on .£3750 per
mile. Within 11 months from the passing of the Act no
less than jive applications were made in Adelaide, by London
capitalists who were desirous of taking the contract. It was
finally taken in the latter part of 1868 by two companies,
who simultaneously sent in formal tenders, and have since
united to carry out the work, paying the Government £SOOO
as a deposit, to be forfeited if the work is not duly proceeded
with. The provisions of the Act, which is extremely favor-


able to the colony, very fully set forth the duties of the
company undertaking the work, and their chief features are
as follows : —“ The Government leases to the company, for a
term of 99 years, at a rental of 20s. per annum, all lands of
the Crown, required for the construction of the railway and
of the necessary stations and buildings. Within 6 years from
date of contract, the line is to be constructed, and to be opened
for traffic of goods and passengers;—the guage of the perma-
nent way is to be 5 feet 3 inches (the same as that of the
main lines, and the rails to be of iron of not less than 401bs.
to the yard); the line to be adapted for the use of locomo-
tives or horses. The Government has power ,to appoint an
officer to inspect the works, in course of construction, and
one member of the board of directors, or other governing
body of the company, to exercise supervision and control, and
to have a right of veto on their transactions. The minimum
number of trains to be run is provided by the Act, and the
passenger trains are to travel at a speed not less than eight
miles an hour, including stoppages. All monies received
after paying the working expenses of the line, are to be paid
weekly into the Government treasury to the credit of the
company. Accounts of receipt and expenditure are to be
rendered monthly, and audited every six months. On the
completion of every 10 miles of the railway to the satisfaction
of the Government, and their being declared open for traffic,
the Government pays the company on 30th June and 31st
December, such sum of money as, with the net receipts for
traffic, will amount to 5 per cent, per annum on the capital
actually expended in the construction of such portion of
railway, not exceeding an average of £3750 for each mile. If
the net traffic receipts for any six months exceeds 5 per cent.,
one-half of such excess will be applied towards payment of
any sums that may have been previously paid by the Govern-
ment upon its guarantee, which ceases at the expiration of
30 years from the time when the first 10 miles are declared
open for traffic. The Government may purchase the line at
any time, on giving 12 months’ notice, at a price to be fixed
by valuation of the stock, plant and buildings, exclusive of
leased land. And finally, if the company does not fulfil all


the conditions of the lease, the Supreme Court of the colony
is authorised and empowered to declare the lease void, and
the railway, and all works connected therewith, are then
forfeited to the Crown.
It will be observed that the system of a guaranteed in-
terest, adopted by the South Australian Government, is that
which was first adopted in this colony, and which is also the
mainspring of railway extension in India, where,, as a rule,
the Government does not construct the railways, but mei’ely
exercises a salutary supervision over them. That the system
works well, is proved by the fact that the capital required to
construct these lines, both in South Australia and India, is
provided without any difficulty by London capitalists, and
the same result would no doubt take place in this colony, if
the Government (for the time being) would inaugurate a
liberal railway policy. It cannot be too often repeated, that
what the country wants is certain and cheap means of access
at the rate of say 5 miles an hour for goods, and 10 miles an
hour for passengers, until the traffic increases so much as to
render it expedient to travel faster ; and that there is no
necessity for incurring the heavy expense of constructing any
extensions of Railways (other than main trunk lines) whether
in New South Wales, in Victoria, or in Queensland, adapted
for a high speed and worked by locomotive engines at a high
rate of cost. In fact, there appears to be no reason why,
with proper precautions, a line of railway should not be
worked both safely and economically by a combination of
horse power and of steam power adapted for heavy and
light traffic. For instance, we will suppose a single line of
railway to be 20 miles in length, having a station at each end,
with an intermediate station and siding at the middle, and a
siding (not less than one mile in length) at a distance of 4
to 5 miles from each terminal station. Calling these stations
A and B, and the intermediate half way station C, we will
suppose that a quick passsenger train travelling at the rate of
20 miles an hour, starts simultaneously from each end of the
line, and is immediately followed by a goods’ train, travelling
at a speed of 5 miles an hour. Each passenger train will
arrive at the intermediate half way station C, at the same


time ; but should one train, by any unforeseen accident be
detained or start a little later than the other, the one which
arrives first at the station 0 must wait on its siding until
the other comes up, thus obviating the possibility of any col-
lision. And the goods’ trains, starting from each end of the
line at the same time, arrive at their respective sidings, and
there await the passage of the quick passenger trains, which
pass on without stopping. In this manner, should the trade
require it, each engine may make four trips a day, at inter-
vals of 4 hours, or thereabouts, without any interference
with the slow horse trains, and it is obvious that this method
of working a line of railway, may be extended to any length
of line by dividing it into sections of 20 miles, each section
being worked by its respective engines, of a light class of
construction, whilst the heavy goods trains proceed through-
out the whole distance. It is clear that the success of such
an arrangement must be dependent on the strictest punctu-
ality in starting the trains, but in any mode of working a
line of railway, this is indispensable, as it may be called the
main spring on which the whole system mainly depends :
without punctuality, the maintenance of strict discipline,
and sucn a distribution of duties amongst the employees of
the line as will secure personal accountability through every
grade of the service, no railway is likely to succeed, as the
travelling portion of the public would certainly not be dis-
posed to travel by any line on which they could not calcu-
late the time of their arrival at their destination with some
degree of precision.
Ilarltodij Snsfcm of America*
The encouragement given to private companies for the
construction of railways in the United States, by means of
grants of land, has proved eminently successful, more par-
ticularly in localities where the land is of good quality and


the climate favourable. ISTothing can be more simple, expe-
ditious and cheap, than the means of obtaining an Act for the
establishment of a Railway Company in America. A public
meeting is held, at which the project is discussed, and adopted,
and a deputation is appointed to apply to the Legislature,
which usually grants the Act without expense, delay, or offi-
cial difficulty, and although the State itself has rarely under-
taken the execution of railways, it holds out in many cases
sufficient inducements, in different forms, to stimulate the
formation of railway companies. In all cases, the Acts
creating the companies, fix a time within which the works
must be completed, under pain of forfeiture, and the traffic
in shares before the definite constitution of the company, is
strictly prohibited. The general system upon which the
railway companies are organized, is one which appears to
afford a good guarantee for efficient management. A railway
is managed by a well-paid president, in whom the whole ex-
ecutive power is vested ; —he is responsible for the efficient
and economical working of the line. A body of directors,
generally good men of business, unpaid , (excepting on par-
ticular occasions) are appointed to watch over the interests of
the shareholders, and to see that the president does his duty ;
and also, to take care that the accounts are kept in such a form,
and with such checks, that malversation cannot take place.
The shareholders have the privilege of electing the president
and directors annually, instead of being compelled to elect
them for three years, as is the case in England; they therefore
possess a direct control over the management of their affairs. *
Such is a brief outline of the railway policy of the United
States, where the railway system has been carried out more
successfully than in any other country in the world. Formed,
in the first instance, to carry a limited amount of traffic, the
American railways are usually single lines, sidings being
provided at convenient distances. Collision is impossible, for
the first train which arrives at a siding, must enter it and
remain there until the following train arrives. Instances
may be given of railways which traverse wide extents of
* From “Report on the Railways of the United States,” by
Captain Douglas Galton, R.E.


comparatively unpopulated districts in America, as in the
Valley and State of Mississippi, in Louisiana, Florida,
Alabama, Illinois, Michigan, and Indiana. These are
frequently detached lines unconnected with the vast network
of railways in the old Atlantic States. In the structure of
the lines, also, principles have been adopted which have been
attended with great economy. For instance, American
engineers do not impose on themselves the difficult and
expensive condition of flat gradients and curves of large
radius, and the consequence has been to reduce in a very large
proportion thecostof earth works, bridges, and viaducts, even in
parts of the country where the character of the surface is by
no means favorable for the construction of a railway.
But the chief source of economy has arisen from the
structure of the permanent way. In some cases where the
traffic is small the rails consist of flat bars of iron, 2| inches
broad and 6-10ths of an inch thick, spiked to planks of timber
laid longitudinally on cross sleepers, so as to form a con-
tinuous bearing. Some of the most profitable railways, and
those of which the maintenance has proved least expensive,
have been constructed in this manner. The station houses,
booking offices, and other buildings indispensably required,
are likewise slight and cheaply constructed of timber, supplied
from the nearest forest at no greater cost than that of felling
and sawing it. On some of the best lines in the more
populous Atlantic States, a little more display is exhibited,
and the timber bridges are constructed in a peculiar method
of trusswork with stone piers and abutments, the cost of such
bridges varying from £2 10s. per foot for 60 feet span to £6
10s. per foot for 100 feet span, for a single line of rails.
The enormous sums that have been expended in England
on railway bridges, stations, and other “adjuncts,” should be
taken, not as a guide, but as a caution for us to avoid such
lavish expenditure. Thus we find stations that have cost
from £200,000 to <£300,000 in London, and these sums are
mere “bagatelles” when compared with the expenditure on
bridges and viaducts, some of which have cost a sum which,
properly laid out, would construct 100 miles of railway in
Australia.


Jlailfoag €xhnmn in Australia.
Amongst other propositions which have been made for the
purpose of promoting the formation of railways in Australia,
is the following . d hat in order to create an inducement
to all classes of the community to subscribe towards the
establishment of a general system of railways in New
“ South Wales, it is highly desirable to petition the Legisla-
ture to make provision in any new arrangement of the
“ iaxid regulations, that, in lieu of a Government guarantee,
either for principal or interest of the capital subscribed,
all subscribers to railroads in the colony which shall
“ receive the sanction of the Government, shall have the
privilege of selecting, at the upset price, portions of the
unappropriated lands, equal in amount to the sums paid
“ the Treasury by subscribers for their various calls
“ upon their shares in the said railroad.”
may be said of this proposition that the principle
of making the public lands of the colony bear the expense,
either wholly or in part, of such works of general utility as
railroads, tramroads, or other improved means of communi-
cation is undoubtedly a correct one to act upon, and is one
which has been adopted with great success in the United
States , but the mode proposed of allowing to each individual
subscriber to any railroad the privilege of selecting at the
upset price portions of unalienated lands in any part of the
colony equal to the amount of his subscription, is open to
several objections, not the least of which would be the con-
fusion that would arise from the transfer of shares upon
which a portion only of the calls had been paid up and the
difficulty of apportioning amongst the various subscribers the
different amounts due on their shares. A far simpler and
more practical plan would be to vest such a privilege in the


company itself, or rather to grant to such railway company,
in fee simple, not only all public land required for the
railway itself and for stations and workshops, &c., but also
an additional extent of land on either side of the railway in
proportion to the capital expended in the construction of the
line at the rate of the minimum upset price of the land at
the’time. In this way the company would be put m
possession of an extensive tract of land on either side of the
line which villages and townships would be formed, and
a greatly increased value would be thus given to the whole of
the surrounding country retained by the State, whilst, in a
financial o point of view, the re-sale, in suitable lots, of the
land acquired by the company, would probably more than re-
imburse it for the cost of construction of the line, thus
rendering it a profitable investment for the capitalists, and
one moreover, which would be free of all risk, as the land,
if unsold, would always represent a certain amount of fixed
capital, which would ofier the best possible guarantee for the
extension of the railway system into the interior, without
burthening the public treasury with a heavy item of cost,
either by actual gifts of pecuniary grants or by the system of
guaranteed dividends.
The simple proposition would then be, that any com-
pany or association undertaking the construction of any rail-
road or tramway in the Australian colonies, should upon
proof of say 50 per cent, of their capital being paid up,
(previous to which no traffic or transfer of shares should be
permitted), receive a grant of an extent of land on either
side of such railroad or tramway equal in amount, at the
minimum upset price of 20s. an acre, to that of the paid up
capital, whatever that might be; such land to be held in
trust by the directors of the company until the completion
of the line of rail or tramway, when an additional grant of
land equal to the capital expended should be made to the
company, after which the whole of the land so granted
would be open for sale or lease, as might be found most
advantageous to the shareholders.
In this manner the Government (or rather the com-
munity) would at no actual outlay on its part obtain the


immense advantage arising from the construction of a most
useful and necessary public work, together with the improved
revenue and the increased value given to the unalienafced
public lands generally in the district through which the rail-
way would pass. Provision would of course have to be
made to enforce _ upon the company the fulfilment of its
undertaking within a certain time, proportioned to the leno-th
of the hue, and the difficulties of its execution, and a
thoroughly competent engineer would require to be appoin-
ted by the Government to exercise a strict supervision over
the works. Amongst the conditions with which such railway
companies “ in posse” might be required to comply, would be
the following, viz. :
1. A limited period of possession, generally for 99
years, after which the establishment to be given up in a
good working condition to the State, the engines and
machinery together with the rolling stock being taken at a
valuation.
2 -_ The reservation by the State'of the right to purchase
the railway at a fair value after a given number of years’
possession.
3. The tolls to be specified at fixed and moderate rates.
4. The nature of the works to be clearly defined, and
the system for drainage, the manner of crossing roads and
rivers, the limits of curves and gradients, and width of gua«-e
to be specified.
5. The mails and despatches to be carried free of charge,
and the military, or the police, when on duty, to be carried
at half fares; while every facility is to be given to the
transporting of large bodies of men or of military stores
along the line in cases of necessity.
6. The preservation of the railway and the safety of its
working to be subject to the control and supervision of a
public department, empowered to enquire minutely into the
causes of railway accidents, to examine witnesses on oath,
and to call for all requisite books and accounts, and to pub-
lish an annual report,
7. The duties of this department (which would be
something in the nature of a Board of Control) would be to


enquire into, and to report upon the merits of all railway
projects, previous to the granting of an Act of Incorpora-
tion. A board thus constituted of individuals selected for
the task on account of their possessing a general knowledge
of the business and matters submitted to them, besides hear-
ing and examining the representations and arguments either
favorable or adverse to the project, should be enabled to
obtain in addition to the evidence produced by the parties
themselves, that of independent agents of its own selection,
and in the case of claims for compensation, where private
landed property is required for the railway, to be advised by
its own assessor, as to the degree in which compensation
should be made to individual claimants, on equitable pnn-
If ft were practicable in the Australian colonies to
make the selection of the line of country through which a
railway or tramway were to be carried depend upon the
terms on which the land could be obtained, the amount ot
claims for compensation would be reduced to a minimum,
but it is very seldom that this can be done, and since nothing
is more certain that a railway either by an adjoining station
or some other cause, will materially raise the value of the
land or premises in its vicinity, a proprietor should not be
entitled to a high rate of remuneration for a portion ot las
estate, when it can be proved that the value of such estate
will be greatly enhanced by the construction of a railway.
pars* Crndxon on gaxlionos.
The subject of horse-power applied to railways or tramways,
is one of very great importance in all the Australian colonies,
where horses a e plentifuland horse-feed is visually cheap, and
it has been tco much the fashion, when bringing prominent y
into view the value of the steam locomotive on railways, to


ignore altogether, or to speak in the most disparaging way of
our old and faithful friend the horse. Where the traffic is
considerable, both in goods and in passengers, and the gradi-
ents are good, there can be no doubt that the cost of haulage
by steam power will be less than that by horses, but on the
other hand where the traffic is light, and the gradients steep,
the economical woi’king of a railway by horse power admits
of no question. The remarks on this subject by a competent
authority, Sir Henry Parnell (afterwards Lord Congleton),
although written some years back, are not the less true, and
they apply particularly to the colonies of Australia at the
present time. He says : “ The heavy expense, which is
“ proved by experience to be unavoidable, in keeping the
railways and engines in repair, when great speed is the ob-
“ ject, will, in numerous cases, soon make it evident that no
■“ dividends can be paid to the shareholders, and the cheaper
method of using horse power will be adopted. This has
recently happened on a railway, where although the traffic
■“ on it was very considerable, both of goods and passengers,
“ the cost of using steam power absorbed nearly all the money
they received, and accordingly, a case having been made
41 by an eminent engineer to sho vv that if horse powor were
“ employed, the traffic would afford a dividend, the use of
“ steam power was discontinued, and the result proved the
41 change to be completely successful.”'^
The exclusive admirers of the modern fast railway system,
with its express trains rushing at the rate of 45 miles an hour
on the top of high embankments, or at the bottom of dreary
cuttings, with an occasional tunnel to enliven the traveller, will
probably object to the employment of horse poweron a railway
at a sober speed of 10 or 12 miles an hour, that it is out of date y
and will bear no comparison with the “ iron horse.” Such per-
sons would do well to bear in mind that the latter is a some-
what expensive animal both in his prime cost and in his feed,
and also that he is very liable to get out of order in his in-
ternal arrangements. In order to show T one item only, viz.,
the prime cost of the “ iron horse,” the Minister for Works
* “ Treatise on Roads,” by Sir Henry Parnell.


in New South Wales, in reply to members of the Legislative
Assembly, stated in October last that the Government had
ordered four locomotive engines from England, the probable
cost of which would be .£ll,OOO ; and that they had ordered
from Messrs. Mort, Vale, and Lacy, six locomotive engines,
in addition to the ten formerly ordered from them, in accord-
ance with their contract for the supply of rolling stock. The
cost of these engines when placed on the railway would be
.£19,500. We perceive, therefore, by this short statement,
that the cost of a locomotive engine, landed in the colony,
and adapted for the narrow guage of 4 feet 84 inches, is
£3250 !
That the real value of the railway is not wholly depen-
dent on the exclusive employment upon it, of steam locomo-
tive power, will be evident from the following extract from
Mr. Wood’s “ Treatise on Railroads,” a work, which although
published some years ago, is not quite “ out of date,” as the
facts contained in it remain uncontroverted as well as incon-
trovertible. He says, at page 632, after showing that the
steam locomotive performs its work most economically
with a maximum load at a speed of from eight to twelve miles
an hour, “ It may not be always convenient, or practicable
“ to obtain a maximum load ■ for the convenience of the
“ traffic, it may be necessary that the trains should make a
“ certain number of trips each day, whether there be a cpm-
“ plete load or not; in the same manner as a stage coach is
“ obliged to stcrt, if it has not obtained a full complement of
“ passengers ; and in this case or others where the traffic is
“ not considerable, the quantity of goods to be conveyed from
“ one place to another, may either be so inconsiderable as
“ not to afford employment for one engine, or the nature of
“ the traffic may be such, as may require so many trips each
“ day, and thus reduce the quantity to be taken at once
“ below that of a profitable quantity with engines ; and
“ therefore, in some cases horses may he more economical than
“ locomotive engines.
The locomotive engine, it is well known, works with
the greatest efficiency, when it has to encounter an uniform
resistance at a regular speed, but on the varying inclines of


a railway the resistance is always varying, and one great
drawback to the locomotive is that we are compelled to use
the same engine for the varying loads and resistances. We
may lessen its useful effect and slightly diminish its con-
sumption of fuel, but we cannot diminish its weight, nor re-
duce the size of the boiler or machinery in proportion to the
varying loads. Another great disadvantage of the locomo-
tive engine is the great proportion which the dead weight
of the engine, tender and carriages, bears to the load re-
quired to be moved. According to published reports on
railways, the ordinary average weight of a passenger train is
6 1 tons, to which if we add the weight of the engine and
tender (say 33 tons) we have a total dead weight of 100
tons. Supposing that there are 250 passengers in the train,
the whole weight of these with their luggage will not exceed
25 tons at the utmost, so that, in order to move this weight,
no less than 1 5 tons of dead or unprofitable weight must be
put in motion, or three times the weight of the load to be
transported.
By the use of horses, however, we can always adapt the
power to the weight required to be moved, and this for eco-
nomy of ti’ansport is an enormous advantage,—and so admi-
rably is the horse adapted by his physical conformation for
the exertion of tractive force, that he is enabled to overcome
with ease any inclination that can possibly occur on a rail-
way, on which he takes his purchase from the rough surface
of the stone ballast between the rails, which is admirably
adapted for giving him a firm foothold, against which he can
use his muscular force and his weight, with the greatest
effect; —whereas the locomotive engine must take its pur-
chase from the adhesion of the wheels to the rails, and this
adhesive power must exceed the tractive power of the engine
on the rails , —otherwise, the wheels will slip, and the engine
will not progress. In coupled engines the adhesive force is
due to the load on all wheels coupled to the driving wheels,
and on a smooth macadamised road, the resistance of friction
is found to be about l-30th of the whole load, so that, calling
the load, or W, one ton, then F, or the frictional resistance
will be 2240 -=- 30—74.7 lbs., and this represents the tractive
force or “ traction” of the horse on such smooth macadamised


On a well-made paved road ...
33
1 in 68
Oq a broken-stone pavement
65
1 in 344
On a gravel road
147
1 in 15.J
On a broken-stone surface on a
bottoming of concrete
46
1 in 49
On a railway ...
8
1 in 280
road. But on the roads which are usually to he met with in
the colonies, and which are neither metalled nor macadamised,
the frictional resistance may safely he estimated at 1-loth of
the load, or about 150 lbs. to the ton. Taking into conside-
tion the work to be done by a horse in overcoming the joint
resistances of friction and of gravity, on such roads, it will
be apparent how large a proportion of his tractive force will
be expended in overcoming these resistances,—and how little
of it will be left for the traction of the load. The econo-
mising, therefore, of the horses’ tractive power, is an
object of the first importance, and very great advantage
has been found to result from the construction of “ horse
tramwavs.”
So great is the advantage which has resulted from these
tramways, that a horse, by means of these tracks, will draw
nearly as great a load up an incline of 1 in 20, as he can do
upon a level and well-made macadamised road. In the long
ascent between the Iliver Clyde, and the Forth and Clyde
Canal at Glasgow, where trams of cast iron, nine inches
wide, are laid down, a horse will draw from 1 to 3 tons,
although the rate of ascent, in some parts of it, is 1 in 14.
It is now more than 20 years since this improvement was
adopted at Glasgow, —and if similar tramways of iron or of
stone were laid down on the great leading thoroughfares of
the colonies an immense saving would be effected in horse
draught, to say nothing of the increased speed that would
be acquired.
The following table serves to illustrate the force of
gravity and its effect upon different classes of road:—
Table 3.
Nature of the Road.
Friction in lbs.
per Ton on
a Level Plane.
Inclination on
which the Gravity
is equal
to the Friction.


The resistance to be overcome on an ordinary macadam-
ised I'oad (exclusive of gravity) amounting to about 64 lbs.
per ton, the advantage of the rail over the road is under
these circumstances as eight to one, and compared with a gravel
road it is more than eighteen to one. But this advantage is
much diminished when the load is made to ascend steep
inclines, such as 1 in 50, where we must add for gravity
45 lbs. + 8 lbs. =53 lbs. ; but on a macadamised road of
the same inclination the proportion will be 45 + 64 = 109 lbs.,
being less than twice the power required on the level, while
on the railway it will require nearly seven times that on the
level—this apparent anomaly being due to the greater pro-
portion which the friction bears to the gravity of the load
in ascending inclines on common roads.
The tractive power of a good draught horse may be
safely estimated as being equal to a force of 140 lbs. at his
ordinary walking pace of miles an hour, continued for 8
hours a day, or for 20 miles; then dividing 140 lbs. by
the power required to move 1 ton on a level railway, or 8 lbs.,
we find that one horse can draw 174 tons for 20 miles in 8
hours, and it has been proved that a good horse is fully
equal to this as his daily work on a level railway. If we
increase his speed to 5 miles an hour, his ti'active force will
be reduced to 100 lbs. or 12|- tons, and so on, inasmuch as
in estimating the useful effect of a horse one law is very
obvious, which is, that as the load is increased the velocity
must necessarily be diminished in a certain ratio, and the
measure of a horse’s tractive power must therefore depend on
the speed at which he is made to travel. Now, there is a
certain speed at which a horse can draw no load and can only
move his own weight, and, on the other hand, there is some
load so great, that the horse is unable to move it. In
both of these two extreme cases the useful effect is “ nil,"’
inasmuch as it depends upon the load which is carried,
and the speed at which it is carried. The greatest
speed of a horse unloaded is usually taken at 15 miles
an hour, and from this his tractive power is calculated
at (15 —Y) 2 in pounds avoirdupois, for a good strong horse
and (12 —Y) 2 for that of an inferior horse, Y representing
the velocity in miles per hour. According to the first


formula, and assuming Y at 3 miles an hour, then the tractive
power of the horse will be represented by 144 lbs. on a level
road, while, according to the second formula, it would only
amount to 81 lbs. Taking Yat 10 miles an hour, then
25 lbs. will represent the tractive power by the first formula,
while, by the second, it would only amount to 4 lbs.—the
ratio of power at these two velocities being as 4 to 81.
It is certain, however, that horses cannot be employed
safely on a railway at a higher speed than 10 or 12 miles an
hour by the ordinary mode of traction, although Mr.
Stevenson, in his work on the “ Civil Engineering of North
America, states that he was conveyed by horses on the
the Mohawk and Hudson Railway from Schenectady to
Albany, a distance of sixteen miles, in 75 minutes, stoppages
included. The car carried 12 passengers and was drawn by
two horses, which ran short stages of 5 miles, from which it is
apparent that it would be practicable to maintain in this
manner a communication between two towns 100 miles
apart, in about 6| hours. But at such a speed as 15 miles
an hour, in the absence of any mechanical appliance by which
the horse can be saved from the consequences of falling or of
the carriage over-running him, especially in descending inclined
planes, there would be considerable danger unless the action
of gravity were counteracted by locking or “skidding” the
wheels.
It has been proposed, however, to remedy this by a
simple contrivance, or “ safety carriage,” by which means the
horse or horses may be employed on railroads at any rate of
speed of which he is capable, without the risk of falling; it
is also intended as a machine to accumulate momentum by
combining the weight of the horse with that of the carriage,
thus rendering him fit for accelerated motion. Some experi-
ments were made in England about 15 or 20 years back,
with one of these machines on the Croydon Railway, and the
result was so far satisfactory that it was shewn that the horse
could not fall at whatever speed he was urged, being partially
supported from springs fixed to a projecting frame, having
two large wheels with a bent axle, beneath which the horse
was placed.


The figure in the frontispiece represents this contrivance,
which the inventor termed the “ horse motor,” and which lie
contemplated introducing on branch, or short lines of railway
in England as a cheap and efficient substitute for the
locomotive engine, where the traffic was insufficient to pay for
the working expenses of that costly power. He also believed
that a speed of fully twenty miles an hour could be realised by
his improved method of applying horse power with a light
load, and the writer fully concurs in this view, and considers
that this invention (now lapsed) might be introduced
successfully on many of our future branch lines of railway in
Australia.
Cost of Construction.
In districts where the population and the traffic are
insufficient to defray the heavy expense attendant on the use
of steam power on a railway, it is indisputable that a line
worked by horse power might be constructed at about one-
fourth of the expense of a steam railway in the Australian
colonies. A steam railway requires not merely the cost of
heavy rails and sleepers but “ turn tables,” “ switches,”
“points,” “ cross-ways,” “signals,” “locomotives,” “fuel,”
“ workshops,” “ steam engines,” and costly mechanical tools,
with a host of skilled workmen to be ready at a minutes
notice to repair any injury that may have been inflicted
upon the “ iron horse,” all of which precludes economy in
these colonies.
On the other hand the economical working of a line of
railway by horse power admits of no question, as the power,
i. e., the number of horses can always be exactly accommo-
dated to the amount of the traffic or of the load to be conveyed,
which cannot bedonebythe steam locomotive. Again the speed


being small, comparatively speaking, the public roads might
be ci’ossed on a level, thus saving the building of numerous
road and foot bridges, with their approaches. The cuttings
and fillings being light, the cost of earthwork would be in-
considerable, and where embankments were required of
considerable length, these might be formed from side cut-
tings. Another consideration is that a country that might
answer very well for a horse railway might be almost imprac-
ticable (except at an enormous outlay) for a railway to be
worked by the locomotive engine.
There is another matter connected with this subject
which is deserving of attention, which is the use of rails,
or “ trams ” on ordinaxy roads, and on the streets of large
towns, in order to facilitate the distribution of local
passenger and goods traffic. Notwithstanding the objections
which have been urged against the system of street tram-
ways, there can be little doubt that where the streets are
wide and straight as they generally are in our colonial towns,
the system is one which might be carried out with great
advantage to the public. The experimental Pitt-street tram-
way in Sydney was a failure, because in the first instance
the street itself was too narrow, and in the next, because
the form of the rail was objectionable. The most simple
form adapted for ordinary vehicles has a guide or flange
on its outer edge so as to keep the vehicles within the
tram; the next form is that which forms a railway for
flanged wheels, and a tramway for ordinary vehicles, where
it is intended that the ordinary traffic shall have the benefit
of the tramway, as in New York, where many of the goods
waggon proprietors and those of public vehicles, have the
wheels made to the guage of the tramway, and who use it
accordingly without any impediment to the tramway omni-
buses which are large, commodious, and well ventilated, and
altogether superior to the badly constructed, ill-ventilated,
and generally over crowded omnibuses in common use in
colonial towns and cities. The chief object in designing
forms of rails for street railways, is to make the rail answer
all the purposes of the tramway, and at the same time not
offer any obstruction to the ordinary traffic; also that the


groove in which the flange runs shall not get clogged up,
but shall work itself clear, it having been found where the
groove is too deep and to wide, that the narrow wheel tires
of other vehicles get into the groove and are often wrenched
off in consequence. The sketch (Fig. 10) shows a form of
rail, invented by Mr. Light, and hence called the “ Light
tram rail,” constructed of wrought iron, and weighing from
45 to 50 lbs. per yard, the part marked A. being used as a
tramway for ordinary vehicles, while that marked B. is
1 for vehicles having flanged wheels,
to be quite deep enough to guide
adapted
found t
the groove being
the wheels, and
offering little obstruction to the ordinary traffic, while the
inside bevel of the rail allows small pebbles that may get
into the groove to. be pushed out of the way by the flange of
the wheel without being crushed. This form of rail appeal’s
to be well adapted for laying along public roads, where it is
intended that the ordinary traffic shall have the benefit of
the tramway. The following is an approximate estimate of
the cost of construction per mile of single line
The “Light” Tram rail System,
No. of
Pieces.
Description of Pieces.
Weights.
Cost per
mile.
per ton.
tons. cwt.
78 1
& s.
502 Rails @ 50 lbs. per yard ..,
1,004 Fish plates, (Sj 7.jlbs. each
4 ’ ol6 Nuts i @ I'*lbs 1 '* lbs - eadl • ■
565 17
30 3
14 0
15 S
11 9
7,680 Spikes, @ |lb. each
1.056 Cross sleepers, 9 ft. long, (10 x 6) @
502 Longitudinal bearers, (8 x 5) @ ...
1,257 Guage bars, 174 lbs. each
4,220 Wedges and keys @ £5 per 1000 ...
1.056 Trenches, 9 ft. long, 14 in. wide,
and 12 in. deep, filled with broken
14 0
2G4 0
150 12
78 8
21 0
stone
316 13
Laying 1760 yards, and filling in be-
tween the rails with stone, (a
3s. 6d. per yard
308 0
21,293
Total
93 3
1761 10


If to this be added the cost of freight and insurance on
93 tons at 30s. per ton, the total cost of the permanent way
will amount to £lß3l per mile.
It will be observed that this estimate comprises
longitudinal bearers as well as cross sleepers of wood, which
are bedded in trenches 4 feet 6 inches apart and filled with
broken stone. The necessity for this is obvious, since it is
found that the under side of a wooden sleeper, when bedded
on earth, is soon attacked by that natural enemy of wood,
the “ white ant,” and the sleeper is rapidly destroyed.
Creosoting the timber is, no doubt a preservative, but not an
infallible one, while the French method of driving out the
sap of the green timber by a solution of sulphate of copper
under pressure is still more efficacious, but is an expensive and
troublesome process. It might no doubt be objected to the
system of trenches filled with broken stone that this material
is not always to be procured in Australia where it is wanted,
except at a heavy cost for carriage. In such cases clay can
however genei’ally be procured, and burned clay is a tolerable
substitute for broken stone. Apart from their rapid decay,
wooden sleepers are by no means so perfect in construction
of permanent way as from their general use would appear to
be the case. In the fundamental matter of “ guage ” their
efficiency is absolutely dependent on the ballast. If the ends
of the sleepers be not thoroughly packed, or be even
insufficiently “ boxed up,” both of which cases are only too
common and difficult to avoid, the pressure of the load on the
ends bends the sleeper up in the middle , throwing the rail-
heads further apart. On the very narrow banks of some
single-line railways hardly any amount of packing or
“ boxing up ” can keep the sleepers from being high in the
middle. It is believed, therefore, that the principle of
supporting the rails directly on wooden cross sleepers placed
right across the track is essentially bad in principle as well as
defective in practice, and the writer has already called
attention to this point when advocating the method of placing
the sleepers at an angle of about 45 degrees with the rails,
thus approximating to the conditions of a continuous bearing.
But this method is inferior to that of laying the rails on


longitudinal wooden bearers, which are themselves supported
on wooden cross sleepers bedded in broken stone, thus
securing the great desideratum of a continuity of bearing
under the rail combined with a moderate degree of flexibility
or partial yielding under the load with subsequent recovery,
for it should be borne in mind that the constant jar or
vibration produced by an unyielding material under the rails
gradually loosens the various parts, rendering continual
attention necessary in order to prevent the rapid disorgan-
isation of the whole structure. But an objection may be
made to the use of longitudinal bearers and cross sleepers on
the ground of the large additional quantity of timber
required, being at least one-fourth more than in a cross-
sleeper road, and although this objection might have some
weight in England, where good timber is deal*, yet it can
hardly be said to apply to a country like Australia, in
which there is an abundance of good timber fit for railway
purposes.
It will probably be many years before iron rails can be
manufactured in the colonies at a less cost than they can be
imported from England or Belgium, and in the meantime we
must adopt the means that are placed at our disposal, and it
is believed that gum, bloodwood, box, or ironbark timber
might be prepared by saturating its pores with an insoluble
substance, so that it would become as hard and nearly as
durable as iron, and that in this state it might be used as
rails, which would possess great adhesiveness and thus confer
an additional tractive force on the locomotive engine, when
that power is employed. Wooden rails have been used in
America for sevei’al years, and an economical form of railway
was invented in England in 1845 by Mr. W. Prosser, in
which wooden rails were used, having guide wheels affixed to
the carriages at an angle of 45 degress, which worked against
the edges of the wooden rails. A short experimental line
was constructed on Wimbledon Common, the line being
partly of wood and partly of iron in order to test the merits
of both, and the experiment was so far satisfactory that it
demonstrated clearly that the use of guide wheels would
considerable reduce the cost of maintenance of railways, as


it prevents that oscillation which is so injurious and destruc-
tive to axles, carriages, and rails.
The wooden rails on Wimbledon Common were 6 inches
square, of common pine timber, and it was stated that an
engine adapted to run on wooden rails should not exceed the
weight of 10 or 12 tons, and that such an engine would have
equal tractive power to one of 16 or 20 tons running on iron
rails. The saving of cost in the superstructure alone
amounts to upwards of <£2ooo per mile, without calculating
the advantages proved by the experiments at Wimbledon of
having steep gradients and sharp curves, and thus avoiding
the expensive deep cuttings and high embankments, which
additional saving may be estimated at £l5OO more.
Mr. Prosser’s guide wheels supersede the use of the
flange on the driving or bearing wheels of engines, tenders,
and carnages, and the method is equally adaptable to iron or
wood. It unites the great desiderata of cheapness, safety,
and comfort in travelling, and the patentee, although
unsuccessful in having his method adopted in England,
deserves credit for a really useful invention in railway con-
struction. His method is shewn in Fig. 12, which represents
the wooden rails in section, together with the end elevation
of a railway carriage or engine fitted with the guide or safety
wheels.
A modified form of this arrangement is that which has
been adopted by Mr. Fell on the “ Mont Cenis Railway,” on
which the locomotive engine and carriages ascend inclines of
1 in 10, or even 1 in 7.
Another mode of construction with wooden rails and
with a central iron rail has been proposed, which would
secure equal efficiency and safety as Mr. Prosser’s method, but
not equal economy. The centre 'wheels of the carriages
run on a light iron rail of about 35 lbs. to the yard, these
wheels being grooved to tit the rails, while the other wheels
which run on the wooden rails are without flanges.
This mode of construction is shewn by Figs. 13 and 14,
which represent the elevation and section of a tram railway
of this description. The trams a, a, are of hard wood, 6


inches square/and are bolted to wooden cross-sleepers of gum,
box, or blood wood, 12 inches in diameter at the base, formed
of round timber, flattened to a width of 6 or 8 inches at the
top. The cross-sleepers are bedded in trenches (c) filled with
broken stone, —the wooden trams a, a, being trimmed slightly
bevelling, in order to pass oft' the rain water, and the whole
being connected together by the wrought iron tie bar e, e.
Such a superstructure as this would be quite competent to
carry a light locomotive engine of from 16 to 20 tons in
weight, but it is more particularly designed by the writer
with a view to the employment of horse power on branch
lines of railway in the colonies of Australia. The following
may be deemed a fair approximate estimate of the cost of the
superstructure per mile of single line :
Wooden Tram Rail System.
i £ s.
ong, 14 inches wide, and 12
ed with broken stone, at 65.... 316 13
feet long (12 x6)at 5s 264 0
'dwood bearers 6 x 6 in 21 feet
nar 10 per cent, for waste), at
266 12
’ lbs. each, 7 tons, 12cwt., at
6l 0
,at £5 per 1000 21 2
016 lbs., at 2d. per lb 33 9
t 35 lbs. per yard, 27 tons, 1 |
per ton | 209 0
ranee on the above, at £1 10s.
| 40 10
ds rails and filling in between |
roken stone, at 3s. 6d. per yard i 308 0
P
Total permanent way £ j 1520 6
1,056 Trenches 9 feet long, 14 inches wide, and 12
inches deep filled with broken stone, at 65....
1,056 Cross-sleepers, 9 feet long (12 x 6) at 5s
15,998 | Lineal feet of hardwood bearers 6 x 6 in 21 feet
lengths (allowing 10 per cent, for waste), at
4d. per foot
1,004 Guage bars at 17 lbs. each, 7 tons, 12 cwt., at
£8 per ton
4,220 Wedges and keys, at £5 per 1000
4,016 Bolts and nuts, 4016 lbs., at 2d. per lb
1,760 Yards of rails, at 35 lbs. per yard, 27 tons, 1
cwt., at £7 10s. per ton
Freight and insurance on the above, at £1 10s.
per ton
Laying 1760 yards rails and tilling in between
the rails with broken stone, at 3s. 6d. per yard
It may not be out of place to mention here that what
are termed “ tram railways’ appear to be coming in use even
in England, as a means of conveyance in some localities, for
the “ Times” of September 9th, 1869, says,—“ A prospectus


“ lias been issued of the ‘ Tram Railway Company of Great
“ Britain’ (limited) with a capital of £lOO,OOO, in shares of
“ £lO, to construct lines to act as feeders to railways, and to
“ bring them into communication with outlying towns and
“ districts. The proposed Board of Direction is respectable,
“ and the engineer-in-chief is Mr. Page, the architect of
“ Westminster Bridge, who has a system under which the
“ cost per mile is estimated at £2,000. Amongst the first
“ districts contemplated for its introduction are those of the
“ Teign Valley Railway in Devonshire, the vicinity of the
“ towns of Cambridge, and of Bolton, in Lancashire, —and
“ the great iron and coal fields of Yorkshire. The experi-
“ ment will be watched with interest alike for the benefit of
“ the shareholder's in existing railways, and by the trading
“ and agricultural classes at present removed from direct
“ access to the chief lines of traffic.”
Now, if tram railways can be found to offer a fair field
for the investment of capital in England, with its net-work
of railways crossing and re-crossing each other in every direc-
tion all over the kingdom, how much more so must they be
adapted as a means of conveyance in the colonies of Australia 1
More than 15 years ago Mr. W. Bridges Adams, civil engi-
neer, proposed to discard the costly railways used in England,
and his system consisted simply of rails, sleepers, dogs, and
joint plates, laid down on the natural surface slightly levelled,
and in this mode of laying down the rails it was estimated
that the cost would not exceed £2250 per mile run for horse
traction, —while that of a general line, when worked by loco-
motives, would not exceed £4,500 per mile run. Thus a
railway from Goulbum to Albury, on Mr. Adam’s plan,
would cost only £900,000 (the distance being about 200
miles) while one from Bathurst to Orange, a distance of about
36 miles, would cost only £152,000 and these two exten-
sions of the railway system of New South Wales are impe-
ratively required, and they should be pushed on with a little
more rapidity of execution than has hitherto been the case in
New South Wales.
The following estimate is for a wooden cross sleeper
railway with trenches under the sleepers, and laid with the


79
chairs*
“ Yignolles ” rail dii'ectly on the sleepers,
and held down by dogspikes as shown in Fig.
without
. 6:—
Pieced “ no * les ” cross sleeper system.
Weight.
Prices
per ton.
Cost per
mile.
502 “ Yignolles” rails @ 60 lbs. per yard
1,004 Fish plates, @ 7| lbs. each
2.008 Bolts ,
2.008 Nuts j ® lbs - each
tons. cwt.
94 5
& s.
683 7
30 3
14 0
15 8
7,680 Dogspikes, @ 1 lb. each
Cross sleepers, Bft. 6in. long, (lOx 5)
1.920 Trenches, 9 ft. long, 14 in. wide,
1.920 and 12 in. deep, filled with stone
1,257 Guage bars, @174 lbs. each
Laying 1760 yards, and filling in be-
| tween the rails, @ 3s. 6d. p yard
10 0
30 10
480 0
576 0
98 0
10 0
308 0
18,299
111 11
2221 8
Add freight'and insurance on 1114
tons, @ 30s. per ton
167 0
Total Permanent way.
2388 0
This system has been extensively adopted on the con-
tinent, the single headed “ Yignolles,” or “ contractors” rail,
being held in high estimation, and being successfully used
under the test of a very heavy traffic; hence it is obvious
that the ordinary cast iron chair is not necessary for the
security of the rail, and that it may be safely dispensed with.
The “ long joint ” chair of wrought iron is much used in
America for the single headed rail, the rails being spiked to
sleepers laid transversely, and the joint being secured by
means of a chair made of boiler plate, with a lip cut out on
each side and turned up ; the lip is barely three inches broad,
and projects about one inch and a half on each side of the
joint. It is stated that the lip soon works up, and when
hammered down is apt to break off, but this defect might
easily be remedied. An improved form of wrought iron
chair 14 inches in length, is shown in Fig. 9. The chair is
made to slide on to the rail, and is without any keys.


The form of rail as shown in Fig. 10 is the invention
of M. Loubat, from whom it takes its name. This kind of
rail is of wrought iron, and weighs from 35 to 40 lbs. per
lineal yard ; it has been found to answer well for light traffic
and for short lines of railway connecting the suburbs of large
towns. It is the form of rail used upon the tramway from
Paris to Versailles, and seems to be well adapted for street
and road railways. The guage of the Paris and Versailles
tramway is 4 feet 10 inches, so that the track of the horses
is inside the rails, and it would not be advisable to reduce
the width of guage below that standard for horse railways;
the very narrow guage of 3 feet 6 inches is not suited for
horse traction, inasmuch as the tread of two horses abreast
will fall upon the rails on this guage, and it is neither con-
venient nor advisable to yoke two or three horses in single
file on a railway, any more than it is on a road. The
ordinary width of carts and drays is about 5 feet, while the
width of track taken up by two horses abreast is 4 feet.
With a 5 feet 6 inch guage three horses might be yoked
abreast without interfering with the rails, and this guage is
one which, without greatly increasing the cost of construction,
will admit of carriages and trucks of sufficient width.
The fact that what are termed “ surface construction
railways,” are coming into use in Great Britain is a sufficient
proof that these railways are duly appreciated by the
English public. The apathy of the colonial public in the
Australian colonies with regard to railway matters, is at
least a remarkable feature in a country where the construc-
tion of economic railways is the great want of Hew South
Wales, both to the north, to the south and to the west of
Sydney.
The fine wheat lands in the vicinity of Orange, Mudgee,
Dubbo, and other parts of the western interior, are practi-
cally almost useless to the consumers in Sydney; and the
the cultivation of wheat, therefore, in those districts is, for
the most part, limited to the wants of the inhabitants and of
the adjacent station-holders: while the farmer finds that in
a prolific season it is more profitable to give his wheat to his
pigs than to sell it on the spot for perhaps two shillings a


bushel. At the same time, the inhabitants of Sydney and
of other towns are perhaps consuming flour, the produce of
wheat-growing states of North America or of Chili; and this
flour, burthened as it is with the cost of conveyance for
upwards of 8,000 miles, is yet sold in Sydney at a price not
exceeding that of the colonial article.
The present state of many of the leading lines of com-
munication in the interior is such as to render any comment
upon them unnecessary. Constructed for the most part in
the most primitive manner, the operation of cutting a track
through the forest is generally all that has been done towards
the formation of a road; while, owing to the want of the
necessary material for road metal, in most districts these
“ tracks ” offer in wet seasons the most serious impediments
to the transport of heavy goods, and soon become totally
unfit to carry even the most limited amount of traffic.
Every traveller in Australia admits this evil, and every
year renders the state of these tracks worse.
The remedy for this state of things is the “ surface ” or
“ road railway,” or “ tram-railway.” At present the waste
lands of the Crown in all the Australian colonies, may be
looked upon as so much “ raw material ” of very little value
until they are rendered not only accessible but easy of access.
The public, therefore, are as much interested in the economy
of railways as in the economy of manufactures : for it is such
improved means of communication that are the most power-
ful agents in promoting civilization and material prosperity.
In Australia, destitute as it is of large navigable rivers, the
formation of good lines of communication, either between
different parts of the interior, or between the interior and
the sea-coast, is most essentially necessary; and if this step,
so requisite for the permanent occupation of the country, be
not taken, the waste lands of the Crown must remain for an
indefinite period unoccupied and unimproved, and the tra-
veller in these vast regions may exclaim with the poet :
Ye Gods of quiet and of sleep profound,
Whose soft dominion o’er this country sways,
And all the widely silent places round !
—Castle of Indolence,


To return, however, to the immediate subject of this
section, which is the cost of construction of different kinds
of railway, the following is an approximate estimate of the
“ Macdonnell” system of way, with wrought iron longitu-
dinal sleepers and bridge rails :
No. of
Pieces.
The Macdonnel Way.
Bridge rails © 68 lbs. per yard
Wrought iron sleepers© 841bs. #yd.
Wood packing .
Bolts and Nuts © Ip lb. each.
Guage bars © 17 lbs. each
Laying 1760 yards and filling in be-
tween the rails, @ 3s. 6d. $ yard
Total
Add freight and insurance on 245
tons © 30s. per ton
Total permanent way
Assuming that the cost of the formation of the line of
a surface railway, including sidings, bridges, drains, and cul-
verts, with the requisite ballasting of the line, do not exceed
<£2ooo per mile, this sum, added to the cost of the perma-
nent way, on the Macdonnell system, will be £4575 per mile
of single way, exclusive of stations, machinery, and rolling
stock.
According to the preceding estimates of permanent way
materials, and assuming the cost of formation and ballasting
to be £2OOO per mile, the following sums will represent the


cost per mile of single way of the different modes of
construction: —
Description of Permanent Way.
Cost par Mile.
Wooden cross-sleeper system with cast-iron
chairs and 75 lb. rails ...
£4lOB
The “chair-sleeper” system, with cast-iron
chair sleepers and 60 lb. rails (equivalent to
751 b.) _ ...
Wooden cross-sleeper system, with longitudinal
wooden trams and central iron rail ...
The “Light” tram rail system ...
The “Vignolles” cross-sleeper system ...
The “Macdonnell” system, with longitudinal
wrought-iron sleepers and bridge rads
Summary.
The conclusions to he drawn from the preceding obser-
vations may be thus summarised :
Ist. That railways worked by steam locomotive power afford
the best roads for arterial or great trunk lines of com-
munication in the colonies of Australia.
2nd. That railways (other than great trunk lines) can be
constructed in Australia at a cost of £5OOO per mile of
single line on the principle of adopting steeper gradients
and decreased speed, to the exclusion of costly tunnels,
viaducts, and other expensive works of art.
3rd. That the existing roads may, in some cases, be made
available for the construction of tram railways at a very
small cost for earthworks, bridges, and culverts, without
interfering with the usual dray traffic, and that such
surface construction railways could, there is every reason
to believe, be constructed in the most solid and sub-
stantial manner for £4OOO per mile of single way,
inclusive of sidings, &c.
4th. That such road railways should be capable of being
worked either by horse power or light locomotive
engines—the former being employed for heavy goods


and agricultural produce, and the latter for the con-
veyance of mails and passengers at a speed of from 25
to 30 miles an hour. *
That a tram railway, to be worked exclusively by horse-
power, could be constructed in Australia at a cost not
exceeding £3OOO per mile, and that by certain improve-
ments in the application of horse-power to railways a
speed of from 15 to 20 miles an hour could be obtained
without injury to the horse and -with perfect safety to
the passengers. (Vide description of the “ Horse
Motor ” and plate in frontispiece.)
That as a general principle the waste lands of the
Crown, which are at the disposal of the Government of
each colony, should form the means, under proper
regulations, of promoting and initiating the execution of
such works by private associations or companies, and
that as cheap fares and moderate rates for the con-
veyance of goods and produce must depend on the
previous conditions of moderate cost in the original
construction and subsequent working of line of railway,
there can be little doubt that if these conditions are
adhered to such undertakings would prove "highly
remunerative to the undertakers.
That in order to create an inducement and encourage'
ment to capitalists, both in England and in the colonies,
for the undertaking of such works as railways in
Australia, it is not only desirable but absolutely
necessary that the colonial Government should grant
every assistance to the promoters of a railway company,
* A light description of engine and carriage has recently been used
on some of the home lines of branch railways, which appears to be
well adapted for light traffic. The total cost is from £lBOO to £2OOO,
accommodating 20 first-class and 96 second-class passengers. By the
use of bow strings with double movement, it can traverse curves of
5 chains radius, running on eight wheels, and travelling with the
load at the rate of 30 miles an hour. Of the £2OOO, the small engine
cost abut £1350 and the carriage £650. A still smaller description
of engine and carriage, to convey 24 first-class passengers only, will
cost about £l2OO.


both in surveys and other preliminary matters—should
give an Act of Incorporation free of cost, and should
grant to any company or association undertaking the
construction of any line of rail or tramway in the colony,
an extent of land on either side of such rail or tramway
equal at the minimum upset price of land in the colony
to the amount of paid vp capital of such company or
association. *
* The following paragraph on this subject appeared in a recent
colonial paper (the Australasian): —
“ A long-talked of New Zealand project, the railway between
“ Nelson and the West Coast Gold-fields, is attracting some attention
“ among speculative circles in London. The line was to be paid for
“in land at. the rate of 10,000 acres for each mile of railway
‘ ‘ constructed, the line being about 200 miles long. Colonel Maude,
“ of the Royal Engineers, has taken the matter up, and proposes that
“ a company be formed with a capital of £2,000,000, and names a
“ provisional committee. The names of the noblemen and gentle-
“ men, who Colonel Maude says will be the provisional directors, are
“ as follow :—Mr. H. Barnett, M.P. (of Hoare and Co.); Mr. Robert
“Baxter, Charles Clifford, the Duke of Manchester, Major J.
“H. Sharp, Sir George Grey, K. 0.8. ; Lord Bury, M.P. ; Lord
“ Colchester, Sir Andrew Waugh, Major-General Alexander, Sir W.
“ Wiseman, Major-General Kavanagh, the Hon. Reginald Capel, Mr.
“ Edwin Clarke, C.E.; and others.”






h“
-I
s
«
H
Ph
co
5
£
§
Pn
Ph
o
02
W
m
W .
cl, m
X g
w S
gS
SO
S w
kS S
s
H fe;
W «
o °
9
5;
i_ 4/3
fc w
O £
M
p H
b|
02
£h H
o I
pc*
O H
H g
ra S
O Q
O P
w
3
t
£
w
B
H
3
IH
£
§
w
Hi
5
Eh
O O
'T3T|t;,Hsnv § . . °
o • •
5?
o
■pmn §
-SUB9Hf) o'
OION O O CO
•soreM o£S °
i*o~
5
■Xrrenii9£)
•aon'BlJ
2 COO 00
® CO CO 10
•eoTJcaray 01 :
_«3
® -c# 00 to ®
2co oo co os •
•pirep.ii H"* J
rH
_«rt
<5 rH CO CO
** r* <M •
rH
<M
O (M Oi
Oso CO rtf CO •
•pirßlSurj w
CO 1-1
©
I
u
©
A
©
a
©
M
w
O M
• • -t & a
■■ ■ I .g
ag s I
aa a 5
: g : g g. g
d ?v
® .Sd ©
® P< *4 © O
do 7 o m d
O ©
«fH 2 rrt © 0
0(H , CLOfl-jd
(X) „«4H a® .d
d A ® O « „
•2 £ § 3 I S 3-3
1 00 g .2 -100.3*2
S g St § =
§t°3 2 £ o
o o o J? 2.9
o o «ho2coP h © h
O • • rH • • -J CO CO >0
S*" ' ' IrflSfcgßS
O 0) U)CI trT 2 ■ + - J
0 fl 5-0 0a g J.U"
* * * * • ® .9 ®
1 <2 ggg-2 oil
o I £>>> X o«H 3 S
® : : : : : *: g,sgs|
Zt nj 7 O cp-fj
S I
~ 2,p -H> h d O r s [“
OlOt-OOCO g Ci ni-2 <tS £oH-''o
Ohm CO k_! P
?.*-« *■ 3 ISsas.g M, g
1-A O ® M V'd . >:
S ® S a $ $ :!
Xf>
o o cq CO CO _2 ° o gl--j
§§.“ ® f o'l
feVT * ,B|s:s: g> H .S|®§&”
~ * aj* »V a”
,2 © £~ S £ 73 rr _r+3'd S 2
0 0 ■# m>a m ft 2<M'H.g<p§§®
S§ . « SJSSSS 1 " |§ll 'Rgfl s *
m _- • a ’ h O S‘S2 0 «22
S a j ®<£ m Sl 2 ®
i« « •a^*:
1 3 . . % |§ M “V ||
2* ’ ' ' 3 :: : : ‘ : 3” g 5 S fl d>
3 9 S £®W * §,ft-»
O /-«, _u ~ .3 *5? rO O 2O® 00
goo CO G_, •T 3 * • • 7O) 7 no ®
§BU 10 * • 0 -i-H • •
s • a I 1. 58^s|Si?
5 J .■§ .8 . , laSs^Sft
g^.« co« 3 « 2 sl*i:: B - a
goco CO <* o » o |s3“«a'S2§
S' 2:| : -3 : .SJSI
« V| | .ad-s-.tso
-* CO CO g£S I
*■*■« "i! IN -i .Spo-h o _r‘s> S° ~2 ?g 53 "3
°.® -i -g <„ n •.9 jj a 3 8 S S S . S
" iSs^-s.-s*
0> Mrj Fj rj ® £ •»
2 -ft ® J 3 O 2 -4J C 3 © -1-5 <T>
eq ® gJ^.g-Vg^
oT rH fl 5 Ifi ®
1 .glilit ?|l|“l < ?|
rr 1 * «!i s Jl s -i
"S °m°. 9 d
a g § I 5 giVlssl
■■l-iit 2 ItliS'lil.
I V- 3 rf I g'llllll'g-l
l?is s i i 1
» o
°§ .». & as.a I
gg*S o «T f ■’g a- H
.®2
5 r! 5 f S f 0) -r i TO ®
rrt -M -
. 213 so ®.a s |
®5 a g ® aai 2
*§-3 a g>
4s § a,


Porss |jotoer Ipacjjhws.
On referring to the account of the experiments made in 1830,
on the Manchester and Liverpool railway with various kinds of
engines, we find the description of one invented by Mr. Brand-
reth, and called by him the “ Cyclopede.” This machine consisted
of a carriage or truck, carrying a horizontal revolving platform,
supported on rollers and carried over a drum at each end. The
horse was yoked to the frame of the truck, and by treading on
the horizontal platform, forced it round by pushing it back from
under his feet, while, through the medium of geared wheels,
the motion of the platform was transferred to the driving wheels
of the carriage. The trial that was made with this machine was
not, however, of a satisfactory nature, as a speed of only 5 or 6
miles an hour was attained, owing chiefly to the defective con-
struction of the revolving platform. It is estimated that in
ordinary draught four-fifths of a horses’ power are expended in
moving his own weight ; and considering the horse as a machine
it is obviously desirous to attain the greatest possible amount of
useful effect from his exertions, and to combine if possible his
muscular force with his weight in such a manner as to obtain the
greatest useful effect from both. But on a horizontal moving
platform no advantage is gained from the horses’ weight, whereas
if the platform were inclined at an angle of say nine degrees,
this angle corresponds with an incline of six to one; therefore,
if two horses, weighing say 1600 lbs., be placed on such an in-
clined platform, their gravitating force down the plane will be
expressed by 1600-Hi = 233 lbs. Abating the friction of the
machine, which may be estimated at one-fifth of the gravitating
force down the plane, we have a passive force derived from the
horses’ weight equal to 187 lbs., which is irrespective of their
muscular or tractive force, which at 140 lbs. each will be equiva-
lent to 230 + 187 —467 lbs. This on a level railway will be equiva-
lent at eight pounds per ton to the traction of a load of 59 tons ;
but as all railways have variable gradients we will assume only
one half of this, or 29 tons, as the load which two horses can
move in the “ Cyclopede,” at a speed of about 10 miles an hour.
If we increase the speed to 20 miles an hour by urging the horses


to walk at their fastest, the load would probably have to be re-
duced to about 10 or 12 tons, equivalent to the weight of the
weight of the carriage and about 70 passengers with their lug-
gage, and there can be little doubt that a Cyclopede might
be constructed to travel at this speed by the exertions of two
horses, without any excessive exhaustion.
A horse-power machine constructed on this principle has
been for several years in general use in America for driving
light machinery, such as chaff-cutters, winnowing machines,
circular saws, and small flour mills,—and being mounted on
wheels, they can easily be transferred from place to place. This
machine consists of a stout wooden frame, supporting a railway
about 7 feet long, on which run the rollers of an endless travel-
ling platform. The axles stretching across the rails are of iron,
and are connected together by a series of links, each about 12
inches long, so as to form an endless chain which passes over a
fixed segment at one end, and the chain wheels at the other.
The travelling platform is made of wooden planks about 12
inches broad and 1 j inch thick, fastened transversely to the end-
less chain. It is inclined at an angle of about seven degrees to
the horizon, and the horse being placed on the platform pushes
it backwards from under him, as in the “ Clycopede,” causing
the chain wheels at the end of the frame to revolve, while the
motion thus obtained is transmitted to the machinery to be
driven.
A “ horse locomotive,” or machine for multiplying the ve-
locity of beasts of burthen, was invented some years back by
Mr. W. Curtis, civil engineer. In this machine, the animal
produced motion partly by his weight and partly by his
muscular force, and it was effected in this manner : Upon the
shaft of the driving wheels, cranks were formed in the same
manner as for a locomotive engine, excepting that the cranks
were opposite, and not at right angles to each other, as in a loco-
motive engine. To the cranks were attached connecting links,
and to these were connected two treadles ; the horse then alter-
nately depressed the treadles with his forefeet, his hind feet
being stationary, and thus he turned round the wheels in the
same manner as in a grinder’s barrow. There is however one
serious objection to this method of employing a horse to produce
motion, which is that only one-half of his weight and of his mus-
cular force, is effective, the other half producing no useful effect
whatever ; it is therefore inferior to the improved form of the
“ Cyclopede,” with an inclined platform, in which the whole of
the horse’s weight and muscular force is effective in producing
motion.


"goafr Steatmr.”
Before closing these remarks, it may not be out of place to
advert to the new “road steamer,” as it is termedby the inventor,
for drawing loads on common roads. All the attempts to pro-
duce a good and serviceable traction engine for common roads
have been to some extent frustrated by two difficulties, which,
until recently, appeared to be almost insuperable. The diffi-
culties consist in the fact, first that the Jar caused by a rough road
is so injurious to the machinery and wheels of the engine, that
they require constant repair and renewal. Secondly, that if
this evil be counterbalanced by making the locomotive of great
size and weight, the injury to the road becomes proportionally
great, and an objection of a very formidable nature thus becomes
established. Until the beginning of the year 1868, it seemed as
though the choice must lie between carts and horses on the one
hand, and the cost of constant repair of engines and roads on the
other ; but Mr. Thomson, a civil engineer of Edinburgh, has at
last succeeded in producing an engine which, to judge from the
success which has already attended some very remarkable trials
of it, promises a solution of the difficulties. Mr. Thomson has
been requested by some friends in the island of Java, to obtain
for them a road locomotive for the conveyance of sugar from
some of the large estates to the port of Sourabaya. The result
of his enquiries after such an engine was not satisfactory ; all
those which he inspected appeared to fail in the important res-
pects of durability and non-injury to the roads. The idea then
occurred to him of fitting stout india-rubber tires to the wheels
of the engine, and thus to overcome the jar and injury alike to
roads and locomotive ; the application being only the develop-
ment of a principle which Mr. Thomson had already applied to
wheels of the platform trucks at railway stations with good re-
sults. The preliminary trial jof the traction engine fitted with
these tires were eminently successful, and it was at once per-
ceived that the machinery and the road became by this simple
device protected from injury to either. The “ steamer,” as
Mr. Thomson calls it, practically runs along on a self laid tram-
way of india-rubber. The Java engine was of three-horse
power (nominal) but the bite of the wheels was so excellent, and
their smoothness and ease of motion were so great, that it was
found possible to take some liberties with the engine of a very


curious nature. Among other things, it was made to cross a field
of soft grass, to run through a field covered with loose earth to
the depth of about two feet, to travel over beds of broken
flints, and to drag a huge boiler, which weighed with
its truck nearly 13 tons, up an incline of lin 12. These feats
were accomplished with the greatest ease, and the trials were
continued for several weeks with uniform success, and in the end
some more “road steamers” were put in course of construction.
Two of these have recently been tried in Edinburgh and in
Leith, in presence of a large company of engineers and others :
one of these engines was intended for carrying coals over nine
miles of road in Derbyshire, having inclines of 1 in 12 ; the
other for the transport of coffee in the island of Ceylon. The
former was of 10 horse power (nominal), weight 8 tons, and had
india-rubber tires 15 inches wide and 5 inches thick. It was
built to draw loads of only 15 tons, but the following are
amongst its actual performances. It was run out to a colliery
12 miles from Edinburgh, drawing a train of four waggons, each
weighing 2 tons 15 cwt.; at the colliery each waggon received a
load of stons of coals, so that the whole train (including the
engine) weighed 40 tons. With this load the steamer, looking
like some luggage train which had escaped from a station, tra-
velled with perfect ease along a road having inclines of 1 in 16
until it reached the city, where it threaded its way deftly and
surely between the streams of omnibuses, cabs, carts, &c., which
form the staple of ordinary city traffic. The whole performance
was a very conclusive one, as far as the tractive powers of the
engine and the control of the train are concerned. Professor
Archer, in a paper which he read upon the subject before the
British Association in 1868, aptly compares these india-rubber
tires to the cushioned feet of an elephant or camel, and it seems
probable that they would prove scarcely more destructible.
(C)
®ixc Cramtoan for Himes
A new and very ingenious modification of an old method of
transporting mineral produce from mines has been designed and
put into active operation by Mr. Hodgson, C. E., who has given
his attention to the construction of a cheap and efficient wire


tramway, which could be readily got to work even where but
little skilled labour is available, and where, owing to the natural
obstacles to be overcome, the construction of ordinary railways
would necessitate so large an outlay, as almost to preclude the
possibility of deriving any adequate pecuniary advantage. The
invention is intended for localities as yet unprovided with rail-
ways, and it is thought that, though a great number of cases exist
in Great Britain to which it may be applied with advantage, the
chief development of the method will probably take place in the
colonies and in other countries which stand in urgent need of
light lines of some kind to lead down their productions to the
main arteries of inland communication, or to sea-ports.
The new wire tramway consists simply of a wire rope of
suitable size and strength passing from one to the other of the
points between which a communication is to be kept up; the
rope is supported in grooved pullies, which are firmly fixed to
posts or standards at suitable distances along the line. To
accomplish the easy passing of the points of support necessary
to carry out a continuous line of communication, and to provide
for the distribution of the burthen, and the application of motive
power, have been problems of no small difficulty; but after
experiments on a first trial length of half-a-mile during the
autumn of 1868, these practical details were worked out, and a
contract was immediately entered into for a line of 3 miles in
length to connect Messrs. Ellis and Everard’s Markfield quarries,
near Leicester, with the railway siding at Bardon Hill. This
line, which has recently been completed, consists of an endless
wire rope, and the posts carrying the pullies are about 150 feet
apart, but, where necessary, much longer spans arc taken, in one
case amounting to nearly 600 feet. The rope passes at one of
its ends round a Fowler’s “ clip-drum,” worked by an ordinary
portable steam-engine, and is thus driven at a speed of from 4
to 6 miles an hour. The boxes in which the stone is carried
are hung on to the rope at the leading end, the attachment con-
sisting of a pendant of peculiar shape, which maintains the load
in perfect equilibrium, and, at the same time, enables it to pass
the supporting pullies with ease. Each of these boxes carries
1 cwt. of stone, and the delivery is at the rate of
about 200 boxes or 10 tons per hour for the 3 mile distance.
It is almost unnecessary to observe that the proportions of such
lines can be carried to any extent to suit the requirements of
any particular trade, ranging from 10 tons to 1000 tons per day.
Judging from a working of the Bardon Hill line, the prac-
tical value of the system is very evident, whilst from the many
modifications in detail of which it admits, it could be applied to


suit almost every variety of condition. With only a 16-horse
portable engine, working at 10 lbs. pressure, the boxes, each
containing about 1 cwt. of granite, are brought along the line
at pretty regular distances of about 100 feet apart—about 150
boxes travelling simultaneously : yet, so absolutely noiseless is
the apparatus in its action that, although the line passes for con-
siderably more than a mile along the roadside, it could not be a
source of annoyance to anyone. The cost of erecting these new
tramways, including steam power and rolling stock complete, is
said to be about £250 per mile.—(From the Scientific Review of
August, 1869.)


PROSPECTUS OF THE RIYERINA RAILWAY
COMPANY.
(Proposed Capital—One Million.)
The question of roads and railways is generally admitted to be
one of the great questions of the day in all the colonies of
Australia, which, although making a steady and sensible
progress in all the elements of material prosperity, present for
the most part the most primitive and inadequate means of
internal communication.
It is unquestionable that railways and tramways form the
best description of road for the purpose of effecting a cheap and
rapid means of transit, but many circumstances combine to shew
that the formation of railways in Australia must for the future
be conducted in a much more economical manner than has
hitherto being the case. Safety, carrying capacity, and
punctuality are essentially required on every railroad, and with
these requisites we cannot dispense ; but we can dispense in
Australia with one great item of cost in the construction of rail-
ways, and that is great speed of conveyance.
In a country like New South Wales, with an area of about
324.000 square miles, and with a population not exceeding
480.000 souls, it is believed that the high-speed and high-cost
railway is totally unsuited to the requirements of the colony,
and that what is wanted is a track which can be laid cheaply and
rapidly through the forest and over the plains of the interior,
where high speed is of far less consequence than certainty of
conveyance, and bearing in mind the high rate of interest which
money commands in Australia, together with the scarcity of
both skilled and unskilled labor, it is obvious that the outlay for
construction should be as small as possible, consistent with the
safety and economy of working, the object being to devote the
money to be spent to the extension of the mileage and opening
out the country, rather than to making very solid works and


ways or obtaining high speeds. These considerations have
largely influenced the construction of American railways, and
the system which has grown up in that great country is well
adapted to the wants of the Australian colonies.
On the great trunk lines that are now in progress of con-
struction by the Government of this colony it is no doubt
consistent with a sound policy to construct these arterial lines in
the most solid and substantial manner, so as to enable them to
carry a heavy traffic at some future period, but it by no means
follows that the same mode of construction should be applied to
the secondary or branch lines, which are destined to act as
feeders to the main lines, for it should be borne in mind that no
railway system can be said to be complete which does not
possess its minor channels spreading from the parent trunk and
drawing produce out of, and carrying traffic into, every town,
village, and hamlet in the colony. This is what our railway
system must become, or it will fall short of its mission in
Australia, while to refuse to the outlying towns of the interior
the benefits to be derived from such improved means of transport,
would be equally unjust and impolitic.
It is, however, in the great Riverina district that inexpen-
sive railways are essentially required, this region comprising an
immense tract of flat country bordering on the Murray and its
tributaries, the Murrumbidgee, and the Lachlan. To the North
of these two rivers, and below their junction, is an immense
tract of about 100,000 square miles of country, almost as level
as the ocean, intersected by the Lachlan and the Darling, which
are rivers only in winter, and in summer are mere chains of ponds,
whereas the country to the south of the Murrumbidgee, and
between it and the Murray, which is the true Riverine district,
is intersected by a perfect net-work of creeks, water-courses, and
ana-branches, more minute and elaborate than can be shewn on
a map, the channels crossing from one to another in every
direction. Near the Murray, the country being to a certain
extent within the reach of the coast rains, may in course of time
rival in fertility and productiveness ancient Egypt and Palestine,
and will no doubt occupy a numerous population, and it is
unquestionable that such an event will be precipitated by the
construction of railways in this district.
The railway from Melbourne to Echuca has been in opera-
tion for some years, and it is now proposed to construct a
railway in continuation of the Melbourne line, from Moama to
Deniliquin, thence to Conargo, on the Yanko Creek, and from
Conargo, by way of Jerelderie and Urana, to Wagga Wagga, a
total distance of about 200 miles.


Moama to Deniliqnin
... 44 miles
Deniliqnin to Conargo ...
... 21 „
Conargo to Jerelderie ...
... 32 „
Jerelderie to Urana
... 26 „
Tirana to Wagga Wagga ...
... 76 „
The following are the approximate distances between the
several places ;
The navigable character of the Murray during at least six
months of the year, and the amount of commerce already sub-
sisting or likely ere long to spring up along its banks, are
important features in connection with the proposed railway ;
thus, the Murray, including the lakes, is navigable at certain
seasons for a distance of 1800 miles, 1000 of which are included
in the boundaries of New South Wales and Victoria. Its
affluents, the “Edwards,” the “ Wakool,” &c., are navigable
for 400 miles ; the Murmmbidgee, with its lakes Ganga, Zala,
Waldeira, &c., is navigable for fully 800 miles, and the
Darling is navigable for about the same distance.
The encouragement given in America to private companies
for the construction of railways in new States by means of
grants of land, has proved very successful, and the Legislature
of New South Wales will no doubt see the necessity of adopting
a similar policy, as the railways constructed by the Government
both in this and in the adjacent colonies have not proved very
successful, owing chiefly to the large sums of money that have
been expended upon them. Thus the Victorian railways have
cost upon an average £31,000 per mile, while those of New
South Wales have cost £15,000 per mile of single way. It is
now estimated that a single line of railway can be constructed in
Victoria for £9OOO per mile, while in South Australia a line
lately opened, forming part of the line now in construction from
Adelaide to the Burra, has cost only £5OOO per mile.
It is estimated that this sum will provide the permanent
way materials for a single line, including sidings, together with
the rolling stock of the proposed Riverina railway, and all
requisite bridges, culverts, earthworks, and ballasting, and as it
is proposed to dispense with wooden sleepers, and to adopt iron
ones, this great item of expense will be avoided, both in the
first cost of the material and of subsequent maintenance.


Earthwork in cuttings and embankments
... 1000
Bridges, drains, and culverts
500
Rolling stock
... 1300
Stations and sidings
500
Fencing, &c
200
Total
... £5000
The following is a rough estimate per mile of single way
for the proposed railway, adapted for the steam locomotive :
Cost of rails, chair sleepers, and fastenings complete £l5OO
The distance from Echuca to Deniliquin is about 44 miles,
and the country consists, for the most part, of a dead level, pre-
senting every facility for the construction of a railway, and
there can be no question that the line can be constructed at the
rate of £3OOO per mile throughout, of single way, exclusive of
the cost of stations and rolling-stock. And as Deniliquin is a
great central point for the traffic of the south-western portion
of the country, there being roads or tracks diverging from that
point to the eastward, to the northward, and to the westward,
while the road to Echuca is common to all three, it is proposed
to construct this section of the line in the first place, in order
to secure the traffic which would augment in a constant and
rapidly increasing ratio, in proportion as the remainder of the
line was proceeding with to Wagga Wagga.
The natural tendency of the traffic, both of goods and pas-
sengers, throughout the whole extent of country to be traversed
by the Riverine Railway, being to Melbourne, this tendency
would be much increased by the construction of the railway,
which would not only prove a great public benefit to the inhabi-
tants of the Riverine district, but, owing to the very favourable
nature of the country, by which the expense of construction will
be kept down to the lowest limit consistent with efficiency and
security, offers every prospect of a fair and reasonable return by
way of interest on the capital to be expended.
Gibbs, Shailard, & Co., Steam Letter-press Printers, 108 Pitt Street.


PLATE I
Pig. 2.
'V
Fig. 1.
Fig. S.
THE BARLOW RAIL.
Fio. 4.
THE MACDONNELL WAY,
THE CHAIR SLEEPER.
Fio. 6.
THE CHAIR SLEEPER
Fig. 7.
ELEVATION.
SECTION.
A. Orxh'_Key S .




Pig. 8.
THE DUMPY RAIL
THE 11 V1GN0LLES ” RAIL.
Fig. 10,
THE “LIGHT” TRAMRAIL
Pm. IX.
THE “LOUBAT” RAIL










