

THE ORD E R
FOR THE
CONSECRATION
OF
iHara's CJjurrii,
WEST MAITLAND,
ON THE 31st OF JANUARY, 1878;
BEING THE SEVENTY-FIRST ANNIVERSARY
OF THE
BISHOP’S BIRTHDAY,
AND THE THIRTY-SECOND YEAR OF THE
REV. R. CHAPMAN’S INCUMBENCY.
WEST MAITLAND:
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER,
HIGH-STREET,




THE ORDER
FOR THE
CoiKijttittimt flf iff ttfg'S s((uwf|.
WEST MAITLAND,
ON THE 31st OE JANTJAKY, 1878;
BEING TEE. SEVENTY-FIRST ANNIVERSARY
OF THE
gist's girtjjfoag,
AND THE THIRTY-SECOND YEAR OF THE
REV. R. CHAPMAN’S INCUMBENCY.
WEST MAITLAND;
HENRY THOMAS, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER.




CONSECRATION SERVICE.
Sfhe Sftishop, with his Chaplains, is to le
received at theporchly the Chancellor, Regis-
trar, Jncumlent, trustees, Churchwardens, and
others attendant on the occasion.
At the place where the Aishop is received, a
petition is to le delivered to him ly some one
of the persons luho receive him, praying that he
ivill Consecrate the Church.
Sfhe petition is to le read ly the Registrar,
or his deputy
Sfhe bishop. Is this your desire ?
Answer. It is.
Sfhe dtishop. In the Name of God then let us
begin.
As soon as the Church is quiet, the Mis hop
and his Chaplains, with the Chancellor, the
Preacher, the Jliipister who is to officiate, and
the rest of the clergy, go wp the middle aisle
to the %oly tulle, repeating alternately the
v&rses of the 2dth Sfsalm.


PSALM XXIY.
1. earth is the Lord's and all that therein
A is : the compass of the world, and they
that dwell therein.
2. For he hath founded it upon the seas : and
prepared it upon the floods.
3. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, or
who shall rise up in his holy place.
4. Even he that hath clean hands, and a pure
heart .• and that hath not lift up his mind unto vanity,
nor sworn to deceive his neighbour.
5. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord :
and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
6. This is the generation of them that seek him :
even of them that seek thy face, 0 Jacob.
7. Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates ; and be ye
lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of Glory
shall come in.
8. Who is the King of Glory ?it is the Lord
strong and might}', even the Lord mighty in battle.
9. Lift up your heads, 0 ye gates; and be ye
lift up, ye everlasting doors: and the King of Glory
shall come in.
10. Who is the King of Glory ? even the Lord of
Hosts, He is the King of Glory.
Glory be to the Lather, &c.
As it was in the beginning, &c.
She bishop and his Chaplains go within
the Altar rails ; the bishop to the north side
of'the jfooly Salle, and the Chaplains to the
south side ’ the Chancellor to the north side
without the rails, the Minister officiating goes
to the reading desh, and the Sreaeher to some
convenient seat near the Sulpit.


Sfhe bishop, sitting in his chair, is to have
the instrument or instruments of conveyance
presented to him ; which he lays upon the
taMe ; and then standing up and turning to
the congregation, says :
BELOVED in the Lord, forasmuch as
devout men, as well under the law as under
the Gospel, moved either by the express command of
God, or by the secret inspiration of the Blessed Spirit,
or by their own reason and sense of the natural order
and decency of things, have erected houses for the
public worship of God, and separated them from all
profane and common uses, in order to fill men’s minds
with greater reverence for His glorious Majesty, and
affect their hearts with more devotion and humility in
His service; which pious practice has been approved
and graciously accepted by our heavenly Father : Let
us not doubt but He will also favourably regard our
godly purpose, of setting apart this place in solemn
manner, for the performance of the several offices of
religious worship, and let us faithfully and devoutly
beg his blessing on this our undertaking.
&hen the bishop kneeling doiun , says,
/"A GOD the Father of Heaven, who has promised
in Thy Holy Word, that in every place where
the remembrance of Thy name shall be put, Thou
will come unto Thy people and bless them : accord-
ing to Thy promise come unto us and bless us, who
novv put upon this place the Memorial of Thy
by dedicating it wholly and only to Thy service and
worship. Amen. .
GOD the Son, Redeemer of the world, \yho in
the Gospel with Thy bodily presence didst lionor
and adorn the Feast of the dedication of the Temple ;


at the dedication of this Temple unto Thee, be present
also; accept, Good Lord, and prosper the work of
our hands upon us, 0 prosper Thou our handiwork.
Amen.
GOD the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the
Father and the Son, without whom nothing is
holy, no person or place is sanctified aright, send
down upon us in this place Thy sanctifying power and
grace, and thereby make it unto Thee a holy habita-
tion for ever. Amen.
HOLY, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, by whose
Power, Wisdom, and Love, all things are puri-
fied, enlightened, and made perfect, cleanse andenable
us by Thy power, enlighten us with Thy truth, perfect
us by Thy Grace; accept, sanctify, and bless this
place unto that use and service, for which, according
to Thine own Ordinance, we have provided it; that it
may be a sanctuary to the Most High, and the gate
of Heaven for us, through Jesus Christ. Amen.
Chen the dlishop standing up and turning
towards th& Congregation, says,
T>EGARD, 0 Lord, the supplications of Thy
servants, and grant that they who shall here be
baptized in the laver of Regeneration may be washed
and sanctified with the Holy Ghost, delivered from
Thy wrath, received into the* Ark of Christ’s Church,
partake therein of the fulness of Thy grace, and ever
remain in the number of Thy faithful and elect
children. Amen.
that they who in this place shall in their
own person ratify the promises made for them
by their sureties at their Baptism, and thereupon shall
be Confirmed by the Bishop, may continue Thine for
ever; and being preserved in the Unity of Thy
Church, may daily increase in Thy Holy Spirit, more


and more, until they come to Thine Everlasting
Kingdom. Amen.
GRANT that all they who with a true penitent
heart, and lively faith, shall receive at this Thy
Holy Table, the memorial of the precious death of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and so shall feed upon Him
in their hearts by faith with thanksgiving, may be
partakers also of His most blessed Body and Blood,
and may to their great and endless comfort, obtain
remission of their sins and all other benefits of His
Passion. Amen.
RANT that by Thy Holy Word which shall be
VJ" rea d an d preached in this place, the good seed
may be sown in the hearts of all who hear it; and
that they mav both perceive and know what things
they ought to do, and also may have grace and power
faithfully to fulfil the same. Amen.
GRANT to all such as shall be here joined together
in the holy estate of Matrimony, that they
may remember the vow and convenant betwixt them
made, in the name of God, and may remain in perfect
love and peace together, unto their lives end. Amen.
GRANT that Whosoever shall confess their sins
and offer up prayers and praises to Thy Divine
Majesty in this place may draw near unto Thee with
such steadfastness of faith, and with such sincerity of
mind, that they may be graciously accepted in Thy
sight. 0 Lord pardon their sins, compassionate their
infirmities, enlighten and sanctify them by Thy Holy
Spirit, and enable them so to serve and worship Thee
in Thy Holy Church here below, and they may be
received into Thy presence to praise and glorify Thee
in the great congregation of Thy Saints in Heaven,
Grant this, 0 Lord, for Jesus Christ’s sake, our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen.


Shen the CHshop hneeling down says the
following prayer :
ETERNAL God, mighty in power, and of
majesty incomprehensible, whom the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain, much less the w r alls of
Temples made with hands, and Who yet hast been
graciously pleased to promise Thy especial Presence
in whatever place even two or three of Thy faithful
servants shall assemble in Thy Name to offer up their
prayers and supplications unto the Thee ; vouchsafe,
0 Lord, to be present with us who are here gathered
together with all humility and readiness of heart to
consecrate this place to the honour of Thy great Name,
separating it from henceforth from all unhallowed,
ordinary, and common uses, and dedicating it to Thy
service, for reading Thy Holy Word, for celebrating
Thy Holy Sacraments, for offering to Thy Glorious
Majesty the sacrifices of Prayer andThanksgiving,and
for blessing Thy people in Thy name. Accept, 0 Lord
this service, at our hands, and bless it with such suc-
cess as may tend most to Thy Glory and the futher-
ance of our happiness both temporal and spiritual,
through Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and Saviour.
Amen.
Jlfter which, the bishop being seated, the
Chancellor, or Acting=Chancellor, reads aloud
the Sentence of Consecration, which the Aishop
then signs, and commands it, together with the
Petition and other instruments, to be registered
among the muniments of his office, and then
says :
OLESSED be Thou 0 Lord our God, and the God
of our fathers, for ever and ever. Thine 0
Lord is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,


and the victory, and the majesty ; for all that is in
Heaven and in Earth is Thine : Thine is the kingdom,
0 Lord, and Thou are exalted as head above all.
Both riches and honor come of Thee, and Thou
reignest over all; and in Thine hand is power and
might; and in Thine hand it is to make great, and to
give strength unto all. Now therefore our God we
thank Thee, and praise Thy glorious Name. But who
are w T e, and what is this people, that we should be able
to offer so willingly after this sort? For all things
come of Thee, and of Thine own have we given Thee.
For we are strangers before Thee, and sojourners as
were all our fathers : our days on the Earth are as a
shadow, and there is none abiding. 0 Lord our God
all this store that we have prepared to build Thee an
house for thine Holy Name, cometh of Thine hand,
and is all Thine own. We know also 0 Lord, that
Thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure in uprightness.
In the uprightness of our hearts we have willingly
offered all these things; and now have we seen with
joy Thy people which are present here to offer
willingly unto Thee. O Lord our God, and the God
of our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination
of the thoughts of the heart, and prepare their heart
unto Thee. Amen.
After this , the Minister appointed is to read
the Service for the day ; except where it is
otherwise directed.
Proper Psalms, 84, 122, 132.
First Lesson, 1 Kings viii. v. 22 to v. 62 inclusive.
Second Lesson, Hebrews x. v. 19 to 26.
After the Gollect for the day ; the Minister
stops till the Aishop has said the following
prayer :


LOED God, who dwellest not in temples
made with hands (as said the prophet), yet hast
ever vouchsafed to accept the devout endeavours of
Thy servants allotting special places for Thy Divine
Worship, promising even there, to hear and grant
their requests, we humbly beseech Thee to accept of
this day’s duty and service of dedicating this Church
to Thy great and glorious Name: fulfil, 0 Lord, we
pray Thee, Thy gracious promises, that whatsoever
prayer in this sacred place shall be made according to
Thy will, may be accepted by Thy gracious favour,
and returned with the desired success, to Thy glory
and our comfort for the sake of Jesus Christ our
Saviour. Amen.
Shen the J/iinister proceeds in the Service
of the day.
COMMUNION SERVICE.
She bishop standing on the north side of
the IMoly Salle, as lefore, reads the Gomrmo=
nion Service.
After thve collect for the Queen, he says the
following prayer :
f~ | MOST glorious Lord God, we acknowledge that
we are not worthy to offer unto Thee anything
belonging to us; yet we beseech Thee, in Thy great
goodness, graciously to accept the dedication of this


place to Thy serviee and to prosper this our under-
taking : receive the prayers and intercessions of us,
and all others Thy servants who either now or here-
after entering into this House shall call upon Thee ;
and give both them and us grace to prepare our hearts
to serve thee with reverence and godly fear. Affect
us with an awful apprehension of Thy Divine Majesty,
and a deep sense of our own unworthiness; that so,
approaching Thy sanctuary with lowliness and devo-
tion, and coming before Thee with clean thoughts and
pure hearts, with bodies undefiled and minds sanctified
we may always perform a service acceptable to Thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
She two Chaplains are to read, one the
hpistle, and the other the Gospel.
The Epistle, 1 Cor. xii. v. 12 to v. 31 inclusive.
The Gospel, S. John ii. v. 13. to v. 17 inclusive.
Shen the Shi shop reads the Jficene Greed :
here shall follow a %ymn.
She Sermon leing ended, the offertory is to
le made, ivhich is to he devoted to the Sund,
for the Church, aftenvards the SHshop proceeds
in the Communion service.
c After the communion, and immediately
ley ore the final Glossing, the GHshop says the
following prayer.
DLESSED be Thy name, 0 Lord God, for that it
pleaseth Thee to have Thy habitation among
the sons of men, and to dwell in the midst of the
assembly of the Saints upon earth ; Bless, we beseech


Thee, the religious solemnity of this day ; and grant
that in this place, now set apart to Thy service, Thy
holy name may be worshipped in truth and purity to
all generations through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
GOD, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, our
only Saviour the Prince of Peace, give us grace
seriously to lay to heart the great dangers we are in
by our unhappy divisions. Take away all hatred and
prejudice, and whatsoever else may hinder us from
godly union and concord; that as there is but one
body, and one spirit, and one hope of our calling, one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of
us all, so we may henceforth be all of one heart, and
of one soul, united in one holy bond of truth and
peace, of faith and charity, and may with one mind
and one mouth glorify Thee ; through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
HP HE peace of God which passeth all understanding,
keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge
and love of God, and of iris Son Jesus Christ our
Lord; and the blessing of God Almighty, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be amongst you and
remain with you always. Amen.
t


This none other hut the House of God, and this is the gate of
Heaven.”
1 r PO the High and Holy One,
To His Spirit, to His Son,
Be this place for ever given,
House of God and gate of heaven.
2 To the truth that makes us free.
To the light that leads to Thee,
We this temple dedicate,
And Thy grace, 0 God, await.
3 Canst thou be approached by men ?
Angels and archangels, when
God His glory on them sheds,
Veil their faces, bow their heads
4 Yet, Almighty One, Thou art
Present in the contrite heart:
There dost Thou descend and reign
Whom the heavens cannot contain.
5 Be our hearts the temples where,
Witnesses that Thou art there,
Come, descending from above,
Faith all-cleansing, peace, and love.
6 These shall consecrate this place
With the beauty of Thy grace :
Radiant thus with light divine
Be this house for ever Thine.
* V Amc'n
* *"
* - w ...*■«*


“ He is the Head of the body, the Church."
f TWIE Church’s one foundation
3 Is Jesus Christ her Lord ;
She is His new creation .
By water and the word :
From heaven He came and sought her,
To be His holy Bride,
With His own Blood He bought her,
And for her life He died.
Elect from every nation,
Yet one o’er all the earth,
Her charter of salvation
One Lord, one Faith, one Birth;
One Holy Name she blesses,
Partakes one Holy Food,
And to one hope she presses
With every grace endued.
Though with a scornful wonder
Men see her sore opprest,
By schisms rent asunder,
By heresies distrest;
Yet saints their watch are keeping,
Their cry goes up “ How long V s
And soon the night of weeping
Shall be the morn of song.
Mid toil, and tribulation,
And tumult of her war,
She waits the consummation
Of peace for evermore;
Till with the vision glorious
Her longing eyes are blest,
And the great Church victorious
Shall be the Church at rest.
Yet she on earth hath union
With God, the Three in One,


And mystic sweet communion
With those whose rest is won;
0 happy ones and holy !
Lord, give us grace that we
Like them, the meek and lowly,
On high may dwell with Thee. Amen
TVEFORE Jehovah’s awful throne
Ye nations bow with sacred joy ;
Know that the Lord is God alone ;
He can create and He destroy.
His sovereign power, without our aid,
Made us of clay and form'd us men ;
And when, like wandering sheep, we stray’d,
He brought us to His fold again.
WeTl crowd Thy gates with thankful songs,
High as the heavens our voices raise;
And earth, with her ten thousand tongues,
Shall fill Thy courts with sounding praise.
Wide as the world is Thy command,
Vast as eternity Thy love ;
Firm as a rock Thy truth must stand,
When rolling years shall cease to move.
WE love the place, 0 God,
Wherein Thine honour dwells ;
The joy of Thine abode
All earthly joy excels.
It is the House of prayer,
Wherein Thy servants meet >
And Thou, Q Lord, art there
Thy chosen flock to greet.
We love the sacred Font.
For there the Holy Dove


To pour is ever wont
His blessing from above.
We love Thine Altar, Lord :
Oh what on earth so dear ?
For there in faith adored,
We find Thy Presence near.
We love the Word of Life,
The Word that tells of peace,
Of comfort in the strife,
And joys that never cease.
We love to sing below
For mercies freely given ;
But oh ! we long to know
The Triumph-song of heaven.
Lord Jesus, give us grace
On earth to love Thee more,
In heaven to see Thy Face,
And with Thy saints adore. Amen.
/TIREAT Shepherd of Thy people, hear,
Thy presence now display :
As Thou hast given a place for prayer,
So give us hearts to pray.
‘Within these walls let holy .peace,
And love and*.concord dwell;
Here give the troubled conscience ease,
, The wounded spirit Real.
May we in faith receive Thy Word,
. ' In faith present our players ;
And in the presence of our Lord
Unbosom all our cares.
The hearing ear, the seeing eye, *
The contrite heart bestow;
And shine upon _us from on high,
«.. JJThat we in grow. A^nen.
* w *
* . 1 ** •: - . r . «...
* ' 9 . T'
• i ‘ m ..




. • *
'*
*
•
*•, ••
■ '
■ . -
■
-
-
'
,
■
.
,
■ .
