

THE CIVIL RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF THE A.I.F.
1920.
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
A SUMMARY OF .THE WORK OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
REPATRIATION FROM APRIL, 1918, TO THE END OF
JUNE, 1920. WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF THE ACTIVITIES
WHICH PRECEDED THE DEPARTMENT’S FORMATION.
Presented by Command; ordered to he 'printed, 29 th September, 1920.
[Cost of Payer; —Preparation, not given; 850 copies; approximate cost of printing and publishing £85.]
NO 67.—F.16850.-PRICE 2s.




Commonwealth of Australia.
Department of Repatriation.
Head-Quarters, Melbourne,
29th September, 1920.
To Senator the Honorable E. D. Millen,
Minister of State for Repatriation,
Melbourne.
Sir,
I have the honor to submit herewith Report on the Civil Re-establishment of the
A.1.F., the same being a summary of the work of the Department of Repatriation from
April, 1918, to the end of June, 1920, with some account of the activities which
preceded the Department’s formation.
Yours faithfully,
D. J. GILBERT,
Comptroller Department of Repatriation.




THE CIVIL RE-ESTABLISHMENT OF THE A.I.F.
BEING A SUMMARY OF THE WORK OF THE DEPARTMENT OF REPATRIATION
FROM APRIL, 1918, TO THE END OF JUNE, 1920, WITH SOME ACCOUNT
OF THE ACTIVITIES WHICH PRECEDED THE DEPARTMENT’S FOR-
MATION.
The Department of Repatriation entered upon its
functions in April, 1918. At that time 44,671 men
had been discharged.
At the end of June, 1920, with practically the whole
of the surviving men of the Expeditionary Army back
in Australia, and all but 2,037 men (still retained in
hospitals) discharged, of the fit or reasonably fit, only
6,049 remained on a rapidly diminishing list as still
awaiting re-establishment in the ordinary avenues of
civil activity, whilst for those whose war disabilities had
rendered them subjects for extended after-care, as also
for the dependants of the fallen, the nature and scope
of the necessary provision had been determined. ( Vide
graphs, Appendix 6.)
Thus, broadly, may be summarized the result of
Repatriation effort during the most tense and critical
period. In many instances the treatment of the indi-
vidual may have fallen far short of ideal perfection,
but, viewing it as a whole, and remembering that it has
been achieved within seventeen months of the Armistice,
in the face of unprecedented social stresses and industrial
dislocations and withal unaccompanied by any serious
disorder, it is a result which must be regarded as
favorable beyond the anticipations of the most sanguine.
The part which the Department of Repatriation has
played in the complicated and difficult task of restoring
the Expeditionary Army to civil life may be set out
generally in the record of its activities from April,
1918, to June, 1920. But no record of the Repatria-
tion effort would be complete which did not also take
acount of the tentative official activities which ante-
dated the Department’s formation, nor again those
widespread activities of many private organizations
and groups of patriotic citizens whose auxiliary ser-
vices were so valuable in bridging the gaps of an official
provision and in rounding off the rough corners of an
official procedure. Taken together these accounts form
a chapter in the history of the Commonwealth which,
perhaps, may not inappropriately have a place by way
of footnote to the heroic story of the A.T.F. It deals
with the period after “ the tumult and the shouting
dies,’’ but if its prosaic substance is exclusive of the
thrilling movement and abundant colour inseparable
from the narrative of the Army’s making and the
Army’s deeds, it may, nevertheless, furnish both illu-
mination and instruction—illumination as to the man-
ner in which the obligation to the Army was inter-
preted ; instruction as to the means and methods
fashioned to discharge that obligation.
That the first division should have gone abroad in
the absence of any thought-out scheme for dealing with
those who returned is not surprising. All attention
then was concentrated upon the making of the Army
and its speedy despatch to the scene of action. This
was primarily the task of the Military authority, and
a Military authority never had been accustomed to
concern itself with what became of the individual when,
he had ceased to be a unit in the war organization.
There was, of course, the customary pension provision,
based largely upon the Imperial precedent which was
soon to disclose its inadequacy, both in scale and scope,
to the requirements of a citizen army recruited from
a community with a generous standard of living.
But beyond this pension provision there were no official
ideas as to what could or should be done to restore to
civil life the men fortunate enough to return, nor
again were there any signs of public consciousness of
the nature of the task which had shortly to be under-
taken.
The First Movement.
Hot until news was received of the shiploads of
casualties following upon the historic landing of the
first divisions at Gallipoli did the public mind begin
seriously to exercise itself with the civilian fate of those
who would be returning scarred and worn by the Great
Ordeal. It is not without interest now to note that
the first great emotional impulse expressed itself not in
a call for Government action, but in a widespread
voluntary effort to raise large funds. The first great
appeal was on behalf of the Australia Day Fund in
Hew South Wales—a fund which quickly rose to the
handsome total of some £BOO,OOO. Contemporaneously
like appeals were launched in the other States, all of
which met with generous response. In this way a very
considerable sum of money was raised, and was con-
tinually added to until the close of the war. Whilst
in themselves a fine expression of the popular sense
of obligation it is indicative of the undefined state of
the public mind at the time in relation to the ultimate
problem of re-establishment that only in a very few
instances did the constitution of these funds contem-
plate assistance to soldiers after discharge.
It was at this stage the first official movement was
made. The Commonwealth Parliament had appointed
a Federal War Committee representative of all sections
of the House. It was the primary function of this
Committee to supervise recruiting and generally to
keep in touch with all activities appertaining to the


raising of the Army and its despatch abroad. Recog-
nising (in August, 1915) that additional to any private
effort then in contemplation—directed, as such mainly
was, to the supplementation of separation allowances
to dependants, the comfort of men abroad and the
amelioration of their condition in the period elapsing
between return and discharge—some official organiza-
tion to concern itself with the after-care of men when
they had resumed their civilian status was called for,
the Committee adopted a scheme for the estalishment
in each State of bodies inappropriately named “War
Councils.” These councils, which were to work under
the auspices of the Committee, were to be composed of
representatives of all sections of the Parliament of
each State, as also representatives of the commercial,
industrial, and civic interests. The Federal War
Committee was to be represented in each council by
those of its members who sat for constituencies in the
particular State. Each War Council was to organize,
for its assistance, “War Service Committees” for each
local governing area in its State. The Councils were
to keep a register of all men discharged and concern
themselves with such matters as (a) the collection and
distribution of funds for general ameliorative pur-
poses, (&) the finding of positions for men able to
enter employment, (c) the registration of men desir-
ing to settle upon the land and the notification of the
various State Lands Departments of those deemed
suitable, ( d ) the formation of local committees
throughout the State to act as auxiliaries to the cen-
tral body generally, and also to assist discharged men
settling in the district to get holdings quickly into a
producing condition; these local committees also to
watch over the interests of dependants.
In pursuance of this scheme the War Councils were
formed, and they functioned until the end of March,
1918. They formed a large number of committees, and
did a vast amount of useful work. But at a very early
stage it became manifest that while they were given
much work to do, they were supplied with no funds to
do it with, and with the exception of Victoria, did not
appeal for any for their own particular purposes.
Their activities, at first, therefore, were chiefly re-
stricted to finding employment.
A Mammoth Voluntary Fund.
It became clear that large numbers of men could not
be re-established without some financial assistance, and
the recognition of the necessity gave rise to the sug-
gestion of a large fund to be devoted exclusively to
this purpose. It is significant that in this the volun-
tary idea was still dominant. While there was a
minority murmur in favour of raising the money re-
quired by taxation the general view was decidedly
averse to this course. It was held that the imposition
of a tax for this purpose would not only embarrass the
Commonwealth in financing the war, but would
seriously damp that eager patriotism which would
delight in the opportunity to give voluntary .expression
to the universal sense of obligation.
To furnish this opportunity for the raising of a
mammoth fund common to the whole of Australia the
Commonwealth Government in May, 1916 (Appendix
11) passed the Australian 'Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund
Act. This Act provided for a Board of Trustees com-
posed of members drawn from both parties in Parlia-
ment together with several prominent business men and
representatives of organized labour. The Prime Min-
ister was ex-officio chairman. To start the fund the
Commonwealth Government donated £250,000, and
allowed it to be understood that further donations
might be made if there proved to be necessity. The
Act gave the trustees a wide charter to appeal for
money, and to disburse it by regulation through the
agency of the War Councils upon such terms and con-
ditions as they might deem prudent.
The trustees, in framing regulations to.govern the
administration of the Act, provided that each State
War Council should appoint a special Committee to
conduct appeals, and determine applications for as-
sistance, and the executive then proceeded to the
organization of the appeal for contributions.
This involved the creation of a very elaborate system
of record and accounts. The fund contemplated by
the Act was to be not entirely, or even chiefly, a cash
fund. It was to take anything or everything pos-
sessing value in use or exchange—securities, land,
houses, stock, new and secondhand machinery, imple-
ments, utensils, seeds, plants, manure, timber,
minerals—anything, everything—the idea being that
while the number who could or would give cash might
be relatively limited, the number able to make a con-
tribution in kind was practically limited only by the
number of the population of the Commonwealth.
Every bank was appointed a receiver; every local
commitee associated, with a War Council, an author-
ized collector. The system had to provide for the re-
cording of every contribution; for the concentration
of cash and securities in the head offices of the banks
in each State; for the recording, assembling, housing,
marking, insuring, and valuing of kind at a thousand
different centres; for the management of properties
and stock while being held for sale or allotment; for
appreciation and depreciation; for freight and the
machinery of transfer from locality to locality, and to
have and to hold all this miscellaneous collection in
such a way as to satisfy all the requirements of audit
ol \ the one hand, and the requirements of allotment,
principally as loans, by a committee sitting in the
capital of each State, on the other. Seeing that the
operations would cover the Commonwealth, and that
reliance had to be placed at so many points upon hon-
orary committees formed without regard to any special
fitness, the executive proceeded to install the system
with the War Councils, not without misgivings,
27th October, 1916, was set apart as Repatriation
Day, upon which the first appeal should be launched,
but before the War Councils had time to take definite
action the first Conscription campaign was announced.
This campaign occupied the attention of most of the
members of the War Councils and of the local com-
mittees associated therewith, and the trustees, therefore,
deemed it prudent to postpone further action until the
excitment had died down. Subsequently the War Coun-
cils of Queensland and South Australia did launch an
appeal which resulted in value to contributions amount-
ing to some £24,000 in all. Hew South Wales never
reached the stage of organizing a general appeal, al-
though some action was taken to this end; Victoria,
Western Australia, and Tasmania never attempted to
do so.
Along with suggestions for the general appeal the
executive communicated a scheme for what was desig-
nated “ Anzac Work.” This scheme, which lacked
nothing in boldness of conception, contemplated an
organized effort on the part of the manufacturing in-
dustries of the Commonwealth to produce, in wholesale
quantities, definite lines of articles required for the
establishment of returned men, e.g., clothing, furniture,
farming implements, and so on. The primary indus-
tries were also brought in. In the case of the manu-
facturing industries the employers were asked to give
their plants and the men their labour, the Repatriation
Fund finding the cost of the raw material where neces-
sary. The goods so produced were to be allotted as
goods. In the case of the primary industries similar


co-operation on the part of the employer and employees
was contemplated, but the produce was generally to
be realized and placed to the credit of the fund in the
form of cash. The production was to be managed by
committees representative of employers and employees
in each trade. It is an eloquent commentary upon the
patriotic spirit prevailing at the time that the scheme
had the approval of representative employers and
various industrial unions in Victoria with whom alone
it had been discussed in any detailed way.
The executive considered that the operation of the
scheme over a period would put them in possession of
immediately “ allowable ” goods (apart from the reali-
zation in money) amounting to a very large total in
value. To the extent that goods were allotted it was
considered that the cash resources of the fund would
be saved, and that the goods produced, less the cost of
the raw material, represented newly-created wealth,
and thus were clear gain.
But “ Anzac Work,” like the general appeal, was held
in suspense pending a favorable opportunity for action.
Meanwhile the public sentiment, which at the be-
ginning appeared to be so definitely on the side of
voluntary effort, underwent a change, and the Govern-
ment of the day announced the policy of raising
£10,000,000 for the fund by means of a special wealth
levy*. This ultimately gave place to annual appropria-
tion by Parliament. In view of this the executive did
not deem it wise to urge the War Councils to proceed
with the appeal for voluntary contributions.
Direct Commonwealth Responsibility.
Apart from the arrest of the voluntary effort through
the indicated change in Government policy, the trustees
encountered difficulties in administration which of
themselves were sufficiently serious to call for a review
of the position. While the trustees were responsible
to Parliament for the general assembling and alloca-
tion of the fund, the Act constituted the State War
Councils the agencies through which the money was
to be disbursed. The expenses of the councils were
defrayed by the respective State Governments, and
their staffs were provided mainly by the State Public
Services, supplemented by temporary appointments
from the ranks of returned soldiers where suitable men
were available. They were really State bodies, and
over them the trustees had no control. While they
were doing much useful work within the limits of the
means at their disposal the trustees felt that the effort
was incommensurate with the requirement, and they
did not consider that any adequate scheme could be
developed and applied unless the Commonwealth re-
cognised that the re-establishmeut of soldiers and the
care of dependants was a direct Commonwealth re-
sponsibility, and took measures to permit of that re-
sponsibility being effectually discharged.
To a Conference of Premiers and Lands Ministers
called by the Prime Minister in January of 1916, the
trustees accordingly submitted definite recommendations
for the direct control of all activities (with qualifica-
tions as to land settlement) by the Commonwealth
authority together with a detailed indication of the
scope of the work which they considered should be
embraced by an adequate scheme. With minor altera-
tions these recommendations were adopted by the
Conference. Subsequently the trustees advised the
Prime Minister that the administration of the new
Department should be administered by Commission.
Although the executive of the Board of Trustees was
hampered by the limitations of finance and the type of
organization which the Act compelled it to adopt, its
short experience was most valuable in focussing the
essentials of the problem, and provided the Department
with a useful basis for the comprehensive scheme which
subsequently was elaborated.
The Place of Private Funds.
Preliminary to giving effect to the resolutions of
the Premiers’ Conference the Commomvealth Govern-
ment early in 1917 indicated Senator Milieu, then Vice-
President of the Executive Council, as Minister in
charge of Repatriation matters.
Pending the passage of the necessary enabling legis-
lation to permit of action by the Commonwealth, the
Minister addressed himself to a survey of the several
private activities then in operation in the various
States with a view to the clear definition of their re-
spective spheres and their co-ordination upon a basis
calculated to insure uniform and effective treatment
throughout. There was much overlapping of various
funds, the disbursements from which, moreover, were
on a different basis in each State. The confusion and
dissatisfaction arising therefrom appeared in some in-
stances to be having an unfavorable effect upon
recruiting.
Convening in July, 1917, a Conference of represen-
tatives of the two classes of funds, which alone were
the subject of immediate concern, e.g. (a) those for
the benefit of men on return, and ( h ) those for the
assistance of men on service, the Minister invited them
to make their .disbursements according to definite scales
to be observed uniformly in all States. The Con-
ference agreed that assistance should henceforth be
granted to the soldier from the date of his return to
Australia to the date of his discharge at a uniform
weekly rate, such rate to bring the income, inclusive
of military pay, up to, in the case of—
Single men, 50s, per week;
Man and wife, 655. per week;
First two children, ss. per week each;
Additional children over two, 2s. 6d. per week each,
with provision for special grants in special circum-
stances.
In regard to dependants the agreement was to sup-
plement the compulsory military allotment so as to
bring the income of—
Wife, to . . £1 10 11 per week.
Wife and 1 child, to . . 119 9
Wife and 2 children, to . . 2 411 „
Wife and 3 children, to . . 2 7 6 „
Wife and 4 children, to . . 210 2 „
Wife and 5 children, to . . 212 9 „
Wife and 6 children, to . . 215 5 „
Wife and 7 children, to . . 217 9 „
Wife and 8 children, and
upwards, to 2 19 0 „
Payments were to begin from the soldier’s entry
into camp, and to be continued until he died (in which
case the dependants became eligible for pension) or
until he returned to the State in which he lived.
These scales liberalized the treatment very materially
in some respects, and although the agreement was not
observed in its entirety in all the States uniformity of
treatment was insured to a degree and with most useful
results, and the way was cleared for the Common-
wealth scheme to be applied later, without overlapping
and embarrassment, to the needs of the soldier upon
discharge and to the dependants of those who died.
Some of the private funds were strong enough to
come through the protracted war period with balances
still unexpended, but others had ultimately to be offi-
cially augmented in order to permit of the completion
of their obligations.
• Afterwards abandoned in f avour 9r Annual Parliamentary Appropriations.


Commonwealth Enabling Legislation
In moving the second reading of the Australian
Soldiers’ Repatriation Bill in the Senate in July, 1917,
the Minister defined “ Repatriation ” as “ an organized
effort on the part of the community to look after those
who have suffered either from wounds or illness as a
result of the war, and who stand in need of such care
and attention .... a sympathetic effort to re-
instate in civil life all those who are capable of such
reinstatement. Repatriation is not or ought not to
be a mere money-scattering proposition. Money will
be required, and much of it; but that money will be
spent only as a means to the end we have in view. If
any other principle is observed it will not only not help
the soldier, but tend to defeat the object we have in
mind. Although underlying any scheme of Repatria-
tion is primarily a sense of responsibility to all soldiers
it is as well to recognise also that there is an economic
problem. If 250,000 men remain unnecessarilv idle
for one week only, there is a loss represented by their
wage-earning capacity of anything between £600,000
and £700,000. It is well to remember, in view of the
heavy financial responsibility which will be involved
in consequence of this measure, that when we help
our soldiers we shall, to a large extent, be helping our-
selves, and in so doing fit this country the better to
carry that great harden of debt which will undoubtedly
fall upon it as a legacy from the war.”
While not attempting—indeed regarding it as im-
possible—to “enumerate all the directions in which,
as part of the scheme of Repatriation, the Common-
wealth must be prepared to help,” he broadly indicated
the general features which he considered an adequate
scheme of repatriation should cover. Leaving aside
land settlement (this being the subject of a special-
arrangement the States, and outside the' scope
of the measure with which he was immediately con-
cerned) his statement of the aims might be summarized
as follows:
Continuance under private administration of
funds raised by voluntary contributions for the bene-
fits of returned soldiers before discharge or for de-
pendants of soldiers; administrative .policy and
methods of such funds to be uniform throughout
the Commonwealth; appeals to be conducted by
one collecting organization representative of the
funds concerned. Benefits from such funds to
begin (in the case of dependants) with the enlist-
ment of the soldier and to end (in the case of the
soldier) with his discharge.
Commonwealth responsibility for the man upon
discharge and for certain dependants within limits
prescribed.
Registration of every man, with particulars of
his condition, requirements, and desires prior to
discharge in all cases —before arrival in Australia,
even, to such extent as might be possible.
Re-establishment, through departmental agencies,
of all fit men, as far as possible, in previous
occupations.
Care of the totally incapacitated, without homes,
in national hostels. Where living in own homos
a special allowance for attendance.
Training of the injured for new occupations in
special schools or in private industrial establish-
ments under an arrangement which will be fair to
the employers and to the industrial bodies
concerned.
Resumption of interrupted apprenticeships upon
conditions which will insure to the apprentice an
adequate adult wage during the completion of his
indentures.
Establishment of special institutions for
tubercular, mental, and similar cases requiring
prolonged care.
Establishment (in co-operation with the States)
of reserve employments in connexion with forestry
and other national works for the absorption of
bodies of men for whom suitable work in the
ordinary avenues of industry could not be im-
mediately found.
Provision for the after treatment of men re-
quiring, from time to time, medical treatment for
war injuries.
Liberalization of the pensions schedules.
Supplemental assistance through a network of
local committees.
The Bill provided for assistance and benefits
to —
(u) Australian soldiers upon their discharge
from service.
(b) Children under the age of eighteen years of
deceased or incapacitated soldiers.
( c ) Widows of deceased Australian soldiers in
certain circumstances,
and defined “An Australian Soldier” as —
(a) Any member of the Naval and Military
Forces of the Commonwealth employed
on active service outside the Common-
wealth or on a ship of war.
(b) Any nurse or member of a medical corps
employed on active service outside
Australia.
(c) Any Australian who has served in the war
with any Military or Naval force of any
part of the King’s Dominions other than
the A.I.F. of Australia, providing that he
or she can prove domicile in Australia.
Responsibility for the administration was vested in
the Minister. Advising the Minister was an honorary
Commission of seven members, and of this body the
Minister, ex-officio, was Chairman.
The primary function of the Commission was to
make recommendations for regulations providing for
assistance and benefits to the classes enumerated, and
to finally determine appeals from decisions under the
regulations; but it might also advise generally upon
such matters as might be considered expedient for
giving effect to the general purposes of the Act.
Associated with the Commission provision was made
for an honorary Board of seven in each State whose
function it was to adjudicate upon applications within
the regulations.
Both Commission and Boards were made up of
prominent business men, representative soldiers, and
an experienced industrialist (Appendix 15), and for
each body the Minister was fortunate in being able to
draw portion of the personnel from among those who
had gained experience either upon the Repatriation
Trustee Board or upon the special Repatriation Com-
mittees associated with the War Councils.
In addition the Act provided for a network of local
committees covering the Commonwealth, and in order
to comply with what appeared at the time to be a very
widely-expressed desire these auxiliary bodies were
given power to raise funds within their respective areas
the local supplementation of any official provision
which might be made.
The executive side of the Department was repre-
sented by a Comptroller, with deputies in each State.
Thus the measure set up what was no more than
enabling machinery. It embraced no policy, embodied
no_ scheme, and indicated no limitations of finance.
With nothing beyond the data furnished by the frag-
mentary experience of the Trustee Board and the War


Councils to guide it, the Department had to formulate
a policy and elaborate a scheme to cover a great re-
quirement, and it is this consideration which invested
the Department of Repatriation with a character
unique among Government Departments. Before the
measure (which had been assented to in September,
1917) could be proclaimed several months had to be
consumed in the formulation of the scheme of benefits
and in fashioning the extensive departmental organiza-
tion necessary to carry the scheme into effect.
THE NATURE AND SCOPE OF ASSISTANCE
AND BENEFITS.
At the opening sitting of the Commission the Min-
ister stated that as he conceived the Act there was
nothing affecting the welfare of the soldier which might
not come within its purview; hut it was essential that
the objective should be carefully defined in order that
the whole of the activities might be' conducted in re-
lation to it. There were the helpless and those who,
although injured, could still hope to pursue a life of
usefulness. In regard to the helpless the task was
simply to make reasonable provision for them for the
rest of their lives. In regard to others, he emphasized
the view that anything done in connexion with them
should he done always with the definite end in vieAv
of re-establishing them as self-supporting members of
the community. Any form of assistance should be to
that end, and not an end in itself.
Taking, then, Repatriation to embrace not merely
those u who had suffered from wounds or illness as the
result of the war,” but the re-establishment of all
soldiers and the care, in greater or lesser degree, of the
dependants of those who died, it was obvious that the
scope and character of the scheme must have relation
to the ultimate financial resources which could be made
available for the purpose. Parliament, however, being
silent on the question of finance, the Commission was
confronted with this initial difficulty that whereas, on
tlm one hand, it did not know what money would be
at its disposal, on the other hand it could not, with the
war at its height, form any reliable estimatee of the
number of persons who would apply for or need the
assistance of the Department. In these circumstances
the Commission decided that it could do no more than
formulate a scheme, honoring the spirit of the Act,
and cover all the reasonable needs of the
situation, leaving the liquidation of the bill as it fell
due to Parliament. “ I tell the Senate,” said the
Minister in his policy speech, “ that I am not at this
juncture concerned with finance. I have put . . .
a proposition representing the duty we owe to returned
soldiers, and whether it is going to cost more or less
for the discharge of that duty, we have to shoulder it.”
(Appendices 1 to 6).
Those whose interests had immediately to be con-
sidered fell into the following categories;
(1) Those discharged as totally incapacitated.
(2) Those discharged as partially incapacitated.
(3) Those discharged for military reasons, in-
cluding disciplinary cases.
(4) The widows and orphans and other dependants.
Eligibility to xlpply.
At the outset it was necessary to determine “ eligi-
bility.” Wlere all who had enlisted to be eligible for
the benefits of the Act, irrespective of the character
or extent or place of service, or were there any
classes, or individuals, who, as a matter of general
policy, should be excluded from participation ? Were
dependants to be eligible irrespective of their
necessities ?
The previous regulations framed by the Repatria-
tion Trustees excluded ( a ) those who had not received
an honorable discharge, and ( b ) those who were deemed
to have adequate means. The Commission, however,
considered it wiser to assign no limits to the right to
apply, preferring to leave all doubtful cases for con-
sideration on their merits, and laying it down that in
affording that consideration in disciplinary cases, dis-
tinction would he made between purely military offences
and those which could be regarded as heinous from the
civilian stand-point. Nor did the Commission consider
that economic status or condition should be taken into
account. Every one had the right to apply, although it
was subsequently found necessary to place a restriction
upon the benefits which the Department might confer in
certain cases, notably those covered by the heavy dis-
charges from camp in Australia, and in which the
individual suffered no material prejudice.
The Principle of Treatment.
The next step was to arrive, if possible, at some
general principle of treatment which would govern the
whole scheme. The Minister’s indication of the broad
aim was “ reinstatement in civil life ” (and inferen-
tially the suitable care of those not thus capable).
“ Reinstatement ” means a return to former place and
condition, but as, in the literal sense, this was out of
the question the practical definition had to be sought
in the implication, i.e., return to an economic place
and condition as nearly as possible equal to that en-
joyed prior to enlistment. But could that stand with-
out qualification? Could it be applied to a man who
gave up a business or profession returning him, say,
£SOO to £I,OOO a year, or more, as completely as to
the man whose earning capacity was £3 per week? If
not, a basis of limitation in conformity with some
workable principle must be indicated.
Could any countenance be given to gradations of
rank? The pensions system furnished a precedent in
the affirmative, but the pensions system had its origin
in the traditions and requirements of a professional
army. The A.I.E. was a citizen army of volunteers
with its officers mainly drawn from the ranks, and men
of all classes and condition commingled in those ranks.
Ther e was equality of sacrifice; therefore, in the Com-
mission’s view, there should be equality of treatment.
The Basis of Treatment.
The principle of equality of treatment determined
what was to be the basis of such treatment? To attempt
too much would be to impose upon the Conn non wealth
an obligation which it might not be able completely to
discharge; to propose too little would be to expose the
soldier and his dependants to hardship. Eventually,
after very exhaustive consideration, the Commission
came to a decision which found expression in the fol-
lowing formula:—*
u That the Department accept as a minimum
obligation the responsibility of providing the re-
turned soldier with an opportunity for earning at
least a living wage, and that until such oppor-
tunity is forthcoming such sustenance payments
will be made as will insure the individual receiv-
ing at least the living wage. Further, that, as
far as possible, the Department will assist in re-
storing the individual to an economic condition
comparable with that occupied prior to enlistment.
The living wage is to be understood as that
judicially fixed or generally recognised for the
part of the Commonwealth" in which the soldier
may happen to be at the time.”
The “ living wage ” basis had the advantage that it
was generally understood and generally applicable. It


guaranteed a minimum expressed in monetary pay-
ment while not relieving the Department of the obliga-
tion to apply its services to the restoration of the in-
dividual to as much above that represented by the
minimum as circumstances would permit.
The Field to be Covered.
In surveying the field to be covered the Commis-
sion decided that re-establishment would involve ex-
penditure, on behalf of the individual, in relation to
the following matters: —
1. Sustenance while awaiting employment.
2. Sustenance while undergoing training.
3. Sustenance while under treatment or care in
hospitals or special institutions.
4. Sustenance while awaiting the allotment of
land and during the initial period of land
occupancy (in the case of settlers).
5. Medical treatment after discharge, including
the provision of artificial limbs and other
surgical aids.
6. Emergency grants to cover exceptional neces-
sities.
7. Fees to educational institutions.
8. Tools of trade, professional instruments, and
personal equipment.
9. Small businesses, plant, and live-stock.
10. Homes.
11. Passages (to and from the Commonwealth).
12. Transportation (within the Commonwealth).
13. Allowances to dependants.
14. Funeral expenses.
Consideration of all that is involved under these
headings will show that they covered the necessities of
the individual at very many points.
Sustenance.
Although the rates of the first pension schedule had
been increased by 50 per cent, (from 20s. to 30s. per
week for total incapacity) it was obvious that the pen-
sion alone was quite insufficient for the purposes of
maintenance even where the full rate was paid. The
partially incapacitated, however, received only a pro-
portionate amount; many men were discharged with-
out pensions at all. The Commission, therefore, found
it necessary to determine rates of sustenance which,
inclusive of any pension there might be, would repre-
sent a reasonable minimum living allowance.
Hitherto there had been no systematic provision for
sustenance to men while awaiting employment, The
amelioration scales of the private funds—Under which
in the populous eastern States the pay of returned men
was made up to 50s. per week in the case oi single men
and to 655. in the case of man and wife, with additional
allowances for children—ceased to apply when the man
was discharged.
The Commission determined that all men registered
for employment with the Department could claim as
a right a sustenance allowance until suitable employ-
ment could be found for them. In fixing a scale it
had to guard against making that scale so liberal as
to predispose certain types of men to indifference about
obtaining employment. If employment was relatively
plentiful, and the departmental organization was effi-
cient in finding positions and holding them at the dis-
posal of applicants there should not be much oppor-
tunity for abuse, but if the departmental effort fell
short of what it should be, or if the demand for labour
should sink to a low level, the burden on the Treasury
might easily reach serious proportions. Ihe Com-
mission however, determined that ample justice could
be done if it fixed the rate for single mep at the rgte
winch would have been paid by the Military authority
had the man not been discharged, viz., 425. per week,
with additional allowances for married men up to a
maximum of 665., safeguarding the position by indi-
cating the circumstances under which the payment
might he discontinued. Although during the later
stages of the war and the demobilization period fol-
lowing the armistice, when the men were returning in
large in numbers, and the waiting list was inevitably
large, this provision provoked a good deal of unfavor-
able criticism, a closer understanding of the position
would have shown that perhaps no part of the scheme
was more wisely conceived. At the termination of the
period which this report covers sustenance while await-
ing employment had accounted for an expenditure of
£1,686,838, hut not only did it assure the discharged
soldier against positive hardship, hut it permitted the
Department time to work methodically for his absorp-
tion and in preventing the development of a resentful
temper saved the community from possibly serious
disorder.
The same rate of sustenance was fixed for those
undergoing vocational training in technical institutions.
But the scheme provided also for training in private
workshops, and in the latter case an agreement by a
conference representative of organizations of employers
and trade unions required that the trainee should
receive the standard wage of the particular trade, the
Department making up the difference between that
wage and the value of the labour, such value being
computed initially at 40 per cent, of the standard, and
ascending as efficiency increased. The Commission at
first determined that this supplemental payment should
he inclusive of pension, and the first payments were
made on this basis. The recipients, however, strongly
protested against the pension being taken into account,
and the industrial organizations afforded a measure
of support to their protest. There was also a protest
from those in schools, but this was little than a
murmur, and, moreover, the industrial organizations
did not so directly concern themselves with the schools.
The Commission failed to discover any sufficient reason
for altering the provision in regard to schools, and
still less reason for making any discrimination in favour
of the private workshop. The Cabinet, however, in
this instance, overruled the Commission, in so far as
trainees in workshops were concerned, not on the ground
advanced by the men —namely, that the inclusion of
pension amounted to an interference with pension
rights —hut because of the anomalous position which
would be created as between pensioned men and un-
pensioned men in the same workshops under a large
extension of the scheme to cover other than injured men
which the Commission about that time had recom-
mended.
This extension was decided upon in a late stage of
the war to meet the case of those who had gone away
as youths and would come back men. The Commis-
sion recognised that the position of these young men
in relation to re-establishment differed materially from
that of their elders. Bor those who had been appren-
tices provision had been made to bring their wages up
to the rate they would have received if they had not
enlisted. But the proportion of apprentices was small.
A much larger number although in employment before
enlistment could not be considered to have settled down
to any definite calling; many had enlisted direct from
school.
Their sacrifice of years at the most critical period
of their lives, if left uncompensated, might easily re-
act to the permanent prejudice of thereafter lives. The
Commission therefore decided, with t>e express ap-


proval of the Government, to provide opportunities for
training all youths (in addition to apprentices and
those started upon a professional course) who had en-
listed under twenty. The age limit, admittedly, was
an arbitrary one, but obviously a limit had to be placed
somewhere, and in the view of the Commission a youth
who had reached the age of twenty before enlistment
—in the great majority of cases, at all events —could
reasonably be said to have found the vocation in keep-
ing with his circumstances or aptitudes. Moreover,
had the limit been extended to, say, twenty-one the
numbers would have far exceeded the maximum total
agreed to by the industrial organizations.
The extension of the sustenance provision to this
large new class not only swelled the financial liability
for training enormously, but it also involved a revision
of the ideas previously entertained as to the scope of
training effort. When the case of the injured men
alone was under consideration the view did not go
much beyond those callings in which ordinary working
skill might be acquired in from three to twelve months;
but when the many thousands of youths were brought
into the category of eligibles for training their neces-
sities required that the whole range of callings in-
volving all degrees of skill should come into the
reckoning.
The claims of the University students, articled
pupils, and others who had entered or were about to
enter upon their studies for professional and similar
callings involving the higher educational preparation
were much on a par with those of apprentices, but the
Commission found some difficulty in meeting them with-
out violating the principle of equality of treatment
which they endeavoured to apply. In the
case of the University student it was required that he
should furnish satisfactory evidence of his pre-war
intention, in which case he became entitled to have his
fees paid by the Department, to be supplied with books,
and to receive a sustenance allowance, on the scale
generally laid down, to cover one academic year, the
balance being advanced to him as a loan. The articled
pupil was given the benefit of the sustenance .allowance
inclusive of any pension or earnings.
Although sustenance during training in its various
phases involves the Commonwealth in a heavy commit-
ment, it is an expenditure which may be regarded as
definitely reproductive. For not only had this pro-
vision been the means of increasing the skilled per-
sonnel of the Commonwealth, but to many of the
younger men at least it has given a chance in life much
in advance of what would have been their position had
they never gone to the war at all.
Sustenance provision, but on a lower scale, was also
made for the widow without children who wished to
qualify for a definite calling, but the widow with
children, while not definitely excluded, was not en-
couraged to seek training, the view being held that she
was most benefited if she were placed in a position to
devote herself exclusively to her home.
Thus far was covered the living necessities of the
man awaiting employment and the man undergoing
training. There remained the case of the man who
had to undergo medical treatment. The Commission
laid it down that if at any time a man had to relinquish
his occupation because of a war disability his treatment
was to-be a charge upon the Department, but restricted
the sustenance allowance to the man with dependants.
The single man without dependants was expected to
rely entirely upon the pension he was entitled to claim
in such circumstances if he were treated in a hospital
or other institution conducted or subsidized by the De-
partment; but if his treatment did not involve his
maintenance he received the allowance.
Sustenance at the ordinary rates was also allowed
to men awaiting land in certain circumstances and with
limitations as to time (ordinarily he was expected to
take interim employment if such could he found), and
likewise during the period which might elapse between
the date of his having a holding allotted to him and his
going into possession. It was also found advisable,
as a special measure, to make an allowance to help the
settler over the non-productive stage of occupancy.
This, however, was at the lower rate of 20s. per week
to the single man with, in the case of the married
man, 10s. additional for the wife and 2s. 6d. for each
child to the number of four, the period not to extend
beyond six months.
Living Allowances.
In effect, the same as sustenance payments, and only
distinguished therefrom in its application was the sys-
tem of living allowances. The necessities of seriously
incapacitated married soldiers and widows with chil-
dren at first prompted the provision of a rental allow-
ance pending the Minister’s projected development of
policy in regard to the erection or acquisition of
dwellings. But this rental allowance subsequently gave
place to a general allowance which embraced the classes
mentioned, and also widows without children who were
certified to be physically unfit to augment their pension
by personal earnings.
The Commission found it impossible to stop here,
however. The Department was deluged with represen-
tations on behalf of persons of every degree of rela-
tionship. The Commission, whilst recognising the
equity of these representations in respect of certain
classes of cases, fully appreciated the danger of com-
mitting the Department to a policy which might leave
the way open to indefinite extension of the area of
claim. Eventually—the scope of the Act, in the mean-
time, having been widened to include them—provision
was made for allowances to be paid on carefully ad-
justed scales to the following classes of applicant, the
provision in each case bearing a relation to the number
recognised as dependants on the applicant:—
(a) Totally and permanently incapacitated
soldier.
(b) Widows of deceased soldiers.
(c) Mothers of deceased unmarried soldiers who
were widows and were dependent on soldier
prior to enlistment.
(d ) Mothers of deceased married soldiers, or
mothers of totally and permanently incapa-
citated married soldiers who were widows
and dependent on soldier prior to enlistment.
( e ) Mothers of deceased unmarried soldiers who—
(1) have husbands so incapacitated as to
be unable to materially contribute
to their support,
and were married to such husband prior
to soldier’s enlistment,
and were dependent on soldier prior to
enlistment.
(/) Mothers of deceased or totally and per-
manently incapacitated married soldiers
who—
(1) have husbands so incapacitated as to
be unable to materially contribute
to their support,
and were married to such husband prior
to soldier’s enlistment,
and were dependent on soldier prior to
enlistment.


( g ) Incapacitated fathers of deceased unmarried
soldiers where such soldiers contributed to
support prior to enlistment.
( h ) Incapacitated fathers of deceased or totally
and permanently incapacitated married
soldiers who—
(1) have husbands so incapacitated as to
be unable to materially contribute
to their support,
and were married to such husband prior
to soldier’s enlistment,
and were dependent on soldier prior to
enlistment.
The subsequent volume of applications for living
allowances suggested that the death of the soldier had
represented an economic loss to relatives immensely
greater than the common experience of life would in-
dicate. To such an extent was this the case that the
Commission in submitting its recommendations in con-
nexion with the amending Act of 1920 advised the
withdrawal of living allowances to the classes enume-
rated. In dealing with a large number of cases it had
become apparent that the pension provision already in
existence was amply sufficient to cover the financial
necessity represented by the degree of dependence upon
the deceased soldier.
To one other class a special living allowance was
made to apply: the children of deceased or totally and
permanently incapacitated soldiers for whom secondary
or technical education might be desired. The Min-
ister’s feeling was very pronounced that the Depart-
ment’s work would fall short of completeness unless
facilities were given for orphans and the children of
permanently handicapped fathers to secure such educa-
tional advantages as would brighten their prospects in
life, and for a time he thought’seriously of developing
a comprehensive scholarship scheme—supported partly
by private benefactions and partly by departmental
funds—which might fittingly stand as the national
memorial of the war. It was subsequently decided,
however, that the provision of scholarships could per-
haps be better left to the several considerable private
funds and to existing and subsequent bequests, whilst
the Department would confine itself to an allowance for
the maintenance of the scholars. Hence the provi-
sion of 20s. per week for boy or girl from the age of
sixteen to eighteen. Up to sixteen the children would
be covered in the allowances made to the parents (and
to guardians where both parents were deceased).
Beyond eighteen the Act did not empower the Com-
mission to go.
Assistance to Start in Business.
Ho part of the scheme of benefits excited so much
protest from applicants, from local committees, from
members of the public and the press, and also members
of the Commonwealth and State Parliaments as that
relative to establishment in small businesses. In the
earlier period of the war when the prevailing fear as
to the measure of ultimate physical disability entailed
by certain classes of injury were rather exaggerated,
and when no realistic conceptions of the possibilities
of adult training had been developed, it was, perhaps,
not surprising that the small business —the small shop,
the home industry plant, the horse and cart, the poultry
farm, the boarding house, and all the other forms of
minor enterprise covered by the term —should loom up
in the minds of so many of the, at the time, hyper-
sympathetic 23ublic as the instrumentality of re-
establishment most generally available and most
generally suitable to the needs of men who had been
weakened by illness or handicapped by hurts. To
many of the men, on the other hand, the small business
proved attractive because of tbe illusion of personal
independence which attached to it. The Repatriation
Trustees, however, had spent an appreciable sum oi
money in financing small businesses, and the result had
been depressingly poor, whether judged in relation to
the benefit conferred or the stability of the loans.
Experience amply proved that it required aptitude, the
capacity for sustained and careful attention to small
details, and a certain amount of special knowledge to
conduct even the smallest and most nondescript kind
of small business successfully. Recognising this the
trustees had endeavoured to restrict advances to a
minimum, but their efforts were rendered only partially
successful by reason of the absence -at the time of
adequate facilities for the only satisfactory alternative
—vocational training.
The Commission concurred entirely in the view
which the trustees had left on record, and framed a
regulation to provide for loans to £l5O in ordinary
cases (in special cases up to £250 with the approval
of the Minister) for the purchase of a business, plant,
stock, or live stock, but restricted the eligibility to
apply to—
(a) The widow of a soldier with one or more
children;
( h ) A married soldier incapacitated to the extent
of being unable to engage in his usual
occupation; or
(c) A soldier who, immediately prior to enlist-
ment, was dependent for his living upon a
business owned and conducted by him, and
who disposed of the business in order to
enlist, and who satisfies the State Board
that he possesses the experience and ability
to conduct with a reasonable prospect of
success the business applied for.
But experience showed that even this was not re-
strictive enough, and the regulation was further
limited, later, by requiring in the case of the married
soldier (referred to in b) that he should not only be
unable to < engage in his former occupation, but be
a unsuitable for vocational training or for an occupa-
tion in substitution of his usual occupation.” In this
class of case the intention was that the small business
should be considered only in the last resort. In the
case of the man who had been in a business which he
disposed of in order to enlist the principle of re-
instatement applied. He had a claim to be put back
in a business if he could show that he had a reasonable
prospect of conducting one successfully, but not other-
wise. In the case of the widow with children the small
business was recognised as often a very suitable way
of supplementing her income, but she was not entitled
to choose this form of assistance and draw the living
allowance in addition.
Notwithstanding the pressure from all sides to relax
the restrictions with which this form of provision was
surrounded, the Commission held firmly to its position,
and this for no other reason than that it was unable to
discover any fresh basis consistent with the principle
which governed the whole scheme. To have “ treated
cases on their merits,” as was urged, obviously would
have been impracticable in dealing with thousands of
men. If a particular motor mechanic were to be set
up in a repair shop in a country town, upon what
principle could the application of any mechanic to a
like treatment be denied? If an operative baker were
to be provided with a bakery plant on the ground that
he was entering upon a directly productive industry,
would a grocer’s assistant appreciate a refusal of an
advance for a grocery shop on the ground that he was
merely a distributer and not a producer?


Although freely invited to suggest a working alter-
native to the policy of the regulation none of the critics
furnished one which when followed out did not end
in a cul-de-sac. So the regulation stood, and while
under it the advances made were few compared with
what they might have been had the door been opened
wider, the Department thereby avoided a largely futile
expenditure, whilst doubtless many men were saved
much disappointment.
Home Establishment.
In every State, from the time that soldiers first
began to return, applications for assistance to build
or buy homes, or to convert mortgages of an onerous
character had been numerous. In Hew South Wales
the early needs were met to a degree which commenced
building dwellings upon land placed at disposal by the
State Government and upon blocks privately donated.
The practice was to obtain from the State Savings
Bank an advance to cover the cost of the material, the
bank subsequently taking a mortgage over the build-
ing, and giving long terms of repayment. Thus for
the*bare cost of the materials a dwelling was provided
at a very low figure, and the purchasing rental repre-
sented but a few shillings per week. The Government
of Hew South Wales carried the provision a stage
further, undertaking —obviously without a full appre-
ciation of all that was involved—to erect dwellings for
widows and incapacitated men, giving a life tenancy
of the same at a peppercorn rental. The definition of
“ incapacity ” rested entirely with the Minister. In
default of a dwelling the Government granted a rental
allowance of 12s. 6d. per week. Few dwellings were
erected, but a number of applications for rental allow-
ances were paid, and this liability had to be taken
over by the Department, being met by the system of
living allowances to which reference has been made.
There were also tentative proposals in some of the
other States.
With a view to more generally meeting the require-
ment over the Commonwealth as a whole the Board of
Trustees recommended to the Premiers’ Conference of
January, 1917, “ that the States (through their Savings
Banks or similar institutions) be asked to agree to a
uniform scale of advances to soldiers and sailors de-
siring to build or purchase dwellings in certain areas,
or to convert existing mortgages of an onerous char-
acter, the Commonwealth Authority to advance 25 per
cent, of the value to a prescribed amount.” The Con-
ference indorsed this recommendation, but at the in-
stance of Queensland fixed the maximum value for
the purposes of the advance at £3OO. This meant that
the Commonwealth contribution would not exceed £75
in any one case. The limit of £3OO, even at the time
when costs were low in comparison with what they sub-
sequently became, was altogether too low.
Pending the creation of the Commonwealth Repatria-
tion Authority as contemplated by the Premiers’ Con-
ference, the trustees thought it wise to provide for
advances up to £75 in the terms of the resolution, and
numbers of applications were approved. Where the
trustees’ advance had been insufficient to cover the
difference was made up from other sources, notably
in South Australia, where the Government placed a
special fund at disposal for the purpose of enabling the
State Bank to erect dwellings up to £6OO in value.
Under this arrangement a comprehensive and very
liberal housing scheme was developed which continued
to operate even after the Commonwealth Housing
Scheme had become an accomplished fact.
The Commission, when it came to consider the ques-
tion, was fully alive alike to the widespread demand
for homes on the part of soldiers, and to the value of
homes as a factor in settling the minds of men who were
all more or less victims of the spirit of restlessness which
their war experiences had engendered. But it did not
see that the requirement could be satisfactorily met by
the method which had been adopted, and favoured legis-
lation enabling the Commonwealth to deal with this
problem on comprehensive lines. As this was a view
enunciated by the Minister, who undertook to introduce
a measure dealing exclusively with dwellings for
soldiers, the Commission decided to make no provision
for advances in the interim.
But whilst the ideal was to get as many soldiers as
possible into homes of their own, this could be only
a gradual process extending ove:* years. In the mean-
time there was the demand for home establishment
even though in rented tenements. The Army was
mostly made up of young men, 80 per cent, of whom
were single on enlistment. Many had married prior
to embarkation; many more had entered into engage-
ments to marry. On all grounds it was good public
policy to encourage marriage freely.
The Commission considered that it would be assist-
ing to establish those who were married as also others
who were contemplating marriage if it made provision
for the purchase of furniture and furnishings. This
provision took the form of advances up to £35 in any
one case. Widows and totally and permanently in-
capacitated soldiers were entitled to £25 by way of
gift. It was a benefit very extensively availed of, and
whilst its allocation can not be said to have been free
of abuse, in the great majority of cases it undoubtedly
justified its purpose.
In keeping with the idea of promoting the establish-
ment of homes was the provision of passages to the
Commonwealth of the girls to whom soldiers had be-
come engaged abroad. The passage was issued only
on the application of the soldier, who had to enter into
an undertaking to refund the cost if marriage did not
take place w T ithin a month of the fiancee’s landing.
Up to June, 1920, some 14,000 passage warrants had
been issued. In the majority of cases the applicants
did not incur the liability to refund; but in some the
evidences of human frailty were not wanting.
Other Benefits.
The scheme covered many other forms of assistance
and benefits. For instance, after employment had
been found for a man—or if he had found it himself
—a grant might be made to the value of £lO for tools
of trade, professional instruments, or such articles of
personal equipment as might be necessary to enable
him to engage in the occupation. If his requirements
exceeded that value he was entitled to apply for a loan
not exceeding an additional £4O. If not being eligible
for vocational training in the ordinary way, but still
was anxious to enhance his efficiency, or to qualify
for some other calling in his own time, he was entitled
to apply for admission to evening classes, have his fees
paid, and be provided with books and instruments up
to a modest value. If the acceptance of employment
at a distance necessitated his removal and that of his
family and his belongings, an allowance was provided
towards the cost of transportation. If he were to die
under conditions of indigence the cost of a modest
funeral might be charged to the Department.
“ The Tyranny of Regulations/’
The government of a scheme embracing so many
descriptions of benefit and applying to so many dif-
ferent classes involved the formulation of an inevitably
large body of regulations. There were not only regu-
lations defining those necessary to protect the public
interest. There was much protest against what was
at first referred to as the “ tyranny ” of these regula-
tions, although the fundamental principles of treat-
ment were never departed from, the Commission from


time to time contracted or extended them in the light
of their experience in dealing with many thousands of
special cases, and hearing many thousands of appeals.
In this way the scheme was maintained in a condition
of continuous adjustment to the infinite variations of
the needs. (Appendix 13 ( a ) ).
THE DEPARTMENTAL ORGANIZATION AND
ACTIVITIES.
The Department, subject to the Minister, was ad-
ministered by a Comptroller with, in each State, a
Deputy-Comptroller who superintended the offices in
which the detailed work was accomplished. The
branch offices were at first confined to the capital cities,
but later it was found desirable to establish sub-branches
in the more populous provincial centres. The branches
and sub-branches were linked up with the local com-
mittees, each of which was given jurisdiction over a
defined area, these areas in the aggregate covering the
whole of each State.
Although the Department took over the liabilities of
the War Councils, there was no system in existence for
carrying on the much more extended work which had
to be done. The necessities allowed for no small be-
ginnings and the gradual evolution of an organization.
The Department had to start complete in all its parts
and equipped to function uniformly throughout the
Commonwealth from a given date. It had been decided
as a matter of policy that the officers should be re-
turned soldiers, the great majority of whom would be
without experience of official work, and all of whom
would be new to the work to be done. It was, there-
fore, necessary to design a system which would not only
embrace every activity, but would also define the duties
of every officer, and lay down in detail the manner of
his doing it. This involved a mental pre-visualiza-
tion of the whole field of exceedingly complex working
in connexion with which there were no precedents and
no models. The system, which took months of expert
endeavour to fashion, represented a new achievement
in official organization. Although it subsequently
underwent modifications and adjustments under the
pressure of rapidly expanding work, the fact that it
enabled a raw staff to embark upon the discharge of
manifold and unfamiliar duties over the broad area
of the Commonwealth, with some approach to order and
effectiveness, may be said to have justified the immense
amount of prior thought and labour which had been
bestowed upon its elaboration.
Registration.
The system provided for the registration of every
man returnmg.io AustraliSo as to place the De-
partment in possession of the earliest information this
was accomplished on the transport, the form providing
for all the necessary service and personal particulars
obtainable at that stage. These forms were classified
and handed to the Repatriation Office at the first
Australian port of call for transmission to the States
to which the men would be returning. On receipt of
the forms the particular office had to notify the par-
ticular local committee, as also the previous employer,
giving particulars of the ’individuals condition, and
inviting early information as to the provision which
could be made for him upon his discharge. Where it
appeared improbable that the man would be fit to„
resume his former duties the employer was asked
whether there was any more suitable position he could
offer, and also whether^'Tn the event "of the former
employee not being able or not wishing to return at
all, a position would be available for another ex-soldier
in his stead. The information contained in the replies
was entered upon his papers, and was available for use
if eventually the individual applied for the assistance
of the Department.
The functions of the Employment Recti on were—
(l) To assemble and assign positions.
(2) To determine sustenance payments while the
applicant was awaiting employment.
(3) To arrange for the transportation of men to
places of employment.
(4) To refer men, difficult to place, for training
or other consideration.
The section had to make use of every available
means to attract to the Department the first offer of
every position open, no matter what its description.
This involved activity on the part of local committees,
employers’ organizations, trades unions, the columns
of the press, and the systematic personal canvassing of
individual employers in the principal centres. If no
suitable employment could be offered an applicant im-
mediately he was listed for sustenance until a suitable
position could be offered. Evidence of want oT~ToncT~
fides on the part of the applicant incurred the with-
drawal of sustenance, and many men suffered this
penalty not without protests to which in the early
stages the public lent an ear which became less sensi-
tive as time went on and the conditions of the depart-
mental provision became better understood. Employers
generally were gradually brought to recognise an obli-
gation to apply first to the Department when they had
vacancies to fill, and it was largely owing to their
cordial co-operation that so notable a measure of suc-
cess was ultimately achieved. As in applications for
all other kinds of assistance, however, so in this the
ingenuity of the “ digger ” was matched against the
vigilance of officials, including the departmental
doctors, and while it fairly'may be said that the
majority of men were anxious to get back into their
normal industrial stride with as little delay as possible
there were not a few who took full advantage of every
indulgence the Department was prepared to extend.
Throughout the period the industrial dislocations
through strikes and epidemics were abnormal, and syn-
chronizing with the rapid demobilization reflected them-
selves adversely in the employment figures. Foreseeing
that there would be periods when the numbers on hand
would be so considerable as to render rapid absorption
through the ordinary channels of industry impossible,
an early endeavour was made to develop “ reserve
employments ” to which men could be sent pending
their re-establishment in a more permanent way. To
this end an agreement was entered into with three of
the States for the temporary employment of men on
the lighter to forestry operations.
Under this agreement the Department undertook to
bear 25 per ce n t7"o fthU'c osTj" tli cent age being a
set-off against a presumed inefficiency as compared with
labour Jn the ordinary way. A certain number of
men ('(some 1,100}) were dealt with under these agree-
ments, was not very satisfactory,
either from the stand-point of the Forestry authorities
or the Department. Later, when the numbers await-
ing placement were at their heaviest, the Common-
wealth Government made a grant of £500,000 for dis-
tribution to local authorities for expenditure on new
works upon which returned soldiers were to be em-
ployed. This grant probably did some temporary
good, although it was not easy to assess the extent of
it. Provision was also made for loans to local authori-
ties with the same end in view, but, except in Queens-
land, these loans were not extensively applied for, and
early in 1920 the offer of loans was withdrawn.
Although the practice was to encourage men dis-
qualified for their previous employment through dis-
ablements to submit themselves for Vr^ationa)


Training, quite a considerable number of this class
preferred to be found positions in involving a
minimum of physical exertion, and no special degree of
skill, such as lift attendants, caretakers, watchmen, and
similar occupations. At no time was it difficult to
find positions for skilled men; ’demand,
especially in the engineering and building trades,
throughout in advance of the supply. The greatest
problem at any one time was to find a sufficient num-
ber of “ light labour ” positions as an introduction to
perhaps more strenuous work later on. “ Light
labour,” though a genuine requirement in the case of
a large number of men, was less requisite in the case
of others whose reluctance to risk industrial strains was
only overcome by a more rigid interpretation of the
sustenance provision.
From the commencement of the Department’s acti-
vities 190,662 applications for employment were dealt
with, 108,949 positions had been found (the same man
was often placed in several positions successively), and
whilst in January, 1920 —the period when the load
reached its peak —the figures of men awaiting employ-
ment stood at 12,000, the list subsequently showed a
sapid and unbroken decline, month by month, to 6,049
at the end of the half-year, and these included a re-
siduum representing a type difficult to place satisfac-
torily under any circumstances. (Appendix 6 (a) ).
Vocational Training.
In the period prior to the creation of the Depart-
ment a certain amount of Yocational Training was
commenced under the auspices of the State War
Councils. Each council had what was styled a
Disablement and Training Committee upon which the
State Education Departments and the principal
technical schools were represented. These committees
examined applicants, and determined the nature of the
training to be undertaken in each case.
When the Department assumed responsibility the
advantage of continuing to utilize existing facilities to
the utmost extent possible was recognised, and as the
States had indicated their willingness to make the re-
sources of their training institutions available effect
was given to a formal agreement under which the De-
partment undertook to provide the cost of any addi-
tional accommodation, staff, and equipment which
might be necessary to meet the increasing requirements
of the comprehensive scheme then in contemplation.
The States on their part bound themselves to take over
at the end of the training period such liabilities as were
represented by substantial alterations or additions
to existing buildings and such new buildings as might
specifically be agreed upon, and were given the option
of taking over all others, and likewise all or any part
of the equipment at a valuation when no longer needed
by the Department; the sum thus involved to be set
off pro tanto against the moneys payable by the Com-
monwealth to the States on account of transferred pro-
perties generally.
To arrive at a sound basis for the determination of
an effective training scheme the Minister convened an
expert Committee consisting of the Commonwealth
Statistician, the Secretary for Labour in the State of
Victoria, the past Chief Commissioner of the Victorian
Railways, prominent manufacturers, and works fore-
men, and principals of technical institutions in dif-
ferent States. The Committee was asked to advise as
to the best means of providing for —
1. The very severely incapacitated who will live
either in their own homes or be cared for in
national hostels.
2. Those who can be trained to do useful work,
but not enough to enable them to take their
place among normal workers.
3. Those who may he equipped to earn a standard
wage in callings for which they can he
trained in from, say, three to twelve months.
4. Those who might be prepared for more highly-
skilled callings involving a longer training
period.
5. Those whose apprenticeship has been inter-
rupted.
6. Those who desire professional training.
The Committee presented a voluminous report in
which it discussed not merely the means of training,
hut also directions (suggested interrogatively in the
reference) in which employment might he provided for
certain of those who would be trained. As to training
it recommended —
Class I.—To receive functional training, to he
followed by appropriate vocational training, and
then to be drafted into ( a ) national hostels, ( h )
their own homes, or ( c ) the homes of approved
persons.
Class lI.—To he provided for in communities
concentrated about national workshops in which
commodities —for preference those made only in
or supplied from enemy countries —would be manu-
factured ; where necessary the manufactures to
he made State monopolies with temporary or per-
manent restriction of imports.
Class 111. —Those possessing a certain minimum
standard of experience to be drafted at once into
employment. Those requiring preliminary train-
ing to receive the same in technical schools, the
equipment and staff of which to be appropriately
enlarged at the cost of the Commonwealth.
Class IY. —Three divisions of this class were in-
dicated: (a) those unable to follow their former
skilled occupations, but who could be specifically
trained for some particular branch of their former
occupation better adapted to them in view of their
physical and other disabilities; ( b ) those who
have to make a complete change from one occu-
pation to another; and ( c ) those who prior to
enlistment were unskilled. Where necessary some
to be intensively trained in technical schools and
colleges; others to be quickly trained in special
workshop schools to take positions as factory
operatives.
Class Y. —Would fall, according to their in-
juries, within one of the classes 1,2, 3,4, and 6.
Those able and willing to continue their inden-
tures to do so. Where the period of apprentice-
ship could be shortened by intensive training such
training to be provided if desired and practicable.
Others to be dealt with according to the classes
under which their disabilities placed them.
Class Yl.—Those who had already entered upon
a professional course and able to continue the
course normally to so continue at the cost of the
Department, the courses, where practicable, to be
taken intensively.
Broadly speaking, the recommendations were adopted
by the Department after having received the indorse-
ment of a Conference representing organized employers
and organized labour, and were given effect to with
small modifications, except in regard to the establish-
ment of national workshops for the manufacture of
various commodities. At the time the Minister framed
his reference to the Committee he shared in the then
very general fear that the number of men likely to be
unable to re-enter the ranks of normal industry might
run into many thousands, and. that, therefore, it was
necessary to provide a means by which they could be
kept healthily employed to the extent of their capacity.


Happily the later experience falsified that fear. One
of the marvels has been the rapidity and extent of the
physical restoration of men suffering from various
descriptions of injury which before the war would have
been expected to entail a serious degree of incapacity
for a prolonged period, if not for the remainder of life.
As experience accumulated it became apparent that the
total number of those who would have to be classed as
permanently sub-efficient through illness or injury would
be relatively small, and as in the meantime those who
seemed destined for this category could be receiving
preparatory training in the schools, it was thought
to be wiser policy not to commit the Department to any
expensive scheme of national workshops with their ac-
companiments of industrial community settlements
until all the men had been accounted for, when the
nature of any special provision found to be necessary
could be reconsidered.
As part of the machinery of training the recommen-
dations embraced the formation of an industrial com-
mittee for each trade or calling composed of two em-
ployers and two employees with the addition thereto
in each case of some one representing the Department;
also a Central Industrial Committee similarly repre-
sentative for each State whose authority might be
invoked in cases of dispute or on matters affecting in-
dustry in general. The Industrial Committees —called
in the regulations District Industrial Committees —
were to satisfy themselves as to the suitability of men
presented for particular callings, and more particularly
to act as assessors of the value of their labour, thus
periodically determining the proportions of the stan-
dard wage which had to be paid by the employers and
the Department respectively where the training was
carried out in private workshops.
When the scope of the training provision—including
as it did definite sustenance and supplemental allow-
ances —became understood the former reluctance to
submit to training gave place to an eagerness which
extended to very many who did not fall within the
departmental category of eligibility. However, in this
as in all other respects those who had been discharged
previous to the Act coming into force were entitled to
apply, and as a number of these were eligible, in addi-
tion to others who returned later, the Department was
severely taxed to expand the training machinery rapidly
enough. The difficulties in obtaining building ma-
terials, the slow rate of construction owing to the
shortage of skilled labour, the slowness again in the
deliveries of special machines and tools many of
which had to be imported—for instructional purposes,
as also the scarcity of suitable instructors, combined to
produce delays which were reflected from time to time
in congested waiting lists which were a source of em-
barrassment and expense to the Department.
Up to the latter half of 1918 those who had been in-
capacitated to the extent of being unable to follow the
pre-war occupation were alone the subjects of concern.
It was at this period, however, that the great extension
of the provision to those who had enlisted under twenty
was decided on. Much difficulty had been experienced
by the Employment Section in placing these young
men. Having had little useful experience previously
in a proportion of cases no industrial experience at
all —they were as adults unacceptable to employers at
the full wages laid down in the awards, whilst in most
cases they were to old to be eligible for the lower scale
of wages assigned for juniors even in the unskilled occu-
pations. From statistics obtained at the time it was
estimated that some 11,500 of this class would be
eligible. Although it .could not be known what pro-
portion of these would wish to take advantage of the
provision about to be made, it was obvious that these
applicants, added to others yet to return who would
be eligible under the previous regulation, rendered a
large and rapid extension of the facilities inevitable.
At this stage the Hew South Wales Government, at
the request of the Minister for Repatriation, made
available the services of its experienced Superintendent
of Technical Education, who thereupon was appointed
to the position of Director of Vocational Training
under the departmental scheme. This officer immedi-
ately addressed himself to the preparation of estimates
for the systematic training of 20,000 men, allotting
them to the highly-skilled, less-skilled, and little-skilled
callings in certain definite proportions. This pro-
gramme, which was estimated to cost some £2,000,000
spread over the full training period, was approved by
the Minister, and subsequently accepted by an Aus-
tralian Conference of Industrial Representatives on
the understanding that no variation in the figures of
allotment would be made without the consent of the
trades concerned.
Whilst up to this time the whole of the training,
other than that concerned with professions had been
carried out in the technical schools under the agree-
ment with the various State Education Departments, if
was seen that additional facilities must be provided in
order to keep pace with the requirements under the
new T regulations. Speed being the all-important factor,
it thereupon was decided to create special trade schools
in which the conditions would approximate as nearly
as possible to those of the ordinary workshop and
factory. They were to create marketable values from
the commencement, and to be under the eye of the
Trade Committees.
In all fifteen of,these schools have been established,,
and it is not too much to say that the results obtained
in their operation have deeply impressed not only the
trade committees (composed of representatives of both
employers and employees), but also the experts in
charge of the State systems of Technical Education.
Over nearly the whole range of trades they have
demonstrated the practicability of developing an
astonishing degree of working skill in a very short
period. After but a few months’ training men have
ben able to operate different classes of machine tools
in a workmanlike fashion, whilst many of the leather,
metal, wood, and textile articles produced have reached
a standard of excellence quite comparable with those
reaching the market through ordinary trade channels.
In building construction the practical character of the
training has been demonstrated in the erection of some
of the Trade School buildings, as also in the erection
under skilled journeymen leadership of several of the
dwellings provided by the War Service Homes Com-
missioner. Generally the experience has shown that
in the lesser skilled trades at least many men can be
equipped in these Trade Schools to earn standard wages
without further preparation, and that in those higher
crafts for which the training must be continued in pri-
vate workshops the trainee can acquire therein a degree
of working knowledge and facility sufficient to make
his services to the employer of very real value from
the start, and to render his attainment of full craft
efficiency a matter of much shorter time than is
usually allowed.
The system of Industrial Committees which was asso-
ciated with the Training Section of the scheme, while
involving the creation of an extensive machinery in
some respects cumbrous in operation, has been attended
on the whole with very beneficial results. It has made
the trade organizations co-partners with the Depart-
ment in reaching the ends aimed for and, by keeping
the responsible representatives of those organizations
cognizant of all that appertains to the process, it bf-«


gradually corrected misapprehensions, and from the
side of both employer and employee brought to the aid
of the trainee much valuable practical experience.
Training for callings involving University courses,
from the Department's stand-point, has given but little
trouble after the initial determination of the appli-
cant’s eligibility. The Universities have shown a readi-
ness to make concessions in regard to fees, and in the
one State in which University costs are defrayed by the
Government and no fees charged the Department has
not been asked to do more than contribute to the
salaries of some additional lecturers whose appointment
was rendered necessary by the attendance of numbers
of soldier students.
At the end of June, 1920, full training being
given under the auspices of the Department in the
following callings (179 in all) :
Applied. Art.
Art metal.
Commercial art.
Electroplate manufacturing.
Engraving.
Jewellers.
Ornamental iron.
Opticians.
Poster drawing.
Photography.
Pottery.
Printing, Bookbinding.
„ Composing.
„ Lithography.
„ Linotype operating.
„ Machining.
,j Paper ruling.
Show card and ticket writing.
Watchmaking.
Engineering, Etc.
Armature winding.
Black sheet metal.
Boat building.
Boilermaking.
Brass finishing.
Coppersmithing.
Draughting (men previous trade experience now
incapacitated).
Electrical wiring and fitting.
Electrical mechanics.
Engine-driving (steam and gas).
Farm machine experts.
Fitting and turning.
Farriery.
Lead burning.
Locksmithing.
Instrument fitting.
Implement making.
Machining.
Motor mechanics.
Motor cycle mechanics.
Moulding.
Metal polishing.
Pattern making.
Sheep shearing machinists.
Shipwright’s boilermakers.
Shop foremansbip.
Smithing.
Station mechanics.
Switch operating.
Steel working.
Safe making.
Telegraphy.
Telegraphy (Wireless).
Telephone mechanics.
Welding (oxy-acet. and quasi-arc.)
F. 16850.—2
Building Trades.
Architectural modelling.
Bricklayers.
Building construction.
Carpentry and joinery.
Coppersmithing (thin gauge).
Drafting (men previous trade experience now
incapacitated).
Fibro-sheet making.
Fibrous plastering.
Foremansbip.
Glazing.
Gasfitting.
Masonry, Marble.
„ Stone.
„ Letter cutting.
Painting and decorating.
Plastering.
Plumbing.
Reinforced concrete working.
Sheet metal working.
Signwriting.
Slating and tiling (roof).
Tinsmitbing.
Wall tiling.
Wood turning.
Woodworking, machining, and saw-milling.
Commercial.
Advertising.
Arts.
Bookkeeping.
Economics.
J ournalism.
Shorthand and typing.
Salesmanship.
Furniture Trade.
Cabinet machining.
Cahinetmaking.
Ohairmaking.
Cutters-off.
Marker s-out.
Mantelpiecemaking.
Pianomaking (including mechanical players).
Polishing.
Upholstering.
Turning.
White woodworking.
Manufacturing and General.
Drapery.
Dressmaking.
Clothing—
Dyeing and Cleaning.
Felt hat making.
Furriers.
Millinery.
Tailors and Cutters.
Weaving mill hands.
Wool classing.
Wool sorting.
Wool scouring.
Food, Etc.—
Baking and pastrycooking.
Bacon curing.
Butter and cheese making.
Butchers.
Confectionery.
Jam and preserve making.
- Meat inspectors.


Education Departments Schools (under
Vocational Training Agreement).
Repatriation
Trade Schools,
VICTORIA
. 22
2*
NEW SOUTH WALES
. 13
3
WESTERN AUSTRALIA .
. -
7
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
. 5
1
TASMANIA
1
2
QUEENSLAND ..
. 1
-
.
42
15
* Also one special School controlled by the Boot Manufacturers
Association without cost to the Department.
Manufacturing and General— continued.
Leather—
Bag and trunk making.
Bootmaking (machine).
Boot repairing.
Harness and saddlery.
Tanning and dressing.
Wood and Metal—
Go-cart making.
Coopering.
Pipe (tobacco) making.
.Picture frame making.
Toymaking.
Iron bedstead making.
Hail, bolt, and screw making.
Artificial limb making.
Brick and tile’ making.
Brush making.
Miscellaneous—
Chemistry (assaying).
„ (industrial).
Cigar making.
Dental mechanics.
Elocution.
Gardening.
Glass bevelling.
Hairdressing and wig making.
Languages.
Lift-driving.
Massage.
Mattress making.
Midwifery.
Music.
navigation.
Nursing.
Poultry farming.
Rope making.
Rubber working.
Tent and tarpaulin making.
W icker-working.
Window dressing.
Professional.
Accountancy.
Architecture.
Agricultural science.
Dentistry.
Engineering (civil).
„ (electrical).
„ (mechanical).
„ (marine).
Forestry.
Geology and mineralogy.
Law.
Medicine.
Metallurgy.
Pathology. ,
Pharmacy.
Science.
Surveying.
Teaching.
Veterinary science.
Vehicle Building.
Coachsmi thing.
Motor body building.
„ panel beating.
„ painting.
„ trimming.
Road carriage building.
Vulcanizing.
Wheelwrights.
Schools (existing, enlarged, and established) were
being utilized by the Department as follows:
In addition to the technical classes ordinarily avail-
able in the State institutions, 396 classes were estab-
lished at the instance of the Department. The total
number of instructors whose salaries are paid by the
Department was 490.
To 30th June, 1920, the applications dealt with
totalled 42,699. Of these 27,019 were approved, the.
remainder having been either refused or withdrawn.
Of the number approved 5,198 had completed training;
8,077 were undergoing preliminary training in schools
or Universities; and 6,129 were completing their train-
ing with employers; 1,254 were waiting to commence
school training; and 650 had completed school training,
and were ready to be placed with employers, leaving a
residual of 5,711 to be accounted for. This residual
comprises those who for various reasons had with-
drawn and foregone their privilege. Many of these
withdrew during the second phase of training, i.e., the
industrial phase, and it may safely be assumed that
the assistance given by the Department had enabled
many of them to secure employment in other workshops
at full wages. Not having been definitely advised as
to their subsequent movements, however, they have been
included with the number who for other reasons gave
up training. As regards the 1,254 awaiting school
training and the 650 awaiting industrial training, the
development of the scheme and the slackening of new
applications has since brought about a much better
position. The congestion which obtained in the schools
has now disappeared.
These figures refer to full-day courses carrying the
sustenance allowance. In addition 1,442 had com-
pleted, and 7,473 were receiving, efficiency courses in
their own time —chiefly in the evenings—in connexion
with which the Department was responsible only for
fees, books, and instruments. (Appendices 6 (h)
and 7).
Medical Treatment and Services.
The responsibility of the Department for the treat-
ment of members of the A.I.F. for disabilities due to
or aggravated by war services became operative only
after discharge. Up to that point treatment was the
obligation of the Defence Department which controlled
the military hospitals, and that Department was re-
quested not to discharge any invalid until further
active hospital treatment was no longer needed or
availing. To save duplication of institutions it was
arranged that the Defence Department should continue
to utilize its medical organization for the treatment of
after-discharge cases referred by the Repatriation De-
partment while such organization remained in ex-
istence for the purposes of the A.I.F.
This arrangement, however, did not free the Depart-
ment from the necessity of creating a medical staff
and from making very extensive supplemental provi-
sion for treatment. The military hospitals were


situated only in or near the capital city of each State,
and could only be utilized conveniently for metro-
politan cases and for country cases requiring continuity
of care. They were not of use for emergent or minor
cases occurring throughout the country. Moreover the
employment of medical officers was necessary to —
(a) Examine men unfit to return to pre-war occu-
pations and to advise as to their physical
suitability for such courses of vocational
training as might be indicated;
(fe) Examine men who claimed to be fit only lor
light employment with a view to ascertain-
ing whether there were actual disabilities
in support of their claim or whether treat-
ment would improve their physical
standard;
(c) Conduct such examinations as might be neces-
sary in the case of men seeking treatment.
The Department, therefore, provided for a principal
medical officer at head-quarters, and attached medical
officers to each branch office with also a medical officer
in each local committee area. Associated with the
principal medical officer at head-quarters was a
Medical Advisory Committee consisting of the follow-
ing eminent members of the profession:
Sir Henry Maudsley, M.D., F.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.,
K.C.M.G.
Mr. R. R. Stawell, M.D., Ch.B.
Mr. George Syme, M. 8., Ch.M., F.R.C.S.
Mr. J. Ramsay Webb, M. 8., Ch.B., F.R.C.S.
Associated with the departmental medical officers in
each branch office were consulting specialists whose ser-
vices might be requisitioned in cases involving doubt
or difficulty.
Broadly speaking, the scheme of medical treatment
approved by the Minister and indorsed by the Medical
Advisory Committee embraced: —
(&) Treatment in hospitals in metropolitan areas
of near cases or cases which could not be
effectively dealt with in a country hospital;
( b ) Treatment as out-patients in metropolitan
areas and in local committee areas as con-
venient ;
(c) Treatment in country hospitals in cases not
presenting any complications or in cases of
emergency;
( d) Treatment in applicant’s own home or else-
where in cases where removal dangerous or
inconvenient;
(c) Treatment in convalescent homes or farms
or hostels;
(/) Treatment of incurables, mentals, tuberculars,
inebriates, alcoholics, and chronic epileptics
in special institutions.
The availability of the metropolitan (military) hos-
pitals permitted to the patient continuity of treat-
ment (often at the hands of the specialists under whose
care he was before discharge), which would have been
lost had the treatment been restricted to the district
of which he happened to be a resident. The utilization
of these metropolitan hospitals, however, necessitated
the provision of travelling warrants, payment of tra-
velling allowances, facilities for the patient to be accom-
panied by an attendant if necessary, and ambulance
transport from rail or ship terminal to the hospital.
The country machinery involved the appointment of
622 medical officers attached to 740 country areas, and
these officers entered into undertakings to examine and
attend patients according to a graduated scale of fees
agreed upon between the Department and the British
Medical Association. It may be mentioned in passing
that these appointments were made from the ranks of
medical officers who had served in the war, wherever
possible. An agreement also was entered into with
293 country hospitals (about 90 per cent, of the total
number in the Commonwealth) for t*he treatment of
both in-patients and out-patients. Further, an agree-
ment was made with the Pharmaceutical Society in
each State under which its members would dispense the
prescriptions of local medical officers, the society under-
taking at the same time to establish a voluntary com-
mittee in each metropolis to scan the accounts rendered
to the Department in respect of prescriptions handed
to patients.
The Department’s undertaking being to provide
treatment only for “ disabilities due to or aggravated
by war service,” it became necessary to define terms in
view of the prevalent readiness to seek treatment for
all manner of infirmities which were distinctly outside
the scope of the provision. Definitions and interpre-
tations were therefore laid down as follows: —
(a) War Service.— The period served in the
Naval or Military Forces from the date ot
attestation to discharge.
( h ) Due to War Service— A condition which has
been caused during the period of Naval or
Military service to include a liability to
contract an ailment or suffer prejudice as
the direct or indirect result of injuries or
other disabilities received during the period
of service.
(c) Aggravated or Aggravation. —Any condition
which the soldier was predisposed to prior
to or during his period of service, and which
has become intensified during such service,
the onus of proof of aggravation to be upon
the applicant.
These definitions involved further rulings in regard
to certain classes of disability and disease. For in-
stance, responsibility for dental treatment and dental
replacements could be recognised only in cases where
such were required as a result of injuries to the face
or jaw. In regard to venereal disease the disposition
at first was to recognise this, not as a disability directly
the result of war service, but rather as one resulting
from the abnormal conditions of service life. In
view, however, of the difficulty of determining the
period of initial infection and of the alarming sequelae
of specific disease it was ultimately decided not to
accept a responsibility, assuming that the patient had
reached a stage of non-infectivity before discharge from
the A.I.F. As to alcoholism a distinction was drawn
between the “ alcoholic ” — e.g., one who by excessive
drinking materially lessens his capacity and efficiency
for ordinary employment, and retards his recovery if
suffering from war disability—and “ inebriate,” e.g.,
one who by excessive and continued indulgence in
alcohol, or narcotic drugs, becomes constitutionally
diseased, tending towards mental and moral degeneracy,
with loss of self-control. A man might have developed
the habit of over-indulgence in alcoholic stimulants as
a result of the conditions of war service; but the in-
ebriate was usually an inebriate before he went to the
war. The alcoholic could be given a chance to regain
his normal condition by a course of treatment in a
departmental institution where work was the chief
agency of restoration, but the Department could not be
responsible for his further treatment in case of relapse.
The inebriate requiring restrain.! could be treated suit-
ably only in State institutions under Acts giving the
power to detain, and while the Department was willing
to pay for him there and make sustenance allowance
for a period up to twelve months no further responsi-
bility could be recognised. In tubercular and mental


eases the manifestation of symptoms of disease within
two years after discharge might establish the claim to
have the condition recognised as a war disability.
From the administrative stand-point, the main diffi-
culty associated with after treatment has been to deter-
mine whether certain disabilities are due to or have
been aggravated by war service; and it is a difficulty
which is likely to be accentuated, by the passage of time.
The main evidence is that furnished by the medical
history sheet and experience has shown already that
this is not always a reliable guide. In cases of doubt
the policy of the Department has been to give the
applicant the benefit of such doubt.
It is yet too soon for the medical officers to attempt
any assessment of the probable extent to which the
Department will be laid under charge in connexion
with the treatment of war disabilities, but they Cata-
logue a list of recurrent disabilities which are certain
to claim attention for an indefinite period. This list
comprises:—
Medical.
Chest.—-Q as, Asthma, Tuberculosis (increasing).
Prior-to-enlistment cases of Chronic Bron-
chitis and Emphysema.
Heart. —All heart conditions are liable to recur if
only on account of the neurotic factor.
Kidneys. —Hephritis progresses slowly downhill,
but rather more rapidly than is usual in civil
conditions.
Abdominal. —Dysentery, Colitis, Gastritis. Hos-
pital observation is always necessary to con-
firm patients’ statements. Many cases of
abdominal weakness chronic in spite of care.
Trench Fever. —Recurrences become milder.
Malaria. —Recurrences are lessening but they are
still responsible for marked debility and
anaemia.
Epilepsy. —Except in gunshot wounds of the head
these are mostly prior-to-eulistment cases, but
requiring observation in hospital.
Eheumatism. —Most prior-to-enlistment and over-
age cases, but numerous. Rheumatic fever
may predispose to recurrences and complica-
tions.
Lumbago. —Recurs as in most civilians.
Bilharzia. —A rapidly lessening trouble apparently
yielding to recent treatment methods.
Nervous. —Very chronic though shell-shock cases
become markedly fewer. Cases recently
claiming attention are mostly consequent upon
alcoholic or other personal abuses, mental in-
stability or continued idleness. Men at work,
however, may suffer relapses when family or
financial worry supervenes.
Surgical.
Amputations. —Very little trouble now owing to
specialist surgical supervision. Artificial
limbs, however, will need constant replace-
ment owing to changes in stumps and ordi-
nary wear and tear.
Bone Injuries. —Chronic cases.
Nerve Injuries. —Chronic cases.
Head Wounds. —Often involve extensive destruc-
tion of bone and brain substance; likely to
require frequent treatment.
Abdominal Wounds. —lnvolve recurrent trouble.
Trusses, &c., need replacement from time to
time.
Joint Injuries. —Very chronic needing constant
care, massage, and use.
Foot Injuries . —lnvolve frequent replacements of
surgical boots.
tiye Injuries. —Damage to eyes resulting from
wounds to face and liead is apt to become
worse as time goes on. Artificial eyes need
replacing, care not exercised by wearer com-
plicatioUs may supervene.
As already indicated, however, the Department has
been directly concerned with the actual treatment
of war disabilities (except at country hospitals and the
other instances to which reference will be made) that in
detecting the need for treatment in men discharged, in
seeing that those requiring treatment in the hospitals
conducted by or under the auspices of the Defence De-
partment, and in establishing or arranging for the
establishment of institutions in which the seriously
afflicted classes may receive the necessary care. Some
account of the activities in this regard may be given:—
Convalescent Homes.-*- Although, obviously, not for
the seriously afflicted, the provision of Convalescent
Homes merits attention as valuable agencies for bridg-
ing the period between the hospital and the commence-
ment of the effort to return to civilian activity. These
homes, which were the conception of the Red Cross
Society, were established first in various parts of Hew
South Wales. They were conducted exclusively by
voluntary Red Cross workers and were generously
equipped, always comfortably and sometimes luxuri-
ously, as homes and not as institutions. They were,
invariably, agreeable centres of rest and recreation and
in the earlier stages of the war received undischarged
as well as discharged men. Of the former many be-
came well enough to be returned to the Front; among
the latter there was often a disposition to prolong their
stay unduly.
Recognising the usefulness of these homes, within
prudent limits, the Department invited the Federal
Executive of the Red Cross to arrange for similar
facilities in the. other States, proposing, at the same
time, to pay a per capita allowance for maintenance,
but stipulating that discharged men should be admitted
only at the Department’s request and retained only for
such period as the Department might indicate. The
Society most cordially responded, and opened numerous
admirable homes in other States. Many men have been
enabled to regain their physical tone in these centres
of recuperative hospitality, but at the end of the period
with which this report deals the need for all but a very
few of them had largely passed.
Hostels for the Totally and Permanently Incapaci-
tated.—Ho phase of the Department’s work has en-
grossed more careful attention than provision for those
whose degree of incapacity is so great as to render them
practically helpless for the rest of their lives but who,
nevertheless, may have a fairly long expectation of life.
For each of this class as have no infective or definite
mental disease—certain incurables as, for instance,
tuberculars in the advanced stage and mentals are the
subject of other provision—national hostels have been
established in each State. The first of those was at
Brighton, Victoria, a mansion in very beautiful and
extensive grounds being purchased with moneys origin-
ally donated to the Repatriation Fund by the Horn W.
L. Baillieu and his brothel's. This was followed by
establishments in the other States of the mainland. In
each instance they have the most pleasant of immediate
surroundings and are in picturesque situations—that
at Brighton is within a short distance of the Bay,
those in Sydney overlook the harbor, whilst the one
in South Australia fronts' the bay at Grlenelg; the
Western Australian establishment is beautifully placed
on the Swan River, and that in Queensland occupies
a commanding point on the Brisbane River. The two
hostels in Hew South Wales (it is the only State in
which there is more than one) represent gifts—in the


one case by Sir Thomas Dibbs, who some time before
had presented his beautiful property at North Sydney
for public purposes, and also subsequently most cor-
dially acquiesced in its being used as a home for in-
capacitated soldiers, and in the second case by the Aus-
tralian Jockey Club. One is conducted entirely by the
Red Cross, and the other by a joint committee of the
club and the Red Cross, but both are under depart-
mental auspices. They are all equipped on a generous
scale with liberal provision for recreation and engage-
ment in hobby occupations, which are a source of
modest revenue to some men and an alleviating pastime
to others. In each instance the auxiliary services of
the Red Cross Society have been cordially availed of
for the purpose of dissipating the institutional atmo-
sphere and promoting the social life of the inmates by
entertainments and in various other agreeable ways.
Tasmania, alone, is without a hostel, it being found
possible to make satisfactory provision in lieu thereof
for the fortunately few cases requiring attention in that
State.
At the end of June, 1920, the number of men in
hostels was 119—New South Wales, 48 Victoria, 18 >
South Australia, 17; Western Australia, IG. This
does not represent the total number of men eligible for
admission to these establishments. There are a num-
ber who prefer to live in their own homes or with their
friends, but in regard to these it is the departmental
belief that in many instances, especially in cases of
severe spinal injury, the burden of private nursing
will become insupportable, and a change to the hostels
will he sought at intervals, and the accommodation has
been designed with this contingency in view.
On the other hand there are some already in the
hostels who will seek spells of change with relations or
friends, for notwithstanding that everything that it
is humanly possible to do for the comfort and
tion of those hadly-hroken men is done by staffs of
selected nurses and their Red Cross associates, it is im-
possible to prevent the development of a measure of
discontent. This is ap inevitable consequence of the
physical condition particularly of those who are de-
prived of the power of self-movement and have to spend
their time in beds or chairs. The Department, how-
ever, has no power to detain a man if he wishes to
leave the hostel, and although discouraging this course,
especially in cases where removal might be attended
with serious consequences, it has provided for periods
of leave in certain circumstances. On the other band
provision is made for near relatives or friends living
at a distance to visit the hostel at the Department’s
expense periodically or when death is believed to he
imminent,
While resident in a hostel a man is entitled to draw
pension at the rate of 425. per week for himself, while
his dependants receive pensions in addition on the ap-
propriate scale. If he is classed as totally and per-
manently incapacitated, and is not in a hostel he is
entitled (under the Act of 1920) to pension on the
special scale of 80s. per week, plus an allowance of
42g. per week for nursing attention, exclusive of pen-
sion? to dependants.
Mentals.-- These are totally incapacitated, hut not
all permanently so, and the responsibility of their care
rests for the time being with the medical section of the
Defence Department, the Repatriation Department’s
contribution being confined to the payment of per
capita maintenance charges and of living allowances
(under the new Act consolidated with pensions). In
all instances use has been made of the existing State
mental hospitals partly because the only expert staffs
available are attached to these institutions, and partly
because the States alone have the appropriate legal
machinery for dealing with the affairs of the mentally
afflicted. In most of the States special Acts have been
passed.to obviate the necessity for lunacy certification
in the case of soldiers, and to permit of the adminis-
tration of their affairs by the Masters-in-Equity. _ In
anticipation of the near time when the fpU obligations
in respect of mental patients wi U become its responsi-
bility, the Repatriation Department has been con-
cerning itself with such arrangements as will insure
the segregation of soldier mentals from civilian mentals
in those institutions where this course has not been
followed already- These arrangements in some in-
stances have involved undertakings to defray the cost
of the erection and appropriate equipment of special
wards.
Sanatoria, Farms, and Hospices for Tuheroulavs.—
Whilst statistics supplied hy the Defence Department
go to show that 1,820 members of the A.I.F. had con-
tracted tubercular disease, this figure cannot be taken to
cover all cases. In many instances —how many it is im-
possible to say yet —definite symptoms became manifest
only after discharge, and it is because of this that the
Repatriation Department has allowed a period of two
years from the date of discharge during which tuber-
culosis may be regarded as a war disability. At the
end of June, 1920, 487 tubercular patients were.still in
institutions controlled by or for the Defence Depart-
ment and the Repatriation Department; the balance
being dispersed throughout the community.
Recognising that one infective tubercular uncon-
trolled is a greater menace to the public health than
1,000. tuberculars under adequate supervision, the Min-
ister has approved a very comprehensive scheme for
dealing with this class of invalid- Under this scheme
three classes of tuberculars are recognised—(a) the in-
cipient cases for which sauatorium treatment is indi-
cated, (h) the arrested cases for which light rural
occupations offer the right conditions for the stabiliza-
tion of health, (c) the advanced cases for which a well-
equipped and generously conducted hospice would con-
stitute the appropriate provision.
During the period of treatment in sanatoria the
patients receive instruction by lecture?, printed matter,
and demonstrations as to their future course of life
and the benefits to the community by their segregation
while in an infective condition- Later the patients
may be classified as arrested ”or “ advanced/’ and
then transferred to the institutions appropriate tp each
class.
The farm scheme for arrested cases is being under-
taken in conjunction with the Red Cross Society. It
involves the acquisition in an approved locality of a
considerable area of good land which will lend itself
to a diversity of light rural activities under skilled
supervision, comfortable living quarters being provided
for the single men and separate cottages for the married
men. During the stay on these farms provision is
made for work allowances in addition to pension.
The first of these farms is in operation in a section
of the irrigation area in Flew South Wales, and the
hope is that many of the residents will be not only
sufficiently benefited in health, but also become suffi-
ciently instructed in the management of small irriga-
tion areas to be qualified and anxious ultimately tc
acquire holdings of their own, and thus resume a career
with normal possibilities of usefulness and personal
satisfaction. The cost of equipping the New South
Wales farm is estimated at £30,000, and the whole of
this is being defrayed by the Red Cross Society. In
Victoria an arrangement has been made with the State
Government for the utilization of an extensive farm
within a few miles of Melbourne, and is bearing the
cost of equipment in this instance also. Similar pro-
vision is in course of arrangement in other States.


This method of dealing with tubercular patients is
most strongly commended by the medical profession,
some of the leading specialists having expressed the
hope that its development will prepare the way for the
like treatment of civilian tuberculars. It is also en-
tirely in line with the recommendation recently pre-
sented by the special committee appointed by the
British Government to consider the problem as it
concerns discharged soldiers and sailors in Great
Britain.
As in Hew South Wales, so in the other States the
period on the farms will be regarded as preparatory to
the ultimate establishment on their own holdings of
all suitable cases. But, admittedly, the farms are ex-
perimental. There is no power to compel men to go
or to stay, and their usefulness will be proportionate
to the success in attracting men into voluntary resi-
dence. In the absence of power to enforce segregation
probably there will always be some who will, however
unwisely, prefer to remain in ordinary contact with
the community.
For the advanced cases provision has been made in
all of the States on the mainland, and is in course of
arrangement in Tasmania. In all cases the establish-
ments in metropolitan centres easy of access to
relatives and friends.
Convalescent Farms. —For war neurosis cases, e.g.,
those suffering from alcoholism (as distinguished from
inebriacy) or inability to settle down to any definite
occupation, those who had lost the habit of work con-
sequent on protracted treatment in hospitals, as • also
certain classes of epileptics, heart cases in certain
stages, and those requiring recuperative spells (after
the closing of the Red Cross Convalescent Homes), it
was decided to establish convalescent farms as the
most effective agencies of restoration. Two pleasantly
situated properties in Hew South Wales are conducted
for this purpose by the Red Cross Society. The De-
partment conducts one near Brisbane in Quensland,
one near Melbourne in Victoria, and one at Kalamunda
in Western Australia, but this provision has not ap-
peared necessary in Tasmania or South Australia. At
these farms the aim is towards mental and physical
restoration, through work tasks being graduated to suit
the strength and aptitude of the individual. The occu-
pational facilities necessarily include both indoor and
outdoor work. While on the farms men receive a
work allowance, and provision is made for their de-
pendants. Men who regain industrial tone may be
referred either for direct employment or vocational
training, so that the benefit derived from treatment
may not be lost. As with farms for tuberculars no
compulsion may be exercised in placing men on the
farms or in keeping them there, but if they are in need
of the kind of treatment which the farms are estab-
lished to provide, and decline to avail themselves of
it they are not entitled to expect the Department to
maintain them indefinitely in idleness.
Control and Treatment of Bilharzia and Malaria. —
By active co-operation with the Department of Defence'
and the Director of Quarantine an effort has been
made for the control of bilharzia and malaria. For-
tunately, as a result of the conferences, the Director
of Quarantine has undertaken in respect of these cases
to endeavour to obtain legislation which will facilitate
segregation and observation. Bilharzia was the sub-
ject of reports which were embodied in pamphlets pre-
pared by experts issued by the Department of Defence.
As a result of observation it had been ascertained that
Australia possessed a fresh water snail which would
act as an intermediate host for the embargo, and in con-
sequence there was a possibility of the disease finding
a lodgment in Australia. The Department, however,
has kept touch with the known eases which have been
brought into hospital in each State, and under the
special treatment adopted all signs of the disease have
been eliminated, and it is hoped that radical cure has
been effected. In regard to malaria, of which there
is a large number of cases widely distributed, the
Director of Quarantine, with the concurrence of the
Department, has circularized the local Repatriation
medical officers with a view to their reporting cases
ot malaria to him, so that he may have the areas
charted and preventive measures taken for keeping the
disease in subjection.
Artificial Limbs and other Surgical Aids. —The De-
partment of Defence has provided the first issue of
artificial replacements and surgical aids generally, but
the Department of Repatriation has been responsible
for all subsequent issues (legs, arms, wheel chairs,
surgical boots, surgical jackets, trusses, spectacles, eyes,
splints, crutches, &c.) and repairs. A factory was
established during the war period, and is under the
superintendence of an expert brought especially from
the United States. Branches of the factory have been
opened in the different States; the legs manufactured
have been of high standard, and have given general
satisfaction. Various types of arm have been tried,
some of them very expensive and elaborate, but experi-
ence shows that no type of arm yet evolved is entirely
satisfactory, especially in shoulder amputations. Up
till June the factory had provided 2,145 legs and 298
arms, exclusive of some 500 Carne arms previously
issued by the Defence Department. According to the
Defence records, however, there remain some 309 leg
and 256 arm amputees to whom no issues have yet
been made.
It will be seen from the foregoing that the Depart-
ment has made a very wide provision for men who
may require medical treatment or after care. Very
shortly those institutions, now under the control of the
Defence Department, which it may be necessary to con-
tinue in use, as, for instance, sanatoria and certain
mental hospitals, and the limb factory will be trans-
ferred. Uor general purposes, however, it is pro-
posed to utilize hereafter the resources of the civilian
hospitals, and arrangements have been made by which
a minimum number of beds will be held at the disposal
of the Department in special awards. (Appendix 8).,
General Assistance.
“ General Assistance ” is a covering term for all
those classes of benefits which involved a money pay-
ment, and embraced such matters as —
Small businesses, plant; furniture; tools of
trade; living allowances; medical—fees, allow-
ances, supply and repairs of artificial limbs and
surgical aids, &c.; transportation—fares, allow-
ances, &c.; free passages to and from the Common-
wealth; live stock; sustenance in its varied
relationships.
At the beginning grants and advances under nearly
all these headings were subject to the determination
of the Honorary Boards which were associated with
the branch office in the capital of each State. As the
volume of work increased, however, it became neces-
sary, for, speedier working, to transfer the power of
determination to the Deputy Comptrollers in most ap-
plications involving gifts, leaving the Boards free to
deal in the main with loan applications, which usually
involved larger individual amounts. Later, to further
lighten the load of the Deputy Comptroller and the
Board, but more particularly to save time, power was
given to the local committees to determine many classes
of applications other than applications for businesses,
in regard to which they were restricted to reports.


This large measure of decentralization certainly was
a great boon to applicants not resident in the metro-
politan areas, but it threw upon the Department the
task of seeing that the committees did not go beyond
their charter and they accounted correctly t6r the
moneys spent. . , .
For reasons which have been indicated earlier in this
report, applications for loans for small businesses and
plant were the most troublesome with which the De-
partment had to deal, and they kept the Boards busy.
A great number of the applications were declined as
beyond the scope of the regulations. A great many
others met a similar fate because of the lack of merit
in the particular proposals. In many cases of in-
stances the Boards —in doubt as to eligibility or im-
pressed with the circumstances —sent the papers on to
the Commission for consideration as special cases. In
many hundreds of instances applicants, dissatified with
the Board’s decisions, exercised their right of appeal
to the Commission. But whether an application for
a loan for a business was granted or disallowed it in-
volved a great deal of departmental work. Many con-
siderations deterred the Department from attempting
to find businesses for applicants. This meant that the
applicant had to find the business for himself, and
then submit it to the Department. The proposal had
then to be reported on by the local committee if out-
side the metropolitan area and by departmental in-
spector if within it. Generally inquiries had to extend
beyond the immediate vendor. Then the case had to
go to the Board. All this procedure with a certain
amount of time. The Board might grant the appli-
cation, but the business might have been sold in the
meantime —for generally it was the desirable business
over which the vendor would give no definite option —
or the Board for various reasons might not grant.
In either case the procedure of finding, reporting, and
determining had to be gone over again. The cum-
brousness of the procedure was recognised, but neither
the Department nor the Boards, which all included
practical men of business, could suggest any method of
simplification which would not leave the way open to
abuses.
In the earlier stages the Boards were not entitled
to grant loans exceeding £l5O, but might in certain
cases refer applications involving amounts up to £250
to the Commission for special consideration. This
restriction was subsequently waived, the Boards decid-
ing in what circumstances they would advance the
full amount. Loans carried 5 per cent, interest on
all amounts in excess of £SO, and the terms of repay-
ment were fixed in relation to the nature of the
assistance, but the maximum period was ten years.
The Board, however, could renew a loan on production
of satisfactory evidence that the money was being
properly used, vary the conditions attaching to any
gift, loan, or promise in appropriate circumstances,
and also write off loans up to £IOO where the borrower
failed and was unable to repay the amount due.
The regulations give the Department power to inspect
property where the soldier or a dependant had been
assisted, and the grantee must produce all books, docu-
ments, &c. In the case of small businesses a monthly
inspection was carried out with a view to assisting the
soldier, and advising, him as to the best means of mak-
ing a success of his undertaking.
Loan transactions with soldiers involved a special
system of security registration. The system set up,
whilst affording similar protection to the public against
possible frauds as obtains under the varying systems
of the States, made for uniformity throughout the
Commonwealth, avoidance of delays, and deduction of
cost to a minimum. The forms of security covered
land mortgage, chattel mortgage, hire purchase agree-
merit, and acknowledgement of debt (somewhat in the
nature of a promissory note). The register is kept in
the principal office of the Department in each State,
and is open to inspection on payment of a fee of Is.
for each five minutes occupied in the search. But
publication of the contents of the security register is
not permitted. This prohibition, however, does not
apply to those securities previously registered under the
State laws in the ordinary way.
Great difficulty was experienced in the early stages
in securing repayment, especially for furniture loans
and advances for tools of trade, but the appointment of
collectors has considerably improved the position. It
is of interest to record that many borrowers who were
in arrears in their instalments came forward and met
their obligations when the war gratuity was paid. On
the other hand it was difficult to trace a certain number
until they felt their war gratuity bonds were in danger,
for the War Gratuity Act gave power to the Depart-
ment to recover in case of fraud, misappropriation or
misrepresentation, and these men had disposed of their
assets or removed from their place of abode without
notifying the Department in the terms of their
agreement.
Where gifts of furniture and tools of trade were
made the grantee was called upon to sign an under-
taking that the articles remained the property of the
Department for a period of five years. This action
was necessary to prevent trafficking, and proved a satis-
factory check on grantees.
The financial results of the various approved appli-
cations for the benefits under the heading of “ General
Assistance ” are set out in the section dealing with
finance, and beyond what has been already stated in a
general way no further reference is called for except,
perhaps, in regard to loans for the purchase of live
stock and grants for passages. The provision in re-
gard to live stock was only permitted to apply to a
limited number of cases not provided for under the
Soldiers’ Settlement Acts of the States, and has become
inoperative because no longer necessary. The first
passages were granted in 1916 to incapacitated men
and to widows (in the same circumstances) to enable
them to return to the United Kingdom if they had re-
latives or friends there to care for them. In 1917 the
provision was extended to the wives (and children, if
any) of members of the A.I.F. who had married abroad,
and also the fiancees under the conditions already re-
ferred to. In 1919 the provision was further extended
to certain relatives of Australian soldiers who were
able to prove dependance on the soldiers concerned.
In the same year authority was given to the Prime Min-
isters of the Dominions to grant, on behalf of the De-
partment, to Australians who had served in the forces
of the Dominions, passages to return to the Common-
wealth. The passages were on a third class basis;
those desiring superior accommodation were required
to pay the excess. Applications would' not be recog-
nised if not lodged within two years of the date of
discharge.
It is estimated that by the end of 1920 some 15,000
dependants and fiancees will have come to Australia
with the assistance of the Department’s passage pro-
vision. (Appendix 6 (c) ).
Local Committees.
The system of local committees has been so pro-
nounced a feature of the Department’s organization
as to merit some specific mention. On no previous
occasion (in the Commonwealth, at least) has a Go-
vernment Department made such extensive use of the
honorary services of groups of private citizens; never
before have such groups been given a legal status, and
certainly never before have they been intrusted with


the power of spending public money within the limits
ol a set of regulations, hut with a discretion within
those limits.
Since the Department came into existence 814 of
these committees were formed, and of these some 700
have been invested with a spending authority. At first
they were limited to the raising of funds in the dis-
tricts assigned to them, and to the disbursement of the
funds at discretion, acting otherwise as agents for the
Department in the matter of inquiry and report. When
y 1 1919, the decentralization of functions was
decided upon, they were intrusted with the discharge
of the following duties
Receive applications for assistance and benefits.
Hand property to an agent on behalf of an
applicant.
Act as local agent of the Department in regard to —
(a) placing men in employment, and ( h)
supervision of expenditure.
Report on the progress of applicants who have re-
ceived assistance, and to keep such records
and furnish such returns as may be required.
Grant sustenance to —
1. Applicants awaiting employment or during
convalescence for a period of four weeks.
2. Issue orders for necessaries for the wife or
children of a soldier in lieu of a portion of
the sustenance allowance.
3. Applicants awaiting employment for one week
only if a repeat application. For longer
than one week after careful reconsideration
of case and approval by a Deputy Comp-
troller.
4. Applicants who have been allotted land, but are
awaiting possession, for a period of four
weeks.
5. Applicants approved for land settlement, but
awaiting an allotment of land, for a period
of four weeks ( vide regulation 37).
6. Approved applicants awaiting businesses, for
a period of three weeks.
7. Applicants approved for Vocational Training
(plus travelling allowance when necessary).
8. Applicants approved by local medical officer
awaiting training for a period of two weeks.
9. Approved applicants who are indentured ap-
prentices.
10. Applicants for surgical aids or out-patients
treatment.
Living Allowances.
Grant allowances to men undergoing medical
treatment.
Vocational Training.
Soldiers desiring to increase efficiency—May, on
the advice of the local medical officer and the
principal of the training institution, enter ap-
plicants for training, provided that the class
of training is approved by the Deputy Comp-
troller, and that there is reasonable prospect of
employment within the local committee area.
Medical Treatment.
Medical treatment on the certificate of the local
medical officer.
Furniture and E quipment.
Determine applications for furniture by way of loan
up to £35. ‘ ,
Determine applications for furniture by y T ay of gift
up to £25.
Determine applications for tools of trade and equip-
ment by way of gift up to £lO.
Transportation.
Grant fares to men going to employment.
Giant fares, on tlie advice of the local medical officer,
to applicants travelling to obtain medical treatment or
surgical aids (plus travelling expenses at tbe rate
prescribed).
Grant fares and freights where applicant is—
(a) Entering into occupation of land;
(h) Establishing himself in business;
(c) Desires to establish a home where he hay
secured employment.
Funeral Expenses.
Grant funeral expenses of a soldier not exceeding
£lO.
A sufficiently formidable list this, but in addition to
dealing with the matters therein enumerated the com-
mittees have been assisting the various State Lands
Departments in matter pertaining to settlement, and
likewise many of them have given considerable aid to
the War Service Commissioner in connexion with
soldiers’ homes, and quite lately have shouldered the
turther burden of submitting reports and assisting the
administration of the A.I.E. canteens trust fund.
Apart from giving assistance by disbursing depart-
mental funds, local committees have in various ways
given invaluable help to returned men, supplementing
with cash from locally raised moneys and by personal
service any benefits that the Department could grant,
or where eligibility under the regulations could not be
claimed, making direct gilts from their private trea-
suries. To raise funds for this purpose many devices
were availed of, such as bazaars, garden fairs, concerts,
kinema shows, and sports and race meetings. The money
and gifts in kind from these and other sources have
been employed in helping to put men on their feet in
a variety of ways; but of equal value has been the
organizing and carrying out of working bees for the
establishment of men endeavouring to make homes on
the land. These worthy efforts have resulted in homes
being- erected, and ground cleared, fenced, ploughed,
harrowed, and sown, so that in a great many cases
(and without any effort on his part) the returned
man has from the start been well launched on his
enterprise. Still further to insure the success of such
ventures, generous gifts of implements, material, land,
and stock have been made; notable in the last-named
direction being the gift of the farmers in one district
of over 1,000 dairy heifers for the benefit of returned
soldiers settling on the land. In another area assorted
cattle to the value of upwards of £5,000 were donated,
and in two prosperous southern districts committees
formed prior to any official movement at all, had money
and kind to the value of some £60,000 standing to
credit. Erom the emergency fund of one country
local committee all hospital and doctors’ fees incurred
in the accouchement of soldiers’ wives in the district
have been defrayed.
Erom one end of Australia to another many out-
right and generous gifts of cash to returned men have
been recorded. One large local committee from its
own funds purchased from the Defence Department
1,500 blankets, and made arrangements with manufac-
turers to have these made up at cost price into overcoats
for the widows and orphans of deceased soldiers.
An excellent article at a very low cost was in this
way made available to those who otherwise would have
been hardly or not at all able to afford them for the
winter; gifts of land with houses erected on them by
working bees have in a number of cases been made.
Noteworthy in connexion with the deeds of the country


local committees are the great distances which, in order
to attend meetings, members had to cover; instances of
40 miles by buggy for each meeting not being rare.
In view of the work which the committees classified
as “ country committees ” were called upon to do, it is
not surprising that the Minister should have seen fit
to comply with the not-unreasonable request for some
financial contribution towards administration expenses.
Acordingly, in addition to a small provision for sta-
tionery, postages and telegrams, which had been
operative from the commencement, the local committee
funds were subsidised to the extent of £lO for each
1,000 inhabitants within the local committee area.
The purely metropolitan committees were not given
spending powers, as the metropolitan offices were in near
touch, nor were they subsidized, although they did au
immense amount of useful auxiliary work with none
the less cordiality.
This experiment in the organization qf honorary
citizen effort over the broad face of a continent for the
assistance of a Government in carrying out a national
task —although nof accomplished without difficulty nor
carried on without misunderstandings and troubles in-
separable from the adjustment of so" many diverse ajul
widely-separated groups of minds to a central point
”of vie^v—-received a justification from the results, which
..give more than a hint of tjie possibilities of organized
citizen interest in connexion with Other goals of
national endeavour. (Appendices 13 (h) and f 6),
SErTpEAJEXT.
Of all the phases of Repatriation activity laud settle-
ment is perhaps the one which hag bulked largest in
the public mind. It is certainly the one around which
the most controversy has centred; yet it is precisely
the one concerning which the most widespread mis-
apprehension exists, both as to its relative place }n
the general scheme and the function which the Depart-
ment discharges in regard to it. Viewed in relation
to its ultimate cost in money it may be considered as
the largest part of the Repatriation tgsh, but viewed
in relation to the numbers concerned, even if every
soldier who applied for land eventually receives a hold-
ing, it is pf lesser extent than some other parts upon
which the Department has been obliged to bestow atten-
tion. Its problem involves no peculiar subtleties, and
presents po novel features; in essence it is tbe age-
old problem of small settlement, only intensified by
numbers and under compulsion pf time.
The Department ha? never assumed any re-
sponsibility fqr the management of land settlement, por
in the circumstances cpiild it dp so.’ From thp be-
ginning the arrangement has been that settlement
should he the affair of tfie States, and should be effected
through States departmental machipery. At first the
States undertook to dp everything that wa? pppessary
in this direction without reference to tbe C^mppm-
wealth- Then it was agreed (Premiers’ Conference,
February, 1916) that while the State? should fin'd tin-
land the Commonwealth “ .should prpyjdp fund? by way
of loan to the States for the purpose of making' loan?
through _ the Agricultural hanks or similar Govern-
mental institution? against improvements effected by
soldier settlers,” and that such loans should he advanced
at interest “not exceeding 81 per pent, ip the first
3ear increasing by \ per cent, eaej) subsequent year
to the full rate of interest at which tbe mpppy* has
been raised, plus working expenses; the difference
between these rates and the cost to the Government of
the money to be borne equally by’ the Commonwealth
Government and the State Government.”
t Ike same time the State Governments were in-
vited to liberalize the conditions applying to the re-
payments for land and land bank advances, if practic-
able, upon a uniform basis.
The position still remained unsatisfactory from a
Commonwealth stand-point, because of the want of
uniformity in the legislation of the States relating to
settlement and because also of the unsuitability of this
legislation (designed for ordinary settlement) in some
cases to suit the special requirements of discharged men.
At a further Conference (Federal and State Min-
isters, Melbourne, January, 1917) the previous resolu-
tions were re-affirmed, but in order to provide a formal
nexus a? between the States and the Commonwealth',
the Conference provided for the appointment of a
Board consisting of a Minister from each State and a
Commonwealth Minister, to be known as the “ Soldiers’
Settlement Board of Australia.”
The Board was empowered to consider and make re-
commendations in respect to —
(«) The maximnm or minimum advances to be
made to end) cottier irrespective of land
provision.
(h) The purposes for which advances may be
made, i.e., whether to cover stock, seed,
plant, and implements, a§ well gs fixed im-
provement?.
(c) The percentage of advances which may be
ipade a? against appraised value of im-
provements.
( d ) The rate? of interest which should be paid by
settler?.
(c) The duration of the initial period during
which interest on in?tajmenls shall be
suspended-
(/) Generally to §epure, as far as the conditions
of each State will allow, uniformity of
conditions throughout the Commonwealth
for soldier settlement.
(g) To receive, summarize, and circulate a
monthly report to be furnished by each
State, showing the number of applications
for land made by returned soldiers, the
number of applicants placed during the
period involved, the number of applications
remaining on the books, and such other in-
formation as to the progress of soldier settle-
ment a? may be of interest.
(4) To consider all matter? in relation to the scheme,
and to make such recommendations as from
time to time may seem necessary for its
successful operation.
Queensland agreed to the general resolutions, but
stood out of the agreement as applying to the Board.
The effect of this for the time being was to place
Queensland outside the scope of the scheme in so far
as it had relation to Commonwealth assistance in the
matter of advances. At a later stage, however, this
State fell into line.
The Board met in Melbourne in -July, 1017, under
the presidency ot the Minister for iiepatriation, and
considered various questions which had not been defined
by the Conference of Ministers easier in the year.
Although the maximum amount of thp advance in
any one case was not specifically stated in the resolu-
tions of the Conference, it was generally understood in
the discussions and public announcements that if should
hp £5OO, and that it should be op the hgsi? of thp full
value of the improvements.
It became necessary, however, to indicate more
clearly the condition? under whjcli the advances might
he mafic; tq reconsider the maximum in some causes;
and to determine whether the advance should be con-
fined to men settling on Crown land or land resumed
by the Crown, or whether it might also be available to


men settling on private land or engaging in share-
farming.
It was agreed—
(a) That where the Commonwealth makes avail-
able moneys to the States for advances the
full amount charged to the individual shall
he expended upon his particular holding.
(This amounted to an affirmation of
the Commonwealth’s responsibility to see
that the soldier settler got the full benefit
of the advance. It had been brought to
the notice of the Minister that in some
States some of the expenses of making
areas available for group settlement as,
for instance, the making of roads within
the area, were charged against the ad-
vances. The Minister took the view that
this was properly a charge against the
State as part of its general developmental
work, and the soldier’s liability should
be rigidly confined to expenditure on his
own holding.)
( h ) That the advance made to any settler shall,
as far as practicable, be expended on such
improvements as the settler may effect or
direct.
(This was to prevent the settler from
being charged with improvements effected
for him at perhaps a greater cost than
he could have effected them himself, and
to insure that the settler should do as
much of the work as possible himself, in
order that the money he drew against the
work should serve for his sustenance over
the non-productive period.)
( c ) That the advance shall be for the purpose of
effecting improvements or purchasing im-
plements, stock, and things deemed neces-
sary for the successful cultivation of the
land.
(This was to make the advance more
generally available as working capital,
instead of restricting it to permanent
improvements.)
( d ) That the advance may also be granted in
respect of land owned or to be purchased
by a soldier settler, or (except for the pur-
pose of fixed improvements) of land
leased on such security as the Government
or the State concerned may deem sufficient.
(This extended the assistance to settlers
on private lands at discretion of the
(State.)
(e) That advances may also be made to enable
soldier settlers to carry on operations as
share farmers on such security as the State
concerned may deem sufficient.
These resolutions gave clearer definition to the
agreement, and the various States brought their legis-
lation into general conformity with it.
After this the idea of a formal “ Soldiers’ Settlement
Board of Australia ” was dropped, but State Lands
Ministers met the Minister for Repatriation again in
conference in October, 1918, and in January, 1919,
and May, 1920.
In May, 1918, the Minister for Repatriation agreed
on behalf of the Commonwealth to increase the ad-
vance to the soldier to £625, and invited the States to
submit definite proposals for provision of a minimum
of 20,000 holdings (each State its quota) inclusive of
those already provided. The minimum total require-
ment was estimated at the time upon the percentage
figure suggested by tbe proportion of applicants who
bad been approved up to that date.
At the Conference held in January, 1919, the Com-
monwealth undertook to finance the States to the
extent of £28,183,699 to cover the settlement of 20,885
men. This amount was allocated as follows: —
Settlers. Amount.
New South Wales . . 8,405 . . £8,774,843
Victoria . . 5,395 . . 10,314,375
Queensland . . 2,826 . . 2,362,731
South Australia . . 1,729 . . 2,895,625
Western Australia . . 2,000 . . 3,625,625
Tasmania . . 500 . . 800,000
It is to be noted that at this Conference the Com-
monwealth assumed a great extension of financial re-
sponsibility, undertaking not only to provide money
for advances to settlers (raised at this Conference from
£5OO to £625 on the average) as hitherto, but also to
finance the resumptions deemed to be necessary, and
also public works incidental to the opening up of Crown
and other lands for settlement.
A further agreement affecting the financial needs of
the States was the subject of a later Conference which
met in May (the adjourned session was completed in
June, 1920). At this Conference the States reported
that with the rapid return of men which had taken
place since the last meeting the applications had greatly
exceeded the quotas which formed the of the pre-
vious estimates; in some States the excess being as much
as 100 per cent. Moreover the rising costs of carrying
out works incidental to settlement had forced a revi-
sion of the figures.
The estimates then presented for the completion of
the contract in relation to the quotas settled upon in
the previous January, together with the proportion of
additional applications which might be approved, would
require an extension of the former figure of £28,000,000
to some £74,000,000, spread over the ensuring three
years. An analysis of the figures submitted showed
that the cost per settler would average in—
New South Wales . . £2,106
Victoria • • • • 1,920
Queensland . . . . 012
South Australia . . . . 1,995
Western Australia . . 1,375
Tasmania . . • • 1,765
The Minister for Repatriation regarded the total
estimate as greatly exceeding any amount which the
Commonwealth Treasury could contemplate with all
its other heavy burdens of finance, including the pay-
ment of soldiers’ gratuities (estimated at £30,000,000),
general repatriation, and War Service Homes. He
pointed to the great disparity between the cost per settler
in those States which still possessed large areas of
suitable Crown lands and those which had to depend
upon resumptions of high-priced private and
suggested that the Commonwealth would not be justi-
fied in undertaking to find more than sufficient to
finance further settlement at a figure per capita about
equivalent to the cost in the States most advantageously
situated in regard to land, leaving it to the States
which could not make provision at that figure, but
which still wished to secure the additional settlement
to make their own arrangements for the amount in
excess. The Commonwealth Cabinet indorsing the
Minister’s view, the Conference (which assembled again
at the end of June to consider reduced estimates) con-
cluded on the following basis of agreement: —
To settle the balance of the quota agreed on at
the January Conference (8,405), New South
Wales was to receive an additional £3,479,348, and
South Australia £726,346. Tasmania, which had


on ordinary building socmty actmluia. - .110 is entitled
settled 1,056 over her quota, was to receive
£1,437,842. For all additional men settled the
Commonwealth undertook to advance money to
the States on the basis of a fiat rate of £l,OOO per
settler, viz.:—
1. Six hundred and twenty-five pounds per
settler (on the average) as working capital
(improvements, implements, seed, &c.).
2. Three hundred and seventy-five pounds per
settler for resumptions and works incidental
to land settlement which have been approved
by the Commonwealth.
Thus the financial liability of the Commonwealth in
future was limited, at least, to a definite amount per
settler. The large increase of applications, however,
suggested the possibility of an additional 16,000
soldiers being settled under the arrangement, making
a total of 37,909 for a total sum (to be found in the
first place by the Commonwealth) of, roundly,
£50,000,000. Up to the end of 30th June, 1920, the
amount actually advanced to the States in connexion
with land settlement was £11,235,716 —
New South Wales ... £1,996,731
Victoria ... ... ... 5,750,371
Queensland ... ... ... 728,084
South Australia ... ... 614,058
Western Australia ... ... 1,166,097
Tasmania ... ... ... 980,375
The States guarantee to receive the money as loans,
but the Commonwealth has agreed to rebate interest to
the amount of £25,000 per million per annum as its
contribution towards any losses that may be incurred.
When the cost of settling returned soldiers on the
land is considered it is useful to keep in mind that not
the whole of this nor even any very considerable part
of it is fairly debitable against Repatriation. Soldier
settlement is largely in lieu of the settlement which
would have taken place normally if the war had not
supervened. Only that portion of the expenditure re-
presented by concessions to the soldier as against what
in the normal course would have been available to the
civilian can be rightly regarded as the Repatriation
cost.
According to figures supplied by the States the settle-
ment effected by the States at the end of June, 1920,
was—
New South Wales . . 4,210
Victoria . . . . 5,470
South Australia . . 1,299
Western Australia . . 3,009
Tasmania . . . . 1,556
Queensland . . . . 1,867
Total . . 17,411
Advances to the States under the Conference agree-
ments are made direct by the Treasury after reference
to the Minister for Repatriation. The Department of
Repatriation as such, however, is directly concerned
with land settlement in respect of sustenance allowances
to men awaiting land and during the non-productive
period of land occupancy, also rural training in State
institutions or farms. The rest remains a matter for
the States alone. Appendix 9 (a), (h), and (c).
War Service Homes.
The provision of homes for soldiers is the concern
not of the Repatriation Act, but of the War Service
Homes, which is administered by a Commissioner, but
this activity, as a part of the general Repatriation
scheme, may be referred to in general terms.
When Senator Millen, Minister for Repatriation, in
December, 1918, introduced the War Service Homes
Bill, he claimed that it embraced the biggest housing
scheme which had been introduced into any Parlia-
ment. As hostilities had only then been concluded,
and a very great proportion of the members of the
A.T.F. had" yet to be returned the Minister had com-
paratively little to guide him in respect of the numbers
of home applications which were likely to be received.
Taking the broitd view of the housing problem in Aus-
tralia, and recognising the dearth of houses, he framed
his measure upon such broad and liberal lines as to
bring within the reach of every returned soldier or
the widow of the soldier who fell on active service a
very desirable type of dwelling.
In his address to the Senate the Minister stated that
the scheme involved a possible liability of £25,000,000
or £50,000,000, according to the number of applications
forthcoming. Writing now with a knowledge of after-
war conditions as applying to labour, cost of material,
&c., together with some indication of the extent to
which those eligible under the Act are submitting ap-
plications for homes, it would be safe to say that the
liability in this connexion was not underestimated.
Originally the Bill provided that the War Service
Homes Commissioner would advance up to £7OO for the
purposes of the Act, but legislation is projected to in-
crease this limit to £BOO.
The effect of amendments which have been intro-
duced into the new Bill will be to widen the eligibility
clauses of the Act, and thus, of course, increase the
total amount required for the scheme. Among those
whom the amending Bill will admit as eligible appli-
cants are those men who had enlisted for service with
the A.1.F., and were in camp, but were discharged
prior to leaving Australia. Many of these were dis-
charged upon the signing of the armistice. Another
class of men who will be eligible under the amending
measure are members of the Y.M.C.A. who saw service
abroad, also seamen, and wireless operators who served
in the war zone.
Briefly summarized, the housing scheme of the Com-
monwealth is as follows:
Any one who is eligible under the War Ser-
vice Homes Act may purchase from the Com-
missioner charged with its administration a
dwelling house up to a value of £7oo*, this
value to include the cost of the land as well as
of the building. Should an eligible applicant desire
a dwelling house, the value of which would exceed the
limit recognised by the Act, he may still negotiate with
the Commissioner for the purchase of the house given
that he can find the difference betwen the value of the
property and that limit.
Under the War Service Homes Act the Housing
Commissioner has authority to acquire either private
or Crown lands, no matter whether such lands are
built upon or are vacant areas, and upon land so
acquired he may erect dwelling houses up to a value
of £7OO. This value will include the cost of the land
as well as the cost of the building.
In addition to the new classes of eligibles named
under the amending Bill, the following persons are
named as eligible for the purpose of the housing
scheme: —An Australian soldier or sailor who is married
or is about to marry, or who can show that he has
dependants for w T hom it is necessary that he should
provide and maintain a home; the widow of an Aus-
tralian soldier or sailor; a dependent widowed mother
of a deceased Australian soldier or sailor (not married
at the time of his death) ; the mother of a deceased
Australian soldier or sailor (not married at the time
of his death) whose husband is so incapacitated as to
be unable to contribute materially towards her sup-
port; and a member of the Army Medical Corps
Nursing Service.
The Housing Bill has two main sections. Under
one of these the Commissioner is empowered to carry
* Since increased to £BOO by


to either purchase houses for the men or to build for
them. If a man owns a house which is encumbered
with a mortgage he can lift that mortgage. This sec-
tion of the work by arrangement will be carried on
by the Commonwealth Bank. Under the other section
of the Act the Commissioner may, without waiting for
returned men to apply for houses, build in anticipa-
tion of requirements. Although the applicant may
not be able to pay any denosit there is nothing U
prevent him securing a house under the scheme. At
the same time he may pay any deposit that is within
his power to pay. The interest charged is at the rate
of 5 per cent,, the periods of repayment range from
twenty to thirty-seven years, according to the material
of which the building consists. The shorter periods
apply? °f course, to the lighter class of wooden build-
ing, and the thirty-seven years’ period applies to the
more substantial brick dwellings. The sinking fund
for the thirty-seven years’ period is 1 per cent.; there-
fore a man would be required to pay 6 per cent, for
the amount standing to bis debit in connexion with his
property. An important provision is that if applicants
so desire they may pay of their property within a
shorter period.
All that is required by way of condition from the
applicant is that he must satisfy the Commissioner
where no deposit is required. Also that the applicant
shall not already be the owner of a house either within
the Commonwealth or elsewhere. There are no con-
ditions which are not within the reach of any steady
working man (returned soldier or sailor) of this coun-
try. There is, very properly, a bar against specula-
tion. There is no bar against a bond fide transfer,
but the Commissioner is constituted the judge in such
a case.
No building society or property agent offers any-
thing like the terms of purchase that the Department
of Repatriation presents to the returned soldier under
this Act. The soldier goes into his property on the
basis of a weekly tenant, and his rental is named
merely at such an amount as will give the interest pn
the cost, plus a minimum instalment in repayment of
the purchase money.
The most convenient conditions have been laid down
for the payment pf purchase money or the repayment
of an advance. Such payments can be made in equal
Weekly, fortnightly, or monthly instalments, as ar-
ranged at the time of the contract. * Recognition is
made of the possibility of cases of hardship arising in
connexion with the administration of the Act, and in
such circumstances the Commissioner is authorized to
extend the period for the making of payments within
his own discretion. Interest will b e chargeable uppu
the payments so extended at the same annual rate as
that which is payable upon the purchase money Of
advance.
All the houses designed by the architectural staff of
the Commission are of modern and progressive type,
and as the Commonwealth is a continent of almost
extreme latitudes, from the tropical areas of Queens-
land to the sub-temperate climate of Tasmania, the
types vary to suit the varying conditions. In the ease
of Queensland and the northern parts of South Aus-
tralia and Western Australia the houses are built well
up from the ground with spacious verandahs on all
sides. Special care has been given to the avoidance
of repetition of type, and each house is individually
designed to create a centre of interest to its owner, in
addition to being in many instances part of the group
development jn a garden suburb, the advantages of
which of course appreciably increase its value.
Marked features of the development of the Common-
wealth War Service Homes architecture are—
1, The abolition of passages;
2. The conjunction of the dining and drawing-
Iroom as one useful apartment, viz,, the
living room;
3. The bathroom properly placed and equipped
with porcelain bath, lavatory basin, and (in
sewered areas) a W.C. where possible;
4. Kitchen design—side light to the cooking ap-
paratus; direct light to the sink. Position
for a table and provision of proper fittings
—larder, meat safe, pot racks, cup, hooks,
&c.
■ 5. Washhouse placed in a way that will permit
of the space being used for food prepara-
tion, and cleaning as an auxiliary of the
kitchen, which properly designed becomes a
breakfast room;
6. A small hall or entry so that hats, cloaks, &C-,
need not he taken into the apartments;
7. A reasonable outdoor space, roofed, in the form
of verandah or porch;
8. The placing of all doors and windows in rela-
tion to the furniture;
0. The correlation of the houses on the ground by
the design of the lay out.
Large areas are being acquired by the War Service
Homes Commission for group developments which will
be designed bn the lines of the modern town and hous-
ing developments. These areas will he within easy
access of established rail and tram lines.
Roads and reticulation of water supply, gas, electric
light, sewerage services, &c., will proceed simul-
taneously with the erection of the houses.
Frontages in these areas will he varied to suit local
conditions, and in cases a greater frontage with a lesser
depth will he used. The lay outs will be designed to
take advantage of all natural features, views, and
aspect to give each house the maximum benefits of the
situation.
Roads and ways will be placed to enable a grouping
of individually designed houses to form pleasant vistas
—spaces for grass plots and children’s playgrounds and
reserves for tennis courts, &c., will be provided for in
the lay outs.
A progress report of the activities of the War Ser-
vice Homes Commission to 30th June, 1920, sets out
that the total approved applications for homes number
11,373, involving an expenditure of £6,678,151. The
number of houses completed at 28th June was 767, of
. which 707 had been erected under contract, and 60
by day labour. In addition the Commissioner bad
assisted in the completion of 56 new homes, while
5,334 houses already built had been purchased on
behalf of returned soldiers or their dependants at a
cost of £2,904,254. Mortgages had been lifted in
favour of returned soldiers or their dependants to a
total of 1,296, involving £614,204. There were in
course of erection an additional 2,461 homes, the ma-
jority of which were well advanced towards comple-
tion, and of these 1,119 were being erected by day labour
and 1,342 under contract. Tenders had been called
for a further 660 bouses. The Commissioner had
secured 2,500 acres of land for further buildings.
It is interesting to record that the average cost of
the homes erected by the Commissioner was £616 per
house, including land, The administrative cost of the
War Service Commissipner’s operations was calculated
at 2.18 per cent. (Appendices 14 and 16.)
Finance.
The expenditure on Repatriation from the inception
of the Department on the Bth April, 1918, to the 30th
June, 1920, was £24,014,104. This amount does not
include expenditure from the moneys of the Australian
Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund which were vested in the


—
Number of
businesses
granted.
1
Amount
involved.
Boarding houses, restaurants, &c.
58
6,910
Bootmakers .. —
129
8,991
Butchers
50
7,001
Dairy, milk rounds, &c.
77
10,439
Fish, game, poultry, small goods shop
68
6,554
Fruit, greengrocery, confectionery
184
16,223
Furniture, joinery, cabinet-making, &c. ..
30
3,287
Grocers
57
6,689
Hairdressers and tobacconists
97
10,281
Hawkers, dealers, &c. .. .
494
23,492
Ironmongers, &c.
3
447
Motor garages, &c.
220
38,225
Mixed businesses (general stores)
103
12,668
Photographers, biograph outfits, &c.
45
4,803
Produce stores
12
2,169
Saddlers
27
2,449
Tailors, mercers, &c.
62
8,187
Other classes .. .. ., ,.
926
97,222
2,641
£265,037
Minister for Repatriation on the proclamation of the
Act, nor does it include expenditure from moneys raised
by local committees. It represents the actual liability
which the Commonwealth Government has so far been
called to meet in discharge of its obligation.
The main items of expenditure are as follows: —
(1) General repatriation benefits and expenses .. £7,681,765
(2) Advances —Land settlement .. .. 11,235,716
(3) Advances to Local Government bodies to pro-
vide reserve employment .. .. .. 135,496
£19,052,977
(4) War Service Homes (under a special Commis-
sion) 4,961,127
£24,014,104
(1) General Repatriation, £7,681,765.
The receipts, which amounted to £7,681,765, were
obtained from the following sources:—
Appropriation by Parliament .. £7,442,819
Repayment of loans, including interest 180,223
' w ' Realization of property recovered from
m grantees .. .. .. 19,098
(3T Sale of products made by trainees .. 15,057
Miscellaneous receipts .. .. 24,568
£7,681,765
This money was disbursed as follows: —
Repatriation benefits—
Gift .. .. .. .. £4,775,934
Loan .. .. .. .. 986,847
General expenses .. .. .. 890,660
— £6,653,441
Capital Expenditure—
Vocational Training and medical institu-
tions .. .. .. .. £331,324
Office premises and furniture .. 84,265
£415,579
Administrative expenses—
Salaries and contingencies .. ~ .. 612,745
£7,681,765
After writing off all grants and expenses the Repa-
triation fund account at 30th June, 1920, was in credit
to the extent of £1,371,987, against which the follow-
ing assets were held: —-
Vocational training and medical institu-
tutions, equipment, &c. .. .. £331,324
Office premises .. .. .. 78,753
Furniture .. .. .. .. 5,502
Loans to soldiers .. .. .. 951,978
Property recovered from grantees .. 3,269
Cash held Postmaster - General's
Department on account of Loans —
(not transferred at 30th June, 1920).. 1,161
£1,371,987
The main items of expenditure in giving effect to
the scheme of benefits w r ere as follow:—-
Employment—Sustenance, fares, tools .. £2,143,810
Vocational Training —Sustenance, maintenance of
schools, including salaries of instructors, &c. .. 1,623,829
Furniture .. .. .. .. .. 639,533
Small businesses, plant, &c. .. .. .. 341,894
Living allowances, including allowances to blinded
soldiers for homes .. .. .. .. 611,358
Land settlers—Sustenance and fares, &c. .. 156,505
Medical treatment - Sustenance, artificial limbs.
fares, maintenance at civil and military hospitals 445,553
Passages of dependants from abroad .. .. 92,048
Miscellaneous -.. .. .. .. 98,907
Grants to Local Committees .. .. .. 33,693
Grants to Local Government bodies to provide
reserve employment .. .. ~ 450,757
Maintenance of medical institutions .. ~ 15,554
£6,653,441
Of this amount £4,776,,934 was granted by way of
gift, aud £986,847 by way of loan.
Employment .—The total cost to the 30th June was
£2,143,810, and of this amount £2,102,118 represents
direct grants to the soldier for sustenance, tools of
trade, &c. On tlie 30th June only 6,049 in on
Were awaiting employment, or 2-| per cent, of the
number of men discharged. The number of applica-
tions received was 190,662, and the amount paid in
sustenance represents £8 16s. lOd. per application.
Tn order to provide reserve employment parlia-
mentary approval was obtained for the grant of
£500,000 to local Government bodies throughout the
Commonwealth. Of this amount £450,757 was ex-
pended. In addition, loans were made to local Govern-
ment bodies for the same purpose, and £135,496 was
advanced to the 30th June, 1920. Further loans to
the extent of £400,000 have been approved.
Arrangements were also made for the employment
of men by the State Governments on forestry work, the
Department paying 25 per cent, of the wages of the men
for twelve months to cover inefficiency of the men in
the early stages.
Vocational Trdining> —The total expenditure to the
30th June, 1920, was £1,623,829. Of this amount
£1,355,808 was paid away in direct grants to the soldier
for sustenance while undergoing training, fares, and
travelling allowances, fees for training, books, and
apparatus. The sum of £18,302 was granted by way
of loan mainly to University students, and £249,719
was expended in the maintenance of technical and trade
schools, including salaries of instructors, class
material, &c.
In addition to the above-mentioned items the sum
of £269,977 was expended on the erection of buildings
and the purchase of machinery and tools for technical
and trade schools.
To the 30th June 28,970 men were in training at a,
cost of £56 per man. Altogether 6,641 had completed
training, and 22,329 men were in training.
The sum of £15,057 was received from the sale of
products manufactured by trainees.
Small Businesses, Plant, £341,894.—At the inception
of the Department 1,256 men had ben established in
small businesses by the State War Councils at a total
cost of £81,950. Of the 1,256 men established 938 are
making good, but 318 have completely failed, involving
a loss of £11,287 after the realization of assets. The
percentage loss to the total amount involved was 13.77
per cent.
Since the Bth April the Department has assisted
2,641 men at a total cost of £265,037. Of this number
2,493 men are in a satisfactory position, but 148 had
failed, involving a loss on realization of £5,017. The
per cent, loss to total amount involved was 1.89 per cent.
The classes of business and the amounts expended
were as follows :


Medical Treatment, £445,553. —Of this amount
£430,665 was expended directly on the soldier repre-
sented by cost of treatment at civil and military hos-
pitals, supply of and repairs to artificial limbs and sur-
gical aids, sustenance while under treatment and during
convalescence, fares, and travelling expenses.
The cost of maintaining hostels for the totally and
permanently incapacitated was £15,554.
At 30th June the Department had established and
equipped certain institutions at a cost of £78,347, but
of this amount £17,000 was paid from the Repatriation
of Soldiers’ Contributions Account, representing part
of a contribution of £25,000 made to the Australian
Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund. The institutions estab-
lished are as follows: —
£ £
New South Wales —
Novar Convalescent Home .. .. 5,078
Upton Grange Convalescent Home .. 3,026
Victoria—
Anzac Hostel for the permanently incapaci-
tated .. .. .. .. 26,758
Bundoora Convalescent Farm . . .. 107
Queensland —
Anzac Hostel for the permanently incapaci-
tated .. . . .. .. 10,503
Mt. Gravatt Convalescent Farm .. .. 2,175
South Australia—
Anzac Hostel for the permanently incapaci-
tated .. .. .. .. 18,404
Western Australia—
Anzac Hostel for the permanently incapaci-
tated .. .. .. .. 11,842
Kalamunda Convalescent Farm .. .. 454
■ 78,347
Living Allowances, £611,358. —This expenditure re-
presents payments supplementing the pensions of in-
capacitated soldiers, widows unable to earn a livelihood,
dependant mothers, and incapacitated fathers. Owing
to the increased rates of pension granted as from the
Ist July, 1920, practically no additional expenditure
except under special circumstances will be incurred in
this direction.
Grants to Local Committees, £33,693. —This repre-
sents a grant to each local committee of £lO per annum
per 1,000 of population in the district allotted to it.
The grant, although specified as a contribution towards
administrative expenditure, could he expended by the
committee in whatever direction it thought fit. Stamps,
stationery, and petty expenses were also allowed.
Where the local committee area contained a population
of more than 20,000 a branch office was established, the
administrative expense of which could not exceed £750
per annum in any one case.
The number of local committee areas with a popula-
tion of over 20,000 was seventeen; the remaining local
committees numbered 797.
Furniture, £639,533. —Altogether 23,144 cases were
approved for furniture. Grants up to £25 are made
to widows of soldiers in necessitous circumstances, and
totally and permanently incapacitated soldiers. The
amount expended by way of gift was £64,706. Loans
up to £35 were granted to soldiers where it was proved
necessary for their establishment in civil life. The
total amount expended in this direction was £574,827.
Free Passages beyond the Commonwealth, £92,048. —
In addition to providing fares of men and dependants
to place of re-establishment 4,770 applications for
passages beyond the Commonwealth were approved at
a cost of £92,048. The majority of applications were
for the passages of dependants and fiancees from Eng-
land. The assistance was by way of gift at third class
rates, the soldier paying the difference if a passage at
a better class was sought.
Miscellaneous. —Other forms of assistance and ex-
penditure incurred were as follows:
Live stock, where the applicant did not
come under the soldier settlement
scheme . . . . . . . . £16,293
Homes for blinded soldiers . . . . 3,897
Educational grants for children . . 748
Funeral expenses of soldiers . . .. 12,827
Loans.
Advances to soldiers were principally on account of
small businesses, plant, live stock, furniture, and tools
of trade of a value in excess of £lO.
Interest on loans was charged at 5 per cent., and
on the amount in excess of £5O. Thus furniture and
tools of trade loans which were limited to £35 and £5O
respectively were not subject to'interest.
The period of repayment cannot exceed ten years,
and the terms are fixed according to the general circum-
stances of the soldier or dependant, the purpose of the
loan and the rate of depreciation and period within
which the asset to be acquired is likely to become
obsolete. The following general scale was fixed as a
guide:—
Loans of £5O and les3, £1 per calendar month
(no interst payable).
Loans of over £5O, for the first £5O, £1 (without
interest) ; for every £5O or portion of £5O over
that amount, 10s. per calendar month, plus
interest.
At the inception of the Department loans to the value
of £178,221 were taken over from the Australian
Soldiers’ Repatriation Fund, representing advances
made by State War Councils. The Department had
advanced for various forms of assistance £986,847,
making a total of £1,165,068. Repayments of loans
and the realization of assets recovered where men had
failed had reduced the loan account to £951,978.
The percentage of repayments to instalments due was
68 per cent.
Assistance to Imperial Soldiers. —Ex-Imperial ser-
vice men have been arriving in Australia from time to
time, and many cases of hardship have come under
notice. As the terms of the Act prevented assistance
being granted the Government were requested in 1918
to make available an amount for the purpose of giving
relief to men in necessitous circumstances. The sug-
gestion was approved, and to 30th June, 1920, 382 ex-
imperial soldiers had received temporary assistance at
a cost of £1,257.
The Repatriation of Soldiers’ Contributions Trust
Account.— The Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation I und
was vested in the Minister as from the Bth April, 1918.
At that date it was in credit to the extent of
£97,120 14s. 2d., and since that time further contribu-
tions, &c., amounting to £57,308 11s. 4d. have been
received, making a total of £154,429 ss. 6d.
The following payment and issues of contributions
in kind have been made: —
£ s. d.
Papuan curios to Anzac Hostel . • • • 10 10 0
13| acres land at Lismore to the local committee .. 270 0 0
Purchase of books for Anzac library .. •• 119 5 3
Loss on realization of gifts in kind .. • • 015 0
£4OO 10 3


The amount at credit of the trust account on 30th
June w r as £154,028 15s. 3d., and is held as follows: —
Cash £113,418 18 4
Securities .. .. • • • • 23,028 15 0
Real property .. .. • • • • 446 15 0
Miscellaneous contributions in kind .. .. 14 6 11
Anzac Hostel .. .. • • • • 17,000 0 0
State War Council advance account,. .. 120 0 0
The details of this account are set out in schedules
Nos. 1,3, 4, 5. (See appendices.)
The Amending Act of 1920 and its Provisions.
In May, 1920, an amending Act was passed to give
effect to certain election undertakings of the Govern-
ment. This measure placed the administration of war
pensions previously with the Treasury under the
Department, abolished the honorary Commission, and
honorary State Boards, and substituted a paid Com-
mission of three members, and likewise paid Boards,
likewise of three members. General control of policy
was still reserved to the Minister, but the Commission
was invested with the administrative function in addi-
tion to the advisory function formerly the part of the
honorary Commission. The paid Boards were limited
to the determination of certain applications as in the
case of the honorary Boards. The functions of the
Comptroller passed to the Commission.
Apart from the machinery alterations mentioned the
chief substantial change effected by the measure was
a new pension schedule which consolidated the payments
previously made under the headings of Repatriation
allowances and pensions in certain cases, and also
created special schedules for the blinded and totally
.and permanently incapacitated classes.
The amended scale brings the general rates up to a
level which compares very favorably with that reached
in any other country, while the special rate of 80s.
per week (with, of course, additional pension for any
dependants) for the classes which have suffered most
is, so far as is known, far in excess of any provision
made elsewhere. A comparative statement is set out
in Appendix 10. (For Act see also Appendix 12.)
General.
In touching the life of the soldier and his dependants
at so many points during a period of extreme public
sensitiveness, it was inevitable that the Department
should have encountered criticism both widespread and
fierce. But while no doubt some of this criticism
might have been legitimate much of it was based on
misconceptions which were only dispelled as the under-
lying principles of the scheme became better under-
stood and the intrinsic difficulties of action appreciated.
One very effective agency in promoting this better
understanding was the journal Repatriation which the
Department has issued monthly since March, 1919, and
which has circulated freely amongst the members of
local committees, organizations concerned with the wel-
fare of soldiers and their dependants, and the general
public.
Finally it is appropriate to record that with the
exception of a very few specialist officers and typistes
the numerous staff of the Department has been com-
posed of members of the A.1.F., and the measure of
success which the Department may be said to have
achieved in the execution thus far of its varied and
difficult task has been largely due to their aptitude and
steady devotion to duty under conditions of extreme
pressure.
D. J. GILBERT,
Comptroller.




APPENDICES.
1. Balance-sheet—
(а) Repatriation of Soldiers’ Contribution Trust Account.
(б) Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Trust Account.
2. Statement of Receipts and Expenditure for period Bth April, 1918, to 30th June, 1920, Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Trust Account
3. Statement of Receipts s and Expenditure for period Bth April, 1918, to 30th June, 1920, Repatriation of Soldiers’ Contributions Trust
Account.
4. Repatriation of Soldiers’ Contributions Account—Securities (Real Property and Miscellaneous Gifts) held on 30th June, 1920.
5. Analysis of Expenditure on Benefits (Gifts and Loans, &c.) for the period Bth April, 1918, to 30th June, 1920.
6. Graphs showing the operations of the Department for period Bth April, 1918, to 30th June, 1920 —
(a) Employment—showing number of men awaiting positions at the close of each month.
(b) Vocational Training—showing number of applications received each month.
(c) Assistance, other than (a) and (b) —showing number of applications received each month.
( d) Total number of applications received for all classes of assistance.
(e) Expenditure—
(i) Nature and extent of payments.
(ii) Nature and extent of benefits.
{/) The plan of administrative organization.
7. Statement showing the position of Trainees at 30th June, 1920.
8. Particulars of accommodation other than at Country Hospitals for Departmental cases.
9. Financial Requirements of Soldier Settlement—
(a) Statement submitted at Premiers’ Conference, January, 1919.
(b) Statement submitted at Conference of Lands’ Ministers, May, 1920.
(c) Statement submitted at Conference of Lands’ Ministers, June, 1920.
10. Comparative Statement of Australian Pensions with those of other Countries.
11. Australian Soldiers' Repatriation Fund Act 1916. {Not printed in Parliamentary Paper form )
12. Australian Soldiers' Repatriation Act 1920. {Not printed in Parliamentary Paper form.)
13. (a) Regulations, General Orders, and Forms. {Not printed in Parliamentary Paper form.)
(6) Instructions to Local Committees. {Not printed in Parliamentary Paper form.)
(c) Medical Institutions, {Not printed in Parliamentary Paper form.)
14. War Service Homes Act. {Not printed in Parliamentary Paper form.)
15. Personnel of Honorary Commission and Boards.
16. Photographs.
F. 16850- 3




APPENDIX No. 1(a) and (b).
Commonwealth of Australia.
Department of Repatriation.
BALANCE-SHEET AS AT 30th JUNE, 1920.
Liabilities.
£ s. d.
State Contributory Funds Account 154,028 15 3
Commonwealth of Australia Repat-
riation Account .. • • 1,371,986 15 4
1,526,015 10 7
Assets.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Contributions —
Cash Contributions (Statement No. 3) .. 113,418 18 4
State War Council Advance Account .. 120 0 0
Securities (Statement No. 4) .. • • 23,028 15 0
Aliscellaneous Contributions (Statement No.
4 ) .. .. .. .. 14 6 11
Real Property (Statement No. 4) .. _ 446 15 0
Anzac Hostel" .. .. • • • • 17,000 0 0
154,028 15 3
Australian Soldiers’ Repatriation Account
Cash held by Postmaster-General’s Depart-
ment on account of Repayments of Loans 1,161 5 2
Loans •• •• •• •• 951,97/ 18 7
Returned Property on hand . . . . 3,268 10 1
Office Premises and Furniture .. .. 84,255 0 2
Vocational Training and Medical Institutions 331,324 1 4
1,371,986 15 4
1,520,015 10 7
D. J. GILBERT, Comptroller.
Ist September, 1920.
H. C. ELVINS, A.1.C.A., Chief Accountant.
Ist September, 1920.
APPENDIX No. 2.
Commonwealth of Australia.
• Department of Repatriation.
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE, Bth APRIL, 1918, TO 30th JUNE, 1920.
TRUST find.
Receipts.
£ s. d.
Parliamentary Appropriation .. .. 7,442,818 16 6
Repayment of Loans .. ■ • • • 176,859 0 1
Gifts revoked . • • • • • • • 11,205 3 4
Realization of Returned Property-
Gift .. •• •• £926 15 10
Loan .. .. • • 18,171 2 8
19,097 18 6
Vocational Training —Sale of Products • • 15,057 14 4
Interest received on Loans .. .. • • 3,364 10 4
Miscellaneous Receipts .. .. • • 13,362 14 4
7,681,765 17 5
Expenditure.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Administrative —
Salaries . . . • 296,607 8 10
Contingencies .. .. 316,138 3 6
612,745 12 4
Capital Expenditure —Office Premises, &e. .. 84,255 0 2
Repatriation of Soldiers—
Gift .. .. .. £4,775,934 7 4
Loan .. .. .. 986,846 12 2
General .. .. 890,660 4 1
6,653,441 3 7
Training Institutions and Hostels —Buildings,
Equipment, &c. .. .. .. .. 331,324 1 4
7,681,765 17 5
APPENDIX No. 3.
Department of Repatriation.
REPATRIATION OF SOLDIERS’ CONTRIBUTIONS ACCOUNT.
Statement of Receipts and Expenditure for the Period Bth April, 1918, to 30th June, 1920.
Receipts.
£ s. d.
Contributions not made for a Specific Purpose-
Amount taken over from Australian Soldiers’
Repatriation Fund .. .. '• • 74,535 2 3
Cash received since Bth April, 1918 .. 40,643 8 5
115,178 10 8
Interest.. .. . • • • • • 2,994 15 9
118,173 6 5
Contributions made for a Specific Purpose—
Totally and Permanently Incapacitated Soldiers 11,107 11 6
Kamesburgh Library, Victoria . . . . 250 0 0
Kalamunda Convalescent Farm, Western Aus-
tralia .. .. ■ • • • 7 5 8
General Pau Scholarship for Children of De-
ceased Soldiers .. .. .. 1,000 0 0
130,538 3 7
Expenditure.
£ s. d.
Contributions not made for a
Specific Purpose—
Kamesburgh Hostel, Victoria 17,000 0 0
Kamesburgh Library, Victoria 119 5 3
Balance of Cash Contributions
held by Treasury .. 113,418 18 4
130,538 3 7
Balance.
£ s. d,
101,173 6 5
11,107 11 6
130 14 9
7 5 8
1,000 0 0
113,418 18 4


Description.
I
Rate of
Interest.
Name and Address of Donor.
Face Value;
Total.
War Bonds
4^%—1925
Barrier Munitions Co.
£ s. d.
250 0 0
£ 5. d.
ft • • • • , ,
99
Press Rifle Club, Sydney
70 0 0
99 • • • •
99
Mr. and Mrs. G. A. Sherwin, Spooner-street, Lith-
10 0 0
gow
99 • • • • , ,
99
A. P. Adams, Esq., Urana
200 0 0
99
99
South Australian Post, Telephone, and Telegraph
850 0 0
Patriotic Fund
99
99
C. M. Wilson, Esq., Perth
50 0 0
99 • • • • , ,
99
Trustees JN. and M. Tournament Funds
160 0 0
War Sav ings Certificates
4£% —1920
H. F. E. Whitlam, Esq., at cost
4 7 6
1,590 0 0
» it
99
Mrs. M. P. S. Gore, Beechworth
10 10 0
>» ii
99
Employees Australian Knitting Mills Ltd., Mel-
21 17 6
bourne, at cost
>» ii
99
Bugle Range’s Repatriation Committee, South
7 0 0
Australia
»» ii
99
South Australian Post, Telegraph, and Telephone
195 0 0
Patriotic Fund
Melbourne Harbor Trust Debentures ..
4%—1939
Hon. W. L. and Messrs. Baillieu
20,000 0 0
400 lo u
20 000 0 0
Beath, Schiess, and Felstead Debentures
5°/
° /o
Mr. and Mrs. A. S. Bloomfield
300 0 0
yj v
300 0 0
Queensland Treasury Bills
3f%—1922
Trustees of the N. and M. Tournament Funds
600 0 0
600 0 0
Victoria State Savings Bank Debentures
4%
Trustees of the N. and M. Tournament Funds ..
300 0 0
300 0 0
23,028 15 0
—
Name and Address of Donor.
Value.
Real Property.
£ s. d.
Land—Lot 29, Oxford-street, section 3, Municipality of Prospect and Sherwood, New
South Wales
A. Hockhen
30 0 0
Building Lots Nos. 29, 31, 32, 33, and 34, Coburg Valley Estate, Victoria
J. Hocking, Frankston; J. Snell,
356 15 0
Fremantle Town Lot 1344, containing 1 rood 16 perches
Miscellaneous.
Dandenong
W. R. Vincent, Melbourne
60 0 0
446 15 0
Wheat Scrip
Hermann Rowe, Warracknabeal ..
7 7 11
» 99 • • - • • • . . , , , , , , ,
A. T. Couzner, Galaquil ..
6 19 0
14 6 11
APPENDIX No. 4.
STATEMENT OF SECURITIES HELD AT THE COMMONWEALTH BANK IN THE NAME OF THE MINISTER OF
STATE FOR REPATRIATION ON 30th JUNE, 1920.
STATEMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS IN KIND HELD AT 30th JUNE, 1920.


—
Total Gift.
Total Loan.
Total General
Total.
£
£
£
£
Repatriation of Soldiers—
Item 1. Expenses in providing Employment (including Sustenance, Tools of Trade,
and Transportation Expenses)
2,102,118
10,677
31,015
2,143,810
,, 2. Vocational Training (including Sustenance, Fees, Books, &c., Maintenance of
Training Schools, &c.)
1,355,808
18,302
249,719
1,623,829
„ 3. Furniture ..
64,706
574,827
639,533
„ 4. Small Businesses
1,504
173,682
1
175,187
„ 5. Plant
771
149,602
41
150,414
„ 6. Live Stock
70
16,223
16,293
„ 7. Settlers’ Sustenance and Other Expenses „ ,.
148,085
23
8,397
156,505
„ 8. Homes for Blinded Soldiers
1,278
2,619
3,897
„ 9. Passages beyond the Commonwealth ..
56,579
25-
35,444
92,048
„ 10. Living Allowances, including Allowances for Homes
573,223
34,712
3,423
611,358
„ 11. Educational Grants for. Children
683
65
748
,, 12. Medical Treatment, including Surgical Aids .. .. ..
430,665
14,888
445,553
„ 13. Funeral Expenses .. .. .. .. .. ., . I
12,763
64
12,827
„ 14. Miscellaneous, including Advance to R.S.S.I.L.A.
27,660
8,031
34,606
70,297
„ 15. Expenses of Allotment
21
615
6,929
7,565
,, 16. Maintenance of Institutions ..
15,554
15,554
„ 17. Grants to Local Government Bodies ..
450,757
450,757
,, 18. Grants to Local Committees
33,693
33,693
,, 19. Payments to Trainees incidental to Advanced Training in Building Trades
and Other Expenses (to be recovered from War Service Homes Com-
mission)
3,574
3,574
4,775,934
986,848
890,660
6,653,442
APPENDIX No. 5.
ANALYSIS OF EXPENDITURE FOR PERIOD Bth APRIL, 1918, TO 30th JUNE, 1920.


APPENDIX 6(a).
EMPLOYMENT.
Showing the number of Men, registered with the Department, who were awaiting positions at the end of each
month during the period April, 1918 —June, 1920.


APPENDIX 6(b) and (c).
VOCATIONAL TRAINING AND ASSISTANCE.
Showing the number of Applications received each month by the Department during the period
April, 1918, to September, 1920.
1918 1919 1920
Apl. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apl. May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apl. May June July Aug. Sept.
Upper Curve—Assistance.
Lower Curve—Vocational Training.


APPENDIX 6 (d).
APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE—S2S,I6S.
Employment .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 190,662
Vocational Training .. .. .. .. ~ ~ . . .. .. 1 50,604
General Assistance .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. . * .. .. 283,899
APPENDIX 6» (i).
No. 1.
REPATRIATION—£7,6BI,76S.
Nature and Extent of Payments
Grants to Soldiers (covering benefits and services in the nature of Gifts) .. .. .. .. .. .. 4,775,934
Loans to Soldiers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 986,848
Grants to Local Government Bodies and Local Committees .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 484,450
Buildings, Equipmenf, &c.. Training and Medical Institutions and Offices .. .. .. .. .. .. 415,579
Maintenance —Training Schools, Medical Institutions, &c., &c. .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 406,210
Administrative Expenses .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 612,744
APPENDIX 6 (e) (ii).
No. 2.
REPATRIATION—£7,6BI,76S.
Nature and Extent of Benefits.
Employment— £
Sustenance, Tools of Trade, Fares, &c. .. .. .. .. .. •. .. .. . • 2,143,810
Grants to Local Government Bodies, to-provide Reserve Employment .. .. .. .. .. .. 450,757
Vocational Training—
Sustenance, Fees, Books, Maintenance of Schools .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,623,829
Equipment, &c. —Training Establishments .. .. .. .. .. .. • • •. . • 269,977
Administrative Expenses .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • 612,744
Office Premises, &c. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • 84,255
Land Settlers —Sustenance, &c. .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • 156,505
Small Businesses —Plant, &c. .. .. .. •. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 341,894
Furniture ~ .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 639,533
Miscellaneous .. . . .. .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 224,649
Medical Treatment —
Sustenance, Artificial Limbs, Treatment . • .. .. .. • • • • •. • • • • 461,107
Equipment, &c., Institutions .. .. .. . • .. • • • • • • • • • • 61,347
Living Allowances .. .. . • .. •• •• •• •• •• •• •• •• 611,358


APPENDIX 6 (/).
PLAN OF ORGANIZATION.— DEPARTMENT OF REPATRIATION.
F. 16850


ifills
| | cr 3 § a
2.9 >£-* §
f kS 3 S-
3* CO £ O"
1
S. S
if 1-
! so’ ! I 50
To
CO -'l
>
Approved and
Or
4-
co *— ►- os to co
00 to OS 00 -J CO
waiting Training
KJ
H-
w
Approved, but
i — i— «4 «J o
O M #1. (fk. o CO
Withdrawn prior to
oo
CO O CO OS o
'J raining.
CO
H- h—
so
• OS CO Or CO
Q
In Technical
Os
1— • *4 rf*- £t 00
Schools.
Ox
H- 4 00 oo H-
'so
co OS • • *4 CO
Repatriation
M
CO
O co ■ • co >—
Trade Schools.
J?
Cn CO *4 CO
S’
Repatriation
£
o
• • • • to -I
w
Special Training
Cn
-i oo
Schools.
H
to
o
t— 1 CO 00
With Private
|:
lO 4 h O O CO
•
Teachers.
OQ
CO
41 Oi 00 O CO o
JO
i—' 1—' CO 00 OS
o
Withdrawn
CO
I— 1 to to> Ca O cO
during Training.
CO OS CD H- 00 00
Completed Pre-
S3
os
. • • Oi t—
w
liminary Train-
Qs
Or
• • to • to O
ing, but awaiting
8
O
“4 O CO
Employment.
ST
Completed
H
H- 1
Preliminary
JJ5
00
i— i—• oo ci
f -
Training, and
5"
to
oi co os oi co 4
placed under In-
CP
CO t— 1 CO CO I— 1 H-
dustrial Scheme.
8
Placed under
'to
i— Ot Oi to co
Industrial Scheme
o*
9? rr fc fc cs to
.
without undergoing
<1
to to OS O Or to
Preliminary Training.
00
I— ‘ CO to
Withdrawn during
CO
00 Or h- to to to
w
Period of Industrial
to
CO *4 CO OS Ol tO
Training.
_l _*
V
H to 4 to H
w
o
cn oo 4j 4i oo oo
O 1— 1 C31 4J co
•
Finally Completed
Training, i.e.,
t— 11 H- 1 to H
co i— 1 Oi to -4
Attained 100 per
-4
g
! cent. Efficiency.
oo
O 00 OS Oi H 00
j
to
41
J— 1 to CO J— < o o°
%
Total
ho
o SS
o
bbb 4w 4
4 CO CO OS OS
Approved.
s-g
s
4CIOIHW00
-4
JO JO
s*
to Or 4 OS CO 'co
Q
OQ*
-J
CO
H4OOO00
»Ol©H0OH
In Training.
D -
V
to to to Or •
Completed
ST
m
w
to
4 00 4 H ■ CO
O to CO CO 00
Training.
CP
CP
APPENDIX No. 7.
VOCATIONAL TRAINING.
Statement showing the Position of Trainees as at 30th June, 1920.
SUMMARY.
Particulars. Columns.
Approved and awaiting training ' •. • • • • • • •• A • • 1 ‘ q’a^-
Total number in preliminary training .. • • • • • • .. C, D, L, r .. B >b77
Completed preliminary training, but awaiting employment .. • ■ .. H .. • • bot
Undergoing industrial training .. .. • • • • • • • • • • • •
Finally completed training, i.e., attained 100 per cent, efficiency .. .. L, M .. . • -’I, ?
Total withdrawals (21 •13 per cent, of total number) .. . . . . .. B, C, K .. 5 » 711
Total number approved .. .. •. • • • • • • .. N .. .. 27,019
'Above figures include apprentices.)


Class of Case.
Queensland.
New South Wales.
i
Victoria.
South Australia.
Western Australia.
Tasmania.
Tuberculars, I.
(a) Stanthorpe
Sanatorium
(c) Bodington . .
( d ) Kuringai
Chase
(a) Macleod (De-
partmental
structures on
State land)
(/) Bedford Park
(/) Wooroloo . .
1
(a) Repatriation
, Hospital, Ho-
bart, or transfer
to Victoria
Tuberculars, II.
To be arranged
(c) Griffith
(c) “ Janefield ”
(to be opened
. at end of 1920)
(e) Bedford Park
To be arranged
Cases to-be trans-
ferred to Vic-
toria
Tuberculars, III.
(c) “ Ardoyne,”
{d) Woodville,”
( h ) Austin Hos-
(e) Myrtle Bank
(a) Repatriation
(a) Repatriation
at Corinda
at Randwick
pital (Segrega-
tion)
Hospital
Hospital, Ho-
bart
In-patients
(i) No. 17 A.G.H.
(») No. 4 A.G.H.
(t) No. 11 A.G.H.
(t) No. 7 A.G.H.
(t) No. 8 A.G.H.
(a) Repatriation
(t) No. 27 A.H.H.
\g) Royal Prince
(g) Alfred Hos-
Adelaide Hos-
(g) Perth Hos-
Hospital, Ho-
Subsequently
to be taken
over by Repat-
riation from
Defence De-
partment, and
conducted by
State
Alfred Hospital
pital
pital, to be
arranged
pital
bart*
(a) Repatriation
Hospital, Laun-
ceston*
Out-patients
No. 27 A.A.H.
No. 4 A.G.H.
(6) Repatriation
(*)• No. 7 A.G.H.
(i) No. 8 A.G.H.
(«) Repatriation
Brisbane Gene-
ral Hospital to
be arranged
Royal Prince
Alfred Hospital
to be arranged
Hospital
Adelaide Gene-
ral Hospital to
be arranged,
and also State
Branch
(g) Perth Hos-
pital (building
proceeding)
Hospital, Ho-
bart
(6) Repatriation
Hospital, Laun-
ceston
Mentals
( e) Goodna Men-
tal Hospital
(e) Callan Park
(e) Macleod Men-
tal Hospital
(/) Receiving
House, Erindale
(e) Stomners
(e) Claremont ..
Cases transferred
to Victoria
Inebriates
State Institutions
responsible twelve
1
months after discha
irge from A.I.F. N
'ot proposed to pro
vide structures.
War Neurosis ..
(6) Mt. Gravatt
Convalescent
Farm
(d) Novar
( d ) Russell Lea
(c) Exeter
(c) Mowbray Park
(a) Bundoora
Convalescent
Farm
j To be arranged
(6) Kalamunda
Cases transferred
to Victoria
Totally and per-
manently in-
capacitated
(a) Anzac Hostel
(c) Graythwaite
Canonbury
(a) Anzac Hostel
(a) Anzac Hostel
(6) Anzac Hostel
Cases transferred
to Victoria if
necessary
Convalescents ..
(c) Graceville ..
(c) Toowoomba
( c ) Brisbane
(c) Sydney
(c) Bathurst
(c) Moss Vale ..
(c) Moree
(c) Neutral Bay
(c) Botany
(c) Ballarat
(c) Bendigo
(c) Healesville
( c ) Geelong
(c) Sassafras
(c) Henley Beach
(h) Cottesloe
(c) Jericho
APPENDIX No. 8.
PARTICULARS OF ACCOMMODATION AVAILABLE OTHER THAN AT COUNTRY HOSPITALS FOR DEPARTMENTAL
CASES.
♦ Note. — Military Hospitals will be utilized whilst they exist to treat all or part of Departmental cases, but subsequently all cases will be treated in separate
wards at Civil Institutions, except in case of Tasmania.
The conditions under which the Departmental cases are treated are as follow, and indicated in Digest by the distinctive marks
opposite :
(c) Controlled by Department, which owns property .. .. .. .. .. .."
(6) Controlled by Department on leased property
(c) Controlled by Red Cross Society, which owns property and equipment
( d ) Controlled by Red Cross Society, in Departmental property, Red Cross and/or Department own equipment
(e) Controlled by State Government. Department provides structures and/or equipment .. .. V
(/) Controlled by State Government
(g) Controlled by Hospital Committee. Department provides equipment and/or structures
(h) Controlled by Hospital Committee
(*) Controlled by Department of Defence
Department
pays per
capita rate
Number of
Institutions
affected.
r 9
3
23
4
- T
3
5
2
w 9
65


—
Number of
Settlers.
Advances to
Settlers.
Advances to
Men Settled.
Land
Resumption.
Public Works.
Special
Provision.
1,
Total.
New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania ..
8,405
5,395
2,826
1,729
2,000
500
£
5,253,125
3,371,875
1,766,250
875,000
1,250,000
312,500
• £
350.000
205.625
125.625
128.000
£
1,208,408
6,592,500
200,000
625.000
500.000
360.000
£
2,313,310
396,481
1,190,000
750,000
£
1,000,000
£
8,774,843
10,314,375
2,362,731
2.895.625
3.625.625
800,500
m
20,855
12,828,750
809,250
9,485,908
4,649,791
1,000,000
••
28,733,699
—
Number of Settlers.
Cost.
Actually
paid by
Common-
wealth
to 19th
May, 1920.
Net
Additional
to be
provided.
Required to
30th June,
1921.
For Period
after 30th
June, 1921.
Average
Cost per
Settler.
Agreed
last
Confer-
ence.
Addi-
tional
Estimate.
Total.
Agreed last
Conference.
Estimated
Additional.
Total.
£
£
. £
£
£
£
£
£
New South Wales
7,500
3,405
10,905
7,964,000
15,000,000
22,964,000
1,898,931
21,065,069
9,521,875
11,543,194
2,106
Victoria
6,000
5,000
11,000
10,500,000
10,625,000
21,125,000
4,295,770
16,829,230
12,000,000
4,829,230
1,920
Queensland
2,826
15,275
18,101
10,911,816
5,605,145
16,516,961
728,084
15,788,877
2,679,176
13,109,701
912
South Australia..
1,400
2,600
4,000
2,690,000
5,291,000
7,981,000
521,058
7,459,942
3,129,746
4,330,196
1,995
Western Australia
2,000
3,000
5,000
3,625,625
3,249,375
6,875,000
925,148
5,949,852
4,449,852
1,500,000
1,375
Tasmania
500
550
1,050
610,000
1,243,750
1,853,750
980,375
873,375
873,375
1,765
20,226
29,830
50,056
36,301,441
41,014,270
77,315,711
9,349,366
67,966,345
32,654,024
35,312,321
••
Purposes.
New South
Wales.
Victoria.
Queensland.
South
Australia.
Western
Australia.
Tasmania.
Total.
Quota
Advances
Resumptions
Works
•
£
1,800
1,000,000
3,500,000
£
5,605
2,906,250
5,355,000
£
2,191
1,369,375
28,606
130,625
£
2,711
1,731,875
1,370,250
807,675
£
3,000
1.250,000
i 2,000,375
f
£
1,210
756,250
f 1,962,070
\ 30,000
£
16,577
9,013,750
12,216,526
2,968,675
Less saving on
provision, Conference, 1919
4,500,000
8,261,250
1,317,317
1,528,606
3,909,800
3,250,375
2,748,320
24,198,951
1,317,317
6,943,933
••
••
22,881,634
Average Cost ..
£2,500
£1,473
£697
£1,410
£1,375
£2,271
••
APPENDIX No. 9 (a).
ESTIMATES OF FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF QUOTAS AGREED ON AT PREMIFRS’
CONFERENCE, JANUARY, 1919.
APPENDIX No. 9(b.)
i
ESTIMATES OF FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND SETTLEMENT.
Submitted at Conference of Ministers, Melbourne, May, 1920.
Note. The quotas given show some slight divergence from those accepted at the Premiers’ Conference, 1919. The figures are given to show the extent
of the proposals.
APPENDIX No. 9 (c).
ESTIMATED FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SETTLEMENT OF SOLDIERS, ADDITIONAL TO QUOTAS
ALLOTTED AT PREMIERS’ CONFERENCE, JANUARY, 1919.
Submitted at Conference of Lands’ Ministers, June, 1920.
Note. —The figures show a reduction on the estimates of the May Conference. The additions are computed in relation to the original quotas accepted by
the Premiers’ Conference, January, 1919.


—
United Kingdom.*
(Royal Warrant, 1919.)
Australia.
(Act of 1920.)
Canada.
(Act 43 of 1919.)
New Zealand.
(Act 16 of 1916, 1 of 1916, 16 of 1917.)
South Africa.
(Act 42 of 1919.)
Franck.
(Law of 31st March, 1919.)
Italy.
(Decrees of 12th November, 1916, 20th
May, 1917, October, 1918.)
United States.
(Act of October, 1917, as amended up
to 1st July, 1918.)
Germany.
(Law of 1906. New Law in pre-
paration.)
Blinded and permanently and
absolutely incapacitated man
£4 (special rate)
Totally disabled man—
Man
9
Man and wife
and one child
and two children..
40s. t
40s. -f 10s. = 50s.
50s. + 7s. 6d. = 57s. 6d.
57s. 6d. + 6s. = 63s. 6d.
£2 2s.
42s. + 18s. = 60s.
60s. + 10s. = 70s. ..
/0s. -f- 7s, 6d. = / 7s, 6d. * ..
47s. lid. ($600 a year)
47s. lid. + 14s. 4d. = 62s. 3d,
62s. 3d. + 11s. 6d. = 73s. 9d.
73s. 9d. + 9s. 7d. = 83s. 4d.'..
40s.
40s. + 20s. = 60s.
60s. + 10s. = 70s.
70s. + 10s. = 80s.
40s. (If a man is permanently
bedridden or incapable of
earning, an additional sum up
to 20s. may be granted)
40s. + 10s. = 50s. ..
50s. + 10s. = 60s.
60s. + 8s. 4d. = 68s. 4d.
37s. (at 25 francs to £1). In case of
several injuries this may be increased
37s.
37s. + 4s. 7d. = 4ls. 7d.
41s. 7d. + 4s. 7d. = 46s. 2d.
(19s. 4d.) (1,260 lire a vear, at 25 lire to
£1)
t 19s. 4d. + 4s. 5d. = 23s. 9d.
23s. 9d. + Is. 6Jd. + 2s. 3d. for child
under 12, or incapable of work =
27s. 6Jd.
27s. 6Jd. + Is. 2d. -(- 2s. 3d. as above
= 30s. 11 Jd.
28s. 10d. ($30 a month, at 4s. 2d. to
the dollar)
28s. lOd. + 14s. 5d. = 43s. 3d.
43s. 3d. + 9s. 7d. *= 52s. lOd.
52s. lOd. + 9s. 7d. = 62s. 5d.
11 From 13s. lOd. to 26s. 4d. (at 20
marks to £1), according to the nature
of the disablement. To meet the in-
creased cost of living this lias been
increased from 1st January, 1919, by
a bonus of 60 percent, to 100per cent,
according to the nature of the dis-
ablement. There are no additional
allowances for wife or children
Note. —Pending the passing of the
new law an all-round bonus of 40 per
cent, lias been granted ns from 1st
June, 1919
and three children
63s. 6d. + 6s. = 69s. 6d.
77s. 6d. + 5s. = 82s. 6d.
83s. 4d. + 7s. 8d. = 91s.
80s. + 10s. = 90s.
68s. 4d. + 7s. 6d. = 75s. lOd.
46s. 2d. + 4s. 7d. = 50s. 9d.
30s. lljd. + 9d. + 2s. 3d., as above
= 33s. ll|d.
62s. 5d. + 9s. 7d . = 72s.
Note. — For children under 18 years
and for each subsequent child
6s. for child up to 16 years ..
Or
5s. for child up to 16, but where
child is under 16, the pension
runs for two years, or till child
is 16, whichever is later
7s. 8d. ($96 a year) for boy up to
16 and girl up to 17
10s. for child up to 16; it may be 17
in case of girls
7s. 6d. for boy up to 18 and girl
up to 21
Or
4s. 7d. (300 francs a year) for each child
up to 18 years
9d. -f 2s. 3d., as above, = 3s. The
children's pension allowance con-
tinues up to 21 years
Nil
Or
An alternative pension equalling
pre-war earnings, plus 60 per
cent, up to a limit of £5
No alternative pension
No alternative pension
No alternative pensiofi, but to main-
tain a man and his dependants in
accordance with their pre-war
standard of comfort his pension may
be increased by 20s., but total pay-
able jn respect of man not to exceed
£5
An alternative pension equalling
pre-war earnings if they were
75s. or under, and with a
maximum of £5
No alternative pension
No alternative pension
Where a man has lost both feet or both
hands, or is totally blind, or per-
manently bedridden, 96s. a week;
but no> constant attendance allow-
. ance is granted in such a case
No alternative pension
In addition to pension, constant
attendance allowance (in help-
less cases)
Not exceeding 20s. ..
See special rate provision
Not exceeding 36s. ($450 a year)
Not exceeding 20s.
Not exceeding 35s. ..
9s. 3d. ..
Up to 4s. 8d.
Not exceeding 19s. 2d. a week ($ — a
month)
No provision
Dependants ..
No provision
A pension or pensions at such
rate as may be assessed by the
Commission, not to exceed in
any one case 20s.
Unmarried man may be allowed
14s. 4d. to support dependent
parent
An amount not exceeding pre-enlist-
ment dependency
No provision
No provision
§ One parent, 4s. 5d. ; two parents,
7s. 3d. ; a brother or sister under 12,
or incapable of work, 4s. 5d. ; for
every additional such brother or
sister, 2s. 3d.
For dependent father or mother, 9s. 7d.
a week
No provision
Partially disabled man
For a 20 per cent, disability, 20
per cent, of the above disable-
ment pension and allowances,
and so on up to a 90 per cent,
disability, by seven regular 10
per cent, gradations
Such rate, less than the above
disablement rate, as may be
assessed by the Repatriation
Board, having regard to the
nature and probable duration
of the incapacity
For a 5-9 per cent, disability, 5
per cent, of the above disable-
ment pension and allowances,
for a 10-14 per cent, disability
10 per cent, of the above, and
so on up to 95-99 per cent, by
nineteen icgular 5 per cent,
gradations
Such rates as are in each case deter-
mined by the Pensions Board ; but
for specific injuries the same principle
is adopted as in the Royal Warrant,
injuries being percentaged from 20
per cent, upwards to 100 per cent.
Wife, children, and other dependants
— such rates as in each case are de-
termined by the Pensions Board
Awards and allowances calcu-
lated as in the United King-
dom
For a 10 per cent, disability 10 per cent,
of the above disablement pension and
allowances, and so on up to 95 per
cent, by eighteen regular ft per cent,
gradations. In case of several in-
juries, there may be a slight addition
** Partial disabilities are divided into
seven categories of 30 per cent., 40
per cent., 60 per cent., 60 per cent.,
70 per cent., 75 per cent., and 80 per
cent., the pension for each category
being a corresponding percentage of
the pension awarded for total dis-
ability. No provision can be found
for any special allowance for married
men or for any allowance for children
in the case of partially disabled men
The man is entitled to the percentage
of pension payable for total disability
equal to the degree of reduction in
actual earning capacity rcsuling from
the disability, but no compensation
for any disability less than 10 per
cent, of total disability
Without going into details, it may be
said that the pension of a man par-
tially war disabled would normally be
from 4s. Od. a week, in the case of a
10 per cent, disablement, to 19s. a
week for a 90 per cent, disablement •
the amount would depend upon the
nature of his disability. To this
would be addl'd, in some cases, the
bonuses above mentioned
Minor disablements .,
Or
Alternative pension —
For disablement less than 20
per cent, of total, a gratuity
or weekly allowance not to
exceed a total of £200
These cases are dealt with
specially
For a permanent disability less
than 5 per cent, of total dis-
ability a gratuity not exceed-
ing £20 16s. 8d.
Dealt with specially in each case
Or
An alternative pension—
As in the United Kingdom..
Disablement under 10 per cent, dis-
regarded
For a 20 per cent, disablement a tem-
porary allowance of 5s. 9d. per week.
For a 10 per cent, disablement a
gratuity from £7 18 3d to £30 4s. 9d.
Disablement under 10 per cent, dis-
regarded
Disablement under 10 per cent, dis-
regarded
Supplementation of pensions ..
Provision made by Special
Grants Committee
Provision for non-dependants in need
— Special provision for disabled men
under Repatriation Act
Each case is considered on its
merits
The National OtHce for the care of war-
disabled and discharged men might
in certain cases assist men pecu-
niarily
The Opera Rationale makes provision
for the protection and assistance of
war-invalids
Note. — Free life insurance to the
value of £40 is granted to every private
who has been to the front
II No provision, but State insurance
on favorable terms for an amount up
to $10,00(1 (£2,083), in tile case of
death or permanent total disability
No provision
Non-attributable cases
A gratuity or weekly allowance
not to exceed a total of £150
No provision
No provision
No provision
As in the United Kingdom
No provision
No special provision
No special provision
No provision
APPENDIX No. 10.
TABLE I. COMPARATIVE TABLE OF WEEKLY PENSION AND ALLOWANCES TO A PRIVATE TOTALLY OR PARTIALLY DISABLED DURING THE GREAT WAR. (IN THE COMMONWEALTH AND OTHER COUNTRIES).
* Most of these figures may vary after 1922 with the cost of living.
tlf the man has a service pension the disablement pension may be 335. . , .
t This is being temporarily increased to 2,940, 3,180, or 4,620 lire a year, according to the degree of mutilation. (At the current rate ot ixc iang ,
48 lire to the £l, equivalent to 235. 6d. to 375. Id. a week.) This includes constant attendant allowance.
§ This is really separation allowance, but will be granted, on application, to the families of totally disabled men.
!| There is no Federal provision, but certain States assist their men.
*i A higher pension is possible where the man has sustaiiml several severe disabilities ( e.q .. blindness and loss ot limb).
** Pensions for partial disabilities are being also increased temporarily, until a new law is framed.
F, 16850—5


—
United Kingdom.*
(Royal Warrant. 1919.)
Australia.
(Act® 34 of 1914, 28 of 1915, 25
of 1916.)
Canada.
(Act 43 of 1919.)
New Zealand.
(Acts 16 of 1915, 1 of 1916, 16 of
1917.)
South Africa.
(Act 42 of 1919.)
France.
(Law of 31st March, 1919.)
Italy.
(Decrees of 12th November, 1916, 20th
May, 1917, October, 1918.)
United States.
(Act of October,1917, as amended
up to 1st July, 1918.)
Germany.
(Law of 1906 (New Law in
preparation.)
Widow (without children)
20s. (26s. 8d. on attaining age of
40)
f With dependent chil-
23s 6d J (ircn or irl necessitous
’ circumstances up to
( £2 2s.
38s. 4d. ($480 a year) 7s. 8d.
bonus = 46s.
30s.
25s.
11s. 3£d. (at 25 francs to £1)
{ 9s. 7d. (at 25 lire to £1) ..
24s ($25 a month, at 4s. 2d. to
the dollar)
7s. 8d (at 20 marks to £1)
and one child
26s. 8d. + 10s. = 36s 8d.
42s. -f 10s. = 52s. ..
46s. -f 14s. 4d. = 60s. 4d.
40s. + 10s. = 50s. ..
25s. + 10s. = 35s. ..
11s. 3£d. + 4s. 7d. = 15s. 10*d.
9s. 7d. + Is. 6Jd. = lls. IJd.
24s. + 9s. 7d. = 33s. 7d.
7s. 8d. + 3s. 2Jd. = 10s. 10*d.
and two children ..
36s. 8d. + 7s. 6d. = 44s. 2d. ..
52s. + 7s. 6d. = 59s. 6d.
60s. 4d. -f 9s. 7d. = 69s. lid.
50s. + 10s. = 60s. ..
35s. + 9s. 3d. = 44s. 3d.
15s. 10Jd. + 4s. 7d. = 20s. 5£d.
lls. IJd. + Is. 2d. = 12s. 3id.
3J3s. 7d. + 7s. 2d. = 40s. 9d. ..
10s. 10*d. + 3s. 2Jd. = 14s. Id.
and three children ..
44s. 2d. + 6s. = 50s. 2d.
59s. 6d. + 5s. = 64s. 6d.
69s. lid. + 7s. 6d. = 77s. 7d.
60s. 10s. = 70s. ..
44s. 3d. + 9s. 3d. = 53s. 6d. . .
20s. 5ji. + 4s. 7d. = 25s. OJd.
12s. 3*d. + 9£d. = 13s. Id.
40s. 9d. + 4s. lOd. = 45s. 7d.
Note.—For children under 18
years.
14s. Id. + 3s. 2Jd. = 17s. 3Jd.
for each subsequent child
6s. for each child up to 16
Or
t 5s. for each child up to 16 ..
7s. 8d. ($96 a year) for boy up
to 16 and girl up to 17
10s. for each child up to 16 ; in
case of a girl it may be 17
years
9s. 3d. for boy up to 18 and girl
up to 21. (The above rates
are slightly increased where
the man’s pre-war earnings
exceeded £136 per annum)
Or
Alternative pension (being half
the husband’s alternative pen-
sion), which may amount to
£50
4s. 7d. for each child up to is years of
age
9Jd. for each child up to 21
For fourth child an additional
4s. 10d., but none for more
children
3s. 2£d. for child up to 18
Note.—Pending passing of
new law an all-round 40 per cent,
bonus has been granted as from
1st June, 1919
Alternative pension, which may
amount to 50s, if under the
age of 40, and without chil-
dren, otherwise 66s. 8d.
No alternative pension
No alternative pension
No alternative pension, but to
maintain pre-war standard
of comfort a widow may be
allowed up to 15s. a week, but
total pension and allowances
not to exceed £4.
No alternative pension, but excep-
tionally favorable terms on re-
marriage
No alternative pension
No alternative pension
No alternative pension
Gratuity to widow and children
£5 for widow and £1 for each
child
No provision
Gratuity equal to two months’
pension, or two months’ allow-
ances, paid the first month,
in addition to pension and
allowances to widow and
children
No provision
Gratuity of £5 to widow, and £1
to each child
No provision
No provision
No provision
In certain cases a gratuity is
payable, depending upon the
payment of the man
Motherless children—
One child
Two children
Three children
12s.
12s. + 11s. = 23s. ..
23s. + lls. = 34s. ..
Up to 10 years, 10s. Three f
From 10 to 14, 12s. ' v such
6d. j children'|
From 14 to 16, 15s. J 37s. 6d.
28s. 8d. (8360 a year)
28s. 8d. + 19s. 2d. = 47s. lOd.
47s. lOd. + 15s. 4d. = 63s. 2d.
15s.
15s. + 15s. = 30s.
30s. 15s. = 45s. ..
20s.
20s. + 20s. = 40s.
40s. + 20s. = 60s. ..
11s. 3Jd. (the widow’s pension)
11s. 3Jd. + 4s. 7d. = 15s. lOJd.
15s. lOJd. + 4s. 7d- = 20s. 51d.
t 9s. 7d. (630 lire a year)
9s. 7d. -f Is. 6Jd. = lls. l^d.
lls. IJd. + Is. 2d. = 12s. 3Jd.
19s. 2d
19s! 2d! + 9s. 7d. = 28s. 9d. ! !
28s. 9d. + 9s. 7d. = 38s. 4d. ..
II 4s. 7d.
4s. 7d. + 4s. 7d. = 9s. 2d.
9s. 2d. + 4s. 7d. = 13s. 9d.
For each subsequent child ..
11s.
As above ..
15s. 4d. (8192 a year)
15s.
20s.
4s. 7d. ..
9£d.
For fourth and fifth child, 4s.
lOd. a week each, but no more
4s. 7d.
Widow of pensioner not otherwise
eligible
Half her husband’s pension, if it
was 10s. a week or over, but
not to exceed 13s. 9d.
No provision
A widow’s pension and children’s
allowances granted if pen-
sioner had a disability of 80
per cent, or over, and died
within five years
No provision
Half her husband’s pension, if it
was 16s. a week or over, but
not to exceed 25s.
§ 7s. 8d., and children’s allowances, if
pensioner had a disability of 60 per
cent, or over
No provision
No provision
No special war pension
Widow of man dying from non-
attributable disability
15s. a week during the war and
for twelve months thereafter.
Gratuity of £5 to widow and
£1 to each child
No special provision
No provision
No special provision
Gratuity of from one to three
years’ husband’s pay
No provision
No provision
No provision
No provision
“ Separated wife ”
Amount due under separation
order, Ac., up to 13s. 9d.,
but not less than 3s. 6d., with
allowances for children, as
above
Not distinguished from widow..
If divorced, or legally separated,
and unable to provide for
herself, to be dealt with as
widow, but pension not to
exceed alimony. Separated
wife, if unsupported by man,
mav be refused pension
Not distinguished from widow
Amount paid by husband up to
20s., but not less than 5s.,
with allowances for children
as above
In certain cases pension forfeited by
separation
Not distinguished from widow
Not distinguished from widow
■
Not distinguished from widow
“ Unmarried wife ”
12s. a week in certain circum-
stances, and children’s allow-
ances as above
In certain circumstances to be
granted widow’s pension
In certain circumstances to be
granted widow’s pension and
allowances
No special provision, but may
receive 20s. whilst caring for
man’s children, with children’s
allowances. If dependent, ar d
in need, she might also be
granted a pension
Half widow’s pension and chil-
dren’s allowances as above
No provision
No special provision, but in various
circumstances she may be deemed
for pension purposes a widow
No special provision, but there
is a presumption in favour of
marriage
No special provision
Parents
Dependency pensions up to 18s.,
which may amount to 36s.
where dependence was on two
or more sons who have fallen ;
Or
Need pensions up to 18s.
Or
Flat-rate pensions of 5s. a week,
which may amount to 15s.
where three sons have fallen
In non-attributable cases need
gratuity may be granted
Widowed mother of unmarried
son, 20s. To other parents,
being dependent, such rates
as may be assessed by the
Repatriation Board, not ex-
ceeding in any one case 20s.
Dependent parents (if no widow
or dependent children) up to
38s. Id. ($480 a year), with
bonus of 7s. 8d.
Widowed dependent — Mother,
15s. to 30s., according to
dependence
To other dependent parents an
amount not exceeding pre-
enlistment dependency
To parents in need, such pension
as the Board thinks fit
Dependent or aged and needy
parents may be granted up to
38s., according to circum-
stances, and, if two sons have
fallen, up to 55s.
Father, who is infirm, or has incurable
disease, or is over 60, 6s. IJd.
For both parents (mother being over
55), 12s. 3d. For widowed mother,
infirm, &c., or in charge of children,
12s. 3d.
For widowed mother, infirm, Ac., who
has remarried, 6s. l|d.
For each additional son who has fallen,
an addition of Is. 6£d.
If no parents, then grand-parents may
be granted allowances from 4s. 7d.
to 9s. 2d., with additional Is. 6|d. for
additional fallen grand-sons up to
three
If no widow or children are left—
A dependent father of 50 years old,
and incapable of profitable work,
9s. 7d., with an additional Is. 6£d.
for each additional unmarried son
who has fallen
A dependent widowed mother, 9s. 7d.
A dependent foster-parent, if no other
dependents, 9s. 7d.
If a widow or children are left—
A dependent father of 50 years old,
and incapable of profitable work,
3s. 2d.
A dependent widowed mother, 3s.
2d.
Dependent mother or father,
19s. 2d. ; both, 28s. lOd. ;
but not to exceed difference
between total payable to
widow and children and 72s. a
week
A special need pension, not ex-
ceeding 5s. a week, may be
granted to a dependent parent
or grand-parent, but only to
one beneficiary
Other dependants
(1) Incapable of self-support,
and in need, up to 16s. 6d.
(2) Not otherwise entitled, a
gratuity not exceeding a yea r ’s
pay of the deceased soldier
Such rates as may be assessed
by the Repatriation Board,
not exceeding in any one case,
20s.,but the total of depend-
ants’ pensions (exclusive of
widowed mother of unmarried
son) not to exceed 40s. a week
Dependent brothers and sisters,
if no widow or children, the
same rates as children
An amount not exceeding pre-
enlisfment dependency
(1) Incapable of self-support,
and in need, up to 27s. 6d.
(2) Not otherwise entitled, a
gratuity not exceeding three
years’ pay of the soldier
No provision
Dependent unmarried orphan brother
and sisters under 21, 9s. 7d.
No provision
No provision
Supplementation of pensions ..
Provision by Special Grants’
Committee
Special provision for widows and
dependants under Regulations
of the Repatriation Act
Provision for non-dependants in
need. Special provision may
be made for widows under
Repatriation Act
Each case is considered on its
merits
The benefit of the National Office has
been extended to female war pen-
sioners
*
The Opera Nationale may grant assist-
ance, and in certain cases the widows,
Ac,, will reap the benefit of a free
insurance policy on the man’s life
No provision, but in certain cases
the widow, children, mother,
or father receive the value of
the man’s insurance policy in
the form of 240 monthly allow-
ances of £5 4s. 2d. ($25) (but
the man’s policy was paid for
by him) Pension exempt
from taxation
No provision
TABLE lI.—COMPARATIVE TABLE OF PENSIONS, ETC., TO WIDOWS AND DEPENDANTS OF MEN KILLED DURING THE GREAT WAR.
* Most of these figures may vary after 1922 with the cost of living.
t Where a child is under 16 the allowance or pension runs for two years, or until the child is 16, whichever is later.
X An addition is being given temporarily which will make this, at the current rate of exchange (48 lire to the £1), equal to about Bs. a
week. A small temporary increase is being given to parents.
§ Special provision where a woman marries a man disabled 80 per cent or over.
H If the man had served for over 15 years this may be increased.


(APPENDICES Nos. 11 TO 14 NOT PRINTED IN PARLIAMENTARY PAPER FORM.)
APPENDIX No. 15.
MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES (HONORARY) APPOINTED UNDER THE AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’
REPATRIATION FUND ACT 1916.
The Prime Minister (Chairman, ex-officio).
* Olliver Morrice Williams, Esq. (Deputy Chairman).
Senator the Honorable G. F. Pearce, Minister for Defence.
Sir William Irvine, M.P.
* Arthur S. Baillieu, Esq.
Denison Miller, Esq.
Samuel Hordern, Esq.
The Honorable James Page, M.P.
Senator the Honorable J. J. Long.
The Honorable J. M. Hunter, M.L.A.
* The Honorable Sir J. Langdon Bonython.
The Honorable J. J. Poynton.
* E. Grayndler, Esq.
The Honorable Sir Joseph Cook, M.P.
(Vice Senator the Honorable E. D. Millen, resigned).
D. J. Gilbert, Esq., Organizing Secretary.
* Denotes member of Executive Committee.
MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION (HONORARY) APPOINTED UNDER THE AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’ REPATRIATION
ACT 1917.
The Honorable the Minister for Repatriation (Chairman, ex-officio).
Robert Gibson, C.B.E. (Deputy Chairman).
The Honorable Sir J. Langdon Bonython, K. 8., K.C.M.G.
Edward Grayndler, Esq.
H. P. Moorehead, Esq.
Lieut.-Colonel R. H. Owen, C.M.G.
John Sanderson, Esq.
Lieut.-Colonel James Semmens, V.D. ( vice John Sanderson, resigned).
MEMBERS OF THE STATE BOARDS (HONORARY) APPOINTED UNDER THE AUSTRALIAN SOLDIERS’
REPATRIATION ACT 1917.
Victoria.
Theodore Fink, Esq. (Chairman).
William F. Greenwood ( vice Mr. Fink, resigned).
James Graham, Esq.
Thomas W. Haynes, Esq.
Duncan McDougall, Esq.
James H. Bradshaw, Esq. ,
Ivor Birtwistle, Esq.
George G. Henderson, Esq. ( nice Mr. Chaffey, resigned).
David Y. Syme, Esq. ( vice Mr. Graham, resigned).
George Robert Palmer, Esq. ( vice Mr. Dougall, resigned),
John B. Young, Esq. {vice Mr. Haynes, resigned).
Ben. Chaffey, Esq-
New South Wales.
William T. Willington, Esq. (Chairman).
Mark Sheldon, Esq., Chairman {vice Mr. Willington, resigned).
William Vicars, Esq. {vice Mr. Sheldon, resigned), Chairman.
Major J. M. Maughan (Deputy Chairman).
Joseph Eade, Esq.
Samuel Hordern, Esq.
George Arthur Parkes, Esq.
Arthur Vernon, Esa.
Queensland.
William M. L’Estrange, Esq. (Chairman).
George Marchant, Esq.
William Mclntyre, Esq.
William N. Robertson, Esq.
Andrew J. Patterson, Esq. {vice Mr. L’Estrange, on extended leave).
Harold F. Laidlaw, Esq. {vice Mr. Gaffney, deceased).
Lieut.-Colonel Francis A. Hughes, D.S.O. {vice Captain Jones, resigned;.
Captain A. L. Jones.
Frederick Harris, Esq.
The late Hugh J. Gaffney, Esq.
F. 16850.—6. —6


South Australia.
George Brookman, Esq. (Chairman).
Frederick W. Vasey, Esq. (Chairman), {vice Mr. Brookman, on extended leave,.
Arnold E. Davey, Esq.
Horace H. Hannan, Esq.
Major L. L. Lewis.
I’homas B. Merry, Esq.
George H. Prosser, Esq.
Robert C. Cudmore, Esq. {vice Mr. Vasey, appointed Chairman).
Thomas H. Davey, Esq. {vice A. E. Davey, deceased).
Western Australia.
Walter W. Garner, Esq. (Chairman).
Robert S. Black, Esq.
Alex. McCallum, Esq.
Alex. J. McNeil, Esq.
Alex. J. Monger, Esq.
Arthur J. Priestly, Esq.
Arthur J. Wright, Esq.
Lieut.-Colonel Henry Pope, C.B. {vice Mr. Monger, resigned).
The late Charles B. Cox, Esq. {vice Mr. Priestly, resigned).
Tasmania. •
Frank L. Gunn, Esq.
Matthew H. Eyre, Esq.
George H. Farrow, Esq.
Allan V. Giblin, Esq.
Charles J. Inglis, Esq.
Charles L. Pringle, Esq.
Lieut.-Colonel Robert E, Snowden.
George W. Smith, Esq. {vice Mr. Inglis, resigned).
A. Needham, Esq. {vice Mr. Eyre, resigned).
Richard J. Meagher, Esq. {vice Mr. Smith, resigned).
Captain C. E. H. Ferguson, M.C. {vice Mr. Farrow, resigned).
Albert E. Bowring, Esq. {vice Mr. Needham, resigned).
Comptrollers.
N. C. Lockyer, Esq., 1.5.0., C.8.E., April-June, 1918 ; provisionally, July, 1917, to June, 1918.
D. J. Gilbert, Esq., June, 1918, to June, 1920.


APPENDIX 16.
VOCATIONAL TRAINING.
1. TINSMITHING.
2. TURNING AND FITTING.
3. A MACHINE SHOP.
4. MOTOR MECHANICS.
5. BOOTMAKING.
6. BRICKLAYING.
7. BOOK-KEEPING.
8. JOINERY.
9. SHORTHAND AND TYPING.
10. MILLINERY (WAR WIDOWS).
F. 16850.- 7


ANZAC HOSTEL, VICTORIA.
1. SIR ARTHUR STANLEY OPENING THE HOSTEL.
2. EXTERIOR OF HOSTEL,
4. A WARD.
3. VISITORS ON THE LAWNS
5. REST ROOM.


Australian Jockey Club Home for Sailors and Soldiers, “Canonbury,” Darling Point, Sydney.
1. HOME AND GROUNDS.
4. ONE OF THE VERANDAS.
7. A GLIMPSE OF THE HARBOR.
2. LOOKING OVER THE HARBOR.
5. A WARD.
8 A VIEW UP THE HARBOR.
3. PORTION OF THE GROUNDS.
6. PART OF ONE OF THE VERANDAS.
9. THE SEA WALL.


ANZAC HOSTEL, QUEENSLAND.
4. PATIENTS’ SMOKE LOUNGE.
5. HALL AND STAIRCASE.
1. HOSTEL FROM THE RIVER.
2. NEW WING.
3. VERANDA ON WING.
6. A WARD.
7. PATIENTS' DINING HALL.
8. WARD KNOWN AS "BUCKINGHAM PALACE.”


ANZAC HOSTEL. SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
1. THE HOSTEL.
4. RECREATION-ROOM.
2. THE VESTIBULE.
5. AT WARD.
3. NURSING STAFF’S QUARTERS.
6. MATRON’S OFFICE AND SITTING-ROOM.


CONVALESCENT FARM, QUEENSLAND.
1 and 2. CULTIVATION PADDOCKS
4 PATIENTS’ DORMITORIES.
3. DRIVE LEADING TO QUARTERS.
5. WORKSHOPS.


ANZAC HOSTEL, NEW SOUTH WALES.
1. ENTRANCE HALL AND STAIRS.
2. EXTERIOR OF WARD.
4. VIEW OF HOSTEL AND GROUNDS.
3. INTERIOR OF WARD.
5. RECREATION-ROOM.


CONVALESCENT FARM. BUNDOORA, VICTORIA.
1. THE OLD HOMESTEAD
3. PATIENTS’ HOME.
2. THE FARM.
4. DRIVE AND GARDEN.
AT THE DEMOBILIZATION DEPOT, MELBOURNE


ANZAC HOSTEL, QUEENSLAND.
1. ENTRANCE FROM SHAFSTON AVENUE.
3. MAIN BUILDING AND LAWN.
2. ENTRANCE FROM THORNE-STREET.
4. VIEW OF BRISBANE RIVER FROM HOSTEL GROUNDS.
RETURNED SOLDIERS DISEMBARKING AT PORT MELBOURNE.
F. 16850. — 8


CONVALESCENT HOME, BUNDOORA, VICTORIA.
SOUTH BALCONY AND GARDEN.
A WARD.
TYPE OF DESIGN FOR WAR SERVICE HOME.


TYPE OF DESIGN FOR WAR SERVICE HOME.


TYPE OF DESIGN FOR WAR SERVICE HOME.


TYPE OF DESIGN FOR WAR SERVICE HOME.


TYPE OF DESIGN FOR WAR SERVICE HOME.


TYPE OF DESIGN FOR WAR SERVICE HOME.


WAR SERVICE HOMES. Examples of Completed Houses.
1. SYDNEY SUBURBAN TYPE.
4. N.S.W. TYPE.
2. BELMORE. SYDNEY, N.S.W.
3. FREMANTLE, W.A.
3. HILLVIEW TESTATE. BELMORE. SYDNEY.
6. WESTERN AUSTRALIAN TYPE.
