

hectare z/,A
BY •♦■
:♦!
THE HON. JAMES H. McCOLL, |
£ BEFORE THE >:
v acrune * nt
| £
ft %
£ HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF VICTORIA, %
* ft
s I
A ON w
ft I
•J: jjj
| The Water Question in J
| florthern Victoria |
ft .... I
;♦; AND THE $
I I
| Work of Hugh JVleColl. |
i
S &. I
I I
I e
A Reprinted by kind permission of $
b i
& The Historical Society of Victoria.




J h rp
6 to
HUGH McCOLL, M.L.A. (1819-1885.)
BENJAMIN HAWKINS DODS (1834-1896.)
Designer and Engineer, Grand North-Western Canal.




Hugh McColl amd the Water Question
in Northern Victoria.
By JAMES H. WIcCOLL.
(Read before the Society, 30th November, 1914.)
It has been a great pleasure to comply with the request to
prepare and read a paper* on the water question in northern
Victoria, and the connexioni of my late father, Mr. Hugh McColl,
with it. It gives me the opportunity of putting on record his
exertions in the cause he had so much at heart, of removing some
misconceptions on the matter ; and of reviewing briefly the
development of the water question in the districts named. The
preparation of the paper has refreshed my memory on a subject
always interesting to me, but which the duties of late lyears
had put on one side. I owe toy thanks to the Society for the
opportunity-
THE PHYSICAL CHARACTER OF NORTHERN VICTORIA.
Victoria occupies the south-east part of Australia, and has
an area of 87,884 square miles, or 56,245,760 acres. The area
north of the Dividing Range is somewhat larger than on the
south. Its whole area is but one thirty-third of Australia. Its
length is 420 miles, and breadth 250 miles. The boundary on
the west is the 141st 'meridian, from thence east to Cape Howe,
then north-west to Forest THU, where the River Murray rises,
and on the north along that river to the 141st toeridian. A
distinct line of division between north and south is caused by
the cordillera or mountain range, which, beginning at Cape York
in Queensland, rung south, and, following a rough jconformity
with the eastern coast-line, enters Victoria about Forest Hill,
thence branching west and running nearly to the western
boundary of the State. All streams flowing on the south side of
this range empty direct into the sea, while those to the north
are affluents of the River Murray, finding their way to Lake
Alexandrina, in South Australia, and finally to the sea over the
shallow reaches of Victor Harbor. ; The drainage area of the
Murray comprises more than half of Victoria. The bulk of the
land through which the streams flow is tertiary or formed
country, the trend of the country being a gentle slope both west
and north, and the character of the soil such as renders it
suitable for irrigated agriculture. To the extreme «north-west
are the 11,000,000 acres of Mallee, at one time the despair and
problem of the Lands Department, but now proved in favorable
seasons to be splendid agricultural land.
THE NORTHERN RIVERS AND THEIR CHARACTER,
From the main divide there flow north to the Murray nine
streams, varying greatly in size and character. I To the east
there are the Mitta Mitta. Kiewa, and Ovens, which flow through
hilly country not Suited for irrigation on a large scale. West of


these are the Broken, Goulburn, Campaspe, Loddon, Avoca, and
Wimmera Rivers, flowing mainly through level country. The
rivers ,to the west, where the rainfall is lighter than on the east,
are shallower and (smaller than those to the east, with little
velocity or scour, losing themselves before reaching the Murray
in jlakes and swamps. The more valuable for irrigation purposes
are the Goulburn, Campaspe, and Loddon, the most important
being the Goulburn, the linest Victorian stream. Its watershed
covers 4,000 square (miles ; the next largest being that of the
Mitta Mitta, with 1,990 square miles. No gaugings of the
northern rivers seem to have) been taken till 1881, when the
Goujlburn and Loddon were measured, the Wimmera being
measured in 1884, and the Mitta and Kiewa in 1885. Other rivers
have since been gauged- It is necessary that an accurate know-
ledge of the quantity 'of water to be relied on be ascertained
before any scheme for utilizing streams for domestic use or
irrigation can be formulated. This is fundamental, and that it
was not paid more attention to in the earlier days before
irrigation schemes were commenced was one cause Why they
were not more successful. There has been an improvement in
the methods of gauging, and the figures to be substituted are
no doubt accurate.
THE RIVERINE SYSTEM OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND
THE MURRAY RIVER.
Any record of the northern Victorian waters involves also
consideration of the above. The most striking physical feature
of New South Wales is its wonderful riverine system. Prom the
western side of the cordilleras or mountain ranges flow
numerous streams, whose waters concentrate in three larger
rivers, the Darling, Lachlan, and Murrumbidgee, the two latter
ultimately [finding their way to the River Murray between
Tooleybuc and Euston, and the Darling joining it at Wentworth.
All the waters of this enormous drainage system, were it possible
for them to flow, would gather at Wentworth, on the Murray.
The total drainage area Is 414,253 square miles, or one-Seventh
of (Australia. But the waters from it affect Victoria only slightly.
The main sujpply of the River Murray above Tooleybuc is ob-
tained from Victorian watersheds. The drainage area at Mildura
is (92,000 square miles. At Echuca it is 19,400 square miles, at
Albury 6,470 square miles, a,t JinjeLlac 2,500 square miles and at
Tallangatta 1990 square miles, while at Kiewa it is but 434 sq.
miles. The run-off or proportion of rain falling in the drainage
area discharged decreases as the river is followed on. At
Kiewa it |.s 36 to 43 per cent., at Tallangatta 35 to 44 per cent.,
at Jinjellic 36 to 55 per cent., at Albury 27 to 38 per cent., at
Echuca 19 to 21 per cent., and at Mildura 9 to 11 per cent. The
fall of the River Murray varies from 8 to 5 inches per mile, and,
while the channel |is clearly defined, its course is very crooked,
as it is a slowly-moving river- Much might be written about
the River Murray, it size, character, and (potentialities, as well
as the long continued disputes about the ownership of the water,
but must be omitted, as 1 this paper only deals with it as it affects
Victoria and its interests. It is interesting, however, to note
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


Mitta
, . . 883,800
Kiewa
576,870
Ovens
. . . 859,530
Broken
. . . 112,010
Goulburn
1,409,780
Campaspee . . . .
89,760
Boddon . . . . .
78,380
Avoca
56,220
WimmeraL . . . .
94,160
Total . . ..
. . 4,160,510
the sources of tsupply to this river and its volume at certain
points. At Jinjeellic its average flow is 1,728,000 acre-feet, each
acre-foot containing 43,560 cubic feet. Of this, 66.4 per cent, is
supplied by New South Wales, and 33.6 per cent, by Victoria.
At Albury, where the annual flow is 3,432,000 acre-feet, the
positions are reversed, New (South Wales sending 34-6 per cent,
and Victoria 65..4 per cent., the additional contributing rivers
being the Mitta and Kiewa. At Torrumbarry, 25 iniles below
EJchuca, where the annual! flow is 4,859,000 acre-feet, the Vic-
torian contribution is still more marked, New South Wales
giving 16.7 per cent, and Victoria 83.3 per cent., the additional
contributing rivers being the Ovens, Broken, GouSlburn, and
Campaspe. At IVEildura the annual average flow is 7,472,000
acre-feet, the additional rivers being the Murrumbidgee, Tumut,
and Loddon, and the percentages—. New South Wales 39-1, Vic-
toria 60.9. At Lake Victoria, where the average annual flow is
13,440,000 acre-feet, the accession is all from the Darling, in the
proportion of 64 per cent, from Queensland and 36 per cent,
from New South Wales. These figures are those of the engineers
for New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia, and were
recently drawn up. In working out the discharge at Mildura
for the period from 1865 to 1912, I made the mean annual flow
8,337,753 acre-feet ; but some wet years in the seventies were
included, which would account for the additional flow, and, in
the roulgh, my calculation endorses the latest figures, which do
not go so far back.
DISCHARGE OF THE VICTORIAN STREAMS INTO THE
MURRAY.
The discharges of the main northern Victorian rivers for
1912, that being a normal year, may be taken as the average
output- In the Upper Murray they (are exactly the average, and
in the lower slightly below, but, on the whole, they show the
annual flow from the Victorian streams expressed in acre-feet,
as is now the custom
Despite the diversions in 1912, the discharge from our Vic-
torian rivers in a sub-normal year was 4,160,510 acre-feet —
sufficient to coverr that number of acres 12 inches deep. Porty
years ago, the discharge was much higher, and the diversions
were few, In qtuoting these figures absolute accuracy is not
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


required, the object being- to show how disregarded this splendid
asset was; the only asset that could have stayed the depopulation
of the 'north, and redeemed the fortunes of so many who lost
their all after years of toil.
THE RAINFALL OF NORTHERN VICTORIA.
Forty years ago the number of recording rainfall stations
was but 43, but of late years they have been increased to 925,
and, consequently, their records are more reliable. 1870 was
the year of heaviest rainfall in northern Victoria, the records
for the north being Mallee, 25 inches; Wimmera, 28| inches;
North-Western, 34 inches; -Central-North, 41 inches, which are
heavy precipitations for these districts. From 1871 to 1875 the
fall was considerably over the average, that of the latter being
the heaviest next to 1870. These were the years of the great
rush to the north for land. Then came the dry years of 1876-
1877, the deficiency amounting- to 30 per cent, below the average-
The years of least rainfall since (1870 were 1877, 1888, 1902, 1907,
and 1908. and of greatest, 1870, 1875, 1887, 1889, 1894, and 1906.
Between 1870 and <l9lO there were 19 years under the average
and 21 years over, the driest being 1902, and the wettest 1889.
In the areas of the Mallee, jWimmera, Northern country, and
Central-North the seasons were practically uniform, there being
a slight difference in only four years out of 40. The longest
dry spell was from 1894 to 1902. As regards precipitation,
northern Victoria can 'be divided into the Hill country on the
north-east, and the Plain or wheat areas from Yarrawonga to
the South Australian border. With regard to the north-east,
statistics are only available back to 1880, and since then the
average has been 23.8 inches- There were live wet years—lBB7-9,
1893-4-6 —the rainfall being from 40.4 to 49.2 inches. There
were then ten dry years —1884-8, 1895, 6-7-9, 1901-2-7-8 —with a
fall of from 21.8 to 30.4 inches- In the western area from 1861
there have been sixteen wet years—lB6l-3-7, 11870-1-2-5-8, 1887-
9, 1890-3-4, 1903-6-10 —the precipitations running from 20 to 29.6
inches. The dry seasons since 1861 and the months when [the
recorded breaks occured were —1865, broken May 1866; 1876-7,
break not recorded; 1881, broke April, 1882; I 1888, broke Jan-
uary, 1889; 1895; 1896, broke January, 1897, but four very dry
months followed; 1901, 1902, broke December, 1902; 1907, broke
May, 1908. the lowest fall being in 1865, 9.5 inches; then 1902,
with 10.9 inches. The highest fall for the dry years tvas 15.1
inches. Over this northern area the average was 17-8 inches,
falling away to 10 inches In the north-west countries. The
utilization of these waters for the purpose 1 of combating drought
and of increasing production from the seems to have had
but little attention till a considerable time after settlement took
place over the greater part of the northern areas.
EVAPORATION IN NORTHERN VICTORIA.
Any article on the water question in the north would not
be complete without a reference to this subject. Evaporation, or
the converting of water into vapour, is a most important feature
in the dry areas that has received but scant attention. The
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


atmosphere is tthe great robber of moisture, and wherever water
is left exposed tto the air it passes away in water vapour. The
importance, therrefore, jpf protecting water in, the dry areas is
very great ; butt little has been done either for the 'dry farmer
or the irrigatiomist to show him ho“w to prevent the waste of
this precious faictor, on which success depends. When water
is scarce and hais to be dearly paid for, the teaching of methods
by which it can be economized should be the aim of those who
control agrioultuire by either dry or wet systems. It might 'well
be made a speccial branch of the Water Supply Department-
Until last year it received practically no attention, jbut experi-
ments were them made at Rutherglen and Wyuna to obtain
evaporation datsa. The Results showed ,at Rutherglen an
evaporation fronn water services of 56| inches, while at Wyuna
it was a little ower 78 inches. This is from three to four times
the annual precipitation. The greatest evaporation is neces-
sarily during thee early and late jtaonths of the year. At both
places the evaporation for the months of January, February, and
December was saboult equal to that of the other nine months.
There is a wide field for usefulness here, if the authorities will
enter upon it. I
PROGRESS OF SETTLEMENT IN THE NORTH.
Waves of setttlement rolled north' as Land Acts were liberal-
ized and as gooed seasons tempted home seekers. In the early
seventies the northern plain s were veritable oceans of verdure.
Girass, rich, llusciious, and abundant, covered them. The timbered
areas were yiot s«o heavily covered as the Gippsland country, and
offered little diffflculty in clearing ; while the millions of acres
of well grassed pda in land ready for the plough without clearing
offered opportunities for speedy and economical settlement
tempting in the {extreme. Rivers {and creeks were flowing, lakes
and depressions "were full of water, and, with the prospects so
bright and high hiopes for the future, the settlers on the northern
and north-west pilains faced the outlook with sanguine anticipa-
tions of prosperity. While the seasons remained moist, as they
did from 1870 to) 1875, all went well. But few of them had
knowledge of noirthern and though they may have
known of droughts, (they had not experienced them, and so they
were not anticipated nor provided for. The unwise provision in
the Land Acts of- allowing settlers a uniform [320 acres through-
out Victoria, without regard to the locality of the land, or the
natural worked ill for the northern men,. To give
the same area in the rich western country or the fat Gippsland
soils as in the drder north; was absurd. Double the areas should
have( been allowecd ini the north to permit of pasturage, and also
of resting the lanid in alternate years from cultivation. So when
dry seasons cam<e the depopulation commenced, and before a
decade passed veiny many had left. At the end of two decades
in many parishes not one tenth of the original settlers remained.
The fee-simple wvas given in six years by the Government if
the conditions we;re complied with, the land being then market-
able ; and many who could afford to do so bought their neigh-
bours out,' aggregation began, and large freehold estates (com-
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


menced to mullltiply- For years the drift continued, and the
drift continued, and the best and most necessary means of
staying it were utterly neglected. Irrigation projects were not
thought of, and even conservation and distribution of water for
domestic use only began to receive the attention of the Govern-
ment about 1880.
TH,E GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON WATER TO 1879.
The main centres of ,and mining districts had
large sums spent on them, but the retaining of the settlers of
the north by iproviding water apparently did not enter into the
thoughts of the then Governments. Up to year 1883, £ 3,800,000
had been/ spent by the Victorian on water works
in Victoria; but little of it went to help Agriculture anywhere,
and none in the (north. Of the sum named, £1,739,000 had been
spent on the metropolis, £917,174 on the Coliban scheme,
£327,178 on iQieelong, and £360,000 on Ballarat; while (the mining
towns of Stawell, dunes, Ararat, and Beechworth absorbed
£287,391 in all, leaving only £167,257 to be spent on 39 other
places, most of them mining townships. Up to 1871 irrigation
in the north was neither discussed or attempted. The land was
mostly in large holdings under lease, and if any private attempts
to Irrigate were made, the results do not seem to have obtained
publicity.
THE GRAND VICTORIAN NORTH-WESTERN CANAL
COMPANY.
But that the question of irrigation in the north had been
seriously considered by some people became evident in 1871,
when a project known as The Grand Victorian North-Western
Canal Company was formulated by Mr- Benjamin Hawkins Dods.
I kiid not come personally much in contact with Mr. Dods, and
cannot therefore write with intimate knowledge of that gentle-
man. He came from Scotland in 1849, had been in business in
Melbourne in connexion with gas and water, and had done a
good deal of hydraulic work. (He had, on visiting the north,
seen the enormous volumes of water going to waste, and formed
the/ fdea of using (the surplus for irrigation, following it up in
the scheme he now brought forward. Ido not know if he could
truly claim the letters C.E. by university training. I rather think
not, but he was a map of great versatile ability, fertile in ideas,
and with the gift of expressing them by speech or pen. I have
since been informed he was (an Edinburgh University man. Not
having, as is probable, the hall-mark of university training, he
was lightly treated by diplomaed experts ; >but he certainly
showed the way the northern plains could be irrigated, and
those who later carried out the present Goulburn scheme copied
his design, and followed in his track. Mr. Dods projected a
scheme for carrying the Goudburn water with that of other
rivers across the plains under the »ame of the Grand Victorian
North-Western Canal Company, and the first public reference
to this proposal (that I have f been able to And is contained in a
parliamentary paper of the Victorian Legislative Assembly, in
1871. Mr. D. Gillies had moved for a return on the 25th July,
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


1871, “ That a copy of the application of certain persons on
behalf of the Grand Victorian North-Western Canal Company
for a lease of Crown land for construction of certain canals,
also copies of any correspondence o n the subject be made an
order of the House-” This wa s laid on the table of the Legis-
lative Assembly by the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown Lands
and Survey on the Bth August,
Clerk of Legislative Assembly.
1871, as certified by John Barker,
The application was as follows—
Melbourne, 18th May, 1871.
To the Hon. J. A. MacPherson,
Commissioner of the Board
of Land and Works
We have the honour to make application, under the 46th section
of the Land 'Act 1869, for a grant or lease for 999 years of three
million acres of land in alternate blocks of one mile frontage to a
canal 60 feet wide, with a fall of /nine (9) inches per mile (such
contour line t,o be determined by future survey), which we propose
to construct through Crown land, starting from a point on the
Goulburn River above Murchison, and proceeding westerly as shown
on map (accompanying this application), intersecting the jCampaspe
the Loddon, the Avoca, the Richardson, the Tarifiambiack, and
Wimmera Rivers, then north-westerly traversing Lakes Hindmarsh
and Albacutya, and also conjoining by a system of levels said lakes
with Lakes Tyrrel and ©uloke. There will also be a system of
levels in the county of Rodney, as depicted on map. The use of
the canal being to bring under a complete system of irrigation and
means of transit the three (3) million acres hereby applied for by
us, also for three (3) million acres of adjoining allotment blocks
still remaining in the hands of the State, which would be improved
in value with the land applied for by us.
We have the honour to be,
Your obedient Servants
B. Hawkins Dods.
W. McCulloch.
C. M. Inglis.
Hugh Parker.
Memo, of Lands Department
The line as sketched on this plan would not be adapted for the
construction of a canal with a fall of nine inches per mile along
that part of it between the Goulburn and Waranga, as some low
schistose -ranges would have to be crossed. The general direction of
the line Is, however, across a tract of country remarkably well
adapted for canalization. In my humble opinion, the carrying on of
the proposed scheme be attended by such public advantages
as to justify liberal concessions to any company who could carry it
out. The grant of three million acres would, however, be too great
a concession.
C. Hodgkinson.
19th May, 1871.
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


> t
\ C Lf 0 / I (.V £ I BAStR^yf' S
rSjlAK
VYA»£L
1 “^Vx
L r V <
"\fl>«.S/A7 SHANHOH tevn. B* it) 'V t
\d>
14181*6
'%3w*mp r *i\ S w " V
n 4S I \\) W
I
PR esetn i
vgpMtmt
/ t Vv
lb acJL
rvA
.i 1 *
"V
*> /
'*“Vj
<©
04AHLY LtYtL
*
V \ / —
r* 30tV£H L£ygL V \
s!3p^\y>
•j
**
*
*
o
)lakcv
HnNDMAASH
.4,
«*»■« ttX '
u
X
-\SZZh '
X.
Basih
r-v / c ?■
p- N>r 4
v --p ) , <
Ya Vjxjbkax « *■
v > y ti
F A 4
j -* o/ / X f
■y
*r /
ZttHU C A
t\
<i/
•t/
\/
// « Er
wi ;
c,
<
n
t\
°\
<rfT
*\S
\ CV t
__ —-"W
\
*
J
>
j
7
«/ \
* •*V
O ] ' ,/ -v •*/ C 11 —n'X CAMrcnP'isr LcrCL J _
•jUv- **fsr C ** - "" j vSv A
X / \J "'"'V iT S
) y V Y V’"' 1 xxT
J / 1 t ’/ v v. // / V
Jf J \ /( _Jr$
''v I {. J ty I — V " /T”
\( r'
-
V / \
J O f
1 \ /
1 >-r
V
B
7 /
\ J N«ACieil*WK tPSO* I
/ f @ ' i
> SANDHURST gjiuont
(
k-c—».
t<**e »»
V/ V
Plan of the
Grand North-Western Canal, Projected in '3871
by B. H.
Dods.
Showi ng
the approximation of
the route proposed by him to that followed by the
Scheme, at present in course of construction
Main Western
Channel
of the Goulburn


The following? is the minufte of the Minister of Lands;
“Inform thart the Government (is not prepared to accede to
this application.—J.McP. 9.6.71.”
Governments were quickly changed then, for from September,
1869, to Alugustt, 1875, six Ministries came and went- The mat-
ter 1 was not alliowed to rest, for just at this time the Govern-
ment of Mr. MloCulloch was deposed, on the 19th June, 1871,
for that of ;Sir UCharles Gavan Duffy, of which Mr. J. M. Grant
was Minister, off A renewed application was at once sent
in as follows:
32 Collins-street, (Melbourne,
26th June, 1871.
To the Hon. J. M. Grant,
Minister of Lands and Survey for Victoria.
We jhave the Hionour to request the re-consideration of the Board
for an application made by us on the 18th May, 1871, to the Hon.
J. A. McPhersom, when Commissioner of the Board of Land and
Works, &c., for three million acres of land under the 46th clause
of' the Land Act 1869, believing that the application so made by us
may be calculateed to advance the interests of the Colony of Vic-
toria jin particular!', and for the benefit of parties anxious to emigrate
from the over-crrowded cities of population in the old world.
We have the honour to be
Your obedient Servants
Benj. H. Dods.
C. M. Inglis.
W. McCulloch.
Hugh Parker.
The record procceeds—
“Inform thaat the application will be considered after
return of Prresident from the country—jC.H. 26.6.71.”
Record by Mr. Lewis —
“Letter not now necessary, Mr. Grant having returned.”
The following clloses the return:
“Deputation received. Pu(t up for the present.—C-H. 12.7.71.
This was the i genesis of Jthe Goulbum Channel, which was to
materialize manjy years after, and is now in operation to the
Serpentine (Creelk, near the (Loddon River.
Treated by thee Government with a contemptuous indifference,
the promoters pmt the prattler before the public in fuller detail.
The project was of an ambitious character.
CHAFRACTER OF PROPOSED SCHEME.
It was proposed to reclaim 15,000,000 acres of north and
north-west Victcoria, providing irrigation in summer, drainage
in winter, and clheap, Jeasy transportation by the canals for the
produce of the tarea to be developed. In the completed scheme
Hugh McCoil and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


its outlet was to be at Portland. Utilizing the Salt Creek there
and running north, it was to be at first used for drainage and
reclamation of swamp country. For irrigation it was to utilize
the waters of the Murray, the Goulburn, and the other north
ern rivers to the west, the main channels being wide enough for
carriage traffic- It was to be incorporated under an Act of
Parliament, with power to raise the sum of five millions sterling
The canal was to commence at Murchison on the Goulburn
River, which was to have a weir constructed across it to im-
pound and raise the level of the water for the canal running
to the west. There were to be canals branching from the River
Murray, and storage basins formed for reserve supplies. In short
northern and north-west Victoria was to be transformed, as
also the country from where the canal turned south towards
Portland, which was to be reclaimed by drainage. The company
proposed, in consideration .of doing this work, to ask Parliament
for a lease of 3,000,000 acres of land, little of which had then
been alienated- But, before the request was formally made, the
Government was asked to gazette a temporary reservation of
the land on the proposed Uine of channels, and to give the
company the right to effect a survey, to obtain the necessary
dajta to demonstrate the feasibility of the project. It was
proposed to raise the money to cover the cost of the survey
by the issue of shares, and if the result of the survey proved the
practicability of the proposal to then treat with the Government
for the concession required, and, if that was granted, to secure
the capital to carry out the work. It was thought that, the
practicability of the proposal being proved, the Government
would come to terms, or otherwise carry out the work itself,
recouping the promoters for the expense incurred in obtaining
the information and any rights they may have secured. This
paper is not intended to give! a detailed description of the
scheme or its history. It is being discussed in it to show the
effect the proposals had on the water question in the north,
and on the formation of public opinion on the subject, and be-
cause no account of the development of the water question in
north Victoria would be complete without a reference to it.
Some yea/rs of agitation followed before the ‘permission to
effect a survey was granted, and during that time public meet-
ings were called throughout Victoria, to enlighten the public
on the proposals, and bring pressure to bear on the Government
to do something. One of the leading organs of the dafy persist-
ently ridiculed the proposals and treated the promoters as if
they were confidence men seeking to impose on a credulous
public. An engineer from India, Colonel Sankay, was requested
to report on the scheme, who, with little knowledge of the
conditions, and without due consideration, held it up to scorn
after a most cursory review, with the result that the way of the
promoters was made more difficult, as his report had to be
controverted. His reflections on Mr. Dods brought him before
the Law Courts when damages for slander were brought against
him, and he made a hurried departure back to India- But, while
Mr. Dods developed his scheme, another man was to voice the
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


needs of the north and spread the gospel of irrigation and
the watering of the northern plains, and by his obstinate
persistence and indomitable energy force it on to public atten-
tion, and make it a living issue.
Mr. HUGH) McCOLL AND TH£ WATER QUESTiON.
That man was Hugh McColl. He was born 22nd January,
1819, and was of the McCdlls of Appin, where his people had
been for 300 ytears. With many other young Scotchmen he came
down south to seek his fortune, served his time as a printer and
bookseller in Nlewcastle-on-Tyne, and then entered into business
in North Shiekds, and later in South Shields. He left England in
August, 1852, arnd arrived here in January, 1853- After following
his trade for somel time, and also running a newspaper, the
Banner”, he ultimately became a commercial traveller in the
Bendigo districct in 1866. This occupation he followed for about
fourteen years.. His business led him to traverse a wide district
around Bendigco, and h© became known for his efforts to secure
for the diggers? (as miners were then termed) water for domestic
and mining puirposes, by the construction of dairas. The mining
was mostly alhuvial, and it could only be carried on if water was
available.
As the Bendiigo district grew, and the necessity for a perman-
ent supply of water was apparent, /the construction of the
Coliban systeim was mooted, and Mr. McColl became the honor-
ary secretary for the movement, and, with Messrs, Angus
Mackay, John : Mclntyre, Robt. Burrowes, Emmett, Burnside, and
others, did mutch to bring the scheme to successful completion.
In 1871 he bemame a legal mining manager, which business he
carried on for two or three yeiars. 'lt) wa s certain that, with his
views on the mecessity of water supply, the matter of the pro-
posed canal shiould come under his notice and during this time,
in 1874, he bescame acquainted *with Mr. Dods and the other
promoters, and! in touch with their proposals for irrigating the
northern plain®., Irrigation wa s just then coming to the front in
California, whcere it was being developed by public companies
with much succcess. Though the system was a novel one here,
there seemed mo reason why l it should not be adopted for the
same purpose, ©specially as the Government would not take it
up. Eater on the became secretary to the company, and joined
Mr. Dods in acctive co-operation. Through friends in California,
he obtained thie literature of the movement there, and contri-
buted articles to the Bendigo press on the subject. One series
was termed, “Water is Wealth,” another, “Shall the Great Plains
be Watered.” TThe company was formed, and an active canvass
of Victoria wars commenced. Public meetings were held in the
north and in aril large centres to show the advantages of using
the water, and! in support of the application for the right to
survey and thue reservation of the area to be required on the
proposed canall routes.
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


PERMISSION TO SURVEY GRANTED.
Government after Government and Minister after Minister
were approached on the matter, but some years passed before
any advance was made. Land Ministers MacPherson, Gillies,
Grant, Casey, and others were approached, and on one pretext
or another put the promoters off. The Government would neither
do anything itself nor yet permit others to try, so for six years
the agitation continued, public opinion being awakened, till Mr.
Francis Longmore became Minister of Lands. On the 21st
April, 1877, the necessary permission for survey was given under
certain conditions. £5OOO was to be deposited, and the survey
completed in twelve months. The Government would reserve
6i chains on each side of the proposed line of the canal. Mr.
T- B. Rawlinson, C.E. and Mr. Dods prepared the specifications,
and the survey was effected by Mr. Rawlinson and Mr. David-
son, C.E., of.Ballarat. The survey was carried ouit in 1878, and
showed that, iso far as configulration of the country was con-
cerned, the proposals were practicable. I am not aware how far
it went, but it was well into the Mallee, a,nd I know from the
officers who carried out the survey for the present channel that
they followed the lines laid down, and frequently came across
the pegs of the comipany’s survey with the brand of G.V.N-W.
C.C. on them. It will, therefore, be seen that not only did the
promoters of this company arouse public interest in the ques-
tion of water .supply and irrigation, which compelled the
Government to take action, but they laid down the practical
lines of the great scheme now operating from the Goulburn to
the Loddon. Why the company did not materialize and do the
work F am not aware, nor does it matter, as for the purposes
of this paper I only desire to show the great influence it had
on the question, and that it was the forerunner of all subse-
quent work done in the northern areas. In 1875 the Berry
Government instructed Mr. Gordon, Chief Engineer for Water
Supply, to report on the scheme, and he started from Rochester
with Mr- Dods. He never reached the Loddon, but turned off
to Bendigo. He never reported, but condemned without evidence
or inquiry, and a change of Government coming in, the matter
dropped for the time being.
Had the promoters confined themselves to a modified scheme,
say, to the Loddon or the Avoca, they might have had more
consideration. The intention was first to complete the scheme
to the Loddon; but it was realized that any scheme for the
north must also have the Murray River as a supply, and the
future will yet show that the more extended scheme can be
realized in part if not in whole. Ft takes a long time to educate
the public, and the canal advocates were in advance of their
times.
ACTION BY THE GOVERNMENT
In spite of the attention called to the water question, and the
disastrous effect of the dry season after 1876, but little atten-
tion was paid to the rural districts. In 1877 some Loan Acts were
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


passed, allowing' local bodies to borrow for water purposes, and
25 shires and boroughs obtained about £700,000 for local
schemes for domestic use. The next step was the action by the
Service Government in/1879, in bestowing a grant lon twelve
rural shires of £lOO,OOO, but up to 1880 nothing had been done
for jthe northern plains. In that year Mr. Hugh McColl secured
a seat in Parliment as member for Mandurang, and the water
question became alive. In season and out of season (he preached
the gospel of water for the north. It was the reason jhe was
there, and he used the opportunity- j
THE REPORTS OF GORDON AND BLACK.
The Government had to take the (question up, and appointed
a Water Conservancy Board, consisting of Mr. G. Gordon,
formerly Chief Engineer of Water Supply, and Mr. A. Black,
Assistant [Surveyor-General, “To inquire and report as to the
feasibility of providing at a reasonable expense a supply of
water for the northern plains for domestic purposes and the
use |of stock.” They furnished twelve reports on this, and, later
on, two on irrigation. The principles of the former adopted were
that the waters of each river should only be /utilized in its own
basin. That weirs and dams should be constructed in creeks
and water-courses, 'and floods and freshets should be sent down
other streams leading from these when the streams overflowed.
These proposals were to be made operative by Urban and [Rural
Waterworks Trusts, and a series of Acts of Parliament was
passed 'in 1881, 1883, and 1884, constituting these trusts- Mr.
MoColl did not approve of these bodies. He had learned the
American system of carrying the water on the high [land by
semi-sulrface canals, from which it could be distributed by
gravitation. He spoke jwith scorn of Gordon’s “gutters,” which
he said would catch, all the filth, and from which water could
not be raised without motive power. 13ome 47 Urban Trusts were
constituted and 10 Rural Trusts, and it wa s to the latter Mr.
McColl took objection, and time (proved that he was correct, for
while they did some good, it was .nothing like what was expected
and as the water question jdeveloped they became almost useless
and imposed heayy burdens on the people for which they got
no return. When the larger (schemes of irrigation came on later
they absorbed these useless works, but the cost wa s debited
to the new schemes, thus swelling (the apparent cost unjustly.
Control of all these trusts was in the hands of the local govern-
ment bodies, and the money for the works was loaned by the
Government.
In 1883 Messrs. Gordon and Black submitted their first report
on (irrigation- It Wos merely a dissertation on the question
compiled from books and reports, and had no proposals for
Victoria. The second dealt with the Goulburn scheme, but the
data [on which it was based had been previously set out by the
Horth-Western 'Canal Company. The Act following these reports
provided for Irrigation Trusts. The Government found no money,
which had to be obtained in the open market. On petition by a
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


majority of land-owners, they might have a scheme reported
on. The report had to give all particulars of land, rates, cost,
and revenue. It lay with plans for a time for inspection at the
municipal offices in the district, and then a ./second petition was
required. Three-fourths of the land-owners holding two-thirds
of the land had to sign (this petition. The first petition did not
bind them the second one did. On the second petition, with all
plans and particulars, going to Governor in Coujncil, he could
approve or not, as he thought fit- The money was to be obtained
on debentures, secured by rates lon the territory, which were to
be uniform. Six trusts were constituted under these provisions,
but they soon came under the larger measure afterwards
brought in.
THE CHANGE IN PUBLIC OPINION
Mr. McColl, by dint of his persistent advocacy of irrigation,
which never ceased, had impressed the Government led by Mr.
Service and Mr. Berry, and had won over Mr. Deakin, then a
rising and talented politician, and Minister of Water Supply,
and in 1884 a Royal Commission (the strongest ever appointed in
Victoria) was appointed for the following purpose :—“To make
diligent and full inquiry into the operation and effect of the
various schemes of water supply, and into the extent to whicn
the present sources are utilized, with a view to ascertain whether
provision ■ can be made for (the conservation and distribution of
water for the use of the people.” The Chairman was the Hon.
Alfred Deakin, M.P., the Vice-Chairman the Hon. Jas. Camp-
bell, M.D.C., and the Secretary Mr. Stuart Murray, C.E. This
was a recognition of the importance of .the question of irriga-
tion and the Commission went most thoroughly into the enquiry.
Mr. Deakin went to America, Prance, Italy, and Egypt to make
inquiries, and the recommendations were embodied in three
reports.
DEATH OF Mr. HUGH McCOLL.
Before the reports were completed Mr. Hugh McColl died.
He had blazed the track, but did not see the result. It is often
thus; the pioneer fallls by the wayside, but the work remains.
Much (trouble might have been avoided had his advice been
taken in the earlier days. He wanted the best expert in the
United States to be brought out to report on the whole question.
He wanted the 'Government to set aside 200 acres on Gan bower
Island, and get skilled irrigationists out to teach the people
the (methods of using water. He wanted the Hydrographic
Contour Survey of Victoria made. He wanted the Government
of the day in the early stages to construct a few miles of chan-
nel on the semi-surface principle to show the people its work-
ing. I He was laughed at and ridiculed for his persistency, and
was told often he was “mad on the subject of water”; but he
went on his way suffering it, knowing he was on the right lines,
and with all he had to endure the writer never heard him say
one junkind word of any one.
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


Mr. McColl /was of an extremely happy and hopeful disposi-
tion, and few would have suspected the dogged perseverance that
it concealed, i Laughed at and rebuffed, he went on his way, no
doubt often with a sore heart, but with a smiling face, confident
in the justice of his /views, and in their ultimate triumph. On
one occasion, on 28th September, 1881, when in Parliament, the
O’Loghlen Government being (in power, he had just returned
from a; 400 mile trip through the northern areas in a time of
drought, yet with the rivers and streams carrying running water
in abundance, not utilized, and ripe wheat but 6 inches high.
He had the usual careless, jeering reception. After describing in
an impassioned manner the stajte of the land, he said, “Sir, these
are facts that ought to (have consideration. I have been sat upon
too much. When I have spoken, how have I been met? There
ha,s always beep a sneer or a jibe or a laugh of mockery ready
for me, because I am associated with a scheme that has for its
object the running through the driest districts of the Colonies a
stream of water that will give (them life and prosperity and with-
out which they will speedily (become like what Palestine wa s in
the days of Abraham. At the same time I am no beggar. 1
have not [been seeking for public money to aid my enterprise.
But it is a crime, when those who are ready to bring water
where it is most needed are flowed to do nothing. Are we to
fold our hands and not stir ourselves to remedy that state of
things ?
When prosecuting his campaign on the water question, he
generally had the plans of the proposed scheme with him, and
was ever ready to explain them to any—high or low—who would
listen to him. I frequently meet persons who met him 40 years
ago, and are pleased to relate the conversations (they had with
him on the all absorbing topic of water, and they generally
finished by “He was right, buft before hi s time.” At early
markets or agricultural shows he would attend with his plans
and specimens of products grown by irrigation, and compare
them with the dry-grown products shown for sale or exhibition.
He pressed the o’L.oghlen Government hard to have a hydro -
graphic contour survey of the Colony made, but it was in vain.
The Minister of the day brought up extravagant estimates of the
cost, supplied by officials, estimates which inquiry among sur-
veyors showed (were out of all reason. Had it been carried out, >
what an enormous sum of money would have been saved in
water and railway surveys, and how easily the (practicability of
water or railway proposals could have been checked. He desired
it taken at 100 feet above datum, and at 200, 300, 400, and 600
feet. He brought it up on several occasions, but could not move
the Government. He was a supporter of the leasing of
land at low rentals, with a 33 years’ tenure, and with so much
of the (polony unoccupied this would have been most desirable.
After much pressing, he got the Minister of Water Supply, Mr.
Chas. Young, to put on the estimates £SOO for a survey from
the Goulburn to the Campaspe, which proved the correctness of
the company’s survey. (He strongly opposed the locking up of
the Mallee for twenty yeairs, as was done under Mr. Tucker’s
Hugh McCol! and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


Act, by which it was leased in large areas at nominal rrents.
He warned the House that, long before the leases expired!, the
land would be needed for agricultural settlement and would 1 bring-
down after every visit north specimens of fruits, (cereals,, and
vegetables grown in the Mallee soil. How true his words were
was proved in the nineties, when the large lessees, who paid
sixpence to shilling the square mile, sold the land forr the
balance of their lease (not the freehold)) at from llilve shillinggs to
ten shillings per acre. Producing from his (travelling bag
peaches, pears, potatoes, and onions, he would implore the mouse
not to lock up the land that could grow such products. But
the Mallee was the bete noir of the Lands Department, amd it
was glad to be rid of ||t on any terms. Many, of the lesssees
made much by letting the land on shares, getting one-thirrd of
the crop for land they paid a mere trifle for. He would :meet
arguments against the water scheme in an original and {prac-
tical manner. On one occasion he was (at Sir Samuel Wilsson’s,
endeavouring to interest him in canalization. Sir Samuell has
considerable sympathy with his views, but raised the objecction.
How can you, Mr. McColi, have these schemes with our
scanty population ? You know well irrigation has been a succcess
only where the people /were very numerous.” Mr. McColi said,
‘‘Sir Samuel, will you kindly ring for some sugar?” “I beg your
pardon,” said his host, “I have kept you so long and not offfered
you pny hospitality.” “No,” said Mr. McColi, “I only noted a
little sugar.” The sugar was brought, and some spread om the
gravel path, which was bare of life. “You see, (Sir Samuel, tthere
is ino sign of life here.” “Certainly not,” his‘host replied.. ;In
a short time he invited Sir Samuel to inspect (the spot, amd it
was black with ants. “That,” said Mr. McColi, “is what irrriga-
tion (will accomplish in the way of filling up our areas now bare
of people.”
On one occasion in the House he said, “They I lhave
water on the brain. You yet will see the water on (the pliain.”
On one occasion, he said he would never touch /whisky again till
it was diluted with water from the canal. I am afraid he was
too much of a Scotchman to keep that promise, /but its breach
may be forgivenX Many more personal touches might be added,
but enough Ijhas been said to show the work and disposition of
the mail, and the (limits of space will not permit any more. It
may truly be said, if ever any one worked unselfishly and patrio-
tically for the good of his country, though to the detriment of
himself and family, it was Hugh McColi.
THE WATER AND IRRIGATION ACT OF 1886.
The reports of the Commission were followed by the Water
and Irrigation Act of 1886, which marked a new epoch in the
history of {water in Victoria. It made all water in running-
streams the property of the Crown, unless a contrary right
could be proved; it authorized national works at the (national
expense; it provided for the advance of money from the public
treasury (for irrigation schemes to be controlled by Commissioners
Hugh McColi and the Water Question in Northern Victonria.


of Trusts, elected directly by the people, with a Government
nominee. It repealed all previous irrigation legislation, except
as to ithe fmts already done. The Act was a great advance, and
the trusts formed under it should have been a success. Few
were, to my mind, and I (svrite with diffidence, for I only express
my own opinion. The causes, I think, were as follows: —<
1. Not sufficient conservation of )water ; abundance of
channels, but not enough water to fill them.
2j. Divided control. —The local engineers (formulated the
schemes, and sent down plans and specifications to the engineers
of the Department. The latter was supposed to check them, and
then return them with or without modifications. Later on it
happened “something was uot right.” It might be an error in
figures or calculations or in work. The Department engineer
said, “I only checked your figures and statements to see they
tallied. I did not examine the conditions on which they were
based.” The trust engineer said, “I sent them to the best of
my ability, and relied on your checking all particulars given.”
So each disclaimed responsibility, and there was trouble, and
the people suffered.
Most of the Trust Commissioners had no previous ex-
perience, and relied on the officials. The practice and methods
of irrigation were not known to either officials, commissioners,
or farmers. Irrigation needs training. The dry or wet farmer
does not understand it. It takes time to master, to ;learn it,
and may either enrich or impoverish the user. Some learned it
quickly, and did well when they got the water. Some did not,
or, if they did, could not get the water. Then the “channel”
was not large enough, or was leaking; there the water ;was
short. Another trouble was “the engines had not power enough
or |the pumpsi were too small.”
THE WRITING DOWN OF WATER LIABILITIES.
So trouble began. Arrears began to accumulate also at an
alarming rate, and the position was serious. To press the land-
owners for what they could not pay meant their leaving, and
others of no experience coming their place. As member
representing most of the irrigation districts I was the buffer
between the Department and the Trusts. I saw that, unless the
whole position was to be sacrificed, there must be a writing
down of liabilities, and there was, just as there had been in
Melbourne, Geelong, and dozens of other places. In 1899 capital,
£575,152, and arrears of interest, £342,773, were (written off.
THE NEW ORDER IN 1905.
The (next year I was transferred to the Federal House, and
since then have not been so much in touch with the subject.
Under the Act of 1905 a drastic change twas made The trusts
Hugh McColi and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


were abolished, and the administrative and advisory functions
were placed in the hands of the State Rivers and Water Supply
Commisison, the Department of Water Supply retaining - con-
struction. Only the Mildura Irrigation and Water Supply (Trust
was exempt. Henceforward the land-owners had to deal direct
with the State. The Commissioners had all powers vested
in them except construction. A further Act was passed in 1909
placing - consruction nnder the Commission, which is now
supreme in all its branches. Under the 1905 Act a compulsory
charge was brought in for irrigation water, based on,land values,
being one-fifth of the net annual value of land commanded by
irrigation , works, from which one-half to three-fourths of the
water was supplied as a right. The price of water varied with
the right allowed £md the price of land.
FURTHER CHANGE IN 1909.
Under the Act the price of water is based on the cost
of supplying it, and includes 4 per cent, on the capital debt for
interest, 2 per cent. Jon th© original capital debt for liquidation
or redemption, and, in addition to these, the sum required to pay
for operations and maintenance expenses. I The water is sold by
measure, and the price is fixed by the acre-foot, so a s to meet
the running expenses, y For the quantity assigned as a rig - ht a
compulsory charge is made. The rest is sold on demand or by
contract. Surplus water is sold cheaper. The original irrigation
trust boundary areas have been obliterated, and the irrigation
areas are divided by the separate water and drainage systems —
the Goulburn, the Murray, and the Loddon. Each is under a
controlling engineer, acting under and only responsible to the
Commission.
THE POSITION TODAY AND NEED OF FURTHER ACTION,
The foregoing reviews the development of the water question
in the north. Have we reached finality in management ? I
doubt tjt. From purely local management w© have swung round
to the opposite—Government management by Commission. I
think the ideal system lies between. The Commissioners are
able, experienced, honest, and well-meaning men, none more so;
but the people feel that, having to stand the cost, they should
have some voice in the and be kept in closer touch
with it. The people do not know all, neither do the Commission-
ers. Hence misunderstanding, friction, (disputes, and ill-will.
There must be a better understanding, a closer connexion by
some link between the Commission and the ipeople over whom
they hold swiay. I have not dealt with Mildura, for it Would
need a 'paper to itself, and this has grown far beyond my in-
tention. At this (time the water question is as acute as ever it
has been we are experiencing in the north the driest recorded
season known, the rainfall to date being only about one-half of
the previously lowest/ registration. , Crops have failed, and stock
has perished, though many made the utmost possible provision
to meet such a season. The whole State |feels it. Unemploy-
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria.


raent is rampant, the cost of (living is mounting up, and for
years come the effect of this disastrous season will be felt.
Schemes for further conservation of water are being talked
about, but they must be resolved into action and that quickly,
and such (action should not be relaxed until every catchment
basin has its embankment, and all surplus water impounded, so
that none in future goes wastefully to the sea.
ADDENDUM.
,| had at first intended to bring the history of “ Water in
the North ” up-to-date, but on consideration gave up the idea.
Expenditure has grown by leaps and bounds and to prepare a
record of it was a task I did not care to undertake. It will be
done, no doubt, by some one later on. Great schemes are now
in progress the cost of which is rising into millions of pounds,
and a halt is being called in many quarters, the past is fading
away from people’s memories, and I am re-printing my lecture
so that it may not be entirely forgotten.
J. H. McCOLL,
30th August, 1928.
Hugh McColl and the Water Question in Northern Victoria,




" ’• v
•
-
.


:
•*•****•'**.
■ isMJI: $1
\
,
\ \
. ,. ' .; • ‘ m'
-
