

r VV\m
Mon
The Story of Ulster.
A LECTURE
ALEX. LEEPER, M.A., LL.D.,
delivered before the
Ulster and Loyal Irishmen?s Association of
Victoria
May 27th, 1913.
PUBLISHED FOR THE ASSOCIATION
By MELVILLE & MULLEN PROPRIETARY LIMITED,
MELBOURNE.


I wish to acknowledge my very great obligation
to the writings of Mr. R. Dunlop, Dr. P. W. Joyce,
Mr. S. R. Gardiner, and, above all, of Mr. Richard
Bagwell, who in my opinion better deserves than
anyone else who can be named the title of historian of
Ireland; also to several of the admirable articles on
the Home Rule question that have appeared within
the last few months in the ?Spectator? (London).
A. L.


Zhc Stor\> of Ulster.
-r? ? ??
To tell the story of Ulster, except in the briefest out-
line, would occupy far more time than I have at my
disposal to-night, and as I wish to say something about
Ulster, not only past, but also present and future, I
must pass very lightly over a great deal that is ex-
tremely important and interesting, and only touch on
the main headings of the subject with sufficient fulness
to explain the present situation, the development of
which the whole Empire is watching either with
curiosity or with anxiety: the anxiety being most keen,
I may say, among those best acquainted with the country
;and its people. The early history of Ulster cannot
well be separated from that of Ireland as a whole.
You will bear with me, I trust, if in my rapid survey of
Irish history I touch upon some matters which must be
very familiar to you, but which, if the narrative is to be
consecutive, cannot well be omitted altogether.
In all probability Ireland was not inhabited at all
before the neolithic period. It is believed by anthro-
pologists that bronze was not known there before
1500 b.c. The first invaders that spoke a Keltic
language appeared in the sth or 6th century b.c.
One of the many popular errors that prevail about
Ireland is the fancy that the people (at least, outside
Ulster and a few coast settlements) are of a pure
Keltic stock. This is certainly not true at the present
daw, but it was never true. In the south and west
of Ireland there are still numerous examples to be
found of a type much older than the Keltic, a small,
dark race, often spoken of as Iberians, and there
can be no doubt that the Keltic invaders inter-
married freely, and became blended with these
3 lA


earlier inhabitants of the island. There were many
invasions and settlements from Scotland and from
Gaul. The classical scholar can learn very little
about Ireland from his own special studies, cer-
tainly very little that is gratifying to his national
pride, if he be an Irishman. A Greek traveller, writing
not long before the birth of Christ, describes the
inhabitants as cannibals. Another tells how ?they drank
the blood of their enemies and smeared their faces
with it, and how when a woman had a boy baby she
would put its first food on the point of her husband?s
sword, and so introduce it into the little mouth. It
is curious how frequently in the legendary lore of
Ireland stories of settlements from ancient Greece are
to be found. You often hear the Irish spoken of as
?Milesians.? You may have been tempted to refer
this name to the great Greek Asiatic city, Miletus;
but there is certainly no connection between them.
According to the legend, these invaders came originally
from Scythia. They owed their name to an ancestor
called Miled, and they were great genealogists, for
in more modern days they traced their line right up
to Noah! All the old historians agree that Ireland
was long ruled by Milesian monarchs. Invasions of
Scythians occur often in early Irish legend, but it is
almost certain that these are due to the resemblance of
the name to that of Scotland. The Milesians seem
to have been a race of terrible oppressors, and the
subject tribes known as the Firbolgs, we are told, rose
against them in the first century a.d. and practically
exterminated their princes and nobles. The old in-
habitants of Ulster were usually called ?Ulidians,? to
distinguish them from their Milesian oppressors.
Near the end of the fourth century a.d. we begin to
find something like reliable history in Ulster, and one
of the earliest historical characters of that time,
Niall of the Nine Hostages, bears a name which
has often figured in Ulster history. There were many


invasions and migrations going on from both sides of
the Irish Sea at this period. Inscriptions found in
Wales and South-west England show that there must
have been large colonies from Ireland settled in those
parts, and, though for a time the point was furiously
contested by Scotchmen, there can be no doubt what-
ever that invaders from Ulster conquered and settled
a part of the West of Scotland and gave their own
name ?Scoti? to that country. Recent research has
shown, also, a very close connection between Ireland
and Wales from early times. A large proportion of
so-called Irish words comes from the Welsh language,
while, on the other hand, much of the Welsh poetic
literature would seem to have had an Irish origin.
The descendants of Niall of the Nine Hostages held
the overlordship of Ireland until not very long before
the Norman Conquest of England.
Here is another of the popular misapprehensions
about Ireland. It is supposed that Christianity was
introduced among the Irish by St. Patrick, As there
was an organised Christian Church in existence in
Wales more than a century at least before St. Patrick
landed in Ireland, it is practically certain that there
were Christian settlements in that country long before
St. Patrick?s mission. St. Patrick?s work was more
closely identified with Ulster than with any other part of
Ireland. He placed his episcopal chair at Armagh,
and the legendary site of his grave is at Saul in the
County Down.
There is another myth about St. Patrick. It is
often said that the whole country was converted to
Christianity by him, and adhered thenceforth to the
faith.' Unhappily there is good reason to believe that
after his death there was an extensive relapse into
paganism, that the Druids recovered much of their
old power, and that the marriage-tie came to be very
lightly regarded. Marriage by purchase is believed
to have been universal. Concubinage was known as


an Irish institution, and was recognised by law in
Ireland, as in Scotland and other countries, till long
after the Anglo-Norman invasion. The Golden Age
of ancient Ireland is comprised in the sixth to the
njnth centuries. Then the monasteries were not only
filled with scholars, but were also the nurseries of
missionaries, who carried their labours into almost every
part of the Continent. Some of the monastic schools,
that they founded there, were among the most famous
places of learning and instruction in Western Europe.
The movement which led to this result seems to have
originated in Southern Wales. Some of the most
famous of these monastic schools were in Ulster, such
as Moville in the County Donegal, Derry, founded by St.
Columba, and Bangor in the County Down, founded
in the 6th century by the famous Congall. Scotchmen
ought to be grateful to Ulster. They'owe to Ulster
not only the name of themselves and their country, but
also their religion, for it was Columba?s mission to
lona that led to the evangelisation of the Piets. To
show what enterprising missionaries these Irishmen
were, it may be mentioned that when the Vikings first
discovered Iceland in the 9th century, they found that
Irish missionaries were there before them.
Strange to say, this wonderful outburst of scholarly
and missionary activity does not seem to have been
accompanied by any corresponding political progress,
in spite of the poets? and romancers? wonderful
tales tb the contrary. The research of historians forces
upon us the conviction that during all this period and
up to the time of StrongboAv?s invasion, there was very
little progress indeed in general civilisation, and that
the country as a whole was given up to intertribal
warfare. It is remarkable, too, that Irish literature,
i.e., literature in the Irish language, seemed always
incapable of rising above the saga or legend. A high
authority on the subject declares that we find no more
trace of development in the Irish world of letters than


we do in the Irish political sphere. I remember once
hearing in my young days Ruskin, in a lecture that
he gave in Dublin, drawing attention to exactly the
same phenomenon in Irish art. It was exquisite and
indeed almost unmatched in Europe, up to a certain
point, but beyond that it seemed unable to advance.
This, I should add, had nothing whatever to do with
the ?brutal and bloody Saxon;? for the arrest of de-
velopment had taken place long before Strongbow?s in-
vasion. A curious light is thrown upon the state of
society in early Ireland by the law that we read of
as enacted at Tara in the seventh century, prohibiting
women from taking part in battle. It looks as if
there were the makings of some very fine suffragettes in
Ireland in those days. The eighth and ninth centuries
witnessed constant invasions by Danes and Norwegians,
who particularly directed their violence against the
monasteries, with the result that the monks fled in
large numbers to the Continent, carrying their books
with them. There were no cities in Ireland before
the invasions of the Danes. It Avas the Danes who
built Dublin, Waterford, and Limerick some time in
the ninth century. Outside the Danish settlements
there Avas constant internecine Avarfare. The absence
of coined money shows hoAv little commerce there
could have been. The influence of these Norse settle-
ments upon the people as a Avhole is illustrated by the
very names of three of the provinces. Ulster,
Munster, and Leinster all have the Scandinavian
suffix??ster,? and the name ?Ireland? itself is of Scan-
dinavian origin. There can be no doubt that there
is a large Scandinavian element in the modern Irish
race, especially in the east and north. Many Norse
Avords have passed into Irish. It is only fair to these
splendid sons of the Vikings to mention that, even
after they had built cities and settled in them, they
were always ready at a moment?s notice to join en-
thusiastically in any fighting that might be going on


among the natives in their neighbourhood. The Irish
annals record as a remarkable fact that once for the
space of forty years, in the ninth century, there was
no fighting worth speaking of.
The greatest figure in Irish history from Patrick up
to the time of Strongbow?s invasion is undoubtedly
Brian Boruma. His knightly virtues are glowingly
depicted in the old Irish literature. Possibly he de-
served all the praise he received, but when we read of
his great generosity to the bards (the chroniclers of Ire-
land) we cannot help thinking what a shrewd man he
was. The battle of Clontarf, fought in 1014, some
fifty years before the battle of Hastings, is celebrated
by patriotic Irish writers as one of the most glorious
pages in their national history. As a matter of fact,
as Mr. Bagwell shows, it was a great national calamity.
It broke the rule of the Danes, it is true, but it had
the effect of permanently weakening the central power
and throwing the whole island into anarchy. Until
the Norman invasion, the country was thus given up
to intertribal warfare, and no strong man arose to
weld the contending factions into a nation. The war-
fare in the 11th and 12th centuries was so incessant
that the contemporary historians describe the country
in characteristically vivid language as being ?all one
trembling sod.? It is most interesting to read that
from the earliest times the house-fed pig has always
been very highly prized. Fresh pork in the early
Irish myths figures as one of the chief attractions in
the future state of bliss. The ancient Irish were in
the main a pastoral people, but in their palmy days
they were famous throughout Europe for the art of
illuminating MSS. and for their exquisite workman-
ship in gold.
It is often asserted that Henry ll.?s invasion of
Ireland had been suggested and sanctioned by a ?Bull?
of Pope Adrian IV. The genuineness of the alleged
Bull?the oldest and most famous of Irish ?Bulls? ?


cannot be proved, but there can be little doubt that
Adrian did make a grant of the island to Henry, and
it is quite certain that Pope Alexander 111. wrote
letters, still extant, in which he warmly commended
Henry 11. for reducing the Irish to order, and ex-
tirpating ?their abominable impurity of life,? and in
which he also exhorted the Irish bishops and chiefs
to be faithful in their allegiance to the King. At
the famous Synod of Cashel, the Archbishops, Bishops,
and Abbots of the Church acknowledged Henry?s
sovereignty, and decrees were passed by which the
Church of Ireland 'was drawn into closer union with
Rome. King John, before he came to the throne, paid
a visit to Ireland. He had been sent there to con-
ciliate the native chiefs, and he went a curious way
about it. It is interesting as perhaps the earliest
example of English conciliation of Ireland. The
chiefs hastened to pay their respects to him as the
King?s son, and he amused himself by pulling their
long beards, of which the chiefs were as proud as the
Chinese used to be of their pigtails. The Irish chiefs
apparently thought he had a very perverted sense of
humor. At any rate they did not like it. Pope
Urban 111. sent him a present of a crown, that he
might be crowned King of Ireland, but John formally
resigned the Kingdom of Ireland to the Pope in 1213.
For centuries the two races in Ireland remained nearly
as distinct and antagonistic as the French and Germans
are to-day, the Irish simply staying outside the feudal
system; but even as early as the 13th century East
Ulster had come to be largely peopled by English
families.
Henry VIII. was the first of English Kings to,
assume the title of King of Ireland. This he did to
get rid of the idea that the island was held from the
Pope; for there was a curious claim made in those
days, based upon a forgery, that all islands w T ere the
property of the Pope. I don?t know whether that


would apply to Australia. The Irish chiefs ac-
knowledged Henry?s authority, and even his ecclesias-
tical supremacy, and renounced that of the Pope. It
is certain that the Church had fallen into a state of
gross corruption before Henry VIII. began to deal
with the Irish monasteries. The morals of the clergy
were scandalous. We get a curious side-light upon
this point when we read that the Archbishop of Dublin?s
crozier remained in pawn for eighty years. Henry
suppressed the Irish monasteries just as impartially as
the English, and the Irish chiefs took possession of
the monastery lands quite as cheerfully as did the
English nobles. It was a devoted band of Jesuits,
despatched to Ireland by Pope Paul 111. toward the
end of Henry VIII.?s reign, that saved the country
for the Roman see. The Desmond Rebellions in Eliza-
beth?s reign brought untold miseries upon Ireland.
The land was devastated with havoc and slaughter.
The Chronicle of the Four Masters records that the
lowing of a cow or the voice of a ploughman could
scarcely be heard from Cashel to the farthest point
of Derry. Ormonde, who, with all his severity, was
honourably distinguished by good faith, claimed to
have killed 0000 men in a few months. The poet,
Spenser, an eye-witness, says that famine slew far
more than the sword. The survivors were unable to
walk, but crawled out of the woods and glens. ?They
looked,? he writes, ?like anatomies of death; they did
eat the dead carrion and one another soon after, in-
asmuch as the very carcasses they spared not to scrape
out of their graves . . . To a plot of watercresses
or shamrocks they flocked as to a feast.?
The last Desmond Rebellion was led by Hugh
O?Neill, one of the greatest of that great Ulster name.
He waged against the English a war of extermination.
The most reliable of the native Irish chronicles records
that in seventeen days there was not one solitary son
of a Saxon left alive in the whole Desmond territory.


Edmund Spenser lost his all, and escaped only to die
of misery in a London garret. This Hugh O?Neill
gained a crushing victory over the English in 1598,
but he eventually had to yield. Elizabeth was the
first English monarch who really conquered Ireland,
though often employing means that the morality of
to-day must condemn. Against Elizabeth?s many
shortcomings, however, must be set, to her infinite
credit, the foundation of Dublin University, by far the
most successful English institution in Ireland: an in-
stitution with which nearly every prominent name in
modern Irish history and letters is associated.
The history of modern Ulster begins with the planta-
tion of that province with Scotch and English
colonists in the reign of James I. Tyrone, Donegal,
Armagh, Cavan, Fermanagh, and Derry were all par-
celled out among English and Scotch settlers. The
site of Derry was granted to the citizens of London,
who fortified it, and Londonderry became the chief
bulwark of the colonists in two great wars. The planta-
tion involved extreme wrong to the former owners of
the soil, but none the less, from that time onward, the
province of Ulster has always been the most prosperous
and progressive part of Ireland. James I. issued a
proclamation of banishment against all Roman
Catholic priests, and there was much persecution of
their religion, though the severest laws in force in
England against the Roman religion were not re-
enacted in Ireland. Ireland has little reason to re-
member Charles I. kindly. After obtaining money by
certain promises, including free trade with England,
he, of course, as he nearly always did, broke what he
called his ?royal word.? The Ulster Presbyterians
were treated by the first three Stuarts*with almost as
much rigour as the Roman Catholics. Soon after
Strafford?s return to England, to end his days on the
scaffold, occurred the terrible rebellion and the Ulster
Massacre of 1641.


The details of the history of the great rebellion of
1641, with its accompanying massacres, are still matters
of dispute among historians. One or two outstanding
facts are certain. Firstly, that it was the purpose of
the conspirators to ?drive the English, bag and baggage,
out of the country,? to use a phrase of Mr. John Red-
mond's in describing the aims of the Nationalists.
Secondly, that it was a religious as well as an agrarian
movement. Thirdly, that it was carried on with the
most pitiless cruelty; and fourthly, that it provoked
a terrible revenge. The English Lords Justices, who
were in charge of the government of Ireland, showed
an extraordinary apathy and incapacity. They were
within an ace of losing Dublin Castle and City, which
were only saved by a pure accident. They ought to
have been warned by the steady influx of Roman
Catholic priests from France and Spain that went on
under their eyes for some time before the actual out-
break of the rebellion. One of the most careful in-
vestigators* in our own day of the history of the period,
after a minute examination of the original documents,
writes as follows about the rising which took placei
early in the winter of 1641:?? For suddenness and
ferocity it is only comparable to the Indian Mutiny.
Whatever had been the initial injustice of the Ulster
Plantation, in the course of a generation mutual in-
terests appeared to be gradually reconciling natives and
settlers. English enterprise afforded employment to
many. English landlords were probably not harsher
masters than Irish chieftains. And where marriage
had not bridged the gulf between Celt and Briton,
?gossipping? and ?fostering? created a real bond of
union and intimacy. No more abrupt transformation
scene, therefore,* can be imagined than that which took
place throughout Ulster on the night of October the
22nd, 1641. In castle, farm, and cottage, men, women,
* Lady Burghclere, ?Life of James, First Duke of Ormonde,? vol. 1., pp. 132-135.


and tender babes were suddenly dragged from bed,
stripped naked, and driven from their blazing home-
steads by a horde of yelling savages, in whom they
recognised the familiar features of those who, yester-
day, were trusted friend or foster-brother, tenant, or
overlord.? Their leader was Sir Phelim O?Neill, one
who reflected no honour on that historic Ulster name.
At Armagh, in spite of a formal capitulation, Sir
Phelim O?Neill, or The O?Neill, as he styled himself,
slew one hundred persons in cold blood. Listen to
that, all who denounce Cromwell as a hellish monster
for his vengeance upon the Drogheda garrison! Happy,
however, were those who fell by the sword, or perished
in the swift, clean waters of the Bann or Blackwater.
?Their agony was mercifully brief compared to that of
the captives roasted, stoned, buried alive, or prodded
to death with sharp wooden laths by Irish hags and
Irish children. Religious and agrarian revolutions,
and the Ulster rising was both one and the other, are
always fruitful of dark deeds. But &at women and
children should have been the most pitiless persecutors
of their sex and kind is one of those mysteries that
make a ?goblin of the sun.? It is true that here and
there Irish men and women actively withstood such
abominations, but they were exceptions. Among the
priests, also, there were some who practised the Gospel
precepts that they were pledged to teach, but more
frequently they hounded on their parishioners to fresh
atrocities. It was a friar who incited the convoy to
massacre one hundred English folk at the of
Mayo. It was a priest, who, having forced a small
band of Protestants to recant and hear Mass, had them
slaughtered at the conclusion of the service, lest here-
after they should be tempted to relapse into error.
In the teeth of overwhelming contemporary evidence,
alike Roman Catholic and Protestant, Ultramontane
and Presbyterian, modern Irish apologists have asserted
that the insurgents confined themselves to expelling the


settlers from the soil of Ulster, and that no blood was
shed by their countrymen till Anglo-Saxon violence
provoked the inevitable retaliation. Happily for the
credit of the Irish name, the death-roll, on inspection,
has shrunk from 154,000 to figures varying between
25,000 and 7,500. But it is pure sophistry to pretend
that the thousands who perished in the terrible march
to Dublin were not as deliberately murdered as the
victims of the hangman?s rope or the assassin?s knife.
Indeed, what other fate than death could await
thousands of men, women, and children, starving and
naked ?for they often had but a wisp of hay or straw
for covering?sent adrift through the winter wilder-
ness? It says much for the vigour of the race that
any considerable number of the sad pilgrims reached
the distant city of refuge.?
The lowest estimate of the destruction that reached
England raised the number of victims to 30,000. The
English naturally retaliated with terrible severity. The
House of Comnfbns carried a Bill confiscating the lands
of the rebels, and soon there came the avenging sword
of Cromwell. It is difficult to excuse Cromwell?s
conduct at Drogheda. It may be, and has been
pleaded, that such methods were common and generally
recognised and deemed lawful in the wars of the period.
For example, Alva?s cruelties to the Protestants in the
Netherlands outmatched in horror Cromwell?s worst.
It must be remembered also that Cromwell felt that he
must exact unsparing vengeance for the frightful at-
rocities of the Ulster Rebellion and Massacre. It
must be owned, too, that, after Cromwell?s visit, the
land had rest for forty years. In some respects, un-
doubtedly, Cromwell?s rule was a blessing to Ireland.
He gave it commercial equality with England, and re-
vived the woollen trade and the shipping interest, and,
most significant step of all on the part of this great
master of statecraft, he anticipated Pitt?s wise policy
b} r a century and a half, by establishing a legislative


union between the two countries and summoning Irish
members to Westminster. Cromwell undoubtedly acted
with extreme severity. He transplanted most of the
Roman Catholic gentry beyond the Shannon, and he
sent some 9000 people to the West Indies into practical
slavery, just as he did in the case of the conquered
Highlanders after Dunbar and Worcester. Under
Charles 11. Roman Catholicism was tolerated, but
Bramhall became Primate, and his hand was heavy
against the Ulster Presbyterians. It is grievous to
have to record that the learned Jeremy Taylor was also
a rank persecutor of the Scotch settlers. In 1689
James 11. reached Ireland with some French troops,
and called an Irish Parliament together. That was a
real Home Rule Parliament at last, and a worfderful
Parliament it-was. Hear some of its achievements.
It repealed the Act of Settlement. It practically con-
fiscated the property of all Presbyterians. Nearly
3000 Protestants were attainted of high treason by
name, and that they might not be able to escape, the
Act was cunningly withheld from publication. The
hunted Protestants took refuge in Ulster, which then
became for a time, as it seems not unlikely to be again
in the very near future, the last asylum of liberty in
Ireland. There, as Macaulay says, ?the imperial race
stood desperately at bay.? 5 The glories of Londonderry
and Enniskillen will live as long as the English name
and race endure. Everywhere defeated, the worthless
James turned on his brave Irish soldiers and reviled
them as cowards. They retorted with a horribly
opprobrious name that will cling to him to the last
syllable of recorded time.
Much has been said about the penal laws imposed
under William 111. They were severe; they were
cruel; but one or two things must be remembered about
them. The Protestants were resolved to make another
1641 impossible. They had had a heart-shaking ex-
perience of Roman Catholic ascendancy. They had


been turned out of house and home twice in fifty years.
Moreover, the penal laws were very imperfectly en-
forced, and further, the treatment of the Irish Roman
Catholics was mild in comparison with that which the
French Protestants had only a few years before re-
ceived at the hands of Louis XIV.
The experience of Ireland under a native Parliament
has always been disastrous. Is it generally known
that in ITO3, more than 200 years ago, the Irish Par-
liament had itself become so convinced of its own in-
efficiency that it appealed to the English Government
for a legislative union? This was, to their disgrace
be it recorded, prevented by English monopolists, as
it would have involved the concession of free trade be-
tween the two countries. Rut no legislation, however
bad, has been able to keep back Ulster. The Ulster
weavers have managed to succeed, in spite of every
obstacle. In the time of Henry VIII. the manufacture
of linen constituted one of the principal branches of
Irish trade. Stratford, Lord-Deputy in the reign of
Charles 1., did much to foster it, and it received a
fresh impetus from a colony of that great race of
men, the Huguenots, some of whom were settled by
William 111. at Lisburn. But for unquestionable
documentary evidence, we should find it incredible that
in the 18th century numbers of Protestant yeomen were
dispossessed by English absentee landlords, when they
thought they could get a higher rent from Roman
Catholic cottiers. The men thus evicted for the most
part went to America. There they became the worst
enemies of England, and as leaders in the War of
American Independence, they terribly avenged their
wrongs. One is not surprised to read that the sympathies
of the Presbyterians who remained in Ireland were
strongly on the side of the Americans during the war.
Is there not a solemn warning in all this of the danger
of overstraining even such a patient loyalty as that
of Ulster?


In the latter part of the 18th century the demand for
Irish independence became very strong, and by the re-
peal of Poynings? LaAV, Ireland enjoyed for eighteen
years the privilege of an uncontrolled native Parlia-
ment. The experience was not encouraging. In the
whole history of popular assemblies there must be few
to compete with Grattan?s Parliament for corruption,
time-serving, and intrigue.
Sir Walter Raleigh is sometimes spoken of as a
benefactor of Ireland by having introduced the potato.
There is no more remarkable example in history of the
manner in which a simple article of diet may shape the
destiny of a people. As a matter of fact, Raleigh?s
gift brought with it dire calamity. Its demoralising
influence is thus dwelt upon by an exceptionally well-
informed writer: ?The labour of one man could plant
enough potatoes to feed forty, and they could neither
be destroyed nor carried away easily. Potatoes cannot
be kept very long, but there was no attempt made to
keep them at all. They w T ere left in the ground and
dug just as required. A severe frost might mean
starvation for the people. The frost of 1739 caused a
terrible potato famine, which is little referred to by
historians. It swept away one-fifth of the population.
With this abundant though precarious food supply
only waiting to be dug, no wonder that the people
multiplied exceedingly. In 1845 they numbered eight
and one-quarter millions, having increased by three
millions in the forty years that followed the Union.
Rapid increase of population, when the food supply is
precarious, is a curse and not a blessing, and so it
proved in Ireland. In the famine of 1847 it is esti-
mated that something like a quarter of a million
perished of want and hardship. An enormous exodus
to America took place, and it was among the Roman
Catholic Irish who went to America that Fenianism had
its birth. The rebellion of 1798 was no doubt largely
the result of misgovernment by the Irish Parliament


and of the poverty and misery of the people; but these
were by no means its only causes. It was partly due
also to the revolutionary spirit which had' come to a
head in France, and the originator of the movement
was Wolfe Tone, a violent socialist, who, during his
stay in France, had imbibed the wildest ideas of the
republicans.
At first the liberty-loving Presbyterians of the north,
who realised how much there was to amend in the
government of Ireland, joined in this movement, but
they soon saw that the rebellion was tending to become
a religious war and a massacre, and they withdrew
from it, and threw in their lot with the Imperial
Government. After the rebellion the genius of Pitt
devised the only possible remedy for the chaos into
which the government of Ireland had fallen. That
was a legislative union. Since the Union there
have been several abortive risings, much conspir-
ing. and political agitation; but still, on the whole,
there has been a perfectly marvellous progress in
national prosperity, more especially since the wise legis-
lation of the Unionist Party upon the question of the
land began to operate. This culminated in the Wynd-
ham Act of 1908, which practically settled for good
and all the question of the ownership of the land.
Throughout this time one district of Ireland has been
marked by continual progress in material prosperity,
education, and enterprise. That is the district com-
prised within the four counties of North-east Ulster,
inhabited mainly by a homogeneous population united
by religion, by race, by political traditions and aspira-
tions. If anywhere there is to be found in Ireland
a community entitled to call itself a ?nation,? it is in
North-east Ulster.
You all have read the blood-stained annals of the
Land League. You are all familiar with Parnell?s
astonishing career, the reign of terror which he es-
tablished, and his ruthless employment of that inhuman


method, the boycott. You all know of the wonderful
manner in which Gladstone turned his back upon him-
self and abjectly surrendered to Parnell: that same
Gladstone who had declared only a short time before
that Parnell?s system of boycotting was enforced by
murders which were never condemned, and who,
speaking in the House of Commons, had pointed out
?with what fatal precision the steps of crime ever
dogged the steps of the Land League.? The crime
and disorder that followed upon Gladstone?s first
Home Rule Bill were gradually put down after he had
gone out of power and Mr. Balfour had become Chief
Secretary for Ireland. Most of those present are old
enough to remember Gladstone?s second Home Rule
Bill, that of 1893, thrown out by the House of Lords
by a majority of 10 to 1, a decision which the country
unquestionably approved. Since that times in spite
of agitation, boycotting, cattle-driving, and other
sporadic outbreaks of lawlessness, the Irish Roman
Catholic peasantry have, through Unionist land legis-
lation, been steadily becoming more prosperous, more
self-reliant, and contented.
That the cause of Home Rule is a dying one, as far
as the Irish people themselves are concerned, seems to
be clearly proved by the fact that it is impossible now,
in spite of the unexampled prosperity of the country,
to raise enough money in Ireland itself to keep the
Home Rule propaganda alive. This has been admitted,
or rather proclaimed aloud with bitterness and
vehemence, by no less a person than John Dillon him-
self. But for the contributions of misguided Irish
Australians (oh! the pity of it!) and of American
Fenians and other fanatical enemies of the Empire,
directed and organised by the egregious Patrick Ford,
fiiend of John Redmond and lover of dynamite, Home
Rule would be at the present moment lying dead and
buried in a dishonoured grave. Even now Home Rule
would be impossible, had not the House of Lords com-


mitted political suicide by that extraordinary act of
folly, the throwing out of the Budget three years ago.
That is what has given the Nationalists their chance
now, their one last chance. If only Home Rule can
be defeated now, it is defeated and killed for ever.
That for two reasons. In the first place the Irish
peasantry is rapidly becoming a race of small landed
proprietors like the French, and there is no class of
society to which political tranquillity is more important.
The Irish farmer is already beginning to see that he
has no use for the political agitator, and that his own
interests are best served by the maintenance of a strong
impartial administration of the law, such as British
rule assures to him. Even with the help of contribu-
tions from America and Australia, it would soon become
impossible to keep alive any enthusiasm for Home
Rule in Ireland itself. In the second place, British
common sense cannot tolerate much longer the monstrous
absurdity of Ireland's present parliamentary representa-
tion. Do all here realise that Ireland, with a smaller
population than Scotland, has thirty more representa-
tives in Parliament; that Ireland, while she has only
one-tenth of the population of the United King-
dom, has one-seventh of the representation? Further-
more, while it takes more than 13,000 voters to
elect an English M.P., an Irish M.P. represents less
than 7000. that is to say, every Irish elector has almost
exactly twice the voting power of every English elector.
It would be well if this fact were pressed on the atten-
tion of Australian critics of Britain, who are in danger
of accepting at its face value the Nationalist assertion
that Ireland is deprived of the right of self-govern-
ment. Irish electors at present have just twice as
much voting power as English electors in the Imperial
Parliament. Let me add another anomaly. The 16
Unionist constituencies in Ulster represent a popula-
tion of 008,000, while the IT Home Rule constituencies
of Ulster represent a population of only 673,000. The


first thing that the Unionists must do, when they re-
sume office, is to carry a Redistribution Bill, by which
the Irish members will be reduced from 103 to 60, of
whom not more than 40, if so many, will be Nationalists.
There will be a vast difference in the attitude of English
Liberal statesmen towards Home Rule, when they have
only forty votes to propitiate instead of eighty, as at
present.
How is this most desirable consummation, the defeat
of Home Rule now and for the last time, to be effected?
There is but one way. All hope of Ireland?s salva-
tion rests now with the strong determined Protestant
democracy of North-east Ulster, If Ulstermen stand
firm, and they tvill, it will be impossible to force Home
Rule upon them. Who is to do it? Will the con-
stabulary? Whom the Nationalists have threatened
with condign punishment for their loyalty, the moment
they get them into their power. Will the British
army ? Is it conceivable that Englishmen and Scotch-
men will ever be brought to drive their bayonets into
the hearts of men, over whose ranks will float the
Union Jack, and whose slogan will be God Save the
King? 1 cannot believe it. I believe they would
rather throw away their arms. Do you know that last
September many of the officers in the Irish Guards
signed the Ulster Covenant? But if British troops
are not to be employed, how is the coercion of
Ulster to be carried out ? By serving writs, by fines,
and imprisonment? Why, all the prisons in the
United Kingdom could not hold one-half of the Ulster
Covenanters. They number already half a million of
adults. You are all lovers of peace, of law, and order;
but can you have any doubt that the men of Ulster
will do right in resisting by force? I have not the
slightest hesitation in saying that not only is their re-
sistance even to the death defensible, but that it is
their sacred duty to themselves, to their wives and
children, to their country, to the Empire, to their re-


ligion. Ordinarily, we all admit that the law ought
to be obeyed; but equally Ave must all admit that at
times resistance to the law becomes a duty. It has
indeed been said Avith truth that the whole history of
England proves that unless Englishmen had held the
view that resistance is sometimes a duty, and unless
they had acted upon that view, many of our most
cherished constitutional liberties AA r ould never haA?e
been secured, and there A\ T ould be noAv no British Em-
pire and no Australia.
It is quite possible for a Parliamentary majority to
be as pitiless a tyrant as an autocratic monarch. Do
not Ave in Australia know that from our own ex-
perience? Our Davs under our party system of
government are not framed by the nation, but by the
party leaders. The Home Rule question Avas not sub-
mitted to the people of the United Kingdom as a
separate issue at the last election. If it Avere submitted
in the form of a referendum noAA T , and not complicated
with such questions as Free Trade, the power of the
House of Lords, the Welsh Church, Plural Voting, it
would certainly be rejected. At the present moment,
taking the English constituencies alone, the Unionists
very, considerably outnumber the Home Rulers, The
Asquith Ministry cannot say Avith truth that on the
Home Rule question they ha\?e the majority of the
country behind them. The only question, then, that re-
mains is this, Avhether Home Rule is a sufficiently serious
issue to justify armed resistance. All the arguments
in favour of decentralization and lightening the labours
of the Commons, and so on, are not matters of the very
slightest interest to Redmond, Devlin, Dillon, and their
rebel creAV. All these men, like their American pay-
master and business manager, Patrick Ford, simply
loathe England and the Empire, and when they raise
the cry of ?Ireland a Nation? they mean a nation anti-
English in character and sentiment. ?Great-hearted
Ulster,? knoAving perfectly Avell what these gentry are


aiming at, declares with unwavering resolve that she
will not belong to any anti-British and so-called ?Irish?
nation. She wishes and she intends, God helping her,
to belong always to the nation of Great Britain, into
which she has been born, and to which she has always
been true and loyal. No King, nor Parliament, nor
Government, is morally justified in transferring by
coercion a body of its own citizens to a different national
allegiance from that which is their birthright. Such is
the coercion with which Ulster is threatened early next
year. The question of national allegiance is something
for which men in all ages have felt justified in taking
up arms, and, if need be, lajdng down their lives. If, as
the ?Spectator? well said, it is a hardship for a Roman
Catholic Keltic Nation to be subject to a Parliament in
England, no less of a hardship is it for an Ulster nation
of Protestant Religion and British race to be subject
to a Roman Catholic Keltic Parliament in Dublin. If
it be established as a principle that every separate
nationality must have a separate government, then, as
there are confessedly two separate nationalities in Ire-
land, there should be two Parliaments there. But the
principle is not a sound one really nor of universal appli-
cation. There are plenty of cases similar to Ireland,
where it would be unjust, impracticable, and foolish?
for instance, Austria-Hungary and India. It was a
wrong to the Irish Roman Catholic in the 18th Century
to be ruled by a purely Protestant Parliament. It
would be equally an outrage to coerce Ulster Protes-
tants into subjection to a Parliament dominated by the
Roman Catholic Church, which would rob them of their
dearest liberties. For, however kindly we may wish to
think,'and do think, of Roman Catholics as individuals,
and for many of them we have all a warm regard and
respect, it is only a matter of history that the dominance
of the Roman Catholic Church in any community
means death to civil and religious liberty. But it is not
only a question of liberty. It is a question also of


national allegiance. The Nationalists are never tired of
insulting and execrating British rule as a foreign rule;
but if British rule be foreign to them, then Nationalist
rule would be foreign rule for Ulstermen, who are loyal
to the British connection. Mr. Asquith s Bill would
compel Ulstermen to cease to be Britons and to become
Irish Nationalists. Bather than that, they will lay
down their lives. We should honour and reverence
them for their patriotism, their love of liberty, their
loyalty to the Empire, their fidelity to their religion and
ours. We should encourage them to resist to the last,
and in my judgment we should therefore proceed as soon
as possible to consider how we, the members of this
Ulster and Loyal Irishmen?s Association, can best aid
them in the coming crisis not only with moral, but with
material support.
The End.
Printed by Ford & Son, Carlton, Melbourne
