

THE
ESSEX CHRONICLE,
PUBLISHED ON BOARD
“THE ESSEX,”
ON HER HOMEWARD VOYAGE, MELBOURNE TO ENGLAND,
1864.
EDITED BY J. W. WHITCOMB.
*x. ■
MARGATE;
PUBLISHED BY THOMAS H. KEBLE.
1865.




THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. I.
Saturday , October Sth, 1864.
THE CHRONICLE.
Everything calculated to relieve tlie wearisome monotony of a sea voyage of
from 80 to 90 days’ duration, is sure to be more or less welcome. With this idea
the Chronicle is commenced, Captain Atwood’s consent to its publication having
been given, on the sole condition that nothing in any way calculated to give pain
or produce illfeeling shall appear in its columns. With this proviso it is a
pleasure to comply, and we have sanguine hopes of being able to supply each
passenger with a printed copy of the Chronicle shortly after the arrival of the
Essex in England, and that it will prove a pleasing memento of the voyage, un-
sullied by a single objectionable personality or ill-natured remark.
We have every hope of being able to fill a certain space each week with mat-
ter of interest in an “ Essex-Australian” sense. Cast together for a certain
period on board this noble vessel-mere waifs and strays of humanity all con-
tained in one huge waif of the ocean —the interest of all is in a great measure
centred in the vessel which bears us and our immediate fortunes. The Essex,
and all information connected with her and her previous voyages will, therefore,
be considered as of paramount importance, andj’eceive the greatest attention.
The country we have quitted must also ever possess a large share of our sym-
pathies, and to Australian subjects of interest, unpublished anecdotes, and
general facts, a certain space will be devoted. An abstract of the “ Log” will
be regularly given, and the medical officer of the vessel will doubtless supply us
with a weekly report of the health of those under his care. We invite contri-
butions of any and every kind, subject always to the captain’s condition. The
names of the writers, also, must in all cases accompany their contributions, but
these will in no case be divulged. It may be our unpleasant duty sometimes to
reject communications. If such a necessity should unfortunately arise, the ma-
nuscript will always be returned on application, without having been seen by
anybody but the editor.
There being no printing press on board, we shall be compelled to satisfy our-
selves with a manuscript copy for each cabin during the voyage. It will then be
for the passengers to decide whether it is worth while to get the whole series
printed on our arrival in England.
We are well aware of the difficulties with which we have to contend, and
only deprecate the hypercriticism which sometimes attends upon such undertak-
ings, We possess no special qualifications for the task, beyond many years’
experience, and as we resume the editorial implements, not for self-glorification,
but for the entertainment of others, we shall be perfectly willing at any time to
resign them in favour of any one who considers he can wield them to better
advantage.
NOTES.
The Essex left the Sandridge Railway Pier at 4 p.m. on Thursday, the 29th
September, in tow of the Steam Tug Resolute, and in charge of Mr. Pilot Sin-
gleton. She was cheered by numerous ships at the pier and in the bay, and
anchored at the Heads at midnight, weighed anchor at 6 a.m., and passed
through the Rip at 8 a.m. Was passed by the Messrs. Green’s ship Dover
Castle, from London, having on board the Right Reverend Doctor Perry, Lord
Bishop of Melbourne, who returned to his diocese by that vessel, exchanging
a 2


salutes. Had a leading wind for three days from the Heads, and during the
latter portions of the week adverse and light easterly winds.
The Essex has on board the following Australian animals, in charge of Mr.
Thatcher, the Agent for the Victorian Acclimatisation Society, and destined for
kindred societies in England, viz. : —4 Emus, 1 Cape-Barren goose, 5 Maori
hens or Weka Weka rails, 5 Opossums, 3 Mountain ducks, 4 Wood ducks,
1 Satin or Bower bird, 5 Wonga Wonga pigeons, 2 Bronze-wing pigeons, 1 Cock-
atoo, 1 Flying squirrel, 2 Mopokes, 2 Wombats, 3 Ground doves. We are happy
to say that, at present, all are in excellent condition, and great hopes are enter-
tained that deaths among them, if any, will be trifling. The most interesting
bird is the Satin or Bower bird, not one of w'hich has yet reached England alive.
There are many other birds on board the property of private passengers, which
will be particularised at a future time, if it is found necessary.
THE LOG.
The following is the abstract of the Log kindly supplied by the officers of the
vessel. A similar abstract will appear in each issue of the journal.
October Ist. —Latitude, 39.41 South ; Longitude, 142.4 East: Distance from
Cape Otway, 82 miles. 2nd. —Lat. 42.13 S.; Lon. 140.46 E.: Distance, 164
miles. 3rd. —No reckoning. 4<th. —Lat. 47.9 S.; Lon. 144.24 E. sth. —Lat.
47.18 S.; Lon. 146.52 E.; Distance, 100 miles. Gth. —No reckoning. 7th. —Lat.
46.49 S.; Lon. 154.59 E.; Distance, 338 miles (2 days). Bth. —Lat. 46.33 S.;
Lon. 156.39 E.; Distance, 108 miles.
Since it has become known that it was proposed to publish this Journal;
promises of assistance have reached us from all quarters. We have every belief
that these promises will be kept, and, if so, our weekly publication will probably
occupy three times the space of this. We mention this fact, so that our first
number may not be regarded as a specimen of the series. Insurmountable diffi-
culties always militate against every first publication, and ours especially will be
understood.
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. 11.
Saturday , October 15/A, 1864.
THE VOYAGE.
All those for whose perusal this is written, are well acquainted with the
thousand and one incidents, some ludicrous, some painful, to which the
intending passenger is subject. The single man takes things pretty quietly;
buying pretty well everything he comes across during his last week ashore, and
finding that he has not got one-fiftieth of those he requires during his first week
afloat. The troubles of the single lady must be imagined, for we cannot describe
these, though confessing an intense curiosity as to the process by which they
contrive to embark at all. But Paterfamilias has the hardest burden of all to
bear. From the moment the voyage is decided upon, everything in his esta-
blishment remains at blood-heat, with the exception of his own comfort, which
is as many degrees as possible below zero. So much to do in preparation, is the
unfailing and unanswerable excuse for every dereliction, and the physical power
of the Archimedian screw is feeble to the excruciating influence of that which
operates upon his cheque book. He is perpetually overtaking, or running against
vapid young men with large paper parcels, either within or in the immediate
neighbourhood of his house, which he never quits without a light covering of
ends of thread, giving him the appearance of having spent the previous portion
of his life in an establishment of countless milliners. His loud remonstrances at
last dwindle down to mere fruitless groaning in spirit, and when the embarkation
is at length achieved, the sense of relief has a spice of beatitude about it.
But it is not achieved without farther troubles out of doors, sufficient to
addle the pates of mere ordinary mortals. The daily perusal of shipping adver-
tisements, and the mental calculation of which is entitled to the largest, if any,


share of belief. The way in which he bores every one of his acquaintances,
whether they know anything of the subject or not, with the most dreary calcu-
lations as to the respective merits of Blackwall and Blackball, White Star and
Blue Jacket, Messrs. Wigram and Green, James Bright and Gibbs Baines, until
one and all heartily wish him at the bottoraest depth of that ocean he
to traverse. He visits the vessel, peering into all sorts of impossible places, stop-
ping the work which is going on, and risking life and limb by constantly placing
himself “ out of the way” in the midst of coils of unmanageable ropes. An officer
at length takes pity upon him, and courteously shows him that which he re-
quires to see, gives him all necessary information, and tells him what he has to do.
The fight with the agents afterwards needs no description. It is the same thing
to all, the agents always gaining the battle, unless it occurs on the day or so before
sailing, when, if the ship is not very full, The passengers do sometimes have a
chance. And so matters gets settled at last, —the luggage gets on board, sundry
stray boxes containing indispensable articles being recovered by super-human
exertions, at the very last moment, and all hands give themselves up to the un-
utterable wretchedness of the first night on board. Bor it is unutterably
wretched. You know no one, suffer a sudden and painful reaction from the
excitement of the few days previous; your cabin appears a kennel, and the ex-
istence of bilge-water and greasy wool is painfully apparent. The very idea of
eating seems suicidal. You go to bed and rise in rough water. You go on
deck, and return in ten minutes, not caring if the next moment is your last.
This continues for a week, more or less, that period being a blank in your exist-
ence, of which you afterwards recall only the dimmest memories. These are
usually of a fiendish nature, and have reference to persons of robust habits,
who played excellent knives and forks, seasoned with capital jokes and shouts of
laughter, immediately outside the door of the cabin in which you are stretched
in all the agonies of sea sickness. We wish no one ill just now, but perish the
inhuman Vandal who has the heart to eat while a fellow-creature is enduring
those execrable torments.
But the evil hour has passed, and you rise from your bunk—a giant refreshed.
You accept the congratulations on your re-appearance, eat a hearty dinner, and
feel at peace with all men. By and bye you smoke, cut in for a rubber, and
join in any rational scheme calculated to make the hours fly rapidly. You take
interest in everything around you, and warm to acquaintances of a day, as you
would not to those of months on shore. You determine to fight shy of the
grumbler, if such a dreadful institution happens to exist, and to extract all tho
enjoyment possible out of each incident, instead of making it a source of
discomfort. So the voyage passes, and if those with whom you are associated*
adopt a similar system, there will be a spice of regret mingled with their joy,
when the voyage is completed.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor.
Sir, —It is with the greatest pleasure I have seen the debut of your valuable
paper, and the interest it has excited in this cabin. Success to it.
Amongst the various ways of passing time in this cabin, there is one which
should not pass unnoticed. Many means are devised on board ship, the greater
portion of the passengers betaking themselves to amusements and light reading.
I do not object to this, but think credit is due to those who combine instruction
with amusement, and thus acquire permanent benefit. For instance, lam sure,
Mr. Editor, you will be pleased to hear that French classes have been formed in
our compartment, under the able tuition of Monsieur Huber, who already ex-
pi*esses great satisfaction with the progress of his pupils, and assures them that,
with continued attention, they will be able to speak French fluently by the end
of the voyage. The time passes quickly, pleasantly, and profitably at these classes,
and I strongly recommend others to follow this good example.
I am, Sir, yours truly,
A Voice from the Third Cabin.


THE LOG.
October. Latitude. Longitude. Distance.
Sunday 9th . . . 46.48 S, 158.35 E, 59 miles.
Monday 10th . . . 46.26 S. 159.57 E. 60 ~
Tuesday 11th . . . 46.42 S. 160.19 E. 20 „
Wednesday 12th . . 49.10 S. 163.64 E. 185 „
Thursday 13th . . . 51.33 S. 166.05 E. 184 „
Friday 14th
Saturday 15th ... 83
NOTES.
The weather during the past week has not been very favourable, light variable
winds and calms having prevailed. The steadiness of the vessel, however, has
led to a variety of amusements on deck, and quoits, sparring, &c. have been
largely patronized. One evening was devoted to dancing, which was kept up with
much spirit till 10 p.m., a Prussian gentleman discoursing very sweet sounds in-
deed on his violin. Several Albatross and Mollymauks have been caught, and
a wild furore exists for pipe stems of bone, and tobacco pouches of the feet of the
former birds. The passengers of every class appear to be very sociable and
contented. A most pleasant voyage may be anticipated if the weather continues
as favourable as at present.
We have great regret in announcing the serious illness of Mr. J. E. Lewis, a
passenger in the second cabin. All possible attention is being paid to him, both
by the surgeon and his fellow-passengers, and we can only hope that the unre-
mitting care and skill with which he is treated will be successful. Special
prayers for such a result were offered during the service on Sunday.
The only losses sustained by Mr. Thatcher amongst the live stock in his
charge, during the week, have been two opossums. Their death cannot be
attributed to any special cause.
CONUNDEIJMS.
A very confiding correspondent sends us the following. If necessary, the
answers will be given next week,
“ Why is a young lady like the third officer of the Essex V*
“ Why is a criminal judge like the rudder of the Essex ?”
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. 111. Saturday, October 22nd, 1864.
COLONIAL SOCIETY.
Wherever we roam, there is one thing indispensable to the enjoyment of
life, and to a great extent necessary to the continued welfare of the individual.
We mean that social intercourse which elevates the moral tone of all circles in
which it is enjoyed and affords that agreeable relaxation from the higher cares of
life which always causes its labours to be better performed. It is, however, not
always possible to obtain this, especially in new countries. At home, where
families have their hereditary acquaintances and friends, people are very diffe-
rently situated to those residing in the colonies, where all sorts and conditions of
people are thrown together by the purest chance, the worst very offen rising to
the surface, and the best sometimes reduced to accept subordinate situations
under them.
In such cases the nicest tact is required to discriminate in the choice of one’s
acquaintances, more particularly if your family circle comprises ladies. You must
draw the line somewhere, and are of course accused by one side of opening your
doors too widely; and by the other, with being a stuck-up person, who having by


accident, achieved opulence and position, now desire to forget your former
struggles and with them those who are too apt to remember and remind you ot
them. Such is the case all the world over, but one is more particularly liable to
it there, where fortune may one day be boundlessly prodigal and on the next
heap on the Pelion of distress the Ossa of utter and irremediable ruin. Supposing
the preliminary difficulties overcome, it is not difficult to describe the society of
a wealthy colony. The metropolitan circles are distinguished from their Euro-
pean prototypes by little save the greater splendour and profusion of dress, equipage
and table, &c. This demonstrativeness, though rightly judged in England as proof
evident of vulgar snobbishness, is by no means to be so construed in a colony.
A few years residence in a Southern climate altogether changes the habits of
the man who, during the early part of his life, was accustomed to Yule logs at
Christmas, and if his expenditure appears more profuse, and his establishment
more magnificent than necessary, it is explained by the simple fact that he is
fond of luxury, and can well afford it. And who is to blame him for it ? It is to
the very extravagance on the part of certain classes, that the great wealth of
others of a lower social grade may be traced, while the well doing of these in
their turn, provides the learned professions with the means for what we
consider their very pardonable ostentation. This is no problem, but simply an
easily comprehended fact in political economy; each helps the other, both do well.
The lines of demarcation are religiously respected, and the bounds of society
retain their proper tension. In the provinces, however, matters are not so easily
managed, but the hospitality, if less dignified, is infinitely more cordial and more
generally extended. A visitor to any district, except those of the second rate
towns, is soon picked up by one or other of the leading men, invited to his house
or station, introduced to others, information afforded him as to the prospects
and resources of the locality, and if he proves worthy of it, made one of them,
and every inducement held out to him to settle amongst them. There are
those in the old country into whose hands this may fall, who will laugh,
at the bare idea of any necessity for safeguard to society in a colony ; that they
are Arcades ambo, adventurers all, and that we are humbugs for trying to
show a distinction between them ; that without those good old titles of Queen,
Lords, and Commons, no structure of society can ever be said to exist. To this
we reply, that the society of Melbourne is at this moment infinitely more respect-
able than that of the King and Lords in the time of those tremendous vagabonds,
William the Conqueror and his Norman Knights; and that we no more believe
in the Divine right of their descendants to be morally better than us, than we
do in that of the King of Dahomey to have his grand customs, and slaughter his
subjects by millions. As political safeguards, we recognize their value, but we
acknowledge no moral superiority in the English House of Lords, over that of any
other denomination of the educated men of Britain. Take, for instance, the bar
and the medical faculty, we believe that in many instances the skill and personal
honour of the colonial practitioner is in every respect equal to those of the highest
grade at home. Their reputation may not be as great, but we regard it as the
purest accident in many instances, that the positions of persons are not reversed,
And who will say that the doctors and barristers of England do not collectively
possess a greater amount of wisdom than those hereditary legislators, some of
whom feel almost disgraced by the contact of those learned interlopers, the Law
Lords and the Bishops ?
We venture to say, that the better classes of society of Victoria present more
agreeable social features than any community of its own age has ever done. This
we attribute in great measure to the inherent wealth of the colony, and its rapid
development, to its free constitution, and the evident determination of all men of
sense to free themselves from that thraldom of the mob which they once per-
mitted to be imposed upon them, and so long as they hold their own in this
respect we have no fear for the permanence of that social edifice which is already
a pleasant structure to behold.


THE
The Essex is a gallant ship,
She proudly sails so light and free,
As swift as sea bird is her speed.
When dashing through the foaming sea,
She scuds along with roaring sweep,
Her keel it cuts the trackless deep.
The Essex still is scudding on,
She sails away with phantom speed,
Her wings are spread to catch the gale;
Her prow chafes like a warrior’s steed
That shakes abroad his flowing mane,
When bounding on the bloody plain.
The Captain—see how bright his eye,
When scanning far out o’er the deep,
See how he frowns when danger’s nigh,
When storms come down with hissing
sweep.
The hardy sailors shorten sail,
And trim the Essex for the gale.
However bright and gay we be,
Grim death is always lurking near;
Out o’er the land and on the sea,
The wise man ever lives in fear.
It matters not what be his age,
The blooming youth or hoary sage.
October 18 th, 1864,
ESSEX.
Take one example in this ship,
There was a youth scarce reached his
prime,
That came on board, no doubt and hoped
That he’d see friends and native clime,
That kindred dear would greet him
home,
And bid him never more to roam.
The doctor stood beside the corpse,
While strangers sewed him in his shroud;
A short prayer, then tossed over board,
And swallowed by waves groaning loud,
He sank down, down into the deep,
No kindred there to mourn and weep.
Ah, me ! a melancholy scene
This ought to be to wayward man,
Who wicked all his days has been,
Who lacks the solid sense to scan
The wisdom shewn to him by God
To dwell in his bright high abode.
The Essex, we all hope will be
Our ark of safety o’er the main,
And pray that she may reach the land.
Where we may see loved friends again;
We trust in God, our happy band
May reach the shores of old England.
W. P. Smith.
MONODY.
On the Death oe Me. T, E. Lewis
October
But yesterday.
And we were face to face
With stern, gaunt death,
He’s passed away,
And Ocean gives no trace,
The winds no breath
Of him now hidden from us, the surging
wave beneath.
His aspect worn,
His bent and haggard frame
Foretold his fate.
His youth forlorn
Crushed by disease, became
So desolate
That death was blest relief to his ex
hausted state.
October 18 th, 1864.
IS, WHO DIED ON BOAED THE ESSEX,
17th, 1864.
That meteor flag,
England’s unsullied “Jack,”
Was his proud pall,
No velvet rag,
Or borrowed plumes of black,
His corpse enthrall;
Mocking the dust beneath, as they
around it fall.
No sculptured stone
Marks his last resting place ;
Beneath the wave
He sleeps alone.
No mortal eye can trace,
No hand enslave,
That spot of Ocean’s depths, we
chose for Lewis’ grave.
J. W. Whitcomb.
BUSH EECOLLECTIONS.
When at Tytindyer, on the Murray, I was accompanied in all my excursions
by a black boy named Boinmoroo, who proved a most able and trustworthy guide
and assistant. With him I visited the camp of his tribe, and found about twenty
aborigines of both sexes and all ages. Their style of dress was remarkable for
anything rather than uniformity, some possessing a full uniform rig, while others
8
THE ESSEX CHEONICLE.


THE LOG.
OCTOBEE.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance.
Sunday 16
51.10S.
171.57E
55 miles
Monday 17
51.53S.
176.4E
162 „
Monday 17
52.17S.
178.30W
207 „
Tuesday 18
. 52.40S.
171.4 W
273 „
Wednesday 19 52.54S.
165.8 W
214 „
Thursday 20
53.15S.
158.24W
244 „
Friday 21
52.48S.
152.1 W
230 „
Saturday 22
53.57S.
147.35W
157 „
Total 1542
NOTES.
had a shirt and tailless coat, and the majority doing “ the noble savage” with
much dignity, but small effect, in all the native grandeur of the opossum rug. It
soon became evident to me, that the occasion was one of more than ordinary
importance, a fact I judged from the profusion of things eatable, which were in
course of preparation. The heaps of fish were enormous, amongst them being
Murray cod of from 30 to 40 lbs. weight, cray fish resembling lobsters in size and
delicacy, turtles, ducks, kangaroos, and eggs of all sizes and colours; indeed, an
Acclimatisation Society’s dinner might have been supplied on the spot, though I
fancy Mr. Wilson and his colleagues would have had to import both cooks and
waiters before their stomachs would have consented to do justice to the fare.
James presently informed me, that the feast was in honour of a Corrobberee,
which was to be held on the same evening in honour of somebody or something,
which was not explained to me. He was the bearer of an invitation to me to
witness the scene. This I eagerly accepted, never having witnessed one pre-
viously on anything like the scale which this promised to be, as before the guests
fell to at the supper, their number reached from 50 to 60. The new comers
differed in no respect from those I have described, all carried arms, and looked
curiously, but with apparent friendliness at me, and as the light of the day began
to fail, and that of the fire to gleam upon their dark bodies, and uncouth ges-
tures, the scene was one which I do not believe was ever surpassed in its character
of the savagely picturesque.
(To he continued .)
It is our melancholy task to report the death on Monday last of Mr. T. E. Lewis,
whose serious illness we mentioned last week. Mr. Lewis was, we understand, a
native of London, and went to Victoria by the Essex on its last voyage but one
for the benefit of his health. His hopes of recovery, however, were not realized,
and he at length determined to return to England. Eor this purpose, he em-
barked again on board this vessel; but, as soon as the weather began to be severe,
its effects upon the deceased were sadly apparent, and his fellow passengers began
to whisper their fears that he would never live round the Horn. These predic-
tions, unfortunately, proved too true: he gradually sank, partial delirium ensued,
and at 6 p.m. on Monday he breathed his last. The uncomplaining patience with
which he bore his illness had greatly endeared him to those most in contact with
him, and he received every possible attention at their hands as well as from those
in authority in the vessel.
Doctor Hyatt was in constant attendance upon him, and he was watched in
turns every night by three stewards, to whose efficient behaviour the Doctor bears
testimony. The funeral took place at 6 p.m. on the following evening, Captain
Atwood reading the service. The officers of the ship appeared in full uniform,
aud nearly all the crew and passengers were present, and visibly impressed with
the solemnity of the ceremony.
The first icebergs of the present voyage were seen on Monday last at a distance
of about five miles, there were nine or ten of them, of various sizes and all sorts of
fantastic shapes. We passed each of them rapidly, but it was not till late in the


afternoon that the last was out of sight. One of monstrous size was seen to
windward on Wednesday afternoon. Mr. W. Proctor Smith has made sketches
of each. It is believed that these are the same bergs seen by the Essex on her
last voyage homewards.
It is proposed when we reach the fine weather to hold a bazaar in aid of the
Institution for the relief of the widows and orphans of sailors. This is a course
in which all will join zealously to the extent of their means; and the system it is
intended to adopt, is likely to meet the approval of all. No money is asked for,
but all hands are requested to subscribe articles which they find useless to them,
no matter of what sort or value they may be. These will be classified, and on a
certain day, stalls will be erected, and the bazaar will be held. We earnestly
trust that the scheme will be well supported, and that it will return a handsome
amount to the Institution.
CONUNDRUMS.
“ I am just two and two,
I am warm, I am cold,
The parent of numbers
That cannot be told,
I am lawful, unlawful,
A duty —a fault,
Often sold dear,
And yielded with pleasure
When taken by force.”
Why does Mr. Dale know there is a
man in the moon ?
Answers to last week.
“ Because she is an angel.”
“ Because she has a stern duty to
perform.”
Good for nothing, w T hen bought;
An extraordinary boon
As a matter of course,
MEDICAL
REPORT.
Sir, —I beg to forward you my medical report for the week ending the 22nd
Oct. 1864, Up to the present time, we have had fine and healthy weather, which,
with the exception of some few has had an exhilarating effect on the passengers,
and the ship is now in a most salubrious state. The melancholy occurrence
during the past week in the death of Mr. Lewis, may have been foreseen by some
few as well as by myself. In speaking of this case, I must not forget to mention
the care shown to him by the second class steward in carrying out all my directions.
I am, Sir, etc.
Brownlow North Hyatt, Chir.
To the Editor of the Essex Chronicle.
Mrs. P. or the Flying Jib.
“ Haul down the Flying Jib.” When this order was given a few days ago, an
elderly female exclaimed: “ Bless me, I have heard of flying fish and flying squir-
rels, but never of a flying Jib. Pray, Sir, will they give one to Mr. Thatcher, to
take home with his other animals. Dear, dear, what strange monsters and cor-
puses we do meet with in these suburban altitudes.”
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. IV. Saturday } October 29 th, 18G4.
OUR ESCAPE.
A paragraph in our last issue told of the first icebergs having been seen in the
early part of that week. Little did anybody on board this vessel at that time
think of the awful peril which he and all of us were to undergo from these
impediments. When those first seen were gazed upon with pleasurable interest
and curiosity, we venture to say that there were few who anticipated danger
from similar masses. But a few days passed, and changed indeed were the
feelings of all. There then occurred the event which is related in another
column, of which it is impossible to think without a tremor, and without a mental


October.
THE LOO.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance.
Sunday, 23rd .
. 54.29 S.
140.41 W.
245 miles.
Monday, 24th
. 54.45 „
136. 1 „
161 „
Tuesday, 25th
. 55.10 „
128.24 „
248 „
Saturday, 29th
. 55.15 „
113.31 „
THE WEEK.
and heartfelt thanksgiving to Almighty God for the merciful preservation which
he vouchsafed to us. It will readily be understood how difficult it is for us to say
anything respecting the conduct of the Captain, the officers, and crew of the
vessel in that terrible crisis of our fate —conduct indeed to which it is not possible
for the power of language to do adequate justice, and by which alone, under
God’s providence, the lives of every soul on board the Essex were preserved. Of
what use is it for us to relate how during the whole of the past week Captain
Atwood has been on the poop both day and night. Is it not the subject of
conversation throughout the vessel—wonder how one man can bear his tre-
mendous weight of responsibility and endure the same amount of physical
fatigue ? When our destination is reached we hope to say something in a sup-
plementary number of the Chronicle on this subject. To express fully at this
time our own, and what we know to be the unanimous feelings of the passengers
on board the vessel, would be in the highest degree indelicate and painful to
those referred to, and therefore only are we silent. But there is not a human
being on board who does not at this moment consider that he owes his life to the
Captain’s skill and courage, and who does not feel confidence in both him, his
officers, and crew.
The week commenced under pleasant auspices, and during the whole of Sunday,
and the greater portion of Monday, the Essex sped on before a favouring breeze.
A sharp look out had been kept, and “no ice in sight” was reported to the
Captain between 4 and 5 p.m. Soon after this the weather began to thicken,
a white haze overspreading the sea, rendering it difficult to see any distance. The
ship was under a press of canvas (two of her royals we believe being set at the
time) and going fully 12 knots an hour. No anxiety whatever, so far as we know,
was felt by any one on board ; things presented their usual appearance, some
smoking, some walking the deck, others playing about, or amusing themselves as
best suited them. But a sudden and fearful change came over that peaceful
scene. The Captain’s voice was suddenly heard ringing high above wave and wind,
and hum of voices, and instantly it became known that the vessel was in danger,
the nature of which was quickly apparent to all. To describe the affair, as it
occurred, is beyond our power; we, therefore, give what we believe to be about
as correct a narrative of it as we can gather from general opinion, premising only
that we have not thought it would be right to ask the officers of the vessel any-
thing about it.
It appears that there was a look-out man on the forecastle, and that the Captain
had quitted the poop fora few minutes, a very unusual thing, as we all know. On
his return he walked to the break of the poop and looked forward, intending, we
understand, to give the order for shortening sail immediately. He, however,
saw breakers right a head with small ice, and ordered the helm “ hard up,”
This was at once done, and immediately afterwards the same eye saw an immense
iceberg looming through the haze close on the port bow. The helm was put
hard-up, the hands called, and everything let go, and in three minutes from the time
when the Captain first discovered the iceberg, the gallant vessel had swung round
to all appearance on her own length, fairly clear of it. The escape was nothing
short of miraculous, and the Captain’s return to the deck at the precise moment
is fairly considered to have been a special interposition of Providence in our
favour. The vessel was clearly going with great velocity right on to the ice ; two
minutes later and she must have gone down with every soul on board; and the
agony suffered by the non-maritime portion of those who saw the danger was


too intense for description. Nobody believed that the vessel could clear the berg,
and so close was it that some of those who looked up at it from the forecastle
declare that it appeared absolutely to overhang them. When all was clear the
sails were taken in, and shortly afterwards “ more ice” was reported on the port
bow. The sharpest possible look-out was kept, but nothing beyond small float-
ing pieces were seen. The haze cleared off almost directly, and the vessel pro-
ceeded safely on her way. Thanksgivings were returned by the passengers in the
respective cabins to Almighty God for our wonderful escape, and never were they
uttered with more earnest fervour.
On Tuesday it came on to blow heavily, and about 2 p.m. the snow squalls
were so heavy that sail was reduced, and the vessel afterwards hove-to under
bare poles. On Wednesday she was put before the wind, and soon after mid-
night the passengers were again alarmed by the shock of her broaching-to. This
difficulty having been overcome with the loss of certain sails, the night passed,
and when morning broke the vessel was found to be hove-to in a gale of wind,
with a tremendous sea running, about two miles to windward of an iceberg. Of
this dreadful danger the passengers were happily ignorant until it was overcome,
but we believe it to have been the greatest of all, and avoided only by the mercy
of Providence, and the great presence of mind, skill, and courage of those to
whom our safety is entrusted. Prom Tuesday until Priday morning the after
and main hatches were fastened down, but, though some water came on board
passengers who had been in other vessels are astonished at the few seas she
shipped. Even when she broached-to she scarcely took in any water at all, though
at one time and another enough was shipped to create tremendous havoc amongst
the ducks and geese. Priday morning broke beautifully clear, with a fine blue
sky, and good breeze. Occasional squalls passed, andjnumerous icebergs, many of
them of enormous size, were visible throughout the day. Saturday, though not
so fine a day, was moderately clear, but the number of icebergs of colossal size
that surrounded the vessel all day long, was positively appalling.
So passed the most dreadful week that most of the denizens of this vessel have
ever experienced. Our account of it is ridiculously inadequate to the occasion,
but we fear that no one but a spectator who, himself unendangered, could have
calmly witnessed the events, could possibly relate with proper unction such a
story, and even then not unless he was a sailor. We must not close without re-
ferring to the admirable behaviour of the gentler sex. Throughout the dreadful
crisis of last Monday evening they retained their presence of mind so as not to
embarrass those on whose perfect coolness our lives depended. There was no
rushing about or shrieking, or anything to distract attention. Of the Quarter-
master and humbler sailors we refrain from writing at present, for the same
reason that we are silent about their officers—that what we say would be alto-
gether valueless if done while the voyage lasts. Of the ship too much cannot
be said in praise. She does everything required of her like a yacht, and we be-
lieve we are right in saying that everybody on board has now had such experience
of her and her officers, that they feel themselves to be as safe as human means
can render them.
MIRACULOUS ESCAPE OP THE SHIP ESSEX,
on the Eve of the 24th October, 1864.
Our gallant ship sailing on
Eleven knots in the hour;
Horizon clear, no danger near.
No clouds o’er head to lower.
Thus on we sped without a dread,
And all our hearts were gay;
The decks they rung with gladsome mirth,
Till near the close of day.
When suddenly a fog came down
And dim’d the sea around ;
On dash’d the ship with wonted speed,
And still did mirth resound.
Our trusty Captain w r as on deck
And peer’d into the cloud ;
His ever watchful eye grew bright,
And out he cried aloud.
12
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.


Port the helm, hard, hard a-port,
Call up all hands, he cried ;
And swift as lightning’s vivid flash,
All nerves on board were tried.
The scoffer trembled on the spot;
The true brave man was cool;
In such a scene a gap is seen
’Twixt wise men and the fool.
An iceberg looming terrible
Tower’d before our eyes,
It seem’d, that icy precipice,
To reach up to the skies.
That icy wall frown’d down on us
A mere shell at its base,
We struggled, it was neck and neck,
With grim death in the race.
Still like a sea bird on the wing,
That darts down near the wave
To seek its prey, then soars again
The hurricane to brave,
So did our good ship sweep along
Towards that icy wall,
But as a thing of life she wheel’d
Like falcon to the call.
And shook her wings and darted on
Amidst the foam and spray.
That awful danger disappeared,
Like demon shrinking back,
When smote by sceptre of the just
Prom Virtue’s sunny track.
Or like the comet’s rushing flight
That nears our planet’s path,
But harmless in its head career
With all its flaming wrath.
We offer’d up thanksgivings then
Unto our gracious Lord,
Por He was near and saved us all;
Let Him then be adored.
Our Captain brave all hail to thee
With judgment cool and clear,
All calm and zealous thou wert seen
And quell’d all craven fear.
Moral.
As in uncertain life we move,
We’re often gay and bright,
But the day that breaks with sunny morn
May end with frowning night.
And as it were laughed scornfully, On hoard the ship Essex,
And proudly sail’d away, Oct. 28th, 1864. W. P. S.
CONUNDRUMS,
Answers to last week.
1. A kiss.
2. Because he has been to see (sea).
1. Why are the Court Beauties in Hampton Court Palace like noon on board
ship ?
2. Why is a new-laid egg like a cow’s tail ?
NOTES.
Notwithstanding the severe weather of the past week, we are happy to be able
to say that no deaths have occurred amongst the birds and animals in Mr.
Thatcher’s charge. We believe he almost despaired of saving the emus, which,
being in the waist of the ship, must necessarily have suffered severely from the
seas shipped. They were, however, placed in one of the stern cabins while their
box was being dried, and since their return “ home ” they appear rather to have
improved than otherwise. We have no medical report this week, no sickness of
consequence existing on board. The only accident was that of a poor little child
who fell down the main hatch and cut his face severely. Happily this was the
extent of the injury, and the wounds are healing rapidly.
An honourable spirit of emulation has manifested itself amongst the passen-
gers with regard to the Bazaar. They are looking up contributions on all sides,
and every prospect of success is apparent. To those who are ignorant of the
objects of the Institution, we suggest a perusal of its Annual Report, a copy of
which is to be seen in each cabin.
Copt of the Ship’s Log, while running through the ice.
Oct. 24. 4 p.m. —Set in foggy.
5 p.m. —Freshening, with very thick foggy weather. Shortened sail.
In royals and stay sails.
13
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.


Oct. 24,
6.20 p.m. —Broken water was visible close to the ship. First seen by
Captain Atwood (apparently drift ice, but which afterwards proved
to be the backwater from a large iceberg.) The helm was imme-
diately put hard a-port, and the ship paid off. When clear of the
bow the helm was righted, and not till then did the iceberg become
visible, towering up above the masts like a fog bank. The helm was
again put hard a-port, and the ship’s head brought to S.S.E. The
yards were promptly braced round, and the jib sheet hauled over,
thereby helping the ship’s way, and after thrashing along for about
five minutes within not more than twenty yards of the berg, suc-
ceeded in weathering the southern extremity. God be praised.
G. F. Gibbs, C. Off.
6.3o.—Shortened sail to close reefed fore-raain-topsails.
7. —Passed several detached pieces of ice.
8. —Breeze increasing. Clear weather.
Midnight.—Strong winds. Thick, cloudy.
Daylight.—Moderating. Set whole main topsails, reefed foresail.
8 a.m. —Passed large berg.
9 to 11.—Passed 5 bergs.
10.—Wind increasing. Bar. falling rapidly. Shortened sail as before.
Noon.—lncreasing to heavy gale, with sharp squalls of sleet and snow.
1 p.m. —Gale at its height, and a continued fall of sleet and snow,
thereby making it impossible to see more than a few yards from the
ship, and knowing we were amongst ice, considered it advisable to
round to under bare poles. Stowed topsail and foresail, splitting
latter, and hove to on starboard tack under tarpaulin in mizen
rigging.
5 p.m. —Blowing a very hard gale with violent squalls and thick snow
and sleet, a heavy sea getting up, ship lurching violently.
8 p.m. —Barometer rising rapidly and weather moderating, though still
thick.
Midnight.—Hard gale. Moderating but still squally and cloudy.
2 a.m. —Decreasing. Set mizen topmast staysail reefed.
3 a.m. —ln with do.
Oct. 25.
Oct. 26.
4 am. —Moderate gale and cloudy.
6 a.m.— Set close reefed main topsail, reefed foresail and inner jib, and
bore away.
8 a.m. —Barometer again falling rapidly. Gale increasing, with heavy
sea running. Battened down hatches, and secured booby hatches.
10 a.m. —Passed several bergs.
Noon.—Violent gale with heavy squalls.
2 p.m. —Heavy do. do. sleet and snow.
7 p.m. —Passed more icebergs.
8 p.m. —Foresail blown away out of bolt-ropes.
9 p.m. —Very high sea running. Ship becoming almost unmanage-
able and taking on board some heavy seas.
Midnight.—Harder gale, if possible, with terrific squalls.
1.30 a.m. —A heavier squall than usual struck the ship, causing her to
broach to. Inner jib and staysail were blown to ribbons. Main
yard was braced forward and a tarpaulin lashed in the mizen rigging.
Helm lashed a-lee. Ship making very heavy weather.
Daylight. —Violent gale with continued fall of snow and sleet, which
froze on the decks. Discovered through the mist a large iceberg
5 points on the lee bow, only a short distance from the ship.
Turned the hands out, and endeavoured to get way on the ship.
Braced all the yards up, and put helm amidships. Set main
top-mast staysail reefed,which immediately blew away. Loosed and
set fore topsail, which held on for a few minutes, a sufficient time
to get a little headway on the ship, and therefore to clear the berg
Oct. 27.


by a short distance. After being set five minutes it blew away.
Fore topmast staysail was bent and set. The ship, lying in the
trough of the sea, which was running very high, took in a very large
quantity of water, which luckily did no further damage than drown-
ing some of the stock. Lee foremost davit washed out of its socket,
but held by topper lift.
10.30 a.m. —Clearer weather, discovered bergs in all directions. Having
cleared berg, brought ship close to the wind.
3 p.m. —Heavy gale, violent squalls, and sea running very high.
5 p.m. —Several bergs seen from aloft.
6 p.m.—Bent best inner jib.
8 p.m. —Moderating, hauling to westward with rain. Barometer fal-
ling fast.
11 p.m. —lncreasing.
12.—Heavy gale, passing squalls. Ship taking in a good deal of water.
2 a.m. —Moderating slightly. Barometer falling.
3 a.m.—Set inner jib and main topmast staysail, and bore away,
6 a.m. —Great quantity of icebergs in sight. Bent foresail and third
topsail forward.
7 a.m,—Set reefed foresail.
Oct. 27.
Oct. 28.
8 a.m. —Hard gale with finer weather.
9 a.m.— Passed several bergs.
2 p.m. —Moderating rapidly, with fine clear weather, course of ship
continually altered, according to position of icebergs,
4 p.m. —Counted from aloft 42 bergs, eight or nine of which each
covered four or five square miles.
8 p.m. —Setting in squally and thick, hove to, having selected clear
space. Stowed fore and staysails.
Midnight.—Gale increasing, with sharp squalls.
5 A.M. —Icebergs in all directions, some of enormous magnitude.
8 a.m. —Strong unsteady winds, with sharp squalls of snow and sleet.
10 a.m. —Continually passing icebergs.
12—Strong unsteady winds and squally.
2 p.m. —More moderate.
6 p.m. —Passed an island of ice supposed to cover an area of ten square
miles, with numbers of detached pieces,
8 p.m. —Weather thick and misty Rounded to on starboard tack.
Stowed fore and staysails.
12. —Fresh unsteady wind and cloudy.
Oct. 29,
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. V. Saturday , November sth , 1864.
SMALL BEER POLITICIANS.
Possibly one of the most extraordinary classes of Victorian public men is that
which is now rapidly becoming extinct. It is that of the Political Agitators,
who boast themselves as the Messiahs of Land Law Reform, and clamour for
payment of Members. Witness them on the hustings, always the Popular Can-
didate —drawing glowing pictures of the vines and fig-trees as they ought to be,
and the shepherd’s hut as it is. Hear them explaining their wants and necessi-
ties to a parcel of gaping clowns who were formerly under the delusion that they
were passably well off, but who suddenly discover that they have been ground
into the dust by the tyranny of the Squatters and monied classes, although they
acknowledge that these are the very people who pay them four times the wages
for half the labour required of them in the mother country. The mission of the
Agitator is simply to get up sixpenny contributions to enable him to contest a
constituency for a seat in Parliament. If successful, his duty there is, first and


foremost, to abuse everything and everybody really respectable ; and, secondly,
to get a Bill passed securing the payment of Members of that House of Assembly
which he has the honour to disgrace.
And he would disgrace the meanest and most ignorant society in the world.
If sprung from the dregs, he has contrived to obtain some smattering of know-
ledge, which, with the cunning of inherent vice, he warps and tortures for his
own selfish ends, making instruments of the poor gulls who are credulous enough
to put faith in him. If well-bred he is the more dangerous, and if not so tho-
roughly contemptible in one sense, certainly more despicable in the eyes of those
whose equals he would be were common honesty one of his qualifications. This
is the man who leads his mob to storm the Parliament House, and flies, pale and
trembling, to the protection of its roof when the first mounted policeman heaves
in sight. This is the man who leads all the Ballarat miners to armed rebellion,
and hides himself in a deep shaft the moment a shot is fired. This is the man
who talks so loudly about bribery and corruption —because nobody has thought
it worth while to bribe him, and to attempt corruption in such a quarter would
indeed be a work of supererogation.
He is passing away, thanks be, with the pasteboard tenements and calico roofs
of days gone by. He was a necessary temporary institution, if only to show
the people the evil results of permitting him to exist. Victorians will no longer
listen to his voice, and he must go and earn his living like others. He has
found his level, and the history of Victoria will in future contain something
better than small beer chronicles of the sayings and doings of such vampires as
we have roughly described.
NOTES.
The weather in the middle of the week was occasionally thick in the day time,
with rain and snow squalls more or less heavy. In the evening, however, it ge-
nerally cleared up, but as a great deal of ice was seen during each day, the ship
was hove to every night. The last iceberg was seen at 8 p.m. on Thursday, on
the afternoon of which day the weather suddenly became beautifully fine and
clear, and the vessel has continued her course ever since. The smartness with
which she is handled draws many expressions of warm admiration from those who
understand such matters, and it is confidently stated that the manner in which
sail was shortened on Monday evening would have been considered remarkably
smart on board a man of war.
Mr. Thatcher has met with one loss during the week, one of his wombats
having died. The intense cold is the cause to which its death is attributable.
We have pleasure in announcing the publication of a contemporary, “ The
Iceberg Punch.” The first number contains the adventures of Mr. Novice
amongst the icebergs. The subject is a cold one, but is treated with much spirit,
and its artist evinces a decided genius as a caricaturist. The future numbers
will be eagerly looked for.
As might have been anticipated, the incessant anxiety, want of rest, and in-
tense cold endured by Captain Atwood during the last eight or ten days, had the
effect of injuring his health, and it soon became known through the ship that Dr.
Hyatt had ordered him not to venture on the poop. Great anxiety was felt on
all sides, the general respect in which the Captain of a vessel is always held
being here heightened into personal regard by the appreciation universally enter-
tained of Captain Atwood’s labours to ensure our safety. We are happy to say
that his indisposition was of a purely temporary character, and that the extra
rest he has been able to snatch has almost restored him to his usual good health.
GRAMMAR IN RHYME.
Adjectives tell the kind of noun,
As great, small, 'pretty, white or brown ;
Three little words you often see,
Are Articles, a, an and the.
A Noun’s the name of anything, Instead of nouns the Pronouns stand,
As school or garden, hoop or swing ; Her head, his face, your arm, my hand.


THE LOG.
Latitude,
Longitude.
Distance.
October.
Sunday 30 .
55.25 S.
110.40 W.
99 Miles.
77
Monday 31 .
55.43
106.44
135 „
November.
Tuesday 1 .
56.27
103.24
121 „
97
Wednesday 2
56.45
98.26
168 „
97
Thursday 3 .
56.50
94.6
200 „
77
Friday 4
58.38
86.32
205 „
77
Saturday 5 .
58.42
79.54
208 „
Verbs tell of something to be done,
To read, count, sing, laugh, jump or run
How tilings are done the Adverbs tell,
As quickly, slowly, ill, or well.
Conjunctions join the words together,
As man and woman, wind or weather.
The Prepositions stand before,
A noun, as in or through a door.
The Interjections show surprise,
As Oh i how pretty ; Ah ! how wise.
The whole are called nine parts of speech,
Which reading, writing, speaking teach.
American Paper.
3. What
train is the most difficult one to catch ?
To the Editor of the “ Essex Chronicle
Sir, —I beg to inform you of a slight error in your last week’s Journal, with
regard to the state of affairs when we had our miraculous escape. The Captain
bad been on deck for some time, in fact the greater portion of the afternoon.
The royals were not set, and the ship was going nearer 10 knots than 12.
I remain, Sir, &c.,
“ Hum Spiro Spero.”
[We distinctly said the Captain was always on deck. The royals we only said
were up as a matter of belief. The Captain is our authority for the pace of the
vessel.]
MEDICAL EEPOET,
To the Editor of the “ Essex Chronicle
Sir, —The Medical Eeport for the week ending November sth, 1864, I am
glad to be able to say is a very favourable one, considering the severity of the
weather during the past fortnight, from which only some bad cases of catarrh
have resulted. There have been three cases of frost-bite, one of the crew had the
first phalanx of each finger on both hands very severely frost bitten, and it was
some time before I could get reaction established. The case, however, is now
doing well, and I do not anticipate any evil of any consequence.
I remain, Sir, yours, &c.
Brownlow N. Hyatt, Cbir.
CONHNDEUMS.
4. Why is new bread like a caterpillar ?
Ansicers.
1. Because they are Eight Belles.
2. Because it was never seen before.
Why is a Parsee french polisher who has become a blacksmith like an elastic
band ? (The reply to this would never keep a week, and is therefore given at
once) —Because he’s a Vulcanized India Eubber.
1. When it’s in, it’s out;
When it’s out, it’s in;
When it’s neither in nor out,
It’s neither out nor in.


2. Enigma. —A friend and an enemy, a blessing and a curse, saves life and
takes it away, is long and short, round and square, rough and smooth, straight
and crooked, hard and soft, hot and cold, most wanted where it is in the greatest
plenty; it accommodates itself to all palates ; sweet and of a bad smell, strong
and weak; sometimes able to bear the greatest burdens, at other times will not
bear a pin; for this men make long journeys, though they have it in greatest
plenty at home. It is subject to reflection, and has the power of dissolving ma-
trimony. It is subservient and overbearing, death and an antidote, causes famine
and plenty, is a fluid and a solid, a mountain and a valley, has a numerous off-
spring, yet is an enemy to children ;the subject of miracles, a theme of poets,
an improvement of music, of great use in fortifications, employed in the finest
paintings, and produces the noblest architecture in the world.
ON THE PEOSPECT OE
The Essex with her living freight
Sails safely o’er the sea;
She steers on for Old England,
A home we long to see.
Many, many are the hopes
That cheer our little band,
And gladly we shall gaze upon
That old beloved strand.
Copt of
BEACHING ENGLAND.
“ Eest,” the husbandman will cry,
“ Sweet home,” shall cry the wife ;
And modestly the maid will smile,
Land of my early life.
Then we’ll crush all craven fears,
Eor then we’re home at last;
And then we’ll forget our cares,
Eor then all danger’s past.
W. P. S.
Ship’s Log.
Oct. 30. 9 a.m. —More than 30 bergs were seen from deck.
Noon. —Bergs in sight, much smaller, evidently getting clear of them.
2 p.m. —Moderate and steady,
3 p.m.—Less ice ; but large numbers of small detached pieces,
4 p.m. —Set in foggy. Shortened sail to whole foretopsail, close reefed
main and mizen topsails and reefed foresail.
7 p.m. —Clearer. Several bergs ahead, some very large. Stowed fore-
sail and hove to under close reefed topsails under lee of a small
iceberg.
12 p.m. —"Unsteady and cloudy.
Oct. 31. 2 a.m. —Eilled and made sail.
5 a.m. —Passed close to berg, weather preventing them becoming
visible till close to the ship.
7 a.m. —Clearer, 12 bergs visible, made all possible sail on fore and
mizen.
11 a.m. —Less ice.
12 a.m. —Several bergs ahead.
3 a.m. —Passed numerous bergs of moderate size, all breaking up.
6 a.m. —Passed close to two bergs and several small pieces.
8 a.m. —Shortened sail to close reefed top sails, and hove to on po.
tack.
Nov. 1. 3 a.m. —Discovered on approach of daylight an iceberg close to the
ship to leeward. Set foresail, jibs and staysails, and whole main
topsail.
4 a.m. —Thick misty weather.
9 a.m. —Lookouts doubled, and every precaution taken for clearing
bergs sighted ahead.
3 p.m. —Several bergs passed and numerous detached pieces.
6 p.m. —Clearer. Several bergs visible.
8 p.m. —Hove to. Close reefed topsails.
Nov. 2. 2 a.m. —Clearer. Iceberg close to the ship on lee beam. Eilled and
made sail.
4 a.m. —Daylight. Passed a great number of ‘bergs and numerou
detached pieces. Made all possible sail.
18
THE ESSEX CHEONICLE.


Nov. 3. 8 a.m. —Sudden shift to S.W. with squalls of snow and sleet. Short-
ened sail to double reefed topsails. Wind increasing to heavy gale,
stowed foresail and mizen topsail and double reefed main and fore-
(opsails.
11 a.m. —Passed close to large berg.
12 a.m.— Strong gale and heavy blinding snow, not able to see ten
yards from ship.
1 a.m. —Barometer rising. Violent gale: clearer weather. Saw some
small bergs at a distance.
3 a.m. —Passed close to a berg: decks, sails and masts covered with
snow and ice.
6 p.m. —Hove to on starboard tack, considering it unsafe to proceed,
from the thickness of the snow squalls.
9 p.m. —-Clearer. Gale moderating.
12 p.m. —Rapidly moderating with occasional snow squalls,
Nov. 3. 12.30 a.m. —Filled and made sail.
4 a.m. —Several bergs in sight.
11 a.m. —Passed close to berg.
12 p.m. —Freshening to a gale. Set top gallant sails and double reefed
topsails,
4. p.m. —Clearer and decreasing wind.
7. p.m.—Passed berg and several floating pieces.
9. p.m. —Set main royal.
11. p.m. —No ice seen.
12. p.m. — Fresh breeze, clear weather.
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. VI. Saturday , November 1 2th, 1864.
THE MERCHANT SEAMEN’S ORPHAN ASYLUM.
In another column will be found a letter from Mr. Campion, bon. secretary to
the Bazaar which it is proposed to hold on board this vessel in aid of the
Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum. This letter shows us that the time has
arrived for the exercise of energy in obtaining contributions, and to explain in a
proper manner to all on board the objects of the Institution and the means by
which the projectors of this bazaar now seek to add to its funds.
The asylum is founded, as its name imports, for “ boarding, clothing, and
educating the children of merchant seamen deceased—to rest ue them from vice
and profligacy, and to place them in such situations where the prospect of an
honest livelihood may be secured.” With this high and glorious object the
Institution was founded in 1827, and has from that period prospered much and
gradually waxed great, its sphere of usefulness being maintained solely by
voluntary subscriptions, donations, and bequests, together with occasional sums
procured by means of bazaars, which form a serious item of its revenue. Founded
entirely for the children of merchant seamen, the great shipowners and merchant
princes of Britain have been its chief support, and a glance through any of its
annual reports will show how munificent they have always been, and also how
the whole British public from Her Majesty and her Peers down to those able
only to give the poorest mite, have shown their sense of the value of the Asylum,
and the true benevolence of its object, by subscribing according to their means.
Some of these, we admit, are from the very elevation of their position compelled
to place their names on the rolls as subscribers to such institutions as these,
(though we are well aware that not one in a hundred grudges his subscription,)
but by far the greater proportion of donors are persons of small means, but
benevolent spirits, totally unconnected with the sea, who give because they admit
b 2


the excellence of the objects sought, and recognize the good the Institution has
done during a period of upwards of thirty years.
How much more then should we “ who go down to the sea in ships, and
occupy our business in the great waters,” how much more should we give our
mites as we are able to aid in securing, as far as may be, the future welfare of
the children of those who are our guides over the trackless waste of ocean!
This is no sham charity, no attempt to Christianise cannibals that never existed—
it is a matter in which the best and holiest sympathies of our nature must be
enlisted. It is one in which the smallest contribution entitles its giver to equal
consideration and gratitude with the more wealthy and more showy subscribers,
who give according to their means as the poorer ones to theirs. We, therefore,
earnestly hope that Mr. Campion’s letter will be heartily responded to, and that
each and all will not scruple to present any article, however small and apparently
valueless it may appear. It is the multitude of insignificant things which enable
the construction of a great result, and there is scarcely anything so small and
unimportant that it will not find a purchaser, and add to the funds of an
Institution which has not its superior in Europe.
NOTES.
On Monday morning last the news was circulated throughout the vessel that
she had rounded “ the Horn,” and very beaming and gratified all hands looked
at the intelligence. There was not at that moment much recollection of icebergs
and danger, from their having been avoided. Thanks to Providence, our Captain
and officers, but little dread appears to be felt of other dangers of the deep.
Throughout the week the vessel has been going along splendidly, making good
runs each day, and the wind generally fair. On Monday evening the customary
hospitality was extended to all hands, fore and aft, by the Captain, whose health
was drank w r ith musical honours, not, as it was observed, for the grog, but in
token of the sense entertained by every one of how much they owe to his
unremitting diligence and skill. The officers and crew were similarly toasted,
and all were responded to with enthusiasm.
On Tuesday morning last a sail was descried some distance off on the starboard
quarter, and was soon made out to be an American liner carrying double topsail
yards and sky-sails. The Essex was at the time going two or three knots, it
being almost calm, and towards noon it appeared that the liner had a breeze and
was rapidly overhauling us. About 1 p.m,, however, “ this old tub of an Essex ”
got the breeze, and before 8 p.m. the Yankee was out of sight, having been
visibly dropping astern from the time the breeze reached her “ chase.” Another
vessel was passed in the middle watch on the same night. She appeared to be
one of the Black Ball liners, which having proceeded from Melbourne to Callao,
was bound from thence to Liverpool with guano.
Can anybody spare any foolscap paper? We have exhausted our sources of
revenue, and are now compelled to appeal to a discerning public.
The “ Crusader’s Return,” and “An Apostrophe to an Iceberg,” will appear
next week. The description of “ the East End of the Essex,” is necessarily
declined.
A birth occurred on board on Sunday morning last, the wife of Mr. William
Garven, a third cabin passenger, having then been safely delivered of a boy.
The medical report informs us that both parties to this interesting transaction
are doing well, and all visitors are delighted with the “ Essex Baby,” which they
declare looks six weeks old.
CONUNDRUMS.
Answers :
1. A candle.
2. Water.
3. Forty minutes past 12, because its 20 to 1 if you catch it.
4. Because it’s the grub that makes the butter-fly.


Sunday, 6th
THE LOG.
. 58.42 S.
72.40 W.
227 miles.
Monday, 7th .
. 57.45 „
66. 5 „
217 „
Tuesday, 8th .
. ' . . 56.30 „
60.13 „
219 „
Wednesday, 9th
. 54.19,,
56.30 „
165 „
Thursday, 10th
. 52.38 „
52.30 „
190 „
Friday, 11th
. 49 „
47. 4 „
289 „
Saturday, 12th
. 45.53 „
42. 5 „
276 „
ENIGMA.
la places where mirth and good humour abound,
Who so welcome as I, or so commonly found?
If I get among gamblers, I’m never the winner;
Eat nothing, yet who can afford better dinner ?
At church of my privilege ne’er bate an ace,
Not e’en to churchwardens or parson give place.
In verse or in prose, there are few who indite,
But to me they apply ere they venture to write.
In council I’m present, nor absent at sea.
Nymphs who’re courted by all, come and pay court to me.
Then seek out my title, each spirited lover,
Who dares such a favourite rival discover;
If I move not on four, as I usually do,
You may find me on one leg; but never on two.
THE BUNYIP.
A correspondent sends the following, which he terms “An Account of the
Australian Bunyip,” dedicated to the Acclimatization Society of Victoria.
“ The Bunyip is an amphibious animal, found on the banks of the Conyaya, and
in the value of its services to mankind greatly exceeds all other cattle, a fact
related in modern spelling books. Its nails are of iron, a fact which explains the
presence of the harder metals amongst the aborigines, as described by Batman,
Ealkner, and other illustrious pioneers. Its tongue is of the same metal and
cut like a file—this circumstance occasioning the beast sometimes to be called a
“ rasper,” while in the former originated the popular expression of “ a hard nail.”
Its eyes are the most powerful magnifying glasses yet known, and it is to the
possession and use of one of these that Hargreaves’ discovery of gold at Ballarat
is attributable, he having seen the “ gutter ” 479£ feet from the surface, 150 feet
thereof being black clay. Its flesh is of a most delicate kind, and of so highly
nutritious a character that a sucking Bunyip, the size of a chicken, has amply
appeased the appetites of the entire body-guard of the Great Mogul, consisting
of 999 men of the stature of Ein-ma-Coul, and two drummer boys —a number
which Messrs. W. P. White & Co., of Melbourne, will inform the reader, exactly
equals 1000 statute adults. The Bunyip is reproducible by sowing the teeth,
either of a living or defunct member of the species, and it is to the culpable
neglect of this great public duty, caused principally by the stupid superstition of
the natives, that the decline of the species is attributable. This fact also
establishes the identity of the Bunyip with the dragon whose teeth were sown by
Cadmus, and produced armed men—the armed men, of course, being a mere
mythological fiction, as no seed can produce anything but its own kind. This
view is to be submitted by the writer to the various antiquarian and scientific
societies of which he is a member, on his return to England, and he hopes will
result in proper attention to the cultivation of this most useful animal, six of
whose teeth, when sown in rich chocolate soil, will produce a herd of 2000
Bunyips in fine condition and .ready for the butcher’s knife. What a relief must
this undeniable truth be to those who fear that a few years will see in Europe
such a scarcity of animal food that famine prices will rule!!!”


BUSH RECOLLECTIONS.
Continued from No. 3.
Whether in peace or war the Corroboree is a solemn festival amongst the abo-
rigines, its distinguishing feature being a series of savage evolutions, which they
term a dance, and is called Cobbarango-Corroboree. This festival is held at irre-
gular periods, but most scrupulously observed once a year in the last quarter of
the twelfth moon, and it was on one of these occasions that I was present. Eor
many days prior to the great event several neighbouring tribes assembled at a parti-
cular spot, that chosen being generally remarkable for possessing one of those enor-
mous mounds of earth known to European settlers as “ Black’s Ovens,” in the
immediate vicinity of which permanent water is pretty sure to be found, and to
which they, in the course of the day, bring those quantities of provisions I have
described. The proceedings commence by the sages, chieftains, and wawas, or medi-
cine men, of each of the tribes taking their places in positions of honour, from which
they commence a march round the enormous fire, pronouncing the while certain
mysterious phrases uttered in a wild and most unmelodious barbaric chant. They
divest themselves of all the charms and amulets which they have worn during the
previous twelve moons, and cast them into the flames. The sacrifice of the charms
having occupied about half an hour, each seeks a piece of wood, which, with more
incantations, are placed in a circle round the boundaries of their temporary camp,
for the purpose of resisting the approach of the evil spirits. This operation
having been satisfactorily completed, all the men commence an elaborate toilet,
consisting of besmearing themselves with a mixture of white and red ochre and
fat, a costume eminently calculated to procure for them a world-wide reputation
as nice young men for small tea-parties. In the meantime the women seat them-
selves, or rather squat on their hams, in a straight line, their opossum skins thrown
well back so as to give freedom to their arms and enable them to wield the sticks
with which each hand is provided. Before them is the huge fire, the bright flame
of which is watched and fed by one of the medicine men.
When all is ready the men seat themselves opposite the women, and one of the
elders mounts the eminence or “ oven,” from which he watches the moment of
the rising of the moon, which is the signal for the commencement of the real
Corroboree. The scene at this moment is eminently striking. The bright flames
cast a lurid satanic glare over the black phalanx, of which each form is a suffi-
ciently hideous object, while the trees tower around in gloomy majesty, and the
wind moans cheerlessly through the boughs which nod and wave in gloomy unison
with the occasion. When the dark gentleman particularly charged with atten-
tion to the lunar movements announces the arrival of that beneficent planet the
dance commences. The women strike their sticks in measured time against each
other, producing a most extraordinary and monotonous music, and chanting mean-
while certain sentences, the gist of which is, “ The kangaroo is active —but
Mgoyulla more so,” &c.
The name uttered by each lubra being that of her husband, or in default of a
husband, of that man to whom her affections are given. The men rise and dance,
or rather indulge in exquisite contortions, and gradually work themselves into
perfect transports of passion. They utter shrieks compared to which the howling
of a band of Jackalls might be considered ravishing music, and brandish their
weapons with gestures of ludicrous ferocity. This continues until one by one
they fall exhausted on the earth, and when partially recovered they charge pell-
mell at the eatables, and gorge till even savage nature cries enough, and they fall
and wallow in the dust, disgusting pictures of animal debauchery.
To the Editor of the Essex Chronicle.
Dear Sir, —Allow me, through your paper, to acknowledge the following
donations in aid of the Bazaar about to take place on board the Essex for the
benefit of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asy'um, and at the same time to state
that any further contributions will be thankfully received and acknowledged. It


south of the line, so contributors will
G. F. Campion, Hon. Secretary,
Mr. J. Gurhack
Concertina.
Mr. Walker
Pipe.
Ditto
Trowsers.
Ditto
French combs.
Mr. Harris
Work holder.
Miss Harris
Pen wiper.
Mr. Harris
Book and socks.
Ditto
Pair of sleeves.
Mr. Sayher
4 books.
Mrs. Greaves .
Mirror.
A lady
Book and razor strop.
Mrs. Jones
3 books.
Mrs. Coulson .
1 do.
is intended the Bazaar shall take place
please send their donations early.
Anon. . . A neck tie.
Sam. . . A stuffed bird.
Mr. Huber . Ingoldsby’s Legends
Ditto . Pair of spurs.
Mr. Hyman . A watch.
Ditto . Pack of cards.
Mr. Sam . . Chinese fan.
Timothy Tadpole 1 dozen cigars.
Mr.R.C. Harris X book.
Mr. J. D. Peacock 1 do.
Mrs. Saville . 2 do.
Mr. Spenser . Dressing case.
Ditto . Silver guard.
MEDICAL REPORT.
To the Editor of the Essex Chronicle.
Sir—l beg to hand you my report for the week ending November 12th, 1861.
The improved state of the weather has had the desired effect with most of my
patients, and all are doing well. There has been one birth during the week, and
both mother and child are doing well. A slight accident occurred, a boy having
one of his fingers torn off while amusing himself with a coffee mill.
I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
B. N. Hyatt, Chir.
THE ESSEX CHEONICLE,
No. VII.
Saturday, November 19th, 1864.
A SEA VIEW OP BRITISH POLITICS.
We have no notion of prophesying, and, in adopting this as a subject, are
actuated only by that tolerably general cause, want of a better. It is not a bad
subject either, though more adapted for coversational discussion than to write
about. However, there is plenty to be said about it, as, in the event of our
getting no news from outward-bound vessels, we shall be five months behind on
pur arrival in England, and we shall compress a few ideas into a brief space.
The American War. Not precisely a British question, but calculated to have
an important effect upon a certain stage of the political discussions of that
country. Is it to be ended by the subjugation of the South, or by the North
confessing itself fairly baffled ? One or other of these things must occur at some
time or other. What, then, will follow? If the former, will the North keep a
permanent garrison throughout the Southern territory, and turn its leisure
moments to account by driving the French out of Mexico and the English out of
Canada? We rather think not. In the first place, they cannot subjugate the
South thoroughly, and have neither men nor means to garrison it. In the next
place, the war must be carried on by those who have kept the ball rolling so long.
They know that the reaction which a peace must cause must crush them, and in
the perpetuation of this true series of battles, murders, and sudden deaths, lies
their temporary safety. Until they bring gold again down to par—a thing which a
skilful financier might hope to accomplish, with everything in his favour, in some-
thing like a century—their status among the nations of the earth must remain
low. From this they will rise greater for their present disasters, and well purified
by the fiery ordeal through which they have passed. But the war will not be
concluded by the time it is probable we shall reach England.
The New Zealand War—a question beginning to occupy a position of some


Miss Eiley ....
. Pincushion and necklace.
Septimus ....
. Pair socks.
Mrs. Sharp....
. Two books.
Mrs. Major.
. Envelopes and collar.
Mrs. Bidmore
. Two books and scarf.
Mr. Chenell
. Slate.
Mr. Dubois
. Book.
Friend ....
. Pistol.
Mr. White
, Two pair socks.
Mrs. Everson
. Bracelets.
Mr. Kenay
. Map New Zealand.
Sandy ....
. Book.
Philpot ....
. Scarf.
Santry ....
. Book.
L. Lorenzson . ,
. Eing.
prominence in tlie House of Commons, is one also which may, if not properly
treated, have the effect of loosening the bonds between the colonies and the
mother country. The theory of Mr. Goldwin Smith, that colonies are at*
expensive nuisance to England, and that English protection is a drag upon the
energies of the colonists, is slowly but surely gaining ground. We are of a
totally different opinion, holding that it is their very bond of union that assures
the strength of both. But the new apostle has his disciples, and they will make
a disturbance yet, the first step of which has already been taken in the form of a
resolution declaring the war to be impolitic and cruel, and one in which the tax-
payers of England are in no way concerned. If this was carried, it was to be
moved that the British troops be at once recalled from New Zealand. We need
not say that this never could be passed. The British Government never could
induce people to emigrate and then leave them defenceless to the tender mercies
of hordes of determined savages. The war in New Zealand can only be closed
oy the unconditional submission of the natives, or their utter extermination. Of
the justice of the war in the first instance, or of its probable result, we offer no*
opinion; but it having come to a war in which blood has been shed on both sides,
it is necessary that the Anglo-Saxon, the dominant race of the world, should, just
or unjust, maintain its prestige, and extort even abject surrender from its foesv
The future welfare of both .sides demands this, and the war may have the good
effect of turning attention to the many noble qualities of the New Zealanders,
and preventing the gradual but apparently certain extinction of the Maori race.
If such a result is obtained, the blood which has been shed in the conflict will not
have been poured forth in vain.
NOTES.
The first whales of the voyage were seen on Wednesday last, an apparently
large shoal of them being visible first at a long distance off on the starboard side.
Soon afterwards a number were visible quite close to the ship, and turned out to
he the smaller kind of whale known as blackfish.
A sail was reported on the afternoon of Thursday. It has not been seen again
since. As we are now, however, in the exact track of the Essex in her outward
journey, it is not probable that we shall be many days without seeing vessels.
The weather has been fine during the week, and the wind fair, except on
Thursday, on which day it was very baffling. On Friday morning, however, it
again became fair, and it is hoped either that we have caught the South-east
Trades, or that the present wind will take us into them. In the meantime the
run of the Essex from the Horn has been better than that of the Swiftsure,
well known as one of the smartest liners.
Mr. Campion forwards the following list of additional subscriptions to the
Bazaar, and states that as it is intended to hold it in a few days, contributors are
requested to forward their subscriptions during the present week.


THE LOG.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance.
November
Sunday, 13th . 42.55 S.
37.37 W.
263 miles.
>»
Monday, 14th . 40.2
33.49
245 „
>1
Tuesday, 15th . 37.24
29.18
258 „
Wednesday, 16th 34.54
25.23
238 „
V
Thursday, 17th . 33.36
23.67
120 „
Penliton ..... Scissors.
Miss Saville .... Fancy mats.
Leby Book.
Mrs. Jones .... Three books.
Miss Robertson .... Eight ditto.
Ditto .... One anti-macassar.
Mr. Beckwith .... Three books, one set of razors.
Ditto .... Two shirts, two socks.
Mr. D. Alebidin .... Cap, scissors, books.
Mr. Dale One kedge anchor.
Mr, Angel One telescope.
Answer to "Enigma. —A Table.
ARITHMETICAL PUZZLE.
A man was desired to lay out £lOO in the purchase of 100 animals, consisting
of ducks at Is each, pigs at £l. each, and calves at £5. each. How many of each
did he buy ?
CONUNDRUM.
In what did the potatoe disease first originate, and how was the fact discovered ?
APOSTROPHE TO AN ICEBERG.
How grand thou looks’t, thou snow-capped monster, raising thy bulky form
from out old Ocean, and looking down with calm composure at his unceasing
efforts to dash thee to pieces ! Thy close-knit mass is too strongly welded to be
crushed by such blows ; but Father Time is ever hacking at thee with his scythe,
and the waves shall in due course absorb into their ruffled bosom thy now
majestic form. As we gaze upon thy glittering sides, radiating the solar rays,
we can scarce divest ourselves of the idea that thou art peopled by a race of
Ice-burghers, and we would search every nook and cranny for some beings of a
nature kindred to thine own. But no! Silence reigns supreme ! The eye roams
o’er thy trackless brow of snow; the spray of Ocean dashes against thy rugged
sides; thy surface is unindented with the footsteps of man or beast, and thy
majestic repose but adds to thy awful grandeur! Whilst in thy immediate
neighbourhood, a chilly fear was at our hearts; for if rude Boreas had driven us
upon thy craggy shore, thou wouldst not have shed one icy tear at our destruc-
tion. We leave thee without regret; but thy imposing and solemn majesty
is too deeply stamped upon our memories ever to be effaced. Farewell, old
friend, and may we never see thee more! !
ORIGINAL POETRY.— The cehsadee’s eetuen—eomanza.
’Twas midnight in the festive hall,
’Midst mirth and revelry;
The silver lamps shed dazzling light
On a “goodly companie.”
Grim belted knights and gallants gay,
With proud and martial mien;
And ladies fair as budding flowers,
All formed a joyous scene.
For once again the wheels of time
Revolving on and on,
Had reached that well-known natal day
Since eighteen years bygone.
The bright Irene, her father’s joy.
First op’d her lustrous eyes ;
His widow’d bleeding heart to soothe,
And calm his anguish’d cries.
25
TIIE ESSEX CIIEONICLE.


And as she grew like beauteous flower
In sunny climate rear’d,
She ’came more graceful day by day,
To one and all endeared.
Her father saw in her, once more,
Her sainted mother’s form ;
Who erst had won his knightly heart,
’Mongst titled and high-born.
And thus it was that once a year
(The Ides of smiling June)
Don Guzman pressed her to his heart,
And thanked God for this boon.
Then in his joy each year he gave
A princely natal feast;
And which the noblest in the land,
With smiling presence graced.
The perfumed lights still brightly shine,
And still the wassail-bowl
Amidst the deaf’ning pause is quaffed
To some on Beauty’s roll.
The merry laugh, the anxious glance,
Soft pressure of the hand,
Felt ’midst the stately dance —all seem
A dream of fairy-land.
But who sits there so pale, so calm,
Tho’ fairest of the fair;
Whose heaving breast, whose drooping
eyes
Denote some inward care.
Ah ! poor Irene! this joyous scene.
But leads thy thoughts astray
To dream of him, thine own true knight,
This hour so far away.
Three years had passed since she had
bade
Gonzalvo sad farewell;
He’d then set out for Holy-land,
The infidels to quell.
Since then his deeds of daring had
In rumours reached her ears;
Yet, he, also, came not, as pledged,
To calm her anxious fears.
What ho! my friends, what meaneth this,
My daughter! why so sad ?
Why sitt’st thou there with distraught
air,
When thou shouldst be so glad P
No, no, my sire, I am not sad,
’Tis but a passing pain;
But yet her looks her words foreswore.
As she smiled, then sighed again.
What minstrel old, with flowing mane.
Sits yonder in the hall;
Let him advance, and by his skill,
Our daughter’s thoughts recall.
The hoary minstrel slowly rose,
Profound obeisance made;
Then, with a grand, majestic air,
For calm attention prayed.
His harp he tuned with magic touch.
Brought forth such wondrous sounds
Of sweetest melody—they moved
The heart of all around.
He sang —a bold and warlike lay.
And like an organ’s swell
His rich and powerful voice rung out.
Yea, like a mighty bell!
Irene starts, as if from trance,
Her colour comes and goes;
Her quiv’ring lips, her wond’ring eyes.
Some startling thought disclose.
I know that voice; it must be his;
But no —it cannot be:
Yet hark! again, his very tones;
Oh, God! what mockery.
Nay, sweet Irene, thy deep true love
Hath pierced thro’ this disguise;
See! thus I doff those vestments strange.
Nay! calm thy wild surprise.
And as he spoke, he’d cast them off.
Stood ’fore the ’mazed throng,
A noble knight, in glittering ’tire,
As ere found theme for song.
Then, nobly stepping up, he took
Irene’s hand in his ;
In sweet embrace, the loving pair
Enjoyed supremest bliss.
And many a time in after years.
With Irene by his side.
He’d archly ask her why she stoop’d
To be a minstrel’s bride.
Noxner.
No. YII. [Supplement.] Saturday, Nov. 19 th y 1804.
A very general desire has been shown amongst the passengers to be supplied
with copies of the Chronicle as soon as may be after our arrival in England.
We are not even now able to state what will be the precise cost of the
printing, &c.; but suppose that with stitching the series together and postage,
the expense will amount to about half-a-crown a number. The Editor, at all
events, agrees to supply any number of copies at that rate, provided over 120
26
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE,


are agreed beforehand to be taken, and will forward them to the various sub-
scribers (as soon as they are ready) to the addresses they give him.
It must be distinctly understood that this is no speculative affair in which
any one desires to make money. Should there be a surplus after paying all
expenses, it will be expended in providing a superior binding for the volume.
Those who are desirous of becoming subscribers upon these terms, are requested
to give their names, with the number of copies they require, to Mr. Huber, and
Mr. Whitcomb, during the present week. When the number of 120 is reached
notice will be given that addresses and subscriptions are receivable.
NOTES.
We have been requested to mention that Dr. Hyatt’s Prayer-Book was mislaid
from the Cuddy after Divine Service, on Sunday last, the 13th instant. As it has
not been since discovered, it is supposed that some one must have taken it by
mistake, and has not discovered the error. It is requested, therefore, that should
anyone find himself in possession of a stray Prayer-book, he will return it to the
Doctor, who has private reasons for attaching more than ordinary value to it.
A light on the lee-bow was reported a little before 8 p.m. on Saturday. It was
only occasionally visible to the naked eye, but was made out to be a Brig, bound
to the eastward.
We may mention that a bath is now prepared every morning on the after part
of the quarter-deck. It is pretty well made use of, and will probably be uni-
versally so when the fact of its existence is generally known. Cleanliness on
board ship is decidedly the next quality to Godliness.
The fair weather we are now experiencing has raised the spirits of all on board;
and opinions, both amateur and professional, are freely given and discussed, as
to the time when we shall probably reach England, We are fifty days out, and
where we now are, the Suffolk was on her 46th day. She made the passage from
Melbourne to the Lizard in 78' days; why then, it is argued, should we not
reach home by Christmas-day ? Why not, indeed, and we all know that no
means, consistent with safety, will be neglected to accomplish this ; and if we do,
it will be one of the finest passages ever made from Cape Horn to England.
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. VIII. Saturday , November 26th, 1864.
THE BAZAAR.
We have already made our appeal to those who compose our little commu-
nity, on behalf of the Bazaar which we now announce is to take place on
Tuesday next, on the Poop of this vessel, in aid of the Merchant Seamen’s
Orphan Asylum. We have only one remark to make beyond what has already
been said. It is this. Whatever occupation a man may adopt as a means of
livelihood, he always looks forward to the time when his means will be sufficient
to enable him to marry, and when the remuneration of his labours will be such
as will enable him to make some provision for his wife and children, in case of
his sudden decease. It is well known that the gains of sailors are not great, and
that, as a rule, they are an infinitely more conscientious class of men than those
occupying a corresponding social grade on shore. The inference, therefore,
naturally is, that the seaman does not marry, because he feels that, however
well able to support his family during his own lifetime, the moment of his
decease throws them out of their means of subsistence, adrift upon the
world. The existence of a Society, such as that whose cause we plead,
would, if our view of the question be right, necessarily exercise an immediately
beneficial influence upon the social condition of those whom we know as able
seamen, of which class the greater portion of those on board this vessel are fair
and admirable specimens. It is unnecessary for us to argue out so self-evident


THE LOCK
November.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance.
Sunday, 20th .
. 24.49 S.
21.5 W.
212 miles.
Monday, 21st .
. 21.15 „
20.50 „
218 „
Tuesday, 22nd
. 17.24 „
21.19 „
230 „
Wednesday, 23rd .
. 14.32 „
22.56 „
195 „
Thursday, 24th
. 10.36 „
24.29 „
253- „
Friday, 25th
. 6.13 „
25.19 „
268 „
Saturday, 26th
. 2.8 „
26.17 „
252 „
a proposition. The social benefit of the mariner while alive, and the maintenance
and introduction to a profession of his offspring, in case of his untimely death,
are the objects sought by the promoters of this Asylum, and we believe it to be
one which all will advance according to their means.
In another column will be found some poetry, not only apropos to the occa-
sion, but also pointing out forcibly the direct benefits received by the world at
large from seamen, and the want of recognition of their services by the public,
when they are incapable of further work. These we commend to our readers*
perusal. The Honorary Secretary’s letter, explaining matters, is also given.
NOTES.
We draw attention to the fact, that the Bazaar will take place on Tuesday
next. Mr. Campion will be happy to afford any information on the subject to
those who desire it.
A vessel on the lee bow was reported from the foretop on Monday last. She
rapidly neared us, and soon after mid-day passed under the bow of the Essex.
She turned out to be the barque Marie, of Bremen, about 400 tons, bound from
Cardiff to the Cape of G-ood Hope. This was all the information obtained, their
reply to our question about the American war, being, that they could not make
out our signals. She is a new American built vessel. Much to the surprise of all
no more vessels have been seen.
The weather during the past week has been delightful; any shady part of the
deck, and as little clothing as is compatible with decency, being the leading
order of the day. On one afternoon only was the wind very light, and during the
rest of the week, capital runs have been made each day. While we write, the
wind is still favourable, and if it bolds as at present to the Equator, we shall have
made one of the finest passages on record from Cape Horn to the Line. We
have had some very severe squalls, but not a single sail has been lost, and stud-
ding-sails have been carried, off and on, throughout.
Notwithstanding the great heat we have lately experienced, the health of those
on board is good, so much so, that Dr. Hyatt has nothing to report. The accli-
matization movement also proceeds satisfactorily, none of the animals showing
signs of illness, except the Mopokes, and even these it is still hoped will be
preserved.
By the above it will be seen that this week’s run has been the best of the
voyage, a distance of 1628 knots having been made. The next best was only
1583 knots. We are now only 128 miles from the Line, or rather were so to-day
at noon, and are now going through the water at the rate of 9 knots an hour.
The run to the Line promises, if the wind holds six or eight hours more, to be
one of the most rapid on record.
The necessary number of subscribers having been obtained, the Chronicle will
be printed on the arrival of the Essex in England. In order that we may have
no occasion to refer to the subject again, it is as well to mention that Mr. Spare,
the chief steward, has consented to receive subscriptions, and that Mr. Whit-
comb will take down the addresses. Subscriptions are now receivable by the
former, and it is requested that in the event of any subscriber not receiving his
copies within 20 days of the arrival of the vessel, he will communicate with the
latter, to the address of Grosvenor Villa, Margate. The error will then be im-
mediately rectified.


THE BAZAAE.
To the Editor of the Essex Chronicle.
Dear Sir, —I beg to acquaint your readers that weather permitting—the
Bazaar will take place on Tuesday next, when I hope all hands will muster on
the Poop, and endeavour to make the day pass agreeably, and profitably to the
Asylum. It is the intention of the committee to supply refreshments—to have a
wheel of Fortune—and to have one stall for fancy goods, books, &c., and to
raffle such things as a telescope, engraving of the Essex, kedge anchor, concer-
tina, etc. Captain Atwood and Mr, Lucas have each given one pound to be
raffled for.
I beg to acknowledge contributions from the following ladies and gentlemen:
Captain and Mrs. Atwood, Mrs. Campion, Miss Webster, Mrs. Whitcomb, Mrs.
Black, Mrs. Donovan, Dr. Hyatt, Dr. Dwyer, Messrs. Gibbs, Crawford, D’Abbadie,
Spare, and Ayliffe. I am, &c.,
G. F. Campion,
Hon. Secretary.
Answer to Arithmetical Euzzle. —80 ducks, £4., 1 pig, £l. f 19 calves, £95.
£lOO.
Answer to Conundrum. —“ln the rotatory motion of the earth.” “By study-
ing the commentators.”
POOE JACK.
Through frost and snow —through wind and rain.
For many a weary league
The sailor keeps unceasing watch—regardless of fatigue,
When all save he throughout the ship are wrapped in slumber deep,
Small rest he finds, for through the night his watch he still must keep.
The soldier in the battle field with man alone doth fight,
But the sailor strives with a deadlier foe —he braves the tempest’s might.
What England is, she ne’er had been, but for her sailors brave,
Men nurtured in that sea wherein too oft they find a grave.
But yet! when age comes on apace, and the sailor groweth old,
And his hairs are grey, and his limbs are stiff through constant wet and cold;
Too often —like some battered bark, which once so tight and sound,
The winds and rains have quite worn out —“ Poor Jack” is run aground.
And after ’scaping shipwrecks oft, and tempests many a one,
He finds himself in sear old age left friendless and alone;
Scarcely a penny in his purse, rags only on his back,
For sharks afloat and sharks ashore, both prey upon poor Jack.
Eeader! if e’er a bosom friend, a child or wedded wife,
Have come across the seas to you, and braved the ocean’s strife,
Eemember that those cherished ones have in the hour of need,
Been protected by those hardy tars, whose cause I feebly plead.
Think of that dreaded iceberg!—the iron bound lee shore !
The fearful cyclone’s mighty whirl, and a thousand dangers more !
And let not the men who have faced all these,
Be in misery left at last,
But out with your shiners their troubles to ease,
And shield them from poverty’s blast.
29
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.


THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. IX.
Saturday, December &th.
THE WEEK.
We had one week during this voyage which is likely to be specially remembered
by all on board on account of its pains. We have now the happiness of recording
one which is equally likely to live in our memories in consequence of its pleasures.
The past week has been in no sense unpleasant, so far as we know, to any one on
board. The heat has certainly been somewhat excessive at times, and there are
few who do not experience that lassitude and weakness which naturally follow
from a cause so enervating, but philosophy seems to have been the order of the
day, and “ grin and bear it,” its judicious motto. Throughout the week the main
deck has been a species of agreeable Babel during the dog-watches, and a not
too demonstrative enthusiast might have been pardoned for opining that the true
Millenium had arrived, so many and singular are the lambs and lions who there
meet together in calm enjoyment, evening after evening. The wind has been
fair and reasonably brisk —the vessel, as she seems always to be, so steady that
one might shut his eyes and almost forget that he was afloat—the savage breast
has been soothed in the orthodox manner in all quarters—the fantastic toe has
been anything but idle—voices of ravishing and dulcet sweetness have mingled
and floated over the blue waters with others of harsher tone, but these latter
mellowed down to such tender cadences that it was difficult to understand that
they belonged to men accustomed to battle with and overcome the fiercest
paroxysms of an angry element. Peace and good will have reigned around—
content has sweetened the cup which Nature in this climate insists shall not be
treated with the contempt of neglect—bottled beer has been at a wondrous
premium, and exhibits symptoms of running short.
But besides and beyond all this we have had an event to which anticipatory
reference has been made in our columns more than once; we, of course, refer to
the Bazaar which was held on the Poop on Tuesday last in aid of the Merchant
Seamen’s Orphan Asylum. Erom this a good deal was hoped but not too much
expected, as there are many calls upon the purses of passengers, and it is not
always easy, or indeed possible, to convince them of the value of Institutions in
which they have no direct interest. In this instance, however, we have much
pride in saying that no difficulty in doing so was encountered, and the great
result of £3B. 4 s 4<d was achieved in a single day, besides leaving sundry articles
unsold, which were disposed of on the following evening by public auction.
The result is splendid, and we heartily congratulate the promoters of the Bazaar,
those who contributed stock to it, and those who purchased it, upon having
achieved an amount not often approached by homeward-bound vessels. This
voyage of the Essex, indeed, appears destined to bear something extraordinary
in its every feature. We had more ice and a longer passage to the Horn than
almost any other vessel of the same pretensions. We had a quicker passage
from thence to the Line, better weather in the region of calms than others, and
now our chance of making Home by Christmas-day is infinitely greater than
was ever expected a month ago. We exhibit, in fact, numerous sterling qualities
—stability, liberality, rapidity, and an appreciation of the beautiful, being the
least worthy of them all. And having successfully demonstrated that the Essex
and her inhabitants are the incarnation of all the excellences, we can now with
patience turn to another subject.


THE LOCK
November and December. Longitude. Latitude. Distance.
Sunday, 27th . . . 1.22 N. 26.29 W. 210 miles.
Monday, 28th . . . 3.44 26.19 142
Tuesday, 29th . . . 5.36 26.5 113
"Wednesday, 30th . . 7.44 26.10 128
Thursday, Ist . • . 9.50 27.36 152
Friday, 2nd 12.25 29.42 197
Saturday, 3rd .
VESSELS SPOKEN AND SIGNALLED.
Monday, November 21st. Marie, Bremen barque, from Cardiff, bound to the
Cape of Good Hope.
Sunday, November 27th. Henrietta Elizabeth Susanna, Dutch barque, from
Rotterdam, bound to Sourabaya. English barque, Creole, from Newcastle to
Batavia, 37 days out. American war not concluded.
November 28th, Danish ship, Gustave and Amelie, from London to Monte
Video, 32 days out.
November 29th, 30th, etc. etc., passed several vessels of various sizes and rig,
one large ship showed commercial signals.
But little information was gained from these vessels beyond that respecting
the winds, although each was energetically questioned. Being foreigners it is
possible that our questions and signals were not perfectly understood, and in
point of fact, the Dutch gentleman fairly confessed that such was the case.
THE
While sailing on our homeward course.
Though still from Albion far, '
To aid the seamen’s widows fund,
We held a gay bazaar.
The day was calm and hot the sun,
The decks were free from tar,
There was an awning spread abroad
To shade the gay bazaar.
A man in white, with visage black
As a Hindoo hussar,
Did speechify and ring a bell,
To open the bazaar.
But tell it not in London town,
How at the tempting bar,
We tippled off the grog and beer,
At Campion’s bazaar.
I saw a quarrel in our midst,
Which left no mark or scar.
So smoothly all things went along
At Campion’s bazaar.
No storm or rain were present there.
Our gaiety to mar,
But brightly smiled the azure sky
On Campion’s bazaar.
Though in the region of the “ line,”
King Neptune and his car
Were quite forgotten in the stir
Caused by the gay bazaar.
Nov. 29, 1864.
BAZAAR,
In truth a glittering show was there,
I doubt if e’en the Czar,
In all his wide spread realms could
match
Bold Campion’s bazaar.
Our ladies stump the universe,
You would not find the par,
To the glowing cheeks and sparkling
eyes,
That enlivened the bazaar.
And hardy sailors, such as fought
The Nile and Trafalgar,
Wore buying toys and baby clothes
At Campion’s bazaar.
But had we sighted in its midst
A Yankee man-of-war,
I guess it would have caused a stir
In Campion’s bazaar.
In fact all merry makings, both
By sea and land, but are
Both dull and stupid when compared
With Campion’s bazaar.
And verily my birth has been
’Neath some unlucky star,
For with the dice my all I lost
At Campion’s bazaar.
Towards the eve, with boxing-gloves,
The sailors had a spar,
Which was the winding up of fun
At Campion’s bazaar.
Neptune.
31
THE ESSEX CHKONICLE.


THE BAZAAR
Everyone on board has decided reason to be proud of bis fellow travellers.
The result of the bazaar held on Tuesday last convincingly proves the generosity
of spirit and excellence of heart of those who attended the sale of sundries on the
Poop on that day, and who so liberally expended their money in behalf of that
most worthy institution, the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum. To the
originators a high meed of praise must be given. ¥e believe that Mr. E. O.
Campion was the first to suggest that a bazaar be held, and ever since the affair
was decided upon he has been most unremitting in his exertions to secure for it
a successful issue. It is no little thing to pledge, as it were, one’s reputation on
the success of such an undertaking, to sacrifice one’s opportunity of enjoying
easy laziness, to contribute money, valuable articles, and to become a considerable
purchaser. All this Mr. Campion has done, and although the Asylum may have
had some large subscribers, it has never had a warmer, a more zealous, or a
better friend than the honorary secretary of the Essex Bazaar.
Soon after half-past ten, or rather “ five bells,” (what’s the use of being an
old salt if you do not make people aware of the fact). Soon after five bells, then,
a single bell was heard to peal throughout the vessel in a manner that would
have incited the Lancashire ringers to suicide. All eyes turned to the per-
petrator of those most dismal sounds and beheld a sable individual of great
altitude and considerable elasticity of spine, who bowed, grimaced, attitudinized
and ejaculated in a manner at once ludicrous and appalling. The children
incontinently bolted. The ladies declared it was Peter, but others observed that
Peter was moderately white, and words ran high upon the subject, which was
eventually settled thus by a promising disciple of a gentleman named Whately.
« The question is one of colour simply. The man was originally white, and,
supposing him for argument’s sake to be the original white man, he is now
inferentially black. The man is thus both white and black. Neither is he one
colour or the other. But everything must have a colour unless it is colourless.
This man is proved to be of some colour because one party admits that he is
actually a gentleman of colour. The question at first sight appears intricate, but
the difficulty is of easy solution. Here is a man once white now black. He
cannot be of either colour, therefore, but must be between the two. Manifestly
then he is the Blue Peter spoken of in nautical novels, and is hoisted as a signal
of distress.”
The applause which naturally followed this learned disquisition having subsided,
visitors flocked to the Poop, and discovered first the grog-shop, which it was too
early to visit just then. A little further on was a youth both fresh and fair,
possessing what the newspapers call, “ a pleasing and gentlemanly exterior,”
belying his appearance by exhibiting a tendency to the abominable vice of
gambling by means of a process not less detestable than thimblerig. The mis-
guided young man was provided with a machine bearing a remote resemblance to
a wooden compass; the plane of its orbit (don’t refer to Norie to ascertain if
the phrase is correct) being divided off in the shape of a number of sextant
cases, each of which contained a candle or a lucifer match, or some other article
of doubtful value, which you had the opportunity of winning by some cabalistic
process, if you only paid sixpence for your chance. It would have been a fine
study for Mr. Millais, RA. —the diabolical young man enticing innocent young
married ladies to err —it truly was a modern example of “ Satan tempting Eve
and what is more, equally successful. Jesting apart, Mr. Crawford showed a genius
for this sort of thing, and cleared off all his prizes so rapidly, that by 2 p.m. he
had shut up shop.
We wander farther aft, and behold—what ? All lower-deck people knew they
were in for a day in Paradise, and here were the Peris. Yes! a Peri in muslin
stood on each side of a large low table, said table being covered with every con-
ceivable description of article of small size and less utility. The Peris waylaid
confiding bachelors and escaped husbands indiscriminately; they tempted both
with an awful disregard of consequences; indeed, Neptune himself declares


that he will have to go without beer for the rest of the voyage; at least, he
affirms that he has “ spent his all,” and that looks something like the same thing.
Enormously successful they were too; and when the fleeced, frightened, and
fatigued sufferer contrived to escape, it was time to visit the elegant marquee of
Mr. Spare, and imbibe bottled ale ad libitum to the tune of “ Haste to the
"Wedding,” for the benefit of the Merchant Service.
But you must not suppose that “ Mr. Novice” was permitted to pursue this
agreeable relaxation entirely undisturbed. A cloud of vampires soon surrounded
him. There were tall vampires and short vampires; there were vampires both
stout and thin; there were vampires in every species of costume, who accosted
you in every possible accent of supplication. About each there was one warning
feature distinguishable—each held a raffle-paper. The Medical Faculty was
raffling sovereigns at two pounds a piece, and the Banking Interest was per-
petrating similar atrocities. The Legal Fraternity became an accessory before,
after, and to the fact, by investing in it; and the grand climax was certainly
reached, when, after being asked to purchase a seven-and-sixpenny picture for
thirty shillings, and, “declined with thanks,” we suddenly happened upon a
tableau vivant, being an allegorical representation of Zoology and Honest Tom,
in the shape of Messrs. Thatcher and Dale, who compelled people to take fifty
chances for the same article at one shilling a piece. This certainly was the
greatest hit of the day, and reflected the greatest credit not only on the rafflers
but also on those who took the chances. And so the day passed on, being a most
agreeable relief to the monotony of the sea voyage, and realizing sufficient to
maintain at least two orphans for a year. An auction took place in the evening,
when the greater portion of the remaining articles were got rid of. Music,
singing, and dancing occupied the remainder of the time until ten p.m., when all
separated, having passed a very'happy and pleasant day, during which many
were brought into contact who had had no previous acquaintance, and we believe
in all cases with mutual gratification.
NOTES.
The good fortune wdiich has attended our vessel since she passed Cape Horn
still continues to wait upon her. The weather has been fine, the wind fresh, and
a good distance has been made each day. With ordinary luck, the passage will
be one to think of in years to come, and will astonish the natives of England
when they hear of its short duration after so many unfavourable circumstances.
A supplement will be published on Tuesday next.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE ESSEX CHRONICLE, No. IX.
MEDICAL EEPOET.
Week ending Nov, 3rd, 18G4.
g IEj —Si nC e my last report bronchitis has been the prevailing disease, resulting
chiefly from the change of climate. With the exception of one bad case of acute
inflammation of the lungs supervening on a severe attack of bronchitis, all are
doing well.
I am, sir, yours, etc.,
Brownlow N. Hyatt, Chir.
EETEOSPECTION.
We sailed from Hobson’s Bay,
’Twas rather late in the day,
For the shores of England bound,
Which we hoped to reach safe and sound
For a time all went w'ell,
Nothing occurred remarkable,
Sea-life to most was rather novel,
And had not yet begun to pall.
33
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE,


How’s the weather and the wind,
And other topics of the kind,
Formed the subjects of discussion;
While two or three, without a blush on
Their faces, looked both big and wise,
Sea-talk did spout, and wink’d their eyes,
Told when we should arrive at home,
How long be toss’d on ocean-foam.
How long ’twould take to round the
Horn,
Where squalls and tempest-winds are
born.
In fact, they had the entire route
Upon a mental map laid out.
But now occurr’d a sad event—
’Tis death that I have to lament—
A passenger in the second class
By death was struck, alas!
One day he died, the next, at eve,
Prayers were read for his soul’s re-
prieve,
Then o’er the side his body cast
Sank beneath the watery waste.
Sad it seems to die at sea,
And prepare for eternity ;
Far from friends, far from home,
’Neath the waves to find a tomb.
But for those whom no home claims,
Who never live in others’ dreams,
Who pass their lives in endless toil,
Roaming e’er from pole to pole,
What grave more lit than Ocean’s bed
Where waves roll ceasless overhead,
And in cadence melancholy,
Sing an endless lullaby.
The days pass o’er, and icebergs now
Attract attention on the bow.
There is quite a rush for glasses,
Through which to view the icy masses.
But soon no glasses needed were,
Bergs too numerous were there;
Port, starboard, bows, and right ahead,
The sea with them was covered.
’Twas on the 24th October,
A night we well remember,
With fog we were surrounded,
While on our vessel bounded
At full eleven knots an hour,
When suddenly was seen to lower
From out the fog and right ahead,
Towering from its wat’ry bed,
An iceberg of enormous size,
Which struck on our astonish’d eyes,
And caused us all to feel such fear,
We surely thought our end was near.
Each face look’d sad and pale with
fright,
As sickbed o’er with ’lectric light,
And truly ’twas an awful sight
To see our ship in such a plight.
But, by our Captain’s stern commands,
And the energy of all hands,
Our ship from off the ice did sheer,
And passed it by all safe and clear.
The next event that strikes my mind
Is “ hove-to ” in a gale of wind,
Toss’d about in a roaring sea,
An ugly iceberg on the lee.
So many sails were rent and torn,
Our situation was forlorn;
Some canvas we did try to bend,
Which the wind did quickly rend ;
But, by dint of hardy toil,
While around the sea did boil,
Our mariners brave did set
Sail enough to save us yet.
Then for many a weary day,
Icebergs all around us lay;
At night hove-to, the danger great,
Captain up both early and late.
But at last, from icebergs clear,
Round the Horn we safely steer,
And, to celebrate th’ event.
In for a shout our Captain went,
Providing liquor for all hands
(I dont know what were the brands).
Favouring gales behind us blow,
And away for the Line we go,—
The dreaded Line, where calms pre-
vail.
With not a breath to fill the sail,
Sometimes ships lay without motion,
“ Like painted ships upon painted
ocean.”
No calms had we; the breeze was fair,
And though sometimes light, yet ne’er
Did we lose it in the Tropics
Where the sun will scorch your optics.
And now I come to the Bazaar,
Which long we’d been preparing for,
In aid of the Institution
For merchant-seamen’s children.
’Twas held upon the poop,
Then did our Captain stoop,
T’ allow us all to sport
Our bobs ’mongst the nobler sort.
When philanthropy’s the end
Aristocracy may safely blend,
And with the lower orders mix,
Without being placed in a fix.
34
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.


All around the poop was hung
With flags, and a bell was rung
To inform the novices,
They could spend their sixpences,
To aid the Institution,
Raffle or wheel of fortune,
In which to invest a bob,
And get nothing or a lob.
A man whose turban round did sweep,
A face as biack as a chimney-sweep,
Whose legs were clothed in raiment
white,
Did to the poop all hands invite.
“ Now for a day in Paradise,
To view the lovely Peris’ eyes ! ”
Such, raising his orbs to the skies,
Were the words of Mr. Novice.
THE OCEAN
’Twas night at sea, our ship rode well,
Bright moonbeams on the billows fell;
Then I dreamt of home’s sweet charms,
Free from toils and storms’ alarms.
All care had fled, all trouble flown,
So had the hardships I have known.
I woke at last, but, sad to tell,
I rode upon the ocean swell.
At dawn of day, a gale came on,
The surging waves their course begun,
The rolling billows swiftly glide
By our vessel’s stately side.
While I lay down, with grief oppressed,
Far from the forms I once caressed.
From joyous scenes, I bid farewell,
Again upon the ocean swell.
Roll on, brave ship, across the foam,
And bear me to my native home.
My absent friends, I then shall see,
And gay and happy I shall be.
There will I talk of bygone days,
Of foreign climes and distant seas.
Sea-songs I ’ll sing, sea-tales I’ll tell
Of stormy nights on the ocean-swell.
Great the mirth, loud the laughter,
That attended our Bazaar ;
And a handsome sum was got
For the Asylum in tot.
And now the talk of one and all,
How long ’twill take to reach Black-
wall ;
Some say two weeks, and some say three,
But I hope the less ’twill be.
Afew there are would lay a bet
That ’twill take us four weeks yet;
But we hope their beta will fall
What’s loss to them is gain to all.
“ My native land I soon shall spy,”
Is the Englishman’s glad cry.
And the Scotsman cries, “ Hurroo!
Sweet Ediubro’, I smell thee noo !”
SWELL.
But hark! I hear our boatswain’s call,
All hands stand by, there comes a squall.
Flying-jib and royal haulyards let go,
Up top-gallant sails quickly clew,
Let go fore-sheet and the foretack,
Stand by braces, she’ll take aback.
Call all hands to shorten sail —
Oh, what a life on the ocean-swell!
When giddy dreams shall be no more,
When ocean waves shall cease to roar,
Or when my form shall cease to be
An emblem of mortality,
No more to battle sudden squalls,
When perils, too, no more enthralls,
In happy regions may I dwell,
And ride no more on the ocean-swell.
The squall is o’er, the gale is past,
Arrived in port, and anchor cast,
Dreams will me no more surprise
When safe beneath my native skies.
Shipmates all, remember me,
In foreign climes far o’er the sea.
When landed safe I’ll sing All’s well,
And ride no more on the ocean-swell.
W. F.
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. X. Saturday, November 10^ ; 1864.
THE APPROACHING END.
Eveetbodt else is talking about it, and there appears to be no reason why we
should not have our fling at the voyage which now approaches dissolution. For
why should not a voyage “ shuffle off this mortal coil,” as well as any other
mortal thing ? It is one of the most wearisome and dangerous of undertakings
under certain circumstances, but we have reason to think that that particular
one whose termination we hope is not far distant, has not been so monotonous
35
THE ESSEX CHEOXICLE.


THE LOG.
November.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance.
Sunday, 4th
18.51 N.
32.26 W.
216 miles.
Monday, 5th
22.30 „
33.41 „
230 „
Tuesday, Gth
25.33 „
34.56 „
196 „
Wednesday, 7th
28.20 ;,
35.58 „
176 „
Thursday, 8th ,
30.30 „
37.29 „
153 „
Friday, 9th
31.23 „
38.30 „
75 „
Saturday, 10th.
32. 2 „
38.26 „
39 „
as is usually the case with those between Melbourne and London. The truth is,
that although land has neither been touched or sighted, events of more or less
importance have been tolerably frequent, and though their importance on shore
would be very small, on board ship they have been sufficient to prevent that ex-
cessive weariness which perpetual sameness must necessarily induce. The great
dangers at one time encountered caused the subsequent favourable circumstances
to be doubly appreciated; and the general good-will which has reigned amongst
all on board has induced them to join in such amusements as circumstances per-
mitted, and compelled old Father Time to travel with an appearance of greater
rapidity than he usually does in such cases. We do not pretend to say that
there have been no complaints ; but we venture to say no voyage of the same
length has ever been accomplished with less of these; and in all cases where
they were just and reasonable the evident desire manifested by Captain and
officers to remedy them has satisfied the complainants, and prevented them from
making trouble about trifles. The certainty which was at one time entertained
of not reaching our destination before Christmas gave way some time ago to the
gradually increasing hope that that great success would be achieved; and, al-
though we are now experiencing very baffling weather, that hope is by no means
extinct. We are in the latitude of Madeira, and have a clear fortnight before
us still; and if the Clerk of the weather turns out good-tempered, we must do
it. In that hope we must remain till the event is accomplished.
1085
MEDICAL EEPOET.
Sir, —In continuation of my series of medical reports, I beg to call your at-
tention to the case of Flipping (one of the crew), who has been under my care
for the greater part of the voyage, suffering from what is ordinarily termed
“ whitlow.” This has been both more serious and tedious than the generality
of these cases, owing to the debilitated state of the constitution of the patient.
The bone having become diseased, I, with my friend Dr. Dwyer, removed a
portion of it. Since the operation the patient has wonderfully improved, and I
hope to send him on shore quite well.
An accident occurred during the past week to an old man who fell down the
coal-hole. He received a great shock to the constitution, and fractured two
ribs. Pleurisy has set in, but at present I have great hopes of his ultimate
recovery.
Mitchell (suffering from inflammation of the lungs) is progressing favourably.
I am, &c.,
B. N. Hyatt, Chir.
THE WEEK.
The week has been enlivened by the sight of a number of vessels, none of
which have, however, approached within speaking or even signal distance. On
Wednesday there was considerable excitement, a large ship of apparently 1400
tons being sighted right astern, about six miles off, at half-past seven a.m. At
one time she appeared to overhaul us rapidly, she being perfectly upright, with


studding-sails set, while our vessel was laying over tremendously, under very
reduced canvas. The wind lessened by and bye, and the Essex soon dropped
her follower, as she has done all who presumed to try conclusions with her
during this voyage. The wind, which has been both light and unfavourable for
several days, has now sprung up in a favourable quarter, and the ship is moving
handsomely. We regret to have to report that a serious accident has occurred.
It is referred to in the Medical Eeport, and we are in possession of no further
information, although we have made inquiry as to the manner of the mishap.
THE HOMEWARD
Hurrah for the ship of the homeward
bound,
God speed her on her way.
With the precious freight of happy
hearts,
And hopes as bright as day.
’Tis a long, long time since they left
their home,
And sought the distant shore ;
But now again they are homeward
bound,
That home to leave no more.
What anxious hopes and fears must
throb
In the hearts of the homeward bound
And how joyful to him will be the cry
BOUND.
Of “ Land ho ! ” that gladsome sound.
And what immeasurable joy
Will beam in his speaking face,
As he strains his eyes to catch a glimpse
Of his home and his native place.
And then, as he sees some form or spot
That he has not seen for years,
He forgets the pains of his exiled lot.
But his cheeks are bedewed with tears,
Eor he thinks of his childhood days of
yore,
And knows that the hand of time
Will in that home have made changes
sore.
Since he’s been in a distant clime.
The above and “ The Ocean Swell,” are written by a seaman of this vessel.
The ability they evince will be enough to satisfy those who liberally spent their
money and contributed goods to the Bazaar, that it is not on behalf of a hope-
less scheme that their generosity has been displayed.
THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. XL Saturday, December 17 th, 1804.
ACCIDENTS TO SEAMEN.
The lamentable accident met with by the seaman Banks, which is duly re-
corded in another column, aptly illustrates the necessity for such institutions as
that in aid of which the Bazaar was held. This affair was, no doubt, pure acci-
dent ; but how many instances are there in which seamen lose their lives or
become crippled for life through sheer carelessness. It cannot be denied that
Jack is careless; indeed, it is that quality more than any other (except his cou-
rage, and of this the carelessness is a natural consequence) that causes him to
be the universal favourite he undoubtedly is. Strip him of that quality and all
his inherent fun deserts him. Joe Miller would lose his best subject for jokes,
and nautical novels would cease to exist. But the quality has its fatal as well
as its funny aspect. Their lives are risked more or less every hour of every day
on behalf of others, and if familiarity with danger induces want of caution for
themselves, is it not the duty of those who reap the benefit of their labours to
do something for the provision of the seaman’s children when he himself is no
more ? Most worthily have those on board this ship acknowledged the justice of
this claim, and if there is one thing connected with this voyage to which its pas-
sengers may in future years point with pride, it is the amount it contributed in
a single day to the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum.
37
THE ESSEX CHIiONICLE.


December.
THE LOG.
Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance.
Sunday, 11
33.1 N.
36.45 W.
133 Miles.
Monday, 12
33.45 „
37.36 „
61 „
Tuesday, 13
. 34.13 „
36.40 „
55
Wednesday, 14
35.29 „
34.54 „
115 „
Thursday, 15
36.49 „
34.1 „
90 „
Friday, 16
38.38 „
32.52 „
122 „
Saturday, 17
NOTES.
LETTER TO THE EDITOR.
Ship “Essex,” 13th Dec. 1864.
Sir, —I have much pleasure in announcing that the Bazaar lately held on
board this vessel, in aid of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum, proved a
great success, the Hon. Secretary and Treasurer, Mr. Campion, having handed
over to me the sum of as the proceeds thereof.
Permit me, on behalf of the Asylum, to tender my warmest thanks to the
passengers of all classes who so kindly and charitably contributed articles to, and
made purchases at the Bazaar. The name of the “ Essex ” will stand very high
in next year’s report in the list of contributions, and all who take interest in the
welfare of this most deserving Institution will long remember the generosity of
the passengers of the “ Essex ” on her homeward voyage in 1864.
I am, Sir, faithfully yours,
J. S. Atwood.
MEDICAL REPORT.
For the week ending December Vlth.
Sir, —It is my painful duty to record a serious accident which occurred on the
10th instant. A sailor named Banks was on that night thrown over the wheel,
and sustained concussion of the spine, from which general paralysis below the
seat of injury has resulted. The sufferer is a stout plethoric man, over 60 years
of age, and now lies in a most precarious condition.
I am happy to state that the man suffering from fractured ribs is progressing
very favourably.
I am, &c.
B. N. Hyatt, Chir.
We have pleasure in publishing a letter from Captain Atwood, containing a
graceful expression of thanks on behalf of the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan
Asylum for the great liberality displayed by passengers of all classes at the
Bazaar held in aid of that Institution. The letter will be found on the preceding
P a £ e -.
This week’s Medical report records a very painful circumstance, and one that
has caused deep regret throughout the vessel. We refer to the accident which
happened to the seaman Banks on Saturday night. He was at the wheel, and
the ship giving a kick he held on and was thrown over, and suffered such serious
injuries that Dr. Hyatt terms his case “ most precarious.” Banks is the oldest
seaman of the crew, and was returning to England to see his children, four of
whom are living. He is a Devonshire man. He bears his sufferings with great
fortitude, and expresses himself as prepared to die, but hopes to live to reach
England and see his children once more. Every possible means are being used
to sustain him till the end of the voyage, the Doctor having great hopes that his
life would be preserved if he had the opportunity of receiving the benefit of
those appliances which every hospital on shore possesses, but which of course are
not to be found on board ship. All will join with us in the earnest hope that
the means employed may prove successful. Special prayers to that effect were
offered up at Divine Service on Sunday.


Flores and Corvo, the most westerly of the Azores, or "Western Islands, were
sighted at a distance of about 30 miles at 4 p.m. on Friday. They were passed
about 7 miles off after dark, we thus having only a very dim view of the first
land seen since our departure from Australia.
Numerous vessels have been passed during the week, but all at such a distance
as to preclude the possibility of exchanging signals with them. We found our-
selves becalmed one morning near a large and apparently heavy ship, but managed
in the course of the day to crawl out of sight.
The weather has been extremely batfling and unsteady during the early part of
the week, and it was not until Friday that a breeze sprung up worth mention-
ing. Whatever may be our chance of dining on shore on Christmas-day, it is,
at least, probable that we shall sight English land before the 25th instant.
The Editor is ready to receive the addresses of subscribers to the Chronicle,
and the Chief Steward is prepared to receive their subscriptions. It is perhaps
as well to request those who wish to have copies of the paper to recollect that,
as our labour has been, and will be, entirely gratuitous, it is hardly fair to expect
us to run about the ship like a mendicant, with a subscription list in one hand
and a hat in the other. We are prepared to receive addresses any day till
Christmas, from 10 to 12 a.m. and 2 to 4 p.m.
THE
WANDERER’S
RETURN.
Oh where are all my early friends,
My friends of other days,
That I have roved and sported with
Among the flowery braes ?
I know that some have left the -land
These maidens, like the gaudy flowers
Which bloom but to decay.
They sported like the butterfly:
Now all have pass’d away.
A sad blank yonder meets my eye,
A well-remembered spot,
Now all o’ergrowu with tangled weed,
Where stood my father’s cot.
Oft in the brook I’ve laved my feet,
That gurgled by the door.
And fished for speckled silver trout.
Far back in days of yore.
Here rosy cheeks and comely forms
Once sported in the bowers,
Or by the field of waving corn,
To spend the lightsome hours.
Unheard, unpitied, lone, I stray
’Mong scenes of other days,
When there was nought to mar our
j°y s >
Beneath love’s genial rays.
I’ve been an exile twenty years,
At home a stranger grown,
I’ll sail again for foreign climes,
For here I am unknown.
Where their forefathers sleep,
And gone, like me, and crossed the sea,
The boundless raging deep.
But oh, I know that most of them
Lie ’neath the willow tree.
This makes me sad; but let them sleep,
From earthly troubles free.
Near this I’ve spent my early days,
Days never to return,
I’ll wander in the old Churchyard,
Departed friends to mourn.
I’ll hie me to the shady bower
Where coos the forest dove,
Beneath the branches green, where I
First met my early love.
That lovely maid lies mouldering now,
A rose-tree marks her grave ;
Her sister said she broke her heart
For him that cross’d the wave.
I’ll wander by the crystal stream
That warbles in the dell,
With primrose-banks where maidens
Farewell again, my native land,
From thee again I sever.
I go to cross the briny deep;
Farewell, farewell, for ever !
W. Peoctok Smith.
went
Their loving tales to tell.
Dec., 18G4.
ON OUR LATE ESCAPE AMONG THE ICEBERGS,
Oh, reader, hast thou ever known that clime,
Where mighty icebergs roam through endless time,
Where from the vast expanse of ocean’s blue,
They rear their forms stupendous to the view.


Where round their base, the sea wind whistles shrill,
Or strews their surface o’er with snow-flakes chill,
Where, goaded by the breeze, the glittering spray,
Lashes their lofty sides the livelong day ?
If thou hast, reader, in this region been,
And if these icy isles thou e’er hast seen,
Then thy mind’s eye the picture plain shall see,
Which I am now about to paint for thee.
How pleasant ’tis at eve wheresoe’er we sail,
When twilight shades o’er day will soon prevail;
When in the western heaven his journey run,
In splendour sets the ever glorious sun;
Looking more fair in his departing hour,
Than when he poured his rays on us with power ;
Teaching us what is mostly learnt with cost,
That good is valued most, when all but lost.
How pleasant ’tis at this delightful time,
When all we see of nature is sublime,
To walk our vessel’s decks, or gaze afar,
To catch the first faint twinkling of a star.
How diff’rent was our case on that dread day,
Which gave the subject for this simple lay ;
Ho balmy eve had we, no azure sky,
Ho sunset bright, to charm each gazing eye.
Though fair our morn, with evening shades came down
A mist so dark, the heavens seemed to frown;
A mist so thick, that from the vessel’s side,
But thirty yards nothing could be descried ;
A mist so dark and damp, and dank and chill,
It forced us down below without our will ;
Shrouding in cold grey folds each mast’s high head,
Filling each heart with gloom, though none with dread.
Though none with dread : ye perils of the sea,
How suddenly ye greet us; had but we
Our dreadful danger ten short minutes known
Before it met us, danger it were none.
Yet as fate willed it, then it may be said,
With truth that none had e’er more cause for dread.
And dread soon came, when in a startling cry,
The Captain lifted up his voice on high;
A cry whose tones still echo in my ear,
Which told a tale of horror and of fear,
Which made the helmsman every musde steel.
And quickly hard-a-port to put the wheel.
As that shrill cry resounded through the ship,
Stopping each pulse and blanching every lip,
Wishing our danger’s full extent to know,
With one consent we rushed up from below,
And gained the deck, and there with terror saw,
What well might fill the bravest heart with awe.
All ye who read these lines which now I write,
Pray heaven to guard you well from such a sight;
And ye who saw with me that danger lower,
liecall with me the perils of that hour.
Few, very few, who still draw mortal breath,
Have had a closer view than we of death.


As round we glanced with eager startled gaze,
We dimly saw ’mid the surrounding haze ;
In silent majesty an iceberg vast,
Towering to thrice the height of any mast;
Browning upon us like some giant brow,
Scarce thirty fathoms from our vessel’s bow.
Its colour was the ocean’s greenish shade
And all around it chilling snow-flakes played ;
It’s wide spread base the rippling eddies kissed,
Its top and ends were lost in endless mist.
In truth the sight of such a berg so nigh,
Is one men see but once before they die.
Our gallant ship with favoring breeze meanwhile
Kept rushing onward towards that icy isle ;
But when she felt her helm, like well-trained steed
Who feels the slender bit direct his speed,
Bound from her course right quickly did she glide,
And slowly moved along the iceberg’s side!
Moved slowly! Ah, how sluggish seemed her pace,
And yet how quickly did she near its base ;
And nearer still she drew, and still more near,
Till hope grew dead, and terror reigned with fear;
Till o’er each face a sickly pallor spread,
And e’en the bravest heart grew faint with dread.
But when we now-felt certain that our breath,
Would soon with icy hand be stopped by death ;
When all our thoughts were of some far off shore,
And those dear friends who ne’er should see us more.
When o’er our whole careers our minds were cast,
O’er all the faults and failings of the past,
Sudden we shook off all our dread despair,
And felt relief and joy beyond compare.
One moment of such joy and such relief
Were worth ten years of his who ne’er knew grief,
Bor when all useless now seemed skill and strength,
We saw our vessel clear the iceberg’s length!
Yes, He who powerful is to slay or save,
Had snatched us from a yawning watery grave,
And once again our gallant ship did glide
In safety o’er the deep and dark blue tide ;
While, like some spectre of the gloomy night,
The iceberg slowly vanished out of sight,
Surrounded still by darkness and by gloom,
To float the sea for years and years to come.
But let us pray, who all its terrors know,
That Heaven may always will its wanderings so
That ne’er again may any vessel be,
Through it, in such dread peril as were we.
MEDICAL EEPOET.
December 3Ls£, 1864.
Si r> I have to record two deaths in my medical report for this week: one of
Banks the sailor, who died from “ exhaustion,” the other of a lad by the name of
Sharp, who died from “ low fever.” This case was somewhat sudden, owing to
the debilitated state of his constitution. With the exception of some cases of
catarrh, nearly all are doing well.
I remain, sir, yours faithfully,
Beownlow N, Hyatt.


THE ESSEX CHRONICLE.
No. 12. January Srd r ~t1865.
Oue voyage is accomplished, our goal is reached. By the time this is read
by those for whose perusal it is intended, they will have gladdened the hearts of
friends from whom they have long been separated, the fatted calf will have been
killed in many a house, joy in paroxysms will have been experienced, not, alas,
unmingled with shades of bitter sadness. Few of us return to old England after
many years absence without encountering things and circumstances so changed
as to lessen the gladness of the return. How many are there amongst the two
hundred and odd souls the Essex brought from one end of the world to the other
who have not some relative or dear friend to mourn, or some worldly sorrow to
regret. In one case a sister has married and the bent of her affections changed,
in another a sweetheart has proved faithless, in another the returned prodigal
weeps in inconsolable agony over his father’s grave. Sorrowful, indeed, are many
of the mingled feelings which pervade us, but happiness is that which caps
them all, and hope wiU rescue us from brooding over miseries inseparable from
our human state.
Much have we to be thankful for, many dangers have we experienced from
which nothing but what appeared to be special interpositions of Providence could
have saved us. The dreadful weather we experienced during the last week of
October, and the danger from the icebergs will long be remembered, and the
gallantry and heroism of our officers and crew, all of us will cordially allow.
Captain Atwood saved our lives by his keen look-out. His officers enabled
him to take such measures as consummated our safety. His crew worked as
British sailors only can, and his passengers gave a hearty hand wherever they
were useful. Though disappointed as regards making a wonderful passage, ours
was a good one. Eighty-nine days is not bad under any circumstances, but
considering our difficulties, eleven nights hove-to and eighteen clear days with
the wind dead in our teeth, we have not much to complain of as regards speed.
Indeed the greatest grumblers admit the excellence of the vessel, and declare her
to be capable of making as quick passages as any that ever traded on her line.
Two mournful events have occurred since our last. Banks the sailor died, and
his body was committed to the deep. On the same evening poor Sharp, a young
third-class passenger also died, and was buried on the following morning. We
append the doctor’s report on these cases.
The Scilly lights were sighted on the night of Wednesday, the 28th December,
and on the following morning several passengers landed by the pilot boat off
Plymouth. The wind was then fair and hopes were entertained of the vessel
reaching Gravesend on Saturday. But Eriday was perfectly calm, and Saturday
was occupied in beating up against a head wind. Sunday found us in an
easterly gale off Beechy Head, and there we stopped till Monday when the wind
shifted, and at noon the tug Vivid took hold of us at Dungeness, the pilot
boarded us, and on Monday evening we anchored in Margate roads. Here more
passengers landed, and the vessel proceeded on her way, and reached the docks on
Tuesday evening.
So ended the 1864 homeward voyage of the Essex, remarkable for several
painful and appalling incidents, but characterized by good-heartedness and a
desire for peace and quietude amongst all on board. We are sure that all our
passengers will unite with us in wishing the vessel, her officers and crew, and all
who may in future sail in her, every possible success and safety, hoping that
.they may not meet with the dangers with which we met, but that if they do they
may have as good men to extricate them from them.
* \ , rims.
