

THE
GOLD FIELDS ACT
REGULATIONS
1861.
bo Sutfjotitgr
SYDNEY; THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
1862.
[Frice, One Shilling.]




■**




THE
GOLD FIELDS ACT
REGULATIONS
1861.
bg Autfjontg;
SYDNEY: THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1862.
[Price, One Shilling.]




INDEX.
Gold Fields Act 5
Do. Regulations .. 25
INDEX TO ACT.
I.— Licensed Occupation.
Miner’s Right .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
Business License .. .. •. .. .. .. .. 9
Auriferous Lands.. ~ .. .. .. .. .. 9
Aliens not authorized liable to Penalty .. .. .. 9
Unauthorized persons prohibited .. .. .. .. 9
Penalty for carrying on business without License, &c. .. 10
II. — General.
Partial suspension of Pastoral Leases ~ .. .. .. 10
Passage of Water through Freehold Property .. .. 10
Commissioners to be appointed.. .. .. .. 11
Regulations may be made .. .. .. .. 11
Public Houses on Gold Fields .. .. .. .. .. 16
lll.— Encroachments or Trespass.
Remedy for Encroachment .. .. .. .. ..12,13
Compensation for Encroachment .. .. .. .. 13
Fees may he demanded by Justices .. .. .. .. v l4
Penalty for non-attendance of Assessor .. .. .. 15
Penalty for resisting Officers .. ~ 15
IV.— District and other Courts.
Local Court may he proclaimed .. .. .. 16
Constitution of Local Court .. .. . .. .. 17
Proceedings to be taken by Commissioner .. .. .. 17
Court may frame Rules .. .. .. 18
Vacancies how caused, and how filled up .. .. .. 19
Yearly election .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Court of Appeal established .. .. .. .. .. 20


INDEX.
Powers of Court of Appeal 20
Justices may entertain Partnership Questions .. .. 21
Assessors may be summoned .. .. .. .. 21
Summary Proceedings .. ~ .. .. .. .. 23
Appeal against Fines of District Court .. .. .. 23
Penalties.
Punishment for Forgery and Personation .. .. .. 22
Punishment for Fraud .. .. .. .. .. .. 22
Appropriation of Fees .. ~ .. .. .. ~ 23
Royal Prerogative not interfered with,, .. .. .. 23


Htfo Sfltttl] Malts,
ANNO VICESIMO QUINTO
YICTOEIiE EEGrINiE.
No. IV.
An Act to amend the Laws relating to the
Gold Fields. [Assented to, 22nd Novem-
ber, 1861.]
WHEEEAS it is expedient to amend the Preamble.
Laws relating to the Gold Fields Be it
therefore enacted by the Queen’s Most Excel-
lent Majesty by and with the advice and con-
sent of the Legislative Council and Legislative
Assembly of New South Wales in Parliament
assembled and by the authority of the same as
follows :
1. From and after the commencement of this Repeal of aoyfe.
• No. 29.
Act the Act twentieth Victoria number twenty-
nine shall be repealed except in so far as the rroviso *
same relates to or affects persons who shall mine
or employ any person to mine for gold in any
land belonging to a private individual without


Interpretation.
the consent of the owner thereof or his duly
authorized agent.
2. In the construction of this Act the follow-
ing terms in inverted commas shall have the
meanings set against them respectively unless
the context otherwise indicate :
“ Mine”—Any mode or method of working
whatsoever whereby the soil or earth
or any rock or stone may be disturbed
removed carted carried washed sifted
smelted refined crushed or otherwise
dealt with for the purpose of obtaining
gold whether the same may have been
previously disturbed or not as well as
the appropriation of such gold by the
finder thereof to his own use.
“Gold”—As well any gold as any earth
clay quartz stone mineral or other sub-
stance containing gold or having gold
mixed therein or set apart for the pur-
pose of extracting gold therefrom.
“ Gold Fields”—Those parts of the Crown
Lands of New South Wales which may
be proclaimed as Gold Fields in the
Gazette.
“ Claim”—The portion of land which each
person or company shall be entitled
to occupy or to occupy and mine in by
virtue of any Miner’s Fight License
or Lease issued under the provisions
of this Act and every holding whatso-
ever occupied by virtue of this Act.
“Business”—Any profession trade calling
or occupation except mining and any
vending or disposing of any goods
wares merchandize or chattels whether
by hawking or in any other manner


except the hawking of milk butter
vegetables or other farm or garden
produce.
“Authorized persons” —All Commission-
ers for the Gold Fields and Justices
of the Peace —all holders of any license
or lease for pastoral purposes—all
Ministers of Religion and school-
masters and any clerk trooper con-
stable or other person employed ex-
clusively in the Government service
and the servants clerks or agents of
such persons respectively there resid-
ing with and in the actual employ-
ment of any of them and all females
and all children under fourteen years
of age who shall only reside and not
mine for gold upon any Gold Field or
any person to whom the Resident
Commissioner shall think fit to grant
a temporary exemption on account of
sickness or other accident.
“ Commissioner ” Any Commissioner
Assistant Commissioner or Sub-Com-
missioner for the Gold Fields.
“Trespass”—Unlawful interference in any
way whatever with any water right or
other right or easement lawfully
enjoyed under this Act.
“Alien”—Any person not being a British
subject or a naturalized subject of Her
Majesty.
“Chinese” —Any male native of China or
its Dependencies or of any Island in
the Chinese Seas not born of British
parents or any male person born of
Chinese parents.


Proclamation of
Gold Fields.
effect of Miner’s
Eight.
3. The Governor may with the advice of the
Executive Council declare by Proclamation in
the Gazette any Crown Lands to he Gold Eields
within the meaning and for the purposes of
this Act.
4. The Governor with the advice aforesaid
shall subject to the provisions of this Act and
the Eegulations to be made hereunder cause a
“Miner’s Eight” to be granted to any person
applying for the same between the first of Jan-
uary and the thirtieth of June upon payment
of a fee of ten shillings and after the last men-
tioned day in any year upon payment of a fee
of five shillings.
5. Every such Miner’s Eight shall be in force
from the date thereof to the thirty-first day of
December then next and shall during the said
period authorize the holder to mine for gold
upon any Crown Lands and to occupy (except
as against Her Majesty) for the purpose of
residence in connection with the object of
mining so much land as may be prescribed
under the Eegulations aforesaid and every such
holder shall during the continuance of such
Miner’s Eight be deemed in law to be the owner
of the claim which shall be occupied by virtue
of such Miner’s Eight and during such con-
tinuance as aforesaid all gold then being in and
upon the said claim shall be deemed in law to
be the absolute personal property of such holder
Provided always it shall be lawful for the
Governor with the advice of the Executive
Council by Proclamation to order and declare
that such Miner’s Eight shall authorize aliens
described in such Proclamation to mine for
gold upon such Gold Eields or at such places
only as shall be named in such Proclamation.


6. The Governor with the advice aforesaid Business
may subject to the provisions of this Act and
the Regulations aforesaid cause a License to be
granted to any person applying for the same
between the two first mentioned days aforesaid
on payment of a fee of one pound and after the
last mentioned day on payment of a fee of ten
shillings which License shall be in force till the
then next thirty-first day of December and shall
authorize the holder to occupy Lands for the
purpose of carrying on business upon any Gold
Eield during such period.
7. The Governor with the advice aforesaid r e o a u s s es L °^" rif '
may subject to and in accordance with the laws
in force for the time being respecting Crown
Lands of the Colony and the provisions of this
Act and the Regulations aforesaid grant Leases
for mining purposes of portions of Auriferous
Lands and fix the amount to be paid by way of
rent whether as a royalty or otherwise.
8. Every alien not being an authorized person Aliens not autho-
who shall mine for gold or become resident on penalty,
any Gold Eield without a Miner’s Right as
aforesaid shall be liable on conviction before a
Justice of the Peace to a penalty not exceeding
Live pounds for the first such offence and not
exceeding Ten nor less than Live pounds for
the second and subsequent offences And any
Justice of the Peace or Police Constable may
arrest any alien who shall be so found upon
any Gold Eield and forthwith take him before
some Justice to be dealt with.
9. Any person not holding a Miner’s Right Unauthorized
t i o u persons v
Lease or License under this Act shall not mine wwied
for gold or possess any claim on any Gold Eield
and shall not work for any other person whether
or not the lawful possessor of any such claim


or as partner with any such person And every
such lawful possessor by whom he shall he
employed as partner or with whom he shall so
work shall absolutely forfeit his claim unless
such claim shall be held by virtue of a Business
License or by a lease in which last-mentioned
case the Governor may with the advice afore-
said remit such forfeiture.
carrying l onhusi- 10. Any person not holding a Business Li-
Lkenle&c 1 ! 4 cense who shall occupy any Crown Land on any
Gold Field for the purposes of business or shall
carry on business thereon and any person
whether lawfully so occupying or not who shall
employ an unauthorized person in such business
shall on conviction before a Justice of the Peace
he liable to a penalty not exceeding Five pounds
for the first such offence and not exceeding Ten
pounds nor less than Five pounds for the second
or any subsequent such offence.
fion 6f Pastoral 11. When any Gold Mine or Gold Field shall
ScowiShave been discovered upon any Crown Lands
then under Lease or License for pastoral pur-
poses the Governor with the advice aforesaid
shall suspend such Lease or License so far as
may he necessary for the accommodation of the
horses cattle and sheep required for the subsis-
tence and convenience of any persons holding
Miners’ Bights Leases or Licenses and for the
supply of water and otherwise for effectually
working the said Gold Mine or Gold Field and
shall thereupon return or remit to the lessee
such portion of the rent of such lands as may
he reasonable and just.
Passage of water p 2. The Governor with the advice aforesaid
through freehold , ~
property. ma y authorize the passage oi any water tor vjroia
Mining purposes through any freehold lands
and also the passage of any water or liquid dis-


charge from Gold Mining operations through
any such lands Provided that the possessor of
any such lands shall be entitled to full compen-
sation for any loss thereby sustained by him.
13. The Governor with the advice aforesaid Commissioners
. . , ini to be appointed.
may appoint Commissioners who shall have
power and authority subject to the provisions
of this Act and the Regulations to be made
hereunder to determine the extent and position
of the claim to which each person or company
is entitled under any Miner’s Right Lease or
License issued under the provisions of this Act
and to mark such extent and to do all other
acts matters and things required of him by this
Act or by the Regulations aforesaid.
11. The Governor with the advice aforesaid £ e £J? ons ma - v
may from time to time make such Regulations
not being contrary to the provisions of this Act
as shall appear necessary for regulating the
form of Miners’ Rights Leases and Licenses
to he issued under this Act—the mode times
dates and places of the issues thereof—the con-
ditions on which the same shall be issued—the
mode of transferring or assigning the same and
of prohibiting any such transfer or assignment
—and generally for the purpose of carrying the
provisions of this Act into execution And may
by such Regulations repeal or alter any exist-
ing Rules or Regulations And any person
being duly convicted before a Justice of the
Peace of a breach of any such Regulation or of
any order made by a Commissioner in virtue
thereof shall forfeit and pay for the first offence
a penalty not exceeding Pive pounds and for
the second and subsequent offences not more
than Ten pounds And any such penalty shall
be irrespective of any forfeiture of claim as may


be therein provided And all such Regulations
when published in the Gazette shall have the
force of law Provided that all Rules and Re-
gulations heretofore lawfully made and sub-
sisting at the commencement of this Act and
not inconsistent herewith shall have the force
of law until repealed altered or superseded by
any Regulations made and published as afore-
said Provided also that all Regulations to be
so made shall be laid before both Houses of
Parliament within fourteen days after their
publication if Parliament be in Session and if
otherwise within-a like period after the opening
of the then next Session.
15. Any Justice of the Peace being a Com-
missioner upon the complaint of any person
holding a Miner’s Right Lease or License under
this Act that any other person has encroached
or trespassed upon his claim may proceed forth-
with to the spot to investigate the matter of
such complaint or otherwise inquire into the
case And may on his own view or the oath of
any witness determine the same in a summary
way And if it shall appear to such Justice
that the person complained against has so en-
croached or trespassed by occupying mining
or undermining such claim or in any other way
whatsoever or that the person complaining has
so encroached or trespassed upon the claim of
the person complained against such Justice may
cause the person so found to have encroached
his servants implements goods and chattels to
be removed from the claim so encroached upon
or direct the discontinuance of such trespass
or may if he shall see fit at any time after the
complaint made prohibit the working of such
claim by any or either party until the dispute


shall be finally decided And any such Justice
of the Peace shall have like power to summon
and compel the attendance of witnesses for the
hearing of any such complaint as is exercised
by a Justice according to the Act eleventh and
twelfth Victoria chapter forty-three.
16. Any such complainant or person com-And assessors-
plained of or such Justice previous to the
hearing of any such complaint may require that
two persons holding the Miner’s Eight or a
Lease under this Act shall assist such Justice
as assessors and thereupon such Justice shall
summon four persons duly qualified as afore-
said and shall select by ballot two from amongst
those who may attend at the time appointed
and shall administer to such persons as may
be selected an oath to the effect that such
persons severally will well and truly inquire
into the matter of the complaint then submitted
and a true finding and decision give according
to the evidence and such persons so sworn shall
be and act as assessors and such Justice and
assessors shall hear and determine such com-
plaint of encroachment or trespass and shall
also find whether any and what gold has been
unlawfully or improperly removed from such
claim and whether any and what damage has
been sustained by such encroachment or tres-
pass and the decision of the majority shall be
binding.
17. Such Justice and assessors upon the compensation
. i „ •i X i forencroach-
hearmc* oi anv complaint as aforesaid and upon mentsortres-
o t/ jl ± pass.
proof of any gold having been removed as afore-
said (of which any finding as aforesaid shall be
sufficient evidence) may cause any such gold
taken or removed from such claim to be sum-
marily seized and delivered to the person en-


croached upon and may also cause tlie whole
or any part of the damages ascertained as afore-
said to an amount not exceeding One hundred
pounds to be paid by the person so haying
encroached or trespassed to be recovered by
distress and sale of the goods and chattels of
such person in manner prescribed by law for
the recovery of any sum adjudged by Justices
of the Peace as a pecuniary penalty or compen-
sation Provided that no person shall be
imprisoned for default in payment of such
damages for a longer period than three months
Provided also that nothing herein contained
shall prejudice the right of any person to resort
to any remedy which he may already have at
law or in equity.
If assessors do 18. In the event of the non-attendance of the
not attend Jus- # in ~ . .
may adjourn requisite number ol assessors at the appointed
■or procee |* me j us ti C e present shall if required by
either party adjourn the hearing of the com-
plaint And if at the time to which the same
shall have been adjourned there shall not be a
sufficient number of assessors in attendance
after due summons such Justice may proceed
to hear and decide with one such assessor if one
shall be in attendance or without any assessor
if none be present and the acts and decision of
such Justice and assesssor or of such Justice
alone if no assessor be in attendance shall be as
valid and effectual as if the regular number
had been in attendance and had acted with
such Justice.
Fees may be de- pQ. Previously to tll6 llCailng of aUV com-
manded, . v ° -
plaint as aforesaid n assessors be required the
Justice shall demand and receive from the
complainant the fee of Twenty shillings and
may refuse to attend to any such complaint


until such fee shall have been paid Provided
that if the decision shall be against the person
complained against such person may he ordered
to repay such fee to the complainant and the
determination by whom the fee is to be paid
shall in every case form part of the decision of
such Justice and assessors and such fee may be
recovered in manner herein directed in regard
to any compensation awarded to any com-
plainant.
20. If any person holding the Miner’s Right
or a Lease issued under the provisions of this assessor.
Act having been duly summoned shall disobey
such summons and fail to attend at such time
and place as may be named therein or to be
sworn as aforesaid such Justice upon proof
that such person was duly summoned or having
been summoned that he refused to be sworn
unless some reasonable cause for non-attendance
or refusal of such person be made to appear to
such Justice may impose a fine not exceeding
Live pounds which fine may be levied and
appropriated in like manner as other fines
imposed by virtue of this Act And every person
who shall attend in obedience to any such
summons and be sworn to act as assessor shall
be entitled to demand and receive the of
Ten shillings for the hearing of such complaint
out of the fee to be paid by section twenty of
this Act.
21. Every person who shall assault or resist “VS"
any Commissioner or Justice of the Peace or fn«roachment. ed
any assessor or any person duly authorized
whilst in the execution of any duty under this
Act or who after the hearing and determining
of any complaint as aforesaid and having had
the boundaries of his claim or his mode of


operation pointed out by any such Justice of
the Peace being a Commissioner shall again
encroach or trespass as aforesaid or who shall
work or attempt to work any claim or ground
or pursue any operation the working or pursuit
of which shall have been duly enjoined or sus-
pended under this Act shall upon conviction
before any two Justices of the Peace be liable
to a penalty not exceeding Twenty-five pounds
or at the discretion of the adjudicating Justices
be imprisoned with or without hard labor for
any period not exceeding three months.
a cont h roi e ”f 22. It shall be lawful for the Governor at
housefoalhe 0 an y time on the recommendation of one Gold
Gold Hews. Commissioner and of one Justice of the Peace
other than such Commissioner to direct that a
Publican’s License for any place on a Gold
Pield be issued to the person so recommended
upon his entering into the recognizances and
paying the duty required by the Licensed Pub-
licans Act and in such cases it shall be in the
discretion of such Commissioner and Justice
to exempt during the six months next after the
issuing of such license the licensed person from
providing the whole or such part as they shall
think fit of the accommodation required by law
to be provided for the public convenience in
ordinary licensed public houses.
District may be 23. IJpon petition of not less than one hun-
proclaimed for X X tt
repose of Local q re d persons holding Miners itiglits or Leases
under this Act on any Gold Pield the Governor
with the advice aforesaid may by Proclamation
declare such Gold Pield to be a District for the
purpose of forming a Local Court with the
powers and authority hereinafter described and
may declare the name of such district and define
the limits thereof And after the publication


of any such Proclamation the locality so des-
cribed shall he and become such district Pro-
vided that no such Court shall be established
if within sixty days of the notification in the
Gazette of any such petition a counter-petition
bearing the signatures of a larger number of
persons duly qualified as above shall have
reached the office of the Minister for Lands
Provided also that the Governor may with
advice aforesaid abolish such Court on a peti-
tion bearing the signatures of qualified persons
in number three times greater than originally
petitioned for the same.
245. Every such’ Court shall consist of eight coMtitaam of
persons holding respectively a Miner’s Eight
or a Lease under this Act and who shall be
elected as hereinafter provided.
25. The eight persons so elected as aforesaid of
shall at their first meeting proceed to elect one
of their number to be Chairman and shall con-
tinue members of such Court for twelve months
from the date of such election unless they shall
sooner retire or cease to be members as herein-
after provided and five of such members shall
form a quorum and the acts of such quorum
shall be deemed to be the acts of the whole
Court and in all proceedings the decision of the
majority shall be the decision of such Court
and in case of an equality of votes the Chair-
man shall have an additional or casting vote.
26. The Commissioner shall name a place Proceedings to
and time by public notification in such manner Commissioner,
as may seem to him most desirable (the place
being some convenient locality within the limits
of the Gold Eields District for which he shall
be Commissioner and the time being some day
not less than seven nor more than fourteen


days from the date of the first publication of
such notice) when and where a public meeting
will be held of persons residing within such
district and holding the Miner’s Might or a
Lease under this Act for the purpose of elect-
ing eight persons holding such Miner’s Might
or a Lease under this Act as are to be members
of the Local Court And at such time and
place the said Commissioner shall attend and
preside at such meeting and any or every person
present thereat being so qualified as aforesaid
may propose any other person so qualified to
be a member of- such Court and if not more
than eight such persons be so proposed then
the Commissioner shall declare such eight per-
sons duly elected as members of such Court
and they shall constitute such Court accord-
ingly Provided that if more than eight such
persons be so proposed the said Commissioner
'shrill proceed by the best means available to
him to ascertain the actual number of votes
in favour of each name proposed in the order
in which they were proposed and the eight per-
sons receiving the largest number shall be de-
clared elected Provided also that in case of any
question arising as to the right of any person
present to propose another or to be proposed
himself or to vote such Commissioner or any
person qualified as aforesaid may demand the
production by such person of his Miner’s Might
or Lease under this Act and if such person can-
not produce either of such documents his vote
or voice shall not be received or permitted And
in the event of the votes for any two candidates
being equal the Commissioner shall determine
such Election by giving a casting vote.
27. Local Courts may appoint a Clerk and


may frame rules for regulating the sittings and
proceedings of such Courts and may also frame
rules not inconsistent with this Act for the
better management of all local matters relating
to mining within the District for which the
members are elected such rules to have effect
only when they have received the assent of the
Governor with the advice aforesaid and been
published in the Gazette and such rules shall
then have the like force as the regulations
aforesaid.
28. Any member of such Court who shall7 a a u c s a e l dand h hw
absent himself from four consecutive meetings ftlled-
thereof or shall send in his resignation in writing
addressed to the Chairman or shall in any way
become incapacitated from attending such
Court shall cease to be a member of such Court
and the Chairman shall call a public meeting
of persons qualified as aforesaid for the purpose
of electing some person to fill the vacancy thus
caused and at such meeting the same proceed-
ings as nearly as may be shall be had and taken
as at the first election of members Provided
that so long as there is a quorum any vacancy
or deficiency in the number of members of such
Court shall not affect the proceedings thereof.
29. Fourteen days before the expiration of Yearly Election.,
the twelve months for which the members of
such Court shall have been elected the Chair-
man shall publicly notify a time and place for
a public meeting to elect eight persons qualified
as aforesaid to serve as members of the Local
Court and at such meeting such Chairman shall
preside and the same proceedings shall be had
and the same rules shall apply as at the first
election of members And the like proceedings
shall be had at the end of every succeeding


Court of Appeal
established.
Powers of Courts
of Appeal
twelve months Provided that any member
then retiring shall if otherwise qualified be
eligible to he re-elected Provided also that the
omission to convene or hold any such meeting
at the particular time hereinbefore directed
shall not prevent such Chairman from conven-
ing such meeting at a later period or such later
meeting from proceeding to such election.
30. Por any Gold Pield or Gold Pields a
Court of Appeal shall be established and shall
consist of a Chairman and two other persons
who have held Miners’ Eights for six months
to he appointed by the Governor with the advice
aforesaid Provided that if any member of such
Court he concerned in any decision to he
appealed against to any such Court of Appeal
or be absent the Governor may appoint any
other person to act in his stead And every
member of such Court of Appeal shall he
entitled to remuneration at the rate of one
pound for every day of his actually sitting
therein.
31. Every such Court of Appeal shall have
power on the application of any person holding
a Miner’s Eight Lease or License and on pay-
ment of a fee of three pounds to entertain any
appeal against any decision order or award made
under this Act by any Justice of the Peace
being a Commissioner or Justice and Assessors
relating to any encroachment or trespass and
to revise or to reverse the same and to make
order for the repayment of the fee to the appel-
lant and to award reasonable costs And pend-
ing the hearing of any such appeal the Chair-
man shall have power to suspend the operation
of any decision order or award of any such Jus-
tice and to prohibit all working by any person


concerned during such suspension And such
Court shall he entitled to administer an oath
and to compel the attendance of witnesses and
to regulate its mode of procedure in like
manner as Justices in Petty Sessions And to fix
its time and place of sitting And the decision
of the majority shall he deemed to be the deci-
sion of such Court And no proceedings of such
Court shall be quashed for want of form or he
removed by certiorari And any lawful decision
order or award of such Court or any order of
the Chairman thereof shall be enforced as by
this Act provided for enforcing the decision of
a Justice of the Peace being a Commissioner
or as by law now provided for enforcing any
order or award of Justices in their summary
jurisdiction.
32. Anv Justice of the Peace being also a Justices may en-
, ,» i • j. 1 1 tertaiu partner-
Commissioner may upon complaint made by ship question*
the holder of any Miner’s Eight Lease or
License under this Act who is or has been while
such holder engaged in a mining partnership
touching any dispute or question regarding
such partnership may issue process to procure
or compel the appearance before him of the
members of such partnership as shall appear
necessary and upon such appearance or in
default thereof after due service of such process
or in the absence of such members as shall not
appear to be necessary parties to such case he
may inquire into and hear such complaint or
application and may make such order relating
to the mode of working any claim or the due
division thereof as to him shall seem meet.
33. The foregoing provisions relating to aif o “ U m- y
assessors as applied to cases of encroachment 111 other
or trespass may at the instance of the complain-


Punishment for
forgery and per-
sonation.
Punishment for
fraud.
ant or the person complained against or of the
Justice himself he applied to the case of any
other complaint or information under this Act.
34. Any person who shall forge any Miner’s
Right License or Lease issued or purporting to
he issued under the authority of this Act or
fraudulently use utter or exhibit any such
forged Miner’s Right License or Lease knowing
the same to he forged or fraudulently personate
the holder of any such Miner’s Right Lease or
License or falsely and fraudulently represent
that any servant'or other person is an autho-
rized person within the meaning of this Act
or fraudulently use or exhibit as his own any
Miner’s Right License or Lease belonging or
granted to any other person or use or exhibit
as a valid Miner’s Right Lease or License any
Miner’s Right License or Lease which shall
have expired shall be deemed guilty of a mis-
demeanor.
35. Any holder of a Lease issued under the
provisions of this Act who shall by any fraudu-
lent device or contrivance defraud or attempt
to defraud Her Majesty or any person autho-
rized to receive the same of any money or gold
payable or reserved by such Lease or conceal
or make a false statement as to the amount of
any gold procured by him or falsify any account
with a fraudulent intent shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor And all officers and servants
of such holder and other persons whosoever
who shall knowingly be concerned in any such
fraud or attempted fraud whether with or with-
out the knowledge or concurrence of such
holder shall in like mannef be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor.


36. Nothing in this Act shall except so far Royal prerogn-
i ° 1 jit tiye not iuter-
as herein expressly enacted be deemed to feed with,
abridge or control the prerogative rights and
powers of Her Majesty the Queen Her Heirs
and Successors in respect of the Gold Mines
and Gold Fields of the Colony.
37. All proceedings for any infringement of summary pro-
J- o # «/ o ceedinw-
any of the provisions of this Act or of any of
the Regulations or Rules lawfully established
as aforesaid and the hearing and determining
of which is not herein otherwise specially pro-
vided for shall he had and taken by or before
any two Justices of the Peace in a summary
way and no such proceedings shall he removed
by certiorari into the Supreme Court
38. Any person ordered or adjudged to forfeit
or pay any fine penalty or sum of money Court-
amounting to ten pounds or upwards who shall
feel himself aggrieved by the order or conviction
of any Justice or Justices and assessors may
appeal from any such order or conviction to
the next District Court which shall be held
nearest to the place where such order or con-
viction shall have been given or made upon his
complying with the provisions of the law in
force for the time being in reference to appeals.
39. All fees or other moneys levied under Appropriation of
this Act unless otherwise expressly appro-
priated shall he paid over to the Colonial
Treasurer and become a part of the Consol-
idated Revenue Fund of the Colony.
JO. This Act shall he styled and may be short xuie.
cited as the “ Gold Fields Act of 1861.”




ERRATA.
Paragraph 11, line 6, page 26:—For “ half a mile” read | of a mile..
„ „ line 7, „ : —For “ one mile” read mile.
may he employed, to the surveyor, for the duties to he per-
formed hy him.
8. Any locality for alluvial working, not being in the Alluvial pros-
conrse of a river or creek, or on the supposed line of a quartz posting ground,
reef or vein, or on the course of a lead, at the time being occu-
pied under the frontage system, and distant not less than
three-quarters of a mile from any claim then producing gold,
shall be deemed to be alluvial prospecting ground.




GENERAL REGULATIONS.
1. All Regulations hitherto in force for the management Former Feguia-
of the Gold Fields of New South Wales are hereby repealed, lons repe
and the following are substituted in lieu thereof:—
2. Wherever the term “ Chief Commissioner ” is Explanation of
used in these Regulations, it shall be understood to mean si^r,” C °”sur-’
the Commissioner entrusted with the general superinten- veyor.”
dence of one of the Gold Districts of the Colony, viz.,
the Northern, Southern, South-Western, or Western District;
and the term “ Commissioner ” shall mean a Commissioner,
Assistant Commissioner, or Sub-Commissioner, in charge of
any particular portion of a Gold Field. The term “ Surveyor’,”
shall mean any Mining Surveyor licensed as such by the
Government.
3. The term “ Claim ” shall be taken to apply to any Explanation ef
authorized holding whatever, unless otherwise specified.
4. By “Registry” shall be meant the entering into a Registry of
book, to be kept for the purpose by the Commissioner, of such claims-
particulars respecting any claim as may be required under
the Regulations.
5. “ Protection area” shall mean an additional extent Protection area,
of ground to be temporarily occupied by the holder of a pros-
pecting claim while he shall be engaged in searching for the
position of the deposit of gold therein,
6- A “ Working Party ” shall mean the party actually Definition of
working or occupying any claim, whether as the holders thereof, " or mg par
or as representatives of other authorized persons, duly possessed
of such claim.
7. The Chief Commissioner may, at any time, fix a payment of
scale of fees or charges to be paid, by the persons for whom he BurTey°r-
may be employed, to the surveyor, for the duties to be per-
formed by him.
8. Any locality for alluvial working, not being in the Alluvial pros-
course of a river or creek, or on the supposed line of a quartz resting ground,
reef or vein, or on the course of a lead, at the time being occu-
pied under the frontage system, and distant not less than
three-quarters of a mile from any claim then producing gold,
shall be deemed to be alluvial prospecting ground.


proteetion area y. Any miner or party ot miners can take up a pros-
claims o .* - pecting claim upon alluvial prospecting ground, and shall be
entitled to mark in a protection area, as follows:
9. Any miner or party of miners can take up a pros-
At a distance from any claim then producing gold not
less than —
f of a mile 100 yards by 100 yards.
Exceeding | and not less
than mile 200 „ by 200 „
Exceeding 1-| and not
less than 3 miles 300 „ by 300 „
Exceeding 3 and not less
than 10 miles 400 „ by 400 „
re a fstry^of'pros 10. Every such prospecting claim must be marked at
pecting claim, each corner by a post not less than four feet in height,
and must, within forty-eight hours of its occupation, be regis-
tered with the Commissioner, unless the distance to the Com-
missioner’s Office shall exceed 15 miles, in which case due
allowance will be made for the distance. The Commissioner
shall grant a certificate of registry, a copy of which must be
kept posted conspicuously on the claim.
Prospector to 11. The holder of a prospecting claim shall report
ofgTid and claim to the Commissioner immediately on the gold having been
to be reduced, struck in payable quantity, and the claim will then be marked
off, according to his selection of ground, and to the distance,
as follows:—
At half-a-mile 80 feet by 120.
At one mile 120 „ 120.
At three miles 150 „ 150.
At ten miles 200 „ 200.
After the claim shall have been so marked off, no fewer than
four men must be kept continuously employed, if it be within
a less distance than three miles, and six men if it shall exceed
that distance.
RWer prospect- 12. On any untried river or creek, or portion of a
mg claims. river or creek distant upwards of one mile from where pay-
able gold has been obtained, a prospecting claim can be taken
up in like manner and on the same conditions as above pre-
scribed, having a protection frontage of three hundred yards.
provided that when gold shall have been struck, the claim shall
be reduced to its ordinary dimensions, except that an additional
claim shall be allowed for each man who had been continu-
ously employed therein, so long as the total measurement
shall not exceed that of twelve claims. When the claim
shall have been finally allowed it must be worked by the
number of men for whom it shall have been laid off, or it will
be liable to a proportionate reduction.


13, On any unoccupied quartz reef or vein, a pros- Prospecting
pecting claim can in like manner be taken up by marking claim on < J uart3 ‘*
and registration, and subject to the same conditions as regards
the working, and additional claims by way of reward, as pres-
~rib''' J river claims. The protection area allowed for such
quartz prospecting claims shall be as follows: —
At a distance not less than | of a mile from any then
existing quartz workings 100 yards by ‘2OO.
Exceeding f and not less than mile 200 „ 200,
Exceedingly and not less than 3 miles 300 „ 200.
Exceeding 3 and notless than 10 miles 400 „ 200.
Provided that when any such claim, while being prospected,
shall be worked by fewer than four men, the length thereof
shall be one-half only of that above specified.
14. No prospecting claim of any description can be Distance from
taken up within half a mile of any other of a similar cha- ° f
racter. And all such claims must be effectively and con- claims effective
tinuously worked from the time of registry. The protection nStatfonof
area shall in no case be held for a longer period than three time of holdings
months.
15. Claims, and shares in claims, may be transferred to Transfer of
any authorized person, but such transfer shall not be recognized shares. an
until it has been registered in the office of the Commissioner.
No transfer shall be made of any claim or holding while any
application to purchase the same, or a portion of the same,
may be then pending in terms of the Crown Lands Alienation
Act.
16. Any miner whose claim may be unworkable
from excess or deficiency of water, or from other cause, shall in reserve,
be entitled to register his claim with the Commissioner, who
will grant a Certificate of Registry, to the effect that such
claim is held in reserve for him, a copy of which must be
posted on the ground, and the proof, in case of dispute, of
sufficient cause for registry shall lie with the claim-holder, who
shall re-commence the working of the claim when practicable.
And in like manner a claim-holder can obtain a similar
registration by reason of illness, urgent business, or other
reasonable cause.
17. All claims, excepting as may be hereinafter claims to !)*■
provided, must be continuously worked after the expiration
of forty-eight hours from the time of occupation; and any
claim or share in a claim remaining unworked and unregistered
for three clear ordinary working days shall be liable to
forfeiture.
18. When the depth of sinking, for which the nearest Amalgamation
shaft bottomed shall be taken as the test, shall not be less
than fifty feet, any two adjoining claims can amalgamate by


registration, and posting on the non-working claim a notice
of registry, having thereon the names of the holders and
numbers of their Miners’ Rights. Any number of claims,
where difficulties of working are occasioned by water or other-
wise, may, in like manner, amalgamate by sanction of the
Commissioner.
claims to be 19. All claims, unless where the mode of marking
properly pegged. ma y b e otherwise provided, must be marked at each corner
by a substantial peg at least one foot above the ground, which
shall be kept at all times exposed to view.
No person to 20. No person shall remove, injure, or conceal any
remove marks. j-, 0UI1( j ar y ma rk on any claim whatever.
claims cn pros- 21. Claims in alluvial prospecting ground, and where
canb n e S hdd U un- the depth of sinking (of which the nearest shaft bottomed
taincases 1 cer ' s^ taken to beAhe test) shall be not less than fifty feet,
may be held unworked so long as at the least one shaft is
being effectively worked within a distance of two hundred
yards of any such claim, provided that the entire working
party shall be present on their claim from 9 to 11
o’clock a.m., daily, and shall keep posted thereon a notice
containing the .names and numbers of the Miners’ Rights
of the holders. • •
Commissioner 22. The Commissioner may at any time make such
mXTemporary temporary rules or orders, not inconsistent with the Gold
rules. Fields Act of 1861, or with these regulations, as he may
consider necessary for regulating the mode of washing at any
stream or waterhole, for the prevention of injury of a
public nature, by the deposit of tailings, or refuse from any
cradle, tom, or sluice, or for any other pm-pose.
nights of pro- 23. Any authorized person can be the proprietor of
pnotor detmed. an y num |j er 0 f c i a i ms or shares in claims, by keeping employed
thereon hired labourers, or other representatives, under any
form of agreement whatever by which the right of owner-
ship is reserved to the proprietor, such hired labourers
or other persons being likewise authorized persons, and being
sufficient in number in each case to represent the extent of
claim, or portion of claim, so occupied.
Partnership. 24. The Commissioner shall have power to deal
with any partnership dispute connected with gold mining, and
to make any order therein consistently with the Gold Fields
Act of 1861. He may entertain any case of such alleged
partnership, and can declare any person, or number of persons,
to be entitled to a share or shares in any claim, and may make
such further order as shall enable such person or persons to be
represented in the occupation and working of such claim.


25. Every holder of a claim in a river or creek shall Flood race in
form and maintain a sufficient flood race through or past such
claim, unless he shall obtain an exemption therefrom from the
Commissioner.
26. Every holder of a lease or of an extended claim in Holders of leases
the bed of a river or creek, shall be entitled to maintain cLim/entuied
the natural level of the water at the head of his ground, to water level,
provided that no prior right be injured thereby.
27. The Chief Commissioner shall have power, under ■Relaxation of
special circumstances, to grant a relaxation of the labour condi- JJ'SiS’SS!
tion of any leased claim ; and where forfeiture of such claim
is provided, it shall be in his power to substitute a diminution
in the size thereof.
28 The holder of more than one leased claim may, Leaseholder can
. . n n \ iu employ labour
bv written permission of the Commissioner, employ "tiie 011 one claim.
amount of labour stipulated for all his claims on any one of
them.
29, Any person desiring to appeal against any dea l rcgu '
cision of a Commissioner, or a Commissioner and Assessors,
must, within seven days of such decision, lodge a written
notice of appeal, together with the prescribed fee of Three
Pounds, in the hands of the Commissioner, who shall im-
mediately transmit the'same to the Chairman of the Court of
Appeal.
30. Each person holding a Miners’ Right will be per- AjoUnent ftr
mitted to occupy and enclose, for the purpose of residence, so arrangement of
much land as may be determined by the Commissioner, not Chinese camps,
to exceed 1,210 square yards, or 22 yards by 55, where
such measurement may be practicable. And where bodies of *
Chinese, in number exceeding fifty persons, shall be assembled
on any one Gold Field, the Commissioner shall have power to
determine the site for their encampment or encampments, to
define the limits, and to make rules for the order and regula-
tion of the same.
31. Each person holding a Business License shall be Business aiiot-
permitted to occupy, for purposes other than gold mining, men ’
land not exceeding in dimension one-fourth of an acre, or,
where such form of measurement may bo practicable, 22
yards frontage by 55 yards in depth. The Commissioner may
further allot to the same person, on payment of additional
license fees, additional lands to an equal extent; and when
such land is situated in a position detached from any tents or
bnildincs, and away from any main road or line of stores or
shops, the Commissioner maj permit the same person to
occupy, under each license, an area not exceeding three times
the above-named extent.


Transfer of 32, A Business License may be transferred from one
business license. (q o ]d Field to another, or from one person to another, and
shall be available on any Gold Field to which the licensee
may remove, provided it be endorsed by the resident Com-
missioner.
inadmissible 33. No claim will be allowed in any position where.
claims. by its interference with the supply of water requisite for the
public, by undermining or digging up of roads, or by obstruct-
ing public thoroughfares, or otherwise, the general interests
will be injured; and no person shall sink or drive within eight
feet of any race of whatever description, without the sanction
of the Commissioner.
Land enclosed 34. No miner shall dig upon or undermine any land
or occupied not enclosed by any authorized occupant, or which is occupied
Without wi- by any building, or with machinery in connexion with mining
thority. operations, or used as' a garden, or as a Government camp,
or police station, or for any public purpose, without the consent
of the Commissioner.
Commissioner 35. The Commissioner may sanction the cutting of
to sanction any race, or the performance of any other operation, necessary
races &c. J uoi/coodij
for the working of any claim; and any race or work, when
duly authorized, shall be the property of the holder.
Proportionate 36. When any race or tunnel shall have been cut,
pcrformed. rk or other work performed, by which the working of any
v claim may be facilitated, any person benefitting thereby shall
pay a proportionate share of the cost of such operation as may
be assessed in terms of the Gold Fields’ Act of 1861.
order to faciii- 37. The Commissioner can make any order for facili-
weteciiimsmS ° f fating the working of any river or other claims, subject to
difficulties by reason of water, by combination of labour, or
otherwise, as the circumstances may appear to him to warrant.
Commissioner 38, Upon any four or more persons applying for a
Zdstoblmade. road or crossing-place over any gully, creek, quartz reef, or
other obstruction, the Commissioner shall determine whether
or not such road or crossing-place is necessary, and shall make
such order relative thereto as he may deem requisite,
shafts sunk near 39. Any miner having a shaft or hole within the
fenced* 0 b 0 distance of six feet from any road, foot-path, or crossing-
place, in ordinary use, and not completely enclosed by the
frame-work of the windlass, shall erect around such shaft or
hole a substantial two-railed fence, the upper rail of which
shall be at least three feet and a-half above the surface of the
ground; and shall also, on leaving such shaft or hole, either
temporarily or otherwise, cover it with logs not less than six
Fences not to be inches in diameter; and no person shall remove, cast down,
removed. or destroy any timber or fence placed for such purpose, unless
by order of the Commissioner.


40. A water privilege shall be taken to mean the Water privilege,
right to convey, by means of a race, a specified quantity of
water to any locality, or the right to a specified quantity of
water in its natural channel. Such water shall be measured
by a plank sluice head, having a sectional area of twelve inches
by one, with a fall of one in twenty-four. Ground sluice heads
shall have twice that sectional area. The water privilege will
be considered distinct from the ground claim, and, with the
Commissioner’s consent, may be held in connexion with fresh
claims. All water privileges not used and upheld for a period
of fourteen days in the case of alluvial working, and of one
week in the case of river working, shall be held to be forfeited,
unless such abandonment be explained to the satisfaction of
the Commissioner.
41. Applications for permission to cut races for con- Races,
veyance of water must be made in writing to the Com-
missioner, and must distinctly describe the source. The
Commissioner, in any permit granted by him, will in all
cases state the extent of water privilege allowed; and where
any such water privilege has been granted the water must
be allowed to return to the ordinary channel whenever the
Commissioner shall so direct. Persons wishing to divert
water from races for the purpose of tomming or sluicing, may
be permitted by the Commissioner to use the surplus water,
on payment to the proprietors of the race of such sum as
may be determined by the Commissioner, in conjunction with
Assessors. Surplus water shall be taken to mean all water
in excess of the extent of water privilege,
42. The holder of a water privilege in the bed of a priority of
stream shall be entitled to a prior right to water, to an extent not 7 e
to exceed three box sluice heads, over the holder of a privilege
whereby the water shall be diverted from the natural channel.
The priority of right to water under any water permit shall
be determined by the date of grant. But where it can be
shewn that the holder of a prior right cannot obtain, by
reason of waste of water or otherwise, at least one-half of the
quantity of water to be surrendered for his supply, his
priority of right shall not take effect.
43. The quantity of water to which any person Measurement of
may be entitled under a water permit shall be measured as water '
nearly as practicable to the spot from whence the water is
first diverted; and in so measuring an allowance shall be
made for leakage. The allowance to be made on any
particular fall of water, for such leakage, shall be determined
by the Commissioner, by testing of the leakage from the race
on the fall to be selected by him as most suitable for the
purpose, and otherwise. The Commissioner shall be em-


powered to make any necessary order for the testing of a
race, or other experiment, for the above purpose; and every
holder of a water privilege shall place and keep a permanent
gauge at the head of his race,
unlawful appro- 44. Holders of water privileges shall be bound to
priatiou of water, see that o ther holders who may possess rights prior to
their own are duly supplied before they appropriate any
portion of the water allowed by their permits; and where
any person shall appropriate and use water allotted to any other
person, he shall be deemed to have committed a “ trespass,”
and be liable to be assessed in damages therefor.
Dams> 45. No dam or obstruction in the course of any river
or creek shall be erected unless by written permission of the
Commissioner ; and any dam so erected shall be liable, should
it interfere in any way with the working of such river or
creek, to be removed by the holder thereof.
BesonoiM and 46. Authorized persons may form or occupy reservoirs
and wells for gold washing purposes and domestic use, on
unoccupied ground, by registering the same with the Com-
missioner, provided that a notice of intended application for
registry shall have been posted on the ground for four clear
days; and the Commissioner shall have power to entertain
any objection to the registry. The holders of such reservoirs
or wells shall have exclusive right to the water therein.
Priority of right 47. The priority of right to water for any reservoir
reservoirs/ 01 or well shall be regulated in the same manner as provided for
water privileges.
Machinery. 48, Applications for permission to erect any machinery
must be made in writing to the Commissioner, who will
grant such permission on being satisfied that a notice
of intended application has been posted on the spot for four
clear days, and that no sufficient objection exists to a com-
pliance therewith. To prevent any injurious deposit of
sludge from any machine, it shall be a condition attached to
the sanction for its erection, that the owner shall, at any time,
on pain of suspension of operations, dispose of the sludge in
such manner as the Commissioner shall direct.
Abandoning 49. Any reservoir or well, or the site of any machinery,
reservoir or well. can registered with the Commissioner; but if remaining
unused and unregistered for fourteen clear days shall be liable
to forfeiture.
Removal of tent 50. Whenever any tent, dwelling place, stable, or
or building. ot h er o h s t ruc ti o n, shall have been so placed as to cause public
inconvenience, the Commissioner may order the removal of
the same to a reasonable distance.


54. Each authorized miner shall be entitled, under Dimensions of
his Miner’s Right, to sixteen hundred square feet of alluvial cuims. ry aUuvial
ground, and such claims shall be marked off in a rectangular
form, the sides of which shall be in proportion to the number
of claim-holders, that is to say :—
For One miner 40 feet by 40 feet.
Two miners 40 „ 80 „
Three miners 60 „ 80 ,,
Four miners 80 „ 80 „
51. No person shall have further right in any “ tail Eight to tan-
water” after it shall have passed beyond his works. water prohibited.
52. At the office of each Commissioner shall he kept Books to be kept,
hooks for the entry of all registries required by these regula-
tions, as also for the entry of the particulars of all applications
therein specified.
53. Any claim, or share of a claim, not worked or Non-fulfilment
occupied in accordance with these regulations, or with any ofrceulatlolls-
order made hy a Commissioner in terms thereof, shall be
liable to forfeiture.
Alluvial, other than River Claims.
And when from any cause it shall be impracticable to take
the claims in the form abovementioned, the Commissioner
may sanction a departure from that form, and allow such area
of ground as shall give to each miner his prescribed quantity,
provided that in no instance shall a claim along a lead exceed
in length twice its breadth; and the same extent of claim shall
be held on any kind of alluvial ground, without regard to
depth of sinking. No ordinary claim will be allowed in extent
greater than for a party of four, and all claims for any one
working party shall be contiguous.
River Claims.
55. Thirty feet frontage for each miner will be Extant,
allowed in beds of rivers or creeks running across the -whole
bed. No working party of miners can take up more than six
of such claims, which must be contiguous.
Quartz Claims,
56. The word “Beef” shall be taken to mean any Definition of the
seam of quartz the average thickness of which, measured
in different places actually exposed to view, shall exceed six
feet. All other seams of quartz shall, for the purpose of these
regulations, be deemed to be veins only.
57. The claim allowed to each miner on the line Extent,
of any quartz vein or reef shall be thirty feet in the direction
of the vein or reef, and the total number of claims to be


allowed for any one party of miners actually employed shall
Party not excee< i six : Provided that in all cases where any party of
miners may be only sinking or driving in search of gold, and
shall not have found it in such quantity as to have induced
them to extract it from the substance in which it is embedded,
only one-half the number of men in proportion to the extent
of claim shall be required to be employed on it. No lesser
extent than two claims, or sixty feet, shall be allotted, unless
by special sanction of the Commissioner,
w'idtii of claims. 58. The width of any quartz claim shall be one
hundred yards, and the holder shall be entitled to work all
reefs or veins within that width ; and also to follow beyond
his boundary into unoccupied ground the “ dip” of any reef
on which he may be actually at work.
Modo Of laying 59. On the discovery of any quartz reef or vein,
of a uar zc alru - 0 f prQspecting claim, or claim which may first
have struck gold, shall forthwith report such discovery
to the Commissioner, who shall appoint, by notice, a time
to attend at the ground ; he shall then proceed to lay
down the supposed line of the reef or vein, and shall allot the
claims thereon, according to priority of occupation, numbering
the same, and no further sinking shall be commenced until
. the Commissioner shall have so laid off the claims; nor shall
any person be entitled to the ground he may have marked
previous to the arrival of the Commissioner, but merely to
the priority of right on the declared lead derived from such
marking. The Commissioner may at any time alter the
course of the base line.
Registry of 60. Within forty-eight hours of the occupation of any
claim, after the line of lead shall have been laid down by the
Commissioner, application must be made to register the same.
The Commissioner shall enter the registry in a book, and
shall endorse on the Miners’ flights of the applicants the date
of registration, the number of claim, and the name of lead.
Transfer of 61. In like manner application must be made for the
claims, transfer of any such claim, or share of claim, within forty-
eight hours; and the Commissioner shall register such
transfer, and endorse the Miners’ Rights of the incoming
holders with the same particulars, heading his notation with
the words “ transfer registry,”
Amalgamation. 62. Any two adjoining claims can amalgamate by
registration with the Commissioner.
63. In the case of comjergence of reefs, the preference
at and onwards from the junction will be given to the claim-
holders on the line first laid off by the Commissioner,
be marked™ 8 to 64. Any miner or party of miners who may be in
posts. 11 6 7 authorized possession of any quartz claim shall, for the infor-


mation of all other persons, mark the boundaries of such claim
by the erection of posts at each end, and at each corner of it,,
to be at least three inches square, standing two feet above the
ground, and kept at all times clear of rubbish, or anything
which may tend to conceal them from view.
65. Between adjoining quartz claims a wall of Wall between
three feet shall be preserved, and whenever any miner, in to
marking off a new claim, shall have neglected to leave the
proper space for the wall, the Commissioner may deduct the
necessary length from the claim last marked off, and assign it
as a wall between such claim and the adjoining claim first
marked. And, in like manner, when any miner or miners
shall have marked off more than the proper width for a wall,
the Commissioner may curtail such excess, and assign it to
the holders of the claim first marked; or, if he deems it
advisable, may order the boundary posts of the claim last
marked to be removed to their proper position.
66. Any person who wishes to retain possession of Persons to stack
any quartz stone, casing, or other substance containing gold, (luartz rroperly '
the product of a quartz claim, may do so for any period of
time not exceeding one year, although the claim from which
it was taken has been relinquished, provided that he stack
such stone, casing, or other substance, in a proper manner
upon ground not supposed to be workable, and erect close to
such stack a post with his name, address, and date of stacking
legibly painted thereon; and no person shall remove, deface,
or damage, any such post so erected, or remove any quartz
stone, casing, or other substance, so stacked. Any stone,
casing, or other substance, taken from a claim, and not so
stacked, shall be deemed to be abandoned and forfeited.
Extended Claims.
67. On ground previously worked and abandoned,
or where the expense attending the mode of working, or the
poverty of the ground, will warrant it, the Commissioner can
allot an extended claim not to exceed the dimension below
specified, viz.:—
In alluvial ground 120 feet by 120 feet.
In the course of a Eiver or Creek 400 feet.
Applications for such claims must be made in writing, and
must set forth the number of men proposed to be employed
during the holding of the claim, and the date from which the
applicant undertakes to employ the specified number. It
shall be in the discretion of the Commissioner, in any case
of the non-fulfilment of the conditions of the application, to
direct a diminution in lieu of the absolute forfeiture of the
claim.


Leases of five
years’ duration
Leased Tracts.
68. Two classes of leases of auriferous tracts and
quartz reefs will be granted :
Ist. —Leases of from two to eight acres of alluvial
land, from two to five hundred yards of a river
bed, from one to five hundred yards on the
line of a quartz vein, will be granted for a
period limited to five years, at an annual rent
of £5 per acre, £5 per hundred yards of river
bed, or £5 per hundred yards of quartz vein
respectively.
2nd.—Leases for a longer period, and for greater
extent of land, will be granted, at a Loyalty
on the gross produce of gold.
69. Persons desirous of obtaining leases of the first
class may make application in writing to the Commis-
sioner, who will submit the same to the Chief Commissioner
of the District, who shall be empowered to issue the lease
by the authority of the Minister for Lands. Previously to the
application being entertained, a notice of intended appli-
cation must have been posted by the applicant on a con-
spicuous part of the claim for six clear days, and the ground
distinctly marked for a like period at each corner by posts
not less than four feet in height.
(1.) Each such application must set forth the machi-
nery to be used, and describe the proposed method of working
the claim, the extent and nature of preparatory work to be
done, the number of men whom the applicant undertakes to
employ within a stated period, the constitution of the Com-
pany, the number of shares, and the names of the shareholders.
(2.) The rent for each year must bo paid in advance,
and the application for the lease must be accompanied by the
sum of £5, as a deposit, to be forfeited by the applicant, should
the lease not be taken out within one month after the granting
of the same shall have been notified to him.
(3.) Every holder of a lease for quartz mining pur-
poses shall be entitled to work all quartz within a distance
of fifty yards on either side of his marked line, and shall also
be entitled, at any time, with the consent of the Commissioner,
to alter the direction of his line, retaining the original point
at either extremity, according to his choice, provided that he
shall not thereby encroach upon any occupied ground,
(4.) Where, from floods or other unavoidable causes, a
claim shall be unworkable, the lessee shall not be required to
continue the employment of the stipulated amount of labour;
but the proof of such sufficient cause shall lie with the lessee.


70, Applications for leases of the second class must Lease*exceeding
be addressed to the Commissioner, and be accompanied by two years *
a deposit of £5O to meet expenses which may be incurred
in deciding upon the application, and also by the following
information :
1. A description of the land required for lease, and
a plan shewing the extent of the auriferous
portion, as well as of that required for setting
up machinery, erecting dwellings or offices, or
for other purposes.
2. The term or period for which the ground is
required.
8. The consideration, in the shape of Royalty, on
the gross produce which it is proposed to pay
for the privilege of mining on it, being not less
than one per cent.
4. The proposed plan of working it, stating the
kind and power of machinery to be used.
5. The minimum number of men whom it is pro-
posed to employ.
6. The time after approval of the application which
will be allowed to elapse before the work will
be commenced.
7. The time which will elapse, and the work to be
done, before the number of men so stated will
be employed.
8. The constitution of the Association or Company
by which the ground will be worked, the pro-
posed distribution of shares, and the amount of
capital subscribed.
71. The Chief Commissioner of the District shall Mode of dealing
forward to the Government every such application, with his Wlth aPPlieants-
report thereon. He will also cause the applicant to distinguish,
by proper posts, the land for which he has applied, and to set
up as well thereon as at the Commissioner’s Office, a notice
defining the nature of the application. If at the end of
fourteen days after such notice has been duly posted, no
objection be preferred to the Chief Commissioner respecting
the lease of such land, he will be empowered to grant
leave for the immediate occupation of it, at the risk of the
applicant, and subject to the decision of the Government as
to the terms on which the lease will be granted.
72. The Government will entertain applications for Leases not
leases under these regulations, for periods not exceeding
twenty-one years, subject to the following conditions, and any
others which from the special nature of the application it may
be desirable to add :


1. That the ground applied for has been abandoned
or is unoccupied.
2. That a right of entry at all times for the purpose
of examining works, books, and accounts be
reserved to the Government, or to those whom
they may appoint.
3. That such books be kept in a form to satisfy the
Government as to the quantity of material
operated oa, and the gold obtained.
4. That accurate plans and sections, shewing the
mining operations, be kept by the Association
or Company, and that copies of these, shewing
the progress made, be forwarded half-yearly to
the Government through the Commissioner in
charge of the District.
5. That the gross produce of gold be forwarded by
escort to the Mint at Sydney, for valuation by
assay.
6. That one-third the subscribed capital has been
paid up.
73, The infraction of any of the conditions of a lease
will involve the forfeiture thereof.
Frontage System.
Declaration of 74. The Chief Commissioner shall be empowered to
declare any field, or division of a field, as regards alluvial
workings, to be under the operation of the “Frontage System.”
Definition of 75. frontage claim shall be meant a claim having a
nutate ami. 0 f one m ji e un tjq g o ](j shall have been struck therein;
but on any field or division of a field, the Chief Commissioner
can declare a reduction of such width.
Definition of 76. A block claim shall mean an ordinary claim,
Uoik LldUa ' marked off in accordance with the Regulations.
Xew ground 77. Any unoccupied locality, wherein any miner or
miners shall desire to sink in search of a lead, shall be deemed
to be u new ground.”
claims on now 78. On new ground within a declared frontage district,
marked on front or division, all claims must be marked on the frontage system,
age. in the first instance.
when sinking 79. When the sinking in such ground shall be found
less than so feet not to reach a depth of sixty feet, of which the bottoming
in a bU)ck. be taken of one or more shafts on the supposed line of lead shall be a
sufficient test (unless the Commissioner shall specially sanction
a further testing), all markings on the supposed line of lead
shall be null, and the ground shall then be open for taking
up claims in the block form, provided that each miner shall


have the right to include any shaft which had actually
been commenced by him in his block claim, taking such shaft
for the centre.
80. The mode of marking on an undeclared lead Mode of marking
shall be by the erection of a post, not less than three feet in i e I Li! n(ieclarca
height, at either end of the claim; and the frontage area
must also be marked by posts, not less than four feet in height,
placed at the extremities of lines intersecting at right angles
the posts at either end of the claim.
81. Any person who may strike payable gold at a Declaration of
depth not less than sixty feet, shall immediately report
to the Commissioner, who shall thereupon appoint a time,
not less than two days thereafter, by a notice at the claim
and at his office, to proceed to the ground in order to consider
any application for the declaration of a frontage lead; and if
it be the desire of the majority of the persons interested, then
present, he may, if he shall see sufficient reason, declare such
lead.
82. On the declaration of a lead all claims previously Ee-arrangement
held on such lead shall be deemed to be cancelled, and holders
thereof shall he entitled to occupy claims as marked by the lead -
Surveyor, according to their priority of occupation on the lead,
excepting where any claim-holder may have sank a shaft at
least twenty feet in depth, in which case he shall be entitled
to the claim in which his shaft is situated.
83. The Commissioner shall then direct the Surveyor claims to be laid
to lay down a base line from either boundary of the prospect
claim, along the supposed course of such lead, on which line be made.
be shall mark the length of claims, and such claims shall be
allotted, according to priority of occupation, on the lead. The
Surveyor shall also lay down cross lines as nearly as possible at
right angles with the base line at each boundary; and shall,
by authority of the Commissioner mark off, as a reserve, any
unoccupied ground which may be considered as likely to be
necessary to any future alteration of the base line.
84. If the actual course of the lead be found to Alteration of
differ materially from the course of the base line, and if the baseliue *
majority of claim-holders affected thereby, shall desire it,
the Commissioner may authorize the surveyor to lay down a
new base line, and to lay off the claims on the new line,
according to their order on the former line.
85. The occupation of a fresh claim On a declared Mode of marking-
lead shall be taken by marking the same in like manner as on JS^S£Si. on
an undeclared lead but in continuation of the Surveyor’s base
line ; and so soon as the Surveyor’s cross line shall have been
laid the claim shall be marked by similar posts at either end
of such cross lines. When the claim shall be reduced in


width the farther posts must he withdrawn and placed at
each corner of the block claim selected.
Registry of 86. Within forty-eight hours of the occupation of any
claim ’ such claim, application must be made to the Commissioner to
register the same; and the Commissioner shall enter such
registry in a book, and shall endorse on the Miners’ Rights of
the applicants, the date of registration, the number of claim,
and the name of lead.
Transfer of 87. In like manner application must be made for
claim. the registry of the transfer of any such claim, or share of
claim,°within forty-eight hours, and the Commissioner shall
enter such transfer, and endorse the Miners’ of the
incoming holders, with the same particulars, heading his
notation with the words “ transfer registry.”
Amalgamation 88. xVny two adjoining claims may amalgamate by
of claims. registering such amalgamation with the Commissioner and
posting on the non-working claim the names of the holders
and the numbers of their Miners’ Rights,
joint working of 89. The Commissioner may make any order for the
wet claims. joint working of any number of claims subject to difficulty
of working by excess of water on the application of the holders,
and for exempting from working the number of holders for
whom there shall not he employment according to the nature
of the order. A copy of such order must he posted on any
non-working claim.
Frontage to 90. When on any declared lead the sinking shall
becoming* have been found to have diminished in depth, so as not to
low - ° reach 60 feet, the Commissioner shall fix a point from which
to declare the frontage system to have ceased, and all claims
thereafter shall thereupon be taken in the block according
to priority of occupation in the frontage. Rut in case of
difficulty to working from excess of water, or other cause, it
shall he at the discretion of the .Commissioner to abstain
from discontinuing the frontage system.
Frontage to . 91. shall he in the discretion of tbe Commia-
ceasoonapphca. g . Qner d j scontinue t h G frontage system from any point on a
declared lead not then occupied, should it appear to him to
he desirable to do so.
Marking of 92. All claims taken up in advance of any line
vtmctfo?&ur-of declared lead, and which would, by extension of the
veyor’s line. Surveyor’s line, come within the wings of such lead, must be
marked in continuance of the Surveyor’s line, and will he
held to he claims on such declared lead.
Prospecting 93. An J person desiring to take up a prospecting
claims, ° claim on a declared lead may do so at a distance not less than
half a mile in advance of the last paying shaft, by registering
the same, and he may mark out and hold on such prospecting


claim an additional claim for each man employed therein, so
long as the entire extent of claim shall not exceed eight
claims, or 160 feet. On any undeclared supposed lead double
claims may in like manner be marked out and registered so
long as the entire extent shall not exceed twelve claims, or
240 feet. All prospecting claims must be effectively and
continuously worked. Any number of claims taken up for
the purpose of prospecting may be amalgamated, but the
additional claims by way of reward will only be allowed (on
the discovery therein of payable gold) to the registered pros-
pecting claim. Mo prospecting claim on any declared or
undeclared lead shall be taken up within half a mile of any
other prospecting claim, except by special sanction of the
Commissioner.
94. The length of frontage claims shall be as follows: — Length of dams.
For two men 40 feet.
~ four men 80 »
No one claim will be allotted for other numbers than as
above stated. „ , , .
95. The width finally to be allowed for a frontage Width of claims.
claim, after the gold shall have been struck, shall be 80 feet,
unless when the depth of sinking shall be found to exceed .
200 feet, after which an additional width of 20 feet shall be
allowed for every 100 feet in depth. And the depth of sink-
ing for any lead, or portion of a lead, shall be determined by
the Commissioner without reference to the depth of any
particular shaft. „ , , .
96. In the case of a convergence of leads the Convergence of
preference at and onwards from the junction will be given
to the claim holders on the lead first declared. Provided
that at any time when a convergence shall seem probable, it
shall be in the discretion of the Commissioner to refuse any
further registry of claims, excepting conditionally, until the
actual position of the lead shall have been ascertained.
97. On all declared leads not fewer than 25 shafts Working of
must be continuously and effectively worked in the claims
on either line of lead onwards from the prospect claim,
and afterwards in advance of the last payable shaft.
98. On other claims, the position of which does Hojgn| ofnon-
not require them to be so worked, every shareholder, or his
representative, to the full number required by the dimen-
sions of the claim, must be present from 9 till 11 o’clock a.m.
daily.
99. The holder of any claim bottoming on the Dntgiof claim-
lead must immediately acquaint the Commissioner, and shall
be allowed 14 days to prove the breadth of his claim, which
time can, on sufficient reason, be extended by sanction of the


Commissioner, The claim shall then be reduced to the
prescribed width, and marked off. But it shall be in the
discretion of the Commissioner to determine, in the case of the
shaft and drive of the holders being without the block claim
chosen, whether they can retain such shaft and drive for the
working of the claim; and until the question be determined
no such shaft or drive can be taken possession of except by
consent of the original holders,
indication of 100. The Surveyor shall cause a red flag to be
course of load, foisted on t^e ] as t c ] a i m on the lead immediately that gold
may have been struck therein, to indicate the course of the
gutter. The holders of such claim must give every informa-
tion as to the course of the gutter. The Surveyor can at any
time enter any shaft, and the holders of a shaft must allow it
to be entered in like manner by any person having the
written authority of the Commissioner.
Abandonment of 101. When any declared lead shall be abandoned
frontage lead. c ] ear days, the declaration of lead shall be deemed to
be rescinded. The Commissioner can also rescind the declara-
tion of a lead on which the number of shafts actually at work
during the 21 preceding days shall not exceed ten. But the
. holders of any claims then working on such lead shall be
entitled to retain their frontage.
Breach of Begu- 102. Any breach of these regulations shall involve
lations. a forfeiture of claim or share of claim, should the Com-
missioner so determine.
Application of 103, The holding of frontage claims will, with reference
lations 7 llogu to any question not herein provided for, come within the
terms of the ordinary general Regulations.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer,—lB62.


\
*


BI6UO


♦
V
t


