

THE MILK BOOK OF
VICTORIA
With the Compliments of
STOCK BROS.
Ashburton Dairy
HIGH STREET, ASHBURTON


Every Persoii living within an 18-mile Radius of the
General Post Office should know what a
Towns Casli Order
will do for
them!
Our only address :
The Towns Supply Co.
Pty. Ltd.
General Financiers
3rd Floor (Take Lift)
Nicholas Buildings
35 Swanston Street
Melbourne
PHONE : CENT. 4838
1 CLIENTS themselves
CHOOSE the SHOE AT
WHICH TO PURCHASE
2 YOU PURCHASE at CAST!
PRICES.
Q The GOODS are YOUR OWN
O PROPERTY.
4 WE DO NOT KNOW what
you have PURCHASED.
5 ADVICE and SYSTEM Cir-
cular FREE.
5 The accommodation for bene-
fits is only 1/- in the £1 (our
C3mmission), the balance re-
payable by Twenty Weekly
Instalments of 1/- in the £!.
7NO SECURITY NO
PUBLICITY. CIVILITY.
PROMPTNESS and EFFI-
CIENCY.


STOCKS BROS.
Ashburton Dairy
HIGH ST., ASHBURTON
Quick Service and Wholesome
Milk
are essential factors in the provision of
Wholesome Dishes
OUR MILK
Is guaranteed tuberculin-free.
Is produced on our own farms.
Is cooled and bottled by latest mechanical equip-
ment and under most hygienic conditions.
Is not touched by hand.
Top Service and Top Quality
Our Slogan
Call and Look over our New Plant.
Milk - Cream - Ice
0
STOCK BROS.
Ashburton Dairy
HIGH STREET - ASHBURTON
A


INTRODUCTION
We take pleasure in presenting this booklet wherein
some of the uses and benefits of milk are written down.
It has been carefully compiled for your benefit, and articles
dealing with the value of milk both as a food and a drink
have been interspersed with suggested recipes covering
a wide range for the housewife’s choice. The articles
have been selected from official publications and are of
considerable educational value.
It will be seen that in all the recipes milk or cream is
utilized in greater or lesser degree.
Xne purpose of this booklet is to be of service to you.
We ask you to read it carefully. You will find much of
interest in its pages.


TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Milk—The Best Food We Have 7
Milk and Its Relation to Public Health 13
Milk—Man’s Most Important Food 17
Influence of Bacteria on the Production of Clean Milk 23
To Achieve the Perfect Figure 33
About Bones 36
Milk in Diet Affects Size of Human Race 47
A Word for Pasteurization 51
Food Value of Milk 53
Milk is the Best Dentist 53
Looking into the Milk Bottle 62
Attention, Please 71
Points to Remember About Milk 94
Milk Recipes—
Milk Drinks 20
Milk Soups 27
Fish : 30
Milk Puddings 37
Cakes .. .. 55
Fillings for Sandwiches 56
Ices, Etc 58
Meat 67
Meat Substitutes 72
Vegetables 73
Sauces • 76




There is no satisfactory sub-
stitute for Ice when kept in
a suitable refrigerator,
because
ICE is sure, silent, efficient, and
self-dependent. Its pure depths
hold no mechanical device nor any
chemicals.
ICE stands in a class by itself for
ECONOMY, because the cost of a good ice chest
is negligible compared with the saving effected by
the preservation of health and food.
HEALTH, because the free circulation of air,
chilled by its contact with ice, carries with it
whatever impurities and odours the food gives
off. These are absorbed by the moisture on the
ice block, and seep down in meltage through the
outlet. No interchange of food odours or
flavours takes place —an important feature not
present in any other form of refrigeration.
SAFETY, because through many generations it
has a record unblemished by a single accident or
mishap—lce is 100 per cent. safe.
SIMPLICITY, because it is trouble-free, never
gets out of order, and needs no manipulation or
operation beyond being placed in the ice chamber,
where it immediately begins to do its work.


SSMS
BELL’S
FOR ALL
The Ideal Pasteurizer for Milk.
Modern
Dairy
Equipment
ut
■
.4. :
M.
All Rotary Filler and Capper.
J. Bell Machinery
Pty. Ltd.
200 KING ST., MELBOURNE
Phone Cent. 8610, 8611
Sectional Milk Cooler.


MILK
THE BEST FOOD WE HAVE
Give Your Children Milk;
Use Milk Yourself
MILK IS A FOOD
Because it contains materials which build up the body,
keep it in repair, enable it to produce energy and heat.
It contains curd, cream, sugar, minerals, and a great
number of other elements, each of which is essential to
health.
The Curd or casein is a flesh and blood forming material
essential for growth.
The Cream or fat is heat giving, heat and energy
producing.
The Sugar or lactose also produces heat and energy.
The Minerals help specially to build up bone, teeth,
and the blood which nourishes the other parts of the body.
The Vitamines also are essential to health and growth.
FOR THE INFANT, HUMAN MILK IS A PERFECT
FOOD
If a baby cannot be breast-fed, cows’ milk must be
modified to make it resemble human milk as nearly as
possible, on any other food it is almost certain that one or
more essential constituents will be omitted to the detriment
of health or even to the danger of life.
MONEY SPENT ON MILK IS MONEY WELL SPENT
One pennyworth of fresh milk contains times as
much body-building material as one pennyworth of beef,
twice as much heat-giving material, and twice as much
energy-producing material.


One glass of milk (one J-pint) has about the same food
value as four eggs, or a large serving of lean meat, or two
moderate-sized potatoes, or three pounds of spinach, or
two pounds of cabbage, or one-and-a-half pounds of fresh
cod, or two-and-a-half pounds of turnips.
Therefore this good and valuable food must be clean
and pure. It must come from clean cows, free from
disease, handled by clean milkers, stored and distri-
buted in clean vessels, kept in clean cupboards, and covered
by clean covers.
Cleanliness costs money. A moment’s thought will tell
you that.
THE DRINK MORE MILK CAMPAIGN
Surveys made by child welfare workers have revealed
that 33 per cent, of the children in the United States are
undernourished. Improper food, rather than insufficient
food, is the chief reason ascribed for this condition. And
the greater culpability—still relying for the findings upon
SOME REQUIREMENTS FOR A “SAFE”
MILKS SUPPLY
(1) Milk should only be obtained from cows free from
disease, more especially from diseases of the udder.
(2) All persons engaged in the production or handling of
milk should be free from communicable diseases,
septic sores and other skin diseases.
(3) Milking should be done in a cleanly manner, in
properly paved and drained and clean milking sheds.
(4) All milking utensils should be sterilized by boiling
water or steam.
(5) The milk should be immediately cooled.
(6) The milk should be kept cool and protected against
contamination during transport to the consumer.


statistics —rests with American and American-born
parents j 54 per cent, of these under-nourished childreA
come from such homes. Among the children of foreign-
born parents, only 18 per cent, are found to be in this
condition.
Milk, pure milk, plenty of milk, and milk for all of the
seven stages of man, is the Red Cross recipe for rosy
cheeks, strong bodies, and vigorous childhood. “At least
a pint a day, and preferably three pints, for every child,
and not less than three cups daily for every adult” is the
quantity advised for the best results.
Under-nourished children are usually backward chil-
dren, and are always susceptible to disease, so that a
substantial economic loss is represented to the State, as the
money spent on education and medical care is multiplied
indefinitely by the number of such pupils throughout the
nation.
Milk Gives Your Children Lime and other salts which
they need. There must be plenty of lime in their food,
for a great deal of it is needed for their bones and teeth,
and a little for their blood and all other parts of their
bodies. Right food, not drugs, is what children need.
Big boys and girls and grown people, as well as children,
need lime, because the bones are constantly wearing away
little by little and must be replaced.
Milk is the chief food for lime. It is much richer in
it than other common foods. These lines stand for lime,
the top one for the lime in a cup of milk, the others for
the lime in a serving of some other foods. Notice how
much more there is in milk than in the others.
Amount of Lime in
1 cup of milk.
\ cup carrots.
2 slices of bread.


Milk is the cheapest food for lime. Buy milk. You
and your children need its lime.
Be Suve Y out IVLilk is Clean and Fvesh. —lf you live in
the city, buy brine cooled or pasteurized from a clean
dairy. In the country see that your cows and milkers are
clean and healthy. Keep your milk clean, cold, and
covered.
Spread the Knowledge Among the Mothers That Milk
Is Our Best Food
Dr. Gerald Leighton, of the Scottish Board of Health
(Food Department), says:—
“Do not grudge a fair price for good milk. Good milk
is that produced from healthy, non-tuberculous cows,
cleanly handled, and protected from contamination from
any source until it reaches the consumer. See that you get
it. Be prepared to pay a decent price for it, and then be
thankful.”
The Boiling of milk practically kills all microbes in it,
certainly all disease-producing germs. It may, however,
partially spoil or destroy some of those valuable vitamines
which are essential to health growth. If a baby is fed on
boiled milk, therefore, it should have a small amount of
orange juice daily to supply the vitamines which boiled
milk may lack. Older persons can get plenty of vitamines
in the fresh fruit and fresh vegetables, eggs, &c., they
eat to make good any that the milk lacks, so that from
their point of view the boiling of milk is not detrimental.
MILK IN THE HOME
It is of little use for the farmer and distributor to take
every care to produce clean milk, if the housewife takes
no care of it after it is delivered.
Some farmers and dairymen do not yet do all they
should to supply clean milk, but neither do housewives do
all they should to protect the milk from dust and dirt.
Till we are sure of a clean milk supply, before allowing
infants or children to consume the milk, it should be:
1. —Boiled before use.
2. —Cooled quickly by standing in water.
3. —Keep carefully covered in a clean vessel.


BUILDING A BOY OR GIRL
First comes the framework, the bony structure, which
must be strong and of good materials.
Next comes sturdy muscles, full of the resilience that
gives grace, strength, ease of movement. Then firm,
clean, solid flesh, through which rich, pure, red blood
should course, furnishing splendid vitality and health.
You may rear your boy on improper diet, but the risk is
great —too great. If some element in the diet is absent,
sooner or later your child will suffer for the lack in his
food. Do not let the realization of this come home to you
when it is too late.
Milk gives you more food for less money.
DRINK MILK
Issued by the Victorian Milk Producers and Retail Dairymen’s
Association, Melbourne.
— 1
■ '
a mmmMM
'
fm • * / .:•
Hk'.: ' V
V 3
EvJ%
a
SK3
»; k-5
- : ' •
Make “real Coffee”
with Milk and
RpseXla
Coffee
Essence
Perfectly blended to
give that full, mel-
low flavor, so de-
licious and satisfy-
ing.
Add Milk to Rosella
Tomato Soup to
bring out the de-
lightful cream of
tomato flavor.


Ice Cream is a Food made from
Milk and Cream
The Swallow product is made by the most modern
equipment Glass - lined tanks, nickel - plated
machines, and up-to-the-minute refrigeration.
v
Am Ideal Sweet for Dinner
Take a Swallow Ice Cream brick, place a serving
in a glass sweet dish for each person, then pour
over each some heated chocolate (previously pre-
pared). A strawberry, cherry, nonpariels, or
desiccated coconut may be added. Serve quickly.
Look for the SWALLOW Shop
SWALLOW & ARIELL
(Ice Cream) Pty. Ltd.
“ The Home of Quality ”


MILK
AND ITS RELATION TO PUBLIC HEALTH
(Reprinted from the Commission of Public Health
Health Bulletin , 193 3.)
From the public health point of view, the importance of
a pure and wholesome milk supply cannot be overesti-
mated. It so closely concerns the well-being of the whole
community that the question of a safe milk supply may,
without exaggeration, be said to be a matter of national
importance.
The problem of securing a safe milk supply presents
many difficulties, and differences of opinion as to the best
methods to adopt may arise, but an attempt will be
made in this article to explain the nature of these difficul-
ties, how they can be best overcome, and the reasons why
certain methods are to be preferred. It has also been
considered advisable to include the published opinions of
several eminent medical authorities of the English-
speaking world on this subject.
Milk is of a dual nature. On the one hand, it is an
invaluable food, on the other hand it is frequently the
means of transmitting to man diseases of both animal and
human origin. The basis of all plans for dealing with
public milk supplies is to preserve all the valuable qualities
of milk as a food, while at the same time rendering it free
from disease germs with which it may have been
contaminated.
MILK AS A FOOD
Milk and milk products are the most important foods
of civilized man. There is no adequate substitute for
milk. It has a high vitamin content. It contains proteid,
fat, and carbohydrate, and has a high calcium (lime) and
phosphorus content. Milk and leafy vegetables are the
only foods that can make good the deficiencies of a diet
composed of cereals, meaty and the non-leafy vegetables.
They are thus protective foods against dietetic


insufficiency. Animal and human feeding experiments
conducted on a vast scale have shown the benefits of the
addition of a ration of milk to the diet. One of the best
known experiments was carried out by Dr. Corry Mann
at a boys’ institute in England. After adding a pint of
milk a day to the boys’ rations, a marked increase in height
and weight was noted, and the boys were obviously more
fit than those of another group who had not received the
extra milk ration. Recent research work has also shown
that the addition of milk to the diet of children is
effective in preventing the onset of dental decay. Those
nations who have made liberal use of milk as a food have
throughout history been noted for their virility and success
in the arts of war and peace.
Medical authorities in all countries have advocated the
greater use of milk as an article of diet. No exact estimate
of the average daily consumption of milk in this State is
available, but that its consumption could, and should, be
greatly increased will be generally accepted.
How can an increased use of milk be secured ? Firstly,
further public education in the virtues of milk as a food
is required. Much has already been done in this way, and
the public generally are now aware that milk has food
properties possessed by no other single food. But there
are still many who regard milk as only a food for infants,
invalids, and young children, and are not aware that it is
also necessary for the use of adolescents and adults. Man
is very conservative in his dietetic habits, and alterations in
national diet are usually of very slow growth. Many
people dislike milk as a beverage, but milk is quite as
nutritious whether taken as such or as part of various food
preparations. Moreover, we are a nation of tea drinkers,
and much less milk is used in tea than in coffee, so that
coffee-drinking countries in general consume more milk.
Milk producers and all engaged in the milk trade, both
wholesale and retail, desire an increase in the consumption
of milk, as it would obviously be to their financial advan-
tage. The medical profession in general also desires to see
an increased consumption of milk, believing that it would
improve the standard of nutrition and health of the com-
munity. One condition only is required by the profession,


that the public milk supply is reasonably “safe.” This
condition must be met. It cannot be evaded. We cannot
expect to see the desired increase in the consumption of
milk until the production and distribution of milk is so
organized that the medical profession and the public are
confident of the “safety” of the general milk supply.
Another factor in determining the consumption of milk
is price. Any method of securing an improvement on
present conditions which would necessitate a considerable
increase in the cost of milk would lead to a decreased
consumption among those sections of the community who
most need an increased supply.
THE PRODUCTION OF CLEAN MILK
The production of clean milk with a low bacterial' count
is quite possible. Many individual dairymen are
producing such a milk to-day. No elaborate or expensive
equipment is required, but cleanliness and care at every
stage of handling the milk are necessary. The first
requirement is, of course, that the cows should be healthy
and free from disease. The other essentials are the educa-
tion of the milker, the proper sterilization of utensils, and
the immediate cooling of the milk, and the keeping of it
at a low temperature.
Milking. —Cows should be groomed before milking
with a wet brush and currycomb, and the udders washed.
The milker should wash and dry his hands before milking,
and should wear an overall. Each cow’s milk should be
removed as soon as possible and run through the cooler.
Milkers would more willingly undertake these simple
precautions if they understood the reasons for doing so.
They should know that dirt means microbes, and that
microbes multiply quickly in milk, and that clean milk will
remain sweet longer and be less likely to spread disease
than dirty milk.
The Sterilization of Utensils. —The sterilization of
milking pails, strainers, coolers, &c., is of the utmost
importance, and is absolutely necessary if a low count is
to be secured. Stale milk adherent to vessels may grow
immense numbers of bacteria. “Poorly cleaned moist


utensils that are allowed to stand at temperatures favor-
able for the development of bacteria have been found the
most important source of these extraneous bacteria.” All
utensils must therefore be sterilized with boiling water or
steam.
The Cool'mg of Milk. —Milk as it leaves the cow is at
the temperature of about 100° F., which is a temperature
very favorable to the multiplication of germs. It must,
therefore, be cooled as rapidly as possible and held at a
temperature at or below 50° F.
By a proper understanding of these principles and
attention to detail in their execution, it is possible to
produce a commercial milk of low bacterial count. Milk
of low bacterial count is being produced by hundreds of
dairy-farmers for a firm in this State which is engaged
in the manufacture of several milk products. This firm
has its own private inspectors, who, by educating the
farmers in the essential principles of clean milk produc-
tion, have succeeded in obtaining a satisfactory milk
without requiring any elaborate or expensive equipment.
The company sterilizes the milk cans at the factory before
returning them to the farmers. The dairy farms are
required to have a satisfactory water supply, paved and
graded yards and milking pens, a bucket and clean towel
and hot water for washing the hands, a cooler easily
detachable for sterilization, and a copper for boiling
water for sterilization purposes. This firm makes no
demands on its suppliers which it would be unreasonable
to require of any supplier of milk for human
consumption.


MILK
MAN’S MOST IMPORTANT FOOD
Milk is man’s most important food. It is indispensable
for children. Whole milk in some form must be
furnished if nutrition is to be maintained and good health
and normal growth assured.
Whole milk contains an abundance of animal protein,
minerals and the growth-regulating substances, besides fat
and sugar. No other single food-stuff, therefore, is so
important in infancy, childhood, and adult life.
The irritating heat of hot days makes it doubly
important that none but the purest, germ-free milk and
other dairy products be generously provided for your
family table and included in your baby’s diet.
Every growing child is better and more cheaply
nourished if it is given liberally clean, pure, wholesome
milk, either as a drink or in the cooked food making up
the daily diet.
Lowered nutrition in children means decreased vitality
and lowered resistance to disease. Intellectual and moral
abnormality are largely influenced by physical health,
and a period of malnutrition may easily be followed by
intellectual and moral deterioration.
Milk, then, is the indispensable food for infants and
children, and whole milk in some form must be furnished
them if nutrition is to be maintained and normal growth
of the children, both physical and mental, assured.
The United States Bureau of Labor says: “Every child
from eighteen months to twelve years of age is better for
having l\ pints of milk in its daily diet.”
You can safeguard your baby’s health and future by
an easy phone call asking our driver to stop at your door.
Milk is a protective food and should be liberally
included in every diet and particularly in a reducing diet.
It contains all of the essential and required food materials
and supplies the deficiencies that may be lacking in any
other foods.


A reducing diet that includes milk and green, leafy
vegetables is a healthful diet. Whole milk contains
approximately four per cent, butterfat. We need some
fat to provide a cushion between muscles and for protec-
tion against cold. We must have some fat to be healthful
—and good health is an outstanding essential to beauty.
Thrifty housewives are using more milk now than ever
before. It is an economical and logical substitute for
meats and other more costly foods. It is entirely free
from harmful drugs, and as a beverage will not cause
discomfort. It is invigorating and refreshing.
WAYS OF USING MORE MILK
Cereals Cooked in Milk. —Corn meal, oatmeal, and rice are
delicious cooked in skim-milk. Use the same amount of milk as
you would water for oatmeal and corn meal. For rice, you can
well use a good deal more milk—four or even more cups of milk
to one of rice. Cook for an hour in a double boiler. This makes
a delicious, creamy cereal. For milk cereal puddings add sugar
or syrup and raisins.
CREAMED DISHES
Milk toast, cream soups, creamed vegetables, creamed fish,
and scalloped dishes are all good ways of putting more milk into
the daily food of the family. The milk for all of these is
thickened into a sauce, thick or thin.
To make the sauces, melt the fat, stir in the flour, add the milk
gradually, and cook until thickened, stirring constantly unless
you use a double boiler. All measurements are level in these and
all other recipes.
Thin White Sauce.—Milk, 1 cup; flour, 1 tablespoon;
fat, 1 tablespoon; salt, \ teaspoon.
Medium White Sauce.—Milk, 1 cup; flour, 2 table-
spoons ; fat, 1 tablespoon; salt, teaspoon.
Thick White Sauce.—Milk, 1 cup; flour, 3 table-
spoons ; fat, 1 tablespoon; salt, teaspoon.
For milk toast and with vegetables use the thin sauce. For
scalloped or creamed dishes, use the medium sauce. The chief
use for the thick sauce is as a binding material in croquettes and
loaves.


>-
W
‘
i
COFFEE
Well Cultivated
Well Roasted Well Blended
For over 50 years those who prefer the
best have enjoyed
FOR. FRESHNESS... FLAVOUR.. . FULL STRENGTH
There are, of course, many varieties, but every
variety is distinguished for a delicious richness
in flavour —just the right strength, and a delight-
ful fragrance.
Lyle’s Coffee feeds the nerves and aids digestion.
It is a higher quality Coffee enjoyed on all
occasions.
TEAS
PURE CEYLONS
of Guaranteed Quality
and we also blend Tea to suit your particular palate.
For Dance Parties and Suppers, Breakfasts, etc., select your
Coffee from
N. LYLE & CO.
204 Commercial Road, Prahran, S.i


MILK DRINKS
SUGGESTIONS FROM AMERICA
(Complete with Local Names)
EGG NOGGS
Old Nassau
Beat one egg well. Add three-fourths tablespoon sugar; beat
again. Add three-fourths cup milk or cream and one teaspoon
vanilla and beat. Nutmeg or cinnamon may be used instead of
vanilla.
South Jersey
Beat yolk of one egg until thick. Add one and one-half
tablespoons sugar and beat again. Beat white of an egg to a
stiff froth, mix with yolk and sugar, add six tablespoons milk
or cream, and five of strong coffee.
Barnegat Bay
Separate the white from the yolk of an egg. Add a pinch of
salt to the white and beat until stiff, gradually adding one
tablespoon powdered sugar, one-fourth teaspoon maple flavoring
and the well beaten egg yolk. Add one cup milk. Serve cold in
tall chilled glasses.
MILK DRINK SPECIALS
Shrewsbury
Heat two cups sweet milk over hot water. Mix together two
teaspoons sugar, a few grains salt, one-eighth teaspoon nutmeg,
one-eighth teaspoon cloves, one-eighth teaspoon cinnamon. Add
to the milk. Beat until spices blend, then chill.
Asbury Ginger Flip
Add a portion of a carbonated bottle drink such as ginger ale
or rootbeer to a glass of cold milk. Add vanilla ice cream.
Hopatcong Foam
Add three tablespoons of vanilla ice cream to one-half cup
strong coffee and one-half cup chilled milk. Sweeten to taste.
Beat well, and serve in tall glasses.


MILK SHAKES
Molly Pitcher
Add two or three tablespoons chocolate syrup or cocoa paste
to one cup of milk. Add egg or egg white if desired. Sweeten
to taste. Stir well. Serve in tall glass.
Ramapo
To one cup milk, add two teaspoons sugar and one-fourth
teaspoon vanilla. Shake well. Serve cold.
Highland Delight
Substitute one-fourth teaspoon orange extract or two table-
spoons orange juice for vanilla in Ramapo.
Jersey Lightning
Substitute two tablespoons cold strong coffee for vanilla in
Ramapo.
Toms River
Mix one quart thin cream and one-half pound sugar, one
pound corn syrup, one-fourth pound butter. Cook until it
cracks. Cool, add a dash lemon and orange extracts. Thin to
syrup with hot water, then chill. Add four ounces this mixture
to pint of milk.
FRUIT FLAVORED MILK DRINKS
Alice in Hoboken
Boil sweetened fruit juice—peaches, plums, pears, prunes, etc.
—to a thick soupy consistency. When cool add this syrup to
milk (two or three teaspoonfuls to each glass). Serve with
chopped ice.
Hackensack
Add two or three teaspoons marmalade—cherry, grape,
orange—to glass of milk. Shake well. Top with mint leaves.
MALTED MILKS
V acation-at-Home
Mix two level tablespoons malted milk powder with one
teaspoon dry cocoa, teaspoon sugar. Add three-fourths cup
milk. Mix thoroughly with beater.


Cape May
Follow Vacation-at-Home recipe, but use six tablespoons cold
strong coffee instead of cocoa.
High Point Park
Mix three level tablespoons malted milk powder and three-
fourths cup milk. Beat until malted milk is thoroughly
dissolved.
HONEY AND MILK DRINKS
Honey Blossom
Add three level tablespoons honey and five to six tablespoons
fresh lemon or orange juice to pint of milk. Shake until
dissolved.
Sandy Hook
Beat an egg with three level tablespoons honey. Add to pint
of milk. Mix thoroughly.
Musconetcong
Add two well beaten eggs and three level tablespoons of
honey to pint of milk. Shake well. Add two dips of ice cream
or a tablespoon of malted milk, or both, if desired.
Raritan Special
Mix one crushed ripe banana with two level tablespoons of
honey and one teaspoon of vanilla. Add to pint of milk. Shake
well. Top with whipped cream and whole strawberry rolled
in cinnamon.
CHOCOLATE MILK SHAKE
2 cups milk, 3 tablespoons cocoa syrup, cracked ice.
Put all the ingredients into a mason fruit jar or a cocktail
shaker and shake vigorously, or whish with a Dover beater.
Serves 2.
TO MAKE COCOA SYRUP: Mix half cup cocoa and
half cup cold water to a smooth paste. Add another half cup
water and cook directly over flame, stirring until thickened and
smooth. This will be at about the boiling point. Add tea-
spoon salt and 2 cups sugar. Boil about three minutes, stirring
continuously. Cool slightly before adding 2 teaspoons vanilla.
Pour into a sterile jar and seal tightly. Makes 1 pint. If there
is less than this quantity, add boiling water.


THE INFLUENCE OF BACTERIA ON
THE PRODUCTION OF CLEAN MILK
(Mr. F. Jensen)
Milk when drawn from the udder of the cow, with all
precautions against contamination, is usually germ free.
The outside of the teat, and the skin of the udder, are
always contaminated with bacteria, especially from
excreta or manure —notably B. Coli y which is a normal
inhabitant of the large intestines of a number of animals.
The teat canal is very frequently infected, even when
the udder is clean, so that the first few draws of milk
are heavily contaminated. In one particular case, the
first two draws contained 25,000 per c.c., and the 13th
and 14th streams contained 218 per c.c. For this reason
it is not an easy matter to secure perfectly sterile milk
direct from the cow. Almost any of the known forms
of bacteria may live and grow, and occasionally be found
in milk. Normally, however, comparatively few different
forms are present. The greater part of these forms,
which cause various changes in the constituents of milk,
and are known as ferments. The normal fermentations
to which milk is subject, may be divided into three
classes:—
First, those which act on the lactose or milk sugar with
production of lactic acid.
At least 20 different organisms are known that may
produce lactic acid. They begin their operations almost
immediately after the milk is drawn, and continue until
the maximum amount of acid has been produced, about
1 per cent., when further development ceases as the lactic
acid is unfavorable to the ordinary germs of lactic
fermentation. Lactic acid bacteria are most active at
temperatures between 80 deg. F. to 100 deg. F. Below
50 deg. F. little acid is formed. At low temperatures
they are inactive, but not dead. At temperatures of 105
deg. F. the lactic germs become inactive, and a large
proportion of them are killed at a temperature of 135 —


-140 deg. F. A large amount of lactic acid is perhaps
injurious to the young and delicate, or weak digestive
organs.
The next class are those that feed upon the proteins of
milk, such as casein. These are chiefly putrefactive
bacteria. Many of the putrefactive fermentations will
go on at a lower temperature than the lactic; hence it is
often found that milk, when contaminated with this type
of organism is kept at a low temperature for a consider-
able time, it becomes bitter or foul smelling. Some of
the putrefactive bacteria form spores, and in this condition
are not so readily killed by heating, even at high
temperatures. Generally, the putrefactive bacteria are
responsible for formation of bitter milk or unpleasant or
disagreeable odours, and they are frequently accompanied
by a considerable evolution of gas. When digestive
ferments find their way into milk they first coagulate the
casein and finally liquefy it.
The third class, those which attack the fats, are known
as butyric ferments , and result in the formation of butyric
acid. They produce rancidity in cream and butter, but
do not affect milk to any great extent.
In addition to these organisms, other types are very
often found, some of which are detrimental to health,
and all of them render the milk unfit for consumption,
such as Mastitis, from cows affected with inflammation of
the udder, caused by the streptococcus Mastididis. The
presence of this organism causes lumps and sometimes
stringy milk, and also a characteristic odour.
“True ropy” milk is caused by a certain group of
organisms found in water, especially stagnant water. If
cows wade in pools where the organisms exist, the exterior
of the udder becomes contaminated, and so it finds its
way into the milk.
“Red Milk” is not always caused by blood, but very
often by an organism known as Bacillus Prodigiosus.
Another organism causes blue milk, and still another
produces an intense yellow colour in milk. With the
exception of red milk , other cases of coloured milk due
to bacteria are comparatively rare. Disease producing
organisms sometimes get into milk, and many cases are


on record where germs carried in milk have produced
epidemics.
Among the most common are diphtheria, typhoid,
T. 8., and scarlet fever ; and it seems that septic sore
throat can also be transmitted by means of milk. The
presence of a large number of Bacillus Coli is indicative
of manurial contamination j and since typhoid germs are
also found in excreta, B . Coli in large numbers is a danger
signal.
The three chief means of controlling the bacterial
content are: (1) Prevention of infection; (2) the preven-
tion of growth of organisms already present j and (3) the
destruction of germs present.
The greatest source of infection comes from the body
of the cow, and the air of the cowshed. The germs are
always present adhering to the hair of animals, and
particularly to any particles of dust or dirt.
Since dam water contains large numbers of bacteria,
and cows frequently wade in to drink until the udder is
partly immersed, it is essential that the udder be washed.
Bacteria find in manure abundant food for growth, there-
fore the flanks, thighs, and lower parts of the animal,
should be washed off with a damp cloth immediately
before milking. In one particular experiment where the
udder was not wiped before milking, the bacterial content
was 64,590 per c.c., and after wiping 250 per c.c.
Bacteria are also found in large numbers in dust arising
from hay, and other dried foods. Next to the stable,
the dairy utensils are an important source of infection.
In cases where trouble is experienced with milk containing
a large number of bacteria, an investigation will often
show that cans, or other apparatus, contain a yellow slimy
deposit loaded with bacteria. In cleaning and rendering
milk utensils as near sterile as possible, there are usually
left alive a few; and in a utensil which contains even a
small amount of water, bacteria find a most favorable
medium in which to grow and multiply.
A can freshly washed and containing 91,000 per c.c.,
left for 24 hours, may contain 428,000,000 per c.c.
It has been proved that 50 cans —washed, steamed,
and inverted on a rack for 30 hours —would have contri-


buted 8 bacteria per c.c. if cans had been filled with milk;
and similarly sterilised cans —left for 30 hours with lids
on —would have contributed 1,816 bacteria per c.c.
In order to prevent bacterial growth, milk should be
cooled to as low a temperature as possible and not freeze,
although temperatures somewhat above freezing will
retard bacterial growth for quite a long time. Even at
50 deg. F. bacterial growth is checked for a short time.
The destruction of germs present is effected by pasteu-
rization. When properly done, it kills pathogenic
organisms, and so renders the milk free from transmitting
disease; but, on the other hand, where sporing organisms
are present, these are not killed at the pasteurising
temperature.
As the dust and dirt in busy city streets may contain
as many as 1,000,000,000 organisms per gram, it can
readily be seen that if the milk is exposed to the air during
delivery, it quickly becomes further contaminated.
PURE MILK
no germs lurk here l
Picture the scrupulous cleanliness of a modern dairy,
where every single thing is scoured and sterilised until
you would think that it was cleanliness gone mad.
And then picture the milk that is bottled in such sur-
roundings hygienically sealed in bottles that have
been subjected to such a scalding and sterilising that
no harmful germ can possibly endure.
That is the milk for your home! Milk that comes to
you in the purity of glass.... glass that, unlike tin, can
neither rust, nor corrode, nor contaminate.
Insist on your milkman delivering your milk in glass!
AUSTRALIAN GLASS MANUFACTURERS CO. LTD.
428 Spencer Street, Melbourne, C.l
MILK FOR HEALTH \v* IN A BOTTLE FOR SAFETY
PUR
JVJJL


ECONOMICAL
MILK RECIPES
The following selection of recipes includes many new and
attractive ways of serving milk products, and indicates the
almost infinite variety of uses to which milk can, with advan-
tage, be put in the preparation of foods:—
MILK SOUPS
Many soups of this class are called “Cream Soups”, and
are all made by the same general method. Cream soups consist
of vegetable stock and pulp with milk; they are thickened to the
consistency of cream; they should be served very hot and as
soon as made.
GENERAL PROPORTIONS AND METHODS FOR
CREAM SOUPS
2 tablespoons butter, 1 teaspoon salt, 2 cups vegetable
stock and pulp, 4 tablespoons flour, one-eighth teaspoon
white pepper, few grains, 2 cups milk.
Melt butter, blend in flour and seasonings. Add vegetable
stock gradually, stir and cook until thick. Add milk, hot or
cold, reheat. Strain and serve at once.
NOTE: Cream soups may be made from many kinds of
vegetables, such as asparagus, cauliflower, artichokes, potatoes,
carrots, corn, celery, onions. The stock may be reserved when
vegetables are cooked and used with left over vegetables. By
doing this much valuable food material is made use of.
CREAM OF CHEESE SOUP
4 cups milk, \\ tablespoons flour, few grains pepper,
2 yolks of eggs, 1 blade mace, three-quarters teaspoon
salt, 1 tablespoon butter, 4 tablespoons grated cheese.
Heat milk with mace, remove mace. Make sauce of flour,
seasonings, butter and milk. Add yolks of eggs, beaten, cook
for 1 minute. Add cheese, serve at once.


CREAM OF CARROT SOUP
2 cups carrot, 1 small onion, 4 tablespoons flour,
1 teaspoon salt, 2 cups milk, £ teaspoon white pepper,
2 tablespoons butter, 2 cups carrot stock and pulp.
Wash and scrape carrots, grate or cut in small pieces. Cook
with onion, in boiling water, until tender. Press through a
sieve; there should be 2 cups stock and pulp. Finish according
to general method.
CREAM OF CELERY SOUP
cups celery, 1 teaspoon salt, 2 tablespoons butter,
2 cups celery stock, 4 tablespoons flour, \ teaspoon
pepper or a few grains of cayenne, 2 cups milk, onion
juice.
Cook celery in boiling water until very soft. Press through
a sieve; there should be 2 cups stock and pulp. Finish according
to general method.
NOTE: Dried celery leaves may be used (one and one-half
tablespoons to one cup boiling water.
CREAM OF POTATO SOUP
lj cups hot “riced” potatoes or 1 cup mashed, 4 cups
milk or milk and water, 1 small onion, 2 tablespoons
flour, H teaspoons salt, \ teaspoon celery salt, teaspoon
pepper, few grains cayenne, 2 tablespoons butter, 1 tea-
spoon chopped parsley.
Scald milk with onion, add slowly to potatoes. Finish
according to general method. Add parsley after soup has been
strained.
NOTE: Left-over potatoes may be used; mash or “rice”
potatoes and reheat with the milk.
SAGO CREAM SOUP
1 pint white stock, 1 gill milk, bay leaf, 1 oz. sago (1
level tablespoon), 1 egg yolk, 2 tablespoons cream.
Bring stock with bay leaf to the boil. Add sago and cook
gently 20 minutes or until sago is transparent. Add milk and
a pinch of sugar. Salt and cayenne to taste. Cook a few
minutes longer. Beat egg and cream together. Add to soup
and stir until it thickens. Soup must not boil or egg will curdle.
Remove bay leaf and serve.


FISH SOUP
Fish bones, 1 spoon chopped parsley, 3 pts. water, 1
onion, 1 cup milk, mace or bay leaf, 2 tablespoons
maizena.
Put bones on to boil with vegetables. Boil 1 hour. Strain
through fine strainer. Put back into pot with cup of milk.
Bring to boil. Mix maizena with a little milk; add to stock.
Bring to boil again. Add parsley. One tablespoon of cream,
if available, will improve Fish Soup a great deal.
ASPARAGUS SOUP (QUICKLY MADE)
1 small tin canned asparagus, 1£ pints milk, salt,
pepper, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 heaped tablespoon flour.
Cut asparagus in small pieces and put into a saucepan (keep
aside some of the tips). Cover with milk, add salt and pepper
and simmer till tender. Rub through sieve or colander. Melt
butter in saucepan, add flour and blend. Add soup and stir till
boiling. Add asparagus tips and repeat. Serve very hot.
KIDNEY SOUP
1 qt. stock or water, 1 tablespoon flour, 1 teaspoon
mushroom ketchup or Worcester sauce, pepper, 3 sheep’s
kidneys (or half ox kidney), onion, chopped finely,
1 tablespoon butter, salt.
Put butter into saucepan, and add kidneys, chopped finely,
and onion. Fry until lightly browned. Add flour, and then
add stock, a little at a time, stirring all the while. Simmer for
1 hour. Add ketchup or sauce, with a little colouring, at last.
POTATO SOUP
3 pts. stock or water, 2 onions (or leeks), 1 parsnip,
pinch of sugar, salt and pepper, 1 bay leaf, 1£ lb. peeled
potatoes, 1 pint milk, 1 turnip, H tablespoons butter (or
good dripping), 1 tablespoon maizena, 1 stalk celery.
Cut vegetables up roughly, and fry in saucepan in butter or
dripping, but do not brown. Add water or stock, and stew till
tender. Put all through sieve. Put liquid and puree back in
saucepan with milk, and bring to boil. Thicken with maizena
mixed with milk. Bring to boil, and serve sprinkled with
chopped parsley. A tablespoon of cream, if available, is a
great improvement.


TOMATO SOUP
4 whole tomatoes (1 small tin if out of season), 2 pts.
stock or water, 1 cup milk, 1 onion, 1 bay leaf, 1 table-
spoon sago, 1 tablespoon maizena.
Put tomatoes and onion, cut in quarters, with bay leaf, in
half a pint of stock or water. Boil for \ hour, till tomatoes
are tender. Strain, pushing everything through the sieve that
will go through. Add to remaining stock or water. Bring to
boil. Put in sago while boiling. Boil \of an hour. Add
milk, with a pinch of carbonate of soda (carbonate of soda
prevents milk curdling). Thicken maizena. Add, and boil up
again. Cochineal colouring improves.
VEGETABLE SOUP
1 onion, 1 turnip, 1 bay leaf, 1 carrot, 1 leek, 1
parsnip, 1 tablespoon butter, 2 stems celery, 2 qts. stock
or water, 1 tablespoon maizena for thickening.
Put butter in saucepan. Chop onion and celery in dice, and
fry in butter. Add other ingredients. Boil 2 hours. Mix
maizena with a little cold water, and boil up together.
OYSTER SOUP (QUICKLY MADE)
1 tin oysters, 1£ pints milk, salt and pepper, 1 table-
spoon butter, 1 heaped tablespoon flour.
Strain oyster liquor and add to milk. Melt butter in sauce-
pan, add flour and' blend. Add milk oyster till boiling. Add
oysters, salt and pepper, add a little lemon juice and stand at
side of stove for 30 minutes. Reheat, and serve very hot.
ARTICHOKE SOUP
3 lbs. artichokes, 2 large onions, 1 oz. butter, a grate
of nutmeg, salt and pepper to taste, 1 quart of milk,
1 tablespoon flour.
Peel and slice artichokes and onions, put butter into a sauce-
pan to melt. Add onion, nutmeg, pepper and salt. Fry for
2 or 3 minutes without browning onion. Add artichokes and
milk. Simmer for an hour and a quarter, rub through a sieve,
and return to saucepan. Make very hot, thicken with blended
flour; serve with fried crusts of bread.


FISH
So far as the nourishing properties of fish are concerned,
there is not much difference between fish and beef. In other
words, fish is meat, although it is not generally regarded as
such. There is little doubt that the old idea that white-fleshed
fish is better than red-fleshed fish is scientifically wrong. It
may be more tasty, but that is all.
Fish decompose quickly, and it is therefore necessary for it
to be used as fresh as possible. Stale fish is generally
poisonous.
How to Choose Fish. —See that eyes are bright, and standing
well out from head. The gills should be bright red, and flesh
firm to touch.
How to Scale Fish. —Put in hot (not boiling) water for a
moment, and scrape from tail upwards with back of knife.
Methods of Cooking Fish
Boiling. —Put in cold salted water, and bring to boil. Allow
10 minutes for small fish, after water is boiling.
Frying. —Always see that fat for frying fish is boiling. This
stage is shown by a thin blue smoke rising from the pan.
FISH PIE
Boiled fish, 1 cup of milk, pepper, 1 tablespoon butter,
lj tablespoons flour, 1 hard-boiled egg, salt.
Place fat in saucepan. Add flour and milk, which makes a
thick sauce. Put in cold fish, broken into flakes, also egg
chopped up roughly. Place in pie dish, cover with bread-
crumbs, and place two or three small knobs of butter on top.
Bake in hot oven for half an hour. If preferred, use mashed
potatoes instead of breadcrumbs, and brown off.
FISH CROQUETTES
1 cup boiled fish, 1 cup milk, 1} tablespoons flour,
1 tablespoon butter, 1 bay leaf, 1 teaspoon chopped
parsley, pepper and salt.
Place butter in saucepan. Add flour, pepper and salt, and
milk. Let boil, then add fish and parsley. Turn on to plate,


spread out, and leave till cold. When cold, take about one
tablespoon of this mixture at a time and roll into ball. Dip
into beaten-up egg, and drop into breadcrumbs. Fry in deep
pan of hot fat for 3 minutes.
SALMON CROQUETTES
1 small tin salmon, 3 cups of milk, 1 tablespoon
butter, l\ tablespoons flour, pepper and salt.
Proceed as in Fish Croquettes.
SCHNAPPER CUTLETS
Trim and clean fresh schnapper and cut into slices 1 or 1£
inches thick. Sprinkle with salt. Dip into flour, and fry in
pan of hot fat for about ten minutes. When dished up, pour
over mixture of 2 tablespoons of butter, browned in saucepan,
with 1 teaspoonful of vinegar.
FISH uAKED IN MILK
1 lb. fish (salmon trout, flathead, etc.), 1 1-3 cups
milk, salt.
Wipe fish with a wet cloth. Place in a pyrex dish or on a
cloth in a pan. Sprinkle with salt. Add milk to cover fish.
Bake in a moderate oven (350 deg. F.) until the flesh falls
away from the bone. Season with butter.
BAKED SALMON
1 large tin of salmon, \ lb. breadcrumbs, 2 ozs.
butter, 1 pint milk, salt and pepper.
Put milk and butter in saucepan and bring to boil. Remove
all bones from salmon, and add it and breadcrumbs to sauce-
pan ; season and mix well; turn into piedish and bake in oven
for a few minutes.
SALT FISH
2 lbs. salt fish, 1 dessertspoon flour, 1 oz. butter, 1
pint milk, 1 teaspoon chopped parsley, a little pepper.
Soak fish in cold water for 4 hours, put milk in saucepan,
boil and thicken with flour; add butter, parsley and pepper,
and stir well; flake fish and mix with sauce; simmer for 20
minutes; serve very hot.


TO ACHIEVE THE PERFECT FIGURE
A good many women seem to think that the ideal figure
is harder to achieve to-day than it has ever been before.
A few years ago when all that was necessary was to look
like a charming skeleton on which clothes hung straightly,
it was as easy as could be.
Those strong-minded ones who were brave enough to
put themselves on a starvation diet could have the fashion-
able figure in no time —together, it is true, with an
impaired digestion and a shattered nervous system.
Well, all that is gone, both the scarecrow figure and
the starvation. Women must now present an appearance
both slender and plump, svelte and rounded.
Diet is the first essential. Know scientifically the
foods that matter and leave the others alone.
These foods are milky orange juice, cod liver oil,
tomato juice, and brewers’ yeast.a
On these simple articles of diet beauty can be built,
because each one is a concentrated form of nourishment
which, when taken regularly, makes it possible to do
without those starches and sweets that clog the system and
fatten without nourishing.
On these foods —the Big Five —we shall never feel
hungry, we are told. No more longings for those little
snacks of sweets and cakes that our starved tissues cried
out for in the diet-slimming days.
We shall have more energy, feel fitter, and achieve
at last the figure that is small in the waist, rounded in
the bust, and curved yet slender in the hips.
But cod liver oil, one hears the exclamation go up, is
so dreadfully fattening !
Not at all. The foods that are “dreadfully” fattening
are puddings, breadstuffs and potatoes, etc. Drop these
out of your daily diet and you will find that the teaspoon-
ful of cod liver oil substituted for them, will give you
the curves you desire and none of the unsightly bulges.
Brewers’ yeast is not very easy to obtain, but its tonic


and nutriment value has been recently established beyond
question.
Oranges are always to be had, and tomato juice, if not
procurable in the winter months, is fortunately one of
the foodstuffs that loses little of its value when tinned by
a reliable maker.
Last, but not least, milk is nature’s most perfect food,
and is rarely drunk in sufficient quantity by adults, so
modern dietitians say.
The Ideal Diet
Here then is the ideal diet for achieving the ideal
figure.
Start the day on a glass or half a glass or orange juice
taken without sugar. Breakfast should consist of a little
cereal with plenty of milk, and some stewed fruit.
If possible a small glass of milk should be drunk at
eleven, or a glass of yeast if it is to be got.
At lunch, if meat is desired, it should be grilled, not
stewed, and should be always followed by a fresh lettuce
salad.
Before dinner is the best time to drink tomato juice.
In America this is taken regularly, shaken with ice and
fresh mint, and called tomato cocktail. It is not only
slimming and beautifying, but delicious to drink.
Dinner should also be a simple meal with dry-cooked
meat and vegetables, no soup, and fresh fruit instead of
puddings of any kind.
After the three principal meals a teaspoonful of cod
liver oil should be taken, and before going to bed, a glass
of hot milk.
It will be seen that there is very little bulk in this diet,
but a superabundance of concentrated nourishment. After
a few. weeks you will find that flabby adipose tissue falls
away if you are over-fat, and healthy flesh and condition
are built up if you are over-thin.
One more important point before you start on your
beauty crusade: Acquire the habit of eating very slowly.
Many cases of overweight are the result of eating not
only the wrong foods, but of eating them far too quickly.
—The Sun News-Pictorial.


Uneeda
Biscuits
Many of the recipes in this book specify
biscuits such as for savouries, for baby,
for the invalid, for supper, and for
many other dainty dishes.
The SWALLOW Brand is ready for
any occasion
Baked in the ovens of experience
by
SWALLOW & ARIELL
LIMITED
“The Uneeda Bakers”


ABOUT BONES
Meat, eggs and milk are very comparable in that all
being animal products are excellent foods, fully digested
and easily assimilated, and their proteins are such that
growth of muscle and blood is easy when they have been
consumed. But in the matter of ash or mineral they vary
widely, though they all may be said to have bone. How-
ever, the bone of meat is on the inside of the meat, we
eat the meat part and throw the bone away. The
bone in egg is on the outside, we crack it, pour the
meat out and throw the egg bone away. While the
bone of milk is in solution in the milk as an integral part
of the milk itself. Therefore it is consumed along with
the milk without the consumer knowing that he is drink-
ing bone in liquid form. However, the bone is there for
immediate application to teeth and to bone growth, and
for general body functions. In this rather vital phase
milk is unique over all other animal foods, and is unique
over most of the cereals in that the minerals are in a better
form for application to the body than they are in any of
the cereals.
How r could this be different, when milk is secreted by
nature to be the natural food for the growing, husky
young of the species ? We are not inventing something
to put into milk—we are simply recognizing now, better
than ever before, what nature has been putting there all
these years.
Eggs have rich amounts of vitamins, and so does milk,
and these enhance their true values markedly over the
forms of foods which are weak, low, or lacking entirely in
vitamin contents.
Since milk has some of all of these various vitamins
and mineral products as well, and also sells at a lower
figure per pound than its most nearly competitive foods,
it may be boosted with a clear conscience.
We do not need to beg anyone’s pardon for boosting
the greater use of milk as a food, for, thank goodness,
dairying is one industry which the more it is pushed, the
better off the consumer is.


MILK PUDDINGS
BOILED PUDDINGS must be cooked in plenty of
water. The water should be boiling before the pudding
goes in, and kept boiling the whole time. As it
evaporates, replenish with more boiling water.
A plate or saucer should be placed at the bottom of the
saucepan before a boiled pudding is put in. This
prevents the cloth from sticking to the pot, and burning.
The pudding cloth should be put back into the water
as soon as it is removed from the pudding. It should
never be washed with soap, and should be thoroughly
dried in the open air before folding away.
When the pudding is dished, open the cloth, and turn
out as quickly as possible, before the steam goes off. This
prevents the cloth from sticking. There is no necessity
for scalding and flouring the cloth if the pudding is
turned out immediately it is dished.
Steamed puddings should be covered with buttered
paper, and cooked rather slowly. The water should not
be allowed to reach more than half-way up the mould.
RULES FOR MILK PUDDINGS
Milk puddings must be cooked in a slow oven.
Milk puddings improve by standing before being
cooked.
Milk puddings cook more evenly if the piedish is
stood in a baking dish of water in the oven.
To every 3 oz. of grain allow 1 pint of milk, 2 eggs,
1 oz. of sugar, \ pint of water. Exception: Semolina —
use 2 oz. of grain.
FLAVORINGS FOR MILK PUDDINGS
Nutmeg is the proper flavoring for rice.
Essence of vanilla is the proper flavoring for sago or
semolina.
Essence of lemon is the proper flavoring for tapioca.
No special flavoring for macaroni.


COCOANUT PUDDING
1 pint milk, 2 tablespoons flour, 3 tablespoons cocoa-
nut, 2 tablespoons sugar, 2 tablespoons castor sugar,
1 tablespoon butter, 2 eggs.
Put milk and butter on to boil. Mix flour smoothly with a
little of the cold milk, and when the milk boils, stir in the
flour and cook two minutes. Add the coconut, lemon rind,
and the yolks of eggs, well beaten, with the crystal sugar.
Pour into buttered piedish, and stand it in a baking dish of
water in a moderate oven, till set. Beat whites of eggs to a
stiff froth; stir in the castor sugar lightly; spread over the
top of the pudding, and put back in the oven for a few minutes,
till set, and a pale fawn colour.
AUNT SALLY PUDDING
H cups suet, cups raisins or mixed fruit, 1 cup
sugar, 1 level teaspoon ground ginger, 2 level teaspoons
ground cinnamon, 1 level teaspoon carbonate soda,
cups flour, 1 bare cup milk.
Mix all together. Boil for four hours in buttered basin, and
serve with custard or jam sauce.
SPONGE PUDDING
3 tablespoons self-raising flour, 3 tablespoons butter,
3 tablespoons sugar, 2 eggs.
Cream butter and sugar together, add flour, then yolks of
eggs. Whisk whites of eggs to a stiff froth and mix in.
Steam for 1 hour.
PLUM SAGO
3 tablespoons sago, 1 tablespoon melted butter, 1 cup
breadcrumbs, teaspoon carbonate soda, 1 cup sugar,
grated rind 1 lemon, 1 cup raisins, 1|- tablespoons milk.
Soak sago overnight, or for at least 6 hours. Dissolve
carbonate soda in milk. Mix all ingredients well. Pour into
mould, and steam hours.


GINGER PUDDING
1 cup suet, 1 egg, 1 dessertspoon ground ginger, £
cup milk, 2 tablespoons golden syrup, 2 cups flour,
cup sugar, % teaspoon carbonate soda.
Dissolve carbonate soda in milk. Mix all ingredients
together. Add syrup, and, lastly, milk. Steam hours.
ORANGE CUSTARD
4 oranges, 4 yolks of eggs, 4oz. loaf sugar, f pint
thick cream.
Grate the rind of one of the oranges and squeeze the juice
of all of them into a saucepan. Add the sugar and stir it over
a slow fire till dissolved. Let it get nearly cold, then add the
yolks of eggs, well beaten, and the cream gradually. Cook in
a double saucepan, or put the custard into a jug and stand the
jug in a saucepan of boiling water, and stir till it thickens.
Serve in custard cups, and decorate the top with a thin strip
of orange rind, or a small quarter of the fruit. If no cream
is to be obtained, use milk, and thicken with moistened corn-
flour.
ECONOMICAL BOILED CUSTARD, MADE WITH
CORNFLOUR
1 pint milk, 2 eggs, 1 oz. sugar, 1 dessertspoon
cornflour.
(1) Beat egg and sugar together. (2) Heat milk and pour
over egg. (3) Return to saucepan, add moistened cornflour,
and stir over fire till it thickens. (4) Remove from fire and
add a few drops of essence.
CANADIAN PUDDING
1 pint milk, 3 tablespoons cornflour, 2 or 3 eggs, rind
of half a lemon, 2 oz. castor sugar, 2 oz. raisins.
Bring milk to the boil; moisten the cornflour and add,
stirring constantly. Cook two minutes; then take off the fire
and add the yolks of eggs, well beaten. Cook gently, without
boiling, a few minutes longer; then remove from the fire, and
add the grated lemon rind. Beat whites of eggs to a stiff
froth, and stir into the custard. Rinse a plain mould out in
cold water; wash and pick the raisins, and make a pattern on
the bottom with them. Pour in the custard and put away in a
cool place till set. Turn out and serve with custard.


PANCAKES
4 oz. flour, 1 egg, % pint milk, 1 oz. butter or cl. fat,
lemon, sugar.
Sift flour; make a hole in the middle, and break in the egg.
Stir gradually into the eggs as much flour as it will take up;
then add the milk by degrees. Use a wooden spoon to stir
with. When half the milk is used all the flour should be in,
and the batter should then be beaten till the bubbles rise. Add
the remainder of the milk, and stand the batter aside for at
least half an hour. Melt a little of the butter or clarified fat
in an omelette pan; pour it away, and wipe the pan out with
kitchen paper. (This prevents the pancakes from sticking.)
Then melt another small portion of the butter, and pour in
about two tablespoons of the batter. When lightly browned
underneath toss to the other side and cook. Turn out on to a
piece of paper on a plate, sprinkle a little castor sugar over,
and roll up. Serve at once on a hot dish with slices of lemon.
SATISFACTION PUDDING
~2 doz. sponge cakes, 1 oz. almonds, 1 pint milk, 3
eggs, 1 oz. butter, jam, 1 oz. sugar, few drops essence,
4 oz. short crust.
Line edge of a piedish with the pastry. Split sponge cakes
in half; spread with jam, and arrange in layers in the piedish;
blanch and cut the almonds in four lengthwise, and sprinkle
in between the layers. Make a custard of the yolks of eggs,
milk, and sugar; flavor with essence of lemon or vanilla.
Pour over the sponge cakes and bake in a moderate oven till
set. Whip whites of eggs to a stiff froth; add 2 tablespoons
castor sugar; spread over the top, and put back in the oven
till set and a pale fawn colour.
BREAD AND BUTTER PUDDING
2 to 3 slices bread, 2 oz. butter, 1 pint milk, 2 eggs,
2 tablespoons currants and sultanas, 2 tablespoons sugar,
few drops essence.
Butter a mould; cut bread into thin slices, and spread with
butter; cut into strips, and arrange in layers in the mould,
sprinkling the currants and sultanas between each layer. Beat
eggs and sugar well; add milk and flavoring, and pour over
the pudding. Cover with a piece of buttered paper, and steam
gently one hour, or put the pudding in a piedish; stand the
piedish in a baking-tin containing a little cold water, and bake
in a slow oven till set.


CARAMEL PUDDING
4 oz. loaf sugar, 2 tablespoons water, 3 eggs, 1 pint
milk (hot), few drops essence, 1 oz. castor sugar.
Put loaf sugar and water on in a saucepan, and boil till a
light amber colour and the consistency of golden syrup. Pour
into a plain mould, and twist round and round till the caramel
coats the sides. Beat eggs and castor sugar, pour the hot milk
over, and the essence, and pour all into the mould. Cover with
buttered paper, and steam gently for one hour. The sugar
will form a syrup over the pudding when it is turned out.
HASTY PUDDING
2 oz. flour, 2 oz. butter, 1 oz. sugar, 1 pint milk, 2
eggs, few drops essence.
Melt butter without browning. Add the flour and stir out
the lumps; then add milk, and stir till it boils and thickens.
Cook for three minutes, and stand aside to cool slightly. Beat
yolks of eggs and sugar together; add to the milk, etc. Turn
all into a buttered piedish, and bake in a moderate oven till
firm. Spread a layer of apricot jam over the top, and cover
with the whites of eggs, beaten to a stiff froth and sweetened.
Put back in the oven to set and brown slightly.
SAVOURY BAKED RICE
3 ozs. rice, 1 pint milk, 3 ozs. grated cheese, 1 oz.
butter, 1 or 2 eggs, pepper, salt, mustard, bread-crumbs.
Wash rice and put into saucepan with milk, bring slowly to
boil, add flavours and simmer slowly until the rice is soft, and
has absorbed the rice. Lift from fire, add beaten eggs and
nearly all the cheese. Pour into buttered dish, cover with
bread-crumbs and remainder of cheese, and bake in a quick
oven until brown.
SAGO OR TAPIOCA PUDDING
4 oz. sago, 1 pint milk, lj in. cinnamon stick, 2 eggs,
oz. sugar.
Soak tapioca or sago (after washing it) for | hour. Put
sago, cinnamon stick and milk in saucepan to boil. Simmer
15 minutes, stirring often. Remove cinnamon stick; cool; add
beaten eggs and sugar; blend. Bake in cool oven in buttered
pie dish about 25 minutes.


MILK JELLY FROM COW-HEEL
1 cow-heel, 1 qt. milk, 2 in. cinnamon stick, sugar to
taste.
Buy a dressed cow-heel; cut it into small pieces, and put it
into an earthenware jar or saucepan with one quart of milk
and the cinnamon stick. Put the lid on the jar, and tie a piece
of strong brown paper securely over it; then stand in a very
slow oven and stew at least three hours. Sweeten to taste,
and strain into a wetted mould. Put aside till set. It may be
eaten either hot or cold, and is very nourishing for invalids.
HONEYCOMB PUDDING
1 pint milk, 2 eggs, 1 oz. gelatine, few drops essence,
2 oz. sugar.
Soak gelatine in milk for half an hour; then dissolve in a
saucepan over the fire. Bring nearly to the boil. Beat yolks
of eggs and sugar well; pour milk slowly over; then put back
in the saucepan and cook gently without curdling. Add essence
and whites of eggs, beaten to a stiff froth. Stir occasionally
while cooling, and when nearly cold pour in a wetted mould
and stand aside till set.
EGG SNOW
4 e gg s > 1 pint milk, 2 tables castor sugar, essence of
lemon.
Bring milk and sugar slowly to the boil. Have whites of
eggs beaten to a very stiff froth, and drop in a tablespoonful at
a time. Keep turning till sufficiently cooked; then lift out on to
a glass dish. Beat yolks with a little more sugar, and stir into
the milk in the saucepan. Cook gently over the fire, but do
not allow it to boil. When it thickens slightly strain and add
the flavoring, and when sufficiently cool pour over the whites.
GROUND RICE PUDDING
3 oz. ground rice, 2 eggs, 1 pint milk, 1 oz. sugar,
nutmeg.
Mix ground rice smoothly with milk. Put in saucepan on
fire and stir till boiling. Cool, add beaten eggs mixed with
sugar and nutmeg. Mix well and bake in buttered pie dish in
cool oven about 20 minutes.


BANANA CUSTARD
3 oz. rice, 3 oz. sugar, 1 oz. butter, 1 pint milk, 1 doz.
bananas, % pint thick boiled custard, 2 oz. castor sugar,
1 gill brandy.
Wash rice in three waters and cook it very gently in the
milk till the milk is almost absorbed. Add sugar and butter
and let it cool; then put into a glass dish. Skin the bananas
and cut into halves across, then lengthwise, and lay on top.
Sprinkle the brandy over, and the castor sugar. Cover with
thick custard, and sprinkle a little nutmeg on top.
SEMOLINA SUN FLOWERS
(A Children’s Pudding)
4 oz. Semolina, pints milk, \ oz. butter, 2 table-
spoons sugar, vanilla flavouring, some chocolate hundreds
and thousands, tin sliced peaches.
Bring the milk to the boil, sprinkle in the semolina and cook
until it is tender and the mixture quite stiff, keeping it stirred
frequently. Draw' aside and add the butter and sugar and
vanilla to taste and stir until dissolved. Turn into two small
sandwich tins which have been rinsed with cold water and
leave till set. Then turn out and arrange sliced peaches on
each to resemble sunflowers. Put some chopped-up peaches in
the centre and sprinkle with chocolate hundreds and thousands.
Serve with peach syrup and cream if liked.
LEMON SNOW PUDDING
1 pint milk, 2 tablespoons cornflour, \ cup sugar, 2
lemons, whites of 3 or 4 eggs.
Put milk on to boil, and when boiling stir in the dissolved
cornflour and sugar and cook two minutes; then remove from
the fire and cool slightly. Stir occasionally while cooling.
When cool add the juice of two of the lemons, and the whites
of eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Stir the mixture well, and,
when nearly cold, decorate sides and bottom of a mould with
the other lemon cut in thin slices, and some crystallised fruit.
Pour in the mixture, and put in a cool place to set. Make a
custard of the yolks, and serve with the pudding.
RICE, MACARONI AND VERMICELLI PUDDINGS
Made the same way as above, only, that these are boiled in
\ pint of water first, instead of soaking.


YORKSHIRE PUDDING
i lb. flour, 1 egg, % pint milk, pinch salt.
Sift flour and salt in a basin and make a hole in the centre.
Break in the egg and beat round with a wooden spoon until it
has taken up as much flour as it can, add the milk gradually,
keeping the moisture all the time in the centre. By the time
half the flour is added, all the flour should he mixed in. Beat
well, add remainder of milk and stand half-hour. Melt two
tablespoons of roasting dripping in baking dish, pour in the
mixture and bake half to three-quarters of an hour in a fairly
hot oven. Cut in squares and serve with roast beef.
CHEESE SOUFFLE
3 tablespoons butter, 4 tablespoons flour, \ teaspoon
salt, dash pepper, \ cup milk, 3 eggs (separated), 1 tea-
spoon Worcestershire sauce (may be omitted), \ tea-
spoon baking powder, f cup grated cheese.
Make a thick white sauce of butter, flour, salt, pepper and
milk. Add cheese and set over hot water, until cheese blends
well with white sauce. Cool, then add well-beaten egg yolks.
Fold in the stiffly beaten egg whites, Worcestershire sauce and
baking powder. Turn into a well oiled baking dish. Bake
in a slow oven 40 minutes. Serves 6.
MACARONI CHEESE
4 oz. macaroni, salt, pepper, mustard (to taste), 2
tablespoons breadcrumbs, 1 heaped tablespoon flour,
4 ozs. grated cheese, lj pints milk.
Wash and soak macaroni. Bring milk to boil, add macaroni
and cook slowly till macaroni is tender and milk is partly
absorbed. Blend flour, add to macaroni, stir till boiling and
thick. Add mustard, salt, pepper and half the grated cheese.
Mix well and taste to make sure that mixture is sufficiently
flavoured. Pour into buttered dish, cover with bread-crumbs
and the remainder of the cheese. Put two or three small lumps
of butter on top and brown in a quick oven or under the griller.
MOCK CREAM
2? gills milk, 2 ozs. cornflour, 4 ozs. butter, 3 dessert-
spoons castor sugar, vanilla or almond flavouring.
Beat the sugar and butter to a cream. Mix the cornflour to
a smooth paste with a little milk. Heat the remainder and stir
on to it, then return to the pan and bring to the boil. Cook
gently for a few minutes, keeping it well stirred. Draw aside
and continue to stir until slightly cool. Then gradually mix in
the creamed butter and sugar. Flavour with vanilla and beat
all together until creamy. This is delicious served with stewed
fruit, and may be used between the halves of a sandwich cake.


FRUIT CUSTARD
1 pint milk, 1-2 eggs, 2 ozs. castor, 1 tablespoon corn-
flour, essence.
Heat milk and sugar together. Blend cornflour with a little
milk, stir into the milk and boil 2 to 3 minutes. Cool, add
beaten eggs and cook without boiling, add essence to flavour.
Prepare any fruits available as for fruit salad. Put into glass
dish and pour custard over. Grate nutmeg on the top.
Bananas, apples, apricots, peaches and pears, flavoured with
orange juice and passion fruit make a good mixture for this
custard. Bananas may be used separately.
RICE PUDDING (WITHOUT EGGS)
lj pints milk, tablespoons rice, 1 tablespoon sugar,
1 tablespoon chopped suet, 1 pinch of salt, nutmeg or
other flavouring.
Wash the rice and put it into a well greased pie dish with the
sugar, salt and a little grated nutmeg or other flavouring. Pour
in the milk and sprinkle with suet, very finely shredded or
chopped, over the top. Bake in a slow oven until the rice is
soft and the mixture creamy. (The slower it is cooked the
softer and creamier it will be.) Serve with marmalade or
sugar.
DEVONSHIRE JUNKET
1 pint new milk, piece of rennet tablet, 1 tablespoon
castor sugar, pinch ground cinnamon or nutmeg, cream.
Mix the cinnamon and sugar together in a glass bowl or deep
dish. Heat milk to body temperature and add the rennet
dissolved in tablespoon of milk. Stir well, then pour into bowl
and sprinkle with sugar and grated nutmeg. Unlike jelly, it
will set better and more quickly in a room of ordinary
temperature.
COFFEE JUNKET
As above.
Add 1 to 2 teaspoons of cofifee essence to milk before
heating.
CARAMEL JUNKET
As above.
Add two to four teaspoons of strong liquid caramel to milk
before heating.


CHOCOLATE PLUM PUDDING
(A Summer Dish)
l\ pints milk, 1 oz. gelatine, 4 oz. sugar, salt, vanilla,
4 oz. seded raisins, 4 oz. sultanas, 2 oz. sliced candied
peel, 1 oz. cocoa.
Soak gelatine in half pint milk.
Blend cocoa in a little of the milk and put the remainder on
to boil. Add cocoa and mix well.
Cool, add milk and gelatine, and stir till dissolved. Strain,
and when mixture shows signs of setting, add fruits and
essence. Pour into a mould, and when set, serve with whipped
cream or custard.
CUSTARD
Custards are nutritious and easily made. They should be
used frequently when eggs are cheap.
There are several methods of cooking them, but the prepara-
tion is always the same. Variety in flavour may be obtained
in many ways. Suitable flavours are vanilla, lemon, almond,
coconut, chocolate, caramel.
Preparation:
Beat 3 eggs with 2 tablespoons sugar and add 1 pint milk.
To Bake:
Pour into a greased pie dish, stand in a baking dish to which
a little water has been added, and bake in a slow oven till set.
To Boil:
Heat milk before pouring over the eggs. Pour mixture into
a jug and stand in saucepan containing water. Stir over a slow
fire until the mixture is thick enough to coat the spoon.
STRAWBERRY CUSTARD
(A Delicious Summer Dish)
Line a greased pie dish with a thick layer of strawberry jam
and cover with a custard made as follows: —
Beat 3 eggs, add 2 tablespoons sugar and stir in 1 pint
milk. Flavour with vanilla.
Pour into pie dish and bake slowly till set.
Spread a thin layer of strawberry jam on top and cover with
whipped cream. Sprinkle grated chocolate over the top.


MILK IN DIET AFFECTS SIZE OF
VARIOUS HUMAN RACES
That use of milk as a part of the regular diet of various
races of men affects the stature of each race is the theory
now being advanced as an explanation of the difference
in stature of various races. In a digest recently issued
by the National Dairy Council, it is pointed out that
studies made of the Oriental races, especially the Japanese
and Filipino, show that babies of both these groups are
breast-fed for about the first year of life, because the
adult diet is not suitable for children. The milk diet is
then dropped. In America and most European countries,
however, breast feeding is gradually dispensed with
beginning with about the sixth month. It is displaced by
a diet of cow’s milk, so that by the time the child is. a
year old he is consuming approximately one quart of
milk each day.
A comparison of growth of American, Filipino and
Japanese children shows that during the first six months
of life, growth of the oriental children compares with
that of the white race, but that after this time the oriental
rate of growth decreases, while that of the white child
continues at the same rate for another six months, after
which time the rate of growth gradually decreases.
Average weight of a two-year-old American child is 30
pounds, compared with 24 pounds for the Filipino child
and 23 pounds for the Japanese child.
Statistics show that children born in the United States
of Japanese parentage are both taller and heavier than
children of the same race, age and circumstances living in
Japan. This is believed due to the fact that milk, which
is plentiful in America, has been introduced into the diet
of American-raised children.
There was a young maid of the dairy,
Who boasted of tastes liter-ary;
To poetry she turned,
Which she wrote as she churned,
Till the boss thundered “Cheese it ! Mary.”


CLOTTED CREAM
Put a pint of fresh cream into a jug, and stand the jug in a
saucepan of boiling water till the cream is lukewarm. Dissolve
half a rennet tablet in half a gill of water, and stir in the
cream. Stand near the fire or in a warm place for about five
minutes.
HOT CABINET PUDDING
1 pint milk, 4 yolks eggs, 1 wineglass sherry, 1 oz.
castor sugar, % doz. small sponge cakes, 2 oz. macaroons
or savoy biscuits, 1 oz. crys. cherries, few drops essence.
Grease a Charlotte russe mould, and line the sides with the
cakes cut into slices. Decorate the bottom with the crystallised
cherries, forming a pattern. Cut up the remainder of the
cakes; crush the biscuits; mix together, put in the mould, and
pour the sherry over. Let it soak in well. Beat eggs and
sugar well; add essence and milk, and pour over the pudding.
Cover with buttered paper and steam gently for one hour.
Turn out and serve with boiled custard or wine sauce.
APPLE FRITTERS
Make a batter of 2 tablespoons of flour, the yolk of 1
egg, 1 tablespoon warm water, 1 teaspoon of melted
butter; the white of the egg whisked to a stiff froth
and added.
Core and peel apples and cut into rings \ of an inch thick;
drop into batter and then drop into a deep pan of hot fat.
When cooked, drain on to paper, and sprinkle with soft sugar.
Serve very hot.
PEACH CUSTARD
1 doz. good juicy peaches, 1 cup castor sugar, 1 pint
milk, 3 eggs, 1 table cornflour, few drops essence.
Skin peaches, break in halves and remove the stone. Put
into a pie-dish, sprinkle sugar over, and let them stand for two
or three hours. Make a custard of the milk and yolks of the
eggs. Make rather thick by adding a good tablespoon of corn-
flour. Add essence, and stir occasionally while cooling. When
nearly cold, pour over the peaches. Whip the whites of eggs
to a very stiff froth; add two tablespoons castor sugar; stir
in lightly, and spread over the custard. Put in a hot oven
for a few minutes to set and get a pale fawn colour.


FRENCH PANCAKES
2 oz. flour, 2 oz. butter, 2 oz. castor sugar, pint
milk, 2 eggs, lemon.
Sift flour and beat eggs. Cream butter and sugar; add eggs,
thin milk and flour. Grease a baking-dish; pour in the mixture,
and bake in a quick oven twenty minutes. Sift a little icing
sugar over, and garnish with slices of lemon.
JUNKET
1 pint milk, rennet tablet, 1 tablespoon sugar, little
grated nutmeg, few drops essence, gill water.
Dissolve the tablet in the gill of water. Put the milk on
in a saucepan, and warm to blood heat. Try with the finger.
Stir in the dissolved rennet tablet, sugar, and flavoring. Pour
into a glass dish, and stand in a warm place to set, and grate a
little nutmeg over the top. Then put away in a cool place.
Junket can only be made with fresh milk. Scalded milk will
not do.
QUEEN PUDDING
2 ozs. stale cake or breadcrumbs, 1 pint milk, 2 eggs,
2 tablespoons sugar, 3 tablespoons jam, few drops
essence, rind of lemon.
Rub the bread or cake through a wire sieve. Put milk on
to boil, and when boiling pour over the crumbs and add lemon
rind. Separate the white from the yolks and sugar well; then
add to the milk and crumbs. Flavor to taste, and pour into
a buttered pie-dish containing a little cold water, and put in a
moderate oven till set. Take out and spread with jam. Whip
the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth; stir 2 ozs. of castor
sugar in lightly; spread over the top of the pudding, and put
back in the oven till set, and a pale fawn color.
BAKED CUSTARD
1 pint milk, 4 eggs, few drops essence, 2 oz. castor
sugar.
Beat eggs and sugar well together, and add milk and
essence. Turn into a buttered piedish, grate a little nutmeg
over the top, and stand in a baking-tin containing a little cold
water. Put in a moderate oven, and cook gently till set.


CHOCOLATE PUDDING
1 pint milk, 2 oz. gelatine, £ pint water, cup sugar,
3 tablespoons cocoa, or 4 tablespoons chocolate, few
drops essence.
Soak gelatine in water half an hour; then dissolve it over
the fire slowly. Add milk, sugar, and cocoa, mixed quite smooth
with a little cold water. Cook gently for five minutes; then
stand aside to cool, and add the flavoring. Pour into a mould
which has been rinsed out with cold water, and put away on
ice or in a cool place to set. Turn out and decorate with the
white of an egg stiffly beaten, and sweetened and sprinkled
with a little cocoa. Serve with boiled custard.
SULTANA PUDDING
1 cup suet, 1 cup milk, 1 heaped teaspoon baking
powder, 2 cups flour, 1 cup sultanas, 1 egg, 1 cup sugar,
rind of 1 lemon, grated.
Mix. . Pour into greased mould. Steam hours.
CARAMEL CUSTARD
i CU P sugar, 3 eggs (beaten up), 2 tablespoons cold
water, pints milk, 1 tablespoon sugar.
Boil the half-cup of sugar and cold water to a caramel, pour
into mould, and run round until all sides are covered. Beat
eggs, tablespoon sugar and milk altogether and pour into
mould. Cover with buttered paper and steam one hour.
Note.—On no account boil this custard. In the absence
of a proper steamer,»this custard may be steamed as follows:
Put lJr inches of water in saucepan, and lay double thickness
of paper on surface, then stand basin on it.
BANANA CUSTARD
Make a custard with 1 pint of milk, 1 dessertspoon of
maizena, 1 egg, 1 tablespoon sugar.
Split bananas lengthwise, spread with jam, put together
again, and cut into pieces about an inch long; put into glass
dish and pour custard over when nearly cold. Sprinkle top
with cocoa.


A WORD FOR PASTEURIZATION
In the report of the English Ministry of Health (No.
63), the following reference to pasteurization is made: —
“Pasteurization has been shown to give the maximum
degree of safety consistent with the preservation of those
qualities which give milk its nutritive and commercial
value.
“Pasteurization carried out in a suitable apparatus and
under strict scientific control is capable of protecting the
consumer from the danger of infection with the tubercle
bacillus, and milk so treated appears to retain its valuable
food properties practically unimpaired.”
Professor Milton J. Rosenau, Professor of Preventive
Medicine and Hygiene, Harvard Medical School, United
States of America, writes as follows on the subject of
pasteurization:—“Pasteurization prevents sickness and
saves lives. Pasteurization is not ideal, but only an expe-
dient. It is advocated because milk is apt to convey the
viruses of a number of diseases harmful to man. Pas-
teurization effectively prevents this hazard. It implies
precaution, protection, and prevention. It is the best
insurance, both for the industry and the consumer, and
the simplest, cheapest, least objectionable, and most trust-
worthy method of rendering infected milk safe. Pas-
teurization has the well-nigh unanimous endorsement of
sanitarians and pediatricians.” Professor E. V. McCol-
lum, of Chemical Hygiene, Johns Hopkins University,
United States of America, joint author of “The Newer
Knowledge of Nutrition,” and one of the most distin-
guished research workers in the field of vitamins,
expresses the following opinion:—
“Certified milk is generally sold raw. It is the highest
quality of milk possible of production, and is about as safe
as any human institution is likely to be. Yet there is a
certain hazard in the drinking of unheated certified milk.
A considerable number of epidemics have been unmistak-
ably traced to its use. The reason for this is that the
danger lies in the human element in certified milk produc-
tion and distribution. Experience has shown that now
and again a person having a transmissible disease will


contaminate the certified milk, and so start an epidemic.
Pasteurization will make a dirty milk safe, but it will
not make it good milk. Refrigeration must be effective
and delivery prompt. All milk should be 'pasteurized.
This prevents the spread of typhoid fever, scarlet fever,
septic sore throat, tuberculosis, and other milk-borne
diseases.”
The late Dr. Charles J. Hastings, formerly Medical
Officer of Health, Toronto, Canada, in his brochure,
“How Can We Best Safeguard Our Milk Supply?”,
states: “No one who has been making a scientific study
of the milk problem, and who is, therefore, in a position
to give an intelligent opinion, has, within the past fifteen
years at least, questioned for a moment the advisability
of pasteurization of all milk for infants and children,
and even for adults. This is especially true if the milk
does not come up to the standard required for certified
milk, and even certified milk should be pasteurized in
order to make it at all times safe.”
The opinion of a veterinary authority—that of Dr.
W. A. N. Robertson, D.V.Sc., Director, Division of
Veterinary Hygiene, Commonwealth Department of
Health—contained in a “Report on a Pure Milk Supply
to Australian Cities and Towns,” is in full agreement
with the views of medical authorities, both in Australia
and abroad. This report contains the following state-
ment : —“Much has been written on the value of pasteuri-
zation as a means of providing a safe milk, and there have
been many opponents. They are, however, a rapidly
diminishing number, for they are recognizing the imprac-
ticability of obtaining a safe supply of raw milk for large
cities.
“The ideal of any scheme for a purer milk supply should
be a safe raw milk. It is, however, an ideal which cannot
be attained. We are, therefore, faced with the problem:
which is better—to slightly lower the vitamin content of
milk and provide a food free, as far as is commercially
possible from injurious organisms, or to provide a milk
full of vitamin, but containing organisms more or less
harmful, with the possibility of some being dangerous ?
The answer must be, to provide the former—an efficiently
pasteurized milk.”


THE FOOD VALUE OF MILK
The food value of milk can hardly be over-estimated.
This may be better visualized by remembering that a
quart of milk equals in food value three-quarters of a
pound of beefsteak, two pints of oysters, eight eggs, two
pounds of chicken, three-fifths of a pound of pork chops,
or three pounds of fresh codfish.
Milk contains practically twenty different chemical
elements, which makes it of enormous value as a general
building food. And this applies not alone to bone and
tooth structure, but also to brain and nerve cells—which
cannot function without lime and phosphorus —and to
various of the ductless glands, which depend upon lime,
phoshates, and sodium salts to stimulate their normal
functioning.
Therefore, it is obvious that no other dietary article so
adequately fills the growth and health requirements of
the body as does milk, and that no other dietetic regime
can compare in simplicity, and yet in effectiveness, with
the full milk diet.
MILK IS THE BEST DENTIST
That milk is the best dentist is pointed out in a pamph-
let published by the Chicago Dental Society and being-
distributed to its members. Importance of correct diet
is stressed in the bulletin, purpose of which is to impress
parents with the necessity of preserving teeth in growing-
children.
Need of milk in the diet of the expectant mother is
pointed out. Milk, the bulletin states, is the most impor-
tant calcium food during the prenatal period, and at least
one quart should be drunk daily. Other necessary foods
are butter, cheese, eggs, vegetables, and cereals.
“The expectant mother who does not drink sufficient
milk which will furnish the child with the required cal-
cium,” according to the pamphlet, “must pay with a supply
from her own teeth, with the result that they may become
defective.”


NO RISK
Pure and Perfect Protected at every point
Specially Super Milled and Analyst Tested
l
m
m
m
$
m
IJs
W. McF.
Maxwell
[LONDON ]
PERMANENT WAVING
AND
BEAUTY SPECIALIST
THE TOILET SALON OF DISTINCTION
Specialists in
PERMANENT WAVING MARCELLING
WATER WAVING TRIMMING
TINTING, ETC.
FACE MASSAGE AND MANICURING
Done by Expert Hands
First Floor, York House
LITTLE COLLINS STREET
Telephone ----- m 4003


CAKES
DATE ROLLS
1 lb. dates, £ lb. flour, 2 ozs. sugar, 3 ozs. butter, 1
egg, teaspoon baking powder.
Stone dates. Beat butter and sugar together until creamy;
add egg, beat well, add flour and baking powder, and work
into a soft, but firm, dough. Turn dough on to floured board,
and roll out not too thin. Cut into strips about 2 inches wide,
and 3 inches long. Place a date on each piece, and roll up
until date is covered. Bake for 15 minutes in hot oven.
GINGER SANDWICH
1 tablespoon butter, cup sugar, 1 dessertspoon
ground ginger, 1 dessertspoon cinnamon, cup golden
syrup, cup milk, 1 teaspoon carbonate soda, cups
plain flour, 1 egg.
Mix butter and sugar, cinnamon and ginger together, add
egg, golden syrup, and milk; then add baking soda dissolved in
a teaspoon of boiling water; to this add flour. Bake in sand-
wich tins for 20 minutes in moderate oven. Cover with icing.
Icing.—| cup icing sugar, small piece of butter dissolved in
a teaspoon boiling water, beat well and spread on cake.
RASPBERRY BUNS
3 cupfuls flour, cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 2 eggs, 1
teaspoon cream of tartar, teaspoon carbonate soda,
% cup milk, little raspberry jam.
Rub the butter well into the flour. Beat eggs and sugar
until creamy, add half-cup milk and the soda and cream of
tartar. Stir this mixture quickly into the flour. Mix to a stiff
dough. Form the dough into buns, and cut off the top of each
bun. Make a depression in the lower half of the bun. Put
in a spoonful of raspberry jam. Replace top, and bake in a
moderate oven for about 20 minutes.
LEMON BISCUITS
\ lb. self-raising flour, \ lb. sugar, lb. butter, essence
of lemon.
Rub butter into flour, add sugar; use very little water to
mix, roll out and cut with small cutter, bake about 10 minutes
in slow oven.


LANCASHIRE SPICE NUTS
l\ lbs. flour, lb. treacle, \ lb. butter, 1 teaspoon car-
bonate soda, oz. carraway seeds, 3 ozs. orange peel.
Warm treacle, add butter, melted, and sugar, spices, soda
and orange peel (grated). Pour this mixture into flour.
Knead into a dough, roll out and cut into rounds with small
cutter. Bake in a slow oven for 10 minutes.
JAM DROPS
| cup sugar, cup butter, 2 eggs, 2 cups plain flour,
2 teaspoons baking powder.
Beat butter and sugar to a cream, add eggs, well-beaten, sift
in flour and baking powder. Roll into stiff balls, make hole
in centre, fill with apricot or plum jam, bake in a quick oven.
CHOCOLATE BISCUITS
\ lb. butter, 3 ozs. sugar, 6 ozs. flour, % teaspoon
baking powder, 1 egg, 2 ozs. grated chocolate.
Beat butter and sugar to cream, add egg, then flour; choco-
late last; mix well, roll out thin, cut with a wine-glass, and
bake on a greased tin for a quarter of an hour in a hot oven.
SPONGE SANDWICH
3 eggs, 3 tablespoons hot water, 1 cup self-raising
flour, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 cup sugar.
Beat eggs and sugar together until creamy (about 10
minutes), add flour; then dissolve butter in hot water and add.
Stir lightly; grease 2 sandwich tins and pour mixture in.
Bake in moderate oven 20 minutes.
FILLINGS FOR SANDWICHES
Butter Filling
3 tablespoons icing sugar, 1 tablespoon butter. Beat to a
cream. Add essence of vanilla and spread between sandwiches
when they are cold.
Orange Filling
Proceed as above, leaving out essence of vanilla, and adding
instead grated rind of orange.


Chocolate Filling
2 tablespoons icing sugar, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 tablespoon
cocoa. Proceed as above.
Coffee Filling
Proceed as above, leaving out cocoa, and adding 1 teaspoon
coffee essence.
ICINGS FOR SANDWICHES
6 tablespoons icing sugar, squeeze of lemon juice, 1 table-
spoon cold water. Put sugar in basin, free from lumps. Add
lemon juice and water, and beat well. Pour on cakes when
cold.
For Chocolate Icing.—Add 1 tablespoon cocoa.
For Coffee Icing.—Add 1 teaspoon coffee essence.
For Orange Icing.—Add grated rind of orange.
For Passion Fruit Icing.—Add 3 passion fruit and 1 drop
of cochineal.
COCOANUT CAKES
4 tablespoons flour, 2 tablespoons dessicated cocoanut,
2 tablespoons sugar, 2 teaspoons baking powder, 2 table-
spoons butter, 1 egg, 1 tablespoon milk.
Rub butter into flour. Add other ingredients, and put rocky
pieces on baking sheet; use a table fork for this, and bake
20 minutes.
BISCUIT CURLS
10 ozs. flour, 4 ozs. butter, 4 ozs. sugar, 1 teaspoon
cream of tartar, teaspoon carbonate soda, 2 small eggs.
Mix butter and sugar into flour. Add rising and eggs; make
into a dough; roll out very thin ?md spread with a thick jam
(very sparingly) ; roll up and cut into pieces \ of an inch
thick. Bake in a moderate oven. Place on baking sheet a
good distance from one another to allow for spreading.
BACHELORS’ BUTTONS
5 ozs. flour, 3 ozs. sugar, 3 ozs. butter, 1 egg, jr tea-
spoon baking powder.
Rub butter into flour and sugar. Add egg and rising; roll
into balls the size of a hazel nut, and place on baking sheet;
dust over with sugar, and bake in hot oven for a few minutes.


ICES, Etc.
VICTORIAN ICE CREAM
1 pint cream, 1 pint milk, 2 egg yolks, about 2 tea-
spoons of vanilla, 1 coffee cup of castor sugar.
Mix and allow to freeze. (Sufficient for 8 persons; as
used on Victorian Railways Express Dining Cars.)
VANILLA ICE CREAM
1 pint milk, yolk of 3 eggs, vanilla, 6 oz. sugar, pint
cream.
Beat yolks, add sugar and milk. Pour into a jug and stand
in saucepan of boiling water. Stir constantly till, thick. Cool,
add cream and vanilla, then freeze.
ECONOMICAL ICE CREAM
Yolks of 2 eggs, 2 oz. sugar, 1 dessertspoon cornflour,
1 pint milk.
Make custard as above by mixing in the moistened cornflour
to the milk before cooking. Cool and freeze.
PEACH MELBA
Ice cream (any of above), peaches (raw or preserved},
raspberry juice, lemon juice and sugar.
Put juices and sugar in saucepan and cook gently over fire
till sugar is dissolved, then cool. Place mounds of ice cream
in glass or on plates, place half peach on each and pour Melba
syrup over.
STRAWBERRY ICE CREAM
Ice cream (any of above).
Add crushed strawberries to the cream when it is nearly
frozen—dish—decorate with whole strawberries.


PINEAPPLE SUNDAE
1 cup sugar, \ cup water, 1 cup grated pineapple, ice
cream.
Cook water, sugar and pineapple together gently for 15
minutes; when cold serve on ice cream and garnish with
maraschino cherry.
TUTTI FRUIT SUNDAE
Crystallised fruits, ice cream.
Serve ice cream in domes or rounds, sprinkle with chopped
crystallised fruits and a little apple jelly.
NUT SUNDAE
Assorted crushed nuts, ice cream.
Make ice cream into domes, place in server, sprinkle crushed
nuts and decorate with whole nuts as desired.
CARAMEL SUNDAE
Ice cream coloured pink, with a little carmine
caramel.
Make caramel by boiling £ cup water with 4 oz. sugar in a
saucepan without stirring, till a golden brown. Turn on to
greased tin. When cold, crush and sprinkle over ice cream and
serve.
A SUBSTITUTE FOR CREAM IN ICES
1 quart new milk, 1 tablespoon flour, 2 fresh eggs,
sugar.
Mix flour smoothly with a little of the milk, add the beaten
eggs to the remainder of the milk, set over the fire, stir in the
moistened flour as soon as it comes to boiling point—then
remove it from fire and pour into a basin to cool. Add a pinch
of salt and sweeten to taste. Stir occasionally whilst cooling.
ORANGE CREAM ICE
6 oranges, 3 lemons, f lb. sugar, 1 quart boiled custard
—or cream.
Rub off the yellow rind of two or three oranges on some
lumps of sugar, squeeze juice from oranges and lemons, strain
over the flavoured sugar, add the custard or cream, also the
remainder of the sugar finely powdered, dissolve and freeze.


APRICOT CREAM ICE
I lb. apricot jam, 1 quart boiled custard or cream,
i lb. sugar, juice of 2 lemons, a few bitter almonds or
apricot kernels.
Idanch and pound almonds, rub the whole of the ingredients
through a sieve and freeze.
FRESH FRUIT ICE
1 pint ripe raspberries or strawberries, f lb sugar,
1 quart boiled custard or cream juice of 2 lemons,
cochineal or carmine.
A few ripe currants or gooseberries—or currants and
cherries—may be used instead of all raspberries or strawberries.
Mash the fruit, pass it through a sieve to remove skins and
seeds, mix with the sugar, custard and lemon juice. Add a
little cochineal or carmine, and freeze.
RASPBERRY CREAM ICE (FROM JAM)
1 lb. raspberry jam, 1 quart boiled custard (or cream),
6 oz. sugar, juice 2 lemons.
Mix—rub the whole through a sieve and freeze.
VANILLA CREAM
H pints milk, ozs. gelatine, yolks of 4 eggs, pint
cream, 2 tablespoons sugar, essence of vanilla.
Dissolve gelatine in milk, add beaten yolks and make like
boiled custard. Cool, add vanilla and stiffly beaten cream.
Blend. Set in wetted mould.
STRAWBERRY CREAM
i pint cream, 2 tablespoons sugar, 1 pint milk, \ box
strawberries, 1-|- oz. gelatine, a few drops cochineal.
Soak gelatine in milk and then dissolve it over the fire. Beat
cream, add sugar, then puree of strawberries and a few drops
of cochineal. Lastly stir in the melted gelatine. Pour into
wetted mould and set.
RASPBERRY, PEACH, PINEAPPLE, APRICOT, and
any fruit cream can be made in the same way.


SPANISH CREAM
1 pint milk, 2 eggs, 1 oz. gelatine, 3 tablespoons sugar.
Soak gelatine in water, when soft put gelatine, milk, beaten
yolks and sugar into a saucepan. Stir until gelatine is dissolved
and eggs begin to set. Draw off the fire and allow to cool.
Whisk whites up stiffly and blend in, flavour with vanilla—put
into wetted moulds. When set serve with cream or stewed
fruit.
NUT FRAPPE
1 cup milk, 1 cup strawberries, 1 cup chopped nuts,
1 cup cream, 1 cup grated pineapple, white of 1 egg,
i oz. gelatine, - 2 cup water.
Soak gelatine in the water and dissolve over fire, cool, add
whipped cream, stiffly beaten white of egg, sugar, fruits and
nuts ; Put into glasses and allow to get very cold before
serving.
PASSION FRUIT CREAM
1 pint of milk (or milk and cream), 1 lemon, 1 doz.
passion fruit, \ oz. gelatine, 2 oz. sugar.
Soak gelatine in the milk and dissolve over fire, cool, add
whipped cream, sugar, fruit pulp and lemon juice, blend well.
Set in wetted mould. Turn out and decorate with red jelly.
COFFEE CREAM ICE
Yolks of 5 eggs, 3 oz. castor sugar, pint of cream,
i pint milk, coffee berries (roasted but not ground).
Make eggs, milk and cream into custard, add to it a few
coffee berries and allow to stand until they have well flavoured
it. Then strain, add sugar and when cold, freeze.
BLANC MANGE
1 pint milk, essence, 1 tablespoon sugar, 3 tablespoons
cornflour.
Blend cornflour and sugar with a little of the milk. Put the
rest of the milk on to boil. Stir in moistened cornflour and
sugar—off the fire. Then cook three minutes. Add essence
and pour into wetted mould. When cold and set, serve in
glass dish with stewed fruit or jam.
BLANC MANGE (2)
Same as in above recipe, but the addition of one or two eggs
makes it more tasty and more nourishing. The eggs should
be beaten and added to the cornflour when moistened with the
milk.


LOOKING INTO THE MILK BOTTLE
Why Health and Happiness Come the Milky Way
What’s in a bottle of milk ? As a producer, we know
there is a lot of hard work and honest endeavour wrapped
up in that bottle that lands finally on the consumer’s door-
step, states a writer in Hoard’s Dairyman.
First, we had to nurse along a wobbly-legged calf for
many days. She had to be fed, cared for, and housed
for a little over two years before she ever produced a
drop of this product that fills up milk bottles. Rations had
to be balanced carefully to make Bossy keep coming up
with a well-filled udder. Land had to be fertilized,
rotated, and managed to durnish the feed requirements
of these balanced rations. Power and equipment were
needed on every hand for tilling, cultivating, and har-
vesting these feed crops. Power and equipment were
needed for storing this feed so that proper amounts
would be available during all seasons. Power and equip-
ment were needed for producing a quality product and
for safeguarding the flavour and food value of that pro-
duct until it left the farnTqn. its jburney to the doorsteps
of the citizens. V
No matter how clever the salesman, he would have
difficulty selling milk to the householders, however, if
all he could talk was the painstaking hard work that
went into that bottle. As the producer is interested in
sales, it becomes a part of his job to let the consuming
public know what is in a bottle of milk that they should
want to buy.
Milk is not a beverage in the strict sense of the word}
neither is it a competitor of medicine. Milk contains
more total solids than do many vegetables. We eat milk}
we do not, as we have always thought, drink it. Milk
is a food, and housewives demand three things of a food.
First, it must be pleasant tasting to the majority of the
family. Second, it must carry food nutrients that provide
fuel and energy for the human body and make for health
and happiness. Third, a food must be in line, so far as


price is concerned, with other competing foods carrying
the same amount of nutrients.
Let’s look into a bottle of milk to see what we can
find that should make housewives use more of it for food.
The cream line is the first thing that comes to our
attention j and, of course, this has always been recognized
as of major importance. Cream has a flavour that has
never been successfully imitated. Cream hands on to all
dairy products that are made from it that same delightful
flavour that almost universally appeals to the consuming
public. The best known chefs modestly attribute the fine
flavour of the foods that make them famous to the cream
and cream products used in their cooking.
Cream brings food value as well as flavour to the con-
sumer. Butter fat is an energy and heat producing food.
On the average, it contains two and one-half times as
much energy as does carbohydrate material, such as sugar
and starch. For the youngsters who expend so much energy
in play, butter fat excels other foods. For the mature
man or woman, who would live a strenuous life in both
work and play, butter fat offers super-charged energy
without the fat building properties from which so many
adults shy.
Above the cream line we find an abundance of the very
important vitamin A. This health-promoting vitamin
insures rapid growth, prevents a very serious eye disease,
and serves to protect people from colds and pneumonia.
Here is food value that the careful buyers should appre-
ciate. A quart of milk a day will normally give a person
enough vitamin A to meet all requirements.
Vitamin Dis found in cream in varying amounts. It
is thought most abundant when cows are in direct sunlight
and when they are given feed rich in this vitamin. The
body needs vitamin D if calcium and posphorus minerals
are to be utilized. A diet lacking in this vitamin results
in rickets, nervous disorders, and possibly bone type tuber-
culosis. Unless milk is specially produced to increase the
vitamin D content, the feeding of cod liver oil to young-
sters is recommended.
Cream is one of the best-known sources of Vitamin E.
This vitamin helps to insure normal reproduction.


The story of the cream value of milk has been well
told many times before. It has, undoubtedly, resulted
in helping increase the per capita consumption of milk.
However, the greatest story is yet to be told when we look
down below the cream line and into the skim milk.
Possibly a better appreciation of the hidden health and
happiness in this little advertised portion of a bottle of
milk would be worth while.
Skim milk is not a waste product. It contains large
amounts of very important food elements which, when
added to what is already known and appreciated about
the cream content of a bottle of milk should bring about
a decided increase in milk buying as a food.
First in importance below the cream line is calcium or
lime. Milk is our best source of this very important
mineral that prevents rickets, aids in building strong
teeth and bones, and helps regulate the nerves. So far
as the children are concerned Dr. J. E. Hughes, specialist
in nutrition at the Kansas State College, says, “No child’s
diet is complete, so far as calcium is concerned, without
milk being a part of it.” Again, the food buyer should
appreciate that a quart of milk per day will normally
furnish enough calcium for a member of her family.
Phosphorus is another mineral that joins calcium in
the important job of good teeth and strong bone building.
Below the cream line we find an excellent source of this
important and essential food.
Looking further into the milk bottle, we find milk
sugar an important part of the skim milk. Average milk
contains 4 9 per cent, milk sugar and thus exceeds the
amount of butter fat by T 2 per cent. Milk sugar is an
important source of heat and energy. It is especially
desirable because, unlike most sugars, it is non-fermen-
tative and aids materially in maintaining the proper bac-
terial florae in the intestinal tract. Mention should also
be made of the aid in calcification afforded by milk sugar.
About 3'4 per cent, of a bottle of milk is made up of
the proteins—casein and albumen. Practically all of this
amount is found below the cream line. These proteins
are very valuable for body growth and body repair and
because of the completeness of their make-up of amino


acids, they admirably supplement proteins in other foods,
making them more valuable for human nutrition.
We should appreciate the fact that all skin, hair, blood,
and muscle tissue is made up of protein and that the
foods we eat must provide the building and repair
materials for this great big part of the human body.
Recent investigations have proved that quality, not
quantity, is the consideration in securing proteins for body
building. The amino acids that make for quality protein
cannot be obtained commercially, but science has found
them in skim milk. Milk proteins are not only better
balanced for this job of body building than other food
proteins, but they are more readily and completely assimi-
lated than are proteins from other sources. Casein, which
forms about 80 per cent, of the milk protein, is easily
digested, and this property has made it especially desirable
as a food not only for infants but adults with weak
digestions.
The proteins of milk are equally readily assimilated
whether eaten in the form of whole milk, evaporated
milk, dried milk, cheese, or purified casein. Heating
only serves to make the proteins more digestible.
Three important vitamins make up the balance of the
health-producing elements found in the skim milk. Vita-
min B services to prevent beri-beri, a nervous disorder
and digestive disturbance. Milk is a good source of this
vitamin when used with cereals, and will offer protection
against the above-mentioned diseases. Vitamin Cis found
in variable amounts, and protection is afforded when milk
is used in conjunction with fruits and vegetables. Amounts
of vitamin C offer a very valuable protection against tooth
decay and the less common disease, scurvy. Vitamin G
is the last discovered vitamin, and its presence in a good
product prevents the human disease known a pellagra.
The ravages of this disease are little appreciated. In South
America, about 30,000 deaths occur each year. It is
estimated that about one-third of the cases of insanity
are results of this disease. Milk is an excellent source of
vitamin G.
Milk is a super-charged food. When the nutrient
elements below the cream line are added to those better


known above it, our bottle of milk can successfully com-
pete with any product when the value of the milk food
dollar is taken into consideration.
Milk has been recognized from time immemorial as the
most nearly perfect food for young folks. The same
food nutrients that make it valuable to children make it
just as valuable to the adult in his constant struggle
against disease, sickness, and body wear. Milk, through
its nutrient products, makes a repair food as well as a
building food.
Dr. E. V. McCallum, world-renowned scientist, says,
“Milk is the great factor or safety in making good the
deficiencies of the grains which form and must continue
to form the principal source of energy in our diet. With-
out the continued use of milk, not only for feeding of our
children, but in liberal amounts in cookery, we cannot, as
a nation, maintain the position as a world power.”
—The Dairyman.
MILK
MILK ! The word re-echoes in my brain,
Goes down my throat like a railway train j
Helps me jump, helps me run,
Gives me most and greatest fun.
MILK ! The word just makes me jump
On my bicycle and it helps me pump,
And in jschool, of course you know,
It helps my brain and makes me grow.


MEAT
COLD MEAT CURRY
Remains of any cold joint, 1 tablespoon curry powder,
1 tablespoon maizena, l\ pints stock or water, 1 table-
spoon sultanas, 1 onion, 1 apple.
Chop up onion and apple and fry in butter in saucepan.
Add tablespoon curry powder, and fry again for a few minutes.
Add pints stock (or water). Add tablespoon maizena
mixed with water. This forms a thick sauce, in which the
cooked meat, cut up in dice, is placed together with 1 table-
spoon sultanas.
Note. —With both these curries, boiled rice is served. To
boiling salted water add 1 cup rice. Boil for
DRY CURRY
1 lb. cold meat, 1 small onion, 3 oz, butter, 1 dessert-
spoon curry powder, 1 dessertspoon flour, 1 dessert-
spoon vinegar, salt, lemon juice.
Cut the meat into neat squares, sprinkle over it the curry
powder, flour and salt. Heat the butter in a frying pan, slice
the onion and fry a little. Add the meat and fry a nice light
brown. Stir while frying, as this easily burns. Sprinkle with
lemon juice and vinegar whilst cooking. Serve very hot, with
boiled rice.
ROAST YEAL
Put breast of veal into baking dish. Rub over with pepper,
salt, and about 1 dessertspoon of ground ginger. Slice 2 large
onions and put on top. Cover well with 3or 4 tablespoons of
dripping. Cover with another baking dish, and roast for 2to
2\ hours. Baste occasionally.
YEAL CUTLETS
Flour veal slices and egg and breadcrumb. Fry in pan
slowly for about 20 minutes. Serve with mashed potatoes and
hot tomato sauce.


BLANQUETT OF LAMB
2 lb. leg or neck chops, bunch of herbs, 1 pint
milk, 2 onions, 1 egg or 2 egg yolks, 1 tablespoon butter,
1 heaped tablespoon flour.
Cut meat in pieces about two inches square and put in sauce-
pan with sliced onion, salt, pepper and herbs. Cover with milk
and simmer two hours. Lift out meat and strain liquor. Melt
butter in saucepan, add flour and blend. Add liquor and stir
till boiling. Lift from fire and add beaten egg and allow to
cook without boiling. Add meat and reheat.
FRICASSEE OF CHICKEN
1 chicken, bunch herbs, piece of onion, turnip,
celery, salt, pepper, 1 pint milk, pint stock, 1 table-
spoon butter, 2 tablespoons flour, rolls of grilled bacon.
Cut chicken in small joints. Cut vegetables roughly. Put
chicken, vegetables, herbs, milk and stock into saucepan and
simmer till tender from to 2 hours. Lift meat out and
strain liquor. Melt butter, stir in flour, add liquor and stir
till boiling. Add chicken, flavour, and reheat. Serve hot,
using grilled bacon and chopped parsley as a garnish.
FRICASSEE OF RABBIT
1 rabbit, 2 ozs. dripping, 1 oz. flour, 1 onion, £ lb. lean
ham, 1 pint milk, rashers of bacon, salt, pepper.
Wash and clean the rabbit, cut it up into neat joints; melt
the dripping in a stewpan, and fry the pieces of rabbit lightly,
but do not allow them to brown. Take out each piece directly
it is cooked on the outside and keep it warm. Stir rabbit, the
slices of ham, and the onions sliced. Season to taste with
pepper and salt. Allow it to simmer gently for one hour and
a half. Roll the rashers of bacon, and put them on a skewer.
Place this in the oven to cook. Serve the rabbit, with the sauce
poured over and garnished with the rolls of bacon.
COTTAGE PIE
2 lb. fresh or cooked meat, 1 tablespoon flour, 1 table-
spoon butter, 1 cup gravy or stock, 1 onion.
Take tablespoon butter or fat, 1 tablespoon flour, and add
cup of gravy or stock, and bring to the boil; this forms a


sauce. Put meat through mincer with onion. Put in meat
and onions, pepper and salt. Mix well. Put into pie dish, and
cover with mashed potatoes. Brown in hot oven for about
i an hour.
Note. —lf fresh meat be used, it must be cooked in the flour
mixture for 10 minutes before being put in pie dish.
RABBIT WITH PARSLEY SAUCE
1 rabbit, 1 tablespoon chopped parsley, 1 bay leaf,
1 rasher fat bacon, 1 cup milk, 2 large onions, 1 table-
spoon flour, pepper and salt.
Joint rabbit and wash well. Pour into pot with all ingre-
dients, except flour, milk and parsley, with enough water to
cover. Simmer gently for 1£ hours. Mix milk and flour
together to make a paste. Add to rabbit to thicken. Add
pepper and salt, and then parsley.
BEEF CAKE
1 lb. top of round steak, pepper and salt.
Free meat of all fat. Put through mincer three times. Put
into basin with 4 tablespoons cold water, pepper and salt, and
stir well. Take a large tablespoon of this mixture and drop
into pan in which a little butter has been melted, and fry from
4 to 5 minutes each side.
FRENCH TRIPE
1 lb. tripe (the thin part is best), 1 small onion, £ lb.
bacon (cut as thin as possible), 1 eschalot, a few sprigs
of parsley.
Wash tripe thoroughly, put in cold water, let boil for 10
minutes, remove and dry. Cut into pieces about 2 inches wide
and 4 inches long. Mince eschalot, onion and parsley. Sprinkle
pieces with salt and pepper. Lay a piece of bacon on each, roll
and fasten with match or string, put the rolls in saucepan with
a pint of milk and water, add a carrot, mushrooms, or oysters.
Stew gently for 2 hours.


BACON PUDDING
2 cups self-raising flour, milk, \ cup lard or dripping,
1 onion, herbs, 1 lb. bacon.
Rub dripping into flour, mix with milk, roll out paste, then
take chopped bacon and spread over with 1 large onion, cut
fine, and herbs to taste. Roll up and roll in cloth, and boil for
3 hours. Serve with potatoes and green peas.
MACARONI AND MEAT AND TOMATOES
\ lb. cold meat, f lb. macaroni, pepper and salt, 4
tomatoes, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 tablespoon breadcrumbs.
Boil macaroni in boiling salted water about \ an hour and
strain. Butter a pie dish; put a layer of macaroni at bottom,
then a layer of cold minced meat, then sliced tomatoes, and
alternately till dish is full; sprinkle each layer with pepper and
salt. Then cover with breadcrumbs and bits of butter on top,
and brown in hot oven 25 to 30 minutes.
HAM AND EGG PASTY
To Make Paste
One pound of flour, 10 oz. good dripping, or half dripping
and half butter, juice of half a lemon, a small teaspoonful salt,
or less if bacon is salt, enough water to form a firm dough.
Method. —Cut the dripping in pieces into the flour. Make
a well in centre of flour, mix lemon juice and water, pour in
and make into a fairly firm dough, and roll out. Cover a dish
with pastry. Now beat up as many eggs as required, add a
little salt and pepper. Cut up a few rashers of bacon, spread
bacon over the paste, pour in the eggs, cover with a paste, and
bake, first in a very hot oven to cook the paste, then a little
slower, from 15 to 20 minutes altogether.
POULTRY
Time-Table for Poultry
For Average-sized Birds:
Fowl, roast, If hours
Fowl, steamed, 1 hour
Duck, 1 hour
Goose, If hours
Turkey, 2 hours


ATTENTION PLEASE!
This wholesome-looking youngster standing at atten-
tion is typical of the army of boys who spend the summer
at Boy Scout camps. And what a splendid regiment of the
young blood of the country they represent !
What a fine mental and moral training these boys
receive ! What great stress is laid upon their physical
fitness ! And what an important part milk plays in their
diets !
Those men in charge of Scout camps know well that
no food can take the place of milk for building strong,
healthy bodies and keen minds.
a Milk, The Body Builder” says the heading, and what
boy scanning the pages of a newspaper would fail to stop
at attention when he saw this advertisement ? It should
also make a strong appeal to parents whose growing boys
class milk as a fit beverage for infants and invalids but
will have none of it themselves.
Gene Tunney well knew the value of milk in the diet
when he expressed himself thusly:—“lf I were giving
advice to young boys, I would tell them that nothing
could keep them in better shape than right, clean
living, no cigarettes, no profanity, a fear of an Almighty
Being, plenty of milk and vegetables and enough sleep.”
On an occasion when interviewed by “Farm and Fire-
side,” this heavyweight boxing champion of the world
said in part:
“I drink lots of milk. I’ve cultivated the habit of
drinking milk as a thirst quencher . .
“I’ve found milk a muscle builder and a great general
strengthener. I find that it creates energy and I regard
it as a tonic. I can readily believe the story to the effect
that a milk diet, more than anything else, was responsible
for the success of the ‘iron men* of Brown Univerity’s
unbeaten football team.”


MEAT SUBSTITUTES
BAKED EGGS
Toast circular pieces of bread from which a little of the
centres have been removed. Place pieces on a buttered dish.
Break an egg and drop contents in the centre of each. Sprinkle
with salt and pepper, dot with butter, pour on a little milk or
cream, and bake in a moderate oven until eggs are cooked.
BAKED EGGS WITH CHEESE
Follow directions for baked eggs, sprinkling slices of toast
with cheese before eggs are dropped on to them. Cover with
white sauce, sprinkle with grated cheese and buttered crumbs.
Bake until eggs are set.
BAKED EGGS IN HAM CASES
To 1 measure of crumbs add f measure scalded milk and
1 measure of finely-chopped, cooked ham. Line greased
custard cups with mixture. Break eggs into the centres, and
bake until set. Serve with white sauce. Mashed potatoes
may be used instead of the bread and milk mixture. Cheese
may be used instead of ham.
SCRAMBLED EGGS
2 tablespoons fat, 5 eggs, \ cup milk, l\ teaspoons
salt, few grains pepper.
Beat eggs slightly; add salt, pepper and milk. Melt the fat
in a frying pan, pour in the egg mixture, and cook slowly,
continually scraping from bottom of pan. When creamy, turn
into a hot dish and serve at once. Serve with ham or bacon,
etc.
BAKED MACARONI OR RICE AND CHEESE
Sprinkle hot boiled macaroni or rice with grated cheese or
cheese cut into small pieces. Arrange breadcrumbs, macaroni
and cheese; or rice and cheese, and white sauce, in layers in a
well-greased baking dish. Cover with breadcrumbs, and bake
in oven until nicely browned. Tomato sauce may be used in
place of the white sauce.


VEGETABLES
TIME-TABLE FOR COOKING VEGETABLES IN
WATER
Artichokes.—3o to 35 minutes in salted cold water.
Asparagus.—2s minutes, in salted boiling water.
Beet Root.— to 2 hours, in cold salted water, with vinegar
added.
Carrots (whole). — hours, in cold salted water.
Carrots (sliced). —f-hour, in cold salted water.
Cabbage.—2s minutes, in boiling salted water.
Cauliflower.—3o minutes, in boiling salted water.
Celery (outer stalks). — hours, in cold slightly salted
water.
Celery (inner stalks). —1 hour, in cold slightly salted water.
French Beans.—2o to 25 minutes, in boiling salted water.
Green Peas.—2s to 30 minutes, in boiling salted water,
teaspoon sugar and stalk of mint.
Onions.—l hour, in boiling salted water.
Parsnips (whole). —1 hour, in cold salted water.
Parsnips (sliced). —|-hour, in cold salted water.
Potatoes.—2o to 40 minutes, in boiling salted water.
Pumpkin!—3s to 40 minutes, in cold salted water.
Rice. —\ an hour, in boiling salted water.
Spinach.—2o minutes, in boiling salted water.
Turnips.—l hour, in cold salted water.
Marrow.—3o minutes, in cold salted water.
All green vegetables to be boiled with lid off.
HOW TO PREPARE DIFFERENT KINDS OF
VEGETABLES
Carrots. —Peel, slice, cube or cut lengthwise. Serve with
seasonings, in white sauce or in thickened meat stock ; or mash
to a pulp; add little butter.
Beets. —Boil in skins, peel, cut in slices, cube or cut as
desired, serve plain, with seasonings or in white sauce or pickle
in diluted vinegar, to which a few cloves, a slice of onion, and
a little sugar have been added.
Parsnips. —Peel, cut as desired, serve hot in seasoned butter
or white sauce, or brown in fat, or mash to a pulp.
Turnips. —Boil, peel, serve plain with seasonings or in white
sauce. Mash.
Potatoes. —Boil with or without skins, peel and serve plain
or mashed. Cut boiled potatoes in slices or cubes and reheat
in white sauce, and serve as creamed potatoes, using cups
sauce to 2 cups potatoes.


Onions. —Skin and boil. Serve in white sauce, or bake
whole or stuffed. Cut raw onions in slices, dip in flour and
fry in a little fat or in deep fat.
Celery. —Serve raw, or boil. Serve boiled celery in white
sauce or melted butter.
Asparagus. —Boil. Use tougher parts of stalks for soups.
Tender, served plain or in white sauce. Serve boiled asparagus
on scrambled eggs, or on toast.
Spinach. —Boil. Drain well, chop finely; put in pot with
little butter, pepper and salt.
Cabbage. —Serve hearts raw, shredded fine for salad, or boil.
Serve plain, seasoned, or in white sauce alone, or with grated
cheese, or scalloped with cheese and white sauce.
1 omatoes. —Dip in hot water, peel, slice, serve raw; or cook
cut into sections with 1 teaspoon salt, 2 tablespoonfuls sugar,
few grains pepper and breadcrumbs to 6 tomatoes ;
Uonion, cut in pieces, added, gives a pleasing flavour; serve
as Stewed Tomatoes. Arrange sliced or canned tomatoes,
seasoned in layers with breadcrumbs or boiled rice or boiled
macaroni or spaghetti, in a well-greased baking pan, and bake
until nicely browned on top; serve as Scalloped Tomatoes.
Stuff raw tomatoes from which slices have been cut off from
the tops and pulp removed; fill with boiled rice, breadcrumbs,
seasoning, and mixed with finely-chopped meat, and bake;
serve as Baked Stuffed Tomatoes.
Marrow. —Wash, cut in pieces, remove seeds. Steam 20
minutes. Turn into a cheese-cloth bag, squeeze out water,
Mash, season and serve.
Pumpkin. Cut in pieces, remove seeds and stringy part,
steam or bake. Mash, season and refill shells, and serve as
Baked Pumpkin.
Com.—Remove husk and silky threads, and plunge cobs into
boiling salted water; boil 30 minutes; serve as Boiled Corn.
Remove corn from cob, heat with 2 tablespoons butter, 1 table-
spoon sugar, teaspoon salt, a few grains of pepper, white
sauce to cups corn, and serve as Stewed Corn. Mix 1 cup
corn with 1 well-beaten egg, £-cup flour, salt and pepper to
taste, and shake to imitate oysters. Brown on both sides on a
well-greased frying-pan, and serve as Corn Oysters.
CURRIED CAULIFLOWER
Make a sauce as follows: —Melt 1 tablespoon of butter or
dripping in saucepan. Stir in one heated tablespoon flour and
half-tablespoon curry powder. Mix well. Add half pint milk,
and bring slowly to boiling point. Add cold cooked cauliflower,
flavour, and stand at side of stove for twenty to thirtv minutes.
Serve very hot.


CAULIFLOWER AU GRATIN
Remains of cold cooked cauliflower, 2 ozs. grated
cheese, £ pint white sauce, cayenne, salt, breadcrumbs.
Chop cauliflower up in large pieces and put in a buttered pie
dish. Make some white sauce and put in half the cheese.
Season with salt and cayenne and pour over the cauliflower.
Sprinkle the remainder of the cheese over the top, add a few
bi ead-ci umbs. Put in a moderate oven to heat through and
brown about 20 minutes. Serve garnished with parsley.
. NOTE: A whole cauliflower—cooked, drained and pressed
into shape—is attractive when served in this way.
MUSHROOMS (STEWED)
1 lb. mushrooms, 2 ozs. butter, \ pint of milk or
cream, 1 dessertspoon flour, juice of £ lemon, salt and
pepper.
Remove skins and ends of stalks. Melt butter in stew-pan,
put in mushrooms and lemon juice, season with salt and pepper,
cover closely and cook gently for an hour, shaking pan occa-
sionally. Mix the flour and cream or milk smoothly together
and pour into pan; stir till contents boil, then simmer for 10
minutes; season to taste, and serve.
VEGETABLE LOAF
1 cup boiled rice, 1 cup ground peanuts, 1 cup milk,
2 CU P finely chopped parsnips. 3 tablespoons butter, 1
tablespoon onion juice, 1 teaspoon mustard, 1 egg, pepper
and salt.
Mix all together well, adding egg last, and bake as a loaf
in a moderate oven.
TOMATOES IN BATTER
6 tomatoes, 3 teaspoons mixed herbs, \ cup water,
1 egg, 1 cup flour, £ cup milk, pepper and salt.
Wash tomatoes and cut out stem scars; into each of these
put j teaspoon mixed herbs seasoned with salt and pepper.
Put in piedish and pour cup of water over them. Make a
stiff batter with flour, salt egg and milk, and pour over the
tomatoes. Put into oven and bake for half-an-hour.


FISH SAUCES
Fish is much improved by the addition of a sauce. The
following sauces may be used with both fried and boiled
fish:—
WHITE SAUCE
1 oz. flour, 1 oz. butter, pint milk, salt, pepper,
lemon juice to season. (The foundation of most white
sauces, whether savoury or sweet.)
Melt the butter in a small saucepan. Add the flour, and
work together with a wooden spoon, gradually stirring all the
time. Add the milk. Bring to the boil. Cook gently for five
minutes. Season with salt and pepper, and a squeeze of lemon
juice.
EGG SAUCE
1 tablespoon butter, 1 hard-boiled egg, 1 tablespoon
flour, pepper, 1 cup milk, salt.
Melt butter in pot. Add flour. Add milk gradually. Bring
to boil. Add chopped-up egg.
ANCHOVY SAUCE
Same as Egg Sauce (omitting the egg), with the addition
of Anchovy Essence.
TARTARE SAUCE
1 tablespoon butter, yoke of one egg, 1 tablespoon
flour, juice of h lemon, 1 cup milk, pepper, salt, 1 tea-
spoon chopped parsley, 1 teaspoon capers, small piece
butter, 1 bay leaf.
Melt butter in pot. Add flour and milk, gradually bring to
boil. On no account let boil after yoke of egg is added, or it
will curdle. Small piece of butter to be added at last, gives a
smooth and glazed appearance.
BURNT BUTTER SAUCE
The best sauce for grilled and fried fish is made by placing
2 tablespoons of butter in a saucepan, and brown very much,
adding 1 teaspoonful of vinegar at the last.


A PAGE OF SUNDRIES
MILK TOAST
I 7 cups milk, 2 teaspoons butter, 2 slices of toast.
Scald milk in top of double boiler. Add butter and pour
over toast. A dash of pepper or celery salt may be added.
Milk toast served with crisp bacon or poached eggs is a
satisfactory supper dish.
GRUEL (FOR INVALIDS)
1 tablespoon oatmeal, pint milk, pinch salt, 1 tea-
spoon sugar.
Put oatmeal in basin and add salt. Bring milk to the boil,
pour over the oatmeal, cover and stand half hour. Strain off
the milk, pressing the oatmeal as dry as possible. Stir over the
fire till boiling and simmer 10 minutes. If too thick add a little
more milk.
ALBUMINISED MILK (FOR INVALIDS)
1 white of egg, 1 cup milk.
Add egg white to milk in a bowl, stir with a fork or beat
slowly with a beater until egg is mixed with the milk. Strain.
Add sugar or salt.
MILK PUNCH
Simmer the thin pared rind of 1 lemon and 6 to 10 sweet
blanched almonds in a quart of milk. Add 2 oz. sugar. Strain
and stir in a stiffly beaten white of 1 egg and 2 to 4 teaspoons
cream. Serve hot.
CAFE AU LAIT
This is strong clear coffee, mixed with equal proportions of
boiling milk as directed.
1 tablespoon coffee, pinch of salt, 1 gill of water, 1 gill
milk.
Bring water to boil, draw to one side of stove, add salt and
coffee. Allow to stand for three minutes, strain. Serve
immediately with hot milk.


POINTS TO REMEMBER ABOUT MILK
The cleanliness of milk, especially when it is to be
given to infants and young children, must be guarded
with the greatest care. If the milk supplied shows any
sediment in the glass or bottle, you should complain to
your milkman, and if there is no improvement, make a
change. Clean, wholesome milk costs more than inferior
milk, but it is the truest economy to buy the best milk.
As soon as fresh milk is delivered, it should be poured
into a vessel which has been well scalded, ;and allowed to
get cold.
Do not keep milk in the hot kitchen cupboard. Fail-
ing a larder, keep it in a cool passage or cool empty fire-
place. A tiny fly-proof cupboard may be made from a few
pieces of wood or a small box, and a little fine wire gauze
all for about one shilling. The milk should be
covered closely with a piece of clean muslin, which must
be frequently washed and boiled. If there is no other
way of keeping it cool, the jug or bottle containing the
milk should be stood in a basin of cold water. A little
methylated spirit in the water keeps it cool.
Washing milk jugs and cans first in cold water is
necessary, as hot water causes a film to stick to sides of
vessel j they must be well scalded with boiling water.


INDEX
ICES, ETC.
Page
Victorian Ice Cream .... 58
Vanilla Ice Cream •.. .. 58
Economical Ice Cream .. 58
Peach Melba 58
Strawberry Ice Cream .. 58
Pineapple Sundae 59
Tutti Fruit Sundae .... 59
Nut Sundae 59
Caramel Sundae 59
Orange Cream Ice • .. .. 59
Apricot Ice Cream .... 60
Fresh Fruit Ice 60
Raspberry Cream Ice • .. 60
Vanilla Cream 60
Strawberry Cream • .. .. 60
Spanish Cream • 61
Nut Frappe • 61
Passion Fruit Cream .... 61
Apple Cream Ice 61
Blanc Mange 61
MEAT
Cold Meat Curry 67
Dry Curry 67
Roast Veal 67
Veal Cutlets • 67
Blanquett of Lamb .... 68
Fricasse of Chicken .... 68
Fricasse of Rabbit .... 68
Cottage Pie • 68
Rabbit with Parsley Sauce 59
Beef Cake 69
French Tripe 69
Bacon Pudding • 70
Macaroni, Meat and
Tomatoes • 70
Ham and Egg Pasty .... 70
MEAT SUBSTITUTES
Baked Eggs • 72
Baked Eggs with Cheese • 72
Baked Eggs in Ham Cases 72
Scrambled Eggs 72
Page
Baked Macaroni or Rice
and Cheese 72
VEGETABLES
Curried Cauliflower .... 73
Cauliflower au Gratin • .. 74
SAUCES
White Sauce 76
Egg Sauce 76
Anchovy Sauce • 76
Tartare Sauce 76
Burnt Butter Sauce .... 76
MILK SOUP
Cream of Cheese 27
Cream of Carrot 28
Cream of Celery 28
Cream of Potato 28
Sago Cream Soup 28
Fish Soup 29
Asparagus Soup 29
Kidney Soup 29
Potato Soup • 29
Tomato Soup 30
Vegetable Soup • 30
Oyster Soup 30
Artichoke Soup 30
FISH
Fish Pie • 31
Fish Croquettes • 31
Salmon Croquettes .... 32
Schnapper Cutlets 32
Fish Baked in Milk .... 32
Baked Salmon 32
Salt Fish 32
CAKES
Date Rolls 55
Ginger Sandwich 55
Raspberry Buns 55
Lemon Biscuits • 55


Page
Lancashire Spice Nuts .. 56
Jam Drops 56
Chocolate Biscuits • .. .. 56
Sponge Sandwich 56
Cocoanut Cakes 57
Biscuit Curds 57
Batchelor’s Buttons .... 57
FILLINGS FOR
SANDWICHES
Butter Filling 56
Orange Filling 56
Chocolate Filling 57
Coffee Filling 57
Icing for Sandwiches • .. 57
MILK PUDDINGS
Cocoanut Pudding •.. .. 38
Aunt Sally Pudding .... 38
Sponge Pudding 38
Plum Sago 38
Ginger Pudding • 39
Orange Custard _ 39
Boiled Custard 39
Canadian Pudding •.. .. 39
Pancakes • 40
Satisfaction Pudding • .. 40
Bread and Butter Pudding 40
Caramel Pudding 41
Hasty Pudding • 41
Savoury Baked Rice .... 41
Sago or Tapioca Pudding 41
Page
Milk Jelly 42
Honeycomb Pudding .... 42
Egg Snow 42
Ground Rice Pudding .. • 42
Banana Custard 43
Semolina Sun Flowers .. 43
Lemon Snow Pudding .. 43
Rice Pudding 43
Macaroni Pudding .... 43
Vermicelli Pudding .... 43
Yorkshire Pudding .... 44
Cheese Souffle 44
Macaroni Cheese 44
Mock Cream 44
Fruit Custard 45
Rice Pudding 45
Devonshire Junket • .. .. 45
Coffee Junket 45
Caramel Junket • 45
Chocolate Plum Pudding • 46
Custard 46
Strawberry Custard .... 46
Clotted Cream 48
Hot Cabinet" Pudding • .. 48
Apple Fritters 48
Peach Custard • 48
French Pancakes 49
Junket 49
Queen Pudding • 49
Baked Custard 49
Chocolate Pudding .. .. • 50
Sultana Pudding 50
Caramel Custard 50
Banana Custard • 50
Brown, Prior & Co. Pty. Ltd., 430 Little Bourke St., Melbourne, C. 1


ICE
A Good Citizen
A Very Good Citizen
ICE is Honest!
Never stops working—does a thorough job and
keeps on doing it.
ICE is Refreshing: !
A wonderfully refreshing drink. Not all water
and a little Ice—but a little water and a lot of Ice.
You try it.
ICE is Everyone’s Friend!
Meals in summer without Ice are a nightmare; but
—with Ice—a constant joy. Salads; Custards;
Cold Meats; cool, safe Milk; Jellies; Junkets,
etc.
That ICE is Wholesome!
Made from doubly filtered Yan Yean water—too
cold for germs to live in.


}
m
'■A*.
m
ifmmm Packed,Muni
38 02021150 9
In the new vacuum scaled glass
jar Bushells Coffee is as fresh the
day you open it as the day it was
roasted and packed.
It will keep fresh indefinitely.
All the richness of aroma, the full
flavor of Bushells Pure Coffee, is
retained for your enjoyment.
So easy to make, so delightful to
taste, Bushells Coffee is always
welcome. Packed in 1-lb and
t/ 2 -lb. glass jars.
Pure Coffee
VACUUM PACKED
Packed Fresh .... Stays Fresh
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
