

THE BRITISH EMPIRE
AND THE WAR
BY
E. A. BENIANS
LONDON
T. FISHER UNWIN, LTD.
ADELPHI TERRACE
Price Sixpence Net.




THE BRITISH EMPIRE
AND THE WAR
BY
E. A. BENIANS
LONDON
T. FISHER UNWIN, LTD.
ADELPHI TERRACE


First Published in 1915.
{.All rights reserved.]


THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND
THE WAR
To understand all the gravity of the present conflict
we must turn our eyes from Europe to the world at
large. Not only the independence of Servia and
Belgium, and the balance of power in Europe, are at
stake, but the future development of the East, and
the form and spirit of Western civilization in its far-
reaching influence over the world. The Allies have,
indeed, laid down the ends for which they are fighting
in terms of European politics. But the intervention
of England in the war, drawing with her the other
parts of the British Empire and her ally in Asia, and
putting at stake the ideas upon which the Empire
stands, has given the conflict a world-wide signifi-
cance. It has brought into collision two conceptions
of world-power —the German, as yet little more than
an ambition, but full of large possibilities, and the
English, tried by a long experience, supported now
by the loyalty it has won, and capable still of vast
and, as we believe, beneficent development. The
English are not much given to introspection, nor are
they gifted in explaining what they aim at or what
they do. They live by instinct, and advance by
experience, and their policy seems from hand to
mouth, but it is an expression of national character,
and is thus a continuous tradition. Only under the


stress of a great crisis like the present, wherein
Empires and the principles upon which they have
been built are put to the test, can the nature of the
policy followed and the results achieved be made
apparent to the world. There must be some mean-
ing in the gathering of many nations, Eastern and
Western, under one flag, in their mighty and unani-
mous rally to sustain its honour and to preserve their
union. There is surely some hope for the world in a
State which has won such far-extended allegiance,
which draws East and West together in a common
purpose, though that purpose be the deadly one of
war. If Austria has failed to win the loyalty of Czech
and Serb, of Italian and Roumanian, and Germany
of Frenchman, Dane and Pole, while French-Canadian
and Boer, Hindu and Mohammedan, rally to the
British Empire, then the British Empire has a
political secret which the others have not, and which
it is the world’s interest to guard. If the nations
within the British Empire are free in their national
development, contented in their material progress,
and peaceful in their relations with one another,
while those in the Empires of Central Europe chafe
against restraints and turn their faces outward, then
it is the interest of neutrals, of mankind as a whole,
that these Empires should not win, to subject other
peoples to their unsatisfying culture, and that the
British Empire should not lose the peoples within
her fold, but should continue to hold up her example
of peace and freedom to the world. Forced, as we
are, at this supreme moment to put our work to the
test, and conscious that the whole world regards with
intense interest the possibility, on the one hand, of
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


our downfall, and, on the other, of a considerable
expansion of our power, let us see what is involved
both for them and for us, for a world-power exists
not for itself alone, but for all mankind, whether for
good or evil. Let us ask what the British Empire
means and for what it stands, and whether, to-day,
we can say to the States of Europe and the United
States, to the nations of the East as well as of the
West, it is better for you individually, and for the
world at large, that we, and not the Germans, should
be victorious in this struggle, for we are trustees of
ideas that will contribute to the peace and progress
of mankind.
The issue with which the world is now confronted
can best be understood in the light of what has been
happening outside of Europe since the Age of Dis-
covery and more particularly in the last half century.
Ever since da Gama rounded the Cape and Columbus
discovered America there has gone forth from one or
other nation of Europe a continuous stream of men
and capital and ideas to influence the development of
other lands and peoples. European nations have
grown up in the uninhabited spaces of the globe, and
older civilizations have been brought under the stimu-
lating influence of Western knowledge. In the last
half century this advance of the West has been
carried forward at a prodigious rate. The Japanese
have modified their life, China has unbarred her
doors, vast regions of Africa and the Pacific have
been opened up, India has entered upon a renaissance,
while the group of European peoples growing up in
the two continents of America have been drawn
closer and closer to the life of Europe. The whole
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


world is now alive with an energy imparted by the
material progress of Western Europe. To some of
the Western nations this process of Westernism is an
unconscious and undesigned result of their activity.
They have no missionary feeling in regard to the
extension of their culture. They prefer to leave to
the nations who come within the orbit of their power
the control of their own destiny in this respect. The
Germans, on the other hand, are not only great con-
tributors to the common stock of Western culture,
and, thus, to the far-reaching influence which it is
now exerting, but they have also come to regard
their own national form of that culture with an
intense pride and self-confidence, and their desire to
spread it over the world seems to have taken some-
thing of the fanaticism of a militant religion. Their
history has made them distrustful of the power of
ideas unaided by force; and hence, behind the expan-
sion of their culture they wish to place the political
and military power of the State. Here is the inner
meaning of the struggle of to-day as it presents itself
from a world point of view. The assassination of an
Austrian Arch-Duke has brought in its train a world-
war, because there has risen up amongst the great
Powers of Europe anew Power, intense, self-con-
scious and egoistic, eager to come forward as the
standard-bearer of Western civilization, and prepared,
as it seems, to take short cuts to its imperial goal.
The Germans were, indeed, so slow in establishing
their unity as a nation, and so late in taking part in
the expansion of Europe into other continents, that
they have never possessed, relatively to most other
European States, a direct influence outside of Europe
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


commensurate with their numbers, their military
strength, and their contributions to European civiliza-
tion. In the shifting course of politics their power
could not have failed to grow, and were they willing
to pursue their imperial ends with the same peaceful
and patient industry they have shown in learning and
commerce, the other Powers of Europe, who have
always regarded their services to civilization with the
greatest respect, could have had no ground of com-
plaint. It serves little purpose to-day to ask whether
more wisdom and moderation on every hand might
not have found a peaceful path for their expansion,
and avoided the tragedy of this terrible struggle.
We are now face to face with the outburst of a great
military State, and bound to strive our uttermost to
save the principles of our own national and imperial
life. Let us realize then what they are and what
they may be.
The course of history has given to the British
Empire the most extensive world-power that now
exists. Though our people are a kindred race to the
Germans, our political traditions are different; and a
long period of world policy, and a large experience of
government in distant lands, have led us to form
imperial conceptions and an attitude to the extension
of our culture far apart from theirs. Jealous of a
power that seems so easily gotten and so lightly held,
some German critics have seen in the British Empire
the type of the robber-State—a great dominion
brought into being by good fortune, violence and
theft, and resting on foundations so weak that they
must crumble in any world-shock. Good fortune we
have undoubtedly had —fortunate in the richness of
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


our land, the mildness of its climate and its com-
manding position—fortunate, too, in the opportunities
which the course of history has brought to our hand.
Violence we have used, as other peoples have done,
though whether more wrong was committed in the
making of Prussia and in her establishment of the
unity of Germany than in the building of our Empire,
East and West, is a question we may leave to the
judgment of history. The political life of mankind
leaves much to be desired, and many States have
owed something in their building to force. But,
however formed, they are maintained and preserved
in the long run by their power to satisfy the needs
and aspirations of their component parts, and to
adapt their form and principles to the changing
conditions of the world. The living issue of to-day
concerns the future not the past. Are the interests
of human progress better served by the principles on
which the British Empire stands—principles wrought
out in centuries of political experience, and adapted
to the needs of a vast variety of peoples, countries
and times —than by the over-running of the world
with the ideas on which Prussia was formed and
Germany united ? The German idea of empire is no
mean and small one, but it looks to a dominance won
by the sword, and the assimilation of many civiliza-
tions in its own all-conquering culture. Is it for the
good of the world that this militant imperialism
should triumph, and that our own Empire, inspired
by other ideas, should fall before it? The British
Empire is not a military State. No one who has
travelled in the many lands beneath the British flag
but must be amazed to see how slender the military
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


basis on which its vast interests are secured. Neither
is it Anglo-Saxon life that fills the Empire, but the
genius of many races and many civilizations. The
leading idea of our Empire is the association and free
development of a group of peoples. The Empire
means freedom. Freedom for the individual has
been gained and secured by those political principles
—the rule of law and the consent of the governed—
which are the foundation of our constitution, and
which, in their limitation of the power of the State,
distinguish our political ideas from the German
conception of the omnipotent non-moral State.
Freedom for the nation is expressed in the recogni-
tion of nationality and the respect for national
religions, laws and customs, which have been the
hall-mark of our policy everywhere, and in the right
of self-government, which has been fully, freely and
rapidly extended to the Western nations within the
Empire, and in some measure to other peoples too.
And the Empire means also peace —peace between
the nations within its borders, guarded and guaranteed
by the pervading influence of the imperial union.
The British Empire in its spirit and its ultimate form
is a league of free nations. Slowly we have been
grasping the fact that it no longer rests on the energy
of a single island people, that they have built more
largely than they knew, and that it stands to-day on
the loyalty and cohesion of the many States and
nations that have been formed or brought within its
frontiers. By whatever accident of history, or motive
or power of ours, drawn together, these States and
nations, once united in a common loyalty, become a
new creation. The Empire is not a machinery to
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


enable the English to exploit a quarter of the globe,
but a far-extending and elastic structure, wherein the
force of nationality can have free development, nations
take form and flourish, live their own lives, learn of
each other, co-operate for common ends, find the
settlement of their conflicting interests, and lift up to
the world an example of union and peace. The
imperialism that would exploit other people’s lands
for our gain, other people’s feelings for our pride, is
doomed to die. If the Empire were formed in that
spirit, it is not in that spirit that it can bejnaintained.
The nations of the Empire to-day are not rallying to
us, or to the exhausted ideas of empire which we are
shedding, but to the larger ideas which spring from
the free principles of our life and from the possibilities
of a vast union of peoples. In the twentieth century
men will not fight and die for the imperialism of the
eighteenth ; nor will Labour, whose voice must soon be
heard in imperial politics, be the champion of an
imperialism that springs from an aggressive capitalism,
or is buttressed by a social and economic ascendency
against which it has fought at home. In the family
of nations lies the idea which best expresses the
character of our imperial work in the past, and the
hope which our success to-day holds out to the
future.
Whoever looks at the history of our Empire will
see that this idea has been its genius. Not always
consciously realized, abandoned in occasional mistake,
enfeebled by occasional hesitation, it has, none the less,
worked out through all our policy, and perpetually
reasserted itself in any enduring achievement of the
race. We must not indeed look to see ideas and
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


intentions where they are not. States seldom take
shape on fixed conceptions. Policy is governed by
the circumstances of the moment as well as by the
character of a people. But a race that is true to
itself works out in its expansion a definite idea ; and
the group of nations that makes up the United
Kingdom, in creating an empire has formed, and is
forming, one in its own likeness. When the first
American colonies were planted, naturally and almost
unconsciously the colonists were left to form and shape
their own life. We did not colonize on a set of prin-
ciples, or tie the New England down to the conventions
of the Old. We acted thus because we enjoyed a large
measure of freedom at home, and our colonies natu-
rally reproduced our freedom, and expanded it in
their new conditions. They grew in strength and
they grew in liberty, and wise men in England
soon avoided putting unaccustomed restraints on
their liberty, while the greatest Englishmen of the
eighteenth century recognised that in America had
grown up an English nation, tenacious of all that
Englishmen hold dear, and deserving to be embraced
on an equal footing with the mother country in a
larger conception of an empire. “The colonies,”
said Chatham, “ are too great an object to be grasped
but in the arms of affection.” Unhappily the mother
country, untrue to her own genius, resenting in her
children what she thought great in herself, developed
a spirit of ascendency, because she had beaten France
in the great wars, stood across the path of their
development, her eyes turned on a past that they had
forgotten, and failed to offer to them, in the new
circumstances that arose with the defeat of the French,
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


an ideal of empire that appealed to their imagination
or was honourable to their self-respect. Thus the
new nation which she had brought into being parted
from her to pursue its own destiny, and the British
idea of the family of nations joined in a single State
was not realized in that century.
Fortune has certainly been kind to us in that it
gave us the opportunity of profiting by our expe-
rience. In the nineteenth century the same issue
arose in new circumstances. After the American
war we had retraced some of the fundamentals of our
policy. We did not, it is true, attempt to assimilate
the French Canadians to our civilization, but we
forgot our ideals of freedom in colonial government,
and lost sight of the idea of nation-building as the
goal of colonial policy. These things had to be re-
learned in new conditions, and Canada was the field
of our experience. In Canada we were checking the
free development of the young communities, and
after ineffectual chafing, Upper and Lower Canada
rose in rebellion. It was a complex movement, for
“ two nations (the French and English) struggled in
the bosom of a single State,” as well as both struggling
against the leading-strings of the mother country.
Lord Durham, in one of the few great declarations
of policy which have been made in our imperial
history, bade us give the Canadians the control of
their own affairs. So one by one we cut the leading-
strings, and recognized in Canada a nation that would
guide its own development. But the settlement was
incomplete, for we tried to unite English and French
in such a way that the English should assimilate the
French, and the two nations still struggled in uneasy
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


union. At last the policy of federation gave full
scope to British ideas, for it at once satisfied the
national aspirations of the French, maintained the
unity of Canada, and opened to both peoples the
possibility of a larger future as a united country
within the Empire. Thus England gave full recog-
nition to nationality, not only as between mother
country and colony, but also within the colony itself,
and this without dividing Canada to her eternal
injury, or disrupting the Empire to the loss of a great
idea. The principles discovered in the government
of Canada were fearlessly extended elsewhere, to the
Australian colonies and New Zealand, to the South
African colonies, and other smaller colonies in vary-
ing degrees as local circumstances allowed. It is not
always indeed by Councils and Parliaments that this
self-government is exercised. The spirit is instinct
also through various forms in the processes of Crown
Colony Government. Thus, in the last Colonial
Reports, we find the Secretary of the Gold Coast
writes of the Governor’s tour through the Colony:
“ The personal interviews and discussions with chiefs
in their own towns have impressed them with a sense
of the share they take in the administration and have
laid a foundation of confidence and goodwill between
the local executive officers and the native authorities.”
And in the Report from Wei-hai-Wei is a passage
which gives us an illuminating glimpse into the spirit
of our imperial policy: “Before any legislation or
administrative measures likely to affect Chinese
customs and village life are put in force care is
always taken to ascertain as far as possible the
opinion of the Chinese through the district and
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


village head-men. This is done in pursuance of the
policy of the Government, which has invariably
endeavoured not only to maintain, but also to
strengthen and consolidate the village organisation.”
So the one tradition runs even to the outworks ot
the Empire. In its larger consequences great results
lay hid. The English people in distant lands who
received control of their own affairs, reached out to
the national ideals which circumstances raised before
them, and learnt to unite their strength in the forma-
tion of new States and nations. Thereby the Empire,
in so far as regarded its Western branches, gradually
resolved itself into a group of nations, bound by ties
light and elastic, but not the less enduring; and all
the experience that has followed shows that, half un-
consciously, by being true to her traditions and her
character England has stumbled oh anew idea ot
empire—the family of nations steadfast in a free
union. In the great trial of to-day the Empire
stands fast. The young States rally to its flag with an
instant and unanimous enthusiasm, born not only of
pride and gratitude in its past, but of an unquenched
confidence in its future. The work endures because
it expresses the true ideas of a race —the mutual
confidence, the spirit of freedom, the power of co-
operation which Englishmen everywhere show, not
the maxims of a ruling class, nor the effete ideas of
imperialism, nor copy-book work in politics, but
experience and truth to fact and nature.
Let us pause here to observe the reason why
England to-day can present this idea of empire to the
world. Much is due to the free traditions of our life ;
and much to the fact that our expansion has been the
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


work of individuals or groups of individuals making
their own way, and not a national military adventure,
having its origin in the spirit of conquest. Even our
more aggressive activity has been worked out by
great commercial companies in semi-independence.
Some too of our colonies owed their foundation to
the spirit of liberty which led men to migrate from
the mother land or from another colony in the
determination to live their own life. But, most
important of all causes, the new-formed nations,
remaining within the Empire, have contributed to
form our imperial outlook, and have expressed in
their influence the ideas of men with a different
experience and, in some respects, a broader point of
view than that of our governing classes at home, and
so helped us to see that the older imperial system must
be and could be resolved into a partnership of States.
Germany has not had daughter nations in other lands
whose opinion could influence the development of her
imperial ideas. Had her expansion taken this form
we may well believe her outlook on the world would
not be given her, as it appears to be, by a military
class, using German culture as its stalking-horse.
Unhappily, as we think, Prussia, which is a military
State, lacking the genius of Empire, has controlled
the ideas of Germany in this day of her development
of world-power and policy, has destroyed the balance
of her mind, taught her to measure other States in
military terms, undervaluing national and racial ties,
and led her to form military conceptions of empire
which the world cannot bear. Whatever the British
Empire owes to good fortune in the play of world
forces in which it has been formed, it stands to-day
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


as a true piece of work, expressing the character of a
race and the force which a spirit of freedom has in
the world when joined with courage and industry.
In its building the labour of all classes of our people
has joined—artizan and trader, missionary and ad-
ministrator, doing each his own business in his own
corner of the world, not knowing, and seldom caring,
whether what he did fitted into some general plan, or
what form the whole would take. And the concep-
tion no less than the work is a joint creation. By those
subtle and half unconscious compromises, through
which the English achieve their power of co-operation,
the ideas of our aristocracy and our merchants, of our
middle-classes and our working-classes, expressed not
only through the people of England, but through the
daughter nations also, have combined to shape it.
Nor do we believe that it has yet reached the limits
of its growth.
It is of the future we have now to think. Who
can doubt that we stand at anew dawn of history ?
That consequent on this struggle, in which Western
civilization is divided against itself, and is spending
with prodigal passion its resources of wealth and
human strength in internecine strife, there will come
a great shifting of power, new thoughts as to the
relations between nations, and a readjustment as
between East and West ? What of the British
Empire at such an hour, embracing as it does many
nations and civilizations, resting as it does on East
and West ? How greatly the future course of history
depends on the spirit which moves it, and what
decisions may be taken within its frontiers. Let us
not for an instant suppose that the British Empire
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


to-day can stand simply on what it has done, on a
record which, however criticized, is indeed honourable
in its total result—in the progress made, the freedom
maintained, the nations formed and reconciled under
its flag. It must appeal to itself and to the world
also by what it can still do, by its unfinished work,
by the efficacy with which its principles can still be
extended, by the urgent needs of the present and the
menace of the future, by the infinite opportunities
which wait on far-reaching power. As regards the
Western nations within the Empire in a sense its
work is done —that is to say the fines on which their
relations will proceed have been laid down. Nation-
ality and empire, diversity of fife and unity of policy,
have been reconciled in the West. They may and
must improve their means of co-operation in the
general interest, and body forth in more reality and
power their sense of their joint being. But all the
future will proceed from that great fact, that result
of history, that they are a group of nations, bound by
“ ties, which, though fight as air, are as strong as finks
of iron.” But what of the remainder of the Empire,
the vast realms of Asia and Africa that we rule, the
peoples of Egypt and India ? What of to-morrow
here ? Is not the need of the future to be true to the
traditions of the past, to carry them now farther and
wider, to extend them East as well as West, to leave
to the Eastern nations the control of their own fives,
while helping them to rebuild their civilizations on
foundations that will stand the strain and stress of
modern conditions, to teach Asiatic and European
countries to five together, and so to maintain in the
world a State in which the diverse genius of many
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


nations is combined, and their jarring interests truly
reconciled, and by which peace is preserved over a
quarter of the globe ?
The connexion of East and West within our
Empire, beginning in trade, and passing on through
government to become more and more intimate and
binding, is a marvel of history, and to-day is full
of fate for the world. Should it end, whether by
violence or mutual consent, the separation would not
necessarily be for the British Empire a blow of great
magnitude, small perhaps beside the catastrophe of
1788. It would turn us indeed to a narrower idea
of empire, but it would give us in homogeneity and
unity, as a group of Western nations, what it took
from us, if it took from us very much, in wealth and
power. But for the future of the world it might be
full of tragedy, if it happened with ill-meaning for
the relations of East and West. On the other hand,
that connexion, maintained and matured in a volun-
tary and lasting union, contains the promise of the
solution of the most menacing of future questions,
in the example of an Empire wherein Eastern and
Western nations meet and co-operate on a footing
honourable to both. It may be that soon we shall
have to face in the East an issue for the Empire like
that which we faced in the eighteenth century in
regard to America, and that we shall be put to the test
as to whether we have the political imagination that
can bind Eastern and Western nations together in a
lasting union—an issue on which, as regards America,
we failed in the eighteenth, but, as regards Canada,
Australia and South Africa, we succeeded in the nine-
teenth century. If we are to succeed in the East, and
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


the events of the hour seem to show success as not
outside the bounds of hope, we must open our minds
to the opportunities that lie before us, and to the
changes that are coming over the world.
In the last half-century Asia has been powerless
before the energy of Western material progress.
Western influence, through trade, education, politics,
and finance, has penetrated every Asiatic State.
Japan has defended herself against the Western
invasion by the alertness with which she perceived
its inevitable character, acquired the Western
military arts and Western industrialism, and thus
gained control of the process of Western change
which is sweeping over her. Elsewhere in Asia that
process is guided by Western hands. The Eastern
nations recognize the superiority of the West in
material progress, but they are becoming uneasy
under its control. From end to end of the East
there is a stir of unrest. The attitude of patient and
deep disdain seems passing away. In its place is a
receptivity to Western ideas in most fields, and a
restlessness under Western leading, for the example
of Japan has raised hope in every Eastern people.
All now desire to control their own development,
while recognizing that the West has much to give.
They will receive, but they wish to receive freely,
and in their relations with Europe to recover their
self-respect. They look to a future in which they
stand upon their own feet with their own civilizations,
enriched and stimulated indeed by Western ideas,
but none the less organically developed. The infe-
riority and the sense of helplessness implied in the
free entry of the Westerner into the East, and the
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


restriction on the immigration of the Easterner into
Western countries, has in recent years quickened
these rising aspirations with a sense of wounded
honour. Whoever looks attentively at the signs of
the times can see coming on to the horizon of world
politics the lowering cloud of a far-reaching racial
issue, which, when the present struggle has died
down, may quickly assume menacing proportions.
It is the darkest cloud that overhangs the future of
the British Empire.
England more than any other Power, England,
and next to her America, has brought this issue into
world politics. Our policy in Asia has not only been
redressing in its favour the balance which turned
against it in the fifteenth century, but it has also
bound together East and West with the closest ties.
By the work of three centuries we have established
a mighty European Empire in Southern Asia. We
have taken under our care the interests of 250 million
Hindus, and have made ourselves the greatest of
Mohammedan Powers. We have brought the fairest
lands of Asia and the birthplace of its greatest civili-
zations within our borders. We found India a vast
Empire in decomposition, a confusion of warring races
and creeds. We have given it peace and political unity,
rebuilt the structure of its government, developed its
material resources, and so added to its life political
and economic elements in which our own civilization
is stronger. The greatness of the task, as it grew
under our hands with the expansion of our dominion,
the ever multiplying problems which economic and
educational changes have brought, as India turned
her face westwards, have indeed made us wonder to
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


what goal we march; and reflecting men will perhaps
look on this confluence of civilizations more in wonder
and silence than in pride, as some majestic work of
history larger than the policy of States conceives or
controls. Yet, be the outcome what it may, we can
fairly claim that we have not sought to assimilate, or
to destroy, but to preserve and rebuild. A handful
of people, gradually taking into our hands a directing
influence over these millions, our position has virtually
depended on our standing outside their real life. We
have always recognized that the deeper changes that
come in India must come by the will of its own
people, for India lives in its social and religious ideas
with which we have had little contact. Our work
has been to bring to its civilizations the stimulus of
Western thought, to raise up again to anew vigour
its nations, and to stir new ideals in their hearts.
The renaissance of these ancient peoples might have
come in any case, in historic fact it has been our work.
But it is not only in India that the policy, which
has guarded through the critical period ol the Western
influx the indigenous civilizations of Asia, has been
apparent. We recognized and befriended Japan in
her struggle to keep the control of her own destiny—
partly from interest, partly from the instinct that has
formed our policy. Whatever our part in the wrongs
which China has suffered, we have tried at least to
preserve her integrity. In Thibet and Afghanistan
our object has been to guard these countries fiom
intrusion. Our share in the misfortunes of Persia
has been an unwilling one. And when, if so it
happens, we take part in the destruction of the
Ottoman Empire, the act will be the reversal of our
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


historic policy, except in so far as it is directed to the
resurrection of the Western nations subjected to that
foreign rule.
All this is said not to praise British policy, but to
explain it, to lay bare what in its historical results—
not always indeed in its conscious aims, which have
fluctuated with times and persons—it has been, what,
when transient phases are ended, stands as the con-
sequences of our work. That policy, good or ill,
arises as much from our defects as our virtues, and
has been guided by our interests, and not by ideals,
but in it none the less is expressed the character of a
iace. Just because of what the English character is,
our policy in Asia, as elsewhere, has never tended to
the destruction of the civilizations with which we
have come in contact, either by intolerant inter-
ference or by friendly assimilation. The English-
man, wherever he goes, remains attached to his own
life, which he carries as far as possible with him,
intent on his own business, seldom understanding,
or interesting himself in, the life around him.
The closer indeed the contact, often the sharper
the antithesis, between him and his surroundings.
He neither assimilates, nor is he assimilated. He
preserves his own life, and is content that other
men should preserve theirs, giving to their faith and
customs the freedom and respect he asks for his own.
Thus there has been very little assimilation, and still
less deliberate assimilation, by Englishmen through-
out the British Empire. The French Canadians
were never Anglicised, though some British families
that settled on French farms have disappeared into
the b rench nation and show their origin only in their
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


names. There was no assimilation of the Boers, who
trekked away from the incoming English civilization;
and, though, in the course of time, the fusion of
Dutch and English is taking place in South Africa,
the result is anew, not an English, nation. In the
East the English have mixed with the inhabitants
much less than any other European people; and
their attitude to the Eurasian population has always
expressed the disapproval with which public opinion
marks the intermixture of races. Just as our un-
adaptable temper is an important factor in our coloni-
zation, because it intensifies that struggle with the
environment by which alone civilization is planted in
anew land, so also our racial aloofness, which is but
another aspect of this unadaptable temper, unfortunate
and wrong as many of its manifestations are, has this
prime result, that it creates a temper and a policy
favourable to the preservation of other civilizations,
and enforces our desire that all the peoples of the
Empire should enjoy the same security and freedom in
their own life as we enjoy in ours. Hence, though all
contact between peoples necessarily involves some
mutual influence, the prime fact remains that that
influence with us is not the influence of a missionary
and militant culture, but is a free give and take, and
that our Empire does not tend to the formation of
one culture, one race, one creed, one form of govern-
ment and administration, one law, but remains a
mighty congeries of races, religions and cultures with
the diversity of a world in itself. Good or ill, that in
its general aspect is the fact. Against the German
ideal of Empire —the march of Teutonic culture over
the earth —we raise the idea of the British Empire,
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


the preservation of many cultures, the free life of
many nations, mutually influencing one another,
living together, but living their own lives.
This, then, is the idea which our character and our
traditions show to be instinctive in our policy, and so
within our reach, and which the urgent needs of the
present and the great opportunities that may soon
be ours call on us torealize. In our policy in Asia
lies the same spirit as in our policy elsewhere, and
we are bound to be true to that and to go forward.
As the avalanche of W estern invasion descended on
Asia, the influence of English policy has been to help
the Eastern nations to preserve themselves, and she
must go further with that, strengthening and uniting
them, as she has done with Western, and binding
both together with the free and elastic ties of her
Empire. For her world-encircling power has laid
on her this historic task, to bind East and West
together, to find within her Empire the basis of their
co-operation, and thus to save the world from the
great inter-racial struggle which looms up before us
terrible in its intensity and its issues. Other nations
have indeed a share in this responsibility, but who
can doubt that the gravamen falls on us ? East and
West have been drawn very close together by the
course of progress. They must learn to live together
or they must part. The East will not bear indefi-
nitely a partnership whose ruling principle is Western
ascendency. The old partnership must be slowly
resolved into anew, in which Eastern and Western
nations, standing each on their own feet, side by side,
free to give or take, can bear themselves with equal
self-respect. It is towards this new partnership that
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


we must feel our way. Under the segis of the
British Empire, on the political tradition which we
have formed by a long experience, equal members of
a mighty State, nations of East and West must learn
co-operation and solve the problem of their relations
that must else divide the world. Along what lines
and with what institutions the States and peoples of
Egypt and India can best work out their own salva-
tion, in, as we believe is for the world’s advantage,
an enduring union with us, and with the other
Western nations of our Empire, is not the concern
of the moment, and may best be left to those
whose business it is to know and mark the
facts. But the spirit and goal of our policy—to
preserve to every people within the Empire the
self-respect which comes from the control of their
own life and development, the meaning and hope of
our Empire —the equal and peaceful partnership of
nations, must be before us now when we have staked
them in the greatest conflict that has ever divided
the world. For this purpose we must show some
elasticity of mind. We must do more than think
imperially. We must think beyond the bounds of
the Empire..—of those great problems of international
relations which are taking critical forms within our
own borders and before our eyes. At a time so full
of fate, whose gravity loosens the mind, we must
expand our ideas to meet the needs of the age and
the progress of the world. Standing, as we have
always done, on the plain facts of life and history,
recognizing at once our own powers and our limita-
tions, we must open our eyes to the new spirit that
is rising over the East, and seek for its reconciliation
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


with the continuous tradition of our policy in an
ever widening conception of our Empire. For in
the shifting politics of the world no State rests on
what it has been. It must have a progressive justi-
fication. In the eighteenth century the unsolved
problem of political development was whether new
communities in distant lands could be bound in one
State with their mother countries, or must fall away
as ripe fruit from the tree. All the great colonial
empires of the eighteenth century, Portuguese,
Spanish, Dutch, French, and English failed before
that problem. The imagination of the eighteenth
century was too jaded to respond to that great call.
In the nineteenth century, England, learning from
experience, in happier circumstances, found a solu-
tion and rebuilt her Empire. Now, to-day the
problem is whether Eastern and Western nations can
be kept together in a single State. It is a part of the
general question of the relations of East and West,
which will soon press on us with anew urgency. As
England, in an earlier age of colonization, united
mother country and colony with enduring bonds, by
transforming the leading strings that bound the
younger and older States into the lighter ties that unite
free and equal nations, so in the days of world-wide
empire, she has to reconcile East and West, resolving
the tie of conquest into the bonds of a voluntary and
honourable union, by extending her conception of
the family of nations, to embrace Eastern as well as
Western. We cannot justify the inclusion of a quarter
of the globe under our flag if we are not solving its
problems and satisfying its needs. We are better
without dominion in the East, better as a purely
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


Western Empire, if no sense of right lies behind our
power. Without it, in the days that are coming, our
hearts will fail and our hands prove too weak for
empire. If not to-day, yet to-morrow, we have got
to bring the democracy to understand and support
the Empire, to realize the responsibilities of world-
power, and the possibilities that it opens out to them.
We cannot rely simply on the governing talent of
one class of the population. However good their
work in the past, the course of our development, the
force of facts, the opportunities of the future are
carrying us to a larger idea of Empire which needs
our united strength to realize. And our people
will not rally to an idea of empire which does not
realize the justice and liberty innate in the national
traditions.
The purpose of our Empire, then, is not the pro-
pagation of a culture, but the peaceful union of
States. Much as we have to do in the East as a
channel for the knowledge that can fight its ignor-
ance, poverty and disease, and that can give anew
stability to civilizations shaken by the inrush of
Western ideas, our business is not to shape the
future of these ancient nations, but to find the means
whereby they may do this for themselves, while
bridging for our time the gulf that divides them
from us. If within our own borders we can solve
the vexed problems that rise between East and West,
and create anew relationship honourable to both, the
influence of such a work will extend far beyond.
“The hearts and good affections of Bengal are of
more worth than all the profits of ruinous and odious
monopolies,” said Chatham, when we first essayed
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


this tremendous task. If we have not been always
true to that idea, yet, to-day, when we stand
astonished at the generous affection with which the
heart of India speaks for the Empire, we may feel
that we cannot have altogether departed from it.
Chatham spoke of moral ties as the bonds that must
be created between us, and we cannot take to heart
too closely the words of our greatest empire-builder
at a moment when we stand perhaps at anew parting
of the ways. If the labours of our forefathers have
formed these ties there remains much work for us
to strengthen them. A vast problem, indeed, lies
before us. But great States come into being only
because they are the solution of vast problems, the
expression of great ideas. In the transformations of
politics new issues rise to the front, old ideas are
exhausted, and those States perish that cannot expand
their conceptions to satisfy the demands of their age.
The British Empire may soon be the greatest State
of history. A parochial spirit, a material outlook,
the vanity of imperial prestige, the narrowness of
racial ascendency cannot support the burden of its
great destiny. Some common ideal must fuse into a
whole the nations that rally round its flag, and some
ideal to which the East will look as gladly as the
West.
We have experience, but we need also imagination.
Our disasters in the past have come from the want of
an imaginative use of our experience. Experience
has given us a policy which has been formed by the
play of our national character in many lands and
many circumstances, which has been tried and not
found wanting, which is within our powers and is
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


capable of large expansion. Let imagination bring
before us the vast concourse of nations to whom this
empire belongs, and whose longings must be satisfied
if our unity is to be preserved. The young Western
nations, hurrying to our side, bring with them not their
arms only, but their incalculable futures, and India all
that the sublime achievement of her past promises she
may be again. If we hold up a large idea they will
rally to it. From every part of the Empire men will
rally to some ideal that shows faith in the purposes
for which it exists, that lifts their minds to the larger
ends that it can serve. Dim and unconscious perhaps,
yet living and powerful, is the thought of this great
State. It is not a spirit of adventure or of private
gain that has moved the young nations of three con-
tinents and the ancient peoples of India and Africa
to rally together in this great struggle. It is because
they see, faintly or clearly, in this great Empire the
guarantee of their national existences, the hope of
their free development. It is for us to translate into
reality the faith for which men from all parts of the
world die side by side in Flanders. It is not to free
Belgium and liberate Europe only that all this blood
is shed ; it is to create and consecrate anew idea of
Empire, and that may be worth the bloodiest battles
of history.
So when this war is over, we, if we are victorious,
shall realize from our world point of view that this
was not simply England’s war, but Canada’s, Aus-
tralia’s and India’s, and that their peoples fought not
to save us or Europe, but battles that in their minds
belonged to the history of the world, and wherein
their own futures were the stake. And we shall have
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


then a solemn obligation to ask them for what they
fought, and to go forward to turn to deeds the faith
that has saved us by realizing in peace the voluntary
co-operation achieved in war. If we have listened to
the voice of India and accepted her decision to stand
with us in this world crisis, we cannot disregard her
judgment when afterwards she speaks for her own
affairs. We are bound by the acts of these momen-
tous hours. The Indians, having fought for the
Empire with whole-souled loyalty, must in the future
say what the Empire means to them which they have
helped to preserve, what ideal for the future lay
behind their devotion. Some profound respect for
England’s work in India and for the ideas she repre-
sents in the world, some faith in the possibilities that
may spring from a more generous union between the
great Aryan race of Asia and a kindred stock in
Europe, raised them above the resentment of many
grievances and moved them to this sublime loyalty.
There is, then, in the spirit and policy on which
half-unconsciously our Empire has been formed, an
idea of a league of free nations, towards which we
must now boldly look as the goal alone worthy of so
great a State. England has done what no other
modern State has done. She has leagued nations
together, and she has united East and West. Such
work, imperfect though it is to-day, is full of promise
for the future. In the great conflict that rages
before us small nations are fighting for freedom, the
word of freedom is indeed on every people’s lip, and
in the great readjustments that must follow men
will cry out for some better guarantees of peace. It
is our obligation to realize these ideals of national
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR


freedom and peace between nations within our own
borders, and thus perhaps our destiny to point to a
future when those undying ideals of mankind may
rest upon some surer basis. If to-day we can save
ourselves by our exertions, to-morrow we can serve
the world by our example.
[?]
BRADBURY, AGNIW, & CO. LD., PRINTERS, LONDON AND TONBRIDGE.
THE BRITISH EMPIRE AND THE WAR
