





yM 335*5 FI
2.0-^
THE PROGRESS OE VICTORIA.
A REPLY.
THE people of the British colonies on this side of
the world are proud of the ties that bind them
to the great Mother country; and in all discussions
that are raised on the subject of her colonies, and her
relations thereto, peculiar interest is felt. The re-
markable growth and progress of Victoria —one of
the youngest and wealthiest of them all—affords a
gratifying proof of the superior colonising powers of
the race from which her people are descended.
This being the case, it is somewhat painful to find
that not only the people, but the material resources
of the colonies, are sometimes strangely misunder-
stood and widely misrepresented. Writers, who pay
transient visits to our shores, satisfy themselves with
making observations and forming opinions upon the
most superficial data, return home, and write lengthy
articles to newspapers and journals, to give publicity
to the fact of their travels and the information which
they think they have gained. These articles are
generally written in support of the individual views
of the author, and ignore altogether the colonial
aspects of the case and the altered circumstances
and conditions under which old theories have to be
applied, and old axioms reduced to practice.


The misrepresentations which form the subject of
complaint on the present occasion are not, let us
hope, wilful; and, if the writer of the article in the
Fortnightly Review will study the facts and figures
which we shall have occasion to produce, he must
admit that his deductions have been drawn from
erroneous information.
Mr. Baden Powell, the winter of the article in
question, has paid two visits to Victoria, and on the
strength of these visits, and the observations which
they may have afforded him the opportunity of
making, but which could only have extended over a
limited period, he has given to the world this article,
the avowed object of which is to prove that New
South Wales has made more progress under, and in
consequence of, its Pree Trade policy, than Victoria
has under a policy of Protection. The secondary aim
of the writer is to prove that, taking these colonies
as illustrations, John Stuart Mill’s admission, that
“ Protection might be found under certain conditions
economically defensible in a young community,” is
wrong in theory, and unwarranted by experience.
In order to accomplish this task successfully, the
first thing he should have done was to make it per-
fectly clear that New South Wales is a Pree Trade
colony as unmistakably as Victoria is Protectionist.
If he cannot do this, his premises are incomplete,
and his conclusion utterly breaks down. lie appears
to have had a notion that his position was open to
attack from this quarter, and he appears also to have
been equally alive to the fact that he could not
make it impregnable; for he does the best he can
under the circumstances, and intrenches himself as
completely as possible by saying that New South


Wales “has followed an essentially Free Trade course.”
What a convenience, what a very Godsend, are these
adverbs and adjectives—which seem to mean so
much, but which in reality commit their employers
to so little—to partisan writers, who, starting with a
purpose, are compelled to make the facts square with
that purpose; and which, if they will not, then so
much the worse for the facts ! In this case the very
use of this qualifying word proves that Mr. Powell
knows that the policy of New South Wales is not a
Free Trade policy; for it is unreasonable to suppose
that if he could have left it out, and thereby have
made his case so much the stronger, he would not
have taken that advantage.
We need not rest this issue upon the negative
proof which Mr. Powell himself gives us. We can
supply the same positive evidence as was doubtless
within his knowledge, when he judiciously guarded
himself by the use of the word “ essentially.”
The next point which, it appears to us, should
have been placed beyond a doubt, was the relative
advance of the two colonies in Manufactures, that
being the only real test of the superiority of either
policy, and to secure which advance was the sole
object of Victoria in adopting her present course.
Instead of this, our critic passes very cursorily over
this, the only really important fact to determine,
and devotes himself principally to a comparison of
our condition in relation to matters which have very
little, if anything, to do with the question in dispute.
We are not surprised at this, because if he had rested
his case upon a careful and impartial analysis of the
Manufactures of the two colonies, even with the
scanty information which New South Wales supplies


as to hers, he would have found it impossible to make
the facts—colour and twist them as he might—
square with the foregone conclusion with which he
set out, and upon his being able to do which his
argument and his article depend.
We propose to deal with these two points in the order
in which we have stated, and to show that Mr. Powell
either knows so little of the question upon which he
presumes to instruct others, as to render his utter-
ances absolutely valueless; or that he has suppressed
the truth, and distorted the facts to suit his Pree
Trade views.
New South Wales has a climate and soil suitable
for the growth and manufacture of sugar, and there-
fore very properly assists those industries by imposing
a duty of ss. per cwt. upon raw sugar, and 6s. Bd.
per cwt. upon the refined. In this way the grower
is amply protected, and the refiner gets an additional
protection of Is. Bd. per cwt. If this were done in
Victoria, it would be stigmatised as a shameful
departure from the true theory of political economy ;
but, because it is done by our neighbours, it stamps
them as “ essentially ” Pree Traders. In Victoria we
have but one duty upon sugar, and that is 3s. per
cwt.; and the assistance our refiners get is the
permission to refine in bond, and so to pay the
duty merely upon the manufactured article. On
tobacco, the protection to the grower and manufac-
turer is, in both colonies, exactly equal. The
Victorian duty is Is. per lb. higher than the New
South Wales; but Victoria imposes an excise duty of
Is. per lb, upon the home manufactured article,
while New South Wales does not, which equalises
the conditions.


New South Wales protects her carpenters and
workers in timber in the same way as Victoria does,
by imposing a duty upon doors, sashes, shutters, and
dressed timber. She protects her agriculturists, as
we do, by imposing a duty upon bacon, hams, cheese,
corn-flour, dried fruits, malt, maizena, raw sugar,
chicory, hops, tobacco leaf, preserved and bottled
fruit, jam, and wine. She protects her biscuit manu-
facturers, her manufacturers of chemicals, spirits,
wine, beer, sugar, molasses, cordage and rope, jams
and jellies, confectionery, cigars and tobacco, bags
and sacks, varnish, oils, starch and blue, candles,
paper, powder and shot, pickles and sauces, and
many other industries which might be enumerated
did time and space permit. This list is enough, at
any rate, to show that New South Wales has no more
claim to be called Free Trade than we have, and that
those of her public men who, on the strength of such
claim, bask in the beams of the Cobden Club, do so
under false pretences, depending upon the ignorance
of their entertainers and their own good fortune to
carry them through.
We have now to show that the Victorian policy of
Protection has accomplished the object for which it
was adopted; and there can be no better method of
doing this than by comparing our progress in this
direction with that of our neighbours. In making
this comparison, it must be distinctly borne in mind
that every advantage, except skill and energy, was on
the side of New South Wales. She had a settled
population, a long - established self-[government,
abundance of raw materials for many industries, the
start of us by the existence of many manufactories—
boots and shoes, machinery, ship-building, to wit —


and, above all, coal in abundance, which we have had
to purchase from her. We were a young community
with a roving population, the result of the decline of
the gold yield, without any of the surroundings
which New South Wales enjoyed; and if, therefore,
our policy had succeeded only to the extent of
enabling us to hold our own, John Stuart Mill’s opinion
would have been fully borne out. We shall be able
to show that in every branch of manufacturing
industry we have left our competitor hopelessly
behind. The difficulty of showing this simply and
clearly at once is very great, because New South
Wales carefully abstains from publishing any
set of statistics in relation to its manufactures
similar to those which we publish in Victoria. For
instance, we can, from our annual returns, show
that the amount of fixed capital invested in plant,
machinery, land, and buildings by our manufacturers
has increased by nearly four millions sterling during
the last ten years, the exact figures being as
follow :
Value of Land, Buildings,
Machinery, and Plant... 1870... £3,543,431
Ditto ditto ...1880... 7,465,328
Increase ... £3,921,897
Then, again, we can tell what is the result of a
year’s work of our manufacturers by deducting the
value of the raw materials operated upon from the
value of the articles produced, thus :
Value of articles produced in 1880 £13,384,836
Value of raw materials used ... 8,012,745
Value of the year’s work
£5,372,091


New South Wales furnishes no such information,
and such as it does afford is all but valueless for the
purposes of comparison, because of its meagreness
and the difference of method upon which it is collected.
As an illustration of this difference, let us take the
statistics relating to agricultural implement manu-
factories. New South Wales tells us that in 1880
she had 50 factories employing. 231 hands, and that
she exported implements of her own manufacture to
the value of £7B. This is the sum total of the
information that is available. Such as it is, what
does it prove but that the 50 so-called factories may
be nothing more nor less than country blacksmiths’
shops, employing from four to five hands each, whose
chief, if not only, work is to repair the implements of
the neighbourhood ?
Victoria, on the other hand, tells us that in the
same year she had 54 factories, 28 of which were
worked by steam power, employing 975 hands, using
materials to the value of £91,659, and turning out
goods to the value of £202,535, carrying on opera-
tions with a fixed capital in land, buildings, plant,
&c., of £127,380; and that she exported imple-
ments of her own manufacture to the value of
£8,476, after supplying her own farmers.
If any further proof be needed of the folly of
comparing or judging of the relative position of the
two colonies by comparing the number of the so-
called factories of the one with the number of the
real factories of the other, we have it in the fact that
while New South Wales, with very little more than
one-third the land under cultivation that Victoria has,
had to depend almost entirely upon her imports of
implements to supply her farmers, notwithstanding
her 50 factories , Victoria supplied her farmers entirely


from her 54 factories, and had a few hundred pounds’
worth to spare. The following statement will make
this important point perfectly plain ;
New South Wales.
Imported Agricultural Implements in
1880 to the value of
... £32,061
Exported ditto ditto ... 4,331
Required to import to supply her
own farmers ... ... ... £27,730
Victoria.
Imported Agricultural Implements in
1880 to the value of
... £ 9,288
Exported ditto ditto ... 10,483
Balance exported from her own
factories, after supplying her own
farmers
£1,195
We have gone thus minutely into this case not so
much because of its own importance, as that it serves
as an illustration for all; and it supplies a direct and
conclusive denial of Mr. Powell’s assertion that, not-
withstanding the protection we give to our own
manufacturers, we are “still forced to supply ourselves
with these ‘prohibited’ or ‘weighted’ foreign articles;
and import on an annual average about as much as
unprotected New South Wales.” We have selected
it also because he has himself chosen it as one of
three industries, the number of which, he says, “ has
largely increased in both colonies.”
It would be trespassing too far upon the space at


Exported in 1880.
New South
Wales.
Victoria.
Difference.
Produce of Clothing Factories...
Produce of Foundries
£
117
5,190
£
180,268
95,320
£
180,151
90,130
Totals
£5,307
£275,588
£270,281
These are the figures for 1880; and what progress,
if anv. New South Wales has made during: 1881, we
my command to follow the other two —foundries and
clothing factories —as we have this one; or we could
show exactly similar and even more startling results.
Taking for the nonce, however, the value of the
exports of their own productions in these two lines
for the two colonies during 1880, we shall he able to
form a very fair estimate of their relative position
and importance.
These are the figures for 1880; and what progress,
if any, New South Wales has made during 1881, we
have no means as yet of knowing. Victoria, how-
ever, increased her exports upon these two lines in
the twelve months nearly one hundred thousand
pounds, the exact figures being for last year
£361,359. Would any sane man, with these facts
before him, or available for his use if he required
them, attempt to make it appear that there is any
comparison between the two colonies in the matter
of manufactures ?
Mr. Powell admits that we have far outstripped
our neighbours in the manufacture of cloth and
woollen goods, notwithstanding that they had the
start of us for years. Sydney tweeds were selling in
Victoria long before we had a woollen mill in exist-
ence ; now, we are driving them out of their own
markets even. If this is not a proof of the wisdom


of our policy, it is hard to say what it is. He attempts
to detract from the evidence in our favour, which he
clearly sees this fact to be, by coupling with it the
statement that in the matter of ship-building New
South Wales is leaving us far behind. Now, without
entering into a minute statement of the conditions
and circumstances which operate to this result, as, for
example, the monopoly which she has of the trade in
coal, it is hardly necessary to point out that, so far
from this fact assisting Mr. Powell in his argument,
it has the directly contrary effect. We protect our
cloth manufacturers by putting a duty of 15°/ Q upon
imported cloth, and they succeed. We do not protect
our ship-builders by putting a duty on ships, therefore
the building of ships does not increase with us. That
is the fair and legitimate conclusion derivable from
his own premises.
Mr. Baden Powell, as we have already noted, is very
guarded and cautious in his statements, taking care
to qualify them in such a way, as to make it some-
what difficult to join issue with him; and, even in
those assertions which are most definite, he takes care
to introduce a qualification behind which to shelter
himself in the event of an attack.
Thus, when he speaks of New South Wales as being
a Pree Trade colony, he introduces the adverb
“ essentially,” by which he hopes to escape the charge
of misrepresentation. Then, in the two following
assertions, which we are about to disprove, he intro-
duces qualifying words which he hopes will serve him
the same good purpose. He says, when speaking of
our manufactures, that their “ development as com-
pared with the great natural industries of the country
is insignificant and further he says, ‘‘in neither


colony is there any appreciable export of commodities
manufactured in the colonies.” The italics mark the
words upon which he depends for shelter, hut they
will not save him. So far as New South Wales is
concerned, his statement is, we believe, perfectly cor-
rect, as the examples already given amply bear wit-
ness. In the case of Victoria, on the contrary, it is
utterly wrong, as we will presently show. We will
prove that we have an “ appreciable ” export of our
own manufactures, and will show what proportion it
bears to the exports of the produce of what he is
pleased To call our “ great natural industries.” The
following tabulated statement of the exports of
Victoria, for the years 1872 and 1881 respectively,
will show at a glance in which direction most progress
has been made, so far as the exports can afford any
criterion. It must be borne in mind, however, that,
great as the increase of our manufactured exports
has been, it is nothing as compared to the increase in
the local consumption, which can be estimated by
noting the falling-off of our imports of those articles
which we are now making for ourselves, and by a
reference to the value, before stated, of one year’s
produce of our factories.
The facts brought out by this table, compiled from
the Government Statist’s returns, are:—
Ist. That the principal “ great natural industry ”
has declined very considerably in the decade.
2nd. That the industry for a long time next in
importance has not increased during the decade
sufficiently to make up for the declension of the
other.
3rd. That the third industry, that of Agriculture,
has made an immense stride during the same period.


Table showing the value of the exports of Victorian products for the
years 1872 and 1881, under the heads of Mineral, Pastoral,
Agricultural, Manufactured, and Miscellaneous.
Increase,
Articles.
1872.
1881.
or Decrease
thus —
Mineral :
£
£
£
Gold and Specie ...
5,056,201
4,679,737
All other Minerals..
40,415
69,752
Totals
5,096,616
4,749,489
— 347,127
Pastoral :
Wool
4,260,801
4,070,626
All other Articles...
146,789
593,749
Totals
4,407,590
4,664,375
256,785
Agricultural :
Grain
23,685
687,213
All other Articles...
56,215
191,214
Totals
79,900
878,427
798,527
Manufactured :
Tallow
353,358
247,372
Leather
215,143
297,327
Preserved Meats ...
257,448
102,306
Butter and Cheese...
9,494
100,987
Sugar and Molasses
100,121
208,782
Apparel and Slops...
62,586
227,098
Boots and Shoes ...
4,494
45,856
Metal Manufactures
20,423
134,261
All other Articles...
100,802
697,159
Totals
1,123,869
2,061,148
937,279
Miscellaneous (unclas-
sified)
42,341
127,128
84,787
Grand Totals
£10,750,316
£12,480,567
r
£1,730,251


4th. That manufactures, the development of which
Mr. Powell ventures to tell his readers has been
“ insignificant,” have far surpassed either of the
others in their progress.
sth. That the protected industries are those which
are most prosperous and have made most progress.
In the list of manufactures given, there are two only
which are absolutely unprotected (unless there be a few
included in the line “ All other Articles”), and these
are the two which show a falling-off in their exports.
The decline upon these two articles—tallow and
preserved meats —has been £261,128. The protected
industries have supplied this gap in our exports of
manufactures, in addition to supplying the whole of
the £937,279 increase. The actual state of the case
is, that protected industries have increased their ex-
ports by £1,198,407, while those of the unprotected
have declined £261,128, leaving a net increase of
£937,279.
6th. That, seeing our manufactures have surpassed
our agriculture, the question of the condition of the
manufactures in New South Wales, as compared with
ours, is seen at once. Agriculture is one of the
“great natural industries,” compared with which
manufacturing development has been “ insignificant ”
in New South Wales. In that colony their agricul-
ture is one-third of ours. Their manufactures are
far behind that small amount of agriculture. Our
agriculture is three times as great as theirs, and our
manufactures are before our agriculture in their pro-
gress and position.
We are aware that exception may he taken to the
inclusion of tallow in the list of manufactures, hut
we purposely placed it there, lest we should appear to


strain after effect. It is a pastoral product, and is
usually considered a raw material. With us, how-
ever, it is a manufactured article, the “ boiling-down”
establishments being erected for that purpose alone.
If we had placed it in the pastoral list, it would have
reduced the increase shown on that line ; while its
removal from the list of manufactures would have
considerably augmented the increase shown there.
Por the rest, this statement speaks for itself; and
the facts which it sets forth have only to be compared
impartially with the position of New South Wales,
to convince any one of the thorough ignorance of
our critic of the entire circumstances upon which he
delivers his judgment, and about which he assumes
to instruct the British public. Prom the latest pub-
lished statistics of New South Wales, he will find
that the exports of their own products increased from
£9,206,101, in 1871, to £12,679,782 in 1880—an
increase of £3,473,681. He will further find that
the increase upon wool alone was £5,743,373, thus
clearly demonstrating from her own documents that
her other products, manufactures included, had fallen
off to the extent of the difference between the net
increase and the increase upon wool alone—namely,
£2,269,692.
If any additional proof of the great and increasing
development of our manufacturing industries be
required, we have it in the following extract from
the address of the retiring chairman of the “ Manu-
facturers’Association,” delivered at its annual meeting
a few days since. Speaking on this very subject, he
said:—“Manufactures especially had made wonderful
strides during the last few years, but the advance
made during the last year was greater than any. He


would venture to say that every manufacturer present
could employ many more workmen than he was
doing Foundries and workshops had now
more work than they could do, and their work was
in every way of a greatly superior description than
used to be turned out in former years.”
Thus we have practically proved to ourselves as a
community that protection is the “ method that
answers.” Let us hope that, in Mr. Powell’s case,
it may be followed, not only by “ thoughts that are
true,” but by words that are true also.
Will this gentleman, in the face of these facts and
figures, maintain the assertions to which they supply
a full, fair, and unanswerable denial ? They show
that, so far from the development of our manufactures
being “insignificant ” as compared with our “ great
natural industries,” it has been greater than either
of the others; and that the total exports of our
manufactured goods have, reached the very “ appre-
ciable ” sum of over two millions sterling, which is
constantly and rapidly increasing; and that the whole
advance of New South Wales is due to its pastoral
industry alone. Another fact which this statement
brings out is this, that, of the £13,384,836, the value
of the goods manufactured by us last year, we ex-
ported a little over two millions’ worth, and our-
selves consumed eleven and a quarter millions’ worth.
Is it any wonder, we would ask Mr. Powell, that our
imports have not kept pace with those of New South
Wales, seeing that we have been supplying ourselves
to this enormous extent ? The fact that our imports
have not so increased is the very best evidence of the
success of the policy which he is attempting to prove
a failure.


Will he still assert that there is not much difference
in the output of the factories of the two colonies? We
venture to think not. Will he still assume that the
number of factories so called, or the number of hands
employed in them, in New South Wales has any real
bearing upon the question? We hardly think he will,
in the light of this fuller information. What has the
number of hands to do with the question, unless we
also know what is the extent of the power by which
the machinery is worked ? The work of our 32,000
employes is supplemented by machinery driven by
engines of 14,502 horse-power; and unless Mr. Powell
can show that New South Wales surpasses us in this
respect, what purpose, but to mislead, can he serve
by comparing the hands employed and the number
of the works ?
Having thus shown, fully and distinctly, the un-
founded and erroneous nature of the assumed facts
upon which the whole argument and theory of this
writer rests, we might fairly leave all else that he
has said to the discernment of his readers. If we
adopted that course, we might be supposed to have
chosen it because we were unable to reply to the
other points raised by him against this colony. There
are several statements, therefore, which we will pro-
ceed to answer. They are in reference to the questions
of external trade, population, accumulations, and
revenue.
Taking these subjects in their order, we have first
to deal with the question of external trade—the im-
ports and exports. We have already shown that
the increase of exports from New South Wales, so
far as that depends upon her own productions and
is not simply an increase of carrying business, is


entirely due to the enormous increase of her wool
yield. This increase of wool is due to the immense
area, nearly four times that of Victoria, which she
has to devote to pastoral pursuits, and to the great
impetus which has been recently given to that in-
dustry, largely by Victorian capital and energy.
The imports have increased principally upon those
items which Victoria is now making for herself, and
has, therefore, no necessity to import. The figures
in relation to this matter are not correctly given by
Mr. Powell. He says that the external trade of New
South Wales has increased £10,000,000 from 1871 to
1880, whereas the increase has been only £8,620,673.
He has also very materially mis-stated the trade
of Victoria, by leaving out of his calculation all the
goods transhipped in the bay, which are not included
in the tables of imports and exports, but which form
part of the trade of the colony. The real position is
as follows:
Total external trade in 1871
£29,282,153
33,376,107
„ „ „ 1880
Increase
£4,093,951
The relative increase of the two colonies, therefore,
has not been as 10 to 3, as Mr. Powell states, but
as to 4. Take away the increase of New South
Wales’ export of wool, £5,743,373, and the total
external trade of that colony would not have kept pace
with that of Victoria. The surprising thing is, that
with such an enormous increase in that commodity
across the border, while the yield in Victoria has
declined consequent upon so much land having been
selected for agricultural purposes, Victoria has been


able still to keep so far ahead of her rival in the
matter of commerce, the difference between them
still being £4,000,000, not £1,000,000 as given by
Mr. Powell. In addition to the fact that our factories
turned out goods to the value of 13J millions last
year, and so have rendered imports of very many
articles all but unnecessary, we have no longer to
import our food supplies. Ten years ago we had to
depend very largely for wheat and flour upon foreign
countries; now we supply ourselves, and have a large
surplus to export. According to Mr. Powell’s idea,
this is an evidence of our failing prosperity; but we
in Victoria hold a very different opinion. He is wel-
come to his theory, so long as we continue to reap
the practical benefits of disregarding both it and him,
and all who are of his way of thinking.
There is another aspect of this case, which Mr.
Powell in all fairness should have presented to his
readers. When he was here in 1878, we were in the
midst of the political turmoil of the Reform struggle,
and he must know that the depression in trade which
we were then suffering, and from which we are now
recovering, was ascribed by all with whom he asso-
ciated to political causes. If this was a correct opinion,
it is surely absurd to ascribe it now to our fiscal policy.
At any rate, to whatever cause it was due, it could
not have been to our tariff; for, with the very
same tariff, slightly altered in 1879 in a still more
protective direction, we are now greatly increasing
our trade. The Premier, Sir B. O’Loghlen, in a re-
cent debate, stated that during the last year the
increase of external trade had been millions.
Until we have the figures from New South Wales
to hand, it is impossible to say whether she has


made a corresponding advance. We are assured,
however, that our policy is not ruining our trade.
The next question is that of population ; and there
are several very patent explanations of the quicker
growth of population in New South Wales than in
Victoria. The first is, that our neighbour spends
large sums in importing population, while we do
not ; the second is in the condition and circumstances
of the people themselves. New South Wales is an
old-established colony, and had families of all ages
gradually growing up to become parents in their
turn, long before the rush of a male adult population
to Victoria consequent upon the discovery of gold
took place. This condition of things continued in
New South Wales without material disturbance, and,
as a result, its population has gone on increasing in
the usual geometrical ratio which prevails under
such favourable circumstances. In Victoria the case
has been exactly the reverse. Our population was
composed at first chiefly of adult males, who came to
find gold and go away again. It maintained its no-
madic character for fully ten years, say from 1851 to
1861. Then, when gold-digging ceased to afford such
constant and remunerative employment, we adopted
our Protective policy for the purpose of providing
work for as many hands as possible at the various
trades to which they had been brought up, but which
they had temporarily abandoned when they came to
Victoria gold-seeking. The result was, that many of
them were thus retained who would otherwise have
left for want of employment. These settled down,
married, and are now the fathers of families, the
eldest children of which families are only now reach-
ing a marriageable age. During all these twenty


years our population has been increasing truly, but
it lias been an increase only from the first stock, and,
as a result, our adult population to-day is small com-
pared with our total population, and not much larger
than it was twenty years since. The next twenty
years will tell a different tale, as year after year
brings these Victorian-born children to manhood and
womanhood, and the geometrical ratio of increase
begins. Directly the first children of these settlers
begin themselves to become parents, every succeeding
year will add a fresh batch to the number; and so it
will go on until it will not be lack of population we
shall have to complain of, but rather lack of room
and comfortable provision. The third explanation is
found in the fact, that we have had in operation
amongst us for the last twelve years a very vicious
land law, which, while it has helped some bond fide
selectors to settle as permanent farmers, has afforded
a great many more adventurers and unscrupulous
persons the opportunity, by taking advantage of its
conditions, to take up 320 acres of land upon an
annual payment of 2s. per acre for three years; at
the end of that time to sell the land to the nearest
squatter or large estate-holder for some £2 to £4 per
acre; to pay the Government the balance of 14s. per
acre out of the money they thus received; and to
pocket the difference, varying from, say, £l. 6s, to
£3. 6s. per acre. By this process the object for
which the State parted with the land upon such
terms, namely, the settlement of farmers, has been
defeated; and that which it desired to prevent,
namely, the growth of large estates, has been accom-
plished. In addition to which, our population has
left us and gone over the border into New South


Wales, Queensland, or one of the other colonies.
This has been brought about by means of our Land
Act, in the following way :—lt is one of the condi-
tions of the Act that no man shall select more than
320 acres. Accordingly any man who has gone
through the above process has no further opportunity
for selecting in Victoria. He consequently goes,
with the money he has made by evading our land
law, into New South Wales or Queensland, where,
with that sum, he can establish himself in a much
larger way, as the terms upon which he can get land
there are more liberal as regards quantity than they
are in Victoria, our neighbours having fully twenty
times as large an area to deal with. The fourth
explanation of this population question is the matter
of area itself. New South Wales is bound to have a
larger population than Victoria, if for no other reason
than its larger area. This is so self-evident that one
need not waste words in comment. On this point we
have only further to add, that with such evident
reasons for a disparity in the rate of growth of popu-
lation in the two colonies, a writer must be sadly in
want of an argument to bolster up a weak and halt-
ing theory who would look for an explanation for
this disparity to the operation of their various fiscal
policies.
We now come to deal with the question of accumu-
lations —the savings of the people as represented by
the increase of capital. Our censor rests his assertion,
that New South Wales is accumulating wealth faster
than Victoria, upon two illustrations only, out of the
many which are available, and which any unpreju-
diced and fair-minded writer, without a preconceived
and preannounced theory to support, would not


Value of Rateable Property in New South Wales and Victoria respect-
ively, in the years 1870 and 1880, and the increase in the same.
1870.
1880.
Increase.
Percent-
age of
Increase.
New South
Wales
£
20,056,530
£
38,147,083
£
18,090,553
90-19
Victoria ...
47,929,684
83,847,418
35,917,734
74-93
These flj
mres, which are taken from the re
‘port of
Lave failed to bring forward. Unfortunately for his
character for correctness, both his illustrations are
exaggerated, the first one grossly exaggerated, to suit
his argument. “ Rateable property,” he says, “ has
doubled in New South Wales in the decade, and only
increased by one-half in Victoria.” This is absolutely
contrary to the facts, as his readers would have seen
for themselves if he had published the figures which he
has readily done when they apparently told in favour
of the position he desires to establish. The exact
state of the case is as follows :
These figures, which are taken from the report of
the Government Statist of each colony, show beyond
dispute that instead of the difference in the rate of
progress in this particular being 50 per cent., as
stated by Mr. Powell, it has been barely over 15 per
cent. They also show, what it was convenient for
our critic to hide, that the smaller, and younger, but
Protectionist colony, has accumulated wealth in the
shape of rateable property to more than double the
amount of its larger, older, but Free Trade neighbour.
The other illustration is also perverted and mis-
leading, through the absolute ignorance of the writer


of the question with which he ventures to deal. He
says that the number of the depositors in Savings
Banks has increased in New South Wales during the
decade from 21,000 to 32,000, and in Victoria from
38,000 to 76,000; and from these premises arrives at
the conclusion that “ wealth in democratic Victoria
is accumulating in the hands of a few.” It would
be interesting to know the exact process of reasoning
by which this public instructor arrives at the fact, —
that an enormous increase in the number of persons
who are in a position to open and keep accounts at
Savings Banks is a proof that “ wealth is accumu-
lating in the hands of a few.” We can assure him,
at any rate, that the 76,000 persons in Victoria who
have made these deposits recognise and appreciate
the fact that wealth is accumulating in their hands';
and while we can show 76,000 such, to the 32,000
of New South Wales, we are not likely to alter the
policy by which that result has been attained. He
also, by this same inverted process of reasoning, assures
his readers that the increase in the average amount
to each depositor’s credit in New South Wales, and its
decrease in Victoria, is another proof of the concen-
tration of wealtli in the hands of a few T in the
Protected colony; and further, that “it is a result
generally associated with a high tariff by all writers
on political economy.” If these writers, whoever
they may be, have no better foundation for their
theories than Mr. Powell himself adduces in this
instance, neither they nor their theories are worth
consideration. To any ordinary person, who is not a
writer on political economy, a few bank deposits of
large amount indicate accumulations in the hands
of a few; while a large number of deposits of small


amount indicate its distribution amongst many.
Superior persons of the political economist class
can, and very often do, see things in exactly the
reverse way to that in which they appear to less
exalted minds. There was no occasion, however, for
Mr. Powell to go in search of any such far-fetched
explanation of the facts which he sets forth in relation
to this matter. There were plain and ample reasons
for it close at hand, which he surely was well aware
of, when he undertook to enlighten the British public
upon the question ; but to have used them would not
have helped him to establish the position for which
his article was penned. Accordingly, they were
quietly ignored. One reason for the difference in the
average amount of deposits, and presumably in the
class of depositors, is the usually higher interest
which these banks give in New South Wales than
they give in Victoria. This, coupled with the other
fact, that in Victoria no depositor is paid any interest
upon any sum larger than £250, fully explains why
the average of our deposits is much smaller than the
average in the other colony. This limitation was
introduced about 1875, for the very purpose of pre-
venting these banks from being used by capitalists,
when fluctuations in the current rate of interest
might otherwise induce them to avail themselves of
the 4 per cent, fixed by law as the rate given by these
institutions. These facts expose fully the absurdity
of all Mr. Powell’s conclusions in reference to this
question.
There is another most important aspect of this
case, which cannot and would not be ignored by
any one who desires to do justice to the issues raised
by this writer, and to the colonies interested, in their


proper appreciation by the public which he addresses.
This aspect of the case is set out in the question,—
Of what possible use, as affording any information
respecting the relative advancement of any two com-
munities in the accumulation of wealth, is any illus-
tration of that advancement which embraces two only
of the many and varied forms which such accumula-
tions assume? If Mr. Powell’s facts, arguments,
and conclusions in this matter of Savings Bank
deposits, had been all in his favour, instead of all
against him, as they are, it would have proved nothing
as against Victorian accumulations, or the policy
assumed to be involved; because in Victoria the
middle and artisan classes have a favourite mode of
investment for which New South Wales has no
adequate parallel, namely, Building Societies. These
institutions pay their shareholders from 8 to 12 per
cent., and their depositors at least 1 per cent, more
than the banks; and the result is that they are
enormously patronised by those who have small
savings to make, and by those who build or pur-
chase small homes for themselves by their assistance.
A comparison, therefore, to be of any value, must be
based upon the sum of at least all the large public
forms of accumulation which are available in each
colony. Unfortunately, the statistics of New South
Wales are as defective in this direction as we have
already shown them to be in relation to manufactures,
consequently no such comparison can be made beyond
that covered by the three items, —rateable property,
Bank capital and deposits, and Savings Bank de-
posits. Taking these three, the comparison is as
follows ; and if Mr. Powell, or any one else, can see
in it any ground for the belief or the assertion that


1870.
1880.
Increase.
New South Wales :—
£
£
£
Rateable Property ...
20,056,530
38,147,083
18,090,553
Bank Capital paid up
7,668,780
9,531,212
1,862,432
Bank Reserve Funds
1,923,257
3,784,330
1,861,073
Bank Deposits
6,107,999
17,883,024
11,775,025
Savings Banks do. ...
931,688
1,489,360
557,672
Totals
£36,688,254
£70,835,009
£3% 146,755
Victoria :—
£
£
£
Rateable Property ...
47,929,684
83,847,418
35,917,734
Bank Capital paid up
8,305,224
9,126,250
821,026
Bank Reserve Funds
2,127,770
2,714,730
586,960
Bank Deposits
10,899,026
17,972,703
7,073,677
Savings Banks do. ...
1,047,146
1,661,409
614,263
Totals
£70,308,850
£115,322,510
£45,013,660
Tree Trade is preferable to Protection as a wealth-
producing policy, they have an obliquity of vision
from which we can only wdsh they were free.
These figures show conclusively which colony has
the advantage in the matter of accumulated wealth.
The only lines upon which New South "Wales comes
anywhere near Victoria are those relating to the
business of banking; and the explanation of that is
to be found in these two facts, that, during the late
political turmoil, very large sums were said to have
been withdrawn from deposit in Melbourne and sent
over the border for deposit in Sydney; and that
immense sums were known to have been withdrawn
for the purpose of making large purchases of land
from the New South Wales Government, which


1870.
1880,
Decrease
marked thus —
Increase.
Total given above
Invested and deposited
in Building Societies.
Do. in Friendly Societies
Do. in Mining Plant ...
Do. Agricultural Plant
Do. in Manufacturing
Plant
Totals
£
70,308,850
1,210,330 '
186,383
2,128,896
1,512,013
2,790,308
£
115,322,510
2,352,808
450,718
1,831,658
2,446,321
3,112,582
£
45,013,660
1,142,478
264,335
— 297,238
934,308
322,274
£78,136,780
£125,516,597
£47,379,817
This table shows that, in these forms of investment
alone, Victoria has an accumulation of capital of over
125 millions sterling, and that nearly two-fifths of
this amount has been accumulated during the ten
sums, of course, found their way into the Sydney
banks. During the last year (1881), the deposits
have increased in Victoria to over £21,000,000. It
is only fair to add that nearly eight millions of the
increase of rateable property is due to the fact that
that amount is the result of the formation of new
municipal districts during the decade, and is not,
as with us, the increase in the value of property
previously subject to rates.
As a further illustration of the unprecedented
progress we have made in the accumulation of wealth
during this period, we may cite the following state-
ment, in addition to the above, of some of our more
prominent forms of investment.
years in question, in which, according to Mr. Powell,


the millstone of Protection has been dragging us
down to ruin. We are so well pleased with ruin of
this description, that we shall welcome its more rapid
approach. It will be seen that there is only one line
in the above list which shows any decline, and that is
the line devoted to the mining industry, which has
fallen off consequent upon the decline in gold-
mining. But this industry, even, has had a great
revival during the last twelve or eighteen months,
consequent upon the facilities for obtaining money at
lower rates of interest, which now exist; and a
valuation of the plant made up to the end of 1881
exceeds that above quoted by £30,000.
In the face of these facts, which ought to have
been known to any public writer who should under-
take to instruct less informed persons, it is most
unjust to malign and misrepresent Victoria for the
purpose of supporting a political theory and proving
some political economist in the wrong upon a question
of policy.
There is only one other matter which remains to be
noticed, and that is the argument founded upon the
question of Revenue. It is unnecessary to dwell
upon it at any length, as our critic, in his desperate
attempts to make adverse circumstance prove the
same point, has successfully answered himself upon
this question. He first proves, to his own entire
satisfaction, that our Import trade suffers terribly in
consequence of our high tariff. Very good, say we;
that is the best possible proof that our object is in
course of accomplishment; we are supplying our-
selves, instead of buying from abroad. It does not
suit Mr. Powell’s theory, however, to admit that such
is the case—that we make our own goods ; so, in


another part of his article, when he is aiming at proving
that our manufactures are little or no use to us for
this purpose, he asserts that we have still to supply
ourselves from abroad to as large an amount as New
South Wales. This contradiction is so gross and
absurd that, lest we should be thought to exaggerate
it, we quote his own words as follow: —“ If we
compare the articles which are imported into Victoria
under a heavy duty, and which enter New South
Wales free, we shall find that, in spite of the increase
in price, Victoria still is forced to supply herself with
these ‘ .prohibited ’ or ‘weighted’ foreign articles;
and imports of these classes, on an annual average,
about as much as the unprotected New South Wales.”
If this statement be true, will Mr. Powell explain
how it is that our Imports have not increased as
rapidly as those of New South Wales ? Then will he
further explain how it is that, if we import as much
of these articles as our neighbours, upon which we
collect heavy duties and they collect none, our
Customs’ Revenue is, as he asserts, declining, while
that of New South Wales is increasing ? In the mean-
time, and until he determines which of these two con-
tradictory and irreconcilable statements he intends to
hold by and which he intends to abandon, we are
relieved from the necessity of answering him. We
are prepared to admit that our Imports have not
increased so rapidly as our neighbour’s, and that, as a
natural consequence, our revenue from Customs’
duties correspondingly lags behind theirs; but we
accept these facts as the direct proofs of the success
of our Protective policy, unless it can be shown that
our people are less able and less willing to purchase
what they require now, than they were before this


policy was adopted. That they are not less able, the
enormous growth of their accumulations unanswerably
proves; and that they are not less willing is equally
well proved by the fact that, last year, in addition to
the consumption of imports of the high duty-paying
articles—equal, according to Mr. Powell, to that of
New South Wales—they consumed eleven and a
quarter millions’ worth of goods turned out from our
own manufactories, the actual consumption being
£l7. 2s. sd. per head of the population of imported
articles, and £l3. 10s. sd. per head of home produc-
tions—a total of £3O. 12s. lOd. per head of the entire
population. Will Mr. Powell produce one Pree Trade
population which can compare with ours on these
lines ? Until he does, not all his manipulation of
figures, misrepresentation or suppression of facts,
will serve his purpose in the least. At any rate, he
must go on his travels again in search of some other
" shocking example ” wherewith to refute Mr. John
Stuart Mill. Victoria will not help him, except with
those, if they are to be found, who are more ignorant
of this colony, its history and circumstances, than he
is himself.
Toward the close of his article he expresses the
opinion that there is in this colony a “ reactionary
movement in favour of a lower tariff,” and gives
utterance to a wish that his contribution “ will give
fresh impulse ” to this movement. We can assure
him that there is no such movement as he imagines,
and, further, that if there were, such articles as his,
so manifestly unfair and unreliable, so easily exposed
and refuted, would have just the opposite effect to
that which he desires. He thinks he sees in the
appointment by the Premier of a Royal Commission


to inquire into the working of our tariff, of which
Commission the writer has the honour of being
chairman, an indication that such a movement is
going on. His opinion is based, in this case as in all
those which we have already dealt with, upon a want
of knowledge of the subject. The Commission is
appointed to ascertain what duties can be removed, if
any, without interfering with the settled policy of the
colony. Mr. Powell must have known this if he had
even read the terms of the Commission before he ven-
tured to publish his opinions of its purpose and
scope. -We may assume, therefore, that he went
upon the principle that, if he knew little or nothing
of his subject, his readers would know less ; and that,
as “ among the blind the one-eyed man is king,” he
might safely dare contradiction or refutation.
There is very much more evidence that New South
Wales will follow our fiscal policy than there is any
probability that Victoria will revert to Free Trade.
The energy and vigour with which the Protectionist
party in that colony is carrying on its operations,
through the lately-organised “ Protection League,”
bears witness to this fact.
Before closing this reply to this travelled economist,
it may be as well to say that in the statement of our
accumulations no account has been taken of State
property in Land, Railways, Waterworks, and Public
Works and Buildings; Municipal improvements, or
Church and School property; all such being exempt
from rates, and therefore not rateable. These items
represent at least £100,000,000 more, making a total
of fixed capital of £225,000,000. When it is remem-
bered that this accumulation is the work of little
more than thirty years, and the result of the labour,


less the £22,000,000 borrowed, of an average adult
male population of less than 200,000, it will be
admitted by every impartial person that the fiscal
policy and political conditions under which it has
been achieved cannot be so bad as they are repre-
sented. At any rate, it is essential that any man
who, on the strength of a flying visit to our shores,
undertakes to pose as an authority upon either or all
of these questions should display at least a fair
acquaintance with his subject, and manifest an impar-
tial judgment in dealing with it. These conditions
we noticed to be “ conspicuous by their absence ” in
Mr. Powell’s article; hence we have ventured to
break a lance in defence of our home, our policy, and
our institutions.
Life is too short, we are too busy, and we are
too accustomed to the thousand-and-one misrepresen-
tations of all that concerns Victoria, its politics and
progress, its manufactures and commerce, its social
condition and its material resources, its present aims
and its future prospects, its capabilities and its dis-
abilities, which constantly appear in the British Press,
to trouble ourselves about answering them.
In this instance the case is different. Our critic is
a well-known public writer, who, by virtue of his
visits to this part of the world, would be accepted,
in some sort, as an authority ; and the medium which
he selected for the dissemination of his crude opinions
and incomplete facts was well adapted to bring them
under the notice of the public. Under these cir-
cumstances, we could not allow him or his misrepre-
sentations to remain unnoticed or unanswered. We
shall be well rewarded if we have helped our readers
to form a more correct opinion of this grand colony


than any they may previously have entertained, and
if we have helped to secure for the future fuller
information upon our affairs, before they speak or
write, on the part of those who presume to instruct
us in the mode of carrying on our Government.
WTMAN AND SONS, PBINTBBS, GREAT QtfBEN STREET, tONDON.


PI
M CCf+4
%. Nov *n |)
yisiX
