

THE COUP D’ETAT.
% Worn from %
BY THE
EEY. W. HENDEESOJST,
OF BALLABAT.
From “ The Argus ” of January 16, 1878.
Ptlliounw :
F i o-bl o
PUBLISHED BY M. L. HUTCHINSON,
Glasgow Book Warehouse,
15 Collins Street West,


% Witt
from
The following is the portion of the im-
pressive sermon delivered on Sunday at Bal-
larat by the Rev. Wm. Henderson on the
subject of the political crisis ;
“ And now, it is a necessity lying on my
conscience that I say something of the event
which, coming from those who are in
authority, has startled this whole land into
earnest inquiry as to where we stand, and
whither we are tending. I have, as you
know right well, never taken anything but a
purely personal interest in party questions
that have shaken our little state. To me it
has been a matter of small moment what
Earty has been in power, and what party has
een out, so long as there has been anything
like righteousness done in the administra-
tion of public affairs. But now a great un-
righteousness has been done in the
midst of us. Those who have under-
taken the government of this colony
have proclaimed the beginning of an anarchy
as the thing they reckon best to be done in
the circumstances. A multitude of public
servants, without any suspicion of blame
attached to them, have been suddenly dis-
missed from office, and a shadow of penury,
of want and despair, has fallen, without any
warning, over many a heart and home. No
hint of blame, but ‘your services are dis-
pensed with from this date,’ with the usual
* honour to be’ attached. Worst of all, the
most important of all branches of the public
service—that of the administration of justice
.—has been, so far as the Government could
do it, as good as blotted out altogether.
All police magistrates, coroners, county
court judges removed; only the judges
of the Supreme Court, who, thank
God, -fly too high to be reached by
these arrows of the hour, are left unaffected
by these changes. Of course, the un-
paid magistracy also is untouched, but we
know what a very insecure bulwark that
must ever be against all the rising tide of
wrong and crime against which we have to
contend. We are told that it is quite a
heroic measure on the part of our rulers.
There is a true heroism .and a false —the true
when a fnan sacrifices himself for the good
of others, the false when a man sacrifices
others for the sake of himself. I have to
THE COUP D’ETAT.
tire
ask you to consider which sort of heroism it
is which is now being shown by those who
have the management of affairs in their hands.
What I have to say, as the first thing,
is that a great iniquity has been done among
us ; or, rather, a twofold iniquity, namely—
1. The more private wrong of casting a
number of tried public servants and their
families unprovided and uncared for upon
the world ; and 2, The more public wrong of
leaving the whole colony practically defence-
less against dishonesty and crime. It is
worse than foolish to defend the action of
the Government only on principles of eco-
nomy, the desire to reduce expenditure. It
is but the other day that the salaries of those
men who have now been dismissed the public
service were submitted in an Appropriation
Bill by the present Government to our colo-
nial Parliament, with the assurance that
there was, or would be, enough of money in
the public Treasury to pay them all. Be-
sides, haven’t we been so often and so loudly
told that our present unexampled protec-
tionist tariff has brought nothing but plenty
and prosperity, that we have been forced,
except on the Psalmist’s hasty decision, that
all men are liars, to believe it, so that there
could be no such pressing demand on the
public purse as to justify such sweeping re-
ductions as these. The man who will tell
me that all that has taken place depends
only on a desire after economy is, in my esti-
mation—l am a plain man, and use blunt
speech—either a liar or a fool. A gross ini-
quity has been done. I am quite willing to
admit that there are certain things which
are wrong in themselves, that may have such
excuse for them as to make them right. It
is wrong for me to take the life of my neigh-
bour ; but if I should find some one who has
broken into my house, has spoiled me of
ray goods, and is threatening the life or the
honour of members of ray family, and if I
shoot him down where he stands, no law of
God or man would be very hard on me for
that. Whether there is any excuse for the
action of our rulers we shall have to consider
presently. In the meantime, the wrong
has been done, and the excuse that would
justify the throwing of so many families out
of bread, and of leaving the country defence-
less against crime, would need to be a very


serious one indeed. I insist—cannot be
emphatic enough in insisting—that a grievous
wrong, hateful to a God of righteousness and
to any honest soul of man in whom there is
any sense of righteousness left, has been
-done in our land.
And we have now to ask, Who it is
that has done it? We must go to high
places first. There is that mysterious
essence called * Governor in Council,’ where-
from all such decisions must l necessarily
come. But behind all Council or other veils
wherein he may wrap himself, there is a
living human personality whom we call the
Governor. His Excellency, in the name of our
Queen, who, whatever her faults may be, is
a lover of righteousness from the crown of
her head to the sole of her foot, has taken it
upon him to dismiss a number of Her
Majesty’s most tried and faithful servants, to
produce an infinite amount of misery in
quite innocent families, and to do his best to
put an end to the administration of justice in
this land. He does not care :he does as he
is told. He leaves, Pilate-like, his blame
upon others, signs any paper he is told to
sign, and then goes off to Portland to make
vapid speeches and to retail stale old jokes,
or to the limestone caves of Mount Gambier,
to make some small pretence of science
there. He has washed his hands and said,
‘All this be upon you,’ and sports his clean
white hands a*. Portland or elsewhere with-
out troubling himself further.
“ But of course beyond His Excellency there
are His Excellency’s advisers. It is on them
that the responsibility rests, and they stand
upbefore the whole community, declaring that
it is a good and not an evil thing that they
have done, and that they are entitled,
not to our condemnation, but to our approval
for the heroic action they have taken. To
them also we have to say— ‘ The thing you
have advised His Excellency to do is an evil
and unrighteous thing—a thing of which no
human soul that has any sense of ordinary
human justice can approve. Our own final
word about it is that there is no justice, that
there is an absolute breach of all laws of
justice in it. You undertook to govern us,
and you are creating an anarchy around us.
What is the meaning of this thing you have
done ?’ We know only too well the sort of
answer we are likely to get to that question—
an answer irrelevant, outside of the question
altogether. The economy excuse is, as we
have seen, absurd, bearing a lie, or a mul-
titude of lies, on the face of it. It
comes to this of it at last. The Upper
House of our colonial Legislature would not
be subservient to the will of the present Go-
vernment in the matter of payment of mem-
bers. On that question there was a difference
of opinion between the Government and the
Upper House. I care not which was right or
wnich was wrong in that matter. The
ft-srr
quarrel is one which does not concern me the
least, whatever my own private opinion ou
the matter may be. But to an outsider like
myself it does seem strange that the mode of
taking revenge on the Upper House should
be this—of sacrificing a multitude of alto-
gether innocent men and families that have
nothing in the wide world to do with the
quarrel. Let the fight be fought out fairly
with the Upper House, if it is needful that
there should be a tight. Force them to yield
the £3OO a year to the members of our Parlia-
ment, if that is an indispensable thing in
these days, when retrenchment has become so
needful, provided the compulsion you exer-
cise upon them is of a legitimate kind.
Abolish the Upper House altogether, if you
are able to do that, and I for one shall have
few tears to shed over that; and if you
abolish the Lower House the day after, I shall
still have a pair of dry eyes, provided only
there shall be some guarantee given us that
something in the nature of righteousness
shall be observed in the administration of
our affairs. To ms it is of small conse-
quence how any party warfare may result, so
long as I can only see that there is some
sense of justice animating those who are
in authority.
“ So let no man dare to say of me that
I am here interfering in things that
don’t concern me, and that should not bo
intruded into such a sacred place as this.
If the love of all that is right cannot find
harbourage for itself here; if lam not ready
from this place to look a glaring iniquity in
the face, and to tell it what it is, whether I
can do anything in the way of curing it or no,
then the place which I, as a professed servant
of a God of righteousness, occupy, had better
abolish itself. And let no man say that I am
actuated by any spirit of hostility to the
present Government. If the present Govern-
ment will only conduct their warfares in any
spirit of honesty and do what is right, they
may retain office till the trump of doom
bursts upon an astonished world, I shall
not vex my heart about that. Neither let
any one say of me that my present words
spring from any friendship to any special class,
to squatters or men of wealth—a thing which
is just as true of me as that I am a friend of
the recipients of relief from our Benevolent
Association, who give me infinitely more
concern than all the squatters or other men
of wealth from Port Phillip to the Gulf of
Carpentaria. Let no side issues be raised. I
maintain that a wrong has been done ; that
many of Her Majesty’s servants have been
treated worse than I would treat my dog; that
the administration of justice has been cast into
chaos ; that anarchy has begun ; and that the
Governor and Government of this colony
have no excuse for what they have done.
If there should be those who will dare to
reproach me for the position I have now


taken, for the words I have now spoken, as bo taking place among us now, at a time-
on the side of God’s own righteousness, and when we ought to feel ourselves to be a
in opposition to all party wrongs or op-
pressions whatever. I shall know what to
think of them. If they should try, on this
account,.to destroy any confidence you may
have in me, to loosen the bonds that bind us
together, and if you listen to them, then I
shall know also what to think of you. Re-
member, in any case, that my position is
simply that a gigantic wrong has been done,
and that it is my duty—a duty which I would
be unworthy of this place, a coward rebel
against ray own conscience, if I did
not fulfil—to testify against tho wrong.
It is, I suppose, the hostility of one class
in our society against another that lies at the
bottom of all the mischief—the world-wide
fight of those who want against those who
have—the two great parties that make up
the world—the men of wealth and the men
of work. You know, if you have any memo-
ries at all, that my views regarding the dis-
tribution of wealth in this world are of the
most liberal sort—too liberal ever, I fear, to
attain to any realisation in our day. But,
again, I have to say that I stand on the side
of order and of justice, the while I look for-
ward to a better time when the gulf between
labour and capital shall not be the hope-
less thing it is now. It is an unfortunate
thing that all this civil strife, fomented
as it is by those who are in authority, should
people still, in the true, and not in any party
sense—now, when we have to contemplate
the possibility that the wild war storms that
are crashing around the world, that are laying
one part of the world desolate, may, ere they
have spent themselves, reach even unto us in
the midst of our peaceful seas. Our very
existence as a as part of the mighty
British empire, is by no means so very secure,
and yet we must be going fighting against each
other, getting our hearts made bitter against
one another, cultivating vices of envy and
jealousy, malice and hatred, and every feel-
ing that comes from the devil, with the
Government furnishing the manure for these
weeds of hell. Meanwhile, what is there for
us but to turn in earnest prayer to Him who
is the Ruler of the nations of the world, and
to ask of Him that He may so order events
that the hearts of the whole people, rich and
poor, the workmen and the wealthy, may be
drawn towards each other ; that the empire
of Him who is the Prince of Peace may be
established among us more and more, in
spite of all faction fights, and all party strife
and bitterness ; and that the Christmas bless-
ing of peace and goodwill may come in all its
wholesome, healing influence—not only over
us as a people, but over the whole world.
Amen.
C vfTs
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.




Bi6LJO
flQ^lOa,
V 6q^f
