

FmmebsU, * Bill
Being an Examination of the
Federal Bill as Amended by the Secret
Conference of Premiers.
i n ,
Published with the Approval of the Colonists’ Anti-
Convention Bill League.
SYDNEY:
—T. E. COLEBROOK, GENERAL LETTERPRESS PRINTER, —
PARRAMATTA ROAD, LEICHHARDT.




BILL ANALYZED.-®-
—^CONTENTS.-**—
PAGE.
The Provincial Governors would be Retained ... ... 2
Salary of the Governor-General ... ... ... ... 30
Salaries of the Members ... ... ... ... 3
Salaries of the Ministers ... ... ... ... ... 3
Patronage in the Civil Service would be restored ... ... 3
Equal Representation of States in the Senate ... ... 3
Equal Representation and Colored Labor ... ... ... 0
The Federal Judicature... ... ... ••• ••• 7
The Right of Appeal to the Privy Council ... ... 7, 24
The Inter-State Commission ... ... ... ... ••• 0
One Man One Vote ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 0
How the Constituencies would be Jerrymandered ” ... 10
How the Army would be Used... ... ... ... ... H
Braddou’s and other Financial Blots ... ... ... ... 12
The New Clause... ... ... ... ... •• ••• 15
The Deadlock Imposture Exposed ... ... ... ... 17
The Federal Capital ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
How the High Court would Govern the Country ... ... 22
The Practical Impossibility of Altering the Constitution ... 20
The Imperial Parliament might Mutilate the Bill ... ... 28
The Unwisdom of Hasty Federation ... ... ... ... 28
Why not Utilize the Existing Federal Council ... ... 30
Appendix: A Suppressed State Document ... ... ... 31


The Federal Bill Analysed.
In 1891 a practically self-appointed Convention met, which for-
mulated a Bill that aroused so much indignation throughout
the length and breadth of Australia as to make it quite evident
that the Bill would never become law. To the Right Hon. G.
H. Reid great credit is due for having in his speeches at the
Protestant Hall and elsewhere exposed many cf its defects. Mr.
Reid’s present attitude is both surprising and saddening. As a re-
sult of popular antagonism to the Bill of ’9l it was decided to
arrange for the election of a new Convention—this time by the
popular vote. All the Premiers agreed to pilot an Enabling Billfor
this purpose through their Parliaments, and all kept faith except
Sir John Forrest (of Western Australia) and Bir Hugh Nelson
(of Queensland). The Nelson Gfovernment declined to send any
delegates, while from Western Australia came ten men who
were not elected bj the people of that colony, but selected by
the Forrest cabal from its Parliament. It was laughable to
observe how in the Convention Forrest’s co-delegates conducted
themselves like an awkward squad of marionettes. They were
“ men of very few w ords ” —Sir John pulled the strings and the
figures moved, and said “ ditto ” to anything that he said.
After prolonged sittings (paid for at the rate of three
guineas per day) in Adelaide, Sydney and Melbourne, the Draft
Bill of 1898 was produced. This Bill was very slightly altered
by the Secret Conference of Premiers that met in 1899 ; and I
will deal with the alterations in their turn, but in the main it is
practically the same Bill as that issued by the Convention of
1898. The 1898 Bill is but little less re-actionary than its 1891
pattern, but it is more craftily drawrn up. Thus while the 1891
Bill expressly states that all the present State Governors shall
be retained (chapter v., clause 7) the 1898 Bill says nothing
whatever about the matter; in this way leading the people to
believe that Federation will abolish, and save the expense of,


the office of Governor. Of course the provincial Governorships
cannot be abolished without the consent of both Houses of the
provincial Parliaments and of the Imperial Parliament.
Dividing the Spoil.
The salaries of Members of both Houses of the Parliament
are to be four hundred pounds a year “ until the £arliament
otherwise provides." “ Provides” being the indicative form of
the verb, expresses, of course, certainty. Had the delegates
any doubt about the matter they would have said “ may other-’
wise provide.” In the Bill of ’9l the salaries were fixed at'
five hundred a year, and we may therefore be sure that the
gentlemen who in 1891 wanted five hundred will take care, if
they are elected, that the Parliament shall very soon “ otherwise
provide ” that the salaries or “allowances ” shall be five or six
hundred a year.
By the Bill of ’9l the seven members of the Government
were to divide among themselves fifteen thousand pounds as
salaries; by the ’9B Bill the amount is reduced to twelve
thousand pounds, —but only “ until the Parliament otherwise
provides ” for an increase of salaries.
Civil Service Corruption.
An abominable feature of the Bill of 1898 is that it pro-
poses to restore the old system of patronage, which has proved
such a curse in the United States and in these colonies. Clause
67 states that all civil servants shall be appointed or removed
by the Government. This means that to the “ victors belong
the spoils,” and that the victors will fill the civil service with
their friends, relatives and parasites ; with their friends, children
and other relatives. The enormous power which the control of
the Civil Service will give the Government, will be the source of
great profligacy and corruption, and will make it well-nigh im-
possible to bring about any reform. Wherever the federal
capital may be placed, it will be centre of immorality, and the
haunt of men w ho “ live by their wits.”
Rampant Minority Rule.
But the most anti-democratic feature of the Bill is un-
doubtedly the proposal to allow each colony equal representa-
tion in the Senate. The Senate will be the Upper House, and
extremely powerful. It may veto any bill, and we may be sure,
considering its constitution, that it will veto anything of a


Sir John Forrest
• • •
... 262
Sir James Lee Steere...
• ••
... 215
George Leake, Esq. ...
... 187
Hon. F. H. Piesse
• • •
... 196
J. W. Hacket, Esq. ...
• • •
... 582
W. T. Lotou, Esq.
... 324
W. H. James, Esq.
• • •
... 246
A. Y. Hassal, Esq.
• • •
... 362
Robert F. Scholi, Esq.
• • •
... 24
Hon. J. H. Taylor
... 1589
democratic character. Its veto on any project of political or
social reform that does not propose money appropriation is cer-
tain. The Bill makes a pretence of not allowing the Senate to
amend money bills, but it says that “ the Senate may at any
stage return to the House of Representatives any proposed law
requesting by message the omission or amendments of any items
or provisions therein.” What is this but amending ? If the
Representatives will not accept the Senators’ amendments there
is to be a simultaneous dissolution of the two Houses ; and
then if the Houses still disagree, there is to be a joint sitting of
the Senators and Representatives, and whatever may then be
decided upon by an absolute majority will become law T . Which
means that the Conservative Representatives can combine with
the Senators to block anything in the nature of radical reform.
That the Senators will be conservatives is shown not only by
the fact that the 1897 elections resulted in the return of con-
servatives to the Convention, but also by the fact that in at
least two of the colonies there is a property qualification for
electors. Here are the votes received by the West Australian
Members of the Convention when they w r ere elected to their own
Parliament: and as they were not elected to the Convention, but
selected by the West Australian Parliament, we must take it
that they represented the persons who elected them to that
Parliament:—
3987
Some of the above figures, such as the 1589 credited to the
Hon. J. H. Taylor, and the 582 credited to Mr. Hacket, merely
represent the total number of electors on the roll j the actual
number of votes cast not being given in the Tear Book. Sir
John Forrest, Sir James Lee Steere, and others, were returned
unopposed. One of the gentlemen that had this honor con-


F. Connor, Esq,
... 26
Alexander Robert Richardson, Esq. ...
... 37
Everard Firebrace Darlot, Esq.
... 37
Septimus Burt, Esq., Q.C
... 52
H. W. Scholl, Esq
91
ferred upon them was Mr. Robert F. Scholl, who represented a
constituency of 24 electors. A nice little pocket borough. The
vote of this unopposed delegate from twenty-four West Austra-
lians, counted in the Convention as equal to Mr. Barton’s, the
latter gentleman having been returned by the votes of 98,540
persons. The Parliament that sent Mr. Sclioll and the nine
other West Australian gentlemen to the Convention—where
they voted en bloc , always in the interests of the small States,
and against those of New South Wales—consisted of thirty-
three members, and contained the following unopposed (unop-
posed for a reason that will be sufficiently obvious to most
people !) “ representatives ” of 243 electors who did not elect.
1 give in each case the total number of electors on the roll: —
Yet the delegates from this Lilliputian Parliament turned the
scale against New South Wales on every important division in
the Convention ! Is it fair to allow the pocket boroughs of West
Australia equal representation in the Senate with the 300,000
electors of New South Wales? Assuredly No! It would be
minority rule run mad.
Under the clauses dealing with the Senate the senators
w r ould be professional “great men,” and only three senators
would be elected at a time. These three men might corruptly
obtain the support of certain unprincipled newspapers, and thus
the electors would be hoodwinked into supporting them.
If we are to have a Federal Senate we must insist upon the
colonies being represented in it proportionately according to
their populations. This is what our kinsmen in Canada have
done, and it is what has been done in Germany. The
Constitution of the United States is the only important one
which permits equal State representation, and that equality of
representation was conceded at a time of panic, and has ever
since proved a stumbling block in the path of progress.
Even in Switzerland the demi-cantons, or small states, are
only allowed half as many senators as the large states, and in
that country 30,000 electors can compel the application of the


referendum upon any law; and 50,000 can set in motion the
machinery for the alteration of the constitution.
Equal Eerresextatiox and Colored Labour.
One of the greatest dangers in connection with equal repre-
sentation is, in my opinion, the probability that it will lead to
the importation, upon a large scale, of colored labor, and, as a
result, civil war. South Australia has, in its northern territory,
gone to such lengths in the direction of permitting the incur-
sions of colored hordes, that, according to the census of 1891,
there were in that year 3507 Chinese in the northern territory
out of a population of 4934. The Hon. J. Langdon Parsons, a
South Australian statesman who, until 1893, was government
resident of the northern territory, writing in 1895 in the
“ Commonwealth and the Empire,” said: On the day of Fed-
eration Australia will enter upon her inheritance in the tropics.
She can introduce, use, and return to the place from whence it
came, the labor necessary for tropical agriculture.” This
quotation makes it amply evident that such a representative of
South Australia as Mr. Parsons, is strongly in favor of the im-
portation of Polynesian or Asiatic labor. No doubt all the
South Australians who would be likely to be elected to the
Senate would hold similar opinions. Thus there would be at
least six votes for colored labor. And if, as is proposed in
South Australia, the northern territory were granted separate
representation, there would be more colored votes. The con-
servative franchise of West Australia and the fact that its
Government has permitted the importation of large numbers
of Afghans and other colored laborers, render it probable that
the senators from W.A. would also'give a colored vote, so that
from B.A. and W.A. there would be twelve colored votes, which
with, say three from the northern territory, would be fifteen
against the twelve probably white votes from New South Wales
and Victoria. The Tasmanian senators would, perhaps, split,
but when we consider the restricted franchise upon which they
would be elected, it is extremely likely that most of them would
give colored votes. When Queensland came in there would be
six more colored voces, or twelve or eighteen if she came in as
two or three states. The white states would be completely out-
voted, and a determined struggle would then commence between
the representatives and the senators. No doubt we in the south
would demand the restriction of the use of colored labor to the


extreme north, while the colored labor senators might insist upon
its use not only in torrid Australia, but even south of the tropic
of Capricorn. If this dispute between the houses took place it
might lead, with the proposed inelastic and practically unalter-
able constitution, to civil war.
Restated, my objection is that South Australia, which has
placed three Chinese in the Northern Territory to every white
person, would have as many members in the Senate as this
colony. And as the South Australians (including such repre-
sentative men as the Hon. J. Langdon Parsons) are evidently in
favor of colored labor (facts in the Northern Territory speak
for themselves), and as the West Australians also encourage
the importation of colored persons, there would thus be twelve
votes in the Federal Senate in favor of encouraging colored im-
migration. There would also be additional colored votes from
the Northern territory; and more votes for colored labor when
Queensland came in. When West Australia -became several
states there would be still more colored votes. There might even
be senators from New South Wales or Victoria in favor of
colored labor. The only way, therefore to secure the supremacy
of the white vote is to give us either proportional representation
in the Senate, or the referendum. I urge this not only in the
interests of the laboring classes, but also in the interests of
business men, for if the free ingress of Asiatics bo permitted,
they will very soon establish themselves as traders. In the
town of Palmerston, in the Northern Territory, most of the
business places are in the hands of the Chinese.
More Big Prizes for Federal Lawyers.
Six out of our ten delegates to the Convention were lawyers
and therefore we can understand why it is that the difficulty
which a poor person at present experiences in getting justice,
is to be increased by the establishment of a highly-paid Federal
Supreme Court, to which the rich litigant may appeal against
the decisions of the State Courts. The right of appeal to the
Privy Council is not to be abolished. The Bill says “ this Con-
stitution shall not impair any right which the Queen may be
pleased to exercise to grant special leave of appeal from the
High Court to Her Majesty in Council.” So that a person who
has sufficient wealth or other influence to induce the authorities
to grant him leave, can actually drag his unfortunate victim from
the Federal Court to the Privy Council in London.


The existing right of appeal to the Privy Council has its
advantages as well as its disadvantages. It was before the Lon-
don Privy Council that Mr. A. G. Taylor defeated Mx\ Edmund
Barton for his unconstitutional ruling as Speaker. Of course
the great objection to the right of appeal to the Privy Council
is that few persons can stand the expense; but if this Draft
Bill be agreed to, there will be the additional expense of appeal-
ing to the Federal Court, which will no doubt be swayed by
class bias, and influenced by friendly relations with the “ powers
that be.” After all, the expense of appealing to the Privy
Council is very small compared with the cost of —say a McSharry
case—before our local courts, and it is well-known that the fees
paid to leading English Counsel are lower than those paid to lead-
ing Australian Barristers. The Privy Council costs the colony
nothing. There seems to be considerable doubt as to the extent
to which our present right of appeal to the Privy Council would
be interfered with if the Bill became law, but Mr. E. E.
Garran is authorised to inform us that “the decisions of
the High Court will usually be final,” (see Mr. Garran’s expla-
nation of section 74), which means apparently that in most
cases the appeal to the Privy Council will not be permitted.
This is a retrograde step. The Privy Council is the highest and
fairest court in the world. Although, like everything human,
it is fallible, and has been known to make what some lawyers
consider mistakes, it contains the very keenest and greatest
judicial intellects in the Empire. It can be trusted to treat all
colonial cases without either prejudice or class bias. It is free
from cliquism. We cannot be sure that our local legal lights
are, in many cases, equally free from these faults. We have
few great lawyers in Australia. In England they have many,
and there are therefore no weak lawyers on the Privy Council.
There is another matter to be considered. As our Federal
system would be similar to that of the United States, the High
Court would probably be guided by American precedents—a
distinctly bad thing, The Privy Council would, however, treat
these precedents with contempt. A decidedly good thing.
The Federal Judicature would be exceedingly costly. It is
to be composed of a High Court, consisting of a Chief Justice,
“ and not less than two ” (I quote the bad English of the Bill)
other judges, and “ such other federal courts as the Parliament
creates,” It is probable that the Chief Justice would receive a


salary of at least five thousand pounds a year, and no doubt any
of our legal luminaries would be very glad to accept such a highly
paid permanent position.*
The Inter-State Commission.
There is to be an Inter-State Commission, appointed by the
Government, to deal with trade and commerce. Of how many
persons it is to consist, and what powers they are to possess,
and how many thousands they are to be paid, we are not told.
From vague hints in the Bill we may surmise that the Commis-
sion is to be empowered to interfere in some way (probably in
the interests of the cliques that govern the smaller states), with
the management of the railways and the control of the rivers.
Perhaps, like Frankenstein, the Convention Delegates will
(supposing that they have any co sciences) one day regret that
they ever created such a monster. It will probably become as
despotic and unscrupulous as were the Roman Triumvirates.
One Man One Vote.
The following sections are supposed by some to concede
“ One man one vote,” by others “ One adult one vote
30. Until the Parliament otherwise provides, the qualifica-
tion of electors of members of the House of Representa-
tives shall be in each State that which is prescribed by the
law of the State as the qualification of electors of the more
numerous House of the Parliament of the State; but in
the choosing of members each elector shall vote only once.
41. No adult person who has or acquires a right to vote at
elections for the more numerous House of the Parliament
of a State, shall, while the right continues, be prevented by
any law of the Commonwealth from voting at elections for
either House of The Parliament of the Commonwealth.
Now if by “ one man one vote ” is meant “ every man one vote,”
then it is certainly not contained in the Draft Bill, but if “one
elector one vote ” is meant, I should like to point out that it is
doubtful if the Bill concedes even this. In section 30 we are
told that “ in the choosing of members ” (of the House of
Representatives) “ each elector shall vote only once.” This
*Some of our Delegates were most discourteous to Queensland. Can it be
that they wished to drive away Queensland competitors for these fat
judicial “billets?”


appears to concede “ one elector, one vote ” but in the Constitu-
tion Amendment Act of the Colony of Victoria the following
similar words occur : “ No elector shall vote more than once at
the same election.” Yet these words are interpreted as meaning,
not “ one elector one vote,” but “ uo elector shall vote more than
once in the same electorate.” The consequence is that a C ictorian
elector is allowed to vote in several electorates on the same day
if he be a ratepayer in each electorate. This form of plural
voting would, therefore, probably be sanctioned by the Federal
High Court on an appeal being made as to the meaning of section
30. The interpretation of the Victorian Act would, perhaps, be
accepted as a precedent, and it is possible that the lederal
judges would consider section 41 of the Draft Bill a corrobora-
tion of their view of the matter.
It should also be noted that in most of the colonies it is
very difficult for a non-property owner to get on the rolls. In
Western Australia the law and the system of registration, are so •
cumbrous and complex that in many electorates there are only
twenty or thirty persons on the electoral rolls I No wonder the
candidates are —providing they have sufficient money —-unop-
posed. In Tasmania the unemployed are deliberately disfran-
chised. Unless they can prove they have earned thirty pounds
(£3O) during the six months prior to their application to be
placed on the rolls, they cannot be registered. Yet it is under
these laws that, according to section 30, the Representatives
of Tasmania and West Australia would be elected to the lederal
Parliament.
How the Constituencies would be “ Jerrymandered.”
There is absolutely no provision in the bill for the formation
of equal electorates, consequently there is nothing to prevent the
“ jerrymandering ” of the constituencies hy the Federal or local
Parliaments, Section 29 says that “ the Parliament or any state
may make laws for determining the divisions in each state for
which members may be chosen, and the number of members to
be chosen for each division,” It is, therefore, evident that under
this section Liberal constituencies might be so enlarged as to
include a sufficient number of Conservative votes to swamp the
Liberals, while the Conservative representatives might be
multiplied by the creation of a number of small electorates in
the districts where the Conservative vote preponderates ; or the
present Liberal electorates might be so divided and subdivided


among the Conservative electorates as to completely overwhelm
the Liberal vote.
How thr Army would be Used.
The military cloven-hoof peeps out in clause 119, wherein
we are told that the Commonwealth shall, on the application of
a State’s Executive Government, protect that State against
“ domestic violence.” A very similar provision exists in the
Constitution of the United States, and the result is whenever
a turbulent strike, or other popular disturbance occurs, the Federal
troops are called out to (with or without the permission of the
State Executive) quell “ domestic violence ” by shooting down
unarmed men, women, and children. It is probable that Federation
would receive little support from Western Australia were it not
that the Federal army may one day come in useful in that colony
by “ dealing with ” the boisterous mining population. The stuff
of which Western Australian public men are made is shown by
the fact that Sir John Forrest, having been hustled by the dissatis-
fied alluvial miners at Kalgoorlie, actually had the irreverent
audacity to parody the words of the crucified Founder of Chris-
tianity—“l forgive them,” said Forrest, “for they know net
what they do/’ Sir John has since conceded all the demands of
the miners : but if he had had the Federal army to fall back upon,
he would not, perhaps, have shown so much alacrity in the matter.
It is not surprising that Queenslanders are not federal enthusif
asts, for should any slight disturbance occur in connection with
their colored labor question, or with the agitation for separation,
it is very probable that federal troops from another State would
be employed to invade Queensland and massacre Queenslanders.
The Federal troops would certainly be useless as a means of de-
fending Australia against invasion. Our only safety is, and will
be, in the presence of the British warships here. If, however,
any great disaster happened to England, and Russia decided to
invade Australia, the entire federated military strength of the
country could not resist for a week that great power * We hare
not population enough. But of course Russia will never bother
about us. It would coot too much, and we are too far away.
Russia has plenty of magnificent land at its own doors, and it
would sooner have a mile of Manchuria than a thousand miles
of Australia.
* Russia lias a population of 130,000,000, and can place in the field ai
army of 2,500,000. ' ' / ‘


All military power would be in the hands of the Governor-
General (or, perhaps, in those of his responsible advisers) and might
be used in the interests of a minority to coerce the majority. Sec-
tion 114*, which deprives the States of the power to raise or
maintain military forces places the States entirely at the mercy
of a Federal army, which might be used against them by a
Senatorial cabal. In this respect the Bill is worse than the
Constitutions of Switzerland and the United States. Unless we
have a number of constitutional safeguards against the Federal
army being used against civilians, we may yet live to see Australia
governed by a tyrannical military satrap, or even autocrat, backed
by a kind of modern Praetorian guard composed of unscrupulous
Federal soldiers. It is strange that so few persons seem to have
noticed this danger. In other countries —particularly England
—the people quickly resent anything like military interference
in civil disputes. Even the introduction of Sir Robert Peel’s
harmless necessary “ Bobbies,” nearly brought about an insur-
rection.
My views as to the probable use of the Federal Army are
corroborated, from a somewhat different standpoint, by the
following excerpt from a speech delivered in the Legislative
Council on the 22nd of November, 1893, by the Hon. L. F.
Heydon:—“ If the colonies do not wish all that will follow from
unification, they must be exceedingly careful not to give those
powers to the central government which will lead to unification.
They must take care to leave the central government so weak
that it can never tyrannise over them. It must be like the
Federal Council, it is for us to say which portion of our complex
constitution shall have the real control. My opinion is that,
situated as our colony is, with Victoria, South Australia, and
Queensland coveting slices of our territory, if we went into
Federation and thought ourselves treated with injustice, we
should find the majority using the Federal army against us, and
New South Wales would lose her sovereign rights —a thing which
the Minister of Justice said she would never consent to.”
Bbaddon’s and other Financial Blots.
The financial clauses are fearful and wonderful. None can
tell with absolute certainty how they will work. What, however,
seems very probable, and, humanly speaking certain, is that they
will enormously increase taxation. The clauses actually stipulate
that the Federal Government must collect four times more


revenue than it will require! Here is the notorious Braddon-
blot—“ Of the net revenue of the Commonwealth from duties of
customs and of excise, not more than one-fourth shall be applied
annually by the Commonwealth towards its expenditure.” The
Bill then goes on to state that the three fourths not required by
the Federal Government, shall be handed to the State Govern-
ments. But Mr. Reid says —“ I must not say you get it back.
I never heard of a financial operation of that kind. The
Treasury gets it.” It is therefore probable that the money
handed to the State Treasurers, will be a most dangerous weapon
in their hands, and may even be used by the State Governments
to defy their Parliaments, and govern contrary to the wishes of
the provincial electors, of whom this Bill makes them, to an
extent financially independent. What will they care for the
State Parliament as long as they can get all the money they need
from the Federal Treasurer ? Moreover Parliaments have been
bribed before, and may be again.
This precious Braddon Blot was thus “ amended ” by the
Secret Conference of Premiers that met in the early part
of 3899:
87. During a period of ten tears after the establish-
ment of the Commonwealth, and thereafter until
The Parliament otherwise provides, of the net revenue
of the Commonwealth from the duties of customs and of
excise, not more than one-fourth shall be applied annually
by the Commonwealth towards its expenditure.
The balance shall, in accordance with this Constitution, be
paid to the several States, or applied towards the payment
of interest on debts of the several States taken over by the
Commonwealth.
It will be noted that by the wording of the clause it will still be
a permanent infliction. It will have the force of a law of the
Commonwealth until a bill for its repeal is passed through both
Houses of the Federal Parliament; and as states like
Tasmania (for whose benefit the blot was created) will have the
same representation as we in the Senate, they will be strong
enough to refuse to allow its repeal. Tasmania and West
Australia will have inordinate power in both Houses in the
event of a Deadlock. We are only to be allowed one Repre-
sentative for about every 60,000 of the population, but Tas-
mania, which has a population of 166,113, and West Australia*.


which has a population of only 137,964, are by the following
paragraph of section 24 to be allowed no fewer than five
Representatives each : “ But notwithstanding anything in this
section, five at least shall be chosen in each Original State.”
The probable revenue necessitated by the Braddon Blot was
estimated by the Financial Commission (consisting of Mr. Bruce
Smith, Mr. Russell French and Dr. Maclaurin) at from £6,500,000
to £7,000,000, or about 225, 6d. per head from every man,
woman and child in the colony. The tariff of between
£6,500,000 and £7,000,000 does not, however, take Queensland
into consideration, said does not adequately provide for the
needs of Tasmania and West Australia. Those colonies would
imperatively have to be assisted by the wealthier colonies. Ihe
Commissioners say : —“ In reply to the question —What amount
of Customs revenue would be required to enable the Common-
wealth to place all the States in a position to meet their financial
requirements? we estimate that about £11,000,000 would suffice
to balance all!” This enormous sum, or even the £6,500,000
or £7,000,000 could not be obtained by means of a protective
tariff, for the reason that a prohibitively high tariff yields little
or no revenue. The revenue would have to be obtained by
heavy excise duties, and import duties on articles that cannot be
produced in Australia. Sir George Turner (Premier of A ic-
tioria) stated recently at St. Kilda that he was in favour of an
excise duty on sugar, and it is regarded as probable that the
duty would be about £5 a ton. This very proposal is evidence
of how the southern states would combine against the northern
states. Sugar is, in Australia, grown only in New South
Wales and Queeensland ; but colonial wine, which would yield
a good revenue, is produced in South Australia and \ ictoria.
Sir George Turner does not propose a duty, on colonial wine.
Another peculiarity of the Braddon Blot is that it apparently
prevents the Federal Government from having the money
wherewith to pay pensions to aged and invalid persons. The
Government would either be compelled to return the surplus
revenue to the State Governments, or pay the interest on debts
that may be taken over from the States. Thus there would be
no money left to pay the pensions with. It is all very well to
say that the money might be obtained by direct taxation. We
knon r very well that the other colonies do not favor any ad-
ditional direct taxation. The facts (hat all the other Australian
Governments are carried on by means of import and excise


dutiea, and that in the other colonies freetraders are almost un-
known, are evidences that the Federal Government would not go
elsewhere than to the customs and excise for revenue. In order
to make quite sure that under Federation the small states would
be able to bleed the big states, the Representatives of the
former at the Secret Conference of Premier’s inserted the follow-
r.g new clause :
(Clause 96 of the Bill as proposed to be amended.)
During a period of ten years after the establishment of the
Commonwealth and thereafter until The Parliament other-
wise provides, The Parliament may grant financial assis-
tance to any State on such terms and conditions as The
Parliament thinks fit.
The above clause was probably in the mind of the Hon. J. H-
Want when he cabled from London that the “Amended” Bill
was “ apparently worse than before.” After what I have said
as to the disproportionately large representation of the small
states in the Federal Parliament it will be seen that under the
new clause they would be able to levy upon us thoroughly in
order to bolster up their possibly bankrupt provincial Govern-
ments.
The Delegates are assumed, by their friends, to possess the
profoundest intellects in Australia ; yet the financial chapter is
a most clumsy production, and full of clauses which contradict
other clauses. Here are some of them arranged in deadly
parallel columns.
“ 82. The revenue of the Common-j “ 87. Of the net revenue from du-
wealth shall in the first instance be
appplied to the payment of the ex-
penditure of the Commonwealth.”
'‘9o. On the imposition of uniform
duties of Customs, the power of the
Parliament to grant bounties on the
production or export of goods shall
become EXCLUSIVE.”
ties of Customs and of excise, not
more than one-fourth shall be applied
annually by the Commonwealth to-
wards its expenditure.”
“90. Any grant of or agreement
for any such bounty, lawfully made
by or under the authority of the
Government of any State, shall be
taten to be good, if made before the
30th day of June, 1898.’,
“91. Nothing in this Constitution
prohibits a State from granting any
aid to or bounty on mining for gold,
silver, or other metals.”


“ 92. On the imposition of uniform
duties of Customs, trade, commerce,
and intercourse among the States,
whether by means of internal carriage
or ocean navigation shall be ABSO-
LUTELY FREE.”
“98. The power of the Parliament
to make laws with respect to trade
and commerce extends to railways
the property of any State.”
“ 99. The Commonwealth shall not
give preference to one State or any
part thereof over another State, or
any part thereof.”
“ 92. Goods imported before the
imposition of uniform duties shall,
on thence passing into another State
within two years after the imposition
of such duties, be liable to any duty
chargeable on the importation of such
goods into the Commonwealth, less
any duty paid in respect of the
goods on their importation.”
(See also the “ account - keeping
clause and the special clause ex-
empting West Australia).
“ 102. Due regard being had to the
financial responsibility incurred by
any State in connection with the
construction and maintenance of its
railways.”
These bounty clauses are worthy of very serious considera
tion, for the reason that the bounties would in many cases act
in the same way as protective duties and thus to some extent
nullify intercolonial Freetrade. In Victoria, for instance, there
is what is practically a bounty on Grippsland coal. Under
section 90 the Victorians would continue to render this State
assistance, and thus handicap New South Wales coal in the
Victorian market. Under sections 91 and 104 of the Bill the
bounty could be made permanent.
All this financial blundering is perhaps to be explained by
the fact that most of the Delegates were ignorant of finance.
The only recognised financial expert elected to the Convention
was Mr. J. T. Walker, but the Delegates did not wish for ex-
perts, so they promptly shelved him by placing him on the
Judicial Committee. The Finance Committee they packed with
incompetents, some of whom are known to be ignorant of com-
plex financial operations.
As for the absurd proposed bookkeeping system, it has been
laughed at and condemned by the most astute financial experts
in Australia, including the very able Mr. B. L. Nash. Mr.
Ooghlan, the statistician, says “ No business man supposes that
the bookkeeping system will be taken seriously by the customs
officials.” The bookkeeping system will prove a mere make-
believe, and will certainly not prevent the revenue from being


defrauded to an enormous extent; in which case the machinery
of Government may be brought to a standstill. However,
enough of finance. The federal patriots will get their salaries
somehow.
The*Dkadlock Fraud Exposed.
The artfully constructed “ Deadlock Clause ” is rather a
long one, but as it is of very great importance I give it in full as
amended by the Secret Conference :
57. If the House of Representatives passes any proposed
law, and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it
with amendments to which the House of Representatives
will not agree, and if AFTER AN INTERVAL OF
THREE MONTHS the House of Representatives, in the
same or the next session, again passes the proposed law
with or without any amendments which have been made,
suggested, or agreed to by the Senate, and the Senate re-
jects or tails to pass it, or passes it w r ith amendments to-
which the House of Representatives will not agree, the
Governor-General may dissolve the Senate and the House
of representatives simultaneously. BUT SUCH DISSO-
LUTION SHALL NOT TAKE PLACE WITHIN SIX
MONTHS BEFORE THE DATE OF THE EXPIRY OF
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES BY EF-
FLUXION OF TIME.
If after such dissolution the House of Representatives
again passes the proposed law with or without any amend-
ments which have been made, suggested, or agree 1 to by the
Senate, and the Senate rejects or fails to pass it, or passes
it with amendments to which the House of Representatives
will not agree, the Governor-General may convene a joint
sitting of the members of the Senate and of the House ot
Representatives.
The members present at the joint sitting may deliberate
and shall vote together upon the proposed law as last pro-
posed by the House of Representatives, and upon amend-
ments, if any, which have been made therein by one House,
and not agreed to by the other, and any such amendments
w'hioh are affirmed by an absolute majority of the total
number of the members of the Senate and House of Repre-
sentatives shall be taken to have been carried, and if the
proposed law, with the amendments, if any, s<> carried ia


affirmed by an absolute majority of the total number of
the members of the Senate and House of Representatives,
it shall be taken to have been duly passed by both Houses
of The Parliament, and shall be presented to the Governor-
General for the Queen’s assent.
I have printed the most objectionable parts of the above
section in large capital letters. In the unamended Bill a three-
fifths majority in the joint sitting was required. In this Bill an
“absolute” majority of the total number of the members of the
Senate and House of Representatives is required. The word
“absolute” seems to be superfluous. Why is it used? Probably
to encourage disputes before the Federal High Court as to the
exact meaning of the section. If a Reform Bill be passed
through the joint sitting it will at once be challenged before the
High Court on the ground that it has not obtained an absolute
majority within the meaning of the Act —even if the Bill has
received a majority of the total number of the members of both
Houses. It is very doubtful whether this “absolute” majority
is any better than the old three-fifths majority. It might be
easier to get a three-fifths majority of those who happened to
sit, than to get a majority of the total number of the members
of both Houses. There is nothing to compel the Senators to
be present, and in the absence of such a provision the Senators
could probably win by simply staying away.
But the most dangerous thing in the “deadlock clause” is
the power given to the Senate to stonewall Reform Bills for
years. They would not peremptorily reject, but would “talk
out.” If the Senate rejected a Bill in the second of the three
sessions of the House of Representatives the three months’
interval would almost certainly take the House into its third
session. Then, when the Bill was re-introduced, the Senate
could stonewall until the six month s limit was reached during
which the joint dissolution must not take place. Then nothing
could be done until a new House of Representatives had been
elected, when the Senate could again twice reject the Bill.
Thus the Senate could reject even a money bill five times and
delay the bill about four or five years before that House could
be dissolved. By the time of the fourth rejection the people
would probably have become dispirited and would pursue the
matter no further. Even if the bill were introduced in the first
session of the Representative, it could be blocked for quite two


years. The power to block a bill imposing taxaiion, or appropria-
ting revenue, is a tremendous one, and in most cases the Govern-
ment would have to make great concessions to the Senate in
order to get without delay the money wherewith to carry on
the business of the country. Provincial Upper Houses are
sometimes compelled to yield to Governments, by measures
favoured by an Upper House being “ tacked on ” to money
bills; but this power is forbidden to the Federal Government
by the following sections :
54. The proposed law which appropriates revenue or moneys
for the ordinary annual services of the 'Government shall
deal only with such appropriation.
55. Laws imposing taxation shall deal only with the impo-
sition of taxation, and any provision therein dealing with
any other matter shall be of no effect.
Laws imposing taxation, except laws imposing duties of
customs or excise, shall deal with one subject of taxation
only; but laws imposing duties of customs shall deal with
duties of customs only, and laws imposing duties of excise
shall deal with duties of excise only.
The Federal Capital,
Here is the clause dealing with the Federal Capital.
Originally the capital could have been anywhere in Australia,
but the Secret Conference of Premiers fixed the matter as
follows:
(Clause 125 of the Bill as proposed to be amended.)
The seat of Government of the Commonwealth shall be
determined by The Parliament and shall be within territory
which shall have been granted to or acquired by the
Commonwealth and shall be vested in and belong to the
Commonwealth, and if New South Wales be an Original
State shall be in that State and be distant not less than one
hundred miles from Sydney.
Such territory shall contain an area of not less than one
hundred square miles, and such portion thereof as shall
consist of Crown lauds shall be granted to the Common-
wealth without any payment therefor.
If Victoria be an Original State The Parliament shall sit at
Melbourne until it meets at the seat of Government.


In at least one respect the alteration in this clause makes the
Bill worse than before. It definitely excludes any large city
from being the permanent seat of the Federal Government.
This is distinctly bad. If it met in a big city the Federal
Government would be more influenced by public opinion than if
it met in a little country village. Chief Justice Griffith says
(“Notes on Australian Federation”) “If the seat of Govern-
ment were a populous city, the dangers of interruption,
awe, or influence would be intensified but a much better
authority—and one favourable to Democracy —the great Ameri-
can writer on Constitutional matters (Mr. E. L. Godkin) says,
on pages 177-178 of his “Unforseen Tendencies of Democracy;”
“It (the practice of fixing the capital in a country district)
has kept legislators when in session secluded from the observa-
tion of the moat active minded of the population and from inter-
course with them, and has deprived them of the information and
the new ideas which such intercourse brings with it. Members
of Congress and of the State Legislatures suffer seriously in
mind and character from our practice of cutting them off during
their official lives from communion with the portion of the popu-
lation most immersed in, affairs, and of keeping tfrera out of sight
of those who are most competent to understand their action and
to criticise it. No one who has paid much attention to our
political life can have helped observing the injurious effect on
the legislative mind of massing legislators together in remote
towns in which they exchange ideas only with one another, and
get no inkling of the real drift of public opinion about a particu-
lar measure until it has been irrevocably acted upon
Every legislature is the better, and its tone is the healthier, for
being kept in close contact with the leading centres of
business in the ommunity, and hearing daily or hourly from its
men of affairs.”
The governing of Federated Australia from an obscure
country town would be the apotheosis of political hole-and-corner
cliquism, and, God knows, we have already had enough of
Government by clique in this country to disgust any genuinely
Badical politician.
The Bill’s stipulation that the capital must be federal terri-
tory is unwarrantable and unnecessary; nevertheless, as suggested
by Sir George Dibbs, it would pay Sydney to give a strip of land
in, say, 1 xince Alfred Park, for federal purposes.


There is another light in which this question of the capital
should be viewed. Sydney is sure to lose very greatly by
Federation. Her present comparative prosperity is due to,
among other things, strategic railway construction (which the
Inter-State commission might interfere with) ; preferential rail-
way rates (prohibited in the Federal Bill) ; the fact that an
important river like the Darling is seldom navigable throughout
its entire length; and protective tariffs (which drive produce and
stock to Sydney.) Under Federation all this will be changed.
A grand scheme of locking and snagging the Darling may be
carried out; and Mr. E. A. Amphlett, 8.E., ASsoc. M. Inst. C.E.,
tells us that “if the whole course of the river was canalised
trade will be diverted to Adelaide.” So that Sydney would lose
in this respect. It is the fashion to talk about Sydney’s great
natural advantages, but the facts are that the best lands in the
colony are nearer to the other capitals than to Sydney, and that
Sydney is naturally handicapped by the existence of 100 miles of
rough mountains, the greatest portion of the Great Dividing
Range, lying just inland of the capital of New South Wales.
The cost of haulage over the mountains will always place Sydney
at a disadvantage as a shipping centre —other things being equal.
Now, if this Bill be adopted Sydney will not only lose because of
these things and of unduly heavy taxation, but she will also lose
because of the exodus of wealthy people to the federal city.
Would it not be fair, as compensation for all that Sydney must
lose, to make it the Federal Capital ? The Governor-General
will probably be a royal duke (the Queen’s son-in-law was
Governor-General of Canada) ; he will have a very large income
and will be the centre of “society.” Wealthy people, many of
them drawing Sydney rents, will leave Sydney for the federal
city in order to be present at the gubernatorial functions ; and
they will spend their money there.
There is also the fact to be considered that the construction
of transcontinental railway lines will make Ports Darwin,
Adelaide and Augusta formidable rivals to Sydney. When
the Russian, Chinese and Indian railways are finished an im-
mense trade must eventually arise between these colonies,
the Southern Archipelago and Asia. The South Australians
see this and, in order to take advantage of it, have attempted
to carry out an ambitious scheme of transcontinental railway
construction, which would cost over £22, 000,000. They have
practically failed, but have inserted clauses in the Federal Bill
i


which empower the Federal Government to carry out the
gigantic scheme. The clauses are sub-sections of section 51.
Here they are —
xxxrn. The acquisition, with the consent of a State, of any
rail ways of the State on terms arranged between the Common-
wealth and the State:
xxxiv. Kailway construction and extension in any State
with the consent of that State.
These lines would be of immense value to South Australia, but they
would boom Port Darwin and the South Australian ports at the
expense of Sydney, and New South Wales would have to pay
most of the cost of construction. Is she not entitled to some
compensation ?
The stipulation that the capital shall be not less than one
hundred miles from Sydney is both a trick and an outrage. New
South Wales is to give the Federal Government one hundred
square miles of her land, and will thus lose all control over it,
including, of course, the right to tax it. It is certain to be, for
the convenience of the other colonies, somewhere on the borders,
and as the borders trade almost entirely with the other capitals
we will not reap even a trade benefit. In this matter Mr. Reid
most certainly betrayed us.
The first Parliament, and, notwithstanding Mr. Reid’s quib-
bles, the Government also, will sit at Melbourne, where it will
remain for some years. The American Government could not
be induced for many years to leave fashionable Philadelphia for
unattractive Washington.
How the Supreme Court would Govern the Country.
The greatest obstacle to the popular will in the United States,
and the most formidable enemy of the poor in that country, is
the Federal Supreme Court. This is how Judge Tully, of
Chicago, referred last year to judical interference in political
matters —“ I venture the prediction that unless the usurpation
of powers by the Courts is promptly checked, we shall within a
few years see elections —and a Presidential one, perhaps —
carried by a Court’s writ of injunction, backed by armed
‘deputies’’ or federal soldiers.” When, after long years of
arduous struggle, the people of the United States pass any
measure through Congress that is likely to benefit the people


it ia promptly quashed by an injunction from the Federal
Supreme Court declaring the measure to be “ unconstitutional.”
“ And now comes the news that the courts have enjoined the
Insurance Commissioner of the State of Texas from collecting
the tax on foreign insurance companies doing business in that,
state. This is getting to be an all round government by in-
junction, with the Federal Judiciary as the arbiter of the
nation’s welfare. Congress passes an income tax law, the
President signs it, and the Supreme Court declares it unconsti-
tutional. The State passes a railroad commission law ; the
railroads declare the rulings of the commission unjust, and the
courts enjoin the operation of the law. The foreign insurance
companies doing business in Texas say that to tax them is unjust,,
and the courts enjoin the State from taxing them. Have the
people any rights at all that the Federal Judiciary is bound to
respect?”—‘Labour World,’ U.S.A.
Exactly the same things would occur in Australia. The
great difference between the proposed Federal Constitution and
the existing Australian Constitutions is that in the former the
nominee Supreme Court is paramount. It is placed by section
74 above Constitution, English Cabinet, Queen, Governor-
General, Parliament, States, people, and the destinies of Aus-
tralia ; and if it is weak, corrupt, subservient to class, Mate,
Commonwealth, or persons, or arbitrarily legal (as opposed to
constitutional ) in its interpretations, the door is opened wide to
a hitherto unknown brood of dangers to national liberty.
That this was fully intended by those who drafted the Bill
is shown by the following extract from the Melbourne Convent on
Debates on Isaac’s proposal to prevent the Federal Supreme Court
from interfering with taxation laws after they have received the
Royal assent, This exhibits the conviction that Sir John Downer
has of the superiority of the Courts to Parliament. Remember,
too, that, as one of the Drafting Committee, his insidious in-
fluence permeates the whole legal language of the Constitution: —
“ Sir John Downer. —Just one word to the Attorney-General
of Victoria. lam not at all certain that, even if he carried his
proposals according to the way he has variously explained his
intentions, he would produce quite the insult that he wants. It
might be possible that he might find himself in the hands of the
Supreme Court at an early stage, and at a later stage as well. If
no Bill can be introduced containing more than one taxation


proposal, then the guardian of the Constitution would say—
“ You must not introduce it,” and a mandamus might be issued.
Isaacs.—A mandamus against Parliament ?
Downer. —What a shocking thing !
Isaacs.—Did you ever hear of such a thing ?
Downer. — Then is Parliament to do what it likes ?
Higgins.—You never heard of a mandamus being obtained
against Parliament.
Isaacs. —If that is the sort of Constitution you want you
had better let us know it.
Downer.—l know that, with the liberal views of my friend
he wishes the Supreme Court to do nothing.”
Here is section 74. It will be seen that the first paragraph
places in the hands of the High Court the interpretation not
merely of the Pederal Constitution, but also of the State Consti-
tutions ! The second paragraph I have already dealt with ; its
object is to give to wealthy or “ influential ” persons the special
privilege of appealing to the Privy Council against poor
litigants :
74. No appeal shall be permitted to the Queen in Council
in any matter involving the interpretation of this Constitu-
tion or of the Constitution of a State, unless the public
interests of some part of Her Majesty’s Dominions, other
than the Commonwealth or a State, are involved.
Except as provided in this section, this Constitution shall
not impair any right which the Queen may be pleased to
exercise, by virtue of Her Royal Perogative, to grant special
leave of appeal from the High Court to Her Majesty' in
Council. Hut The Parliament may make laws limiting the
matters in which such leave may be asked.
There should be no such thing as the granting of “special leave.”
The unrestricted right of appeal to the Privy Council for the
poor as well as for the rich, for the uninjluential as well as for
the ‘ influential,” should be preserved at all hazards.
The following is the opinion of Mr. R. R. Gl-arran, 8.A.,
(Barrrister-at-Law), as to the meaning of the above clause It
supports my own :
“ 74. Appeals to Piuvr Council. —There is to he no appeal
to the Privy Council in cases where the meaning of the
Federai Constitution or the Constitution of a State is in


question (unless the interests of some other part of the
Empire are involved). In such cases, therefore, the decision
of the High Court will be absolutely final.
In other cases the decision of the High Court will usually
be final; but the Privy Council may grant special leave to
appeal to it in any particular case. But The Parliament
may limit the matters in which such leave may be asked.”
The Federal Supreme Court of the United States sanctions what
most people regard as deliberate violations of the United States
Constitution—provided that they maintain the interests of the
wealthy and of the governing cliques of professional politicians.
President Cleveland sent Federal Troops some years ago to
suppress a strike in Illinois; and a cablegram from America with
reference to the matter ran as follows: —“ Mr. Hogg, Governor
of Texas, when addressing the State militia, said that President
Cleveland, by illegally despatching Federal troops for the suppres-
sion of a strike (against the wish of the local authorities), had
committed gross invasion of State Eights. The conflict between
capital and labor, by leading to a deliberate breach of the
Constitution, showed that America was on the eve of a bloody
revolt, which threatened the dismemberment of the Republic.”
Yet this “deliberate breach of the constitution” was upheld by
the Federal Supreme Court!
“The English Cabinet system has been evolved under a
system, where Parliament is supreme, where strictly legal
intrepretations of Parliamentary powers have been and would
be sternly resented aud flouted, and where constitutional ‘ con-
ventions” and tacit understandings are more potent than legal
decisions could be. The “Cabinet” itself, the most powerful
instrument of free government in the world, is quite unknown
to the law.
The various Australian constitutions endeavour to put this
system as far as it may be put in print. And in a measure they
may perhaps be said to have fairly succeeded. But they have
never until this attempt put an irresponsible Supreme Court as
final interpreter of the said constitutions. The Governor’s
instructions, the tact of the English Cabinet, the aptness of our
application of English constitutional methods, “conventions”
and tacit understandings, and the carefuhy-selected Governors
we have usually had, have made it possible for us to get along
smoothly enough.”


But, as I have shown, the Federal High Court would, under
the Bill, be the supreme power in Australia, and —then let
Australian Democrats tremble.
The Practical Impossibility of Altering the Constitution.
Many who have read thus far may exclaim —“But if we find
in practice that the Constitution does not satisfy us, we can alter
it!” No, sirs, you cannot! All National Constitutions come
to be regarded with a sort of superstitious reverence bv the ma-
jority. The Constitution of the United States has inflicted un-
told hardship upon the people of that country, and yet the
Americans almost worship it. It is a matter of habit and train-
ing. But the framers of the Draft Constitution Bill of 1898 have
made assurance doubly sure, and have so drawn the Bill that
when once adopted it cannot be altered without insuperable
■difficulty. They declare that any proposed law for its alteration
must be passed by an absolute majority of each House of Par-
liament, and then, some months afterwards, it shall be submitted
to the electors; “ And if, in a majority of the States a majority
of the electors voting approve the proposed law, and if a major-
ity of all the electors voting also approve the proposed law, it shall
be presented to the Grovernor-Greneral for the Queen’s assent.”
With all these majorities and delays it would be easier to move
a mountain than to alter the Constitution. The Secret Confer-
ence slightly altered this clause by inserting the following:—
“ But if either House passes any such proposed law by an
absolute majority and the other House rejects or fails to
pass it or passes it with any amendment to which the first-
mentioned House will not agree, and if after an interval of
three months the first-mentioned House in the same or the
next Session again passes the proposed law by an absolute
majority with or without any amendment which has been
made or agreed to by the other Home, and such other
House rejects or fails to pass it, or passes it with any
amendment to which the first-mentioned House will not
agree, the G-overnor-G-eneral may submit the proposed law
as last proposed by the first-mentioned House and either
with or without any amendments subsequently agreed to by
both Houses to the electors in each State qualified to vote
for the election of the House of Representatives.”
It is doubtful if this is any improvement. If it is, it is a
very slight one. The Constitution cannot be altered without


For altering the
Constitution.
Total Votes
say—
For.
Against.
New South Wales ...
Victoria
300.001
300.001
300.000
300.000
1
1
Agains* altering the
Constitution.
South Australia
West Australia
Tasmania
80,001
60,001
40.001
40.000
30.000
20.000
40.001
30.001
20.001
690,000
90,005
“ In this case, though 690,000 might be in favour of an
alteration in the Constitution, 90,005 would render the majority’s
vote nugatory. Though there is no pretension to preciseness in
the figures they serve to point a valuable moral, i.e., the fool-
absolute majorities having been twice obtained in the Federal
Parliament, and the proposal having been sanctioned by a
majority of the electors and a majority of the States. Moreover,
unlike the constitutions of the United States and Switzerland,
the Bill contains no right of initiative. In Switzerland if St'.OOO
electors demand an alteration, the proposal is submitted to the
referendum ; while in the United State*, Congress can be com-
pelled, by two-thirds of the State Legislatures, to submit auy
proposal for the alteration of the Constitution to the State
Legislatures, or to special conventions elected for the purpose.
This is much more democratic than our proposed method of
altering the Constitution, for the reason that, owing to the large
electorates necessitated by our proposed Constitution, the State
Legislatures would be considerably more democratic than the
proposed House of Representatives. The electorates for the
Federal Lower House would be six times larger than those for the
provincial Lower House.
How the Convention’s cunning scheme of insisting upon an
affirmative vote of a majority of the States being necessary be-
fore an alteration could be made, would work out, is thus shown
by Mr. Henry Joseph, of Moree
hardiness of a community that would entertain such a compact,
and the brazen effrontery of those who would tell you the
Constitution is democratic.”


Equal Representation in the Senate could not be abolished
unless at least five majorities were obtained, viz., two majorities
in the Federal Parliament; a majority of the electors in a
majority of the States ; a majority of all the electors voting ;
and a majority of the electors in each of the States affected by
the alteration.
The Imperial Parliament Might Mutilate the Bill.
There is no provision for referring the Bill to the people
again in the event of the Imperial Parliament materially altering
it. It might come to us from the present Tory Imperial.
Parliament in such a mutilated and completely objectionable
form as to render it quite distasteful to the immense majority
of the electors of Australii, and yet the terms of the Bill would
compel us to accept it.
The Unwisdom of Hasty Feheration.
In his "‘History of Europe" Dr. Freeman says: —“There
is no lesson which history teaches us which we cannot learn from
Grecian history, and this is mainly because in Greece everything
whether forms of government, literature, art or philosophy, is
all quite fresh and not borrowed from any other people. In
these ways Greece, though so small a part of the world, has
influenced all the history of the world ever since.” In some
respects the ancient Greeks resembled the modern Australians.
They lived in a land with a climate somewhat similar to our
own, they were politically self-governing, they were divided into
a number of States ; and for a very long period they were not
federated. Aet Dr. Freeman says that the fact of their being
divided into independent States “ not joined under one govern-
ment,” was one of the main causes of their intellectual greatness.
He says on page 13 of his “ History ” —“They were sure not to
join under one government, but to keep apart in small states,
each town or district being, or trying to be, independent of all
others. All these things, division into many small states, a sea-
faring life, and all that such a life leads to, are things that
greatly tend to sharpen the wits. The Greeks bad the start of
all other people in literature and art and science, and, above all,
in the art of government. For they were the first people who
made free commonwealths.” For more than six centuries the
Greeks, who, unlike the Australians, were dangerously situated
geographically, flourished without any federation whatever.


During this period they produced Homer, the greatest of epic
poets, Pindar the lyric poet, iEschylus, the first great tragic poet
aud founder of the drama, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes
and other poets, Phidias, the greatest of antique sculptors ; the
philosophers Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato aud Aristotle, the
historians Herodotus and Thucydides, the physician Hippocrates,
the orator Demosthenes, and the statemen Solon, Pericles and
Lycurgus. In fact all the great Greeks of undying fame ap-
peared in the pre-federal age. About 280 b.c., the first Greek
confederation, which was termed the Achaian League, was
formed ; and the Greeks never afterwards produced a truly
illustrious man ; and about the beginning of the second century
before Christ they were subjugated by the Macedonians, and,
afterwards completely overwhelmed by the Romans. History
may repeat itself. At any rate we should not hasten to con-
struct an additional and extremely powerful and expensive
government, without reckoning the cost and calculating the
risks. We have fought many years, and endured much, in order
to hand down to posterity a democratically governed state, in
which the majority rules, and intelligence is counted as of
greater value than bricks and mortar. But the Draft Bill is not
based upon manhood suffrage ; it permits a property qualification
for electors, and in the Senate establishes minority rule. The
Senate will be master of the situation. Unless a deadlock
occurs it will never have to face a general election, because its
members, who will be elected for six years, will retire, not at
once, but in batches at separate periods of time. In Western
Australia and Tasmania they, as well as the Representatives,
will be elected upon a carefully restricted franchise. It is also
worthy of note that the Conservative Party may at any time
greatly strengthen itself by admitting the Northern Territory,
and portions of Queensland, and Western Australia, as new
states, and no matter how r small the population of those states,
the Parliament may allow them as many members in either
House of Parliament “as it thinks fit” (see chapter vi.)
We are in absolutely no danger of invasion while the
British Naval Squadron is here, and as for our troops, it is well-
know r n that the military commandants have agreed upon a
scheme for the immediate federation of the whole of the Aus-
tralian troops iu the event of war being declared.
The immediate federation of the Post Offices (which the
agitators for hasty federation loudly demand) would be a serious


injury to the people of New South Wales. The* Honorable
Joseph Cook says that the rates are much higher in the other
colonies thau they are here, and that the Federal Government
would raise the rates to those prevailing in the other colonies.
So that one of the boons of federation is that we would have to
pay twopence postage on a note addressed to a person in the
next street. Truly we shall have to pay dearly if we are so un-
wise as to elevate blatant, demagogic, federal agitators into very
high positions.
Why not Utilize the Federal Council?
When we do federate, let us take the existing Federal
Council and elect its members by manhood suffrage, or adult
suffrage, allowing representation to each State according to its
population. Let the members of the Council be paid—say three
hundred a year, and empowered to raise revenue by customs
duties, and to establish intercolonial Freetrade. Let them also
be empowered to deal with questions of national defence. In
time, if our sense of the value and trustworthiness of the
Federal Council increased, we might entrust it with the work of
federating our railways ; and (if possible) consolidating our
debts; and eventually it could perhaps be trusted to carry out
vast works for the obtaining and conservation of water, and the
irrigation of the soil. This scheme of federal government is
simple, democratic, and —unlike the Draft Bill—not revolution-
ary ; but it would not suit the hungry ambitious lawyers who
are howling for the best paid positions ever obtainable in this
or any other thinly-populated country. Our leading Federalists
—always with hungry eyes on the federal judgeships—sneer at
the Federal Council ; and yet, perhaps the greatest period of
English history was during the Commonwealth, and before the
Protectorate ,of the usurper Cromwell; when G-reat Britain
was most successfully governed by a Council of State of 41
members. With the democratization of the Federal Council,
such as I have proposed, there would be no Governor-General
at “not less than £IO,OOO a year”; no Federal Judges at from
five to ten thousand a year; no Federal Premiers at three
thousand a year; no vastly over-paid Military Magnates; but
there wmuld be economy, simplicity of Government, and pure
democracy. It is strange that with all the clamour for Federa-
tion, no one appears to have thought of advocating this demo-
cratization of the Federal Council. Under sub-sections H and


T, of section 15 of the Federal Council of Australasia Act, general
defences, patents, marriage and divorce, naturalization of aliens,
“and other matters of general Australasian interest, with re-
spect to which the legislatures of the several colonies can
legislate within their own limits, and as to which it is deemed
desirable that there should be a law of general application,”
may be dealt with by the Council, if so requested by the existing
legislatures. Section 31, which gives ;-ower to withdraw from
the Council, could be repealed. If the Council were paid, its
powers enlarged as above, and its members elected by universal
one-adult-one-vote, we should have a much more satisfactory
system of federation than any that has yeT; been proposed.
Democrats ought not to desire a powerful, highly centralized
government. Pure democracy seems to flourish best in small
communities, and therefore (including the
maintenance of existing local legislative bodies and the creation
of new ones) is what we should strive for. While dealing with
this proposed democratization of the Federal Council, it is,|as I have
said, worth noting that England was governed (during the Repub-
lic) by a Council of State for about five years. The Council was
elected by Parliament, and elected its own President. Hereis what
William Godwin says in his “ History of the Commonwealth,”
about the rule of the Council of State: “The five years treated
of may challenge any equal period of English history in the
glory of its rule, and perhaps in the virtue and disinterestedness
of many of its most distinguished leaders.”
APPENDIX.
A SUPPRESSED STATE DOCUMENT.
The following letter, from the Hon. John Lucas, M.L.C., ap-
peared in the Sydney Morning Herald , on May 13, 1891:—-
“ Sir, —Sir Henry Parkes, in one of his first speeches on this
subject (Federation) stated that the first and principal object of
Federation was to protect the colonies from invasion. An Im-
perial Committee was appointed to inquire into and report on
the defences of the whole of the British colonies. The Com-
mittee reported that their geographical position was a sufficient


protection for the Australian colonies ; that the transportation
of an effective force to Australia would be so costly that no foreign
power would attempt it; and that if they did, with the present
mode of communication and the several English warships in these
waters, it would be impossible for them to avoid being captured.
“ The Imperial Committee disagreed with General Edward’s
report, and stated that the Australian colonies only required a
few 6-inch guns and about 10,000 of a defence force (not 30,000
as General Edwards reported).
*• Had this report been made public, it would (as The Sydney
Morniny Herald stated in its leading articles) have shown that
invasion was impossible, which disposed of Sir Henry’s first and
principal reason for Federation.
“ Sir Henrv Parkes received a copy of this report, and locked
it up, and took care that it should not be made public or seen
by the people or Parliament.
“The Victorian Government also received a copy of the report
and at once made it public, and it was from the Victorian news-
papers that the Herald obtained the information.
“ Having read the remarks in the Herald I asked a number of
■questions in my place in the Council about this report The
answers I received yvere evasive and unsatisfactory. I was suf-
fering from illness and unable to follow up the question, but
in ray absence the Hon. John Stewart questioned the Vice-
President on the subject, and was told that the report was a
private document and would not be made public.
“ In the early days of responsible government if any government
had concealed such an important public paper they would have
been ignorainiously hurled from office ; and, if in opposition, Sir
Henry Parkes would have been the first to move a vote of cen-
sure.
“ Sir Henry Parkes well knew that if he published the Imperial
■Committee’s report it would damage the prospects of the
President of the Australian Commonwealth —so it was suppressad^ST^k^
W&f f r
BI6UO jfo g T
T. E. Colebrook, Printer, “ Budget ” Office, Leichhardt. I ■< "9
Hum fe
Vno: y




