

THE
POWER OF THE ROMAN POPES
OVER
PRINCES, COUNTRIES, NATIONS, INDIVIDUALS,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THEIR TEACHINGS SINCE
GREGORY VII.
REVIEWED IN ESTIMATING THEIR
INFALLIBILITY,
AND CONTRASTED WITH
THE REVERSE TEACHINGS OF THE
Lopes and Conncils of the First Eight Centuries,
CONCERNING THE RELATION OF THE
TEMPORAL POWER TO THAT OE THE CHURCH.
BY
DR. J. F. VON SCHULTE
PROFESSOR OF CANONICAL LAW AT PRAGUE.
Translated from the German
BY
ALFRED SOMMERS.
ADELAIDE:
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1871.
Prick 3s.
Andrews, Thomas, Si Clark, Printers, Grenfell-Street, Adelaide.




THE
POWER OF THE ROMAN POPES
OVER
• PRINCES, COUNTRIES, NATIONS, INDIVIDUALS,
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THEIR TEACHINGS AND ACTIOJJSWSN^'w.
GREGORY VII. ' ' 4 1
REVIEWED IN ESTIMATING THl^gi
INFALLIBILITY^
AND CONTRASTED WITH
THE REVERSE TEACHINGS OF THE
I’opcsi mul Councils of the £irst eight Centums,
CONCERNING THE RELATION OF THE
TEMPORAL POWER TO THAT OE THE CHURCH.
BY
DR. J. F. VON SCHULTE
PROFESSOR OF CANONICAL LAW AT PRAGUE.
front tfje (Serntart
BY
ALFRED SOMMERS.
ADELAIDE:
SOLD BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1871.


ANDREWS, THOMAS, & CLARK, PRINTERS,
GRENEELL-STREET, ADELAIDE.


In offering to the public a translation of the most celebrated
work which has as yet been written in illustration of the dogma
of the “ Papal Infallibility,” I wish to state at once that this
translation lays claim to no other merit than being a “ literal
one,” I having purposely abstained from using any other' words
than those made use of by the author himself, with whose mode
of expression—he being a dear and near relative of mine—l am
thoroughly conversant; aye, it was in a great measure the very
style adopted by him—a style disdaining all the flowers of rhetoric,
letting the facts do their own speaking and pleading —which in-
duced me to give extended publicity to a work so congenial to
my own ideas, and so confirmatory of what my innate feeling,
letting alone common sense, had long ago taught me with regard
to the subjects it treats of; I hoping in this manner to enable my
co-religionists and all the general public to become possessed of a
text book which explains the question at issue from all points,
and which will give them the key for the deep-rooted feeling of
resistance offered in Germany and elsewhere to a dogma which
deifies a human being—a feeling to which we must ascribe the
following Proclamation, dated Munich, June 12, 1871, addressed
by a meeting of the leading German (old) Catholics to their
Catholic brethren : “1. We adhere in rejecting the Vatican infalli-
bility and the Vatican dogmas, which, in spite of all the denyings
of the bishops, give personal infallibility and an absolute sway over
the whole Church to the pope. 2. We adhere to the firmly-rooted
conviction that these Vatican decrees do form a serious danger for
the State and civil society, and that the same can never harmo-
nize with the laws and institutions of the present States, and that
we by accepting them would enter into dissoluble conflict with our
political duties and oaths. 3. The German bishops themselves


show, by their dissimilar and contradictory interpretation of the
Vatican dogmas, that they are fully cognizant of their late growth,
and that they feel ashamed of them. We grieve therefore at their
making such use of their episcopal teaching—grieve that the
German bishops did not scruple in their pastorals to reply to the
appeal of conscience (Gewissensschrei) addressed by their dioce-
sans to them, with abusing of intelligence and science. 4. We
reject the threats of the bishops as unjust, their warrants as void
and unbinding. We know that by their excommunication the
faithful will neither lose their good right for the blessings of the
Church, nor the priests their calling to spend the same ; and we
are resolved not to let our rights be weakened by any of the cen-
sures which have been issued for the furtherance of these false
teachings. 5. We live in hopes that the conflict now broken
out will, by higher guidance, be the means of preparing and
effecting that unavoidable reform so long wished for, both with
regard to the state of the Church in its constitution and in its
life. We are in hopes of such a real regeneration of the Church,
in which every civilized Catholic nation may form a limb of the
one universal Church, this in accordance with its innate nature,
and in harmony with its mission of civilization; in which the
clergy and lay community may work together in common in the
cultivation of the life of the Church; and in which a learned
episcopate and primate may strive to bring the Church again to
the front of civilization in the world ; and we hope that such regen-
eration may bring us nearer to the highest aim of Christian
development—the re-union of all Christian confessions.”
This proclamation bears thirty-one signatures, among which are
found the following names: Doellinger, Friedrich Huber,
Reinckens, Schulte, Knoodt, Michelis, Strumpf, Lord Acton, Count
Moy, Zirngib.
The reader will find the above resolutions amply proven in the
following lines ■ and allow me, in closing, to add just one remark
concerning the translating of this work.
Wherever I did consider it of use I have given duplicate words,
&c., in brackets, so as to enable the reader to accept the one most
apt to meet his own individual conception, I believing in this
manner to forward the studious and not only the cursory reading


of these writings—an aim which the author must certainly have
in view when saying (page 6) —“ In order to facilitate self-study
for every educated person, and not only for those who have pur-
sued learned studies, does this work give all the quotations from the
sources in faithful and therefore not fluent translation, but in a
translation as near as ever possible —now their meaning, now their
very words.” That in translating I was thus bound to adhere to
the original construction will be evident from the foregoing remark,
and this has been done by me as much as ever possible without
breaking their grammatical construction ; thus a kind reader will
excuse if some of the sentences require a little thinking to fathom
their full import, to seize which it must likewise be considered that
the documents adduced were written in different times from ours,
and by a body corporate having its own peculiar style.
In closing, I beg to publicly thank all those by whose kind help
.and encouragement I was induced to publish the following trans-
lation.
A. SOMMEKS.
Adelaide, October, 1871.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
The numerous new facts and quotations given purport on the one 1
part, to further the aim of these lines, to prove : That , according to
the Papal Theory developed since Gregory VII., no State can exist as
independent whose citizens really believe in an infallible pope , except
such State place itself under papal supremacy ; and, on the other
part, they go against the infallibility itself. This work gains more-
over by such augmentation the peculiar character that it teaches
to the educated what the Papal Temporal Rights are, as based on
the theory of the popes themselves, whilst at the same time it
collects the sources for science. This second edition proves from
numerous letters of Pope Leo the Great, of other popes, by the
Synods of the first eight centuries, and by the words of Cyrillus,.
that the doctrines of the position of the Church to the State,
which originated since Gregory VII., and which in their chief
points must be looked upon as Articles of Faith by all the
adherents of the new dogma of the 18th July, 1870, stand in
direct opposition to those of the old Church.
If thus the logical incongruity of the “Papal Infallibility”
with the ancient teaching of the Church is proved in an essential
point, it offers at the same time the proof that the “ Papal Infalli-
bility” is likewise incongruous with the doctrines of the old Church
concerning the functions of the Councils, and the status of the
bishops; that it is, therefore, without foundation in any direction
whatsoever.
The old saying which is always imputed to “antagonistic malice,”
“ The end sanctifies the means," is thus made the firm standard for
placing under censure everything and everybody in accordance
with the “ Obedience of Belief,” it being specially demanded of the
teachers of theology to try and persuade the multitude that the
vapours of the illusions which hitherto held captive the spiritual
eye were now destroyed by the July sun, they now plainly perceiving
what a simple thing the “ Infallibility” was, it explaining itself so-
naturally, it having always been believed in and so forth. One;


might almost think the awful and deep indignation, and the manly
opposition had not been earnestly intended by the multitude.
The motto “ Everything for the glory of the Most High,” must
sustain us here ; in face of that, all considerations, which are not
ordained by love, must vanish ; it is now obligatory only to deal
kindly with the person.
The phantom “ schism,” which had to be avoided at all hazards,
does not apply ; for it was made by those who have made an
addition to the Gospel of Christ. It is not the aim of Catholic
science, by sophistry, misrepresentation, and the contortion of
history, to fill the chasm, or to explain away the incongruities
which originated on the one part from the re-modelling of faith
necessitated so as to complete the idea of the Almighty, and on
the other part sprung from the want of courage to remain faithful
in the belief of the fathers, as if it had been forgotten that in
Home thrones only the first of the bishops—of bishops who,
according to the words of St. Paul, the teacher of nations, have
been appointed by the Holy Ghost, for the administration of the
Church, and not for being made the mere executors of the com-
mands and winks from above.
To notice the voice of science and of history has long been
discarded in those quarters, where science is considered identical
with the training and fitting out of scholastical weapons; where
only that method of style is upheld which is guided by the pencil
in al Gesu ; where the exegisis of the Holy Scriptures is hardly
more than a lux-ury which must be retained on account of the
“ heretics,” so that in a German archdiocese already years ago the
exegisis of the Old Testament could disappear from the exami-
nations of theologians, and lectures upon them be thus declared as
non-essential to clerical knowledge; where the dogmatist builds up
his system from, and upon logical deductions, instead of being always
and everywhere guided by the Scriptures and fathers, as were
Cyprian, Cyrillus, the holy Pope Leo, &c.; where a St. Thomas counts
more than the whole of ancient times, inclusive of the Scriptures •
where the moralist does not let the Scriptures, the fathers, in short
the sources speak, but St. Alphonsus Liguori and his sources down
to Laymann cum centum aliis —aye, where Gury forms a Gospel
which is applied when wanting to measure with a casuistic foot-rule
how far one may go without breaking through the barriers erected
between the peccatum mortale and veniale, so as to avoid the
punishments placed upon the real contraband—a system composed
of juristical propositions, probabilities, sophisms, and so forth ;
where the historian of the Church is superfluous, and does not


appear at the fountain head ; and where he does enough when
furnishing the citations to show to the pupils, already prepared
and admiring, that what is aimed at was present in greatest
purity from the very beginning, and could only not be perceived
by the arrogant, and especially German savans, who were wanting
in the humility of belief; and that the best kind of religious con-
struction was its systematic basing upon papal definitions and
Roman congregational decisions. If such a system be not proscribed;
if each and all parts of theology be not taken from the clear spring
of the Scriptures and the fathers; if they do not cease following a
system which does not comprehend the spirit of the author,, of the
writings, their whole meaning, but instead thereof to construe from
juristical tatters a caricature in which generally one thing only can
be seen —that of its being very congenial for the supreme guidance
of the machine by the highest pressure ; until then, nothing for
the better will be effected. Science has in opposition to this but
one aim—to step forth for truth, come from it what may. Worse
than at present it can never be in the Catholic Church—better,
yes ! May God will so !


DECLARATION AS INTRODUCTION.
The following is the verbatim translation of the Latin original
of the “ Prayer of several archbishops and bishops of Gallia, Ger-
many, Austria and Hungary, Italy, England, Ireland, and North
America, laid before their Eminencies the Presidents of the
Council
“ Eminent and Most Reverend Presides—
“ There being nothing obligatory to the Vatican Council but the
augmentation of God’s glory and the furtherance of the welfare of
man in the best possible manner, the aim of all the fathers is the
same; and though it can, in accordance with human nature, hardly
be expected that different opinions should not occur in this holy
assembly, be it nevertheless distant, that in opposite factions be
divided those who are assembled for the protection and clearance
of truth. We can, therefore, not believe that there be more
numerous fathers who would refuse the most minute investigation
of the question of the Papal Infallibility. Though there will remain
several difficulties which peremptorily demand an investigation of
a kind which cannot take place in a general congregation, there
still remains one whose importance cannot be overlooked by those
who will have to render an account to God for those whose souls
were confided to their care ; for it touches the information of the
commands of God to be given to the Christian people, and concerns
direct the relation of the Catholic Church to civil society.
“ We are far from the unjust opinions of those who accuse the
popes of the middle ages of unbounded ambition as regards their
judgments upon kings and states, or their disturbance of civil
order. We are, on the contrary, fully convinced that they legally
exercised a power derived from the public rights of the Orient, and
that from it great benefits accrued to the Christian nations. But
as those popes, even the most learned of them used to do, judged
of past events according to the standard of their times, and were
often led astray by false accounts of popes of former centuries who
had dethroned emperors, they firmly believed what they enun-
ciated in their degrees and rescriptions, that God had delegated to
them the right to give commands and judgments from the stand-
point of sin in all temporal transactions; especially that Christ had
given to St. Peter, and in his stead to his successors, two swords—-
the one the spiritual, which they were to wield themselves, and the
other the temporal, which the princes and warriors were to wield
in accordance with their orders. This doctrine of the relation of
the Papal power to the temporal did Boniface VIII. announce and
command to be followed in the bull ‘ Unam Sanctam.’ There are
those who put forth in extenuation of this difficulty that Boniface
B


had defined only that all men were enjoined to regard the Roman
pope as the head of the Church appointed by Christ; but he who
knows the transactions between Boniface and Philip, the Beau,
must be clear about the bull which was issued in a synod held
about the affairs of France. To gainsay such evidence the love of
truth does not allow, neither would this answer truth; for to make
use of such arms would offer to the enemies of the Church the
brightest pretext to vilify it, and to weaken all the evidences of
history that vindicate the Church. Moreover, the popes have up
to the seventeenth century publicly taught that power in temporal
affairs had been given them by God, and have condemned the
reverse opinion.
“ Another doctrine with regard to the relation of the power of
the Church to that of the State do we teach, with nearly all bishops
of the Catholic world, to the Christian people. For we teach :
Unlike certainly is the dignity of the two powers, for, as the
heavens overhang the earth, thus the eternal gifts which man gains
by the spiritual power are higher than the temporal, upon whose
maintenance and augmentation the principal aim of civil authority
is centered ; but each of the two powers, however, is, in the peculiar
demands made upon it, the highest under God, and not subjected
to the other in its functions. The temporal prince, as member of
the Church, is subject to the clerical power, which received by
divine origin the right to impose church punishment even upon
kings, but which never gave them the right to dethrone them and
to sever the allegiance of their subjects from them. The power to
judge kings and reigns which had been exercised by the popes of
the middle ages had been vested in them by the peculiar formation
of the public rights of their times, whereas, with the changed cir-
cumstances, both public and private, such rights had, with the base
upon which they rested, passed away.
“ That which we teach about the relation of the power of the
Church to the temporal is not new, but from most remote anti-
quity, and strengthened by the uniformity of the holy fathers, and
the expressions and examples of all popes until Gregory VII. ;
wherefore we do not doubt that it be the whole truth, for may God
guard us that we should falsify the original meaning of divine law
to suit the exigencies of the times. Nevertheless, the dangers
must be pointed out which will accrue to the Church from a decree
not in conformity with this our teaching. Nobody can ignore that
it would be impossible to reform civil society in conformity with
the rules laid down in the bull ‘ Unam Sanctam .’ Still it is im-
possible to annihilate by the change of human opinions and insti-
tutions a right conferred by God, nor the duties involving on such.
If the Roman pope in St. Peter has received the power which,
figuratively speaking, is denoted by the two swords, and which, as
is asserted by the bull ‘ Cum ex apostolatus officio' had been derived
by divine right over nations and states in all fulness of power, it
would not be left to the option of the Church to hide this from its
believers, for it must follow the traces of St. Paul, who assures


those whom he had to teach, ‘ I have not failed to impart the whole
plan of God to you.’ Were the Christian instruction re-modelled
in this way it would avail little to say in a loose manner (multis
asseverateJ that which pertained to the power of the Papal See in
■temporal affairs was confined within the limits of theory, and had
no weight in the face of events and transactions ; that Pius IX. did
not intend in the least to depose the leaders in the affairs of state.
With laughter of derision the antagonists would reply : ‘We do not
fear the papal decrees, but after long and various transformations
it has at last become evident that every Catholic, whose deeds
should be guided by the belief he confesses, is a sworn enemy of
the State, he considering himself in conscience bound to do all in
his power to effect that all nations and states become subject to
the pope’s power.’ It is superfluous to point out at greater length
the many machinations which could be deduced therefrom by the
enemies of the Church.
“ This being the case, it cannot be doubtful to him who considers
this difficulty carefully, that the same, before the infallibility of the
Pope be dealt with, should be most minutely discussed. Our
propositions of the 11th March can add much to their enlighten-
ment ; but the question, whether God had given power to St. Peter
and his successors over kings and reigns, is, especially in our times,
of such importance that it should be directly laid before the Council
and investigated and weighed by such in all its bearings. It would
not be right to induce the fathers to decide in a case, whose con-
.sequences spread so far, and which will effect the relation of the
■Church to the State in so many different ways, without a full and
searching investigation. Therefore, it is necessary that the above
•questions should be laid before them ere the eleventh chapter of
the Schemes of the Church be taken into consideration. If it
should be desired, they could be placed before them separately; but,
as they cannot be thoroughly decided before the relations of the
powers of the Church to those of the State have been examined
from all points, it appears very necessary to us that the chapters
xiii. and xiv. should be discussed before the xi.
“ In the meantime we use this opportunity to subscribe ourselves
with most profound veneration and esteem, your Most Eminent
Reverences most humble, devoted, true servants.
“Given in Rome, April 10, 1870.”
Who are the signers 1 Besides the author, the Archbishop of
Vienna; Cardinal Rauscher—whom few of the fathers equalled in
knowledge of history, in experience, in intelligence, whom none
reached in the knowledge of the rights of the Church ; the Arch-
bishop of Prague ; Cardinal Prince Schwarzenberg, who has never
ceased to point out to Rome, during his long active administration
as bishop, the dangers which a war against intelligence and science
would call forth; Bishop Strossmayer, the courageous, sparkling,
and unchangeable speaker ; Bishop Hefele, the first savant of Coun-
cil-history ; the most of the Austrian-Hungarian bishops (p.e. the
Archbishops of Ollmiitz, Agram, Colocsa, the Bishops of Budweiss,
b 2


Gurk, Levant, &c.); the most of the German bishops (p.e. the
Archbishops of Munich, Bamberg; the Bishops of Augsburg,
Treves, Ermland, Breslau, Rottenburg, Mayence, Osnabruck ; the
Apostolic Vicar of Saxony, the Prussian Army bishop; of whom
several try, since the Fulda Pastoral of August 31, 1870, with
boundless haste to bring that very doctrine to grief of which they
said April 10, that “ consequences would accrue from it which
contradicted the catechism as taught by them hitherto”) —the
Coryphees of the Episcopate of France, of Italy, of England, of
Ireland, and of North America.
What effect had this document 1 None at all; it was put ad acta ,
for the declaration of the Infallibility had been resolved upon for
years. At the moment when the first information of a council
was received, all those who do not imitate the ostrich knew what
was coming.
Cardinal Rauscher has in his work “ Observationes quandam de
Infallibilitatis subjecto Neapoli, 1870” (cap. x. p. 62), treated the
same subject still more minutely, and pointed out that Suarez —-
the classical dogmatist of the Jesuits—has already taken for his
foundation that the bull of Boniface VIII. declared as an article of
faith the right of the popes to depose heretical or obstinate princes,
as well as those who acted detrimentally to their government in
matters of faith, and states that Bellarmin did likewise declare the
power of the pope in temporal affairs as an article of faith; this
likewise with regard to Boniface VIII. (tract, adv. Guil. Barcl., cap.
hi., p. 37, Rome 1610). Baronius and Lessius took it for granted
that the words of Gregory VII. in the Roman Council suffice to
form an article of faith. In the same manner have other men
loudly pointed out the fearful consequences of dogmatizing thus
practised, and demanded direct in the Desideria —copies of which
are before me—that the Papal Infallibility be neither declared nor
defined. The pope was begged by the German bishops who were
assembled in Fulda in the autumn of 1869 (it is stated that Dr.
Conrad Martin, the Bishop of Paderborn, whose printed catechism
did hitherto not know an infallible pope, did not sign) not to bring
such question before the Council, which prayer explains the kind
belief that induced these bishops in their pastorals of 1869 to
announce —without, however, pointing out the punctum saliens with
clear words (they even did not in their pastorals of 1870 point
out with a single word the chief points of the July dogma !) —that
it was not intended to decide matters in the Council which might
disturb the good quiet people.
The Constitutio Dogmatica Prima of the 18th July, 1870, has
been solemnly published in many German dioceses, in two or three
Austrian it has been formally published, in a few others (p.e.
Vienna, Leitmeritz, Prague) it has simply been printed in the
parochial papers. Thus the stern necessity arises for every Catholic
to gain light as to what he has to believe in future about the power
of the pope in temporal affairs, and about the relation of the
Church to the State.


Whatever has been taught formerly about this subject by the
popes ex cathedra is now an article of faith. For these fundamen-
tal points there is, as will be shown, no doubt. But it does not
suffice to bring forward the theoretical decrees of the popes only.
As the document of April 10, 1870, properly puts forth—which
euphemistically lets the antagonists make those objections, which
logically spring from the matter itself, against its theoretical
signification only, and which, therefore, must likewise be con-
siderations of the signers themselves —that it cannot have been the
intention of Boniface VIII., nor that of Gregory VII., Innocence
111. and IV. before him, and later of Pius V. or Pius VI., to hold
lectures (as the Civilta Cattolica rightly says in a paragraph which
will be given hereafter), they have aimed at more practical ends.
And hence everyone has the right, not only to consider their
theoretical laws, but likewise those awfully solemn edicts and acts
which tend directly upon the passing of their theory into life itself.
In what follows no other sources but official ones have been
used, or such, which besides having been approved of, have undis-
puted validity in Rome, or which come from names acknowledged
as correct : —Baronius, Raynaldus, Bzovius, Spondanus, Del Bene,
Morelli, Schrader, &c.
What I adduce is, as most of what is before me, long known.
But such general knowledge is confined to certain statements of
facts, not upon the knowledge of the meaning of the words, as far
as that is decisive. Diverse edicts and facts, however, were only
known to those who have studied the history of the rights of the
Church, and that of the Church itself from their very sources.
These sources are an awkward thing. For we can, unfortunately,
not deny that very often the theory and praxis of the different
times do not harmonize; not even then, when the art to make the
most heterogeneous matter agree is cultivated to perfection, as has
been done by several works of the literature of the Council.
Seemingly he is best to do with his conscience who knows of history
only as much as has been disclosed to him in a seminary, in a
school, or in a correct book or lecture. He can—be he bishop,
priest, or layman—consider as true what has been told him. But
truth will remain truth eternally, everlastingly, and it is the duty
of everyone to give reasons for his belief and actions. This is a
duty the more peremptory in a time in which indifferentism and
unbelief elevate their heads more openly and impudently after
every utterance of the Pope, whilst at the same time hypocrisy
and pretending piety progress with gigantic strides. To acknowledge
openly the voice of truth is now the duty of every Catholic, since
the voice of those men died away without effect, who, as St. Paul,
had by their calling a right to have the courage to speak the truth
•openly in the face of the Pope, they following the Scriptures, the
fathers, and their own judgments. After they had firmly and
boldly declared their non placet on the decisive 13th of July, they
remained, unfortunately, away from the purely formal act of the
18th July, 1870, this owing to mere humane considerations, or


because they did not like to grieve the person of the one implicated
in the question, Pius IX., as is stated in the declaration of the
formal renewal of their non placet on the 17th July, made by
fifty-six bishops. lam firmly convinced—based on the fact that
at once after the closing of the sitting on the 13th, the public
meeting was appointed for the 18th, though there could be no idea
of uniformity, though it was not possible to meet the colossal
objections against it in four days, objections which hitherto centuries
have not been able to remove one—that even their non placet
repeated on the 18th would have effected anything; therefore it
is not my intent to blame those men in these words. But the
pretext “it might have come differently” they have offered to those
who seek one, to give a motive for their pact between conscience and
station. The latter already make free with the words that the'
bishops who remained away had foregone their right to vote, as if
our God had made the salvation of millions of believers dependent
on juristical forms, and this even is done in pastorals. But as.
little as the Pope, my bishop, my priest can bring me to heaven
by his prayer, if I do not believe myself in Christ and live as a
Christian, just as little can I, or anyone who recognizes truth,
confide my salvation to the responsibility which perhaps a third
party might be willing to undertake. From me does the Lord once
demand an account of my life. I shall always adhere to the
teaching of the Apostle Paul in his letter to the Romans, xiv. 12—
“ Then must everyone of us render an account of himself to God,”
and 2 Corinthians v. 10—“ For we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that each receive according to the good or
evil he may have done in his body,” and I shall never place myself
under a stranger’s responsibility. In order to facilitate self-study
for every educated person, and not only for those who have pursued
learned studies, does this work give all the quotations from the
sources in faithful, and therefore not fluent translation, but in a
translation as near as ever possible —now their meaning, now their
very words. Wherever a verbatim translation is given, the usual
quotation signs show this. Truth need not fear light; to teach the
educated the real history of that which the popes have taught and
done in affairs which are dear to everybody, cannot be wrong.
I am well aware that non-conformity to the Church, rebellion
against Church powers, injuring of the Church, &c., will be the
slurs cast even against the fact of the very existence of this work;
the attack against the person, as conceit, German scientific
arrogance, inclining towards liberalism, &c., will be added to the
above; for the right of the ever faithful organs to drag into the
mire that which does not joyfully settle everything in the last
instance with Roma locuta est, causa finita est (Rome has spoken,
the thing is settled) is very old —aye, bishops, in spite of history,
are not ashamed to announce such ultimate decision as binding,
this being in accordance with the teaching of St. Augustine ; this
method—to attack the person where the object cannot be gainsaid,
to let sophism, misinterpretation, and falsehoods speak, where the


reasons of intelligence do not suffice—has too often been used with
good results not to be considered as effective in all cases.
It has cost me a long, a serious struggle before I resolved on this
step. I dare, without fear of contradiction, affirm to have written
much in the defence of the Church and the Popes ; perhaps I have in
the best of intentions contributed my share to render victorious
the setting in of Blank Absolutism in the Church, as low as my
position may have been. Just on account of this do I owe a public
declaration for the step I now take.
I acted to the best of my belief Convinced of the divinity of my
holy Church, convinced of the necessity and the authority of the
Primate of the Church, convinced of the equally as necessary
authority of the Episcopate, convinced thereof that the mission of
the Church now is as it was eighteen hundred years ago, I could
always start from the point that the Church, unchangeable in its
foundations, could and had to use in its external actions those
means and ways which became necessary, the Church having to
work in the time for the time being. Thus I could boldly look
upon the views and peculiar institutions of a certain time as
identical with such. I did the same as the petition of the bishops
took for their standard on April 10, 1870, and argue that they had
to be such for the purposes of the Church ; thus I could look upon
the utterances of Gregoi’y VII., Boniface VIII., their demands and
decrees, those of Gregory IX., Innocence IV., Pius V., &c., &c.,
now as the simple expression of their rights, based upon the tenets
of their times, now as the consequence of the peculiar conceptions
of the middle ages, which are based principally upon private
privileges, and the belief that what existed was of divine origin) thus
I was enabled to argue every incongruity in the principles and
teaching of the Church with the tenets and requirements of the present
states and times ; thus I could at last, as a warm friend of the
State and as a true son of the Church, try to mediate between
them purely abstractedly, to give to Caesar what becomes Caesar
and to God what becomes God. That I have always followed this
standpoint prove all my writings, every explanation in which this
subject has been treated. If my views went astray in the one or
other point, such had its cause, now in simply erring, then in its
being a subject easily disputed which point was of a nature purely
pertaining to the Church or to the State. My youth passed in a
time where the new liberty in the Church awakened in all those
interested in it the glad hope that a new impetus would be given,
which might breathe new life into its forms, substitute life for the
antiquated, and change the mechanism for the spirit. With
millions I was of the firm opinion, that (though I belonged to
those few young men who, I say it openly, looked with a misgiving
eye on certain political events in the year 1848) Pius IX., whose
first actions were the chief cause of the political movement and
revolution, would institute a reform as was done formerly by Leo
IX. and Gregory VII., based on the ideas of their times. Did not,
above all, the action of the German Episcopate, held at Wurzburg


in October, 1848, under the presidency of Cardinal Prince Schwar-
zenberg, then Archbishop of Salzburg, lead to such a conclusion 1
Did not the Prussian bishops at once understand the independence
of the Church practically, even before it had been understood thus
by the State in its political bearings 1 Whatever broke the fetters
of the Church could but be dear to me. Thus I greeted especially
the Austrian Concordat, and entered the arena boldly and often
for it, though from the beginning there was more than one point in
it of which I disapproved. But I could sacrifice that, which to
my belief was better for the real good before me, and could be
satisfied with the lesser good. Now, where the experience of a
quarter of a century has enabled me to gain an insight into the
circumstances of a great many dioceses—after I have, little by
little, in contact with the leading and administering personages,
penetrated their most internal structure —after a great many travels
have gained for me an acquaintance with the institutions of many
countries, in doing which I observed with unclouded eyes and open
ears, and made earnest and incessant studies upon the fields of the
life of the Church, assisted by the richest materials—now, where
the resolutions of the 18th July, 1870, confront me in the papal
“ Constitute Pastor Aeternus” with all their rigour as laws by
divine, origin — now, I must say, I have lived in profound delusion.
Not my principles, not my wishes have changed. I hope, with
the help of God, to adhere faithfully to the last of my breath to
the belief of my fathers as I received it from the catechetical
instruction in a Catholic school of Westphalia, in the colleges, in
the Catechismus Rom anus; to adhere to the Church of Christ, the
Primate, the Episcopate, and the whole teachings of that Church.
But my ideas with regard to the relations between the Church and
State, and those about the intentions of certain circles, I had to
acknowledge gradually as erroneous ones, it becoming evident to
me that they were not Roman ones. Already ten years ago the
thought struck me with regard to the object aimed at by a power-
ful party in the Church. Loudly did I raise my voice in the so-
called “Catholic General Assembly” of Aix-la-Chapelle in September,
1862, in the old Emperor’s hall, against such exaggerations. There
it was permitted that the most renowned orator of the “ Catholic
General Assemblies” could, under loudest applause, give the
appellatives of “Satanic Institutions” to the State colleges and
universities. In the so-called official report these words certainly
are not given, but I have heard them with my own ears, not being
more than two paces from the speaker, and they were heard by all
those who heard the speech. At length and with horror did I
converse in a small circle of friends about w T hat had been said at
the time being. And yet that priest was one of the mildest, with
whom it was possible to associate, in spite of diverging opinions.
Since then I was looked upon as suspicious, for though he is
liked who walks with them assisted by the courage and arguments
of intelligence, he is not permitted to say openly what he considers
to be the truth. The so-called meeting of the Learned, held at


Munich September, 1863, revived my hopes, I believing to see a
means thereby to consolidate the learned authorities of the Church,
and to work by their influence against the rush of another current
which, tempest-like, does not throw down the decayed tree only,
but above all the tree full of life, blooming in full splendour of
boughs and branches. The papal breve, Tuas libenter, of Decem-
ber 21, 1863, addressed to the Archbishop of Munich-Freysing —
the writing of the Nuntio containing conditions unworthy of men
and public teachers, which conditions were to guide the future
meetings this, and what I learned from many bishops and those
initiated —all this left, in place of youthful hope, cold, silent resig-
nation.
I did, nevertheless, not cease to retain my standpoint, for I
must confess I did not like to acknowledge to myself that I had
erred, because it well nigh broke my heart to forego, to cease
working for that which I had taken up with the enthusiasm of
youth, had pursued with the earnestness of manhood, and had
incessantly tried to defend with all the arguments of science.
But wherever, since then, I did find an opportunity, I did in my
writings, in my letters, in conversations, give vent to my gloomy
forebodings. I could adduce a great many wellknown names,
whose works and letters show that they have arrived at similar
conclusions, but it is not my object to name such, or to blame
those who have their reasons to bury their conclusions “in the
shrine of their breast .” I have not been influenced by the in-
cessant enmity which a mass of newspaper articles, &c., have
shown me since 1854, but / must look upon this lute debelopment
with different eyes than formerly. Neither will the threat which
first was uttered by Mr. Scheeben, then by others in various letters
to me, that, in opposing the decrees of the Vatican Council, “ I
would descend from the height of my literary fame,” induce me to
remain silent. Ido not seek literary fame or glory ; I seek truth.
Should I have gained an honourable name for myself, it will not
be weakened by this frank explanation, nor will writings lessen it
in the eyes of the intelligent, which treat purely abstractedly of a
matter on which depends the quietness of soul of a great many, as
well as that of my own. I had a long time the intention to remain
silent. But since the action of the German Episcopate at Fulda,
which is in the most striking contrast to the position held by most
participators of that assembly previous to the 18th July, has
taught that bowing to the letter is the only alternative left to
Catholics—since the measures against professors of the theological
faculties of Bonn, Breslau, Braunsberg, Munich, among whom are
men of a profundity of science, purity of life, piety and disinte-
restedness that I only wish they were possessed by every bishop
of the Church—since those measures taken against other men as
well, show that by the most ruthless disregard, by the withholding
of the blessings of the Church, they try to bring the weak to yield —
show that they will rather have formal signers of the dogma than
men faithful to their judgments, since then did I put the question


to myself, “ Dare you remain silent any longer T' Never having
believed in the papal infallibility, though I have often been cited as
a partizan to such—a trick which finds its simple solution therein,
that neither the combination nor the meaning of the citations were
given—for nowhere in my writings, never in my lectures did I con-
fess to such doctrine, in consequence of which I have been cited as
an authority, even in the latest times, —I owe it to my literary
honour to break my silence. This alone, however, would not have
induced me, for as a Christian I may endure much. It is the wel-
fare of the Church that impels me after having suffered much.
I know that many a bishop does not find any proof in the Scrip-
tures nor fathers for the infallibility. I know dozens of the most
worthy priests, and especially teachers of theology, even such who
have formally recognized the dogma, who are of the same opinion,
and I can prove this judicially. I know among all the educated lay-
men who are capable of judging not twelve who hold other views.
That in refutation of this will be said “ It is not thus,” I know
full well. As previous to the 18th July all were enjoined not to
agitate, because otherwise the definition would become necessary,
which obedient silence then, because the agitation had passed over
without results, was looked upon as belief in the infallibility; in
like manner is silence looked upon even now as a sign of belief, as
numerous as its individual causes may be. If I had not obtained
by the most serious studies the means for its most minute investi-
gation, I would keep silence likewise. But considering the present
state of the Church, I look upon it as the duty of everyone who
has the courage and ability to come forth publicly. A mandate is
needed by none; to give evidence for truth is the duty of every-
body ; to do as much for my church as my small strength may
enable me to do, behoves me as well as the Pope, the bishops, the
priest; for the Church has not been ordained that Hierarchy should
rule, that the lay-community should obey : but the Lord has estab-
lished His Church that each may find in it a safe road to work his
salvation. The welfare of the Church I place higher than the
pleasure of the hierarchy for the time being, higher than the favour
or hatred of man. Fear I have none if my conscience be quiet.
If the majority of the bishops could, after the Council of Nicaea,
embrace Arianism without the Church suffering thereby ; if the
world has often seen the spectacle that the Church had several
heads at a time, heads who reciprocally tried to surpass each other
in cursing the others, and has nevertheless remained intact; if the
Church continued to flourish after the Council of Constance, though
the latter saw in the abolishment of all popes the only remedy; if
the Church has not ceased as such, though there has been no pope
repeatedly for several consecutive years, &c. ; then we may still
have the firm belief that the Lord will make good in some manner
what has been decocted by the systematically organized spirit
which has tried for the last three hundred years to centralize
Omnipotence.
The dogma of the Papal Infallibility purports to lay the firm


keystone for all authority, all other, as said, having been found
wanting; it is therefore considered necessary that one man should
announce to all men at all times, as infallible teacher, which of the
different opinions entertained upon the vast field of faith and
morals, philosophy and law, are of divine origin. If the possessor
of such infallibility enter into union with the possessor of temporal
power—the thing is tempting—there could be no better means than
by such united powers, the newest coneordia inter sacerdotium et
imperium, to strengthen the obedience of the multitude towards
authority in our present loose circumstances, in a time where the
so-called Liberalism, Socialism gains ground more and more, and the
so-called Conservatism loses such. I certainly believe that as far
as the Church is concerned (its political aspect does not affect me
here, wherefore I abstain from giving any quotations), a far better
way would be to place its internal mission in the foreground ; to
look upon the merely exterior as of secondary importance ; to
consider the parochial duties as the chief, and the administrative
government as simply unavoidable means ; to place upon humility
in its priestdom the same importance as upon its government; to
look upon the congregation, not as inferiors, as the mass handed
over to the onera parochialia for administration, but to look upon
them as brethren with whom they should work together and so
forth. But the short experience since the 18th July, 1870, does
prove that a contrary order of things has taken place.
This is why I send forth at first this volume, that the governors
and the governed may know what is henceforth the conscientious
duty of every Catholic to believe when believing the infallibility of
the Pope ; and to learn at the same time how the infallible popes
did in their actions deal with countries, nations, and individuals, as
shown by history.
Not because I look for great results from this step of mine, but
because I am fully aware of its importance and possible consequences,
I have fully explained my motives in taking it. lam sustained by
my belief, as I have received it from the catechism, as a tender
child from the mouth of dear parents, then from the Scriptures and
fathers, and I may therefore adhere firmly to the words of St. Paul
to the Galatians, chap. i. 8, &c.
Have I—thus I must ask myself before closing—the calling and
the right to appear before the public 1
As public teacher of canonical laic I have to define, protect, and
step forward for that which I consider as true, and teach the same
as the law of my church. If I taught as Catholic canonist, without
my words rendering the evidence of my innate judgments, in deeds
which embrace the most sacred subjects, it would be unworthy of
men, it would not be the teaching of science, it would be the ser-
vice of a menial. I can find no justification for the Cap. 3 and 4
of the Constitutio dogmatica prima de ecclesia “ Pastor Aeternus,”
either in the Scriptures or in the fathers, or in the authenticated
sources of antiquity. Therefore do I owe it as a duty, and have a
right as teacher of canonical laiv to adduce my reasons publicly.


As professor of a university lam a State official. Shall I teach
such Catholic doctrines, which, as these writings will prove, must be
considered as articles of faith based on the Vatican Constitution of
July 18, 1870 ; then I am under the obligation to teach them to
my Catholic hearers—and such are ninety-five hundredths of them
—as true ; in doing which I must declare at once that it is their
implicit duty to believe them, and to act in accordance therewith.
Should I do this I would render myself directly culpable , for I
would have to denounce numerous laws as heretical, as abhorrent,
their givers as excommunicated, their subjects as not bound to
obey them, and the judges excommunicated for executing them, as
the reader will see for himself.
Christ teaches : Give to God what is God’s, and give to Csesar
what is Csesar’s. Wishing to keep the oath I have sworn to my
emperor as faithfully as I keep the commandments of my religion,
I have as public teacher of the State as well as canonist , the full
calling to state openly to the world why I do not accept the decree
of July 18, 1870.
As I have done in these writings only from one point of view, I
shall in a second one furnish the canonical proof that those decrees
cannot be looked upon as decrees emanating from an (Ecumenical
Council, and show in a third one the harmony between papal
teachings and actions on the one part and the authenticated
articles of belief on the other part, as furnished by history.
And in this way I hope with the help of God to render to my
holy Church a better service than if I, in spite of my better judg-
ment, had remained silent, and been considered by some as a
hypocrite, by others as devoid of character, and by the third as
deprived of judgment. For now I can openly continue, not ac-
cepting the said decrees of the July Constitution as dogma, as I
adhere to my whole faith —to teach that the relation of the Church
to the State was, as it had been taught previous to the 18th July,
and as it had been taught until then by the bishops and catechisms,
and by the bishops in their declaration of April 10, 1870. From
this point I can still step forward for the rights of the Church
whenever, wherever, and by whomsoever I may find them threat-
ened or injured in their bearings to the doctrines of the old Catholic
Church, not to those of the July Constitution.
The festival of the birth of Christ is approaching. May the
Saviour, who worked our salvation, who taught the rules of love,
in whose belief we find refuge, may He kindly assist His Church to
guide His vessel safely past those rocks, which are more dangerous
perhaps than all those against which His vessel did threaten to
wreck for nearly two thousand years !


§ 1.—CONTENTS OF CAPUT IV.
“De Romani Pontificis Infalibiliti Magisterio” of the “ Constitutio Dog-
matica prima de Ecclesia Christi edita in sessione quarta sacrosancti cecu-
menici Concilii Yaticani.”
1. In the bull published by the Pope July 18, 1870, in St.
Peter’s Church of Rome, commencing with the words “ Pastor
aeternus,” the fourth section treats of the infallible teaching of the
Roman Pope. After the investigation of the reasons for such de-
claration, the decisive paragraph is as follows: —(*)“ While faithfully
adhering to the tradition, derived from the beginning of the
Christian belief, we teach, with the consent of the holy Council, for
the glory of God, of our Saviour, for the elevation of the Catholic
religion, and for the welfare of all Christian nations, and announce as
an article of faith derived from God: That the Roman pope, when
talking ex cathedra , that is when he defines in the execution of his
functions as pastor and teacher of all, by virtue of his apostolic
power, as a doctrine to be upheld by the whole Church, anything
concerning either faith or morals, that such doctrine, by the divine
power which God vested in St. Peter, possesses that infallibility
with which the Saviour has furnished His Church in decisions con-
cerning its teachings with regard to faith and morals ; and that
such decisions of the Roman popes are in themselves, and not only
with the consent of the Church, infallible. If, however, anyone
dare to contradict this our decision, which God forbid, he be
anathema.”
2. I start from the supposition that it be permitted here, as well
as at the declaration of any law, to argue in accordance with the
rules of logic and intelligible interpretation. If this be granted,
two rules must be given for such declaration, viz. —the first ride :
the words used are to be taken in that sense which they indispu-
tably possess; second rule: the sense which is implied by the words
lies in them direct without any contortion (Kiinstelei).
3. Based on these everlastingly simple and absolutely true
propositions, everyone must draw from the above fourth section the
following conclusions :
(a) The article of faith of the infallible teaching of the Pope is
derived from God. ( 2 )
( 1) I give the translation according to the one given by Dr. Wilh. Molitor,
Dean of Speyer, and papal theologian of the Council , as published under
approbation. It is likewise given in the first dogmatical constitution of the
Church of Christ, as announced in the fourth public sitting of the Vatican
Council. Tran si. by Dr. W. Molitor. With remarks provided by Dr. M.
J. Scheeben, professor of the archiepiscopal seminary of Cologne. With
episcopal approbation, Regensburg, &c., 1870.
( 2 ) Scheeben, page 30 :—“ The teaching in question is defined, that is,
established, as a dogma revealed by God. The dogma is revealed not


(bj The aim of the doctrine pronounced is, the “glory of God our
Saviour” “ the elevation of the Catholic religion,” “ the welfare of
the Christian nations.”
(c) Infallible is the Pope when speaking ex-cathedra.
(d) The Pope speaks ex cathedra when he defines ( 3 ) a doctrine
which affects the faith or morals, and which has to be adhered
to by the whole Church; and whenever he delivers such decision
in the execution of his functions as pastor and teacher of all
Christians.
(e) This infallibility is the consequence of the divine power
promised the Roman Pope in St. Peter.
(f) This infallibility is that one with which God wished to furnish
His Church for the establishment of matters of faith and
morals.
(g) Such decisions of the Roman Pontifex are in themselves, not
however in consequence of the consent of the Council, unalterable.
fhj Whosoever dare contradict this decision is anathema.
only as a verbal tradition inspired by the Apostles, nor as a teaching
simply laid down in the Holy Scriptures; it has been expressly revealed
by the solemn words of the Saviour himself, which, as the Bible shows,
were not only said once, but repeatedly, and that in the most solemn
moments,” &c.
( 3 ) The word decide does plainly not render exactly the meaning of the
Latin word definire , because we jurists are thinking of same generally as
referring to disputed points. The infallible teaching, however, is not likely
to embrace only disputed matter. But if it is said (Scheeben and others,
above p. 32) —“The expression must therefore, first, have for its object a
real teaching in matters of faith and morals, and tend towards the propa-
gation of such teaching, must be a doctrine; secondly, by its form and
principle it must not be uttered as a mere affirmation, but be pronounced
and established as a law by virtue of the highest authority, must conse-
quently be recognizable as the last and ultimate decision, or as a true sentence
given by the judge in the last instance ; thirdly, must by its tendency and
effect not apply only to individual persons in individual cases, as the
sentences of the civic courts, but as being universally and eternally valid,
and in so far to have the character of a law,” this amounts in reality to the
same thing, and proves only the vast field of confused ideas over which the
official interpretation extends. For law, legal sentence, doctrine, last
instance, are ideas which belong to different branches. It will be pardoned
that the word definire will serve once more as the subject of a remark ; the
importance of the matter justifies the repetition.
§ 2.—LOGICAL CONSEQUENCES.
4. From the eight propositions derived from the words of the
Constitution, as taken from an authorized translation and in con-
formity with an approved commentary, it follows in accordance
•with logic and the undoubted teaching of the Church :
i. That it is the duty of every Catholic to believe the dogma
announced on the 18th of July, 1870, because the salvation of his


soul depends on his believing such and living in accordance there-
with.
ii. The honour of God, the elevation of religion, the welfare of
Christian nations cannot have been built upon mere words, it can-
not be the object of this article of faith, announced so solemnly
•eighteen hundred years after the existence of the Church, an article
which undoubtedly must have been inherent in the Church from
its very beginning as a dogma derived from God, to decide only
theoretical scholastic questions, but it must consist in this : To
make recognizable by the decisions of the Roman popes ex cathedra
•all those proper principles according to which we must live to work
our salvation.
hi. Not only the present pope has become infallible; every one of
his predecessors was so likewise under the abovenamed conditions.
iv. Not the use of a certain formula can decide, because such
belongs to the time being. • If the pope pronounces a teaching
which concerns faith or morals, with the intent to have the same
followed by all Christians, and accompanied by circumstances which
admit of no doubt as to his having spoken as pope, then he is in-
fallible.
v. It is immaterial when, where, how, and whichever pope has
spoken ex cathedra. Whatsoever has once
cathedra by any one pope, that is established by/^ffw^assistaij^e.
vi. Whether the other bearers of the
whether the episcopate ; whether the Church in’ contradistinction •
to the pope did acquiesce in such decision; or whether they did
accept the same afterwards, is in substance immaterial; unalterable
in itself is the decision ex cathedra, it receives no additional force
from the concurrence of the Church.
§ 3.—JUDICIAL CONSEQUENCES.
It is not to be supposed that any decision could be solemnly an-
nounced as being derived from God without its exercising influence
upon the faith and life of Christians. For it is an article of faith
that by the Gospel is not only commanded (’) to have faith, but like-
wise to follow the commandments of God and of the Church. ( 2 ) It
his not belief only which is required by the Church, but deeds
emauating from it, a life according to faith. To follow the com
mandments given for this life is as much the duty of every Chris
tian as faith itself. What character a rule, a commandment, a
law may have, depends on itself, wherefore the perpetrations against
it cannot be alike. Is, however, an utterance given by the pope
ex cathedra, about any matter appertaining to faith or morals, such
is unalterable, established in consequence of the innate infallibility
the pope possesses by divine authority when speaking ex cathedra.
U) Can. 19 de justificatione Sess. vi. Cone. Trid. ( 2 ) Can. 20, ibid.


What is uttered by an infallible person must be unalterable. The
pope speaking ex cathedra decides consequently absolutely true
doctrines. Hence, whatever has been uttered by any pope ex
cathedra with regard to faith and morals is absolute truth, unal-
terably so. Whether such decision is intended must become e vident
to every one by its abstract features. For if it were not thus,
nothing would remain, but either to make such expression
dependent on the use of the scholastic formula ex cathedra, or to
state by another expression that expression so and so had been
given ex cathedra. Such dogma would then be pretty well denied
to the past, and implicite declared that only from the time being it
gave such decisions, which would be absurd. The second case
approaches the comical, and requires no comment. That there
must be such peculiar abstract points, that each sensible person may
recognize such ex cathedra expressions, is evident from this, that
such expressions must either be of use and consistency or not.
If they be not all consistent ones, they would be unnecessary ;
this would be absurd. Are they consistent, every single individual
must be able to recognize them, because each one has to work out
his salvation for himself; because we are enjoined by the Apostolic
admonition to seek truth, to grow in knowledge. ( 3 ) Such abstract
points must moreover have always been the same. For, if the infalli-
bility of the papal teaching is resting in the pope as successor of St.
Peter, to whom such divine power had been promised, the base for
such teaching must have been the same from the first pope down-
wards. Consequently, there is an expression ex cathedra whenever
the Roman pope gives a decision ivhich he intends to be looked upon as
taught by the Church. This may be deduced now from the words-
direct, now from the circumstances, and at other times it will
emanate from the decision itself.
6. The object of the infallible teaching embraces faith and
morals. What belongs to belief is certainly not easily said in some
matters, but may be answered in its generality by the catechism
and dogmatical works. It is the teaching of God as One, of the
Trinity, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of God as Creator, of
the Creation (spirits, nature, man), of God as Saviour, as the Most
Holy (grace, sacrament), &c.
7. Whereas the articles of faith are at once recognizable as such,
it is not so easy in matters of morals. If we take the compendium
of morals most used, that of Gury, ( 4 ) we find as belonging thereto-
_( 3 ) Eom. xii. 1; 1 Peter i. 1; 1 Cor. iii. 16; 2 Cor. vi. 4, f.; 2 Peter iii.
17 —“Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your
own stedfastness ; 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and for ever.
Amen.”
i 4) Compendium theologue moralis autore, J. P. Gury, S.J. in Collegia
Romano et in Seminario Valsensi prope Anicium professore. The same is
used in most of the seminaries of Italy, France, Austria, and Germany. A
book by which the greatest part of the clergy is educated, may be cited as
an authority. However, the object is the same in all other works, &c. The
numbers I have added for the better classification.


lectures about Human Actions; 2. Conscience; 3. Laws (founda-
tion, subject, object, promulgation, obligation, definition, dispen-
sation therefrom, termination, natural, of the Church, civil law,
law of custom, privilege); 4. Sins; 5. Virtues; 6. The Ten Com-
mandments ; 7. The Commandments of the Church (holidays, con-
fession and communion at Easter, abstinence, fastdays); 8,
Righteousness and Right (ideas, kinds of right); Property (object,
subject, of the clergy, regulars, authors); gain of property; use
and temporary enjoyment; actions against the law (theft, resti-
tution) ; agreements (object, subject, base, obligation, alteration,
strengthening by oath, modus, condition) ; kinds : promise, gift,
borrowing and precarium, depositing, sequestering, order, loan [in-
terest, pawnbrokering], purchase and sale, society, current agree-
ments, bills of exchange, rents, bail, assurances, bets, lottery,
playing); 9. The different classes (laymen, duties of judges, advo-
cates, legal executors, actuaries, notaries, plaintiff, defendant,
witnesses, physicians, surgeons, apothecaries, watchmen [field,
forest], artists, tradesmen, clergymen); 10. Sacraments; 11. The
punishments of the Church ; 12. Irregularities, appendix, indul-
gences, and jubilees.
8. It is seen that the morals embrace the whole compass of the
life of the individual as such. If we abstract the civil and penal
process, in part the international laws of nations, we find very
nearly the whole extent of jurisprudence drawn within its precincts.
Thus the infallible teaching of the Church can extend itself over
all matters, and in all directions, which exercise any importance on
the moral life of man.
9. That this is no idle assertion, but one declared ex cathedra
by the pope, therefore an unchangeable doctrine, is evident. In the
Encyclica of Dec. 8, 1864, wdiose claims as an expression ex
cathedra cannot be doubted, ( 5 ) those false opinions which are
mentioned in the Encyclica of Pius IX., of November 9, 1846, in
the Allocution of December 9, 1854, of June 9, 1862, in the En-
cyclica of Gregory XVI., of August 15, 1832, and in others, are
pronounced void by virtue of Apostolic authority, and are
proscribed and condemned, and all Catholics enjoined to consider
them as such. That, however, in these very Encyclicas, &c.,
manifold decisions are given exactly with reference to matters of
right, is well known, and will be shown.
10. It is likewise in the nature of the thing itself, that only the
pope himself can define the object , and the limits of an ex cathedra
expression. For if he has delivered an expression ex cathedra, it
is unalterable, because given as the consequence of divine teaching.
Therefore to say —“ The object of this decision belongs neither to
faith nor morals” cannot be done, because it is not the individual
who has to decide, but the infallible Church. This, however, is
the pope speaking ex cathedra. Consequently, everything which
c
( 5 ) Scheeben, p. 32, gives as “real illustration of all these conditions” the
passage from same “ In tanta igitur” to “ volumus et mandamus.”


has been declared by the pope ex cathedra is unalterable doc-
trine.
11. To be certain therefore to follow safely the teaching of the
Church with regard to the relation of its powers to those of the
State, we must look to the expressions of the popes. Whatever
the.y have spoken as popes is true, must be believed, and consequently
followed by every Catholic. For thus speaks Leo X. in the bull
“Exsurge Domine” of June 15, 1520, which excommunicates
Luther and condemns his teaching in § 6: —“ Had he (Luther)
done this (come to Home), we would have taught him clearer than
the light that the holy Roman popes, our predecessors, have never
erred in their canons or constitutions .” ( 6 ) In the same manner it has
been declared ex cathedra ( 7 ) by Pius IX. in condemning a book,
verbatim, as follows :—“ At last, not to think of other errors, it
rises to such a degree of temerity and blasphemy, that it asserts
with unheard-of boldness, the Roman popes and (Ecumenical
Councils had overstepped the limits of their power, had assumed
the rights of princes, and had likewise erred in decisions of faith
and ■words.”
And basing upon this breve, the Syllabus ( 8 ) condemns in num.
xxin. the sentence : —“ The Roman popes and (Ecumenical Councils
had overstepped the limits of their power, had assumed the rights
of princes, and had likewise erred in matters of faith and belief,
and teaches consequently as doctrine of the Church the conclusion —
The Roman popes have never overstepped the limits of their
powers, have never assumed the power of princes, and have never
erred in the establishing of articles of faith and morals.”
( 6 ) That this bull speaks ex cathedra will certainly be denied by nobody.
( 7 ) Breve Multiplies inter of June 10, 1851, p. 59, given in the work :
“ Sanct. D. IST. Pii PP. IX. Epistola Encyclica data die viii. Decembris,
MDCCCLXIV. ad omnes catholicos antistites, una cum Syllabo pr.®ci-
PUORUM AETATIS NOSTRAE ERRORUM ET ACTIS PONTIFICIS, ex quibus ex-
cerptus est syllabus. Accedit appendix antiquiora et novissima documenta
continuens, quae ad epistolam encychcam et syllabum referuntur. Eatis-
bonae, 1865. After the Roman edition. That this breve speaks ex cathedra
follows: —1. It refers to the duty to guard the flock of Christ which had
been confided to him as chief pastor. 2. It speaks of the apostolic office.
3. Of the apostolic fulness of power. 4. Commands public promulgation.
5. Reference thereto in the Syllabus. 6. It decides after mature con-
sideration, with the advice of the cardinals, &c.
( 8 ) That this “ Syllabus complectens prfecipuos nostrae aetatis errores, qui
notantur in Allocutionibus consistorialibus, in encyclicis, aliisque Aposto-
licis Literis Sanctissimi Domini nostri Pii Papae IX,” has a high signification,
follows from the writing of Cardinal Antonelli of December 8, 1864, to all
Catholic bishops, in which same is said to have been made by papal order,
and that he forwarded it by papal command. We may indeed after this
declaration and in view of the Encyclica itself, which nearly demands such
a composition, loolc upon same as its most integral part, as is done in the
writing of Father Clement Schrader, S. J.: —“ Der Papst und die modernen
Ideen, 2 vol. (The Pope and Modern Ideas). The Encyclica of December
8, 1864. Vienna, 1865. Publ. by Carl Sartori. From this one do I give
the translation of the reverse of the errores which have to be looked upon as
Catholic teaching. This I did to have a source above suspicion.


§ IV.—PAPAL DOCTRINES, SIMPLE, EX CATHEDRA, AND
DEEDS SHOWING THE RELATION OF THE POPES
TO THE STATE, COUNTRIES, NATIONS AND
INDIVIDUALS.
I. All human power is from evil , and must therefore he standing
under the Pope.
12. Pope Gregory VII. writes ( x ) March 15, 1081, to Bishop
Herriman of Metz, that it was not necessary to uphold him in his
prayer against those who affirmed that the pope could not excom-
municate the emperor, nor dispense him from his oath to the same
“ because so many certain and direct proofs for so doing were found
in the Bible.” Mobody was exempted from the power which God
had delegated to St. Peter; he to whom had been given the power to
open or shut the gates of heaven, must likewise judge the earth.
Then verbatim : —“ Who does not know that the kings and dukes
have their origin from those, who, ignoring God, usurped the
power to rule over their like with pride, plunder, breaking of faith,
murder,—briefly with nearly all the vices, under the instigation of
the ruler of the world, namely, the devil, they ruling with blind
zeal and insatiable arrogance 1 ? These, whilst striving to cast the
priests of the Lord beneath their feet, to whom could they be
likened with more justice than to him who is the chief of all the
children of pride, to him who tried to tempt the Highest Priest,
the Head of all Priests, the Son of the Most High, promising Him
all the countries of the earth, saying— ‘ All this will I give thee
if thou fall down and worship me.’ ” He then explains that the
priests were the fathers and teachers of kings, wffio consequently
had to obey them ; adduces the theory of the two swords ; states,
that the kingly diadem was in proportion to that of the bishops as
much lou T er as lead was to gold ;no king had performed miracles,
awakened the dead, cleansed the leper, given sight to the blind.
<l It is to be feared that from the beginning of the world very few
kings of all the different countries, and of countless number, will
be pronounced holy, while in a succession of bishops—that is the
Roman —since the time of St. Peter nearly hundred are accounted
thus. Wherefore, but that the kings and princes of this world,
led astray by vain glory, do prefer their temporal affairs to the
spiritual ? Whereas the pious popes prefer the divine to the vain
glory of the flesh.”
The same strain of thought recurs again in other letters, p.e. i.,
63 (ibid. col. 109), iv. 23, iv. 24 (ibid. col. 230 fol.) Compare
ibid. col. 376 ff. But perhaps these passages are not to be looked
upon as having been spoken ex cathedra.
c 2
(’) Epistolae Liber viii., num. 21., Mansi cone. xx. col. 331 If. Similar
is his former letter to the same of August 25, 1076 (Ep. iv. 2. ibid, col.
208 ff.)


11. The temporal powers must act unconditionally in accordance
with the orders of the spiritual.
13. This proposition follows with logical sequence from the
celebrated bull “ Unam Sanctam” of Boniface VIII. ( 2 ) which says
verbatim : —“ That there are in the power of Petrus two swords,
the spiritual and temporal; this is taught by the Gospel. For
when the Apostles said— ‘ Here are two swords,’ the Lord did not
reply that they were too many, but, that they were sufficient.
Truly, who denies the temporal sword in the power of St. Peter
understands badly the words of the Lord, ‘ Sheath thy dagger.’
Each of the two swords is therefore in the power of the Churchy
namely, the spiritual and the temporal. But the latter is to be
wielded /or, the former by the Church. The first is that in the
hands of the priest, the other that in the hands of kings and
warriors, but vending the ivinks and permission of the priest. One
sword must be subjected to the other, and the temporal power must
be subjected to the spiritual. For, if the Apostle says—‘There is
no power without God; but that which is, is ordained by God,’
there would be no order if the one sword were not beneath the
other, and the lower, as it were, elevated by the higher. For,
according to St. Dyonis, it is divine law that low matter is by the
medium of the intermediate elevated into the highest. In accord-
ance Avith the rules of nature all atoms are not led alike and direct,
but the lowest are guided by the intermediate, and the mean by
the medium of the higher to the highest order. That, however,
the spiritual power surpasses the temporal in dignity and nobility,
we must confess the more freely, because whatever is spiritual
surpasses by far that which is temporal. And this we perceive with
clear eye by the rendering of the tithes, the blessings, the
sanctification, by the receiving of the power itself, by the adminis-
tration of the things themselves. For, witness of it is truth ; the
spiritual power has to appoint the temporal , and to judge over same
if it has not been just. Thus the Church acknowledges in its
powers the prophecy of Jeremiah— ‘ See I have placed thee over
nations and countries,’ &c. Consequently when the temporal power
( 2 ) In c. Ide majoritate et obed. in Extrar. comm. i. 8. That this has
been given ex cathedra cannot be doubted. Philipp’s Kirchenrecht 111., p.
256, adduces as its aim “to develop dogmatically in conformity with general
principles the relation between the State and Church,” and says p. 259 :
“In the same manner as Boniface does in the preamble of his bull confine the
salvation of man to his belonging to the one Church founded by God, in
the same manner he utters as infallible teacher the sentence —that in order
to gain salvation it was necessary for everybody to be subject to the pope.”
Moreover the “renewal and approbation ” of this constitution which did take
place in the eleventh sitting of the fifth General Lateran Council of Decem-
ber 19, 1516, “for the salvation of the souls of the believers, and for the
highest authority of the Holy See, and for the unity and might of the
Church, his bride, with the consent of the Holy Council,” removes every
doubt. Compare the ed. Sa. Lateranen, Concilium novissimum sub Julio ii.
et Leone x. celebratum (at the close in words) 1521, in 4° fol. clxxxv.
fg. Compare the document of April 10, 1870 (introduction), and further
on the explanations of the Civilta Cattolica.


disagrees, it is judged by the spiritual; but when the lower spiritual
order (disagrees), differs (abweicht), by its superior ; but when the
highest, it is judged by God alone, and not by any man, as is
witnessed by the Apostle. The spiritual man judges everything,
but is himself judged by no one. But this authority, though given
to man, is not of human, but on the contrary, of divine origin;
this, by the divine words spoken to Peter, and confirmed to him
and his successors as being the one alluded to as the rock when
Christ said to Peter— ‘ Whatever thou bindest shall be bound,’ &c.
Whosoever opposes this power given by God opposes the order of
God, except there be according to the erroneous teaching of Mani-
chaeus two principles; but such we declare as false and heretical,
for —according to the evidence of Moses—God did not create the
heaven and earth in the beginnings, but in the beginning. ( 3 ) And
thus do we declare, announce, and decide— To be subject to the
Roman Pontifex is necessary for the salvation of the soul of every
human being.” ( 4 )
111. The Church is empowered to grant, or to take away, any tem-
poral possession.
14. Thus does Gregory VII. speak in solemn sitting of the
Council at Rome, March 7, 1080 ( 5 ) :—“Be it well, then, ye
fathers and most holy princes, that the whole world perceive and
acknowledge that if ye can bind and loose in Heaven, ye can
take or give away on the earth the empires, kingdoms, principali-
ties, duchies, countries, and all the possessions oj every man accord-
ing to his deserts. For you have often taken from the bad and
unworthy, the patriarchate, primate, archbishoprics, and bishop-
rics, and given them to the pious. And if you can judge in this
manner over spiritual matters, what must not be believed of your
power over the temporal; and if you judge the angels who lord
over all the proud princes, what may you not do with their slaves 1
May now all the kings and princes of the world learn how high
you are, what you can do, and may they beware to esteem lightly
the commands of your church : and take care to execute quickly
(®) The play of words “principia,” “in principiis,” “ in principio” cannot
be properly rendered.
( 4 ) This is in substance the same view which is developed by Innocence
111. in his writing Solitte benignitatis to the Constantinopolitan emperor
(which is given in c. 6, x. de major, et obed. i. 33 ; complete in Baluze Ep.
i. p. 549), to whom he shows by interpretation that Paul did not intend,
when saying the words “be subject,” &c., to imply a subjection in the sense
of the State, but intended same only as an appeal for humility. He deduces
that the two great lights in the firmament mean the episcopal and kingly
power ; that the first is so much higher than the latter than the sun is
higher than the moon. According to the solemn declaration of Gregory
VII., the Pope is responsible to Ood for the soul of the king, whom he can
depose. Mansi Sacr. Conciliorum nova et amplis. Collectio T. xxii. Venet.
1775 fol. col. 377 sqq. Thus Pope Urban 11. could preach at Milan in the
Church of St. Theda in the year 1096 that the lowest priest preceded every
king. (Landulfus junior, cap. 27, in Migne Patrol, clxxxiii.)
( 5 ) Translated verbatim from Mansi xx. col. 535 sq. Baronius and Les-
sius consider this expression as a real doctrinal one (page 4).


your judgment passed with regard to the said Henry, that all may
know that he does not come to his fall accidentally, but in con-
sequence of your power. May he be crushed to repentance, that
his spirit may be saved on the day of the Lord.”
Gregory VII. being, if not actually the theoretical inventor, at
least the first one who pxit into execution the spiritual power over
the State, it is worth while to describe his acts more minutely.
15. At first Gregory VII. did excommunicate Henry IY. in the
Roman Synod of the year 1076 (Feb. 14 to 22) (Mansi xx. 467
sqq. Jaffe Regista Pont. num. 3731) with the words: —“Holy
Peter, Prince of the Apostles Based upon this confi-
dence for the honour and defence of thy Church, on the part (ex
parte) of the Almighty God, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
by thy power and authority do I take from the King Henry, the
son of the Emperor Henry, who rose with unheard-of pride against
thy Churches, the reins of the whole realms of the Germans, and of
Italy, and absolve all Christians from the oath they may have
sworn him, or which they may have yet to swear, and forbid that
any one serve him as his king. And because he disdained to obey
as a Christian, and did not return to the Lord whom he had left,
associating with the excommunicated, and despising the admoni-
tion for the welfare of his soul made by me to him, as you are
witness, and separated from the Church, trying to divide the same :
I bind him with the bonds of the Anathema in thy stead: and thus
I bind him in confidence of thee, that all nations may know and
approve that you are Peter upon whose rock the Son of the living
God did build His Church, against which the gates of hell shall not
prevail.”
The very meaning of the words shows that the deposition of
the reign was self understood.
16. In Synod at Rome, March 7, 1080, he says, after the enu-
meration of that which had been done against him by Henry :—-
“Therefore, confiding upon the judgment and the benevolence of God,
and His most pious mother, the constant Virgin Mary, and based
upon the authority of you (Peter), do I excommunicate and bind
with the bonds of the Anathema that Henry, so often named
King, and all his adherents : and whilst forbidding him anew the
reign of the Germans, and of Italy, on the part of the Almighty
God, and on your part, I take from him all Icingly power and
dignity, and ordain, that no Christian whatever obey him as his
king, and I do absolve from their oath all those of the reign
who may have taken such, or who may yet take same. Henry,,
however, with his followers, shall have no strength in battle and
never gain a victory in his life. That, however, Rudolph (of
Rheinfelden), whom the Germans have elected their king, may
govern and protect the reign of the Germans, I do grant, forgive,
and absolve from all their sms all his adherents for their faithful-
ness and power, and promise them, based upon your confidence,
blessings in this and the future life ; for in the same just manner
as Henry was deprived of the dignity of the kingdom in conse


quence of his pride and falseness, in the same manner is the power
and dignity of the reign granted to Rudolph on account of ms
obedience, humility, and truthfulness. Well then,” &c. (num. 14).
This excommunication was repeated by the Synods of the yeais
1081 (Mansi xx. 577. JaffS, p. 437), 1083 (Mansi, col. 587,
Jaffe p. 441, 1084 (Mansi 589, JaffS p. 442).
17. In order to vanish every doubt that Gregory >ll. did con-
sider the rights exercised over the German king as based upon t e
papal power (which rights could only have their origin in is
teaching concerning the relation of the Church to the state, or
he did not consider the German King as Emperor, nor did any
relation of the subjection of the King to the Pope as such exist
similar to that which had existed with regard to Frederic 1. (fee.,
and Sicily), several cases in point shall be given from decisive
letters
He writes, September 3, 1076 (Ep. iv. 3, Mansi xx. 210) to the
Germans: —“If you consider attentively that writing, m whic
the said King Henry has been excommunicated in holy Synod by
the judgment of the Holy Ghost, you will undoubtedly learn there-
from what to do with him. You will see from it why he has been
interdicted with the ban, deprived of his kingly dignity, and why
the whole people that was subject to him was absolved from the bonds
of the oaths rendered him. . . . Should he not from his heai e
converted, someone else must be found, with God’s help, who will
bind himself by a secret promise, admitting of no doubt, that he
will o-uard that which has been pointed out as necessary for the
Christian religion and the weal of the reign. That we, however,
may affirm your choice, if it be much needed, that such take place
under Apostolic authority, and thereby strengthen the new order
of things in our times (nostris temporibus), as we know it to have
been done by our holy fathers (history, as is well known, teaches
n othing of the sort), inform us as quickly as possible about his
rank, person, his morals . . . .” . ,
18 January 28, 1077, he makes known to the Germans (Epist.
iv. 12, Mansi xx. 218, Jaffe Regesta Pontificum num. 3765), that
Henry had done repentance, and had promised to give satisfaction
to God, to St. Peter, and to him, and remain obedient to the end
of his life, if he were only forgiven : “ At last he came with but few
to the town of Canossa where we remained, and stood there before
the gate three days, miserable, denuded of all kingly pomp, baie-
footed (discalceatus), and in woollen vestments (laneis mdutus),
and ceased not with many prayers to ask for the assistance and the
consolation of the Apostolic benevolence, until all those who were
present, or to whose ears it came to pass, were induced by such
piety, and the sentiment of brotherly love, that they begged tor
him with many prayers and tears, and were astonished at the
unusual severity of our mind; and some said, we were not mil o
Apostolic severity, but as it were, of the cruelty of tyrannic wi
ness. At last, conquered by the intensity of his remorse, and the


great intercession of those present, we did accept him again into
the bosom of the holy mother Church, and to the blessing of the
membership of the Church, by annulling the ban after given
guarantees, as follow hereunder, the affirmation of which took place
by the hand (seal) of the Abbot of Clugny, our daughters Mathilde
and Countess Adelhaide, and of such other princes, bishops, and
laymen, as seemed of use to us.”
If we compare this description of the Pope, given in his own
dictation, with the words of the Bible, after St. Peter had denied
the Lord three times: —“ Then the Lord turned about and looked
at Peter. And Peter remembered the words of the Lord, which
he had said : ‘ before the cock crow wilt thou deny me three times.’
And Peter went outside and wept bitterly” (Luke xxii. 61, 62),
then we must shudder. How does the conduct of the Lord
towards him whom he had made the first of his apostles contrast
with that of the Pope towards the emperor, who was his master in
temporal matters !
19. In the letter of May 31, 1077, whose import (content) he
made known to the Germans in a second letter of the same date
(Epist. iv. 23, 24, Mansi xx. 229, sqq.), he enjoins his legate to
bring about a decision at the meeting of state between King Henry
and (his opponent) Rudolph. Whichever of the two did not yield
he should be excommunicated, &c.; the other, who acted sub-
missively, and “ did not despise (thus in the second letter) the
sentence (passed by the Holy Ghost, but pronounced by you), him
confirm in the kingly dignity by virtue of the authority of the holy
Apostles Peter and Paul in our stead, and command all bishops,
abbots, clergymen, and laymen of the whole reign to obey and
serve him faithfully, as ordained (von Seiten) by the Almighty God.”
Compare likewise Ep. vii. 1, in which he writes—“We have com-
manded and ordained by the judgment of the Holy Ghost that a
meeting of the States take place.” In the waiting Ep. ix. 28
(Mansi xx. 360, sq.), he promises to hold a Synod and depose
Rudolph, if same had not been elected legitimately.
20. In the writing of March 15, 1081, mentioned in num. 12, he
says : —“ Another Roman Pope, namely Zachary, deposed the king
of the Franks, not so much on account of his misdemeanours, but
because he was not capable of wielding such power, and placed
Pippin, the father of Charlemagne, in his stead, and released all
Franks from the oath of allegiance made to him (for the sources
referring to the declaration of Zachary, which latter does not
exactly agree with that of Gregory —see Jaffe Regesta Pontificum
Romanorum. Berol. 1851, 4°, p. 188). It is likewise often done
by virtue of frequent authority (ex frequenti auctoritate) that the
holy Church absolves the warriors (milites) from the bonds of their
oath; which is likewise done with those bishops who are deposed
of their episcopal degree by apostolic authority. And the late
Bishop Ambrosius, though holy, but not bishop over the whole
Church, did exclude the Emperor Theodosius the Great from the


Church on account of a fault which was not even looked upon as
mich a very grave one by the other priests. ( 6 ) Which king or
emperor can by virtue of his station wrench a soul from the power
of the devil and add it to the children of God( 7 ), or protect it
with the holy Chrisma 1 or what is the highest in the Christian
religion 1( 8 ) Which of them can prepare with his own mouth the
"body and blood of the Lord 1 Or to which of them is the power
given to bind and loose in heaven and upon the earth 1 From this
it follows clearly by what great prowess the dignity of priest is dis-
tinguished. Or which of them can consecrate anyone as clergyman,
or even less depose one on account of any fault whatsoever! For in
the consecrations of the Church it is left to a higher power to
depose than to ordain. Certainly bishops can consecrate bishops,
but in no case depose ( 9 ) them without the authority of the Apostolic
( 8 ) There is a remarkable intermixture of the spiritual and worldly
matter in this, as in many other argumentations of Gregory and of other
popes. Convinced of the elevation of the priestdom, he does not under-
stand at all, that, because he may hold sway over a person in spiritual
matters, it is not said that on account of that he is above him in temporal
•affairs. It was, as has already been justly remarked by others, the spirit of
ascetic monkdom, carried to its greatest climax in the despising of all
worldly matter, by which he was guided. It is only sad that such an
•exalted mind did mould his propositions into a system, and that same were
then proclaimed and executed by divine right.
( 7 ) A queer argument in the mouth of a pope, it having long been declared
as dogma that every one could baptize validly, even the non-Christian. For
the effect of baptism it matters nothing whether the regular spending of it
belongs to the spender ex officio or not. Thus there is again such queer use
•of arguments which do not apply at all.
( 8 ) With this argument harmonizes strangely that the deposition of a
•bishop is looked upon as proof of the highest papal power.
( 9 ) This argument again is partly wrong, and proves partly that the real
content of the primate appears as a power of right only. It is wrong, because
it is self-evident that it requires a higher religious power to give to a person
the indelible character of bishop than to simply deprive him of a BENEFICTUM —
of the execution of his power. A bishop never losing, according to the dogma,
his innate episcopal qualification ; and the granting of such demanding a
power which can only be held by him who did receive same from God him-
self, it surpassing human capability and power ; if, according to the dogma,
every real bishop can validly ordain priests, because of his being a successor
in the apostolate ; if even the Pope, previous to his being chosen as such
(which has often been the case) is not yet a bishop, and succeeds to the apos-
tolate only after having been consecrated as bishop, — consequently becomes
only by a purely episcopal act Bishop of Rome, and then only as Bishop of
Rome the successor of Peter ; it follows as logical sequence, firstly, that the
Apostle Paul says rightly in his letter to the Ephesians ii. 19:—“Now, there-
fore, ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the
saints, and of the household of God; 20, and are built upon the foundation of
the apostles and the prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone.” Secondly, that the peculiar higher power of the pope is a judicial one,
because by the dogma the fulness of the priestly power, and the faculty to
ordain bishops, and the succession in the Apostolate, is contained in the
episcopal already. Justly did therefore antiquity place the primate there-
in ; justly does Gregory VII., though some of his arguments may not apply,
■adduce only its judicial aspect. As many opportunities as he had here and
elsewhere in his writings and acts, the Papal Infallibility is nowhere adduced
as a proof that the pope stood above the bishops, &c. If he had believed in


See. Who, therefore, knowing ever so little (vel tenuiter sciolus)
( 10 ) could cloubt that the priests pass before the kings (anteferri) llf
then the kings must be judged for their sins, by whom could they
be more properly judged than by the Roman Pope? Brief (ad
summum), it is more fit to consider as kings all good Christians,
than to consider as such bad princes. For the former, seeking the
glory of God, govern themselves rightly (stramm); whereas the
latter, not seeking what belongs to God, but only what is their own,
and acting as enemies to themselves, subjugate others tyrannically
the former are the body of the King Christ, but the latter that of
the devil.” And such arguments, which might not be amiss in the
mouth of a pious arch-democrat, does Gregory VII. adduce to-
establish his demands, which latter are to be looked upon as binding
for all times!
21. Sometimes he bases his rights also upon the territorial
right over the countries of the earth given to St. Peter. Thus he
writes April 30, 1073, to the princes of Spain (Epist. Lib. I, ep. 7,
Mansi xx. col. 65) :—“ We believe that it be not unknown to you
that the kingdom of Spain has been in the possession (property) 1
of St. Peter from the oldest time, and is so still (though occupied
by the heathens long ago) [‘ Paganis,’ generally the Mahometans
are not reckoned as such], for the law of justice has not become
valueless, thus it belongs to no mortal one, but in all justice to the
Apostolic See alone. For whatever, did once come into the possession
of the Church by the authority of God (auctore Deo) himself may
perhaps be diverted from its use for a time, in consequence of tem-
poral causes, but can never be alienated from it without a legal
concession. Evulus, Count of Roceio, who will enter that country
and wrench it from the heathens for the honour of St. Peter, did
such, he could have said with different effect —the pope is infallible, posses-
ses therefore a divine quality, and is therefore as high as God above humanity.
Of infallibility, however, I can find nothing in his words. For even the
expression in his letter ad Symadensem (Simadensem) archiep. of June 6,
1080 (Ep. viii. 1, Mansi xx. 313) —“The holy Roman Church, which by St.
Peter, as it were by a certain privilege, from the very beginning of belief
itself, is described by the holy fathers as the mother of all churches
(adstruitur), and which will be held as such to the very end, in which as
yet no heretic was known ever to preside (in qua .... prsefuisse dignoscitur)
nor ever, as we hope can do so, especially as the Lord promises so ; for the
Lord Jesus says : —‘For I did pray for thee that thy belief do not grow
less,’ —contains only the utterance of a fact as regarded the past, and a hope
for certain facts in futurity, but in no single word the idea, as if such
could not take place, less so the expression as if the personal quality of the
pope made this impossible. Aye, even here again a judicial idea, privilege,
is adduced ; for the Homan Church is so little identical with the pope,
that the latter appears only as the one presiding over same. This is the
more important, because Gregory VII. held Synods for all important acts,
which were not attended by the Roman and Italian bishops only, and did
always give the sentence of the Synod as the fundament for his actions, as is
already shown by some of the passages given; p.e. Epist. i. 54, i. 82,
ii. 54 ; Mansi xx. 380, 404, 405, &c.
(i°) Whether I translate this word correctly, I do not know. Even
Ducange has no passage (proof. Beleg) for a translation fitting here.


receive from the Holy See the permission to possess, in accordance
with a treaty made between us, all that territory from which he
may drive the heathens with his own help and that of others.”
This he then makes known to all the princes.
22. On another occasion the supremacy of St. Peter over the
whole world is brought forward again. For March 20, 1074, he
writes in a letter to King Sancho of Arragon (Ep. i. 63, Mansi xx.
109): “Because we confide in Jesus Christ, that the blessed
Apostle Peter, whom the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Glory,
constituted ruler over the reigns of this world (principem super
regna mundi constituit), and to whom you have proved faithful,
will guide you to obtain the object of your desire (ad honorem tui
desiderii) and make you the victor of your enemies. ’ One would
almost think here that Peter was God himself.
23. And again for another country he deduces the papal
supremacy from acts in which beyond all doubt no subjection to
the temporal ruling of the popes could be found. He writes
October 28, 1074 (Epist ii. 13, Mansi xx. 138), to King Solomon
of Hungary :—“ Your letter .... we would have received more
kindly, if your silly behaviour had not offended St. Peter so very
much. For as you can hear from the great (elders 1 majoribus)
of your country, the kingdom of Hungary is the property of the
Roman Church, made over to St. Peter by King Stephen with all
its rights and powers, and piously handed over by him long ago.
Moreover the Emperor Henry, of blessed memory, did conquer
that reign for the honour of St. Peter, and did send to the shrine
(body) of St. Peter the lance and crown after the defeat of the king,
in this manner sending for the renown of his triumph the insignia
of the reign thither where he knew that precedence to his dignity
(principatus) was due. In spite of this you have, besides deviating
from kingly dignity and virtue, lessened and given away the rights
and honour of St. Peter, as far as you were able, you having, as we
were informed, taken the reign in vassalage from the king of the Ger-
mans. If this be true, learn that you cannot hope to gain our
good wishes (pleasure, approbation) in any other way, nor to ride
long without apostolic punishment, except you acknowledge, after
mending your error, that you hold the sceptre of the reign you
possess as vassal of the Apostolic, and not of the king s majesty.
Compare Ep. ii. 63 (Mansi xx. 174, to King Geysa 11. 70,) (ibid
180) to the same.
24. But this presumptive territorial right is brought forward
only in such cases where, as with Hungary, a purely judicial act,
as the giving in vassalage of a country to another, which was an
act perfectly in accordance with the customs of the times, was to
be protested against. To depose kings was vested in the pope,
according to his ideas, as a matter of right. Thus in cases where
no presumptive right could be adduced such general right is no
less pronounced.
In a letter to all the bishops of France, dated September 10,
1074 (Ep. ii. 5., Mansi xx. 129), he describes the existing circum


stances of France, calls the king a tyrant, and enjoins the bishops
to reason with him in a body. If this had no effect they should
lay the whole country under the interdict, and cease all public
worship. “ Should he not even come to his senses after this punish-
ment, then it is our pleasure that it remain hidden or doubtful to
no one, that we shall try in every way whatsoever to w T rench the
reign of the Franks with the help of God from his occupation .”
If the bishops proved themselves dilatory (lax), they were threatened
with the same dart of wrath.
Nov. 13, 1074 (Ep. ii. 18., ibid col. 141), he writes similarly to
the Count William, of Poictiers, with the injunction to admonish
the king and some bishops and nobles. If he did not change
(mend) he would excommunicate him and all who rendered him
kingly honour and obedience.
25. As well as Gregory VII. did his successors depose emperors
and kings.
Pope Alexander 111. excommunicated the Emperor Frederic I.
in the Lateran Council of the year 1168, depossessed him of his
reign, absolved all from their oath of allegiance, declared he would
gain no victory, &c. Compare Mansi xxii. 33 sqq. The documents
of their reconciliation, the absolving from the ban, &c ; , of the year
1177, see Mansi xxii. 173 sqq.
Pope Innocence 111. deposed in the Roman Council of 1210 the
Emperor Otto IV. (Mansi xxii. col. 813 sqq.)
Pope Gregory IX. declares in the bull Quia Fridericus( n ), of the
year 1239, after excommunicating the Emperor Frederic 11., “We
enact that all who are bound to him by an oath of allegiance shall
be absolved from same, and we firmly forbid that they keep their
faith; this we enjoin in conformity with canonical rules.”
And in a letter to the legate in England (Mansi xxiii. 77), “.We
have thought fit, with the advice of our brethren, and on the part
of the Almighty God, whose place we occupy on earth, though
against our -will, and by virtue of the authority of the Apostles,
Peter and Paul, and our own, to publish the sentence of excom-
munication and anathema against him (the Emperor Frederic II.),
in delivering Frederic himself to Satan for the perdition of his
flesh, that his soul might be saved on the day of the Lord ;( 12 ) and
we ordain that all those who are bound to him by oath be absolved
from the obligations of same, and forbid strictly to obey him as
long as he is held within the bonds of the ban.”
With regard to the excommunication in the Council of 1228, see
Mansi xxiii. 161.
26. Pope Innocence IV. banned in the Council of Lyons (Mansi
xxiii. 613 ff.) Frederic 11. by the bull Ad Apostolicae, absolved all
( 11 ) Magnum Bullarium Romanum Luxemb. 1727. Tom. i, p. 80.
( 12 ) But if Frederic did not get rid of the ban, was in that case his body
only damned for eternity ? How can this sentence be made to agree with
ether ones stating that the excommunication was binding beyond the grave
likewise—and with the teaching of the resurrection? Shall we look upon it
as a mere formula ?


rom their oath, and exposed, as a matter of course, all those who
might assist the Emperor to excommunication : “ But those in
whom is vested the election of another emperor in that country
may freely choose a successor. But with regard to the kingdom of
Sicily we shall deal according to our pleasure after consultation
with our brethren.”
The transactions between Boniface VIII. and Ludwig (Louis), of
Bavaria, I can omit and turn to later facts.
27. Pope Nicholas V. deposed the counter pope Felix (Amadeus
of Savoy), declared all his dominions confiscated and the property
of those who would possess themselves thereof; towns, lands,
burghs, and chattels ; and to the King Charles of France he gave
the right to annex his territory and leave it for ever to his suc-
cessors. ( 13 )
28. In the bull Ejus qui( 14 ), of August 30, 1535, Paul 111.
threatens, beginning with the words, “ Being upon the earth in
place of Him who moves everything with miraculous providence
and order .... and placed in His judgment seat upon the
earth .... having a peculiar supremacy (prineipatum
prsecipium) over all the kings and over all the nations of the whole
world.” The King Henry VIII., of England, with excommuni-
cation and all its consequences. These latter he declares in the
bull Cum Redemptor as having taken place. ( ls ) In this bull
Henry is excommunicated with all his followers, deposed of his
kingdom, and his reign and dominions placed under the interdict,
the King with his descendants by Anne Boleyn, and all his
adherents and their descendants deprived of all rights, &c., their
holdings (feudal) elapsed, everybody absolved from his oath, and
all obedience to him forbidden; the King and his followers
declared infamous, unfit to give evidence, unfit to delegate any-
thing, unfit for the execution of any judicial act; all the temporal
and spiritual (clerical) vassals, all other clergymen and laymen
are enjoined to drive them, their soldiers, servants, and all other
armed followers, from the kingdom and their possessions; this,
should it be necessary, with the force of arms; all the powers
are commanded, by virtue of the Holy Ghost, to attack Henry
and his partizans with the force of arms, and constrain him to
the unity of the Church and obedience to the pope, to seize the
goods of those adhering to Henry, of whatever kind they might
be, even such that were situated beyond the pale of that
country; to keep them as their own property, given by the pope,
and to make slaves of such adherents.
29. Pope Pius V. says in the bull Regnans in Excelsis ( )fi ), of
( 13 ) Raynaldus Annal. ad a. 1447, num. 18, T. xviii. p. 398.
( 14 ) Magnum Bull. cit. T. I. p. 707 sqq.
( ls ) Bullarium 1 c., p. 711 sq.
( 16 ) Magnum Bullar, editio cit. T. ii. p. 324 sq. In the bull of Clement
XI. Inter multiplices of May 22, 1712 (Bullar, T. viii. p. 92 sqq.) Pius V. was
numbered among the saints. In it is said that he persecuted, as inquisitor,
the heretics in all possible ways, so that to him was given for the first and


Feb. 25, 1570 : —“ The Lord on high, to whom belongs all power
in Heaven and upon the earth, gave the one holy and apostolic
church, beyond the pale of which there is no salvation, to govern
in the fulness of power, this to but one single one upon the earth,
that is to the prince of the Apostles, Peter, and to the successor
of Peter, the Roman Pontifex. Him did he place over all the
nations and over all the reigns as prince, that he might extirpate,
destroy, scatter, annihilate, plant and build, so as to keep the
faithful flock together by the bond of reciprocal love in the unity
of spirit, and guard and keep same undefiled for their Saviour.”
In the administration of that office he had to watch over Catholic
unity ; the servant of evil, the so-called Queen Elizabeth of England,
formed the prop for all the godless. “Based upon the authority of
God we do therefore declare, from Apostolic fulness of power, that
the said heretic Elizabeth and her adherents are under the Anath-
ema, and separated from the union of the body of Christ. Aye,
the same he moreover deprived of her assumed right over that reign,
and of all property, of all dignity, and of all privileges. And in the
same manner shall all classes, subjects, and the people of the
country, and whosoever did swear to her be absolved from such
oath, and from all duties of vassalage and obedience for ever, from
which we hereby absolve them ; we depose the said Elizabeth of
her assumed rights of all the above mentioned things, and forbid
the administrations, the subjugated nations, and others to obey her
edicts and laws.”
30. Pope Paul IV. declares in the Bull ( 17 ) Cum ex apostolatus of
last time the dignity of “the most supreme and constant judge of heretics
over all bishops and delegates,” that “ struck by the rays of His Holiness
(as pope) a noble Englishman, and others, among whom a very rich Jew
were converted.” King Henry IV. was deprived of his kingdom Navarra
by hope bixtus V. under similar circumstances (motives), declared incapable
to succeed to the throne of France, and everyone absolved from his oath of
allegiance. The same repeated the deposition of Queen Elizabeth with the
The deposition of Henry IV. was repeated by Gregory
(”) Magnum Bullar, i. p 840. It is addressed to the whole Church, signed
by the cardinals, consequently in the most solemn form, therefore certainly
an EX cathedra one. Compare the prayer of April, 1870. It remains
remarkable that the pope says “ Because it is very awkward that a pope
can be accused of heresy,” therefore do we issue this constitution Still
more remarkable it is that the pope says—the pope being the represen-
tative of God, and absolute ruler of the world, and on account of this there
being nobody to judge him, it is awkward that he could be blamed. But
the most remarkable thing is, that in a special bull the choice of a heretic is
declared null and void in advance, it being adduced as reason that it would
be a too grand affair,. if the. (infallible) pope could be proved as differing
from faith without being subject of condemnation. It is, however, entirely
incomprehensible how the pope and the whole collegium of cardinals could
conceive the possibility that an (infallible) pope could be found differing
trom faith. That, however, this incomprehensibility does take place follows
therefrom, that if the person who stands in place of God and Christ is
denoted as the one who might swerve from faith, nobody else can ever be
meant thereby than the pope as such, that is, the representative of God of
Christ, not the private individual who did become pope.


February 15, 1559, §. 1. verbatim : —“We, considering that it is a
serious and dangerous matter, that the Roman pope, who occupies
upon the earth the place of God, of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
possesses the fulness of power over the nations and countries, and
who judges all, cannot be judged himself, or be called to account
(redargui, proved against) when he is found differing from faith,
and that in a case where the greater danger threatens, greater
care must be taken that the false prophets or others in the seat
of temporal judgment do not universally entangle the simple-
minded and drag with them to perdition and damnation the
numerous souls confided to their care in spiritual and temporal
matters, we renew all the punishments placed upon heresy,” &c. ( 18 )
In §. 6. the choice of a heretic, 4"c., as pope, is annulled in ad-
vance, everything done by such a one is declared void, and all
are absolved from their obedience to him and enjoined to have
recourse to the temporal power.
31. It is more frequently found in the preamble of bulls that
the pope is the ruler of the world, which is implied in the above
words and deeds. Thus the bull Divina disp., of Leo X., issued
in the 11. sitting of the 5 Lateran Council of December 19, 1516,
■says p.e., speaking ex cathedra —“ By the mildness of God . .
.. . . placed in the elevated position of the Apostolate, and over
the nations and reigns .” In the bull Postquam verus of Pius
V., December 3, 1586 ( 19 ) stands as follows : —“After that true
Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, Christ the Lord, had given to the
prince of Apostles, St. Peter, the fulness of heavenly and earthly
power for the government of the whole Church which He had pur-
chased with His precious blood, and placed him in his own stead
upon the earth, in the like manner the Roman pope sitting on the
throne of Peter is himself the successor and real representative of
Christ by divine preordination (divina prseordinatione), and occu-
pies the summit of the highest apostolic dignity and represents its
place on earth, in a similar manner do the cardinals of the
holy Roman Church stand aside of the pope as representing the holy
apostles serving the Lord whilst he preached the reign of God and
worked the secret of human salvation. ( 20 )
( 18 ) In § 2—5 the censures and punishments against heretics and
schismatists are then enumerated.
( 19 ) Bullar, cit. ii, p. 680.
( 20 ) This bull is signed by all the cardinals. The theory is simple ; the
pope is Peter, the cardinals are Apostles; ergo, the whole Catholic Church is
concentrated in the Roman (meant in the sense of the Roman diocese,
Trans!.); the bishops, except the six cardinal bishops, are mere assistants.
Now the cap. 3of the Const, dogmatica of July 16, 1870, agrees. Unfor-
tunately, the preambles of bulls are generally not noticed, perhaps not on
account of their exuberance of words. This should not be thus, for they
often contain the very quintessence of the whole bull. Does not this
preamble show that the canonists, &c., did hitherto ignore the real importance
of the cardinals. Even Phillips vi. p. 252 sqq., does not notice this passage,
considers the collegium of cardinals as a quasi divine institution, but does
not hold to consider the cardinals, if they are not bishops, as the successors
■of the Apostles, he looking upon this view simply as being a fitting com


IV. The pope has the right to give countries and nations which
are non-Catholic to Catholic regents, who can reduce them to slavery.
32. Pope Nicholas V. gave in the bull Romanus Pontifex to
the King Alphonse of Portugal, with respect to Western Africa
&c., “ full liberty to attack, conquer, war against, and subjugate
all the Saracens and other enemies of Christ in all places, and to
appropriate their reigns, duchies, principalities, territories, posses-
sions and goods, to make use of them for his own, or for the
benefit of his descendants, to leave them to the latter for ever,
and to reduce their persons to perpetual slavery.” This grant
he repeated in the bull Nuper non of January 9, 1454 ( 21 ); it
has been confirmed by Calixtus 111. in the bull of Inter Caetera
of the year 1456, and by Sixtus IV. in the bull Aeterni Regis of
the year 1481, which still extends. In the bulls of Nicholas V.
exclusive dominion over those seas is given to the Portuguese.
33. Pope Alexander VI. says in the bull Inter caetera of the
year 1493 ( 22 ), to ensure that the newly discovered islands and
countries would become christianized : “ We give by these presents
for ever, grant and make over to you” (to Ferdinand and Isa-
bella), “ from our own free will, not in consequence of any prayer,
but from pure generosity aud certain knowledge, by the virtue and
fulness of Apostolic power, all the islands and continents, discovered
or undiscovered towards west and north (noon), in drawing a line
from the North to the South Pole, which line commences from
each of the Azores 100 leucae towards west and south, so that all
islands and continents which are discovered or may be discovered
west and south of this line, but not taken actual possession of by
any other Christian prince or king up to the next Christmas 1493,
by any of your messengers or chiefs, by virtue of the authority of
the Almighty God which has been delegated to us in St. Peter, and
as the representative of Jesus Christ, as which we rule on earth, such
with all their dominions, towns, burghs, villages, rights, courts and
pertinencies, and we give them to you and your successors (the
kings of Castile and Leon) and heirs, to lord over with full, free,
and each and every power.”
V. The pope can make slaves of those Christian subjects whose
prince or ruling power is interdicted by the pope.
parison. If this bull is to be accepted as containing pious expressions only,
in order to overcome the danger pointed out, then I must confess my
incapacity to comprehend how same could be made with such solemnity in
a writing signed by all the cardinals. However, I can understand very well
if nobody compares any papal expression to the Gospel.
( 21 ) The copies in Raynaldus ad a. 1454, num. 8 (Tom xviii. p. 413 sqq.)
The most complete collection (commentary) with regard to all papal edicts
concerning all the Indies, &c., is given in the work “Fasti Novi Orbis et
Ordinationum Apostolicarum ad Indias pertinentium breviarium cum anno-
tationibus. Opera D. Cyriaci Morelli presb., olim in univ. Neo-Cordub. in
Tuccumania professore. Venetiis mdcclxxvi. (prostat ap. Ant. Zatta),
in 4. ” The Spaniards beholding in such papal gift the title for their dominion,
we can understand their belief in papal almightiness.
( S 2) JBullarium cit. i. p. 454. Comp. Raynaldus Annales ad a. 1493, num.
19 (T. xix. p. 421.)


34. Thus done and declared by Clement V., who in the year
1309, in dispute with the Venetians, excommunicated their Doge,
the Senate, and the people, announced them lawless (legum et
judiciorum beneficio privatos), ordered the clergy to leave their
territory, except those necessary for the spending of Baptism and
Repentance, confiscated all the property of the Venetians, and
pronounced a crusade against them. ( 23 )
Gregory XI. says, March 22, 1376, in the bull In omnemfere, in
relation to the Florentines :—“ And to prevent their temerity from
becoming the example for the despisers, we have, in accordance
with the advice of our brethren (the cardinals), confiscated the
real estate of all the Priori, Gonfallonieri, judges, and congregation,
and that of all Florentines wherever they may be, and ordained that
their persons, however without the right of killing or maiming them,
all or separately, belong to those who seize them, to be made slaves
of, and that all their moveable property might be taken possession
of by any believer.” He then subjects them to the punishments
threatened by John XXII. against tyrants and disturbers of the
peace : infamy for themselves and their descendants, incapacity
to make testaments or to inherit by in in-
juries, &c. ( 24 ) :
Of the later cases it is sufficient to (Julius dis-
pute with Venice) the similar conduct of «p|u]||J|. wßfi regard Vto
the English, in the bulls Eius qui and\6u\nßed"empt<&f attSMy
quoted.
Analogous is a much older instance. PopfriQ'/idriau'l'V'. 'by-birth
an Englishman, authorised King Henry of EngfitrrdyTn'tbe year
1155, in the writing “ Laudabiliter satis” (Mansi xxii. 788, Jaffe
Regesta Pont. num. 6908), to conquer Ireland, he the Pope
retaining for St. Peter and the Roman Church the right of an
annual tax of a denari for every separate house only.
VI. The laws of the Chvrch, concerning the liberty of the Church
and thepapal power , are based upon divine inspiration.
35. Thus declares Pope Julius 11. in the fourth sitting of the
5. Lateran Council ( 25 ) verbatim : “Julius, bishop, servant of the
servants of God, for future remembrance, with the consent of the
Holy Council: Though the decrees of the holy Canones, of the
holy fathers and the Roman popes, our forefathers, and those
sanctioned in general legitimate Councils( 26 ), which were given for
the defence of the liberty and dignity of the Church, ancl for the
protection of the Apostolic See, must be unalterably kept by all,
these decrees, issued as it were by divine inspiration, are therefore un-
changeable.” Then a demand was issued with regard to the
Pragmatical Sanction which was at the same time solemnly
denounced.
D
( 23 ) JRaynaldus Annales. T. xv. p. 43 sq. ad an, 1309, n. 6.
( 24 ) Baynaldus ad a. 1376, n. 5. (T. xvi, p. 544).
(*>) Ibid, fol. xlix. b.
(i 6) “I n generalibus legitimis Conciliis.” A peculiar adjective. Have
there been perhaps any general illegitimate Councils (Schein-Concilien) ?


It lies in the nature of the thing, therefore, that the papal power
dare extend itself over everything which has, let it be ever so
slightly, any connection with the Church. And hence these points
are consistently enacted by the executive power of the laws of the
Church. As proof of this, the following passages.
YII. The Church has the right to practice the unconditional censure
of boohs.
36. Leo X. says in the bull Inter sollicitudines (f), issued with
the consent of the Holy 5. Lateran Council, May 4, 1515, in its
tenth sitting : —“We decree and ordain that henceforth, and in all
future times, nobody dare print a book or any writing in Rome,
or in any other town or diocese, or to get the same printed,
except it be minutely examined, if in Home by our Vicar or
Master of the Palace, if anywhere else by the bishop or a delegated
official and the inquisitor of heretics, and by them provided with an
approbation given by their own hand and gratis, this under pain of
excommunication. Who acts against this suffers, beside the loss
and public burning of such printed books, and the unavoidable
payment of 100 ducats for the benefit of St. Peter, and one year’s
suspension in his profession (craft), the punishment of excommuni-
cation, and in contumacium will be persecuted with all means as a
warning example for others.”
VIII. The pope has the right to annul State laws , treaties, consti-
tutions, Sgc.; to absolve from obedience thereto, as soon as they
seem detrimental to the rights of the Church or those of the clergy.
37. An instance of the Avignonian time, very interesting for the
jurist, is the following-Pope Gregory XI. (not Gregory IX.
under whose letters Mansi. 157 ff. gives the respective writings—
compare my “deutsche Reichs-und Rechtsgesehichte,” 2 Edition,
Stuttgardt, 1870, p. 159) says in a Bull of the year 1374 : “ For
the veneration of God, for the eradication of errors, and for the
elevation of the Catholic religion and righteousness, and for the
salvation of souls, we do denounce certain damnable writings,
called laws or Mirror of the Saxons, after a long and diligent con-
sultation, by virtue of apostolic authority, condemn them and declare
them void and powerless, wanting in all strength and firmness, as
is mentioned in our letter, which says.” In this latter he says
that he was the representative of God, who, foreseeing the evil and
the chaff (weeds) among the wheat, had given to St. Peter and his
successors the most replete (fullest) power, he had therefore to
eradicate that which disagreed with eternal salvation. Now, he
had been often informed, that in Saxony and elsewhere this horrid
Saxon Mirror was found and followed (adhered to) both by nobles
and plebians. This insulted God, burthened our neighbour, &c.
That God might not demand from him the blood of all those
who sinned in consequence of that work, he had same examined
minutely by some cardinals, theologians, and doctors at law.
“ After mature consideration we denounce, condemn, and declare
( 27 ) Raynaldus ibid. fol. cli.


it as null, void, powerless and false, bold, unjust, unlawful, in some
points heretical and schismatical and against good morals, and
annul all sentences passed, which date from any of the disapproved
articles.” He forbids all Christian believers to use it, and calls
upon the authorities to forbid it by the punishment of excommuni-
cation, which would ensue by rights, and enjoins all rulers to pro-
vide grave temporal punishments.
In a letter to King Charles IV., dated Avignon, October 15,
1374 (Mansi xxiii. 159), he repeats this, and adds that he had
sent his writing to the Archbishops of Mayence, Cologne, Bremen,
Magdeburg, Prague, Riga, and their Suffragans. The disapproved
articles, all of a purely juristical nature, are: I.—“ Any action
beyond the pale of the law can be denied (rendered powerless) by
oath simple.” This is a purely processual sentence of the Saxon
right. 2.—“ The pope or anybody else can ban the Emperor if he
has been ordained (consecrated), only in three cases —when he
doubts in faith, when he separates (casts off) from his wife, when he
injures the Church.” Consequently, the pope lays claim to the
most exhaustive power over the Emperor, and that in all directions.
3.—“ The excommunication without the (temporal) ban does not
weaken the law (right), neither the civil, nor that of vassalage.”
Thus the pope taught that excommunication did have effect in civil
laws. 4.—“ The pope cannot change ( verschlechtern, make worse)
the Saxon right of tenure and vassalage.” Hence the pope claims
the right of direct legislation. s.—Condemns the duel as legal proof.
C.—Denounces the law to clear (exculpate) the slain in certain cases
by duel. 7. —If the evidence is contradictory, the duel decides.
B.—The one challenged can only then refuse the duel, if the chal-
lenger is of lower rank. 9.—Denounces the use of fire, water, duel
(in the so-called proofs before God—Gottesurtheile). 10.—“ Who
weakens a woman first and then marries her, cannot have legitimate
progeny by her.” 11.— “Who carries on open adultery with a
married woman and marries her after the death of her husband, does
not have legitimate progeny by her.” 12.—“ The heir need not be
responsible for theft or robbery committed by the testator, which
is wrong at least before the forum of conscience.” This sentence of
the Saxon Mirror has nothing to do with conscience, but is with
many others an emission of sentences which His Holiness does not
seem to have understood. 13.—Condemns the right to make
-concessions by testaments as too much restricted. ( 28 ) 14.—Declares
d 2
(2 8) The bull says verbatim—“ That whosoever, with his sword in his
belt and his shield in his hand, cannot jump from a wood (form) or stone,
an ell high upon a saddled horse, cannot testate, make over, or give in
vassalage, nor even give moveable goods, with the effect that he who expects
same after the death of the donor could rely thereupon. This article is
erroneous (erroneous, the technical word for sentences which are not exactly
heretical, because not contradicting any article of belief formally expressed,
but approaching said word very closely), in so far as it forbids (prevents)
alms, testaments, and other works of charity.” The sentence of the Saxon
Mirror purports, in harmony with the system of the German right, to pre


as erroneous the sentence according to which the proprietor of soil
could alienate same without the consent of the nearest in kin, and
without legal permission, in so far as it prevented the giving of
alms, or other works of piety. The reason for this is likewise
easily perceived.
This constitution offers a proof which cannot be gainsaid, that
the popes claim the right to draw within the precincts of their
authority all laws, and laws of custom even. Whether some of
those sentences are judicially untenable from the standard of the
Roman right, or from that of the present time, is perfectly
immaterial. The Saxon Mirror stating itself most positively that
its aim was only as to temporal rights, the execution of pure papal
omnipotence is evident. If we examine these bulls minutely, we
cannot doubt that they are given ex cathedra. The complete history
of the condemnation of the Saxon Mirror, brought about by the
Augustine Friar, Johannes Klenkok, is found in “Johannes Klen-
kok wider den Sachsenspiegel, von G. Homeyer. Berlin, 1855. 4.
(Treatise of the Academy. Appendix thereto of June 5, 1856).”
38. The bull Pastor Aeternus of Leo X., of December 19,1516,
issued in the eleventh sitting of the fifth Lateran Council, shows
and practises this with regard to all laws. “ The eternal pastor . .
placed upon the firmness of a rock Peter and his successors as his
vicars upon the earth, who, according to the Book of the Kings,
must be obeyed with such necessity, that , who does not obey shall
die, and, as is stated (read) elsewhere, that no one can be in
the Church who leaves the cathedra of the Roman bishop ; for,
according to the expressions of Augustine and Gregory, obedience
alone is the mother and guardian of all virtues, and possesses alone
the merit of belief, without which every one counts as an unbeliever,
even if he do believe.” Hence his care to insure obedience towards
himself. Then the Pragmatical Sanction is annulled, every use made
of it, even a citation before court or elsewhere, the possession of
copies, be it in private houses or public ones, forbidden by pain of
serve the succession of the legal heir as the normal one, and to prevent
that anyone, except such be in the full possession of his health, alienate
his property from his natural heirs. If, however, a State law —and in this
case we have moreover to do with an institution sprung from the very spring
of popular views, a regular right of custom—dare not even decree with
regard to the judicial acts as applying to deaths, if belief extends even
thereto, then the Church is most certainly the State itself. Though verily
to give alms, testaments in favour of the Church , &c., persons are most-
inclined when on their deathbed they can be threatened with hell, &c.
Thus the Church fought continually for the institution of the testament,
and for the non-requirement of certain forms (Formlosigkeit) in testaments
for pious purposes (see my treatise with regard to the Testamenta ad piam
causam, in Zeitschrift fuer Civilrecht und Process. IST. F. viii, p. 157 ff.,
1.851 ; Giessen). Everyone acquainted with history knows that the greatest
ruffians made the richest donations to convents, &c., when on their deathbed
they were admonished by the priests. The sentence of the Saxon Mirror
had therefore very practical motives; just as much so as Charlemagne’s law
for the Saxons, according to which everyone could freely give his real estate
to the Church or king, had purely political ones.


the ban major taking place as a matter of course, for clergymen
moreover demission ; for laymen, the loss of feudal holdings, which
depended on the Roman or any other church, incapability for legal
acts, infamy, punishment as for high treason, under proviso of
absolution by the pope.
39. For a whole category of laws whose object is the taxation of
the clergy or the domains of the Church, the subjection of them
to temporal jurisdiction, there are, as is well known, so many laws
that a selection becomes difficult. A few instances taken from the
so-called Bulla in Coena Domini may suffice, in which is said : (f)
“We curse and condemn (excommunicamus et anathematizamus) all
those who burden their countries with new taxes, except in those
cases established by the law, or by special papal permission, or who
raise them, or who demand those newly decreed or those lately
raised.” Excommunicated are all who appeal from a judgment or
any other order of the Roman court, or one of its numerous organs
of all kinds to the temporal courts or temporal power) who attempt
even the smallest infringement of the power of the Church in any
of the ways then enumerated, which are of a most voluminous
character and variety; who call before the temporal Court any
person of the clergy, of any degree whatsoever, except in accordance
with canonical law ; who issue any rule by which “ the liberty of
the Church is annulled, injured, or weighed against, or by which
any right of the Papal See or of any church is prejudiced, either
directly or indirectly, expressly or self-understood (stillschweigend),
which obstruct spiritual (clerical) rulers, or their relatives, or
relatives in law, in any one function to carry out which they are
entitled by canonical law; who usurp, or only sequester papal
rights or revenues without special permission ; who impose upon
the clergy or possessions of the Church any tax whatsoever, without
papal permission, be they kings, princes ,” cj - c. Excommunicated are
further all authorities who proceed in criminal cases against the
clericals, who attack any part of the Ecclesiastical States. The
absolution therefrom is reserved to the pope, and can only take place
on the bed of death, after bail is given that the commandments of the
Church will be kept and restitution offered.
40. Pope Innocence X. declares in the bull commencing with the
■expressive words Zelo domus dei, of November 20, 1648( 30 ), “By
virtue of the fulness of apostolic power,” those articles of the
Westphalian Peace which displeased him in both instruments “void
invalid, unjust, unlawful, damnable, denounced, in vain, wanting in
(29) We choose the bull Past. Rom. Pont, of Paul Y. of April 8, 1610.
As is known a bull in coena Domini is a number of different bulls which
were published in former times annually on Thursday before Easter Sunday,
the day of the institution of the Christian (Lielesvndhl) communion (Lie-
besmahl, meal of love, given out of love, the name often given to the Holy
•Supper. Transl.), which bulls were the pick of excommunications. They
were extended according to necessity. A collection (but not complete) in
the Magnum Bullar, iii, p. 281.
( 30 ) -Bullar. T. v. p. 466.


strength and effect in all future times,” and “ protests before God
against them on account of their emptiness,” restitutes that which
had been in integrum, and declares as void whatever was contra-
dictory to it.( 31 ) Among the sentences thus declared godless,
figures (§ 1) likewise these —“The heretics of the Augsburg Con-
fession, as they are called, are allowed free religious worship in most
places, and sites for temples are promised them, and they are like-
wise to be admitted with Catholics to the public offices and services.
The papal revenues are not demanded from them.( 32 ) The number
of electors, formerly fixed by apostolic authority at seven,(f) is
increased without our consent and that of this Holy See ; an eight
electorate is created in favour of the heretic, the palatine Charles
Louis, and a great many other things are ordained, to announce
which we feel ashamed, prejudicial and noxious to the orthodox
religion and to this See and the Roman and lower Churches.”
41. This protest was renewed in the protest which Cardinal Con-
salvi entered June 14, 1815, at Vienna (fi) against the acts of the
Vienna Congress, in so far as they were detrimental to the Papal
See ( 35 ) and the Roman Church. ( 36 )
( 31 ) How gladly do not the German bishops point to the Westphalian
Peace ! How often has same been put forwar d in the nineteenth century as
a pattern of confessional parity ! What, however, if in{l64B the powerful of
the earth had been obedient to the representative of the Almighty God on
earth ? My poor fatherland, which thirty years had torn and devastated, in
that case would have suffered anew, that force might retain what was no
longer found in belief ; this in consequence of the love of the representative
of Him who gave his own life for others. But what cared the Roman John
Baptist Pamphili, if the heartblood of Germany was flowing !
(32) Verbatim:—“The annates, rights of palace, confirmations, papal
months, and similar rights, and the reserves are excluded in the possessions
of the Churches of the Augsburg Confession.” These words, demanding a
commentary for a great many, I have given their real import.
( 33 ) Of this the real history of the origin of the Electorates knows
nothing.
(34) Printed in Klueher's acts of the Congress of Vienna. Erlangen 1815,
iv. p. 325 sqq.
( 35 ) As objects of complaint are enumerated—that Avignon and Yenaissin
remained with Prance, that the part of Ferrara situate on the left bank of
the Po did not fall back to Rome, and that Austria was allowed the right
of occupation in Ferrara and Commachio—Comp, yet ibid. vi. p. 429 sqq.
( 8 ») To these belong, according to former writings, the non-re-installing of
the spiritual principalities, the retaining of the secularized estates in the
hands of their holders, the lapsing of the German reign.— Klueber, among
others, vi. p. 432. The allocution of Pius VII. of September 4, 1815, about
the same subject, in which, however, are specially praised the Emperor
Alexander of Russia, ‘ ‘ not less celebrated by numerous victories than by
his internal government,” the Kings of Prussia and Sweden, and the Prince
Regent of England. In view of this protest it will always remain queer
that Pope Paschalis 11. declares in the well-known document of February,
1111. (Mansi xx. 1007, xxi. 42, Jaffe Reg. 4661), that it was against the
institutions of the divine law and the canons that the priests were occupied
with worldly cares, which he adduces in detail. Perhaps if this was to be
used against the temporal power of the pope likewise, the sentence ‘ ‘ si duo
faciunt idem, non est idem,” or “quod licet lovi, non licet bovi,” would be:
looked to in justification.


42. In principle the old standpoint is retained in the Austrian
Concordat of August 18, 1855, in article xii. of which “the Holy-
See gives its consent , that if a temporal Patronate is concerned, the
temporal powers might decide its succession,” where in the art. xiii.,
xiv., “ in consideration of the times being, the Holy See gives its
approbation to bring before the temporal courts the purely temporal
affairs of the clergy, such as right of property, debts, inheritance,
to be there investigated and decided, ( 37 ) “ that the clergymen can
be placed before the temporal courts when committing crimes, or
in any other way acting against the Penal Code of the empire,”
with the exception of the causpe majores of the bishops. ( 3S )
43. And thus says Pius IX. in his Allocution of June 22, 1868,
verbatim :—“ On the 21st of December of last year an unheard-of
law (infanda lex) has been issued by the Austrian government ( 39 )
as a fundamental law of State, which is to be valid and perpetuate
in all points as law, even in those solely appertaining to the rights
of the Catholic religion. By this law full liberty of opinion, of the
press, of belief, of conscience, and of science is granted, and in
conformity with it every citizen of the State may establish educa-
tional or secular institutes, all religious communities being placed on
one footing and recognized by the State. ( 40 ) .. . The same guber-
( 37 ) Kota bene ! For the civil legal affairs of the Church such consent is
not given, and just as little for Bavaria and Prussia; consequently, all
those judges who have ever dared, or who will ever dare, to decide such
legal affairs in the above-named countries are subjected to excommunication
with all its terrible temporal and everlasting consequences, these canons
never having been annulled in those countries. And with them will be ex-
communicated those bishops and clergymen who have recognized the com-
petency of the State in hundreds of similar cases; for the excommuni-
cations of the bull in coena Domini apply to them. The bull Apost. Sedis
of Oct. 12, 1869, in num. 6. 11, applies here as well ; this latter subjects to
the excommunication reserved to the pope, as self understood (this of the
first class), sub 11. the sequestration of property and revenues which belong
to clerical persons in consequence of their Churches or their benefices. Woe
to you, ye judges, if ever you committed such an accursed action in a civil
suit against a clerical person. You stand condemned !
( 3S ) Similar is art. xxxiii. with regard to the tithes. If one only consents
to a thing, in consideration of the circumstances of the times being, the right
is certainly reserved to occupy another standpoint, such circumstances
having changed. The translation is the official one.
( 39 ) It shows a gloomy tactic to say a government—for as such will any
one who has an idea of constitutional matters consider the ministry —had
issued a fundamental law of state.
(*°) This affirmation—“ et omnes cuiusque generis religiosce Societates
acquiparantur, et a Statu recognoscuntur" —is not true. The art. 15. says :
“Every legally acknowledged church or religious society has the right of pub-
lic congregational worship, ordains and administers its internal affairs inde-
pendently, remains in the possession or enjoyment of all institutions,
benefices, and funds which belong to their cultus, educational or benevolent
establishments ; but is subject to the universal laws of the State as any
other society.” Art. 16—“ The followers of a religious confession not
legally recognised are allowed religious worship in their dwellings, if same
be not against the laws or morals.” In Austria (Cisleithania) are only
recognized the Catholic Church, the Evangelical and Helvetian confession,
the Greek Oriental Church, and the Jewish religious society.


nium did issue a law, May 25, which is binding for all, and ordains,
even Catholics being thereby in duty bound, that the boys by
mixed marriages follow the religion of the father, and the girls
that of the mother, ( 41 ) and that children under seven years of
age follow their parents when the latter renounce their religion.
Moreover the (legal) force of the promises which the ( 42 ) Church
demands, and ordains with the best of rights, and absolutely before
uniting mixed marriages, is annulled, and apostacy from the
Catholic and Christian religion is looked upon as a civil right ; all
power of the Catholics over cemeteries is taken from them, same
being obliged to bury in their cemeteries the bodies of the heretics,
( 43 ) if such heretics have none of their own.” Then follows the
enumeration of the annulment of the spiritual (clerical), and the
re-establishment of the laws of the State with regard to matrimony
and matrimonial jurisdiction, the laws with respect to schools,
where it is mentioned that the superintendence of religious
instruction in the public schools was left to the respective con-
fessions. “ You perceive clearly, venerable brethren, how violently
are to be blamed and condemned those abominable laws (abominabilis)
which the Austrian Government has issued, and which are
directly opposed to the teaching of the Catholic religion, opposed
to its venerable rights, authority, and divine constitution, and
to our power and that of his Holy See, to our Concordat, and
to the laws of nature itself. ( 44 ) Therefore, upheld (vermoge) by
the care which Christ the Lord Himself did give us over all Churches,
do we raise our apostolic voice in this your Most Venerable Assem-
bly, and denounce and condemn by virtue of our apostolic authority
the above mentioned laws, and all and every individual action
which may be done in these or in any other matters touching the
rights of the Church, or be ordained, or tried to be done by the
Austrian Government or any of its subordinate administrations;
and we declare by virtue of our authority, that all these decrees
have been and shall be totally void , and without all force whatsoever.
The originators, who call themselves Catholics, all those who did
not scruple to propose, approve and execute these laws and acts,
we conjure to be reminded- of the punishments of the Church , and the
spiritual ones ivhich emanate therefrom as a matter of course, such
being ordained by the papal laics and the decrees of the Roman
Synods ayaitist all those who injure the Church.” ( 45 )
( 41 ) But the law does not forbid parents to decide the religion by agree-
ment : aye, it permits this expressly. Why is this not stated?
(42) The late Bishop of Munster, Caspar Max von Droste Vischering, did
solemnly join in holy wedlock King Otto of Greece and the Protestant
princess M. F. Amelia of Oldenburg, though the Greek constitution de-
manded the bringing up of their children in the Greek religion.
C 3) This is not exact; the Catholics must only suffer that they are
buried. It is, however, interesting that 1868 all non-Catholics are simply
figuring as heretics (haeretici) in such a solemn document.
( 44 ) “ Qui nimium probat, nihil probat,” says an old proverb.
C 5) On April 24, 1854—the date of the marriage of His Majesty the
Emperor Francis of Austria—whilst solemn high _mass was said in Borne


44. Were 1 to give all the instances in which the principles here
practically illustrated are upheld, a book of its own would be
required. The pretended elevation of the clergy extends briefly
(namlich) so far, that the State has nothing to say to it. However,
a few cases will suffice.
Urban 11. to Ildefons (Mansi xx. 681) : —“ Remember the pious
Prince Constantine, who did not even Avish to hear (listen to) the
judgments of (against 1) the priests, he considering umvorthy that
gods be judged by men. Consider (hear) in us therefore the Lord
and the Apostles, if you wish that your demands be granted by
them and by us.” Compare the conception of Gregory VII. with
regard to the elevation of the priests above the kings in num. 20
of the text. It is this conception which sees in the elevation of the
clergy the privilege granted same by the temporal powers, to be
judged by their bishops only, which privilege is explained by the
circumstances of the times being. Thus writes—not to say any-
thing of still older instances —Pope Victor 11. in a letter to Count
Rudolph : —“ We desire that you know that no temporal ruler is
allowed to have power over the clericals ; all such being subjected
to the bishop only. Whosoever presumes otherwise (aliter prae-
sumpserit) will undoubtedly fall under canonical judgment.” (S.
Ivo Carnot Decretum vi. 408.) The Lord did not—according to
the statement of the Bible—adduce the incompetency of the tem-
poral judge, nor did the Apostles adduce anything of the kind.
That the newest arena in the Church which has evinced the great
gift of inventing dogmas of which nothing was known hitherto in
spite of the existence of the Church of Christ for eighteen centuries,
should likewise arrive at conclusions which are absurdities in the
face of history, and which, put forward as the teachings of the
Church, do not harmonize with the Holy Scriptures, will astonish
nobody. Pius IX. who at first, December 8, 1855, did establish a
dogma in the bull Infallibilis Deus against the ancient rules and
customs of the Church, could hardly be expected to falter in solving
juristical questions of detail by expressions ex cathedra, which words
were spoken by Archbishop Kenrick, of St. Louis, with apostolic
freedom in his remarks in the Council (No. 139, page 237 oi the
Synopsis analytica observationum quae a patribus in caput adden-
dum decreto de Rom. Pont, primatu factae sunt).
45. And in illustration of this he appropriately issues the follow-
ing propositions in the Syllabus in a universal manner ( 46 ) :
Num. 57. “. . . The civil laws ought and must not deviate
from the divine inspiration and authority of the Church.” ( 4 ')
in Sta Maria dell’ Anima, the Exequies for the late Queen of Portugal were
read in the Sixtina under the assistance of sixteen cardinals. His Holiness
was not present, on account of indisposition. I adduce this only as a proof
of Roman distinction (consideration, courtesy).
(do) Verbatim, as the translation of Schrader formulates the reverse of
the theses condemned.
( 47 ) If this must be believed, no State law dare be enacted which collides
with any canon not formerly annulled. The vigens ecclesia disciplina


Vim. 30. “ The immunity of the Church and clerical persons
does not date its origin from civil laws.” ( 48 )
Num. 31. “ The clerical jurisdiction for civil and criminal
affairs of the clergy is not at all to be abolished, nor without
the consultation and against the injunction of the Holy See.” ( 49 )
Num. 34. “ The teaching which likened the Roman pope to a
free prince who exercised his power over the whole Church is
not a teaching which predominated in the Middle Ages.” ( 50 )
Num. 44. “The power of the State cannot interfere in matters
of religion, of morals, and of clerical regime. ( 51 )
Num. 54. “ Kings and princes are neither exempted from the
jurisdiction of the Church, nor do they stand, in deciding questions
of jurisdiction, higher than the Church.” ( 52 )
Num 62. “The so-called system of non-intervention is not to
be published nor to be followed.” ( 53 )
Num. 80. “ The Roman pope can and dare never become re-
conciled with, and conform himself to, the progress and liberalism
of modern civilization.” ( 54 )
Num. 30 and 54 are taken from the Breve Multiplices inter
of June 10, 1851 ; 34 from that of Aug. 22, 1851, Ad aposto-
licce; 44 from the allocution In Consistoriali of Nov. 1, 1850 ;
num. 57 from the alloc. Maxima quidem of June 9, 1862 ; num.
62 from that of Sept. 28, 1860, Novos et ante; 80 from the
all. lamdudurn of March 18, 1861. Pius IX., referring in the
dogmatical part of his bull of Dec. 8, 1864, to his former allo-
does not help here, because the proof has already been given that the
popes stand unalterably upon the base of the old canones.
( 4S ) In the edition of Schrader the remark is found : —“But roots in the
inherent right of the Church given to her by God. ” Therefore, the State
has no right to tax Church property ; hence, he who enacts, who executes
same is excommunicated. But if we are to take “origin” (origo), which
the word justifies, as synonymous with leginning, the affirmation of the
Syllabus is an absurdity for every one who knows history, but proves well
what may be offered to Catholics, since dumb silence is considered as
profundity in faith and knowledge (science).
( 49 ) Schrader’s glossary :—“For it is founded in the inherent right of
the Church, and can be transferred to the temporal courts with the express
consent of the pope only.
( 50 ) Schrader’s note:—“But such a one, which corresponds with the con-
stitution of the Church, and which therefore must be ruling for ever.” At
any rate, it is neither contained in the Holy Scriptures nor in aDy of the
fathers.
( 5 i) Is the state not empowered to protect morals by penal laws, or has-
same simply to execute those of the Church ?
In accordance with a remark made by Schrader with reference to num>-
ber 45 — “the supreme superintendence of the public schools, in which the
youth of a Christian country are educated, appertains to the Church .”
(5 5) It not being stated, the kings as private persons, as human beings,
the Icing must be meant as such. Ergo, it is likewise the church which
judges acts of government, as is evident by the foregoing and the following.
(53) Very natural, because with its enactment the Ecclesiastical States
would have already ceased to exist in 1848, same being only upheld by the
Article 62 since 1815.
( 54 ) Thus generally worded, this sentence forms a declaration of the false-
ness of all modern progress.


rations, &c., as the special sources for the condemnation of the
false sentences, there can be no doubt as to the ex cathedra
character of the above propositions.
The number of bulls, &c., which treat of the cessation of laws
and acts passed by the Governments of Sicily, Sardinia, France,.
Tuscany, &c., is enormous. I verily believe that if all the papal
letters, &c., be counted, at least one half of them would be
found containing pretensions of rights, and excommunications, &c.,
for their contravention.
IX. The pope possesses the right of admonishing ’ and, if needs he,
of punishing the temporal rulers, emperors, and kings, as well as of
draiving before the spiritual forum any case in which a mortal sin con-
curs.
46. c. Solitae 6. x. de maj. et obed. I. 33. of Innocence 111.
to the Emp. Alexis, ( 55 ) in which is stated expressly that God
had exempted nothing at all from the power of binding and
loosing given to Peter, and in which the Emperor is made to un-
derstand that he is below the pope.
47. c. Novit ille( 56 ) 13. x. de judiciis 11. 1. of Innocence 111.
of the year 1204, addressed to the prelates of France. The
pope claimed, on the denunciation of John of England, that
Philip of France had broken an armistice sworn to, the decision
for himself, because perjury, being a mortal sin, belonged to the
forum of the Church.
X. Without the consent of the pope no tax or rate of any kind can
he levied upon a clergyman or upon any Church whatsoever.
48. For Boniface VIII. says in the bull Clericis laicos in c. 3-.
de immunitate eccles. iii. 23. in 6, whosoever do levy such,
administrations of all kinds, and all those who exact same, be-
come subject to the excommunicatio latae sententiae, which is
reserved to the pope; towns are interdicted. Certainly Benedict
XI. did confine the punishments to those demanding or enforcing
such in his bull Quod olim (c. un. de immun. 111. 13. in extrav.
comm.), and Clement Y. did annul them completely, on account
of the scandals, great dangers, and disadvantages caused thereby,
in the bull C. Quoniam un. de immun. 111. 17. in Clem. But
the bull in coena Domini took to it again, and the Syllabus
defines that the popes have never overstepped the limits of their
power.
XI. The pope has the right to absolve from oaths and obedience to
the person and the laws of the princes ivhom he excommunicates.
49. Thus Gregory VII., Alexander 111., Innocence 111. (in the
num. 15 ff. 25, 26), Gregory IX. in the bull Quia Fridericus,
already cited, Innocence IY. in that cited also Ad apostolicae,
Pius 111. in Redemptor, cited also, Pius V. in the bull Regnans,,
cited likewise, &c.
( 55 ) The explanation in Philip’s Kirchenrecht iii. 208 sqq., which applies
throughout, illustrates the principle clearly. Compare likewise the deduction
of the Civilta Cattolica given at the end.
(5 6) The description in Phillips iii. p. 224—239, shows the events.


XII. The pope can annul all legal relations of those in ban, espe-
cially their marriages.
50. P. Innocence IY. did confirm in the bull Cum adversus,
( 57 ) of Oct. 31, 1243, the laws of the Emp. Frederic 11., which
placed among others the pain of death (burning at the stake)
upon heresy, by embodying them in his bull, and enjoining
their execution under pain of the greatest punishments, and in
the Bull Ad extirpanda of May 15, 1243, ( 58 ) he did ordain :
every one may take away the property of a heretic and keep
such as his own, except those who do so officially, the assistants
of the judges of heretics receive one-third of the property and
fines of the latter; a house in which a heretic is found shall,
except where its proprietor denunciated, be levelled to the ground
(destroyed) and never be rebuilt; likewise the adjoining houses
of the same owner, the goods found in them be sold for the
benefit of those who take them, except they be officials ; more-
over such owner is declared infamous, pays to the congregation
500 pounds in currency, or in default is incarcerated his whole
lifetime ; whoever assists a heretic in any manner whatsoever,
pays fines, becomes infamous, incapable to execute political rights,
to give evidence, to make testaments, or to inherit; if he be a
judge his sentences are without force, and no case dare be brought befbre
him. The sons and grandsons of heretics, and those who assist
them can never be admitted to any public office ; and the punish-
ments decreed with regard to heresy can never be redeemed.
This ban, issued by a pope, stands in remarkable contrast to
the Saviour on the cross, begging for his tormentors, for it makes
not even a distinction, if it be the wife , child, parents, brothers,
and sisters , or friends who favour the heretics; however, it does
harmonize perfectly with elder ( 59 ) and later laws.( 60 ) It has never
been publicly repealed, nor even been declared immoral.
( 57 ) Bullar. cit. i. p. 83 sqq.
( SS ) Bullar. cit. i. p. 91 sqq., where are found likewise the others to the
same import.
(59) p or i s no t allowed to pray for a heretic who died as such (c. 8, x.
de haereticis v. 7, Alex III.) The temporal authorities which do not promise
by oath to persecute heretics are excommunicated, and their country placed
under the interdict (c. 9, ibid. Lucius III.) The estates of the heretics are
to be confiscated, and revert in ecclesiastical (spiritual) countries to the fiscus
ecclesice, and in the secular to the State ; this, even ivhen their children are
of the right belief (c. 10, ibid. Innoc. III.) These sentences are repeated
with the transmission of the condemned to the temporal judge, cam. 3of the
4 Lateran Council of 1215 (c. 13, ibid.) Whosoever is bound to a heretic by
any oath of allegiance is absolved therefrom ( c. 16, ibid. Greg. IX.)
(e°) who buries a heretic is excommunicated until he exhume the body
with his own hands, and throw same away ; laymen who dispute publicly or
in private religious questions , are excommunicated ; the sons of heretics, or of
their favourers, are exempted from all emoluments of the Church down to
the second generation ; whosoever holds, in consequence of the intercession
of such a one, any Church dignity, loses same, and if he held such
knowingly, becomes unfit ever to hold any other one (c. 2, de hasret. in 6,
v. 2, Alex. IY.) Who relapses anew into heresy must be made over to the
temporal judge without any hearing whatsoever (that is, must be burned), he


51. The most frightful enactment of punishment for heresy is
contained in the bull Cum quorandum of Paul IV. August 7, 1555
(Bullarium cit. pag. 821), in §. 3, which defines : whosoever denies
the Trinity or the divinity of Jesus Christ or His conception by
the Holy Ghost, or His death as Redeemer on the cross, or who
denies that the Holy Virgin is the true Mother of Christ, and did
always remain in the state of virginity, before, at, and after her
confinement (partus): he can be looked upon as an apostate and
be handed over as such to the temporal courts, and subjected by
them to all those punishments which are due to apostates, just as
if he really was an apostate and had been declared as such.”
The consequence was therefore, in being condemned, death in all
can only be admitted to confession and communion when showing real signs
of repenting (c. 4, ibid. Alex. IV.) Already previously Lucius 111. had
ordained the transferring to the temporal court without any further hearing.
(Mansi xxii. 477.) Against heretics and their favourers those excommuni-
cated and the accomplices of the crime are permitted to give evidence “ for
the advantage of belief ” if it can be supposed that they will not witness
falsely (c. 6, ibid. The same.) In order to confiscate the property of one who
died under accusation of heresy, judgment may be given after his death (c. 8,
§7, ibid. The same.) If a woman of the right belief marries a heretic
knowingly, her dote becomes confiscated (c. 14, ibid. Bonif. VIII.) Tem-
poral authorities which refuse obstinately to execute the laws against
heretics are themselves to be condemned as such (c. 18, ibid. The same.) A
rich selection is offered likewise by the remaining chapters of the penal code
of the Church of Gregory IX., Boniface VIII., Clement V., and others
under these and other headings, especially with regard to the process (the
trial of heretics.) The Spanish Inquisition had few new principles to
establish; it found the substance of everything existing in the papal laws
already. A few instances deserve to be given yet. In R. P. D. Thomas,
del Bene, clerici regul. theol. profe, Exam., S. Rom. Univ. Inquisitionis
Qualificatoris De officio Inquisitionis. . . Lugd. 1666, fol. ii., p. 647,
stands verbatim —“ About the torture of the accused and their accomplices
for the finding of truth. On July 28, 1569. Abiding the decrees which
formerly had been issued by Pope Pius IV., of blessed memory, did our
Most Holy Master, Pope Pius V., ordain that all and every accused who
have confessed to heresy, in order to obtain further truth, and on account of
their accomplices, shall be tortured by the judges according to their discretion
(ad libitum) .” Pius V. was pronounced holy (sainted) after his death. Page
645 has verbatim—“On the last of April, 1556. In the congregation, and
in the presence of our Most Holy Lord, and that of the cardinals, the Great
Inquisitors, did our Most Holy Lord, by the providence of God, Pope Paul
IV., command, establish, and ordain —is legally established that any Por-
tuguese or Lusitanians whatsoever, who did dwell in Portugal or Lusitania,
and came thence to Italy, where they are found to live as Jews, or according
to Jewish customs (judaizare), they shall be condemned as renegades from
the Christian belief, as by rights such like apostates are to be condemned
and punished, notwithstanding they have been tortured (exposite torturoe sen
tormentis) and have constantly denied this, and stated that they ivere baptized
or had lived as Christians, or had done Christian works, or had received the
sacraments of the Church. Because the Holy See was clearly and plainly
informed some sixty years ago, or thereabouts, that no Hebrew was suffered
to live in Portugal and Lusitania, except they were baptized and lived as
Christians. And this did he command, establish, and ordain, that it be
enacted.” Is there an expression strong enough to condemn a law which
exposes a person to the pain of death on account of such an exorbitant
supposition?


cases. That such a law is directly opposed to the very spirit of the
Church is evident. With regard to the Ecclesiastical States, where
spiritual and temporal law emanated from one and the same per-
son, this distinction did not exist at all, only perhaps in the per-
sons of the mere instruments, the judges. But the whole distinc-
tion with regard to this point is nothing but a fiction to quiet
conscience. For if the spiritual judge had found guilty of
heresy, the temporal one decreed pain of death. The clergyman
brought the heretic so far that he had to come to the stake, &c.;
but the command to kindle the fire was given by the temporal.
Now the former did not become irregular and the clergy could
say — we do not sentence to death. A greater pharisaism cannot
be imagined.
With regard to the confiscation of real estate, the right to occupy
the personal estate of those under law, lawlessness, &c., of heretics,
the constitutions already cited give ample information.
52. Very characteristic is the conduct of Urban V. against the
Duke Bernabo Visconti of Milan, in the year 1363. He had, as is
described ( 61 ) “The judgment published, by which he announced him
as heretic and unbeliever and schismatist and as banned by the
Church, absolved his subjects from their oath of allegiance, and
Jus wife as a Christian from the bonds of matrimony with a heretic
and unbeliever ( 6 ), and subjected to the same penalties all and
each favourer, assistant, and counsellor : and gave at last full in-
dulgence to all those who would take the cross against him. After
this judgment had been published, he rose, fell down upon his
knees and called out with folded and elevated hands, that Christ,
whose representative he was, and the holy apostles, their succes-
sors, and the whole of heavenly beings (curiae coelestis) should
help him, and he prayed with loud voice that Bernabo might be
bound in heaven as he had bound him on earth.”
XII. The pope can release from every obligation (oath , vow)
either before or after (being made).
53. Proved by the privilege ( 63 ) which Clement V. gave to King
( 61 ) Spondanus Annalium eccles. Baronii Gontimiatio. Tom. i, p. 557
(Lugd. 167 S fol.), ad a. 1363, n. 1.
(02) T] le Council of Trent having dogmatically declared that God had
already instituted matrimony as inseparable in Paradise (doctrina de sacr.
matr. Sess. xxiv.), the same having (can. 5, ibid) declared as dogma that
matrimony could not he loosed hy heresy , it follows that Urban V. did, with
dhe approbation of the collegium of cardinals present, and with that of the
Roman Church, enact terribly solemn acts against articles of faith. In
view of such, how pleased they must feel about the invention ex cathedra !
(63) Printed in d’Achery Spicilegium. Publ. in fol. Paris 1723. T. iii.,
p. 724. There are found likewise a dozen of analogous privileges, p.e. that
to choose a confessor ad libitum who could absolve them from excommuni-
cation, without any further ceremonies, inflicted in consequence of actual
injury done to a clergyman, p, 726. In the face of these privileges it is
easily understood why the French kings did always harmonize so well with
their confessors. Now can be understood also why their French Majesties
need not care about their oaths given upon the rights of the Estates General,
&c., it having been made so comfortable for them to get rid of such by alms,
&c. At last it cannot be denied that this point of papal almightiness has
something very agreeable and taking for a great many persons.


John of France, his queen, and all his successors, to the effect
that every father confessor chosen by them, whether secular or
monk, could release them from all the vows already made, and
from all those which they or their successors might make in
future (with the exception of the votum of a crusade and
Apostolarum Petri et Pauli, of chastity and abstinence), as well
as from, all the oaths already taken , or those which they and their
successors might take m future, and to change them into works of
charity.
54. Pope Paul IV. demanded, 1555, of Charles V. and Ferdi-
nand I. to cashier the Religious Peace (Treaty) of Augsburg. The
•oath taken being pointed out to him, same was denounced by the
pope in the declaration “he liberated and absolved from that un-
allowable oath, aye, he even commanded that same be not obeyed.”
If the king acted in accordance with the command, the pope would
by virtue of his power over all Christian believers (“pro pio in
cunctos Christi fiaeles imperio sub poenarum ac censurarum de-
nuntiatione mandatis”) command all Catholic powers to render
him assistance for the preservation of the orthodox belief and the
immunity of the Church. ( 64 )
XIV. The execution of papal commands Jor the persecutions of
heretics causes remission of sins.
55. In his writing of March 3, 1075, to the inhabitants of Pia-
cenza, Gregory VII. writes (Mansi xx. 167. Ep. 11. 54), he had
deposed Bishop Dionys for ever from the episcopal office, and had
absolved from their oaths all who had sworn allegiance to him, so
that they might not be against this decree , and he would do his best
that all the faithful of St. Peter would assist in chasing the wolf.
“ Therefore, ye citizens of God, be strengthened, for God is with us,
and if we are resisted by the turretted towns of the land of
Canaan, and the gigantic bodies of the sons of Enoch, our fearless
leader Jesus with His trumpet (sonus) enters the Land of Promise.
For He is himself the giant to go that road, who said : ‘ Confide, I
have conquered the world.’ If one of you should die in the de-
fence of righteousness, he will be freed (liberetur) of all sins by the
prayers of the Apostles Peter and Paul.”
56. And Pope Paschal 11. writes to the Count Robert of
Flanders, January 21, 1103 (Mansi xx. 986. Jaffe Reg. num. 4432),
praising him for the persecution of the perverted : “ And not only
there, but everywhere, pursue Henry, the head of the heretics, and
his followers to the best of your ability. Verily, you can offer no
sacrifice more agreeable to God than fighting against him who has
risen against God, who dared to wrench the reign (dominion I—reg-
num auferre) from the Church of God, who sets up Simon’s idol in
sacred places, and who has been driven from the home of the
Church by the judgment of the Holy Ghost. This we command
(8*) Bzovius Annales. Continuatio T. xx. (Col. Agripp. 1641, fol.), ad a.
1555, p. 306. What did it matter to the Italian if Germany was torn again
by civil war ? or if foreign powers attacked it ?


you and your warriors for the remission of sins (in peccatorum
remissionem) and the friendship of the Apostolic See, that you
may obtain by these works and triumphs, with God’s help, the
heavenly Jerusalem.”
XV. mo hills one that is excommunicated is no murderer in a
leyal sense.
57. For Urban 11. says : —“The slayers of the excommunicated,
subject, as you know, to the usages of the Roman Church, in
accordance with their proper intentions, to a commensurate penance.
For we do not consider those as murderers (homicidas) because it
happened, that they, burning against the excommunicated with
zeal for their Catholic mother, may have slain anyone of them
(trucidasse). That, however, the discipline of the same mother
may not deviate too powerfully (ne .... desaeviat), you shall
subject them in the manner denoted to a merited penalty (penance),
by which they may become agreeable in the eyes of divine sim-
plicity (qua divirue simplicitatis oculos adversus se complacere
pervaleant), should they perhaps have done something equivocal in
the committal of such error, in consequence of human weakness”
(si forte quid duplicitatis pro humana fragilitate in eodem flagitio
contraxerunt). This passage is in S. Ivonis Decretum x. 54,
Gannormia viii. 11; Collectio Caesaraugust, xv. 52, Coll, trium
partium I. 14, c. 12, in the Gratian Decree c. 47. c. xxiii. q. 5.
Whoever considers these expressions and the inexpressibly low
standard of the masses in the middle ages, can understand the
effect of the ban. The slayers of the excommunicated are no
murderers in a legal sense ; they are only liable to a penance, so
as not to let things grow too glaring, and to atone for whatever
human which may have concurred (p.e. satisfying of revenge, &e.);
anyone fond of quarrels can fight against those in ban and gain
easily remission of sins and the papal friendship. Certainly the
multiudes of to-day are no longer upon the standard of those of
the twelfth century. But fanaticism has its weight even now-a-days.
Why is it impossible that there be individuals even at the present
time, who, fanatized by the ban, believe themselves doing a praise-
worthy deed, pleasing to the sight of God, if they, though not
exactly slaying the one in ban—which might have its draw-
backs, considering the state of justice in our days—slander, and
prosecute the same with all those means which the powers of dark-
ness so amply possess 1
XVI. The pope has the right to establish the dress to be worn by
all.
58. Pope Gregory VIII. ordains (1187) in an encyclica ad uni-
versos episcopos (Mansi xxii. 534): “The males shall not wear
garments indented below (or, indented undergarments ( 1 ) incisas
vestes ab inferiori), and the females shall have no luxurious (sump-
tious, sumptuatse) dresses, and none that project beyond the
length of their body, but shall go forth in modest and decent attire
which neither shows frivolity nor vain conceit. Whosoever it may
be who in future makes such dresses, be it man or woman, shall


not only be kept from the table of the Lord , until he amend, but
likewise from all participating in divine worship ; a punishment still
more severe awaits him at the hands of his clergymen (sacerdotis —
as is well known, this term is one of the technical words for that
used afterwards —parochus), if he does not take better care of his
frivolity.” It will be seen that the care of the Popes for the sal-
vation of souls was very searching, and gave practical force to the
religious admonition. Many females have the satisfaction that
their short and narrow out-door dresses correspond to the Holy
Canon, whilst the long dresses of those noble ladies, who are
generally much inclined towards the Pope and his infallibility, will
be badly off. Interesting remains, however, that the long gowns
of many clergymen (p.e. much prevalent in France) which in
saying mass are often right ungraciously thrown about by their
feet; and a great many other things could creep into the dress of
the clergy, though the preamble of the bull cited does likewise
speak strongly against luxury in their dress as well.( 65 )
§V.-THE OBJECTIONS TO QUIET CONSCIENCE AND
THEIR REFUTATION.
59. There is still, and there was previous to the 18th July,
1870, a favourite means at hand to weaken all conclusions of a
disagreeable kind, springing from papal declarations and laws.
It is said the Pope X. did not speak ex cathedra, consequently
E
(° 5 ) In order to show to what purposes excommunication must serve, be
one instance permitted yet which is peculiarly interesting to myself. There
are papal breves, &c., by the dozen which place excommunication as self-
understood upon the taking of books, manuscripts, &c., or their borrowing,
beyond the precincts of certain libraries, which excommunication is reserved
to the pope, and from which others can only absolve when death threatens. See
p.e. the constitutions in the Bullarium, cit. T. viii. p. 67, 68, 114, 211 (of
Clement XI.) The regulations of the Vaticana are known ; in some
libraries of convents I did see papal breves of this kind adorn the walls, to
be —at least in Austria, thank God—dead letters. A real scientific working,
only in the room of a library which is not at all times at one’s disposition, is
not possible for anyone. The Vatican library is not open for use 140 days
in the year; neither catalogues of the manuscripts are given for examination,
nor is it allowed to take printed books from the library; there is no library
whose use is connected with so many disagreeablenesses. And now let it
be supposed an unfortunate Catholic scholar has lent a book from a library
possessing such an important privilege, and dies suddenly without absolution ;
is he bound by such excommunication beyond the grave ? It is frightful and
—les extremes se touchent —ridiculous to see the representatives of Christ
make such use of the most solemn Christian means of punishment. lam
glad that, whenever I made use of any such library, I never thought of
excommunication, and remained therefore intact in consequence of such
good faith, this in accordance with the most correct teaching. Perhaps it
has likewise taken place that other Catholic scholars, probably very piou3
ones, did not think of this either.


the pope did not err, or command, or ordain legally something
unjustifiable as pope, but the private person did so who is liable
to err, &c. (- 1 ) If we examine this objection a little closely, it falls
to pieces. The Conte Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti has, with
all respect be it said, just as little to say in the Church as I;
as Conte M. F. he did not, nothing being known of his literary
activity, teach anything in matters of the Church; as such he
did not judge, command, and issue statutes ; as Conte M. F. he
did not come, as is the case with monarchs in a hereditary
monarchy, to the government of the Church, nor even to that
of the Ecclesiastical States, but owing to his choice as pope
only. What the pure human being physically does, that cer-
tainly does regard the “ private person.” Nobody will say there-
fore : the pope eats as pope, drinks, sleeps, rides, drives, &c.
Nor is it less clear that the “private person” remains the same
in a spiritual point of view likewise, nothing being known that
the orders of consecration impart a higher intellectual power, or
that the stock of knowledge became augmented thereby. It is,
therefore, perfectly comprehensible that the private person Conte
M. F. as pope called'Pius IX. could write a scientific or any
book and err therein!* br could teach or affirm something heretical
in conversations not official. ( 2 ) At last it is self understood that
there are governmental acts whose validity is dependent on the
life of the one enacting same. If the pope grants a favour
vvhich is to be valid only until such time as he may countermand
it, same lapses with his death, as is the case with every
monarch—aye, every human being—that an obligation entered
into for his person only does not affect his heirs. Is, however,
even in purely temporal matters, the intention of the pope not
evident that something should not survive his person, it is taken
as granted that such decision wa3 valid for ever, that is, until
such time as the Apostolic See countermanded same.( 3 ) But
it is at present beyond doubt that each action which a pope has
to execute and does execute, if such be relative to the teaching,
ordination, or government of the Church, is not done by the private
person X, but by the pope as such. And it is just as clear that the
( 1 ) In this manner it is said that Pope Honorius did not speak ex cathedra,
though it is hard to imagine a more solemn occasion or more solemn cause
for it, or a more important subject for one than the demand made by the
object in question.
( 2 ) Therefore do the infallibilists teach likewise ; the pope could sin and
even be a heretic, certainly only the private individual. But our forefathers
(the ancients) did not say papa est or papa tanquam or pro persona privata,
but simply papa.
( 3 ) Therefore, says Boniface VIII. in c. 1, de rescr. in 6, i. 3 : —“ If it be
graciously permitted thee by the pope to retain the benefices thou wert
possessed of at the time of thy advancement, until the decision of his
pleasures (will), such grace lapses as a matter of course with the death of
him who granted it. It is different, however, if the said favour is given
until the will of the Apostolic See is made Jcnown. For then same is
valid, the Holy See not dying, until it be countermanded by one of his suc-
cessors.”


pope acts as such, may it concern an act for the diocese of Rome
or for any other diocese, or for the whole Church. For the papal
power is possessed by the bishop of Rome as such, and not by any-
body else, which is the constant teaching of the Church. If the
Bishop of Rome did not have as such the primate over and in the
Church, he would have no right to actions which had reference to
other dioceses; if the Roman bishop had only metropolitan power
over a certain number of dioceses, he could ordain nothing with
regard to other ones. But the Church does expressly adduce the
primate of the Roman pope from his being the successor of Peter,
because the latter died as Bishop of Rome, so that all the legitimate
bishops of Rome did succeed to the primate of the Church in
consequence of their being the bishops of the Roman See, as
vacated by the death of Peter. It is, therefore, as clear as the
,sun that the popes as such did utter every decision, did execute
every action, did issue every law which emanated in Church
matters( 4 ) from the Roman bishop. Whether the effect is to ex-
tend itself only over one diocese or over the whole Church, is quite
immaterial; because the person and his change
in consequence of drawing a certain limit
60. But, it is further said, the Coui^^AfS^amsneOK^ ) , infalli-
bility only to expressions which morals partita and
laws of Governments have nothing to WpWiwP it: fiiHgoe i-wpust
be remarked above all things that the dilferjmt articles
to faith and morals have never yet been 'Church
in one list (declaration), purporting to emanate, asf raejuituterable
eflux of the infallible teaching of the Church. It is therefore
awkward that there is not even an absolute certainty for the object of
a sentence. on whose accepting or refusing salvation depends. I have
shown in § 3 what is reckoned as belonging to morals ; the whole
of the human rights are pretty well embraced by that term. Shall
we look upon the dogmatical guide books of the Middle Ages,
'which were then technically called Sententise, or upon the Summa
of the Aquinian, or upon the morals of St. Alphons Ligouri, or
perhaps upon the still older of Father Busenbaum, as ruling! If
that is the case, there are, besides the Ritus, administration, and a
few minor transactions of the Church, few things which do not
belong to faith or morals. But that distinction is, moreover, a
very queer thing. In the Holy Scriptures not a single loot dis said
of a separate teaching power of St. Peter. Nor has the cap. 4. of
the Constitute dogmatica of July 18, 1870, been able to point out
a single passage with regard to such. The Holy Scriptures affirm
that St. Peter was the first empowered by the words, “ What thou
bindest in heaven shall be bound in heaven, and what thou loosest
on earth shall be loosed in heaven” (Matt. xvi. 19), which were
then repeated to all the Apostles ; “ What ye bind on earth shall
e 2
( 4 ) The temporal ones referring to the Ecclesiastical States do not concern
my subject. The pope, however, being as such the temporal ruler of Rome,
it is plain that the same applies, the pope is at least responsible.


be bound in heaven, and what ye loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven” (Matt, xviii. 18). The order to teach was given to the
eleven after the resurrection of the Lord, for the Scriptures inform
us (Matt, xxviii. 16. sqq), “But the eleven disciples went to Galilee
upon the mountain, whither Christ had ordered them; and when
they saw Him they worshipped Him ; some, however, were doubt-
ful. And Jesus stepped to them, spoke with them, and said :To
me all power is given over heaven and earth ; therefore go ye and
teach all the nations of the earth, and baptize them in the name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost j and teach them
to keep everything I have commanded you, for, behold, I am with
you every day until the end of the world. ()
61. It can hardly be denied that it would be inconsistent to base
the infallibility on the primate of the Roman bishop, and to exclude
from such at the same time all the acts of legislation and other
ones, except those having a purely theoretical character as to the
teaching (of the Church), though not a single passage of the Bible
represents the primate of St. Peter in any other light than that of
right; this firstly with regard to the binding and loosing power,
which the Church up to the present moment looks upon as a
whole flock. It cannot possibly be misunderstood that the legis-
(S\ In the translation of Allioli the following note is appended : Note
how Christ gives here to the chief pastors of His Church, assembled under
Peter the teaching power, and assures them of His divine assistance, St.
Matthew ends thus his gospel with the teaching and infallible Church, in
which Christ continues to dwell on earth.” Compare, likewise, St. Mark
xvi. 15. Of the assembling under Peter there is nothing m the Bible ;
neither is this necessary, for where the Lord was visibly present the
actual power of Peter ceased, as is said by the > canonical law to the present
day “coram episcopo cessat jurisdictio vicarii.”
fo) Canon 9 de sanctiss. pcenitentice Sacramento Sess. xiv of the Council
of Trent says : 44 If anybody says that the sacramental absolving of the
priest was no judicial act, but a simple office to make known and declare
that the sins were forgiven to the one confessing . . . he be in ban
Canon 11 ibid : “If anybody says the bishops did not possess (have) the
riaht to retain cases except for external order (regulation, quoad externam
politiam), and such did not prevent the priest from truly absolving from
those retained, he be in ban. ” In order to overcome these difficulties imper-
cevtibln the hints seem to be thrown out by Scheeben and others, as given
in 3 2 'according to which the pope should define teachings as judge ex
cathedra. I must confess there is system in the thing (school). But, never-
theless, will teaching never become a judicial act. In order to teach it is
necessary to possess knowledge, information ; consequently, the Church can
only give evidence for that belief which in reality existed from the beginning
whenever it establishes (adduces) any articles of belief. Thus the bishops
not only the pope, are witness. And only m as far as they are witness and
entitled to give by their collateral evidence the force of law to matters of
belief, do they appear as legislators m such likewise. ludicare (defimre)
could justly be said, because in olden times a dogma was only formulated
when a clear teaching of the Church was disputed, and at the same time
some one was condemned as being a heretic, and the doctrine justified such
conduct (judgment). Under Pius IX., however, the world has seen that
dogmas are established (proposed) because the pope feels a desire (Dec. b,
1855), and because a faction (school) feels the theoretical necessity m ore er
to base their sole supremacy thereupon.


lative as well as the papal governing power must rest on a funda-
ment, which must he the fundament of the Church itself, because
otherwise it would only he an historical phenomenon, which could be
altered, aye, done away with, by the Church at any moment. In
.conformity with this it has not only been declared once, but often,
and that in declarations which must undoubtedly be considered as
ex cathedra ones, that pure acts of jurisdiction of the pope did
possess a dogmatical character. In the bull Exsurge Domine of
Leo X., num. 23, the sentence is condemned. “ Excommunications
are only external punishments, and do not deprive man of the
universal (general) prayers of the Church f num. 27 : “It is
•certain that it is not at all left to the Church or to the pope to
establish articles of faith, less so laws of morals or of good works
num. 28 : “If the pope with a great part of the Church opined
so and so, and did not err, it is no sin or heresy to opine the
reverse, especially in a matter not necessary to salvation, until such
time as the one has been reproved and the other approved of by a
general Council.”( 7 ) In the bull of Clement XI., Unigenitas of
1713, num. 91, the sentence is condemned. “ The fear of an un-
just excommunication must never keep us from the execution of
our duty; for we never separate from the Church, even if we seem
driven away from it by the malice of man, as long as we revere
God, Jesus Christ, and the Church itself.” Thus the sentence is
adduced as true :—“ The fear of an unjust excommunication must
at times (or always!) keep us from fulfilling our duties,” &c.( 8 )
which means : if anything is bid by pain of excommunication, we
must do it; if anything is forbidden by pain of excommunication,
we must not do it. The same bull denounces the sentence :
“ Rather than betray truth, to suffer in quietness excommunication
and an unjust Anathema is imitating St. Paul; so far is this from
rising against authority or disturbing unity,” and does therefore
announce plainly that everyone must yield himself unconditionally to
excommunication. Appeals from the judgments of the popes have
often been answered by the Anathema. It has, as is shown already,
been dogmatically pronounced, that the popes have never over-
stepped the limits of their power, aye, it has further been declared
that they have never erred in their Canons and Constitutions.
Consequently it has evidently heen established hy the popes, that all
papal laws were perfectly justifiable. The very same thing is like-
wise pronounced by the cap. 3 of the Constitutio Dogmatica in
affirming, whilst threatening with the Anathema all those who
might deny the dogma, “ The Roman Pope has the full and su-
preme power of jurisdiction over the whole Church, not only in
( 7 ) Consequently the condemnation of this sentence, the reverse of which
being thereby declared true, declares that it is sin and heresy to he of a
different opinion even in matters not necessary for salvation.
( 8 ) Gregory VI L (Mansi xx. 380) declares already, “that a sentence
f judgment) given by the pope in a matter (reason) not sufficiently important,
>or less in order, should not be despised on account thereof, but absolution
be sought for in all humility.”


matters which concern faith and morals, but likewise in those with-
reference to the discipline and administration of the Church
scattered over the whole globe . . . this, his power is a proper and
direct one, be it over all and each Church, or over all and each
pastor and believer.”( 9 )
62. Perhaps still more distinctions are made. They have grown
accustomed to transfer ideas and expressions (words) taken from the
temporal ruling over to that of the Church; this, since the papal
temporal power developed itself more and more into an absolute one,
dating from the times of Innocence 111. Thus it can hardly as-
tonish anyone, should the adherents of the absolute papal power
say : As well as a temporal law of an absolute ruler is valid, even if
it be bad, as well must this be the case with a papal one, though it
need not have been given by the infallible pope ; and: As w T ell as-
a judgment delivered in the last instance is of legal force in a state,
because there is no higher judge, as well is this the case with regard
to the pope. This is in reality a favourite argumentation of such,
that from laws given in matters of right, or from individual cases,
no conclusion could be adduced against the papal infallibility,
because neither the one nor the other concerned faith or morals.
This is not true —the laws of heretics concern the execution of
faith; a great many others concern the morals. But the com-
parison does not apply at all. For the powers of the State nobody
does claim infallibility. Whatsoever is ordained by it positively
has no application, for the Church, which is no State, can never
occupy the place of the State—is no State within the State —no
reign of this world; for it the legal order is not aim, but only a
means. Were this otherwise, we would be obliged to grant like-
wise to the constitution of the Church, in every relation, an
historical progression. As certain as it is that the popes of the
first thousand years, still less before Pseudoisidor, before Gregory
VII., before Innocence 111., before the Council of Trent, &c.,
could not dare execute a great many of the most important actions,
because they had no right to do so, which right they did gain little
( 9 ) Mr. Scheeben denotes, therefore, quite properly, the power her&
allotted to the pope as “ Sovereignty,” and considers it as a legislative and
judicial one.' Sovereignty, monarchy, kingdom, are the favourite expres-
sions for the papal power in the writings of the most correct authors, and in
those of the popes it is the imposing potestatis plenitudo. Their full import
is best expressed for legal bearing in the expression of Boniface VITI. in c. 1,
de constitutionibus in 6 i. 2, “Licet Bomanus Pontifex, qtji iura omnia
in scrinio pectoris sui censetur habere, constitutionem condendo pos-
teriorem priorem quamvis de ipsa mentionem non faciat, revocare noscatur,”
&c. If, however, one of the latest pastorals imputes the expression of
the pope, “he had all the rights in his chest (bosom)” as a pun of the daily
press, calling same frivolous, it would certainly not be amiss to advise the
“ Eight Reverend Gentleman” to look about a little in the legal sources of the
Church. This would especially not injure the German bishops ; they would
then learn the difference between the sentences of the Corpus juris canonici
and the consequences of the cap. 3 of the Constitutio dogmatica of July 18,
1870, in accordance with which the bishops can judicially , instead of their
former quality as Ordinaries, be now qualified as papal diocesan vicars.


by little since those times; just as certain it would have to be
granted, the analogy of the State being correct, that in time the
proper and direct poioer of the pope over every believer could lapse
But how would this agree with the dogma of July
18, 18701 And now let us consider the following : —lf it does not
matter whatever the popes may have ordained in their laws, if
everything contained therein can be eliminated by the phrase—
“ The Pope X. did not speak ex cathedra in law so and so,” the con-
sequences will be frightful. As the very words show, such laws
were given by the popes as the representatives of Christ —aye, still
more, in some of them they do not only speak of themselves as the
representatives of God for the Church solely, whose founder and
head is Christ, nay, as being at the same time the co-ordinate rep-
resentatives of Christ and the delegate of the Almighty Godf), they
decree by divine authority , by the fulness of Apostolic power, subject
to punishments, which according to the dogma are binding beyond
the grave likewise, and ordain things on which depend the salvation of
the soul. And now we are to consider the pope in the same breath
in a certain theoretical situation as infallible, and at the same
moment only as a compiler of essays on style when casting forth
such terribly solemn and frightful bans 1 And this we are to take
as belief disclosed (imparted) by God, without a single word being
found in the Bible, that only under such and such a condition was
Peter infallible, without being able to find even a single passage in
the fathers of the first six centuries which gives in dry words the
idea that any individual one of them, let alone the whole Church,
did consider the Roman bishop infallible, or which would lead us
logically to infer the necessity for such an interpretation. In case
the passages of the Bible, &c., cited for the infallibility of the pope,
were to be understood in this peculiar manner, such infallibility
would certainly be possessed by all his official acts. For Quodcun-
que ligaveris, &c. does not only imply a teaching, or only a teaching,
but it implies, as clearly as the sun, every legislative, every judicial
act. And confirma fratres tuos does certainly not only apply to the
teaching of the brethren, but to every act which strengthened
them. And this is the case in such a degree, that lamin a position
to prove, that exactly the very passages of the Bible cited in support
for the infallibility became the judicial formula in bulls which con-
cern purely judicial acts —granting of privileges, confirmations of
bishops, giving of the pallium, &c.
63. In a bull for the Bishop of Autun, of April 14, 1100
(Mansi xx. 1017, 1086, Jaffe 4360), in which Paschal 11. confirms
( 10 ) By virtue of cap. 3 the pope can enact any act whatever in every
diocese without any reference to the bishop ; he can directly appoint any
pastor, any vicar, can decide every trial, &c. He who does not grant this
must talce their meaning from the words themselves. The theory of the
reservates of the fourteenth and following centuries has been elevated into a
dogma ; nothing more , but certainly nothing less. Whether this can be done
practically , who knows ? Heretics are burned no longer now-a-days, because
the bailiffs are wanting.
( 11 ) p. ein num, 30, 33.


certain privileges of his church, is said :—“ Having been elevated
to the dignity of this office by the pleasure of God’s will (judg-
ment), without any merit of our own, so that we occupy the place
of the Prince of Apostles in the administration of the Church, we
must unconditionally work and aim that we, in negotiating the
affairs of the Church (in constituendis exclesiasticis negotiis) imi-
tate his admonitions and institutions with the most faithful
humility and most humble belief, for his belief and love seemed so
distinguished to the Lord that upon his peculiar immoveable
stability of faith (in eius singulariter fidei stabilitate) the Son of
God erected and confirmed the church he had purchased with His
precious blood, in saying : —‘ Thou art Petrus, and upon this rock
I will build my Church.’ To him He gave likewise the preroga-
tive of power so great, that in conformity to his will that should
be bound in heaven and upon earth what he had bound, and that
loosed what he had loosed. The succession in this power he (St.
Peter) left himself to St. Clement, and in him to all who possess
his see (seat) legitimately and strive to guide with canonical
order (canonica ordinatione disponere staduerint) the Church of
God. Based upon the authority of his belief, do we confirm
you, dear brother Norigaud, and all your canonical successors, in
everything which belongs to the Church of Autun, to which we
have ordained you canonically,” &c. What is the import of this
bull 1 ? A legal power, nothing else.
64. But there are cases much more in point. Thus Paschalis
11. announces to the Archbishop Guido of Vienne his confirmation
as bishop, gives him metropolitan rights, and sends him the pal-
lium in a bull (Mansi xx. 1046) which begins :—“ The power to
bind and unbind in heaven and upon earth, given by God (auctore
Deo) principally (principaliter) to St. Peter and his successors, is re-
cognized by the Church in those words with which Christ addressed
Peter :— ‘ That which thou bindest on earth shall be bound in
heaven likewise.’ To him is given , by the authority of the same
God (eodem Deo auctore), the firmness of his own belief as well as
the power of strengthening that of others, when he is told :‘ I
have prayed for thee, Peter, that thy faith do not falter ; and that
thou, once converted, strengthen thy brethren.’ We must
therefore, we residing, though unworthily, in the place of Peter
(residere videmur in loco Petri), fortify what is right, and arrange
in every church that which has to be arranged, in such a manner,
and in accordance with the guidance (will) of the internal judge
(interni, perhaps aeterni), that our judgment emanate from his
face, and our eyes behold equity. Agreeing to your prayer, dearest
brother Guido, we protect the holy Church of Vienne, over which
you preside by the authority of God (auctore Deo), by virtue of
the authority of the Apostolic See. By this decree valid for all
eternity,” &c. The bull of like import for the Bishop of Ache-
ranza has exactly the same beginning (Mansi xx. 1055), like-
wise that of Eugene 111. (Mansi xxi, 570); quite similar are
the writings, ibid. ii. 70, 72, iv. 2, 778., cone. Roman, a 1074


c. 23 (xx. 429), of Urban 11. (xx. 699), Alexander 111. (xxi.
959), Coelestine 111. (xxii. 600), and several others. One bull only
shall be adduced here.
65. Pope Hadrian IV. grants, in the bull of June, 13, 1157
(Mansi xxi. 824, Jaffe num. 6985), which is signed by all the car-
dinals, to the patriarch Henry of Grado the power to ordain
bishops and consecrate churches in Constantinople, and in other
towns of the Constantinopolitan reign wherever the Venetians had
churches. This bull begins :—“ Among all the stars in the
heavens formed by divine wisdom as ornaments for this world and
for the benefit of man, it was ordained from the very beginning
that the sun should be distinguished above all by his clear light,
that his rising should announce the day and chase the darkness
of the night. It was the more fit that he should be distinguished
before all the other heavenly bodies, the more he had been chosen
by the Supreme Creator to come before the day in the beginning
of all things. In the same manner did our Saviour, in spreading
His churches like brilliant stars over the different zones of the
earth, ordain firmly that the Roman Church, whose ruler was the
prince of apostles, Peter, should as it were precede all as brilliant
sun, and be the head of the separate churches which were as
its members to be inferior to it. This is eight plainly declaeed
in those words with which the Lord addressed the same Peter:
‘lf thou lovest me, then tend my flock!’ And in another
place : —‘ Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church.’ The rock, however, upon which as we read the same said
Church was to be built, receives no cracks and allows no chasms.
The same is shown again, when it is said : —‘ Whatever thou
bindest upon earth shall also be bound in heaven; and whatever
thou loosest on earth that shall be loosed in heaven.’ To him is
likewise given the firmness of his own belief and that of others,
when he did merit to hear from his Master, ‘ I did pray for thee,
Peter, that thy belief do not grow less ; and that thou once con-
verted mayest strengthen thy brethren !’ From those and other
reasons did therefore the holy and apostolic Church, which by
virtue of a heavenly privilege occupies the chief place among the
others, receive from the head, from the Lord Jesus Christ Him-
self, such a great prerogative that it has the special authority to
provide for all the churches of the whole globe (universis ecclesiis
providendi; this may likewise mean, to appoint for them), and to
ordain for them with careful consideration whatever it recognizes
to be ordained. We therefore, though filling with less merit the
place of the prince of apostles in the holy Church, must right
studiously care and effect that each and every church receive,
according to its worth and circumstances, that honour which is
due to it, and that same be rendered to our brethren in accordance
with the weal of the people in wise measure (Sorgfalt),” &c., &c.
Whosoever reads these passages —I could add similar ones by
the dozen —carefully and without prejudice, must acknowledge : 1.
That in them no trace of the papal infallibility is found, though


nowhere else was the occasion more befitting to pronounce this most
particularly, had such been cognizant of it; 2. That the primate
only is deduced from the Bible ; 3. That the primate and the prero-
gatives of the Roman Church are only affirmed (placed) in judicial
acts; 4. That all the papal acts appear as the eflux of these same
prerogatives; 5. That it is incomprehensible how, in the face of
these passages, a dogma could be deduced from the Bible on the
18th July, 1870, of which no pope hitherto had the least idea of
their containing such a one. It can, however, unfortunately be ex-
plained from the fact (leider) that in the Vatican Council, as
never heretofore, the majority of those assembled were without all
solid investigation—aye, it may be said without sufficient, let alone
thorough knowledge of the sources,—and went to work with an in-
credible haste. I have carefully studied every one of the remarks
made by the fathers of the Council and the papal commissaries, as
found in the official “Synopsis observationum,” and in the “Adno-
tationes” to the “ sub secreto Pontificio” laid before the Schema Con-
stitute nis dogmatics de Ecclesia Christi, and I have found nothing
in them but the most commonly known things. Of the bulls
given by me, of hundred other ones, which I shall use in my
second writing, no mention is made anywhere. The non-Roman
bishops meet no blame; they had no idea previous to their setting
out for Rome what was to be dealt with there ; and in Rome there
were not sufficient literary means at their disposal, as Cardinal
Rauscher complains of in his writing already cited; aye, suchwere
altogether kept away from the “ Opposition Bishops.” The more
terrible becomes the responsibility of those who effected that Pius
IX. who, without doing any injustice to him, can hardly be sup-
posed to possess a knowledge of these historical questions, did
announce a resolution as dogma which has destroyed the peace and
unity (harmony) of the Church.
66. But even in laws are found those requirements for a decision
ex cathedra as demanded by the cap. 4 of the Const, dogm. of
July 18. For in it the infallibility is (at first) attached in a ge-
neral way to the pope speaking ex cathedra (from his seat of teach-
ing). If now the pope speaks as such solemnly in a Council or in
a sermon ( 12 ); if he declares and ordains in the most solemn man-
ner in place of God what is to be done, ( 13 ) or if he gives laws
with regard to the validity of the choice of a pope, and con-
sequently regulates how the subtraction of the infallibility could
become possible ( 14 ); if he declares directly he was sitting in the chair
(cathedra) of St. Peter, ( 15 ) if he has his acts drawn up by the cardi-
nals, that is by those who are declared by Sixtus V., in those rules
( 12 ) See the words of Gregory VII. (§ 4, num. 12) of 1080, of Urban'
11., Leo X., Divina, Julius 11. in the fourth sitting of the 5 Lateran
Council.
( 13 ) Bull Ejus qui of Paul 111., Regnans of Pius V., Divina of Leo X.,
Pastor aeternus Leo V. ; the expressions of Innocence 111. in § 4, num. 46..
( 1 4) q u il Cum ex apostolatus of Paul IV. in num. 30.
( 15 ) The bull Postquam verus of Sixtus V., Pastor aeternus of Leo X.


which regulate their whole position, as the successors of the
Apostles ( 16 ) ; if the pope declares, with the approbation of a
synod held to be oecumenical, that all papal constitutions, as based
upon divine inspiration, are unalterable (inviolable) ( 17 ); if he pro-
nounces, by virtue of apostolic fulness of power, principles about
the most important subjects, p.e. religious worship ( 18 ); if he
announces the most effective sentences with regard to the relation
of the spiritual to the temporal power( 19 ) —he must certainly have
spoken ex cathedra , because such laws cannot be given without the
justification of the grounds on which they rest; for in giving a law
a principle is pronounced as a matter of course. That, however,
these principles, the forerunners of the laws, relate to faith and
morals is the more clear, because—l, a number of them concern
faith solely; 2, the relation of man to authority, the keeping of and
absolving from oaths, vows, &c., appertains to morals undoubtedly
3, none of the given constitutions having as aim the discipline of
the Church only, the latter being intentionally not mentioned at all;
4, all those laws, if not relating to faith and morals, and not con-
cerning discipline , would he a transgression of the papal power.
This, however, has, according to a dogmatical expression, never
taken place; 5, ultimately, many of those laws contain only
teachings.
67. However, the peculiar formidse of the cap. 4 of the Const,
dogm. are likewise adduced. For, firstly, the bulls ( 20 ) cited are
issued by the popes in the administration of their functions as pastor
and teacher of all Christians, as is shown in most of them in the pre-
amble already, but becomes more evident when considering that they
are given to the Church in general, which the very forms used do prove;
and lastly,- that it is impossible to distinguish two or three persons in
the pope, but only the one pope, who is the teacher and pastor as
pope. Secondly, the constitutions are issued “by virtue of the
highest Apostolic power” as is distinctly stated with regard to most
of them, but which follows in all as natural sequence, because
“ by the highest Apostolic power” alone could they be enabled to
( 10 ) Bull Postquam verus, above. It is always denoted above when a
bull has these signatures.
(' 7 ) Num. 35, Julius 11., in the fourth sitting of the 5 Lateran Council.
( 18 ) Innocence X., bull Zelo domus dei, Alloc, of Pius IX. of June 22,
1868.
( 19 ) Many of the demands given are relative to it.
( 2 °) The few letters cited, the simple acts, need not be taken into consider-
ation. I simply mention this, because, where things cannot be contradicted,
the affirmation, ‘ ‘ they were not spoken ex cathedra, ”is made to serve. It is,
therefore, plain enough that the principal objection to this writing will be,
that I gave as papal teaching that which was not given in ex cathecra
definitions. Whoever reads my writing will see that it never entered my
mind to look upon every declaration as being an ex cathedra one in the sense
of that faction. But this is true and my opinion : ex cathedra theory is
only an invention of a school (faction) ; it has no justification in itself and
none at all in justice (law). Only on account of the antagonists it must be
taken into consideration, in order to prove that their dogma, even upon their
own theory, is a new one , fabricated July 18, 1870.


issue such. Thirdly , whatever is defined must “he a teaching to
to be folloived by the whole Church .” That such is the case is proved
in some by the Anathema being the consequence of their non-accep-
tance, that the salvation of the soul is made dependent upon them,
in others this is stated directly. Fourthly , do those expressions
which are the most important for my aim contain “ teachings con-
cerning faith and morals,” aye only a teaching, they expressing only
theoretical sentences, and not containing regulations or decisions of
individual judicial points. Thus the bull Unam Sanctam of Boni-
face VIIL, the breve Inter multiplices of Pius IX., the words of
Gregory VII. in the Council of 1180, the preambles of the bulls
Eius qui of Paul 111. and Regnans of Pius V., and cum ex aposto-
latus of Paul IV. and Postquam verus of Sixtus V., &c.; the bull
Divinaof Julius 11., and the words of the same pope in the fourth
sitting of the 5. Lateran Council. That at last something is
“ decided” in each of the acts given, is self-evident.
However the word ‘decide’ (see note 3, §. I.), is not exactly the best
one, because it implies too easily a doubting. This, however, is
neither implied in the meaning of the word ‘ definire,’ nor in the
sense in which the word has been used hitherto in the language of the
Church, and this in the most unequivocal manner, because the word
is no technical one. Defino is rendered by Forcellini with consti-
tute, circumscribo, decerno, et finiendo certos rei de qua agitur ter-
minos prsescribo. Not a single passage is given by him which
shows the same as implying the deciding of a dispute in a legal
sense. In the Council of Trent the word ‘ definire’ is not used a
single time technically before a dogmatical definition; aye, this
word is only used synonymously with, and not as introduction for a
decision in S. xiv. pr., S. xxv. i.f. (definitio, definire). This Council
uses, as well as the former ones, the word doctrina for the denomi-
nation of the sections of Faith (thus in the Sessiones xiv. doctrina
de sanctissimis poenitentise et extreme unctionis sacramentis, xxi.
doctrina de communione sub utraqua specie et parvulorum, xxii.
doctrina de sacrificio missse, xxiii. vera et catholica doctrina de
Sacramento ordines ad condemnandos errores a S. Synodo Trid.
decreta et publicata Sessione septima, xxiv. doctrina de Sacramento
matrimonii), or the wordDecretum (thus in the Sessiones v. decre-
tum de paccato originali, vi. decretum de justificatione, vii.
decretum de sacramentis, xiii. decretum de sanctissimo Eucharistic
Sacramento, xxv. decretum de purgatorio. ( 21 ) In order to give the
idea of the ultimate validity of a teaching, the Council uses the
words: (a) docere (S. xiii. deer, de sanct. Euch. Sacr. c. 1., xiv. de
sacrif. missse prooem., xxiii. de sacr. ord. c. 4). (bJ declarare (Sess.
V, deer, de pecc. orig., vi., c. 1., xiv. de sacr. prooem., xiv. de poen. c.
6., xxi. de commun. c. 1,2, 3, xxii. de sacrif. miss, prooem). (c)
statuere, decernere (Sess. v. deer, depecc. orig., vii. de sacr. prooem.,
xiv. c. sde confess.) In the very same manner, however, it uses
( 21 ) Only in these sittings, respectively sections mentioned here, do dog-
matical definitions occur^


statuere, decernere, declarare, for purely judicial regulations (p.e. in
the decreta de reformatione of the meetings; v. cap. 1. 2, xiii. c.
3, xiv. c. 14, xxi. prooem. c. 2 and termination, xxii. prooem. and
c.’ 1., ’xxiii. c. 1., xxiv. de ref. matr. c. 2, 6),.&c. ( 22 ). Definire is
therefore, even if often used before the Council of Trent, especially
in the Latin translations of the old Councils, a word not at all
technical in the accepted language of the Church ; to make capital
out of it is, therefore, just as false as ridiculous.
68. I now arrive at the last possible objection. It could be
said : even if it must be acknowledged that in laws it is possible to
teach ex cathedra, as well as in doctrines, because such doctrines
hove, on account of the Anathema, attached thereto, at the same time
the character of laws, and because very often the most impoitant
things are embodied in laws ( 2S ), no conclusions can be made from
single acts and deeds of the popes as to the teaching of the Church.
If, therefore, the popes did depose princes, and give away nations
and countries, absolve them from their oaths, &c., it does not follow
therefrom that this is the teaching of the Church, or that such is
the unalterable dogmatical decision of the infallible popes. This I
have likewise formerly affirmed, believed, and taught, as I can
prove at any moment by numerous citations from former works, by
occasional remarks made in criticisms, &c. But after the 18th of
July, 1870, remains only the one alternative for me and everybody
else : not to recognize the decision of the cap. 4 (and 3) of the
constitutio dogmatica de ecclesia as the proposition of a true
(Ecumenical Council, or to acknowlege as firm teaching oj the
Church, likewise, those principles which the popes have pronounced
direct , or which must, in accordance with all logic, have been the iden-
tical suppositions on which their actions in the government of the
Church were based. Even if the reasons for this are already given
in the foregoing, the importance of the subject demands that some
of them be recapitulated, and the more remote ones adduced. To
begin with, it is as clear as the sun that every act which I have
given has been issued by the pope as such, and consequently
( 22 ) I have made use of the first edition of the Cone. Trid. “ Canones et
decreta sacras. oec. et gen, Concilii Trid. sub Paulo 111., Julio 111., Pio IV.,
Pontificibus Max. Index Dogmatum et Keformationum. Romas, apud
Faulum Manutium, Aldi F. mdlxiv. In Aedibus populi Romani,” of
which ccxxxix. pages are numbered, the following six blank, six leaves
index, —my own copy which has the autograph signatures of the secretary
and the two notaries. For judicial regulations the Council of I.rent uses
yet mandare (xxv. de invocat.) and praecipere (xxiv. de ref. matr. c. 1). _
( 23 ) Or must I likewise believe that no valid marriage can take place m
face of a law which contains an obstacle for the separation of such? Or
does this perhaps not fall under the objects for definitions ex cathedra 1 Are
we to believe , if popes declare in Synods, the ordinations of bishops conse-
crated Simonically as invalid ? Certainly this law and this teaching were,
and still ar q false, in spite of the papal infallibility, and in spite of having
been given ex cathedra. This has likewise been adduced by several bishops
in the Vatican Council. But Pope Pius IX. was to be made infallible, and
those popes who ex cathedra expounded heretical teachings had to be taken
into the bargain.


required a justification, which necessarily predisposes that the pope
as such found his justification in the views of the Church, and in
his ideas as to the import of the power of the primate. If this be
not granted, it must be declared that numerous popes have acted
in the most important questions of the world with a wantonness
beyond all example, with an ignorance bordering on the incredible,
with the most refined wickedness, and that they had played care-
lessly with the woe and weal of humanity. This is impossible, in-
admissible ; thus, however, is the subterfuge which is contained in
the above objection void, and only fit to satisfy children, the
ignorant mass, those persons whose mental capacities are incapable,
owing to a certain spiritual training system, to comprehend pro-
perly anything which lies beyond the pale of the beaten path, or
those who will believe, from some motive or other, whatever they
consider useful or necessary, or to impose upon such whose
simplicity of belief is so touching that we may, perhaps, envy
them, but do not take them as guide when considering ourselves as
reasonable beings, having the firm conviction that God had given us
intelligence to make use of it, and that in the 19th century even
a Catholic might adhere to the words of Paul : “So then, every
one of us shall give an account of himself to God” (Rom. xiv. 12. ;
2 Cor. v. 10). If sophisms are of no avail there remains nothing,
in view of the dogma proclaimed July 18, 1870, but to consider
the acts executed by the popes as the consequences, relatively, as
the administering of the true principles of the Church. For firstly,
it has been affirmed in a decisive manner ex cathedra : the popes
have not overstepped their power, consequently they were justified
in the promulgation of such acts. If they were justified in so
doing, then the teachings with regard to the papal power, without
which such acts could not be executed, are true.( 24 ) Secondly :no
act of this kind has ever been renounced by the Church, nor less
declared inadmissible in principle by subsequent popes. If now
the pope is considered as infallible by the Church, same recognizes
in that manner such actions as well. Thirdly : the popes did
exactly in these acts, as shown, give as reason, in the strongest
possible manner, their quality as pastor, as representative of God,
as being provided with the fulness of apostolic power. Fourthly :
it would be a remarkable thing if the popes, whenever and in what-
ever manner it might please them, could promulgate articles of
faith as infallible beings under divine assistance, without possessing
at the same time any guarantee whatsoever to be prevented from
inclining, like a bending reed, in all directions —this in the issuing
of the most solemn acts upon which depended or could depend the
( 2 ‘) If, therefore, a pope did give away countries and peoples ; if he
absolved subjects from their allegiance ; if he deposed a king; if he loosed
oaths, &c., the inference must be correct, because it is not only taught by
the action, but, what is more, put into execution as well; that the pope is
placed over kings and princes, has unconditional sway over conscience, that
is, as is also stated in the bulls given, the pope represents in all things God
Almighty on earth.


weal or woe of millions; aye, had to depend thereon in accordance
with their will. Fifthly : the guarding of the infallibility by a
string of clauses is a mere arbitrary affair, for “ suorum quisque
verborum optimus interpres” is an old saying. What then, if a
pope pronounced a doctrine which everybody looked upon as having
been spoken ex cathedra , and declared himself afterwards: I did
not mean that at all, I did not intend to decide ex cathena Sup-
posing the bishops who did not agree to the dogmas of the 18 th
July °had remained firm and strong,( 25 ) and had shown this by
deeds, or did do so in future, what could prevent a new ex cathedra
declaration of Pius IX. to the effect : in the cap. iv. the consent of
the bishops is implied; such has simply not been declared for the
greater glorification of the popes, that the formal individual sanc-
tion of the pope should be given as the sole reason for its external
validity 1 There is nothing to stand in the way of this. For in
the cap. iv. there is not even an ex cathedra declaration with regard
to the declared dogma. ( 26 ) If this were not possible in the face of
history it would matter little, for the history of the Vatican Council
has shown that history does not concern same ;( 27 ) it has also been
(25) Every subsequent submission affects in nothing the character of reso-
lutions which were not those of an oecumenical council from the very
beginning. That this is so, is taught already—in order to serve those who
are always throwing about with general sentences, in like manner—by the
old judicial sentence of the Church in reg. jur. 18. in 6—“ Time does not
confirm that which by rights was not_ found in the beginning. lhis sen-
tence must just as well be admitted as the other one, that those who
remained away in spite of their protest of July 17 had foregone their right
to vote. That, however, the Church has already been degraded into a mere
judicial institution, that follows irrefutably if a purely judicial or processual
sentence is applied to the indispensable duty of giving evidence for belief.
If many bishops declared “in our diocese they do not know and do not
believe the papal infallibility,” is it not absurd, if some of these say now,
and others with them, that they had renounced to give evidence for truth.
Christ says, Matt. xv. 8, fol. “This people draweth nigh unto me with
their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from
me. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the com-
mandments of man.” And it applies what is said by Paul to the Gala-
tians i. 8.
( 28 ) And how they wriggle and turn about, is shown already by tlie
interpretation of the Bishop of Ermland and by other pastorals, which do
not apply at all to the history of the cap. 4. ...
( 2 7) j n Komische Briefe vom Concil von Quirinius, Munich, 18 1 0, puge
555, we are told that Pius IX. did declare to Cardinal Guidi, who had
adduced tradition and St. Thomas against the infallibility “La tradizione
son io” (the tradition am I.) The correctness of this characteristic remark
is likewise confirmed by other sources. It agrees with the declaration of
Boniface VIII. given in the last note to num. 61. Now that the pope has
been declared infallible, July 18, 1870, it is true (richtig) likewise. For now
where the pope alone can make infallible dogmas ; as dogma being declared
(should be ?) only that which is shown to be such by the Scriptures or
tradition; Pius IX. having published a dogma July 18, 1870, without its
proof by Bible or tradition having been given ; it follows that either Pius
IX. must be the tradition or not. If lie were not, the dogma would be
false. This cannot be believed by the infallibilist, and least of all by Pius
IX. himself. Ergo, must it be believed by Pius IX. and every believer
that Tins IX. is the, Tradition. The system is crowned. First a fact is


shown by the sophistical turns given by the correct believers when-
ever they come in contact with queer expressions and acts of former
popes, that they are willing to make use of history to give evidence
for themselves, but that same is discarded as abstract evidence.
Sixthly : it is difficult to make anybody comprehend or believe
that the popes had not erred as such, had not done wrong, had not
overstepped the limits of their power, and to make him believe at
the same time those teachings which they indisputably acknowledge
by their acts are no teachings. Seventhly : it is beyond doubt that
the teaching does not exist only in order to exist, but that in cases
where a guide is wanted for actions, these actions had to be carried
out in accordance with such teaching. If this were not so, the
Council of Trent need not have taken the trouble of formulating
the teaching of the justification of the Church in sixteen chapters of a
dogmatical character and in thirty-three articles of faith, then the
same Council might have omitted altogether its fifty-eight theoretical
dogmatical explanations, and the formulation of its ninety-nine
articles of creed, ( 28 ) then, above all, it would have never come to the
separation of the Protestants. If, however, the Church places the
greatest value, this in unison with its most constant teaching, upon
works, would it not be very inconsequent to deny that from the works of
the popes no deductions could be made as to their teachings, whose
fruits works necessarily are % Shall I consider the pope as infallible
if he teaches the whole Church with regard to faith or morals, it
would be asking much of me to ignore him as infallible teacher
in his actions for the Church, especially if he does same according
to his own words, as the chief pastor, as the representative of
Christ, the delegate of the Almighty God, by virtue of the fulness
of apostolic power, &c. I would then take it for granted that
they had not thought anything in connection therewith, which,
however, is the more impossible with such minds as Gregory
VII., Innocence 111., Innocence IV., Pius V., Sixtus V., &c.,
created. If such were false, the fundament of the Church would be shaken.
This cannot be the case, because same is built upon a rock, the Holy Ghost
is with her, &c. Consequently, the fact must be true. Ergo, the justification
to bring forth such fact is true likewise. Quod erat demonstrandum. Rome
has created and acted upon the theory of the fait accompli; Rome, not
Machiavelli among others, is the teacher of it.
( 3S ) I should like to know how many grown-up Catholics out of a hundred
would be capable of conversing about only one single point of the teaching
of the belief—letting alone those points contained in the so-called Apostolic
Symbolum—or to answer any questions put to them, without committing a
heresy. And how many of those educated, even scientifically, aye, how
many clergymen even, do know or have present all those hundreds of dog-
matical expressions which have been given by me in the bulls cited in the
foregoing explanations only ? I must confess, that in spite of my memory,
which is not so very bad, I often had to look, though there are few printed
papal bulls, in all the works I ever had access to, which I did not read care-
fully. If, however, such is the knowledge of lelief in its details —and that
this is the case, is known by every scientific person (Kundige), because it
cannot be otherwise—then it cannot be demanded that every one should
believe to the letter what may be said by a bishop. For how many bishops,
do know history ?


&c., the very greatness of these men consisting in tneir being
convinced as to their ideas, that they only acted thus because
they considered that which they believed and claimed as the word and
teaching of God, because they would have preferred death to yielding,
( 29 ) and because it is exactly this greatness of character which is mostly
lauded in them from the most Catholic views. And then Ido
ask, where did Christ bind his words with clauses and formulee 1
Is His teaching not so very simple, so clear, not at all scholastic
like 1 Did he attach importance only to certain teachings, or only
to His teaching, not to His life % And the popes, who in the second
millenium of the Church do call themselves with great gusto, this
nearly always, the representative of Christ, of God, nor less or
more seldom successor vicarius b. Petri should call for the non-ob-
servation of whole chapters of teachings, and demand only the ob-
servation of certain teachings guarded by clauses ! Certainly this
could hardly legalize the vicarius Christi! ( 30 ) Seventhly, it is un-
questionable that the pope as such, if he, because being the succes-
p
( 2 9 ) Gregory VII. writes June 24, 1073, to Beatrice and her daughter
Mathilda (Mansi xx. 60) —“ With respect to the king, our will is, as you
have read before, that we send pious men to him, by whose admonitions,
with God’s inspiration (inspirante Deo), we may bring him back to the love
of the Roman and his mother Church, and effect to instruct and educate
him (instruere et expolire—interesting words) to accept the imperium in the
proper form. Should he, which we do not hope, despise to listen to us,
then can, nor dare we swerve from our mother, the Roman Church, which
has nourished us, and often gained new sons with God’s help from the blood
of its sacrificed sons. And it is certainly more safe for us to defend ivith
our own blood truth for our own salvation, than to become lost to perdition
by yielding to his will and consenting to injustice with him; may this be far
from us.” This one instance may suffice here; but it must be considered
that the controversies of those times had nothing to do with faith, but con-
cerned partly matters of discipline, partly matters of right, which the one
demanded and the other refused.
( 30 ) It has often been pronounced that more importance is attached to
works than to words, and every good pedagogue seeks to instil into the child
the truth of the old saying—-“Exempla trahunt, verba movent! ” The popes
also have plainly acknowledged this. Thus the holy Leo IX. says in the
letter to the holy Petrus Damiani (Mansi xix. 686), in which he praises his
celebrated book “ Gomorrhianus ” :—“But, dearest son, I am infallibly
(inerabiliter —perhaps from this expression of feeling the infallibility might
be adduced—the infallibilists do not seem to have known this passage)
pleased, because you build that up by the example of your life which you
teach with eloquent capacity. For it is more to teach by works than words.”
Very interesting is the following instance which I give to show the dis-
position of that time. The primas, the archbishop John of Lyons, had
called the bishops of the province of Sens to attend a council at Lyons.
Against this the latter: Archbishop Daimbertus, Bishop Ivo of Chartres,
Walo of Paris, John of Orleans, &c., write to him that he was not authorised
as primas to call them beyond the precincts of the province. They then
enter upon the subjects and deduce—the investiture of the German king
was a sensible concession; they should let the matter (the forced concession
of Paschalis rest, so as not to disclose the pope’s weakness (Blosze); to
speak of the investiture as heresy was false, because same had nothing to do
with faith ; they had no right to judge (over) the king. The primas John
writes against this and emphasizes particularly, the heretic is known by his
works (Mansi xxi. 77 sqq).


sor of St. Peter, acts as the representative of Christ, must either not
he capable to err in matters which supine a principle, or must not in
himself be infallible. For the representative of God it is out of the
question to say : “ Follow my words, but not my deeds.” Thus I
must confess openly : whichever way I look and turn, as much as I
have meditated and considered about it, I can arrive at no other con-
clusion than the following :—if the Pope is infallible, he must either
possess in himself (überhaupt) the personal quality of infallibility, or
he must enjoy an inspiration. That but this alternative remains,
follows among other reasons therefrom, that nothing at all is con-
tained in the Bible of a peculiar teaching of Peter; that the primate
of Peter consists exactly in the right to bind and loose and to tend
the flock, that is in acting , in the right to certain acts and laivs ;
that the Bible knows nothing of the necessity of a mission for the
bishops on the part of the Pope, nor does the first thousand years
in its generality know any more ; that Paul, who as is known was
converted after Whit-Sunday, that is, after the primate of Peter had
become active already, says in his letter to the Galatians i. 1. ff.
“ Paul, the apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ, and God the Father, who raised Him from the dead,” and 11
ff. —“But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was
preached of me is not after man ( 31 ) : for I neither received it of
man, neither was I taught it, bat by the revelation of Jesus Christ,”
and ii. 7. ff.—“ But contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel
of the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the gospel of the
circumcision was unto Peter; for he that wrought effectually in
Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty
in me towards the Gentiles.” Paul, therefore, knows nothing of a
peculiar higher teaching of Peter, and does not scruple to com-
mence his epistle (Gal. i. 8) with the words: —“Butthough we, or
an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel than that which we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed.” And what was the
point at issue 1 The question whether the Gentiles in becoming
Christians were to be subjected to circumcision 1 This question,
however, had its principle in a doctrinal teaching. If salvation was
dependent on the following of the (Mosaic) law, then Paul did
preach falsely ; if it did depend upon it, then “ was the yielding of
St. Peter an approving of false principles to all intents and pur-
poses.” ( 32 ) Well, if Paul considered a connivance of St. Peter so
important, that he issued such a powerful writing, which contains
up to the present day the guide for the necessity of the belief, and
( 3I ) Verbatim it ought to be :“I make known to you, brethren, that
the Gospel that has been disclosed to you by me is not after a man, for I
have it neither,” &c. However, our approved translations are often not of
much use. That, however, the note in page 268 to Gal. ii. 13 has not been
omitted in the grand edition of Alioli astonishes me, because same, how-
ever justly, accused Peter with the approving of false principles. The fol-
lowing sentence is not even correct in accordance with the Vulgata, which
has evangelium praeputii and circumcisionis, apostolatum circumcisionis.
( 3S ) Verbatim from the cited note of Alioli’s translation.


the relation of the Christians to the (old) “ laws,” then we are the
more entitled to examine the actions and laws of the popes as such
to prove whether the principles on which they are based are the
teaching of the Church or not. The infallibility as a personal
quality, however, is disputed in the pope with indignation by the
infallibilists themselves. It is certainly impossible, it being neces-
sary that it be based upon an act or foundation, that X. (p.e.
Mauro Cappellari, Conte Mastai Ferretti) was blessed with such.
If the Lord had spoken thereof, the matter would be simple, clear,
and beyond doubt. This, however, being nowhere delivered, the
pope never having received a different ordination from that of a
bishop, there is no foundation for such quality. The inspiration is
even more decidedly refuted, and that with full justice, not the
least point speaking for it. Upon what then is this infallibility
based % Upon divine assistance in certain highly solemn moments.
In order, however, to know (find) such, it was necessary to invent
first a, judicial formulae (the teaching ex cathedra), of which nothing
is found in the Bible nor the fathers; hence they are compelled
now to condemn, in spite of all the solemnity of its words, a papal
decision which does not agree with their system, ( 33 ) and at another
time to accept one as ex cathedra because it fits, though it may in
all respects be far inferior to the other in solemnity. And upon
such a formula the salvation of the world is to depend. For
“ extra ecclesiam nulla salus” and to be subject to the Roman
Pope is necessary for the salvation of every human being (Boniface
VIII., bull Unam Sanctam). ( 34 )
69. To finish : It is as clear as the sun that not only theory, but
praxis as well, must have a dogmatical fundamental, because the
Church is no union (club) for doctrinal speeches, decisions, &c.
That this is likewise a teaching of the Church was shown indu-
bitably in No. 61, from the articles of belief emanating ex cathedra
from the bulls issued by the Council of Trent. From this it fol-
lows, that any papal edict for the Church, to which appertains the
quality of a law or act announced by virtue of apostolic power, that
is by the chief pastorate, by the primate, does as a matter of course
acknowledge in its very promulgation those principles as true and
taught by the Church which spring from such edict itself, in con-
formity with logical reasoning.
f 2
(33) Thug the pastorals shelter (help) themselves with the simple affir-
mation : Honorius did not speak ex cathedra. lam convinced “ the simple
(general) pious Catholic,” not every one, but many a one, will willingly
believe this. But can this be thought of men who are to stand up for such,
base upon them, and consider these as the real fundamentals, they knowing
history as well, or perhaps better, than most bishops ?
( 3 + ) I wish it to be understood particularly that in this place it is flo in-
tention of mine to combat the papal infallibility, but simply, wishing to show
its import (bearings), to adduce that no one has the right to limit same
arbitrarily, that it cannot be done in order to purify acts, or to represent
them as not existing as teaching to use the sentence—the bull, the breve of
such and such a date does not speak ex cathedra. But at the same time the
infallibilty is in so far already done for (vernichtet), it being proved as clear
as sunshine that popes have made as popes heretical sentences and doctrines.


And therefore must I come to the conclusion, as a natural
deduction from all the reasons given, that: If the teaching in the
fourth chapter of the Constitution of Pope Pius IX. of July 18,
1870, which commences with the words “Pastor aeternus”is a dogma
of the Catholic Church, then every Catholic must look upon all
those teachings and principles whichever were pronounced or
enacted by the popes in their power as chief pastor and teacher,
with reference to the whole Church, and given to the believer, as
Constitutions to be accepted and adhered to, as being the unalter-
able norms of the Catholic Church, as being a right of the Church,
and as being the religious duty of every Catholic to consider and
follow them as suchf 35 )
§ VI.-POLITICAL CONSIDERATIONS.
70. It has been proved ( J ) that the popes, according to their own
teaching, have full and unlimited power over the world —countries,
nations, oceans, reigns of all kinds, emperors, kings, and all
authorities, and have practically carried out same ; it has moreover
been proved in a special manner ( 2 ) that the popes, according to
their teaching, can depose the temporal rulers, dispense nations
from their oath of allegiance, give away lands and people, grant
the right of occupation, give human beings away as slaves; it has-
further been proved ( 3 ) that the popes are justified, according to
their teaching, to declare void any law of the State, and to absolve
from adherence to all such which may, according to their ideas, be-
detrimental to the interests of the Church ; it has also been proved (f)
that the popes are authorized, according to their teaching, to depose
non-Catholic princes, to absolve from oaths of allegiance, and reduce
to slavery, all subjects who disregard such orders of the pope ; it
has no less been proved ( 5 ) that the popes can deal ad libitum with
the life and body, property and liberty of the heretics, as well as
with those who are in ban ; it has ultimately been proved ( 6 ) that
the popes, according to their teaching, are authorized to command
Christian monarchs to wage war against and subjugate those
princes and States laid under ban by them, in doing which they
would be doing a work pleasing in the eyes of God, and become
entitled to a higher degree of salvation.
It having been declared by the popes ex cathedra that the popes
( :! 5 ) That this takes place in the decisive ones has always been shown
above or emanates from the meaning of the words. The separate acts cited
prove the practical execution of the theoretical sentences: They had to be
given, therefore, to show the harmony between theory and praxis.
i 1) Numbers 13, with note, 14 fol. 29 to 34, 37, 38, 45, 46, 47.
( a ) Numbers 13, 14, 15 to 28, 34, 49, ( 3 ) Numbers 37 to 43.
(*) Numbers 14, 28, 29.
(») Numbers 14, 27, 28, 29, 34, 37, 38, 49, 50, 51.
(o) Numbers 27, 28, 29, 54 fol.


had never overstepped the limits of their power; ( 7 ) it having been
declared by them that they never erred ( 8 ) in their canons or con-
stitutions, which, as it were, rested on divine inspiration ( 9 ) —no
expression having been ever given which indubitably exempts any
one part of individual or social life from the power of the popes,
the papal acts and constitutions, extending over all branches of
public and private rights—edicts about thrones, lands, people, laws,
treaties of princes, property, liberty, life of the subject, all this
with relation to Catholics, as non-catholic Christians and non-
Christians, honour, testaments, inheritance, public and private
safety, authorization for taking property of others, for insults and
injuries, &c., &c. : it follows necessarily that it rests only in the
hands of the pope whether he will do anything or not. In this
manner the popes have justified their own expressions, that they
are the representatives of the Almighty God. ( 10 ) The limit of the
papal almightiness on earth consists therefore solely in their own
will.
71. It being beyond all doubt that exactly the most important
declarations as to principles are of a dogmatical character; ( u )
that the pope, in pronouncing a dogmatical sentence, is infallible,
and his expressions unalterable, it follows that the popes have to-
day, and in future, the same power they ever had, and which, in
enacting, they believed themselves entitled to.
72. It never having been declared that the followers of the
Christian confessions which separated from the Catholic Church are
no heretics, but on the contrary all such being enumerated up to
the present day under the expression haeretici in all the official
documents of the Roman curie, ( 12 ) and the papal power extending
over every Christian ( 13 ), aye, over every mortal even ( 14 ), it follows
that the pope is justified at any moment to execute the former
laws against heretics, to issue new ones, render more stringent the
old ones, &c.
73. It being self-understood that every believing Catholic is not
only bound to believe what is taught by the popes, but must like-
wise follow their instructions—the unjust excommunication even
being binding ( 15 ), the papal excommunication being not only
binding for this earth but likewise for heaven ; ( 16 ) it having been
declared particularly ( 17 ) “ the obligation which binds Catholic
teachers and authors throughout, must not be limited to that only
which has been uttered by the infallible expression of the Church
as a matter of belief for all; ” it follows that the believing Catholic
( 7 ) Number 11. ( 8 ) Number 11.
( 1J ) Number 35. ( 10 ) Numbers 30. 33.
O 1) Numbers (12 ?), 13, 30, 31, 45, 61, 67.
( 12 ) Numbers 40, 43, 44. Other citations are not needed. However, let
us take tbe latest bull of Pius IX. of Oct. 12, 1869, Apostolicse Sedis,
which agrees with a bulla in coena domini. In num. 1,2, all non-Catholics
are, without all doubt, called roundly haeretici, just as they always have
been called, no distinction having ever been made.
( 1S ) Num. 13 fol. 00 Num. 13. ( 15 ) Num. 61. ( l 8) Num. 12, fol. 61.
( 17 ) Num. 22 of the Syllabus.


teachers and authors have to teach as valid those papal teachings*
and that Catholic officials ( 18 ) and Catholics in general, need not
feel in conscience bound to carry out those laws expressly denounced
by the pope, or those which stand in opposition to the principles
announced by the popes. ( 19 )
74. If such principles have validity, it is evident beyond all
doubt that no ruler non-Catholic is safe of his throne, no govern-
ment carried on by non-Catholics of its power, no non-Catholic of
his life, of his liberty, of his honour, of his property as such; such
principles having validity, it is possible under circumstances —if
excommunication has been resorted to—that no Catholic regent,
no government carried on by Catholics, no Catholic is safe, such
measures being pei’mitted to be taken any day as they were taken
from the eleventh to the seventeenth century. The legal state of
Germany becomes thereby absolutely unsettled, protests having
been entered against the peace of Augsburg, of Westphalia, and
even against the Congress of Vienna, in so far as the pope saw
the rights of the Church injured thereby.
7 5. What can and will be the consequences under the different
circumstances 1 No State, no monarch, no government in the world,,
will consider the papal expressions, which form the subject of these
investigations, as binding. But no State can be safe, however,
that it be not attempted to bring the one or the other into practical
execution. ( 20 ) But above all things it is not in the power of any
State to guard against the consequences which the teaching of such:
principles, the taking of them as guide may produce, or the effect
they may have upon the mass of people, they being made use of
to work upon such.
As purely theoretical emanations of no practical value, no State-
can look upon these principles from the moment where every
Catholic has to believe as divine article of faith that the popes are
infallible, when undoubtedly after the foregoing it must be evident
that such infallibility appertains likewise to all the ancient ex-
pressions of principle, unconditionally, when it is evident that even
the papal edicts have received a character which elevates to the
dignity of articles of faith many papal expressions made with
regard to the relation of the Church to the State and other matters
of the greatest social importance.
Very likely the State will separate completely the Church from
the State, will solve every relation between both. But—can be
said justly by the Protestants—why should the State act in ani-
( 18 ) It is known that the Pcenitentiarie declares the oath upon the Aus-
trian Constitution unconditionally as inadmissible. See Yering, Archivfuer
Kath. Kirchenrecht xvii. p. 447.
( 19 ) That many (numerous) laws belong hereto will be clear to every
thinking person without being specially pointed out. The bull of October
12, 1869, does not differ so very much from the bulla in coena domini
given.
( 20 ) Proof: the encouraging (and praising) of the Tyrolese against the-
religious worship given to the Protestants in the Tyrol, by P. Pius. IX.


mosity to the Protestant Church, if same be given to the mercy of
the pope by Catholic teaching 1 And does not the Catholic Church
solemnly condemn the 'principle of the separation of Church and
State % ( 21 ) Has it not in detail denounced same 1 ( 2 “) Consequently,
is the State acting for the Catholic belief if it does not follow such
on its part. Whither will all this lead 1
Either the monarchs and governments, who do not wish to ignore
the Catholic Church in their states, demand, penetrated by the
unmeasurable influence of the dogma now formulated, taught by
the teacher of humanity, by history, a binding declaration of the
pope to the effect: “ the expressions with regard to the relation of
the Church to the State, &c., made by former popes, as well as the
dogma of the papal infallibility and the unalterableness of the
papal decisions ex cathedra, do not purport to have, do not have,
and can never have, any signification for the dominion which the
State claims as its own.” If such declaration is to be of any value,
same must —which is self-evident —be one ex cathedra. Will Rome
give same 1 Can Rome give same ? These questions I can neither
affirm nor deny. If such be given, it concerns the State no
longer \ in that case the oldest and newest teaching has for it only
the signification of a res inter alios acta. How its citizens and
officials settle matters with their own conscience is then their
private affair. If such declaration is not given, the second case
takes place.
Or, the State must, possessing no right to make helots of
its Catholic inhabitants, but possessing the right to ensure the con-
ditions of its existence, of its quietness, of the peace among its
inhabitants of different confessions, having to proceed against every
subject when contravening its laws, and demanding from its
officials their administration, and from the representative of the
people not to do anything against the fundamental laws ; to protect
itself by an unconditional binding declaration of the Catholics who
■wish to become officials, or to be chosen as representatives, or
to enter the chamber (parliament, &c.) as such. Thus it may lead
(21) Alloc, of Pius IX. Acerbissimum of September 27, 3852. Syllabus,
num. 55. #
(22) 'ppe Church dare make use of external force, having a direct and in-
direct temporal power. Lit. Ad apost. August 22, 1851, and Syllabus num.
24. The ordained servants of the Church and the Roman pope are not to
be excluded from all guidance and ruling in temporal matters. Alloc.
Maxima, June 9, 1862, and Syllabus n. 27. The immunity of the Church
and of clerical persons has not its origin (source) in the civil rights. Multi-
plices inter of June 10, 1851, and Syllabus n. 30. Without the consent of
the Church the spiritual jurisdiction cannot be taken away in the criminal
and temporal affairs of the clergy. All. Acerb.; Nunquam fore of Dec.
15, 1856, and Syllabus n. 31. The supreme superintendence of schools
belongs to the Church (thus in the note to the edition of the Syllabus by
Schrader). Alloc. In consist. November 1, 1850, Quibus of September 5,
1851, and Syllabus n. 45. Civil marriage has been denounced ever so many
times, just as well the liberty of the cultus. All. Nunquam December 15,
1856, Syll. n. 79, the free execution of other cultus in Catholic countries,
Acerb, and Syllabus n. 78.


to a second edition of what has already taken place in England.
For those articles, which were considered so important in the times
of King James I. and Charles 1., as to make emancipation
dependent on an oath, are so no less now since the popes form as
infallible teachers the Church itself. For even if we are with
justice indignant about such English intolerance, we have, in face
of history, no right to break the staff unconditionally over Pitt’s
conduct in the year 1788. ( 23 ) His three questions, which he laid
before the different theological faculties, are they really so very
absurd 1 Do they not on the contrary contain subjects which can-
not be disputed as having been the constant teaching of the
Church from Gregory VII. down to the Syllabus of Pius IXI And
if the Irish nation replies to similar ones, 1757, under the presi-
dency of the Bishop O’Keefe ; if the Catholic bishops of Ireland
since the time of George 111. do from the year 1793 answer these
questions in their oath of investiture, their signification must not
be so very absurd, because it is hardly fair to think that those
men swear to absurdities. But let us honestly answer the ques-
tion.
Is it possible to take oath, and vow, what the Irish people
declared, the bishops affirmed by oath.
The oath which the bishops gave since 1793 is as follows ( 24 ): —
tl I, . . . . take oath, that I abjure, condemn, abhor as unchristian
and godless, the principle, that it be permitted to murder, extirpate,
or in any manner to insult any person whatsoever, or under the
pretext that same be a heretic; ( 2S ) and I declare solemnly, before
God, that I believe that no act in itself unjust, immoral or wicked,
can ever be excused or justified under the pretext or colouring
that it had been done either for the welfare of the Church or in
obedience to any Church power. ( 26 ) 7 declare that there is no
article of Catholic belief, nor am I called upon to believe or to
affirm, that the pope is infallible,if 7 ) or that lam bound to obey
any command immoral in its nature, even if the pope or any
power of the Church should have issued such command or might
want to do so ; but on the contrary do I hold, that it would be
sinful to give it any consideration or obedience on account of that.
( 23 ) Aug. Theiner, Collection of some important official documents with,
regard to the history of the emancipation of the Catholics in England.
Mayence, 1835.
( 3t ) Given after the official text of Theiner in other places, p. vi. note. He
has opposite to the one of 1773 some modifications, which latter are given
there p. v. in the note.
( 5 ) That, in part, the reverse of this affirmation has been looked upon by
the popes as allowable, aye, was taught as duty for centuries, is shown by
all the edicts given, which deal of the treatment of heretics ; this principle
here denounced was never denounced by a pope.
( 2 0 ) Does the right delegated by the pope to rob the moveable estate of
the heretic, the exemption from punishment for injuries inflicted upon them,
the right given by the popes to make slaves of the subjects of authorities in
Ban, agree with this ?
( 27 ) This oath could be taken by Catholic bishops from the year 1793 !
How does the dogma announced July 18, 1870, relate to it ?


I declare, further, that I do not believe that a sin of any kind
committed by me could be forgiven me by the mere will of
the pope, or of a priest, or of any person whatsoever ; but that
real repentance for sins committed, a firm and upright resolution
to avoid sin in future and to appease God, must precede same, and
is irremissible, in order to ensure a firm hope for forgiveness, and
that whoever received absolution without these preliminary con-
ditions would commit the sin of sacramental sacrilege; and I
swear that I will defend to the best of my ability the relations of
property in this country as established by the existing laws. I
denounce, deny, and abjure solemnly, every intention to undermine
the present state of the Church, for the object of placing in
its stead a Catholic constitution; and I swear solemnly, that I will
exercise no privilege whatsoever which may have been given me, or
which may be given me, to destroy or to weaken the Protestant
religion and the Protestant government of this kingdom. So help
me, God.”
From the assembly of the year 1757, one of the declarations is
as follows ( 28 ): —“ We abjure, deny, and condemn, the opinion that
the princes excommunicated by the pope, the Council, or any other
power of the Church, could be deposed or murdered on account of
that by their subjects or any other person. We abhor such teach-
ing as blasphemous and godless ; and we declare ( 29 ) that we do not
believe that either the pope, with or without a general council, nor
a prelate or priest, nor any other Church power, could dispense the
inhabitants of this kingdom, or some of them, from their allegiance
to His Majesty King George 111., who is by the authority of the
Parliament the legitimate king of this country.” Similar declara-
rations, as in the oath of the bishop, follow. Then : “ Sixthly.
After this our declaration, it is immaterial in a political view
whatever our belief may be in other points concerning the pope ;
nevertheless, for the greater satisfaction, we do declare that it is no
article of the Catholic belief, nor that we are thereby demanded to
believe or to acknowledge, that the pope is infallible ,” &c.
Who can guarantee that demanding similar oaths or reverses
from Catholics may not be resolved upon 1 Aye, who could
wonder at it after the experience and expressions of the last
decades ? I have only the intention of pointing to that which
may emanate from the constitutio dogmatica of July 18, 1870 ; to
do which it was necessary to show what has taken place, as w T ell as
the principles upon which historical facts are based.
(- 8 ) Tlieiner, page iii.
(-'■’) The following part disavows formally the bulls Eius qui, Cum Re-
demptor, Regnans in excelsis.


§ VII.-FROM THE RIGHTS OF THE CHURCH IN THE
STATE, AS TAKEN FROM THE CIVILTA CATTOLICA.
The Roman review Civilta Cattolica is notoriously that organ
which has been raised by an edict of the Pope Pius IX. to an
independent institution ; which has often been praised in the most
prominent manner for its tenor ; which stands under the guidance
of Jesuits; which remained authorized, even during the sittings of
the Vatican Council, to step forward for the papal infallibility,
whose most pronounced defender it is ; which in the most open
manner could attack its antagonists during the time of the Council,
whilst the latter were bound to keep silence by the Secretum Pon-
tificium, and were by the papal censure deprived from using the
columns of the Roman press. Whatever this journal brings forth can
be taken as the undoubted and faithful imprint of those views which
have validity in the circles of the Church which are since the time of
Pius IX. the ruling ones. If I give in the following the emanations
of that journal in faithful translation, I may hope to have paid my
tribute to the object in question, as well as being convinced that
such information can only be of advantage to this volume, and to
the aim in view.
[ Verbatim translations from the “Civilta Cattolica .”]
Series vii., vol. iv. (November 7, 1868) —
Page 264 —“ It is said that if the Catholic States had the right
to forbid other confessions (credenze), in order to guard its
internal peace and union, the unfortunate heteredox States had
likewise the right to forbid Catholicism. (Page 265) . . . But the
chief and principal reason to denounce liberty of conscience is not
the peace and unity of the nation, but the obligation to acknowledge
the only true religion, and thus to work for the obtaining of the
last goal of man. The peace and unity of a nation can be used as
a secondary consideration, but only on the supposition of the
possession of the only true religion ; for under the adverse sup-
position the word of Christ has validity (Latin in the original)
“ I did not come to bring peace, but the sword; ” because national
discord is a much more incomparably smaller evil than persistency
in religious error. But religious truth being possessed already,
this certainly forms a new argument (reason) for preventing the
propagation of false confessions, because from such disunion might
arise among the people. Moreover we say with Father Tar-
quinius— ‘ If it be said, that error not being declared as such,
could lay claim to the same rights as truth, it is just as wrong as
if it were said that idiots, not considering themselves as such, could
claim the same rights as those in their sound senses. . . . The
Church is sure by divine evidence that within it truth is found, in
false religions, error. As far as the heterodox are concerned, they
enjoy, if they are of good belief, the same privileges as the idiots,
to whom is not imputed whatever they may do in that state. (Page


266) —However it may be with the internal true belief of the
heterodox, same cannot be considered as a just external proof.. For
they must either prove (examine, investigate) earnestly and with a
good will, or not at all, the evidence for the truth of the Catholic
Church, and the falseness of their own sect. If they do not
examine them at all, or not in the right manner, their ignorance—
being an ignorantia crassa, or affectata—cannot be of the right
belief. But if they regard those evidences in the proper manner,
it can even less be supposed that they, being Gf the right belief,
could persist in error. For if they consider the origin of the
Catholic Church .... they must, beyond all doubt, acknowledge
themselves to be in error. Whatever may therefore be the inner
state of the heterodox, of which God alone is judge, inforo externo
no just judge (considerer) can acknowledge them as of the right
(good) belief.’ —(Tarquini Jus eccles. Rome, 1868, page 77.) . . .
(Page 268) —“ As well as the individual, the State has not only the
right, but the duty to accept the true religion, and once having
accepted same, to ensure to its subjects its quiet possession and
preservation by forbidding access to all false religions. But it will
be said— £ then will the heterodox States assume the right to
exclude Catholicism.’ We reply —‘then they do wrong and will
be punished by God ) for can we, because others assume a right
in an unjust manner, take this away from him to whom it is due,
and change, on account of the malice, or if it be better, on account
of the ignorance of another one, the order of truth and justice V ” (*)
Series vii., vol. v., page 139 of January 2, 1869 —
“ The aim of civil society or of the State is essentially temporal
happiness only. This, however, is subject in man, w T ho has an
immortal soul, to eternal happiness, to which the Church, and
nothing but the Church can lead, to which alone Christ has given
the power and the necessary means to reach same. With him, who
is at the same time Catholic and citizen, the duty to obey the
Church ranks higher than the duty to obey the State ; for we must
obey God more than man. Consequently, the power of the State is
subject to that of the Church.”
“ The subjection of the State to the Church is, however, not
only taught by reason itself; it is likewise the general teaching of
the Church. ... At last Pope Boniface VIII. teaches expressly in
his dogmatical bull Unam Sanctam, in comparing the two powers
to the two swords, that the temporal must be subject to the
spiritual: Oportet gladium esse sub gladio et temporalem auctori-
tatem spirituali subjici potestati. He derives this from the order
in which things emanate from, and return to God: Nam cum dicat
apostolus : Non est potestas nisi a Deo ; quse autem sunt, a Deo
( 1 ) It is as clear as the sun that the short meaning of this long tirade
(speech) is—the Protestant princes and countries must grant free religious
worship to the Catholics, but the Catholics dare not grant it to those; the
Protestants must be looked upon as heretics judicially likewise. If we
do no longer burn them, &c., this is simply not done because we no longer
have the power to do so. Should this become the case ....


ordinatse sunt, —non ordinatse essent, nisi gladius esset sub gladio et
tanquam inferior reduceretur per alium in suprema. And in calling
the adverse opinion, as if it gave two principles (causes), Mani-
cliaean, he defines and declares necessary for the salvation of every
human creature, to be subject to the Roman pope : Porro subesse
Romano Pontifici omni humanse creaturse declaramus, dicimus,
definimus et pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. We
can, therefore, only describe it as exorbitant, if Tagliaferri represents
as the view of only a party in the Church the teaching of the
subjection of the State to the Church ; it is the doctrine of the
whole teaching Church”—(page 148.)
“ The Church is always based upon evident right, and it can
never happen that she could ever demand anything unjust. What-
ever belongs evidently to the dominion of the State, as the purely
civic and political matters, is perfectly safe against the danger of
any encroachment on the part of the power of the Church. Cer-
tainly in those points which approach each other closely, the
houndary-line cannot he always clearly defined. But here likewise
ts any dispute between the Church and the State not permissible.
For the latter being subject to the former , the Church has, after
respectful and sensible discussions , always to decide such dispute
which may have arisen, andj it is just as little left to the State to
protest against such decision as it is in the power of a loiver court
to rise against that of a higher one. Let it not be said against
this, that judges could err. For, firstly, there would be, if this
objection was valid, no power to decide disputes in civic matters.
Secondly, the object of such a decision of the Church is either a
universal rule, or the application of such a one in a peculiar case.
As far as the first one is concerned, God can never permit that the
Church fall into any pernicious error, either with regard to her
teachings or her actions ; whereas the usurpation of the rights of
another would be a pernicious error. God has made the Church
the teacher of truth and righteousness ; whatever she has there-
fore defined as a general rule in matters obscure or doubtful, that
cannot be error. Therefore did the Syllabus under num. 23 con-
demn the sentence —‘ Roman popes and CEcumenical Councils have
overstepped the limits of their power, and usurped the rights of
princes.’ ( 2 ) With regard to the application of a universal rule in
a special case, perhaps a less just definition may be given by the
authority of the Church, but in such rare cases it is on the one
part open to refer to the Church herself, which is always ready to
render justice to the reasons of others, and on the other part the
injury suffered can never be of such a kind as to weigh heavier
than the evil of battling against our own mother, adding thereto
the vexation and confusion of the whole congregation of believers.
(") Here fs taught in dry words what I have adduced above ; that not
only teachings, but actions as well do decide. Aye, the pope is here directly
identified with the Church, actions of the former appearing as those of the
latter, whilst the syllabus is cited for them (in support).


Therefore must in such a case the ruling of Charlemagne he
followed which he gave to his subjects : in veneration to St. Peter
all should, even if the Holy See imposed a yoke hardly endurable,
hear such with pious submission. For it is perfectly in accordance
with the reasonings of nature, to suffer the loss of a lesser benefit,
to preserve intact the greater benefit” —(page 296.)
“ The doctrines of the Church with regard to its relation to the
State are contained in this sentence of St. Thomas, £ The temporal
power is subject to the spiritual as the body is to the soul; and,
therefore, it is no usurpation if a spiritual superior does interfere
(eingreift) in temporal matters.’ We must herein distinguish
three kinds of affairs. Firstly, the purely spiritual, as divine
worship, the spending of the sacraments, the preaching of the
Word of God; these stand naturally exclusively under the
authority of the Church. Secondly, the mixed affairs, as p.e.,
matrimony, burial, benevolent institutions ; these stand under both
authorities, but in such a manner that the authority of the Church
occupies the supreme rank, and intervenes directly, in order to
amend and annul what the civic laws may have decreed concerning
these matters in opposition to divine and canonical law. At last
the purely temporal affairs, as the militia, the taxes, the civic
courts. Though these are standing directly only under the power .of
the State, they may indirectly ratione pecoati, fall likewise
under the jurisdiction of the Church; then, namely, when the
laws relating thereto further immorality, or are in any way detri-
mental to the weal of the people. In these cases, must and can
such laws, emanated from the civic authority, be corrected by that
of the Church, and be set out of activity. For it appertains
to the authority of the Church to prevent public sins, and to
guard against all obstacles on the road to salvation, which it has to
prepare for all believers. In this manner did all the popes act
down to Pius IX., who has likewise repeatedly denounced and
annulled (several) laws passed by European parliaments” (page
280).”
Series vii., vol. v. of March 20, 1869, page 647
“ Temperate liberalism does not affirm, at least not expressly, the
supremacy of the State, but its complete independence from
the Church. It does not deny the supernatural order, but it
excludes from such the political order of society. Though less
horrid (orrido), it is not less absurd than absolute liberalism.
Whilst the latter is based on Atheism, the former is based on
Dualism. It does not deny the existence, but the unity of God.
This we derive from the dogmatical bull Unam Sanctam, in which
Boniface VIII. upbraids the adherents of the absolute autonomy of
the State with the belief of two principles in the world. There-
fore might these liberals be properly called ‘new Manichseans.’”
Page 648— 11 Every other society, whichever it may be, is subject to
the Church, and must receive its guidance and normal standard
from it.”
“ The State possesses only a relative independence. In things,


which in themselves have direct reference to temporal weal (as the
finances, army (page 640), commerce, peace among its subjects, re-
lations to other nations), the State acts motu proprio, and has the
highest authority. But in matters which directly and in them-
selves concern piety, righteousness, morals, the State must conform
itself to the norms established by the Church, and in those things
which, as has been said, belong to its dominion, it has the negative
duty to do nothing which might injure the state of morals of the
subjects, and the obedience they owe to God. If the contrary took
place, it would be plain that the Church had the right to correct
and annul what had thus been ordained in an unjust and immoral
manner, even in temporal matters.”( 3 )
Series vii., vol. vi. of April 3, 1869, p. 19—
“ Catholicism affirms the necessity of harmony between the
Church and State, but the necessity of that harmony, which
emanates from the subjection of the State to the Church.' 1 ' Suarez
de legibus I. v. c. 9. Thom, de reg. princ. I. Ic. 14, p. 21.
u Bonifaces VIII. teaches this more especially than any other pope
in the bull Unam Sanctam.”
He begins with teaching the unity of the Church (p. 22), of
that great and universal society in which all the believers in Christ
form but one body : Unam .... tenere. “ For,” he adds, “ this
one body must necessarily have but one head ; such was invisibly
Christ, visibly the pope. Igitur . . . oves meas. If such a head
is but one, everything must be subjected to it which belongs
to this body. The temporal sword, the symbol of the civic
authority, must, therefore, be subject to the spiritual sword,
the symbol of the authority of the Church. Oporte gladium....
antecellunt, p. 23. This authority is peremptory and no true
Catholic can withdraw from it.”
Remarks made by the Civilta : —“Some liberal journals have
blamed, that we did call this bull a dogmatical one. But it
evidently is such a one, may we consider its import, or the
authority from which it emanated '. The pope speaks in it to the
whole Church, and that in his capacity as teacher, and treats
important points of principle, to which the relation of the Church
to the State most certainly belongs. At last he terminates the
bull with an express definition : Subesse Romano . . . (the passage
given above under num. 13 in its translation). As far as the
authority of the bull is concerned, same has not only been estab-
lished (confirmed) by that of Boniface VIII., which alone would
suffice, but it has been confirmed by that of Leo X., who upholds
it in the bull in which he condemned and annulled the Pragmatical
Sanction. Moreover, it has the approbation of a general Council,
that of the 5 Lateran. Leo X. says— ‘ Cum de necessitate ... et
approbamus.’ Is then a bull not dogmatical which was given by
( 3 ) This means in dry words—if the Church finds that a State law does
not come up to its ideas, same is annulled by virtue of the subjection of
the State to the Church.


two popes, under approbation of a general Council, and which con-
tains such a solemn definition 1 Corpus juris can. i. 2, Sept. Deer.
1, 111. t. VII. de conciliis.” ( 4 )
. Eod. p. 27—“ The Church is entered by individuals and nations,
the one and the other of which are subject to the laws of Christ,
which are enacted and explained by the pastors of the Church,
especially by the representatives of St. Peter and Christ. No dis-
tinction must be made between the individual and the State ;
both are under the same obligation : . . . P. 28—The regent does
not exist for himself, but for the multitude governed. Therefore
must he arrange his actions in such a manner that they answer the
requirements and the well-being of his subjects, and do not hinder
the fulfilment of their duties, and of that aim which they have in
common with all human beings ; but on the contrary they must be
conducive to such. If thus the wants and the welfare of them,
and the voice of duty demand from them subjection and obedience
towards the Church, the regent cannot swerve from this in the
maintenance and administration of the social life of his subjects.
This, as is self-understood, is the case with every State, even if its
ruler be heterodox, and so much the more if same be Catholic.”
Series vii., vol. vi. of April 30, 1869, p. 291
“ The Church is a true reign, the reign of God on earth, whose
invisible monarch is Christ, whose visible monarch is the Roman
pope .... This reign of Christ is the fifth reign of Daniel 11. The
Roman reign says Thomas (to 2 Thess. ii.), has not been lost, but
has been changed from a temporal into a spiritual one. Rome con-
tinues to decree to nations, but by virtue of religion (p. 292), not
with the force of arms, but by the force of religion : quidquid non
possidet armis, religione tenet. It is the metropolis of the whole
globe, and as such the queen of nations. From this it follows that
■the whole world is the peculiar territory of this reign, same being
destined to unite all humankind within its pale Every
human being has the right (duty) to become a subject of this
reign. Christ Himself, however, has clothed the Church with
authority over all men. Therefore does St. Bernard write to the
pope Eugene : Orbe exeundum est ei, qui forte volet explorare,
qua) non ad tuam pertinent curam (de cons. iii. 1). This care ex-
tends itself, likewise, over the unbelieving nations, which, though
not actually, are potentially subjects of the Church. As far as the
believers are concerned, who by baptism have become members of
this spiritual Church, the Church holds over them an actual 'power
in its whole extension. Therefore did the congregation of the
holy officium (inquisition) justly condemn as heretical and schis-
(*) Most undoubtedly is the Civilta correct in stating that the bull Unam
Sanctam taught ex cathedra. Same is correct as well in saying that Boni-
face utters a definition; consequently, did Boniface VIII. in accordance
with the most correct papal teaching issue as infallible teacher an unalter-
able definition in accordance with the dogma of July 18, 1870. What he
■says, is dogma. These reasons of the Civilta apply to other constitutions
•as well, which are therefore likewise dogmatical ones.


matical the sentence in a decree of the year 1644, approved by
Pope Innocence X., that the popes in sending their constitutions to
places belonging to other temporal rulers did promulgate laws on
a field not belonging to them. In the same manner as every
Christian country belongs to its lay prince, in relation to its civic
administration (Ordnung), in the same manner and still more (a
pill forte ragione) does it belong to the prince of the Church with
regard to its spiritual administration. (P. 293) —The authority of
the Church is the authority of Christ Himself, who governs the
faithful by His representative. Every baptized being is, therefore,
much more a subject of the pope than of any temporal rider
ivhatsoever. This subjection is a spiritual one, but just on account
of that does it bind man more than any material subjection
whatever, the chief aim of man being the soul, and not the
body.”
Page 301—“ It cannot be said that the temporal power could, at
least indirectly, interfere in spiritual matters in so far as they dis-
agreed with the civil or political order of things (offendessero
l’ordine, &c.) . . . . For the Church is not subject to the
State, but the State to the Church; therefore has the State no
indirect power over the Church (p. 302), but the Church an indirect
power over the State relative to purely temporal matters. Thus it
can correct and annul the civic laws and the temporal judgments
of the courts (le sentenze del foro secolare) if they are adverse
to the spiritual weal; it can limit (steuern) the bad use of the
executive power and of arms (frenare), or command the use of
same (ovvero prescrivere l’uso) if the defence of the Christian
religion demand it. The tribunal of the Church is higher than the
civil; the higher tribunal can revise the affairs of the lower, but
the lower in no ways those of the higher. With regard to judg-
ments the rule established by Boniface VIII. in the dogmatical bull
Unam Sanctam must be held valid ; Si deviat terrena pot. &c.”
Series vi., vol. vi. of May 15, 1869. Recension of a writing—l
cattolici liberali—
Page 450—“ Anonymus adduces a number of moralists and
theologists, especially Jesuits, who say there could be important
circumstances that the regent was obliged to grant suffrage to the
heterodox cultus. These, however, say only that the suffrage of
the cultus was allowable, when necessary, to prevent in that manner
greater evils. Anonymus, however, continues : There is a great
difference between ancient and modern society. In the Middle
Ages, and in the first two centuries of the modern times, there
existed, especially in Europe, large reigns and flourishing republics
which had only Catholic subjects and Catholic rulers; the heretics,
raw and undisciplined, threatened nearly everywhere public safety,
therefore were the Catholic authorities then obliged to protect the
Catholic soil against heretical weeds. Now it is different; the
nations, Catholic and non-Catholic, have approached each other;
with Catholics the old belief has been considerably weakened ;in
place of absolute monarchies we have constitutional ones and


republics ; the confessors of religious errors enter no longer into
conspiracies, nor do they draw the sword to subjugate Catholics ;
the liberty of cultus has sooner or later been granted in all modern
societies; under such circumstances it must be obvious to everyone
that it is now the duty of every Catholic regent not only to suffer,
but to approve of religious liberty.” Thus is the weakening of
belief in Catholics, the milder intentions of the heterodox, and in
a general way the present political state, substituted for the
peremptory necessity to prevent greater evils, which the moralists
adduced as reason for the suffrage of the cultus. What sense is
then possessed by the words of the present popes, who declared
religious liberty and that of the cultus as madness (delirio), and
the perdition of nations ? What meaning has the condemnation of
same, which Pius IX. pronounced, when President Comonfort in-
troduced them in Mexico, where all those circumstances, which
Anonymus adduces, concurred ; where the nation had no longer
an absolute monarch ; where the old belief had grown cold; and
where there were no dissenters to disturb from religious motives
the public order 1 Do, then, Gregory XVI. and Pius IX. speak to
nations of the Middle Ages, or did they intend to hold historical
lectures to those living about what was fit for the former or not
1 (p. 451). Anonymus says the distinction (separation)
of the Church from the State is a general fact which is based on
three causes—on the liberty of the cultus, the constitutional
system, and in the ruling spirit, so little Catholic.” Then he asks :
“ Have the Catholics the power to change these circumstances T
We reply : 1. If the Catholics cannot do away with them where
they already exist, they nevertheless can prevent their access where
this is not the case; 2. If they cannot change them they can, at
least, prove their reticence (reita), and their pernicious social and
moral consequences. Thus, at least, if the fact cannot be avoided
the right is gainsaid (p. 452), and the evil avoided that the prin-
ciples of truth and order are perverted . . . . (p. 453).
Anonymus says if the Church were divided from the State there
would not be so many among its children who became hypocrites
in order to render themselves agreeable to the State by pretending
to be religious. But the Church would then have a great many
who caused offence, godlessness would make proselytes and seduce
the simple-minded. Certainly hypocrisy is a great evil, but not a
greater one than causing offence. The hypocrite does only injure
himself, the one who causes offence others as well as himself. He
is therefore more repulsive to the general welfare, and whoever
keeps this in mind will regret less that there be hypocrites than
those who give offence . . . . (p. 454). Pius IX. has con-
demned the sentence : “the Church must separate itself from the
State, and the State from the Church.” Anonymus remarks here :
1. The pope did not intend to denounce all and every separation of
the Church from the State, but only that complete total one by
which the State would be deprived of all religion which was not
desired by the liberal Catholics ; 2. The pope spoke of separation ;
G


the liberal Catholics, however, wanted distinction (distinzione) ;
3. Those who nurtured the error denounced by the pope spoke of
a duty of the regents, the liberal Catholics of an established fact.
But, 1. Who gives him the right to add the adjective “ total” 1 The
pope does not condemn the sentence Ecclesia a statu statusque ab
ecclesia totaliter separandus est, but the sentence Ecclesia a statu
statusque ab ecclesia separandus est; 2. That separation which he
defends in the name of the liberal Catholics is exactly the total
separation. To prove which two of his sentences suffice : “ Who
does not see that it is not only the duty of Catholic regents to
suffer, but to approve of the liberty of the cultus V’ and “ The
liberty of cultus has as consequence that the governments do not
wish to interfere with the different religions, and leave such to
themselves.” From these it emanates that the separation which,
according to his judgment, springs from the liberty of the cultus,
is exactly the very one which he calls a total one, for not to in-
terfere with the different religions, and to acknowledge none, means
one and the same thing. Moreover, it proves that he speaks of a
duty, he saying that it was now the duty of the Catholic regents
to suffer the liberty of the cultus, from which follows in accordance
with his own words the said separation.
How justly I have understood the ruling view—that is, the
Roman, infallibilistic, jesuitical —is proved by the following passage
of the Dublin Review, Jan. 1871, pag. 223:—“Far from it, that
the popes of the Middle Ages exercised an undue influence over
society, politics, and kings ; they were only enabled to execute a
comparatively small part of the authority given them by God. Let
us study carefully that grand teaching which in the bull Unam
Sanctam (see page 20 foil.) has been brought forward in an in-
fallible manner, and it will be seen that God did give to the Holy
See a far greater power than even Innocence 111. and Boniface
VIII. were capable of rendering valid. In the contest between
them and the world victories changed constantly with defeat, and
even their greatest victories were but imperfect ones. In one point
the popes of the 19th century are more powerful than those of the
13th; since the first If) sitting of the Vatican Council it is an
article of faith that the pope possesses a direct episcopal power over
all Christians in the whole world, to recognize which power the
local Churches of the 13th century would certainly have been much
less inclined than those of the 19th.”
Dr. Ward, the publisher of the Dublin Review, is the special
friend of Archbishop Manning, who is counted as one of the firmest
infallibilists. I am curious to see what England, what the pastorals
■will say to a confession which gives the lie direct to all their
assurances.,
That my exposition with regard to the ex cathedra theory (in §5)
should receive the most brilliant justification, does Herr von
Schiizler, of the correct, one of the most correct, give as the
teaching of Manning and his own in the most correct German


paper, 11 The Catholic ,” January, 1871, page 51 :—“ The pope is
not only then infallible when he announces to the Church anything
that is to be believed, not only then when he defines a dogma or
condemns an error as heretical. A definitio doctrinse or infallible
teaching is according to the verbal usage of the Church every dog-
matical judgment, or judgment of belief, every expression addressed
by the highest teaching power of the Church to the whole Church,
be it a traditional truth, or one in any way connected with tradition;
in short, every rule of the supreme teaching power concerning sal-
vation, or the general welfare of the church.”
It is self-evident that there is hardly anything which could not
be made to apply to the above. I shall not be astonished in the
least if a book be published soon, in which may be taught that all
decisions of the Roman administrations were also infallible. Aye,
I should not be astonished even, if they would teach that infalli-
bility could be delegated likewise in legal matters.
§ VIII.—SHORT REFLECTION SHOWING THE RELATIVE
POSITION OF THE JESUITS TO THE POPE.
Such then is the State law of the Civilta, and with her of all
those who, following the spirit of the Jesuits, of the Collegium
germanicum, behold in the whole development (progress) since the
sixteenth century an abomination, they looking on the town beyond
the mountains as their home proper, and on their native home only
as being of use to send to Rome St. Peter’s pence, dispensation
taxes, Pallium moneys, cammeralia taxes, and servitia minuta by
the medium of its newly-installed bishops, but never once giving
it a thought that its sons might be justified in wishing that attention
should be bestowed on its wants, that the welfare of the Church
should not consist in the cut and dried forms of Rome being trans-
ferred to it in all things \ that not in the absolute uniformity of
mind alone happiness of soul should be found, but that his Church
might at last revive and substitute for its ruling by the letter, by
formulas and pretending good deeds, placing phariseeism in the
shade in many things and instances, such institutions as might
be conducive in advancing real intensity of belief, and grant to
the people a participation in the administration of the Church
instead of leaving same to a Bureaucracy deadening heart and
mind, and in this manner to bring about a more active interest for
the life of the Church, this even outside the boundaries of those
manufactories of addresses called “ General Catholic Assemblies,”
■and of other places, such as “ Catholic Clubs” (casinos), and by
other means than beer, wine, music, dancing, speeches of candidates
g 2


for political elections, and such like. But this does not suit a
system, whose theory is expressed according to the proper words of
its most knowing adherents and most zealous defenders, in the
formulas, as published under the eyes of the pope, and with papal
approbation : —unconditional subjection of the State to the Church;
total subjugation of every human creature under the pope ; duty
of the State to enact any norm of the Church ; right of the Church
to annul all laws and judgments of the State which are repulsive
to the maxims of the Church, that is, of the pope; duty of the
State to grant to Catholics everywhere free liberty of religion, and
to let the pope rule as the monarch of the globe; duty of the
Catholic States to prevent the non-Catholic cultus with all means
in their power ; renunciation of all religious liberty, and that of
conscience; blind obedience towards superiors; full liberty to do
everything such may permit or command to be done.
The pope being now declared infallible, the words which are
found already in the original statutes of the Society of Jesus (§6
of the bull of Paul 111. Regimini militantis of September 27, 1540,
in Bullar, cit. edit. I. p. 744), as follows, receive a totally different
signification : “ And though we are taught by the Gospel, and per-
ceive and firmly acknowledge in orthodox belief, that all those
who believe in Christ are under the pope as the head and represen-
tative of Jesus Christ, we have nevertheless believed that it would
lead to the still greater humiliation of our society, and to the com-
plete abnegation of every one, and the overpowering of our will,
that we, each individually, should be bound by a special vow besides
that general one, to the effect that whatever the present, or any pope
for the time being may command , belonging to the benefit of the soul
and the propagation of faith, and to which provinces soever he
may send us, we are held to execute such command without any
subterfuge or excuse, may he send us to the Turks or to any other
unbelievers—even to India, or to whatever heretics , or to whatever
believers. Therefore, let those who wish to come among us, and
before they place their shoulders under this burden, consider much
and at length whether they possess so many spiritual blessings
(tantum spiritualis in bonis habeant), that they may finish this tower
in accordance with the divine plan, that is, whether the Holy Ghost,
who impels them, will promise them such grace, that they may
expect to bear the weight of their calling by His assistance, and
after they have been enlisted into this army of Jesus Christ by the
inspiration of God (Domino inspirante), they must be ready, day
and night, with girt loins, to settle such important debt (debiti).”
By § 7 they must leave all care for carrying out this solely to the
pope and their general (Societatis Prseposito), which latter must
vow “to do nothing with regard to his own mission in the one or
other direction, except with the advice of the society and the pope.”
§ 9—“ The inferiors, however, are in duty bound to obey their
superior in all matters concerning the institution of the society, as
also to recognize in him as it were Christ present (et in illo Chris-
tum veluti prsesentem agnoscant), and as far as is proper to venerate


him (as such) All this is exactly repeated in
the bull of confirmation Exposcit by Julius 111. in the year 1550
(Bullar i., p. 795), and confirmed by later popes. Now we have full
clearness with regard to the position of the Society of Jesus. Abso-
lute obedience towards the General, in whom, as it were, the living
■Christ (Christus prsesens) has to be recognized and venerated,
absolute obedience of each single one, and of the General direct,
towards every command of the pope, because (“ protect us anima-
rum ”) advantage of the soul, and (“propagatio fidei”) propa-
gation of the faith appear in all the ancient and modern papal
constitutions, &c., both direct and indirect as motive and object;
all this makes of an army (militia) of thousands and thousands
of Jesuits, a religious, church, social, and political power to
which no other army can compare itself in tactics and strategy.
Is, however, the superior’s superior at the same time the infallible
representative of Christ, there lies in every command of same,
which the individuals receive through their superior, in whom they
have already, as it were, to recognize and venerate Christ as present,
a direct divine command. Who, after having examined himself as
enjoined above, and found himself chosen for the fulfilling of such
trust, to Him there can be nothing higher for the greater
humiliation of his order, than to do his best, that according to the
teaching of Boniface VIII. every human being should be subject
to the Roman pope, whose dearest defenders the fathers of the
Society of Jesus very naturally must be.
And now we can likewise understand the name “ Society of
Jesusf and the working of the Society of Jesus, which offers
the proof for the conception ; that the same was the Church. The
name most certainly belongs to the Church ; in her does Jesus
Christ continue to exist. But if a peculiar society is confirmed by
the popes, whose members have to recognise in their superior as it
were Christ present, and to venerate him as far as is fit as such,
then may such society, confirmed by the representatives of Christ,
call itself indeed the Society of Jesus per eminentiam. Thus we
■can likewise understand that, ultimately, not to be for the Jesuits,
is identical to the Jesuit with being against the Church, the pope,
aye, against Christ himself.
( 1 ) The words given above are somewhat different from those of Cap. 11. of
the regula S. Benedicti, which say —“Abbas . . . Christi enim agere
vices in monasterio ereditur,” because to them is added,—“ Ideoque Abbas
nihil extra praeceptum Domini, (quod absit), debet aut docere, aut con-
stituere, aut jubere.” “With the Jesuits the comparison relates to the
•person, with the ancient orders it means only obedience to the commandments,
which are the fundamental ones ; in a similar manner as the commandments
of parents are represented as those of God to children, without meaning
thereby that the children should as it were acknowledge and venerate in
their father God present.
Pope Sixtus Y. commanded, that the name Societas Jesu (Society of
Jesus) should be altered, but died exactly whilst the reforms of this order
were going on, a few weeks afterwards. This is related with several
other interesting matters relating thereto, p.e., the sermon of a Jesuit of
Madrid against the pope, by von Hiibner, Geschichte Pabst, Sixtus V., Leip-
zig 1.770, ii vol. 82. If.


§ IX.—1. FALSENESS OF THE TEACHINGS OF THE
POPES WITH REGARD TO THE RELATION OF THE
CHURCH TO THE STATE FROM GREGORY VII., AND
(2) THE IMPERIAL INFALLIBILITY.
With the 18th of July, 1870, a system has come to an apparently
formal completion, which has, in constantly executing some of the-
ideas, sprung up from the time of Gregory VII., and above all
things by the most perfect absolutism in the workings of the
so-called Societas Jesu (Order of Jesuits), made of the Catholic
Church a new thing altogether, as well upon the field of belief as
upon that of judicature. The proof of this shall be adduced, and
in different other writings it will be shown in what systematical
manner the position of the primate and the episcopate in the
Church has been totally changed ; and how, likewise, in other
departments, measures have come into operation which are in the
most direct opposition to the Spirit and the rights of the old
Church. Such proof, however, in order to satisfy science, must
show the hundreds of quotations which have been collected, in their
original languages. Such a work not permitting the slightest haste
months will pass before even a part of them will appear in public.
In the meantime the dogma manufactured (gemachte) July 18,
1870 is likely, inferring from experience, owing to the connivance
of the bishops, caused by manifold reasons, to be brought into
general actual recognition. In order to offer to every educated
person at once a firm basis, which may give him full peace of
conscience in refusing the new dogma as false, I give the following
exposition. Same proves with the proper words of the holy Pope
Leo the Great (governed from Atigust, 440, to November 10, 461),
w r ho belongs to the greatest and holiest of all popes, and surpassed
in knowledge and intellectual greatness the most of them down to
the present day, as—to use a favourite papal comparison—the sun
surpasses the moon, that the relation of the temporal to the
spiritual power as pronounced from Gregory VII. down to the
Syllabus of Pius IX., and shown by me from the sources in § 4,
does not harmonize with the teaching of Pope Leo. That it does
neither harmonize with the teachings of the fathers and other
ancient popes, both before and after Leo, and that the later papal
theory with regard to this point was historically dependent on
their needing the services of the emperors or not, that it depended
on the political situation of the pope for the time being, that
I shall prove hereunder only in a general way, but later, at length,
and by the sources. For every thinking person the falseness
emanates therefrom, that the teaching of the holy Leo stand's in
direct contradiction to that taught since Gregory VII. In this
manner the new dogma of the papal infallibility is proved as void,
because it is established that the “ infallibles” contradict each other
in a point, one of the most important for human society..


But the letters of Pope Leo, and above all others the beyond all
doubt purely dogmatical one addressed to the emperor Leo, August
17, 458, result in something quite different, which is the cause of
my giving them already here. For they invert in the most direct
manner the new dogma, in so far as they prove as clearly as the
sun, that in all religious questions according to the teaching of the
pope Leo the Great , it is the emperor who is infallible. ( x )
I. For this is the writing of the holy Pope Leo the Great
of March 21, 358 (Mansi vi. 438, sqq. Ballerinii S. Leonis M.
Bom. pont. opera., Venet. 1753 fol. i. 1339. Jaffe Reg. num.
31.5)
“ Leo the bishop to the Emperor Leo.—With great joy exults
my spirit in the Lord, and much cause have I for congratulation,
for I perceive that the most distinguished belief of your Highness
( 2 ) is throughout augmented by the gift of divine grace, and
because I experience in you, by such augmentation of diligence, the
purity of the spiritual (clerical) mind. ( :! ) For in the addresses of
Y. H. it is shown beyond a doubt what is effected through you fur
the benefit of the ivhole Church ( 4 ), and how much the prayers of
all the faithful should beg that, for the glory of all, your reign
should extend itself, you constantly dividing your cares of the
temporal affairs with the serving of Divine providence ( 5 ) (religiose
providently famulatum) in its divine and eternal injunctions; so
that, namely, the catholic belief , which alone makes alive the
human race, alone sanctifies, should remain in one confession; and
the differences of opinion which emanate from the variety of
human opinions, might break before the firmness of that rock on
which the town of God is to be built, most glorious emperor.
These gifts of God, however, will only then be granted to us, if we
are not found ungrateful for what has been given already, and do
( 1) In the following notes the consequences of the words of the text
shall be adduced in cases where same might be overlooked, the passages in
point shall be given in the original, and applicable remarks be added.
( 2 ) The appellatives of title entirely strange to us, such as—Vestra dem-
entia (your clemency), Yestra Pietas (your piety), &c. I shall always ren-
der with Y. H. (your highness) which plainly corresponds and is conver-
sant to us, only letters to the emperor or empress being given.
( 3 ) The priestly mind and priestly teaching, &c., of the emperor and
empress, which is expressed in many of the following letters, stands in
queer contrast with the conceitfulness of Gregory VII. &e., of which samples
are given above in pages 19, 21, 26.
(G It could not be said more plainly that the emperor was a direct
organ of the Holy Ghost. There is not a single passage which expresses
more plainly the operation of the Holy Ghost in a pope. Original—
quid per vos in totius Ecclesise salutem spiritus sanctus operetur. Even
Pius IX. did jot dare to say this in his July constitution, but was contented
w 7 ith the divine assistance promised the popes in St. Peter. As is well
known, the Lord did say in a general manner to his apostles : “I or whei e
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them.” —(Matthew xviii. 20).
( 5 ) In this and many subsequent passages the emperor is declared to be
the immediate, direct, and individual organ selected by God. The unity of
belief appears as his work.


not demand the reverse, as if what we possessed already counted
nothing. For to seek what has been disclosed, to treat anew what
has been completed, to destroy what has been decided, what else is
it than not thanking for that which has been received, and to
stretch forth for the fruits of the forbidden tree the godless desire
of deadening lust 1 Therefore, because you have been pleased with
solicitous care (cura solicitiore) to guard the peace of the whole
Church, and the custody (custodia) of the Catholic belief j), you
perceive evidently what is risked by the great prosecutions of the
heretics, as between the adherents of Eutyches or Dioscoros and
him, who was sent by the Apostolic See, when a zealous con-
sultation was carried on, as if nothing had been defined before ( 7 );
as if that which was accepted (probant) by the priests of the
whole Catholic world in the holy synod of Chalcedon, and about
which they rejoice as about something affirmed ( 8 ) (gaudentque
firmatum), should be held as of no power, even to the insulting of
the Council of Nicaea. For that which is affirmed (gefetstigt)
about the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ at the Council
of Chalcedon in our time, that has been defined likewise by
that mystical number of fathers at Niccea ( 9 ), that the creed of the
Catholics should not believe—either that the Son born of God was
in any one way unlike to the Father, or that same, in becoming the
Son of Man, had not possessed the real value of our flesh and soul
(animse).”
We must, therefore, abhor, and constantly avoid, what the
( 6 ) These and other subsequent passages prove that Leo ascribes to the
emperors a principal inherent right to do everything they considered neces-
sary for belief, that this was a grace of the emperor, and that the pope did not
even dare contradict the emperor directly, this even when the thing desired
by the emperor was not consistent. The latter namely inclined to another
investigation of the question of incarnation in spite of the Council.
( 7 ) It is very characteristic that Leo spreaks regularly (in his letter to the
Concil. Chalced. Relig. Clement, stands episcopate) of Sacerdotale concilium,
Sacerdotum consensus, in short of priests, wherever he speaks of a general
Council, &c. And nevertheless were the resolutions formed by such, with
the exception of the Roman legates—who often were no bishops—formed
only by bishops, as is shown by their signatures. The reason is, that the
Church was more inwardly inclined, had not as yet been absorbed in juris-
diction, so that the office of priest stepped in the foreground even with the
bishop, and not the judicial one of his higher power. For, apart of the
faculty to ordain, it is the jurisdiction above all things by which the bishop
is distinguished.
( s ) Not a word is said here by the pope : a pope had confirmed, &c., but
the priests of the whole world. As is known, the popes never published the
dogmata and canones of the General Synods in their own name previous to
Innocence III.; but such was done by the Synod, as was also the case at
Constance, Basle, and Trent.
( 9 ) This passage is still more characteristic. That therg be no doubt at
all that the grand total of the bishops, and only those, inclusive of the pope,
and not the pope with so and so many, had to decide in the Council, he
says directly—The number has resolved (defined), that is, the 318 bishops.
Original —hoc etiam apud Nicseam mysticus ille Patrum numerus definivit.
Thus the word definire now so grandly intonated (above page 60) is used by
the great pope Leo —not of the pope, but—of the fathers of the Council, of
all the 318, as is well shown by their signatures.


■cunning of the heretic tries to obtain ; that whatever has been
piously and fully defined, be taken up again for any discussion
soever, that it may not appear that we were, according to the
pleasure of the damned, doubtful about that of which it is evident
that it agrees throughout with the authority of the prophets, the
gospel, and the apostles ( 10 ). Therefore, if there be those who
differ from that which has been defined (ordained) by heaven
itself ( u ) (coelitus constituta), may they be left to their opinions ;
and may they leave the Church with the perversity chosen by
them. For in no manner must it take place that those who dare
contradict the divine secrets (sacraments), are bound to us in any
union whatever. They may glory in the vanity of their speeches
and in the cunning of their argumentation, which is the enemy of
belief, and vaingloriously say: it pleases us to obey the command-
ments of the apostle, who says :— ‘ Behold, that none confuse you
with philosophy and vain temptation of man.’ For according to
the same apostle, do I make myself, if I build up again what
I have destroyed into a prevaricator (prevaricator), and become
subject to those conditions of wrath winch not only the authority
the late prince Mar dan, of blessed memory , did confirm , but like-
wise I with my assent. ( 12 ) For as you have sacredly and verily
said ‘perfection receives no increase, and fulness no addition.’
Therefore because Ido know( 13 ), that thou venerable prince, pene-
(i°) There is not a single passage in the sources of the Church up to the
fifteenth century which said ‘ ‘ that which has been decided by a Council is
valid, because the Council is infallible.” As here and in all other cases the
pope —and the same is done in all old sources— places its weight (importance)
only and alone thereupon that the definition agreed with the Bible, the fathers.
Who knows the words of Paul, Ephes ii. 20, and the words of the Saviour
in the different passages, and considers same, to him the proof of validity
is contained alone in this accord with the prophets, the Gospel, the apostles,
described so beautifully by Leo, and, both before and after him, by others
hundreds of times. Such proof need then not fear the light, but demands
a study, an investigation of that which w r as enacted by the old Councils
without exception from the very Council of the apostles downwards. Of a
mechanical infallibility of the person, as such could be called, the ancient
times know nothing ; just as little is known of it by the literature up to
the sixteenth century. It is the right and immediate product of the
disciples of the—as it were living Christ —visible Jesuit General, who as
such must be infallible. When the constitution of the Order of Jesuits
was transferred to the Church, the pope could not have less than his
most faithful son— infallibility.
C 1) This was not defined by the pope, hut by the number of the fathers.
Ergo, there are by this expression besides the Roman bishop still others who
can define something infallibly.
( 12 ) Let it be well understood, the dogma formulated at Chalcedon is
here the subject dealt with. Of it he says, the emperor had confirmed it;
of himself, however, he speaks only as approving (agreeing, consenting),
Original : quas non solum auctoritas beatae memorise Principis Marciani, sed
etiam ego mea consensione firmavi. He thus places the emperor above him-
self, and adduces his authority as reason for confirming.
( 13 ) Original : Unde cum sciam te, venerabilis Princeps, sincerissimo
veritatis lumine imbutum, in nulla fidei parte nutare, sed sancto perfectoque
judicio a pravis recta discernere, et a refutandis amplectenda dividere :
obsecro, &c. There is no passage before the 18th July which acknowledges


trated (full of) with the most undefiled light of truth, dost not falter
in any part of the belief, but dost with holy and perfect judg-
ment distinguish the right from the false, and separate what
must be refused from that which must be accepted, I be-
seech (beschwore) thee not to believe that my lowliness might be
accused of distrust, because this caution of mine does not only
care for the whole Church, but serves likewise for thy glory, that
in the time of thy reign the wickedness of the heretics increase
not, and the safety of the Catholics appear as destroyed.
Though I place thus great and unconditional confidence upon
the heart of your piety, and clearly perceive that you are suffi-
ciently INSTRUCTED BY THE HOLY GHOST WHO DWELLS IN YOU, AND
THAT NO ERROR WHATEVER COULD EVER PLAY WITH YOUR BELIEF
(cheat you) ( 14 ), I shall nevertheless strive to obey your command
therein, that I shall send some of my brethren, who will represent
me (the image of my presence) with you, to demonstrate what
are the rules of the Apostolic belief, though, as I have said , same
are xoell known to you: who shall expose to all, and prove that
those are not at all to be reckoned as Catholics who do not follow
the definitions of the Holy Synod of Nicaea, or the rules of the
Holy Council of Chalcedon : because it is apparent that the holy
decrees of both emanate from the source of the Gospel and the
Apostles ( 16 ) and that whatever does not come from the spring
(watering) of Christ is from the poisoned cup. Thy piety may
therefore know, venerable Emperor, that those whom I pro-
mise (vow) to send, to not leave the Apostolic See to dispute
with the enemies, nor to battle against any of them : because we
do not dare to enter into any discussion (treating) about those
matters which have been defined at Nicaea and Chalcedon, as it
pleased God, as if that could be doubtful and of no force which
had been strengthened by such a great authority through the Holy
Ghost, ( 16 )
11. To the Emperor Theodosius he writes (epist. 54., Mansi vi.
45) : “I pray to God that he may inspire ( 17 ) your heart with
that which is truth, and not permit that you might be led astray
in any one thing by the cunning of human jealousies.”
111. To the Empress Pulcheria he writes (ep. 80. Mansi vi. 65) :
with equal evidence the papal infallibility, as is done here with regard to
the imperial. Who does not falter in any part of belief ; who does possess
a holy perfect judgment, must be infallible.
( u ) This passage declares in such dry words the impossibility of erring in
the person of the emperor, that, if there were the least doubts as to its.
genuineness—which, however, is established most clearly, nor has same ever
been disputed—we could hardly trust the evidence of our eyes. Original :
Quamvis ergo multum per omnia de pietatis vestrae corde confidam, et per
inhabitantem in vobis Spiritum Dei satis vos instructos esse perspiciam, nec
fidei vestrae ullus possit error illudere ; pneceptioni tamen vestrte in eo
adnitar obedire, &c.
(15) jr r esh confirmation of what was stated in note 10.
( 16 ) Compare notes 8 and 9.
( 17 ) Very interesting, but proves that dogmatical capital cannot be de-
rived from every word.


« Therefore, because Divine Providence never does leave her Church
and kindles in the same works, and at the same time
by the Spirit of God, as well as by the solicitude of Y. H., as
likewise by the care of my heart, that we both may wish the same
thin o, with regard to the remedies to be taken (the letter treats of
the heresy of Eutyches) ( 18 ), I therefore pray for that which has
been begged for by me before, the more intensely with the greater
confidence, after having received the protection of the (thy) most-
venerable encouragement. I hope that the benevolence of God
may, under the co-assistance of Y. H. ( 19 ), be able to do away
with the malady of that pestilential error : that, whatever whole-
some may be done by his inspiration and help, would be done
to the lauding (approbation) of your belief: because human affairs
can never be safe otherwise, than in being based as well on the king y
as on the spiritual authority, WHICH is denoted by the confession
of God ” ( 20 )
IV. To the same empress he writes, July 16, 450 (ep. 70 Mansi
vi. 86, Buller. i. 1009, Jaffe num. 231) “ I rejoice in the belief
of Y. H., that you worthily make use of religious zeal, that the
peace of the Church may be renewed, which seemed to be shaken
(destroyed) by the disagreeings of some. For this is owing spe-
cially to your glory, that after the removing of all offences, which
the enemy had called forth against Catholic belief, that there is
one and the same profession of truth throughout the whole ivorld.
(He then explains his belief) .... Should any disagree there-
from, then may, with the assent of Y. 11., a general Council of the
priests iff be called within Italy, ( 22 ) by which after removing the
art to dissimulate, it may at last become apparent what by higher
treating ( 23 ) had either to be held together or remedied (healed.)
( 18 ) Highly interesting. The Spirit of God works in dogmatical matters
in the same manner in the woman as in the pope; both are co-ordinate ; the
latter however, is the submissively exhorting one, the empress the more
elevated enlightened (inspired) one. Original: eodemque opere et tempore
Spiritus Dei et clementise vestrse sollicitudmem, et curam nostn cordis
accendit, ut de remediis procurandis eadem utrique cuperemus.
(i 0) Hence, the pope requires the co-operation of the woman. Gan it he
believed that Pone Leo did derive his personal infallibility from the
well-known sentence “If thou art converted once, then confirm thy
brethren?” , • •
(•io) Original : Quonium res humanse aliter tutae esse non possunt, nisi
nii£e ad divinam confessionem pertinent, et regia, et sacerdotalis deiendat
auctoritas. It is not possible to describe more pointedly the inmate (eigene)
right of the State, the emptiness (invalidity, nonentity) of the theory de-
veloped since Gregory VII. But this means perhaps only protection m the
sense of the suppliant servant? Against this the very reading of the
letters is proof. The question concerns powerfully positive actions ot the
emperor.
( 21 ) Compare note 7. , ,
\ is this likewise only protection, &c. Hence, not the synod and pope
no, a woman —did save the unity of the Christian religion; a womara must con-
sent to the assembly of larger synods. And all this is said and begged tor
by the “ representative of Christ,” and that by a person as St. Lem
(23) This is very important. The celebrated dogmatical letter of Pope eo
addressed to Flavian, which was accepted as correct by the Council ot Chat


Y. To the Emperor Marcian he writes (ep. 78, Mansi vi. 103):
“ The great thanks we bring you do not perceive them from our
words but from your (those) benefits which you have rendered the
Church, because you were never in doubt that He will requite you
for everything, for whose religion you care so piously, and who has
chosen you , as the thing itself proves, O most glorious, that the
Catholic belief should be protected from the prosecutions of its
enemies (nota bene ! of the heretics).”( 24 )
VI. And again he says in the letter of April 13, 451, to the
cedon, after a close and careful examination and comparison with the Bible,
the Niceanum and the fathers, done in spite of the protest of the papal
legates, was written June 13, 449. (Mansi ep. 28, tom. v. 1365, Bailer i.
801. Jaffe num. 201). It did not conciliate, and then the pope recognized
himself that a higher investigation by a Council was necessary. This fact
has often been adduced in the writings against the infallibility of the
Vatican Council. Vo pope can acknowledge more plainly the superiority of
a Council over his decisions in matters of doctrines. Original: A qua si
forsitan ab aliquibus discrepatur, universale concilium sacerdotum haberi
intra Italiam, Clementia vestra annitente, jubeatur; quo remota arte fal-
lendi, tandem pateat, quid altiore tractatu aut ccerceri debeat aut sanari.
( 2i ) Compare notes 5 and 6. The very same view with iv. is held in the
letter of Leo to the Council of Ephesus Religiosa clementissimi principis
tides of June 13, 449 (Mansi v. 1409, Bailer i. 863 ; Jaffe num. 206 ; Coll,
hispana ii. p. 59), same saying “The religious belief of the mildest prince
knowing that it would be most conducive to his glory (fame) if no germ of
heresy took root, showed to the divine institutions such respect that he
associated for the (better) effectiveness of the holy rules, the authority of
the Holy See, as if he demanded of St. Peter himself that it should be
declared, what had been praised in his confession, when in reply to the
speech of the Lord— ‘ Whom do men say that I the Son of God am ? ’ all
the disciples expressed themselves differently as to the several opinions held.
But when he asked them what they believed themselves, the prince of the
apostles briefly expressed the fulness of belief—* Thou art Christ, the Son
of the living God.’ That means Thou, who art truly the Son of Man, art at
the same time the true Son of the living God ; Thou I say, real in the deity,
real in the flesh, and notwithstanding the peculiarities of both natures, both
in one. If this was believed by Eutyches in its entirety and with fervency,
he would never swerve from the path of this belief, on account of which
the Lord replies—‘Blessed art thou, Simonson of Jonas,’ &c. (foil. Matt,
xvi. 17, 18). But he is too far from the union of this edifice who does not
comprehend this confession, and who contradicts Christ's Gospel in showing
that he never had the desire (study) to seek truth, and in vain does he have
the venerable appearance, his white hairs not being adorned with the
authority of his heart. But because the salvation (healing) of such is not
to be neglected, and the Christian emperor wanted piously and religiously
that an Episcopal Council he held in order to overcome (do away) the whole
error by a fuller judgment, I sent . . . Julian Ilenatus and . . . Hilarius,
and with them Dulcitius . . . who are to be present at the Holy Assembly
n place of myself, ” &c. Be it well noted! The celebrated dogmatical letter
to Flavian is of the same date. Instead of simply referring to same—instead,
as is done now-a-days, of adducing the papal infallibility from those biblical
words he says: ‘ ‘ Though the Bible is clear that Christ is truly man and
truly God, but because the emperor wishes (wants) for a Council, that a
more competent (fuller) judgment than mine be given, therefore do I send
my legates. The pope does here with dry words place his judgment under
that of the Council. This one instance suffices against July 18, 1870. It is
only given here as a pattern. Similar ones I shall adduce in time by the
dozens.


same Empress Pulcheria (Ballerini Op. Leonis I. 1035, Mansi vi*
105, JaffS num. 297) : “ That which we have always inferred from
the holy mind (sense) of Y. H. that we have from experience recog-
nized most perfectly, that the Christian belief, though it be
attacked by various prosecutions of the godless, cannot be destroyed
you being present and provided (equipped) by Goa for its
For God does not forget (leave) the secret (sacramentum) of His
benevolence, nor the merit of your working by which you long ago
did drive the cunning enemy of his religion from the very bowels
of the Church itself, because the godlessness of Nestorius could
not keep his heresy, because he did not confuse the servant and
disciple of truth , as much venom as was instilled in the simple
minded by the coloured lies of the talkative man. From this fight
of virtue it is proved that by your care did not remain hidden what
Satan had woven, and that they had chosen their peculiar part of
redoubled godlessness, but were cast down by the one virtue of
Catholic belief This second victory over the destroyed error of
Eutych.es is therefore yours.” Then follow expressions of gratitude
and prayers.
VII. To Emperor Marcian he writes (ep. 83, Mansi vi. 115) :
“ This effort for the healing of what had been wickedly
(nichtswiirdig) done will, with the help of God, be followed by
quick results, if Y. H. will please to add your assistance for the re-
establishment of the peace of the Church :( 26 ) that, in your governing
thus, you deserve as well to have God’s reign among you (intravos)
as that no falseness might injure the Catholic belief that no heresy
might disquiet the same , and that it be not left to any one to leave
the teaching of the Gospel and enjoy his spiritual (clerical)
honours.” Then he begs him to postpone the (Ecumenical Council
called for already till a more propitious time.
VIII. And again to Marcian (ep. 104, Mansi vii. 187): “By the
great gift of divine benevolence are the blessings (joys) of the whole
Catholic Church augmented, since by the holy and glorious efforts
of Y. H. that pernicious error has been eradicated, so that our work
came to a quicker termination because Y. H. serving God , did assist
same with belief and power, (f) Therefore, because it is fit for the
belief and the glory of Y. H. that, in the same manner as the
heresy was destroyed by the acting of God through you,( 23 ) all
(25) Original:—“Leo episcopua urbis Romse, Pulcberise Augustas. Quod
semper de'sancta pietatis vestrse mente pra3sumsimus, id plenissime expe-
riendo cognovimus, cbristianam fidem, quamvis diversis pravorum appete-
retur insidiis, vobis tamen praesentibus, et in defensionem eras a Domino
praeparatis, non posse turbari. Non enim Deus aut suae misericordiae
sacramentum, aut vestri laboris deserit meritum,” &c. Nothing need be
added to the infallibility of a woman, against whom not only a disturbance
of the Church, no, not even one of Christian belief was declared possible,
whose work was described as a merit which to consider, &c.; it s
sufficient to point to notes 10, fol. 5, 6 fol.
( 2 0 ) Compare note 6.
(=') Compare note 6. But the emperor assists at the same time with his
belief. This would have no meaning if such were not the right belief.
( 28 ) Compare note 5, likewise 4.


ambition should be surpressed likewise,” does he demand of him
not to agree to the resolution of the Council of Chalcedon relative
to the Patriarchate of Constantinople.
IX. To the same, Apr. 23, 451, ep. 111, Mansi vi. 217, Bailer. I,
1043): “And if anything is undertaken in an animous spirit
against the completion of such a great work it must be called to
order (Hiilfe gerufen werden) by Y. H., whom the Divine Provi-
dence has appointed (prepared, vorbereitet) for the protection of
Catholic truth.I 29 ) . . . His declarations (the papal legate’s)
for Catholic unity be pleased to give ear to as if they were my own,
that you thus may please God who may give to you, besides your
kingly crown, likewise the priestly palm.”( 30 )
X. And again to the Empress Pulcheria, March 10, 453 (Op.
Leonis I. 1188, Mansi vi. 220, Jaffe num. 266) : “There being so
many proofs in existence by which the affection of Y. H. in the
love of the Church of God becomes known, your help is demanded
with justice as often as any offence is created, that the belief
which, if you assist, will be protected against the inventions
of the heretics , and the constant stability of a firm peace be se-
cured.”( 31 )
XI. Again to Marcian, March 21, 453 (ep. 115, Mansi vi. 230,
Ballerini I. 1199, num. 269):. “It having been effected, espe-
cially by your working, that, after the defenders of the godless
dogma were condemned, the sacrilegious error lost all strength.
. . . To me great confidence is given because God working
through you( 32 ) Y. H. has shown in your address that you have
approved of my observance ( 3S ) with regard to the retention of the
Canons. And my joy is justly doubled when I perceive that it
please you in the most holy manner that the Nicaean belief retain
its firmness ,( 34 ) and that the privileges of the Church remain
( 2 <J ) Compare note 5. Is it possible to state more plainly—l, that
actually the emperor was the highest in the Church ? 2, that without the
imperial power the spiritual could never prevail ?
( 3 n ) Compare note 3.
( 31 ) Compare notes 4,5, 6, 13, f. 25, 27. Let it be well understood, to
protect the belief against the impositions of the heretics, that is against_/afee
teachings , cannot be done by forcibly bringing such to keep silence, but in
showing their falseness. And this task is left to a woman , who writes a
letter against the heresy. Orig. : ut fides, quae annitentibus vobis, contra
haereticorum commenda defensa est, securaj pacis perpetum obtineat fir-
mitatem.
( 3S ) Notes 4,5, 6, f. 20, &c.
( 3 3 ) Therefore, the approving of a papal duty by the emperor is declared
as a direct divine effect. Can the Ccesaropapism be carried further ? Orig.:
Mihi autem multum iiduciae, Deo per vos operante, collatum est, quod
probasse vos observantiam meam de custodia canonum paternorum, pietatis
vestrse affatibus indicastis. Et merito geminatur gaudium meum, cum vobis
religiosissime placere cognosco, ut et fides Niceena suam teneat firmitatem,
et privilegia Ecclesiarum illibata permaneant.
( 34 ) Original text in note 33. This sentence is a brilliant (glorious) proof
for the imperial superiority. If only the sentence with regard to the order
of precedence of the cardinals had been given, it might not have been so
much amiss, but that this and belief, aye, the creed, has been named, sur-
passes the credible. Imperial grace, not to be against belief ! The emperor
can likewise amend (bessern) or protect belief !


intact. Though Y. H. did not inform me of this glorious work of
your belief, I announce hereby that it has become known to me by
my brother Julian, who with me warmly venerates you, how
piously you had been pleased to instruct and keep in check by your
reply the minds of the unknowing monks, that if God’s benevolence
has not left them entirely, they must feel that they have been
taught (gelernt) what they have to believe and to acknowledge, and
what to fear. Because , however, y our piety and most religious
will must be obeyed in all things (omnibus modis), have I joyfully
added my opinion (libens adjeci sententiam meam) to those synodal
rules (those of Chalcedon) with regard to the confirmation (confir-
matio) of the Catholic belief and the condemnation of the heretics
which have pleased me (placuerunt); which Y. H. command may
please to ordain that same come to the knowledge of all priests
and churches (quee ut in notitiam omnium ecclesiarum que perve-
niat, vestree clementise prseceptio ordinare dignabitur). I hope and
believe that God’s grace will not fail, which may effect that the
holy care of such a great prince may receive the fullest granting
(Frucht) of all its desires, and that, after all the opportunities for
dissenting (dissentiendi) have been cut off, the peace and truth
of the apostolic teaching may rule everywhere. May Y. H., how-
ever, perceive that I have enjoined my brother Julian specially to
lay before you in my name whatever he may consider subservient
there for the preservation of the faith, because I am certain that
you are capable with the help of God to amend and to protect
ALL THIS.”
XII. And again to the empress Pulcheria, March 21, 453 (Op. i.,
1206, Mansi vi. 233, Jaff& num. 270) : —“Though I did not exactly
receive a letter from Y. H. when the most renowned prince wrote,
I am none the less glad about his distinction, as if I had been
favoured with thy address. Therefore must I guard (adhere to)
the custom of my dutiful office , to make known that I am pleased
about the welfare of Y. H., and that I incessantly pray to God that
he may conserve you to the Roman State and the Catholic Church
in full strength (well-being). lam not able to express here what
great thanks I offer to God for the strength of your beliej, by
which you unremittingly sacrifice your life for God : because we
acknowledge that the princes of our times are not only the receptacles
of the kingly power , but likewise those of the spiritual teaching (sacer-
dotalem doctrinam).”( 35 ) He then cites her writing against the
monks.
( 35 ) Are there words to compete with these, to show the complete
nonentity of the papal theory of the second thousand years of the Church
with regard to its power over the Christian princes, which expressions were
uttered by the pope, according to his own words, spontaneously, flowing
from the fulness of his heart, and were addressed to a woman ? The woman
possessed innately the priestly teaching. And let it be noted well, Leo
declares hardly ever episcopal, but always priestly teachings, priestly council.
Orig': De vigore autem fidei vestrse, qua indesinenter—Domino sacrificium
lamlis offertis, quantas Deo gratias agam enarrare non valeo : quoniam
Principibus temporis nostri non solum potentiam regiam, sed etiam sacerdo-
talem cognoscimus inesse doctrinam. Pulcheria and her husband Marcian
had written letters, in which they theologized, against the monks.


XIII. To Marcian (Mansi vi. 269) : —“ Y. H. will keep this palm
that belongs to you for the salvation (Heil) of all those who may
return to Christ the Lord through the Cathoiic belief, or be recalled
to Him thereby.” ( 36 )
XIV. To the same (ep. 288, Mansi vi. 288, Bailer i. 1274, Jaffe
nnm. 286), April 15, 454 : —“For many proofs have often shown
that the holy zeal of Y. H. for the Christian religion does continue
and augment by most laudable additions, and this belief of Y. H.
does not only condole and strengthen me, but all the priests of the
Lord ; we approving in the Christian princes the priestly dis ■
positionC if) . . . But if he (Anatolius, Patriarch of Constanti-
nople) obstinately choose what displeases God and you, ( 38 ) I shall
with the proviso of the respect for your mildness with all, and for
all, proceed against the proud man with firmness, if you also consent
to this.”
XV. To the Emperor Leo, September 1, 457 (Bailer i. 1305,
Mansi vi. 311, Jaffe num. 301) : —“Though I have lately sent a
double writing to Y. H., of which one should fulfil the duty of
congratulation, and the other pray for the condition of the Church,
it is not fit, most renowmed emperor, not to use this opportunity
offered me by God’s Providence to repeat both. Owing to that
confidence which you have, with God's inspiration, instilled into the
whole Church, ( 39 ) you having previous to the prayer of any person
ordained that which was most to be prayed for, we do not cease to
offer thanks to you, and bless (benedicere) the Providence of God
in the zeal of your belief, which with holy and Catholic spirit, has,
as I have learned from the mouth of my brother and co-bishop
Anatolius, so resisted the impudence of the heretics, that we had
to confess that you are the guardian of the Council of Chalcedon
for the peace of the whole world. This being according to the
judgment of your belief defined in the most wholesome manner, ( 40 )
(3g) What resignation ! The teaching Church has according to these
words no merit, for its unity and belief is saved by the emperor alone. Orig. r
Sed. vestras mensuetudini haec palma servatur, ut vobis omnium qui ad
Christum Dominum nostrum per catholicam fidem revocantur aut redeunt,
sanitas debeatur.
_( 37 )_ Orig.: Quod stepissime multa jam experimenta docuerunt, sanctum
pietatis vestrse studium circa religionem christianam gloriosis perseverat et
crescit augmentis : et haec fides Clementise vestrae non solum me, sed et
omnes Domini Sacerdotes consolatur et roborat; dum in christianissimo
Principe sacerdotalem expenmur alfectum. Hence, the emperor strengthens
(confirms) the pope in his faith, aye, the pope and all the priests—thus the
faith of the former must be the stronger, the weaker not being capable of
strengthening the stronger ; the pope here again throws all weight on the
priest; the king appears as priest. If affectus should be translated by
affection or such like, this amounts to the same. Disposition is certainly
more fitting as corresponding to the whole.
(as) what can be said in face of this and similar passages already
given ?
( 3 9 ) The emperor is inspired ! And this in deed ; for the pope proves it,
the emperor having voluntarily, without any summoning, done that which
they would all, that is the whole Church, have been obliged to ask for.
He therefore justly praises Providence. '
(*“) This is the most colossal direct acknowledging of imperial infalli


it is the more zealously to be made known to the whole Church, that
the quietness of the Christian belief might be beneficial to your
reign, and heretical godlessness could boast in nothing of a
beginning. Whose godless and obstinate resistance (Kampf) ceases
at once when held in check by the imperial power ”
XVI. To the same Emperor Leo he writes December 1, 477 (epist.
156, Mansi vi. 323, Bailer i. 1321, Jaffci num. 309) “ The letter
of Y. H., full of the force of belief and truth, I have received with
veneration. I should like also to obey it in that point where Y. H.
considers my presence necessary, that I might derive greater benefit
(fruit) by beholding your splendour.” (Now he adduces that the
resolutions of Chalcedon could not be gone over again ; he had not
done so, though such had been circulated by the heretics.) “ With
the most Christian prince therefore, who has to be counted among
the preachers of Christ with becoming honour (pilediCatores
Christi), I make use of the liberty of the Catholic belief and
admonish you safely to the society (Genossenschaft) of the apostles
and the prophets, that you may firmly despise and refuse those who
have deprived themselves of the name of Christians, and do not
suffer that the godless patricides deal with the faith in sacrilegious
affectation, it being known that they intend to destroy the belief.
For, because the Lord having enriched you with such a great
enlightenment op his secret (tanta sacramenti sui illuminatione
ditaverit), you must unhesitatingly consider that the kingly power
has not only been given you for the government of the world, but
H
bility. In accordance with the belief of the emperor, the dogma is de-
fined. For only him did Leo take into consideration.
Original of the whole letter: Leo Episcopus Romse, Leoni semper
Augusto. Licet proxime ad Clementiam vestram gemina scripta direxerim,
quorum unum debitum salutationis impleret, aliud pro statu ecclesue sup -
plicaret, tamen occasione, quae Deo providente se prsebuit, iterari utramque
convenit, gloriosissime Imperator. Secundum illam ergo fiduciam, quam ex
Dei inspiratione universali Ecclesi* praestitistis, anti cuiusquam preces
constituendo, quod maxime ab omnibus fuerat expetendum, non desinimus
gratias agere, et providentiam Dei in fidei vestrae fervore beneclicere, qui
sancto et Catholico spiritu, sicut fratris Coepiscopi mei Anatolii sermone
cognovi, istse haereticorum impudentise restitistis, ut profiteremini, in
totius mundi pacem Chalcedonensis Synodi vos esse costodes. Quod cum
ex vestrae fidei sententias saluberrime definitum sit; quanto studiosius uni-
versali Ecclesiae est conferendum ; ut tranquilitas fidei Christian* etiam
vestro prosit imperio, nec improbitas haeretica in aliquo de suo molimine
glorietur? Cujus pertinax et insidiosa contentio illico conquiescit, et impe-
riali protestate freuetur. Date Kalendis Septembris, Constantino et Rufo
viris clarissimis Consulibus. .
The pope blesses the Divine Providence for the zeal in the faith of the
emperor ! I wish to adduce here at once that the letter num. xvii., as is
absolutely evident, declares much more strongly the infallibility of the
emperor than the “dogma” of July 18, 1870, does that of the pope;
the emperor is declared as directly ..inspired by the Holy Ghost; that the
letter num. xviii. declares the papal teaching as a human one , the im-
perial, however, as one immediately derived from the Holy Ghost,
and that at last letter xviii. shows most plainly that the coinciding of the
teaching of Leo with that of the fathers alone was considered proof of
their validity. To particularize the other consequences is hardly necessary.


principally for the protection of the church ; that you in keeping
under the wicked enterprizes, protect at the same time that which
has been well established, and likewise give true peace again to
that which has been disturbed: thereby, that you banish the
destroyers of the rights of others, and that you reform the seat of
the old belief of the Church of Alexandria, that in consequence of
thy reforms (Yerbesserungen), the pacified wrath of God may not
requite the town, formerly so pious, what it has done. Imagine to
yourself, before the eyes of your heart, venerable emperor, that all
the priests of the whole world pray to you for that faith in which
is found the salvation of the whole world. ... It is consequently
something grand for you, that the crown of faith be added to your
diadem by the hand of God, and that you triumph over the enemies
of the Church ; for if it be laudable to crush the arms (power) of
the people of the enemy, how great must be your renown if you
free the Church of Alexandria from the most senseless tyrant, that
Church in whose grief lies an offence for all Christians «... And
this evil must likewise kindle the priestly and apostolic spirit of
your piety to justice and retribution, because it obscures in a
pestilential manner the purity of the Church of Constantinople.”
XVII. And again to the same August 17, 458 (ep. 164, Mansi
vi. 343, Bailer i. 1344, Jaffe num. 317) :—“ln rejoicing in the
many and convincing proofs of the affection (affectu) with which
you care for the whole Church, I did not fail, as quickly as it could
be done, to obey the commands of Y. H. in sending Domitian and
Geminian, my brethren and co-bishops, who representing me with
the prayers of my carefulness shall beg for the quiet of the
evangelical teaching, and preserve the liberty of that belief in which
(latter) thou eminently siiinest by the erudition of the Holy
Ghost (fidei, in qua secundum eruditionem spiritus sancti ipse pras-
cipue emines) .... Know, therefore, noble and venerable emperor,
the great protection of the whole world which is prepared in thee
by Divine Providence, and perceive, which assistance thou owest the
Church, thy mother, which mostly rejoices in thee (prides itself).
(He then explains that they dare not refer again to that which had
been decided at Chalcedon, else that might ultimately be held true
which was defended with the greatest eloquence.) But the gospel
of Christ does not require such art, for in it the teaching of the
truth is made known by its own light, and that is not wanted
(asked) which is pleasing to the ear, where it suffices for true belief to
know (him) who teaches .... Wherefore the holy Chalcedonian
Synod, which was celebrated by all the provinces of the Roman
reign with the consent of the ivhole world, and undivided in its
decrees with those of the most holy Council of Nicaea, did eradicate
(cut off) the whole godlessness of the Eutychian dogma. How
can then a fallen one return to the bosom (peace) of the Church if
he has not been purified by perfect retribution 1 ”
XVIII. And in his writing to the Emperor Leo, considered with
his epistle to Flavian (epist. 28), his most celebrated dogmatical
writing (comp, the admonitio of Mansi vi. 347), of August 17,


458, which he had announced in a former one, he says (ep. 165,
Mansi xi. 349 ff., Bullar i. 1353, ( 41 )
venerable emperor, having promised to send in that matter of
paith about which I know thy clemency so piously concerned, a
more comprehensive (extensive) explanation (treatise) by my
humble self y which I now execute wdth God’s help, the opportunity
being favourable, that a useful instruction , as far as I can opine,
might not be wanting for the zeal of thy piety. For though I
know that thy clemency does not require human information,
HAVING DERIVED THE PUREST TEACHING FROM THE BOURNE (fulnessj
of the Holy Ghost, it is still my duty to disclose that as well
which thou understandest, than to preach that which thou believest
that the fire which God did send upon the earth from the
beginning (at his arrival), might, nourished by the motion of
frequent meditation, become so heated as to glow, and inflame itself
so as to give light. (He then expounds the belief with regard to the
incarnation in accordance with the Bible and the Synod of Nicaea
and closes)-That, however, thy piety might recognize that we agree
with the teaching of the holy fathers, I thought it best to add a
few (of their) sentences to this explanation. If you deign to con-
sider these, you will find that we do not preach anything else than
that which was taught by our holy fathers all over the world, and
that only the godless heretics differ from it. From this, contracted
as much as possible, most renowned and venerable emperor, you
will perceive that our preaching likewise agrees with (is united to)
thy belief inspired by God, and thut we do not differ in a single
one of the evangelical or aposticul teachings, or in the symbol of
h 2
( 41 ) Original text Promisisse me memini, venerabilis Imperator, in
causa Mei, de qua clementiam tuam novi pie esse sollicitam, pleniorein
numilitatis meae dirigendum esse sermonem : quem nunc, auxiliante
Domino, fideli occasione persolvo, ut sancto pietatis tuse studio utilis,
quantum arbitror, deesse non posset instructio. Quamvis enim sciam
clementiam tuam humanis institutionibus nun egere, et sincerissimam de
abundantia Spiritus sancti baussisse doctrinam ; officii mei tamen est et
patefacere quod intelligis et prajdicare quod credis, ut ignis ille, quem
Dominus veniens misit in terram, motu crebrae meditationis agitatus se
eoncalescat, ut ferveat, et sic inflametnr, ut luceat Ut autem
pietas tua cum venerabilium patrum preedicationibus nos concordare cog-
noscat, aliquantas eorum sententias huic credidi subjiciendas esse sermeui.
Quibis si digneris attendere recensitis, non aliud nos pisedicare reperies,
quam quod sancti patres nostri toto orbe docuerunt, nec quemquam ab
lllis nisi solos impios hserticos discrepare. His iffitur, gl( riossissime et
venerabilis Imperator, quanta patui brevitate perstrictis, cum inspirata tibi
divimtus fide etiam nostram prsedicationem unitam esse cognosce, nec in
ahqiio nos ab evangelica, apostolicaque doctrina, vel a catliolicae profession is
symbolo discrepare, quoniam, sicut docet b. Apostolus Paulus, “magnum
est pietatis sacramentum, quod manifestatum est in carne, justificatum est
m spintu, apparuit angelis, prasdicatum est gentibus, creditum est in hoc
mundo, assumptum est in gloria. ” Quid igitur tuae utilius est saluti ? quid
tuie congruentius pietati ? quam ut paci ecclesiarum Domini tua constitu-
tione prospicias, et in omnibus tibi subditis Dei dona defendas, neque ulla
ratione patians per invidiam diaboli ministros ipsius in cuiusquam saevire
permciem, ut qui in hoc saeculo temporali emines regno, in aeternum merearis
regnare cum Christo.


the Catholic creed: because, as is taught by St. Paul, 1 great is the
secret of the piety which was made known in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, appeared to the angels, was preached to the heathens, believed
in the world, and accepted into glory (splendour).’ What could then
be more beneficial to thy weal, what more conducive to thy piety,
than that thou by thy ruling shouldst care for the peace of the
Church and protect the gifts of God in all those subject to thee,
and suffer in nowise that the servants of the devil work perdition
in any of them, so that thou, who predominated in this temporal
world by this dominion, merxtest to rule in eternity with
Christ.”
Here the same expression is made directly with regard to
the emperor, likewise for his power (ruling) in heaven, which
the priests use daily in saying mass for the reigning of Christ
with God the Father and the Holy Ghost. The evidences which he
now adduces, in order to prove that his teaching and that of the
synods of Niccee and Chalcedon did orrespond with the fathers,
are taken from the works of St. Hilarius of Poictiers, of St.
Athanasius of Alexandria, of St. Ambrosius of Milan, of St.
Augustine of Hippo, of St. John of Constantinople, of St.
Theophilus of Alexandria, of St. Gregory of Nazianz, of St.
Basilius of Cappadocia, of St. Cyrillus of Alexandria. Not a
single Roman Bishop’s evidence is given.
XIX. To the same Emperor Leo he writes June 17, 460 (Mansi
vi. 412. Bailer I. 1431, Jaffe num, 322):—“ Now, therefore (after
colossal praise for the re establishment of the peace in the Church),
since you have effected this with firm resolution and grand mind,
add to the finished, work of belief that likewise , to ordain with
regard to the chief pastor of that town (Alexandria), what pleases
God . . . .”
Superlatively (praising) is also the letter of the general Council
of Chalcedon to the Empress Pulcheria (Mansi vi. 1101).
In face of these letters—to which several similar ones could still
be added, and of which the numbers iii., iv., vi., vii., viii., xi., xiv.,
xviii., that is several of the most important, are likewise found in
the Collectio Hispana (this is not the place to denote those separate
ones found in IJyonisius Exiguus, or in the old collections generally),
and were transmitted regularly from this relatively older source
into the collections of the Canons since the ninth century —in face
of what evidently is proved in these letters and stated by me in
the heading of this paragraph, viz :
The Emptiness of the Papal Theory with regard to the Relation
between Church and State since Gregory VII.,
and
The Imperial Infallibility as the Teaching of Leo the Great,
it may well be asked, How was it possible that not a single one- —I
can find nothing in the Synopsis Observationum, nothing in the
controversial writings of the bishops—of the seven hundred bishops
pointed to their import (content) 1 ? If that had been done, the


Constitutio dogmatica of July 18, 1870, would have become
impossible. It has been trumpeted about, both before and after
December 8, 1870, in all Catholic papers, that never had such
an assembly been sitting, never had so many men of in-
telligence, science, &c., been collected together. Several theo-
logians have been called to Rome. And, nevertheless, not a
single hither of the Council seems, except in commonplace (general)
expressions to have used documents, which every one should
know, who did really take a thorough peep at the sources of
canonicity and dogmatics, and who did not gain his dogmatical wis-
domfrom St. Thomas, Liebermann, Peronne, Klee, Dieringer, Schwetz,
Schrader, and such like, and his knowledge of the history of the
Church and its rights from a text-book only. It was considered un-
necessary to examine all the letters, speeches, laws of the former
popes, in order to establish whether they harmonize with the
teaching of the gospel and the apostles, a procedure which the
Synods of the first thousand years and the popes themselves did
always pursue. Only in this manner was it possible that a resolution
could be arrived at, which disputes (contrasts, disagrees) so evidently
with the teaching of the old Church.
Results and Consequences (deductions).
The emperor is chosen directly by God, by Divine Providence,
as that instrument by which the unity of the Church is preserved,
the faith strengthened, the order kept up in the Church, its peace
ensured, the just investiture of the bishoprics ordained; the
emperor has to command and carry out everything which may be
required.
The emperor is the head of the Church : he calls the general
Synod; he confirms same ; his commands must be obeyed by all,
thus, likewise, by the Roman bishop.
The emperor is selected by God as the inspired organ of divine
ruling over the world and in the Church.
The belief of the emperor has the guarantee of divine inspira-
tion, flows direct from the Holy Ghost, and requires no human in-
formation, not even that of the pope.
The belief of the emperor is the touchstone for the correctness
of that of all others; its concord with same gives to St. Leo the
assurance as to the correctness of his own, he placing the belief of
the emperor co-ordinate to and on the same footing with that of
the Council of Nicsea.
The belief of the emperor is the fundamental for the decision of
the Council.
The belief of the pope is only safe when same is proved as
agreeing with the gospel, the writings of the apostles, prophets ;
the belief of the pope, as well as that of the whole world, is
strengthened by the belief of the emperor.
The emperor possesses not only kingly, but sacerdotal, aye,
apostolic power; his dignity is so elevated that the same is


not only confined to this earth, bnt even continues beyond the'
grave.
This dignity, this belief, the emperor has as such, the empress
possessing same just as well.
The emperor and empress are the inspired infallible organs of
Divine Providence in the Church, selected by God, and instructed,
by the Holy Ghost.
All these sentences are either contained exactly in the letters of
St. Leo above given, or they emanate from them with a simplicity
which must be self-evident to every one.
Perhaps it may be asked, do these letters speak ex cathedra ?
This is unmistakeabiy true of those which contain an exposition of
faith, and especially of the most important of them, num. xviii.,
which says so directly itself. This one alone would already justify
the deduction of the sentences given as emanating from the dog-
matical conception of St. Leo with regard to the position of the
emperor in the Church and community (society). From this
reason it is unnecessary to investigate further. To this can be
added that in § 5 the emptiness of the ex cathedra invention has
been shown.
The system of all the letters of Leo is of the one cast. This proves
that he was penetrated by what he said, that it affirms his belief. For
he expressing himself in all of them (everywhere) with regard to the
relation of the emperor to the Church and to himself; all of them
treating of the most consequential subjects, the most of them of
the teaching of the incarnation of Christ; it is already on account
of this, incredible to believe, that Pope Leo the Great intended
merely to address phrases to the emperor, or to flatter same, or
perhaps to induce him to look upon such teachings as sub-edited
to the former (the emperor) by him (the pope) as his own (the
pope’s) peculiar work, &c., when he (the pope) says to the emperor ;
“ In him did the Holy Ghost work for the salvation of the whole
Church,” “ the emperor effected the unity of belief,” “ the emperor
gave (dedicated) to the Church the service of Divine Providence,”
“ the emperor had confirmed the Council by his authority,” “ the
emperor was filled with the purest light of belief,” “ the emperor
did not falter in any one point of belief,” “ had a holy and perfect
judgment,” “ was instructed by the Holy Ghost innate to him,”
“his belief could not be made to waver by any error,” “without
the co-assistance of the emperor the divine confession (belief) could
not be protected,” “if the emperor was present, faith could not be
destroyed,” “the emperor had sacerdotal, apostolic mind (office),”
“ the emperor strengthened the pope with his belief,” “ the
empress was imbued with priestly teachings,” “the emperor
was the guardian of the canons,” “in accordance with the
emperor’s judgment it was defined,” “ he belonged to the preachers
(teachers) of Christ,” “he had been enriched by God with the
inspiration of the teaching of salvation,” “ he shone eminently
before all others by the instruction of the Holy Ghost,”, “ the
emperor did not require the human information of the pope, having


obtained the purest teaching from the bourne of the Holy Ghost,”
“ the preaching of the pope agreed with the belief of the emperor
inspired by God,” “he merited to reign in eternity with Christ.”
A man of the high character, the mind, knowledge, and energy
of St. Leo is convinced and penetrated of that which he teaches
and executes. His belief, his teaching, his actions, his inexpressibly
deep obedience towards the emperor, his exuberant devotion, can
all be understood if we consider that he perceived in the emperor,
firstly, the pious benefactor of the Church, penetrated by zealous
love, looking upon the affairs of the Church as the most important,
persecuting the heresies ; secondly, beheld in him the ruler of the
world ; thirdly, did not know anything as yet of the modern
infallibility, which by principle requires no studies, no consultation
of the Church, no co-operation of the bishops, no investigation
upon the base of the whole (universal, total) history of the Church,
but which lets the pope derive everything alone “ from the shrine of
his breast f fourthly, that he had before his mind the teaching of
the Holy Scriptures, in accordance with which, as is well known, the
Holy Ghost was not promised to St. Peter in a peculiar manner,
but to all the apostles, and works in them, and not even alone in
them, as is still taught by the Catechismus Romanus (p.e. 1., cap.
ix. 2, viii). ( 42 )
(42) Wishing to show at present only in a single one, though in a perfectly
satisfactory example, that the conception of Leo was the same as held by
the whole of ancient Christendom, I choose one of the most learned fathers
of the Church, St. Cyrillus of Alexandria, whose religious tracts were
accepted by the General Council of Ephesus (431) and incorporated with its
acts ; whose epistolse synodicse, which was expressly recognized by the
General Council of Chalcedon as the perfect expression of belief and incor-
porated with its acts, does apply here. Cyrillus says in his “liber de recta
in dominum nostrum Jesum Christum fide rel. iinperatori nuncupatus” cap.
1 (Mansi iv. 618) —“ The highest summit of human fame, Christian emperor,
which with greatest distinction precedes and surpasses all others ; such a
glorious calling and highly celebrated office descended from the divine excel-
lence and majesty upon you , that is, in which manner same desired to
establish (perpetuate) on earth another trace, as it were, and image of the
highest elevation and dignity. Therefore, as before that Most High Being
every knee is bent, and the thrones and dominions, the princes and powers
bend their backs, venerating and confessing with words of praise and hymns
that the heavens and the earth are full of its glory and majesty; in the same
manner can every one behold in your serenity (serenitas) the glorious and clearly
defined image of the brightest and highest splendour. For you are more
elevated than every summit of the earth ; you are the source of the most
widely spread dignities. You are the beginning of human felicity (vos
humane felicitatis principia et origines) and its springs ; by the gracious
winks (admonitions) of your majesty are induced into following an honour-
able and happy (beatem) life all men subject to your rule, wherever they
may exist (quidquid usquam est gentium).” In this same style it continues
still stronger—“ The immoveable firmament of your most pious and holiest
imperial state is the Lord Jesus Christ himself. For through Him, as it
stands written, do the kings govern and hold those powerful judgments, for
His will is almighty, and fulness of all that is good, if He but winks. He
therefore spends at first distinguished and glorious gifts among his friends,
who are to keep them in the highest possible estimation, and this right
willingly. That this, which we say here, is true, is evident already by


Whosoever reads attentively the numerous expressions of Pope
Leo the Great given above, and considers that such are in part con-
what your Majesty has derived from Him, and what you may yet, as we
firmly hope, receive moreover.” He now shows by the Bible that piety was
the best fundament for kingly dignity, cap. 4—“ l am necessarily compelled
to offer as a spiritual gift to your Majesty, and likewise to the queens, the
canon of the right belief as delivered to us by the apostles, collected in a brief
essay (explanation) .... Because I am perfectly convinced that you will
conserve (conservaturos) this belief do I offer this writing as a certain (safe)
firmament of the mind, and a luminary (light) of the soul, and a crown of
the heart. For thus it stands written —‘Knowledgeis better than precious
stones, and all that might be wished for cannot be compared with it.’ I
shall, therefore, speak briefly of the incarnation of the Only Son, of the
signification possessed by this secret (qusenam sacramenti huius ratio existat),
this with the greatest transparency, as can be done by those who behold only
in a mirror and riddle, and that only partly, that is according to the measure
of the gift of the Holy Ghost, as is said by St. Paul (for nobody names the
Lord, except it be by the Holy Ghost, as again nobody curses Jesus except in
Beelzebub), so as to enable them to acknowledge and explain.” This means
certainly as plainly as possible : I shall explain with the help of the Holy
Ghost, as far as such is possible by a mortal being. In the book to the
queens (Mansi iv. 679 ff.) it says, c. i—“ Verily everyone calls you the most
holy and chaste brides of Christ the Saviour of us all (most pious and by
God beloved empresses), the ornament of the globe, the embellishment of
the most holy Church with the greatest of rights ; for in you appears
wonderfully every kind of virtue and adorning, agreeable to the sight of
God. And not satisfied with these treasures, you subject yourselves to every
care and trouble that vou might distinguish yourselves in all. ways by your
just and unfaltering belief, thinking undoubtedly of that which is written
by the wisest (of. all) dispenser of the secrets of Christ (sapientissimus
mysteriorum Christi dispensator), and the teacher of nations, Paul ‘ Well
then, my dear brethren, be firm and immoveable, always overflowing in the
working for the Lord;’ this the more where the just and untarnished
belief is united with the probity of good deeds, and joined thereto in even
walk and course, so that perfection in all goodness and purity of heart is
gained.” After similar laudations, and an analogous acknowledgment
(dedication) as in the first letter, he deduces, that he wished to adduce the
Biblical teaching of Christ, “ and explain throughout (thoroughly) whither
was directed the force (power) of the dogmas of truth.” C. 8 contains again
a great acknowledgment of their theological understanding; c. 13 “If
you now consider the successive chapters (which contain the Biblical expla-
nations), you will recognize my explanation (exposition) as right and as
befitting to the norm of truth.” Thus acts Oyrillus in expounding the
fundamental dogma! In the second tract to the same de recta fide (Mansi
iv. 803 fF.) c. 1, he says—“ Sources of salvation, however, we call the holy
prophets, the evangelists and the apostles, for these water with the blessed
teaching derived from heaven this world, saturated with the Holy Ghost,
and blessing the whole of the globe.” As the agriculturists tie the most
beautiful flowers into a nosegay for the pleasure (joy) of their masters (lords),
“ thus do we offer likewise, we, who have undertaken the office of teaching,
from the Holy Scriptures, as if from an acre, an ornament, not of quickly
fading flowers, but the odour (perfume) of explanations and teachings,
which through the Holy Ghost contains the beauty of piety towards the
never-fading Christ, and wdiich breathes his mysteries (mysterium) in great
sweetness and fulness.” He now gives briefly, first his confession of faith
(belief), and continues then c. 3 —“ And to judge of such (sentire) we have
been taught. For the sayings of the holy fathers and their admonitions
(sentences) tell us wisely that we should greatly study, and diligently notice
what was most in accordance with the Holy Scriptures, and that we should
meditate with fine (minute, acute) distinction (comprehension) about what


tained in writings containing purely dogmatical questions (expla-
nations), and were moreover issued in the most important (difficult)
had been expounded with regard to Christ, so as to see the of the
divine dogmas ...” Cap. 4—“ That which could tend before all others m
leading the more simple minded into error, I shall try in employing the
greatest possible clearness, to explain to the best of my ability , and foi t
better understanding (light) add to every sentence its exposition
solution), as God likewise governs our path in this direction. lor same g
the word (speech) with great power to those who teach the Gospel, as
the psalmist sings. We have further explained, m the commentary addressed
to the holy virgins, most satisfactorily that which is more at hand and mor
easily comprehended (understood); in this present one, however, we shall
treatof the explanation of the more obscure ones. For it is not more than
iust that your Majesty should know this likewise, and not ignore \ -
mer • that the knowledge of both should dwell as a light inyour most holy
minds ” He ends cap. 59. col. 883 : “ God will guide your mind, most pious
empresses, by the Holy Ghost, that you may (will) gain the right compre-
hension For Christ the Lord having formed you so, that is, finding you
adorned with firm and unalterable belief (Anna ac stabili M e
will to the fulness of heavenly gifts, enrich you and make y™ than
blessed ” (longeque beatissimasefficiet.) In the letter against his accuse
(Mansi iv 889)f he says: “For I have .... explained the teaching
of the right belief.’’ In the letter to an adherent of Nestonus he says
(ibid col °1002): “ But because it concerns a matter of faith . • • *
which remedy could be used against those evils to whom God confided the
teaching of the divine mysteries, whom those who are introduced and msti ucted
ly usTan justly accuse, and say that they had retained the belie which
lind been tamrlit bv us Verily of the laymen every one has only
to render an account of his own life, but we whose shoulders are burdened
with the priestdom will have to render account, not only for ourselves but
for all Christians. ” Now, he states beautifully that he would teach the
truth to his death, which he often repeats (p.e col. 1007). Interesting is
his letter to Pope Colestine (ibid. col. 1015;. The import of this letter is
to ask of Colestine whether he should publicly summon Nestonus ; lie
could no longer remain silent, being responsible to God, because the scan la
was too great. This letter is tne more interesting Nestonus not being
under the jurisdiction of Cyrill, consequently no fomial right could e
adduced by Cyrill ; it contains a silent reproof for Colestine not having
already interfered. It is certainly as clear as possible that Cyrill, m con-
sidering it necessary to explain to the pope what the right teaching of the
Bible was, did not think it requisite to demand inf ormation from the pope,
but, on the contrary, considered himself entitled to give such to the latter
It says in the letter “But how much more must he not consider that as
certain which all the orthodox bishops and lay brethren scattered ove
the whole globe confess-that Christ is God, the virgin, however, who had
borne him is the mother of God, and that he alone errs who denies this
(For the most important mystery (secret) Cynllus doesllo^ cr ] L f l^
the belief of the lay community!) “ The service of the Word (of God , the
guarding of belief having been, as it were, deposited with us, what will we
be able to say on the day of judgment if we are now deaf against such. .
That however, thy Holiness perceive clearly what he says as well
as'what he understands (means), and likewise that which our holy a^ d 9jeat
fathers did teach, I did send writings (tomos, m reality rolls of pape )
which contain the opinions of the principal ones, and had same, far as it
could be done in Alexandria, translated into Latin ; my letters also I d
give to Possidonius with the pressing demand to offer them to your Holiness
Now, what does Colestine reply to it (ibid. col. 1018) ? For a long time he
had not been able to find (think of) a remedy, and had beenswayed by the
stings of different thoughts ; now, where he had seen his letter is tne
remedy at hand by which that pestilential sickness (disease) seems capable


cases, where the confirmation of the fundamental truths of the
Christian belief was concerned, he must arrive at the conclusion
that the conception of Pope Leo the Great is the following :
For the government of the world, of human affairs, God did ap-
point the temporal authority. Same has the right and the duty to
do everything required in the execution of order, of right. The
bearer of the temporal power in the Roman reign of this world is
the emperor. Since the Roman emperors became Christians, they
looked, in imitation of Constantine the Great, upon their chief
office as upholding the peace, the order of the Church, and effecting
that the commandments of God were obeyed. If this object was
to be gained, it was necessary before all things that the unity of
belief remained intact in the Church. Consequently it appears as
the peculiar (substantial), aye, as the highest object of the emperor,
to do everything which served this purpose. Therefore, it is his
obligation to call general Councils as often as he considers such
necessary, in which the emperor or his representatives were, ac-
cording to the indisputable evidence of the acts of the first eight
general Councils of the Church, the leaders. The emperor sanc-
tioned their resolutions and elevated them into laws of the State.
If even the peculiar investigation and confirmation of the dogma
remained with the bishops, the belief of the emperor was never-
theless considered as very material. For in his belief does Leo
find the proof for the correctness of his own ) the concord of his
belief and the belief of the Synod with that of the emperor gives
him full assurance. In the like manner as the emperor appears to
him as the organ of authority predestined by God, he appears also
to him as the similar organ in the Church. Leo establishes this
belief by the guide of the Scriptures and Tradition. Far from con-
sidering his exposition infallible, in consequence of his being the
Roman bishop, he states directly that the emperor did not require
human information. He gives same to the emperor only as instruc-
tion ; the Council investigates the teaching of Leo and declares
of being cured by a certain effective (healing) antidote; I speak of the
spring water of the ‘pure source which flows from thy (dear) teaching in great
abundance (fulness), by which all the sediment of the impure (flowing im-
purely) brook can be taken away, and all be led back to the safe and right
teaching (belief).” Then he says that he thought the same about Christ,
and did not wonder that a priest so learned and full of love and study for
belief taught thus; he did already surpass the glorious examples of the fore-
fathers, to him applied the word of the Gospel of the Good Shepherd. He
(Colestine) would like to add something but did not know of anything new,
Cyrill had said everything. He then empowers him after a prayer, to take
care if he (Nestorius) did not within ten days, reckoned from the date of
admonition, renounce his teaching formally, and vowed (promised) to teach
henceforth the same belief as to the nativity of Christ, ‘ ‘ which the Homan
as well as the Church of thy Holiness, at last the whole Christian religion
does teach.” Whoever reads these passages carefully must feel convinced
that Cyrill considered himself fully entitled to expound (develop) the true
teaching with God’s help from the Holy Scriptures, and thought as little as
Pope Colestine himself of the pope’s infallibility, and that he did consider
the emperor the representative of God on earth.


it, after having found it to agree with the teaching of the whole
Church, as the correct representation of its own teaching. It is
God, the Holy Ghost, who is directly effective in the emperor
in accordance with the words of Leo, in the like manner as he
appears (from the sources) in the Council.
Everybody must perceive that it is not the person of the one
emperor upon which Leo centres such importance. His conception
is the same with regard to the different emperors to whom his
letters are addressed; the same thing is said of the former ones.
This very same view we find later, especially in the time of the
fifth general Council of Constantinople (553), of the sixth of the
same place (680, 681), of the seventh of Nicaea (787), of the
eighth of Constantinople (869). And if afterwards it was a very
emperor who forgot himself so far as to destroy the peace of the
Church by iconoclacy, the papal letters of the time express the
same sentiments nevertheless, and condole themselves with the
examples of those kings of the old covenant who also neglected
their duties, and pronounce the stronger the duty of his successor
to make good such scandal. If such a thing took place, a simple
deviation only had taken place. How such has to be looked upon
we learn from the letter of Pope Pelagius 11., of the year 585, to
the patriarch of Aquileja (Mansi ix. 433 fg., Jaffe num. 688). As
is well known, Pope Vigilius 11. had at first agreed to the so-called
three chapters denounced as heretical by the fifth General Council.
Pelagius writes (Mansi col. 439 fg.) : “It is farther stated in your
letter that you were taught by the Holy See and by the archives
(scrinium) of the Holy Church over which we preside with God’s
authority (Deo auctore), that you need not agree to this matter
which had been dealt with during the reign of the Prince Justinian
of pious memory ; and this remark (assistance) do you add to your
excuse, saying that in the beginning of it (the question in dispute)
the Holy See, in the person of Pope Vigilius, and all the authorities
o f the Latin provinces had strongly resisted the condemnation of
the three chapters.” Now he states that the Latins (those
speaking Latin) had at first not properly understood Greek, but
had, as soon as they recognized what was right, firmly believed
such; Saulus likewise had resisted God a long time, and was just
on account of that a preacher (teacher) of the Lord ; even Peter
had not, at first, been willing to convert (baptize) the Gentiles, and
had only been brought to his senses by Paul. Then he continues:
“ Could it be said to the prince of apostles, Peter, when he taught
something contradictory (sibi dissimilia) : ‘That which thou sayest
now we dare not listen to, for thou didst teach differently before ?
If, therefore, in the matter of the three chapters something else
than truth was looked for, and something else than truth was
found, there was said: ‘Why is the alteration (changing) of the con-
ception (sententia) looked upon as a crime of this Holy See in
which the whole Church humbly venerates its founder? For not
the changing of the sentence (idea), but the inconsistency of the
mind shows guilt. If, therefore, in the recognition of that which


is just, the intention remain the same, what could prevail when one
losing his ignorance changes the words T( 43 ) This he now seeks to
justify by stating that even God had said, “I repent having anointed
Saul as King of Israel.”
As a consequence of the conception of Leo it emanates from care-
ful contemplation that he transfers to the Christian emperor that
which is said in the Old Testament of the Anointed of the Lord.
Thus we can understand that a general Council hails the emperor
as the new David. The old Roman ideas were likewise conducive
to this. Both explain the sacerdotal quality which he ascribes to
the emperor. If he could not exactly behold the divus Augustus
in the emperor any longer, the Pontifex Maximus is, however, quite
discernible.
And at last it is as clear as day that the participation of the
emperor in the affairs of the Church, as is shown in the letters of
Leo very plainly, proves very strongly the unity of the. Church ; for
the emperor represents in his person and by his organs the lay com-
munity. In him and the episcopate as the head of the clergy the
whole Church is represented, in the same manner that faith as such
does not dwell in the clergy alone, but as well in all believers.
These are the views of the old Church which are here only given
in a few important instances, but which, in my greater writing,
shall be proved by hundreds of documents. Certainly in time these
did change, in some respects already from the decay of the Occi-
dental Roman Empire, but theoretically and practically they
became the contrary ones only from the time of Gregory VII.,
since all co-operation of laymen in the affairs of the Church had been
prohibited, and subjection to the power of the Church had become
a fact. But, nevertheless, there remained in the anointment of the
emperors and kings, analogous to that of the consecration of the
bishops, in a few other rights—aye, in the admission of the delegates
of princes to the Council of Trent—a weak remnant of the belief
of the old Church. Pius IX. did annihilate, in the Vatican
Council, the last vestige by his absolutely ignoring the whole lay
community, which is understood by his complete disregard shown
to all the temporal powers.
(43) This passage is the more interesting the more it contrasts -with those of
the latest method. Pope Pelagius never once thinks of saying, “My prede-
cessor, Vigilius, did not speak ex cathedra when he committed by his recogni-
tion of the three chapters such a little heresy ,” but he says : “How can you
come to accuse me ?” At first they did not perceive the truth, but as soon as
they did perceive same, they came forth the more boldly for it. To change
false ideas is not wrong, but to change our mind is so. Now the Apostolic See
wanted (desired) always to hold the right teaching. But if even Peter could
change his dogmatical views, he being at first against the admission of the
Gentiles, considering circumcision a quality (condition) for salvation, with-
out anyone blaming him for accepting the right view, having gained better
knowledge, then certainly no blame can attach to the Apostolic See. If
Pius IX. had read only this letter of his predecessor, and considered such
impartially, I believe this changing of opinion would have protected us
from the misfortune of the 18th July, 1870, a dies nefastus. However, this
passage, with the later ones in which Pope Honorius is damned after death,
will serve as a guide how they can get rid of the new dogma afterwards.


And in the same manner as he did, July 18, 1870, declare the
Roman bishop as being the Church in its office of Reaching, and
transformed the Roman bishop into the episcopate of the Church
in its office of administration, in like manner were the clergy
declared by such precedence as the Church, and those whom the
Roman bishop chose to admit as advisers were declared as the
advising Church. ( 44 ) „ _ . , . „ v
In order to show already here that the Church remained m sub-
stance upon its old views from the sixth to the I 61 *! 1 century, a
few instances shall yet be adduced to show the sharper the great
contrast between such and those since Gregory v II-
In the termination (Aoyo; TipoacpuivrpxGc) of the sixth general
Council of Constantinople, 680 (Mansi xi. 657. fg.), it says ‘ I™m
the right hand of God, who did create and preserve everything,
receiving the diadem of imperial power by merit (merito), thou
lovest, by Christ beloved emperor! to reward the Lord who destined
thee to govern by humanity and clemency, and by innate piety
and righteousness of belief; for thou knowest that such reciprocal
services are agreeable to him, he liking to be served thus (™oux o«c
vap avuSiupoic olSac aixov eCdaaxea&ai, oL i-jaiaf »epentei«o»<zi.) • •
you govern in kindness through Christ, and Christ loves to give
His Church peace through you. He himself awakened now li e-
wise Y. H., and led (induced) you m the right zeal for belief to
call this general Synod, that in this manner the heresy lately
sprung up be destroyed, and the teaching of truth confirmed; that
if such be done the union of the Church remain immovable and
unalterable exxArpac ™ suajp). For you did consider it incom-
patible, most wise emperor, that we should agree and work to-
o-ether in most other things, but should differ and be separated
with regard to the chief aim of life, that we, the one being the
limb of the other, be the one in the body of Christ oy the same
uniformity of belief, which exists with Him and in Him . . - -
Obeying your imperial (divalibus, likewise divine, an expression
much in vogue in the imperial laws since Justinian) commands did
the occupant of the old Roman, and the highest Apostolic See, as
well as we humble priests and servants of Christ, the fol
himself by writing and by his delegates, as well as we with them
in person, stand round the throne of thy valour so pleasing to
God .... Boldly we say, as it were by the organs ot the
Holy Ghost, that thou didst through us and with us weave to-
gether again what had been rent, and restore it to its entirety.
And thus working all of us, and agreeing all of us by the inspira-
tion of the Holy Ghost, and approving of the dogmatical letter ot
(•*) The species of Church thus named by me is quite correct, for
according to cap. 3 and 4 of the Const, dogmat of July 18 the
council has now only an advising voice, whereas the council as used to be
said, represented the Church. We have now the following species- of the
Church-.- 1. The infallibly teaching, that is the pope. 2. The fallibly
teaching one. 3. The obeying one, which branches again mto-a, the
one obeying the infallible i b, the one obeying the fallible one.


our holiest and most supreme pope to your valour. ... we
teach,” &c. (follows the dogma) “ subject to the Anathema ....
with them Honorius, ivho was Bishop of Rome , because he followed
them therein
Pope Leo 11. replies, 682, to the letter of the Emperor Constan-
tinus written after the closing of the sixth Synod (Mansi xi. 726,
Jaffe num. 1630) : “To the King of kings, in whose power are
the reigns of this world, do we say little and great thanks, who
gave to you (™ ouxtoc etc upac p-ETayayovTi tijv emyetov (3aatXetav.
Mansi gives nobis in the Latin text, which gives no meaning)
the kingdom of this world in such a manner that he granted to
you to prefer the heavenly to it Therefore the more
your Christian piety predestined by God (Oeo&ev TtpotuitwOetaa rj
receptacle for the Holy Ghost within the secret (precincts) of
your heart, the more you follow the head of the Church,
Jesus Christ, and the rules of real piety ' thus proving your-
self worthy of the spender (originator) of the reign given
you, the more will you please the holy venerable body of
same, which is the holy mother church, as its faithful and
principal child (principalis filius, irpcuTounou xlxuou), by the spend-
ing and favouring of same with an immovable firmness ....
with praises we commenced to exclaim : Lord, preserve our most
Christian king, and grant his prayer the day he calls to Thee; by
whose efforts, of God inspired, the piety of the Apostolic and true
tradition burned over the whole of the globe, whilst the frightful
vapours of heretical wickedness disappeared . . . . for we
recognize that this holy oecumenical great sixth Synod, which by
the grace of God was lately assembled in the royal town by an
imperial decree, did conclude the same as the general Council which
sat with this Holy See, whose functions we execute (previous to
the sixth Synod an occidental Council had been held at Rome, whose
teaching the pope had expounded in his letter), and defined the
integrity of the just belief in conformity with the rules of our fore-
fathers and of our own, that &c. (follows the creed) ....
likewise (condemn) Honorius, who did not enlighten this apostolic
Church by the teaching of apostolic tradition, but who dared to under,
mine the untarnished belief by senseless treachery (persana proditione.
T lf TcpoSoata).”
The same Leo 11. writes to the Spanish bishops, in announcing
to them the results of the sixth General Council (Mansi xi. 1050,
Jaff& num. 1631) : —“Because, however, now by the grace of God
under the government of our most Christian son, the Emperor
Constantine, who was chosen and selected in advance, the rays of
the right belief and apostolic tradition broke forth over the whole
of the globe, like those of the morning star, after the dissipation of
the vapour of heretical malice, and peace and unity of truth reign
among all the heads of the Church of Christ, emanating from the
peaceful faith of Christ, which is the true and wholesome peace by
which we are reconciled to God” ....


And to King Ervig he writes (Mansi xi. 1057, JaffS 1632) :
“ The most pious emperor imbued with the grace of the Holy Ghost
did voluntarily undertake to cleanse the Catholic Church of God
with all his might from the stain of heretical error, and he effected
(made) that the Church of God was rid of that which could offend
the Christian nations, and by the judgment of the venerable
Council are damned and cast oiit of the union of the Catholic
Church all the instigators of that heretical affirmation, that is
Theodore . . . Cyrus . . . Sergius, Paulus, Pyrrhus, and Peter. ..
and with them at the same time Honorius of Rome, who consented
that the untarnished rule (teaching) of the apostolic tradition, which
he had received from his forefathers, became soiled .”
The seventh General Synod of Nicsea of the year 787 says in
actio vii. to the Emperor Constantine and his mother Irene (Mansi
xiii. 390): —“The head of the Church, Christ our God, becomes
glorified, best princes, because your heart, which is guarded in His
hand, spoke a good word in commanding that we should retain
most firmly the unalterable, and immoveable, and divine expression
of the articles of faith of the Church. For as your head is adorned
with gold and precious stones, your mind is filled with evangelical
and parental (fatherly) teaching (StSaaxataaic). For being the
scholars and companions of those whose calling extended over the
whole world, and the guides to piety of the whole people named
after Christ, you have written the speech (teaching) with the style
of truth, and described the character of righteousness and piety,
and as shining lights you did appear to the believers and extended
your help (hand) to the wavering (swaying) churches in confirming
the sound principles (confirmantes, Kptxxuavxec), and defining those
which do not agree (verb, the agreement of the non-agreeing).”
Pope Hadrian 11. writes June, 869, to the Emperor Basilius
(Mansi xvi. 20, Jaffe 2211) : —“But thou also, happy and praise-
worthy emperor, who didst receive the seed of Divine words, not
as an acre full of stones, thorns, or thorn bushes, but as good soil
with good heart (substance), producing manifold fruit, and as a
true preacher (ecclesiastes), didst at once after seizing (entering
upon) the reins of government, care and effect more for the peace
of the Church than for temporal matters, thus appearing in our
times as a Solomon, that is, as one loving peacefulness; thou didst
listen to the voice of thy father, and didst not leave the laws of
thy mother the Church, thus finishing thyself what had been struck
out for thy predecessor. And it being impossible, in accordance
with the Scriptures, that “he can reform whom God despises,”
whilst God’s consent (co-operation 1 Zulassung) being found wanting,
nothing was reformed (amended), thou thyself dost do enough
(that which is necessary. Tr.) to effect the ameliorations of that
Church. For thou hast perceived, as is shown by thy gentle
writing, by what wounds your Church suffered when thou re-
ceivedst the reign from heaven (te coelitus consecuto imperium),
and thou hast learnt clearly by consulting the teachers of our
belief, that this See could heal such wounds. . . Our will is (we


desire) therefore, that by the effort of thy piety a numerous Council
be assembled there. . . Moreover, we do admonish and care with
wholesome zeal to make sure that by the effect of your imperial
presence (instantia) those chapters of the sentences which we did
announce as synodal ones to that Church in which rests the body
of St. Peter, treating of the annulment of those profane Synods
held by Photius at Constantinople against the respect due to the
Holy See, as well as against the Pontificate of my brother and cp-
Bishop Ignatius, might be confirmed in your Synod by the signa-
tures of all (roborentur), and carefully deposited in the archives of
the separate churches.”
What contrast with the conception of Gregory VII. and his
successors down to Pius IX! In accordance with Leo, the emperor
can do everything, his words forcing us at times to think of a
deified emperor; there is nothing more elevated than the empe-
ror. In accordance with Gregory VII. and his successors, the
emperor can in reality (eigentlich) do nothing else but obeying ;
every priest is superior to him, he has simply to execute what the
latter winks at (pleases), or suffers to be done. If Leo does let the
emperor reign with Christ in heaven even, Gregory fears that few
kings at all would be likely to enter same. Brief, that which Leo
teaches with respect to the emperor was transferred to the pope by
Gregory. With Leo the emperor appears as the organ of God, he
never calling himself vicarius Christi( 45 ), nor, as far as I can
remember, vicarius Petri; but since Gregory VII., relatively
Innocence 111., the expressions vicarius Christi, Dei, Omnipotentis
Dei, are the favourite ones, letting alone the mere formula servus
servorum Dei which, as is known, does not go back to remote
antiquity.
Greater contrasts are not imaginable. If the one conception be
right, the other must be false.
If the dogma of July 18, 1870, is true, then Pope Leo the
Great was infallible as well as Gregory VII., Paschalis 11.,
Alexander 111., Innocence 111. and IV., Gregory IX., Boniface VIII.,
&c., &c.
It being impossible that the teaching of Leo, shown with absolute
evidence, can be true, and at the same time that which is estab-
lished as the teaching of Gregory VII. and his successors, the un-
disputed teachings of both being contradictory to each other—it
being impossible that different persons can be infallible whose
teachings contradict each other, for, if the emperor be infallible the
pope cannot be it except there be several infallibles—it follows in-
( 45 ) As is known, this expression was invented March 13, 495, in the
Roman Council held in St. Peter’s Cathedral, where (by the acts) in closing
the obedient bishops, &c., called out eleven times, “In thee do we behold the
Vicarius Christiand six times “In thee do we behold the apostle Peter
and thirty-seven times the terminating formula of congratulation, as can be
read in every one of the more complete collections of the councils (p.e.
Mansi viii. 184, better in Thiel, i. 447, where this notice is given in the
nota).


disputably that the dogma of July 18, 1870, stands in dissoluble
contradiction to the teaching sof a former pope; that same is like
the dogma of Eutyches, a heresy.
But even if what has been said by Leo should be valid only with
regard to the Emperors Theodosius, Marcian, Leo, and the Empress
Pulcheria, the result would be the very same, it being self under-
stood that a dogma of the Church cannot be declared the contrary
of which has been believed by the Church in one moment only. By
the dogma of July 18, 1870, the popes possess the infallibility
promised to the Church. It being proved that Pope Leo the Great
did consider another one than the pope as infallible, he considering
the pope’s teachings only as human ones, but the belief of the
emperor as derived from the fulness of the Holy Ghost; it follows
that a dissoluble contradiction is evident, that the dogma of July
18, 1870, is false.
This deduction (result) would remain the very same if even the
words of Leo were to be taken as mere (empty) phrases. For a
pope who could have made use of such phrases his whole life long,
this in the most important matters in existence (world), and in
terms absolutely unequivocal, could impossibly have been infallible.
But if a single pope has not been unconditionally infallible, then
not one of them has been so, nor ever will be except he be inspired.
This I need not examine, the infallibilists themselves denying
this.
But, this may be the last excuse, Leo the Great does not teach
belief in his demands. If such be the case, it is likewise no teaching
of belief what is taught July 18, 1870. For the object, not to err
in faith (belief), and as its sequence the just belief, teaching, is the
same with both; aye, Leo says, as has been shown, in much plainer
words, and with much more substantial reasons, that the emperor
was infallible—he adducing everything from the inspiration and
direct information of the Holy Ghost—than such is taught of the
pope by Pius IX. Leo proves his own belief in the correctness
of that of the emperor; the belief of the latter he represents as
flowing direct from the Holy Ghost; his teaching with regard to the
incarnation he looks upon as being only human, whose correctness
had to be confirmed by the Gospel, &c., but the emperor he
declares expressly as having the right belief. If Leo is so con-
vinced thereof, even before the emperor’s belief is expressed, his
belief in such must be stronger still. But Leo does not pro-
nounce the word infallible. He says much more, he says : “ the
emperor enjoyed inspiration, was enlightened direct by the Holy
Ghost; God dwelled in him.” From this the infallibility evidently
follows. For if God is directly active, no error can take place, for
otherwise God could err.
And here we reach the culminating point. If the Church or
the pope teaches that which corresponds with the belief left us by
Christ, same is infallible. Without such word having been used
by the old Church in a single instance even, same did show her-
self infallible. Leo declares his teaching correct, same agreeing
i


with that of the Gospel, of the apostles, of the prophets. In
order to show this he adduces sundry proofs, but not a single
one of any pope. He does not say with a single word that such
and such was true because taught by him, but he says the teaching
of Nicsea and Chalcedon is true, same agreeing with all evidence.
In this manner did all his predecessors act, all CEcumenical
Synods. If this is done, the Holy Ghost will never fail.
But the Vatican Council did not act thus. No investigation
did take place, aye, the demand for such a one was proudly
ignored; none of the papal teachings in direct opposition there-
to have really been considered; all contradictions, all facts of
history, have simply been put aside. Only one sentence has been
made use of: Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.
And what remains to be done for the Church, the episcopate,
for every Catholic, in the face of this terrible (dilemma) position 1
Shall he doubt his Church, his belief!
Not at all. The remedy is at hand, has already been pointed
out.
If the pope teaches anything which is in uniformity with pro-
phetic, evangelical, and apostolic teaching, with the teaching of
the fathers, upon which that of Nicsea, Ephesus, and Chalcedon
&c., was based (and in which the Church beheld its strength until
July 18, 1870), then such teaching is true, then the Church does
teach infallibly, because then it is impossible that the Spirit of
God (Holy Ghost) be not with her. Therefore, no one need
waver in believing in the primate, the episcopate, and the teaching
of the Church, as possessed in toto by the old Church. The pope
who teaches from this standpoint ivill and must demand the evidence
of the episcopate, must and will consult the sources, and will formu-
late no dogma without the Church, he stands in union with the body
of Christ. Nor can a Council have any other standpoint. If the
pope, if a Council deviate (give up) from such, the former would
have separated from the Church, and the latter would be like the
robbers’ council of Ephesus, &c.—no true one, but a false one in
spite of its universality. That which has been taught by the pope
July 18, 1870, assisted by the connivance of a peculiar majority,
is in contradiction with the teaching of the Gospel, of the apostles,
of the fathers Consequently, the pope and such majority did
forsake (leave) belief, and cannot claim to be believed. Whether
many, or some, or all (of the latter) did afterwards agree to it,
induced by whatever inner or outer reasons, is immaterial, because
what is false does not become true, even if believed by all, the whole
transaction differing, as has been proved briefly in these lines, from
the principles of Christian antiquity.
And therefore we can adhere firmly and joyfully to the old
Catholic Church. The Church has (the duty) to annul (do away
with) this offence. It lays with the successors of the apostles, upon
whose fundaments the Church of Christ is built, to take the proper
steps for this. The resolution of July 18, 1870 must be annulled
(cashiered) as unjust, contradicting Christian antiquity, as an in


voluntary one; the episcopate must again he established in its
divine rights; and the pope must be confined again within those
limits which have been allotted him in this necessary connection
with the episcopate.
The Catholic, who believes, need not believe a teaching not
announcing the Word of God. Let all believing Catholics step
before their bishops and remind (admonish) them of their duty.
To do this in a proper manner is a right possessed by everyone.
For where a thing is so evident as in this case, it is not presump-
tion (pride), not, as is taught by those adherents of Rome who be-
hold in the pope the Church, the belief of one’s own infallibility
which impels, but is the force of evident truth. Let the fetters be
broken by which truth is confined.
To do this is above all things the duty of the Christian princes.
They have, as history teaches, the right to care for the welfare of
the Church.
But what, if the present state of the Church should become per-
manent % Asia and Africa contained flourishing churches, hundreds
of dioceses. The Islam (Mahometanism) swept them away. Who
dare affirm that God did guarantee for ever to Europe the sta-
bility of the Catholic Church in its latest constitution, aye, even
in the former one 1 Should, however, which God may forbid, in
consequence of the present crowned system, the Catholic Church
come to grief in but one country, should only one soul become
lost, God will judge on whom the curse is to fall.
For the individual Catholic a simple consequence is evident. He
perceives that the infallibility of the pope is not the word of God,
but that of man. If he follows the sentence of man, he has his
choice to believe with regard to the spiritual power that which is
taught by the old popes, or that which is taught since Gregory VII.,
and which has de facto (stillschweigend) been sanctioned by the
latest Church. Fie is then in that predicament (position) in which
a certain system of morals places many, a system which puts instead
of the simple moral commandments of the Lord casuistic subtle-
ties which spring from impossible (unmasticated, unverdauten),
juristical sentences. The reservatio mentalis and analogous subjects
will then be the base of his morals.
If he follow the Word of God, there can be no doubt for him.
“ Render unto God the things which be God’s, and unto Ccesar the
things which be Caesar’s,” will then be his motto.
I approach the end.
In the acts of the third (Ecumenical Council of Ephesus, Actio
secunda of July 10, 431, it stands written (Mansi iv. 1285) :
“ Projectus bishop and legate of the Roman Church spoke —‘ May
your Holiness command that the letter of the holiest pope, who is
to be named with all respect, of Colestine, which has been delivered
to you, be read aloud, that from it your Holiness may perceive
what care he takes (has) for all Churches.’”
And after the most holy bishop of the Church, dearest to God,
Cyrillus of Alexandria had spoken, as is contained hereunder,


did Siricius, notary of the holy Catholic Church of Rome, read
aloud.
Cyrill, bishop of Alex, said : —‘The letter of the most holy and
most blessed bishop of the Roman See, Colestine, be read to the
holy Synod with due honour.’
Siricius, the notary of the holy Church of the town Rome, read
aloud.
And after same had been read in Latin, Juvenal, bishop of Jerusa-
lem, spoke * The already read letter of the holy and blessed bishop
of the great Rome, ivhich contains the pious and orthodox views,
may be entered into the acts (of the Council).’
All the most venerable bishops begged that the letter be read,
translated into Greek.
Philippus, priest and legate of the apostolic See, spoke--* Custom
has been satisfied, and the letter has been read in Latin first. Now,
however, where your Holiness demands that same be read in Greek,
it is necessary that the demand of your Holiness be complied with;
we have had this done, that the Roman speech be translated into a
Greek one. Command, therefore, that same be received and made
known to your holy ears.’
Arcadius and Projectus, bishops and legates, spoke— * As your
Holiness has commanded, that the letter brought come to the
knowledge of all; because there are many of our holy brother-
bishops who do not understand Latin, therefore has the letter
brought been translated into Greek also, and if you command, same
shall be read.’
Flavianus, bishop of the Philippians, spoke—* The translation
received of the letter of the holiest and dearest bishop of God, of
the holy Roman Church, be read.’
Peter, priest of Alexandria, and chief of the notaries, read; ( 46 )
“Colestine, bishop, to the holy Synod assembled at Ephesus, beloved
and most welcome brethren, salvation in the Lord.
** The presence of the Holy Ghost is proved by the assembly of
the priests, for time is what we read, because truth cannot lie, whose
expression in the Gospel is as follows (Matt, xviii. 20): —* For
where two or three are met together in my name, there am lin
the midst of them.’ If this be the case, if even to this number so
small the Holy Ghost is not found wanting, must we not believe so
much the more that he be present where united are gathered
together such a great number of priests 1 For holy is, in accor-
dance with the esteem due to it, the Council (other reading conci-
lium; Greek auveSpiov); in it we must perceive the reverence (rever-
entia, aXXajkta) of that greatest assembly of the Apostles of which we
read. Never was the teacher wanting to these whom they had
(46) This letter dated May 8, 431, is found in all the collections of the
councils, likewise in Constant Epist. Rom. Pont. Paris, 1721 fol., Vol. I.
(single) 1155 ; (Comp. Jaff'eJ&e g. num. 161, Mansi v. 569). From the Latin
original, with which the Greek text of Mansi agrees minutely, my verbatim
translation has been made. The letter begins “Spiritus sancti testatur
pnesentiam. ”


received to preach; with them was always the Lord and teacher ;
"but the teaching ones likewise were never deserted by their teacher.
He taught, who did send. He taught who had said what they
should teach. , He taught, who in His Apostles affirms that he will
be heard (listened to). This care-for the delegated teaching came
'(fell) upon all (together) in common : from hereditary right we are
driven to this care, whereever we may preach in their stead the
name of the Lord throughout the whole earth, it being said to them:
*Go ye, and teach all nations.’ Ye, brethren, must notice that we
have received a universal (general) mandate ; He also wanted that
we should all do this, He who gave to all in common their office.
It is therefore necessary that we duly follow our predecessors. Let
■all of us bear the cares (troubles) of those whom we have
followed in honour. We apply diligence to their sermon, to which,
as the apostle admonishes, we are not to add any sermon (teaching).
Not less important than the office of the one who delivers is the
care for that which is delivered (taught). The former cast
the seed of belief; this our care must watch, that when the Father
of our family come He find sound and manifold fruit, which alone
can spring from the fertility of the apostles. For, as is spoken by
the vessel chosen, ‘ planting and watering does not suffice, if God
does not give growth.’ With common work we must therefore
•strive, that we guard that which is believed (other reading:
delivered), and has been kept by the apostolic succession hitherto.
For it is demanded of us that we follow the path of the apostles.
For it is not a form (species, person), but our belief which is
called to account (sed tides nostra vocatur ad causam). Spiritual
arms are to be taken, because these are wars of the Spirit, and the
words (are) arrows ; that we might remain firm in the belief of our
king. All those there at present the apostle admonishes to remain
where he commanded Timothy to remain (1 Tim. i. 3). The same
place, the same subject, demand likewise at present the same calling.
We also must now investigate (betreiben, follow, enact) and study,
what he intended to achieve at that time : that no one opine differ-
ently, and no one give heed to those questions which are
principally offered in the fables (et quaestiones pracstantibus max-
ime fabulis, ne quis intendat. The Greek text is just as difficult
to render), he commanding himself: let us be of the one
mind, one, because thus it behoves us, thinking : let us demand
nothing by quarrelling, do nothing by (for) vain conceit; one soul
and one heart be all in all, the belief, which is the one, being estab-
lished (coined). May the whole college feel sad, aye, grieve about
this in concert with us (collegium, awsSiov). He is called to judg-
ment who will judge the world, he will be (examined) investigated
who will investigate the whole world, and calumnity suffers who
redeemed. Your brotherhood be girt with the arms of belief.
You know which helmet protects our head, which mail encloses the
breast. Not now only did the camps (Lager) of the Church
receive you as leaders. Let nobody doubt, with God’s favour who
makes both into one, that peace will come after the laying down of


the arms, if the subject defend itself. Let us look back to those 1
words of our teacher which he uses exactly with regard to the
bishops preaching this (words of Paul, Acts of the Apostles xx. 28):
‘ Take heed,’ said he, ‘ therefore unto yourselves and to all the
flock, over the which the Holy Ghost has made you (overseers)
bishops to feed (govern) the Church of God which he hath purchased
with His own blood.’ From this (thence) we read that those are
called who should hear that, whither your holiness has come to-
gether. To the Ephesians, therefore, to whom the preaching of
the belief is known, he now made known likewise our (other
reading, vestra) defence of same. Let us offer to those by such
dedication of our mind that firmness by which is worthy what is
great; what in pious spirit the constant quiet (order) did preserve.
May be announced by you what has inviolably been reigning
(taught) since (the time of) the apostles, because the words
of tyrannical ruling were never admitted (accepted, authorized)
against the king of the kings, nor could the object of truth
be smothered by falseness. I admonish you, most holy brethren,
to regard only that love, in which throughout, by the voice of
the apostle John, whose relics present you venerate, we must
remain (abide). Be the prayer to the Lord one in common. We
know what power will come to such (that) divine presence , when
such a great number of priests pray in the one mind, for, as we
read, that place could be moved in which twelve prayed with the one
voice (in the printed text of Mansi stands loculus. Colestine refers
to the miracle, Acts iv. 31. It should therefore be locus, except
that loculus, which is used by Forcellini in the sense of sermo
could mean ‘place of speech.’ The Greek has: xouxouc bcsivos XW£IV
Suvaxai, other reading : xotoc exeivoc, &c.) What was the prayer of
the apostles 1 That they might receive to preach the word of God
with confidence, and to act by His power, from whom they had
received in Christ our God such power. And for your holy
assembly what else is to be prayed for, but that you may speak
the word of Christ with confidence? that you, full of the Holy Ghost,
as is written, though with different tongue, adduce as one what had
been taught by the Holy Ghost. By this briefly reminded, (enlivened)
—because, as the apostle says, ‘ I speak to those who hnoio the
law, and speak wisdom among the perfect’ (Rom. vii. 1,1 Cor. i. 17),
remain in the Catholic belief, and defend the order (quiet) of the
Church, because it is thus said of the past, the present, and the
future, in praying and keeping what is conducive to the peace of
Jerusalem (Psalm 131). We have sent with our (due) care our
holy brethren and (fellow) priests, with you of the one mind and
well approved, who are to be present during the transactions, and
execute what has been ordained by us previously. For we doubt
not that your Holiness will give your consent, because that, which
is treated of seems to be ordained for the safety of the whole Church.
Given viii. Idus Maii, Basso et Antiocho cons.”
And the acts proceed :
“All the most venerable bishops called out at once : ‘that is a


just sentence’ (judgment). To the new Paul Colestine, to the new
Paul Cyrillus, to Colestine, the guardian of faith, to Colestine
agreeing with the Synod, Colestine offers thanks the whole Synod.
One Colestine, one Cyrillus, one belief of the Synod, one belief of
the globe.” (Mansi iv. 1287). ( 47 )
To this letter, which so clearly, so plainly contains the confirma-
tion of that which previous to July 18, 1870, had and could he
looked upon as the teaching of the Church with regard to infallibility,
and the relation of the primate to the episcopate, which in its
grand (pathetic), its real apostolic language contrasts with the
decree of July 18, 1870 (which dozens of the fathers of the
Council, even infallibilistic ones, accused, according to the official
Synopsis observationum, of dry, juristical coldness) as pure wine
with dull (ice) water, —to this I have nothing to add but the
words itself, pointed to by the Pope Colestine, taken from the
letter of Paul to the Galatians i. 6.”
“ I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called
you into the grace of Ghrist unto another Gospel, (7) which is not
another; but there be some that trouble you, and would perveit
the Gospel of Christ. (8) But though we, or an angel from heaven
preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed /” ( 4S )
(4 7) x n the Actio YI. of the Condi. Chalcedonense (Mansi vii. 170) is
said : —“ Our most divine and pious emperor spoke to the holy synod , let
the holy synod state whether the definition now read is the exposition oj
all the bishops. All replied, we all believe thus : One belief, one will; we
all think the same, we all have approvingly signed, we are all orthodox.
This is the belief of the fathers, this is the belief of the apostles, this the
belief of the orthodox, this belief has saved the globe. To Marcian the new;
Constantine, to the new Paulas, to the new David, the years of David to t le
emperor, to him the pious Lord the life, to the new Constantine, to the new
Marcian. May vour belief sustain you. Christ whom thou honourest
guard thee Himself. Thou hast strengthened the orthodox belief; as the
apostles, so do you believe. To the empress many years. You the lights ot
the orthodox belief, on account of these, peace reigns everywhere. Lord,
do you protect the lights of peace. The lights of the world, do guard them,
Lord. Eternal memory to. the new Constantine. She who is of the ortho-
dox sex, may God protect her; the watchman of belief, let God protect
him,” &c. .
(4D Who are meant by those who in accordance with 7, do conjuse, may
be seen by the reader in the second chapter where verse 1, Petrus, is called
such a one. Courage, therefore ! If Peter even could vex the congregation
by his connivance towards false views of a dogmatical character (the obliga-
tion of the Gentiles to become circumcised as a condition of salvation), that
Paul did blame him so strongly, then the Church may overcome that a
mere successor of Peter confuses same by dogmatical teaching.


INDEX.
Page.
Preface by Translator ... ... ... ... ... iii.
Preface to the Second Edition ... ... ... ... vL
Declaration as Introduction ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
§ I. Content of the Caput IV. de Eom. Pont. Mag. of the Constit.
prima, of July 18, 1870 ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
§ll. Logical Consequences ... ... ... ... 14
§ 111. Judicial Consequences ... ... ... ... 15
§ IV. Papal Doctrines, simple and ex cathedra, showing the relation
of the popes to states, countries, nations, and individuals ... 19
§ V. Objections to the foregoing in order to quiet conscience, and the
refutation of the said objections ... ... ... 49
§ VI. Political Considerations ... ... ... ... 68
§ VII. Extracts from the Civilta Cattolica, showing the laws of the
Church as bearing on its relation to the State ... ... ... 74
§ VIII. Short Reflection, showing the relative position of the Jesuits
to the pope ... ... ... 83
§ IX. Falseness of the teachings of the popes concerning the relation
of the Church to the State from Gregory VII., and the Imperial
Infallibility ... ... ... 86
Andrews, Thomas, & Clark, Printers, Greafell-St., Adelaide.
