

THE ESSENCE
OF
SEPARATION:
BEING A DRAFT OF A SUGGESTED LETTER FROM
THE NORTH TO LORD KNUTSFORD, IN ANSWER
TO HIS LORDSHIP’S DETERMINATION ON THE
SEPARATION QUESTION IN MAY, 1887,
WITH APPENDICES
DEALING WITH SIR S. W. GRIFFITH'S REPORT ON THE SEPARATION
CASE, AND WITH THE FITNESS OF THE NORTH FOR
SELF-GOVERNMENT.
By WILLIAM COOTE,
THE HISTORY OF QUEENSLAND," “THE CAPITAL
QUEENSLAND,” AND SOMETIME SECRETARY FOR
TH QUEENSLAND SEPARATION COUNCIL.
[ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.]
TOWNSVILLE:
AT THE OFFICE OF HASTINGS & JONES, FLINDERS ST.


®0 mg Jrimbs:
DODD S. CLARKE,
Whose uniform hindness I cannot sufficientlij appreciate,
and whose great fault is that he does not realise his own
abilities;
ROBERT CHRISTISON,
not less as a Friend than as an ardent worker in the
cause of Separation; and to
JAMES GORDON, of Cluden,
of whom, as no one can say evil, I need say not fl
| insfri&f tin:; rifcrrf
on behalf of the general cause of the
WILLIAM


THE ESSENCE OF
SEPARATION.
||N the last letter that was written by the present writer on the
J|l Separation question, it was suggested that a form of letter to Lord
|| Knutsford might be of some value, more as giving information
upon the essential point which lies at the basis of the whole
question than as contributing to what might be called a barren contro-
versy. Summing up briefly, that point is this : If the people of the
North desire self-government, to whom are they to appeal, and in whom
is the power vested of giving it ?
The writer was anxious to disentangle this question from the
perplexing misrepresentations which had been made. Theoretical
disquisitions as to the right of a Parliament, sitting in a remote corner
of a vast territory of 668,000 square miles in area, to dictate to the
whole of its inhabitants did not trouble him. The question was not
one of opinion, but of fact; and the fundamental fact to be ascertained
was, upon what basis did the right to self-government of any Australian
colony outside of South Australia and Western Australia rest? To
that he applied himself with such ability as his age permitted, and with
such means as were at his command.
He found that the present colony of New South Wales did not
exist as an inherited, but as a created constitution, under laws em-
bodying reservations which during half a century were strictly guaran-
teed, as it seemed to him—-not from a desire to maintain a prerogative,
hut—to secure to the people who might hereafter inhabit what was
then, in a great part, an unknown wilderness, protection against the
unjust domination of early settlers and their descendants, over those
who in future times entered upon an occupation which they themselves
were unable to effect. He who reads history rightly will find no more
beneficent legislation than that of the mother country with respect to
the vast territory once placed under the jurisdiction of New South
Wales. For as new communities grew, it gave them a right to claim
those powers of self-government which the first attained, which made
them prosperous, and which by inevitable analogy must be supposed to
exert the same effect upon the younger ones.


Sins of presumption are supposed by some casuists to be more
heinous than any other mental crime. The writer of the suggested
letter to Lord Knutsford should be acquitted of any such iniquity. He
simply desired to lay before his readers a plain statement of all the
facts in Imperial legislation which might entitle them, on just grounds,
to insist upon it that the Imperial laws, to which we owe so much,
should not be violated, and the Imperial pledges should not be broken.
The writer has only a few words to add. He thought that any
such letter should be signed by representative men of all classes, the
members of Parliament elected by their constituencies, the mayors of
Municipalities, the chairmen of Divisional Boards, and, probably, not
the least effective, the heads of the great labour leagues. All are, or
ought to be, earnest on a question which which concerns themselves,
and those that come after them.
The writer has endeavoured to present to his readers a full expo-
sition of their interest in this matter; but he warns them that, whatever
their interest may be, there is something higher to be thought of. Ihe
Duke of Newcastle’s precedent conditions to any Separation are, as
have been laid before you, these: That the interest and wishes of the
people will entitle them to the fulfilment of the Imperial promises. If
these promises are inviolable—as the writer believes, and has insisted
they are—if these interests and those of generations to come require
self-government—and if from petty jealousies and conflicting, or even
worse influences, these wishes are left unexpressed—the community
which permits it will not stand very creditably in the pages of
contemporaneous history; and may, and will, deserve condemnation in
that which will hereafter be written, when he who now writes, and those
who now read, are silent and forgotten.
W. COOTE.
Townsville, January 1, 1889.
To the Right Honorable Henry Thurstane Holland, Baron
Knutsford, in the Peerage of Great Britain, Her Majesty s I nn-
cipal Secretary of State for the Colonies.
My Lord,— Eighteen months having elapsed since your Lordship’s
reply to the deputation from North Queensland which waited upon you
in May 1887, and no substantial efforts having been made in the
direction suggested in that reply, and your Lordship s subsequent
despatch to the late Governor of Queensland, we are compelled, in
courtesy to your Lordship, as well as in the interests of the North, to
resume the correspondence. It might, at first sight, seem that there
has been an unjustifiable delay in that resumption; but we beg to
deprecate any such imputation. We have waited to see what the
Legislature and Government of Queensland would do towards carrying
your Lordship’s recommendations into effect; and, when finding, at the
end of the second session of Parliament since they were given, tha'
nothing practical had been done, we thought it desirable to renew the
correspondence. Some time was occupied in collecting the information


which it was necessary to lay before your Lordship, and in arranging it
in the most convenient form for perusal and reference.
(2) A Parliamentary paper laid before the Queensland Legislature
during the Session of 1887, and entitled “Further correspondence
respecting the proposed Separation of Northern Queensland,” contained,
along with certain items of minor importance, a copy of Sir S. W.
Griffith’s report on the subject; a copy of a despatch from the late
Governor to your Lordship, enclosing and commenting upon that
report; and a copy of your despatch to him embodying the conclusions
expressed at the interviews in May, 1887. It is with these last that
we propose to deal; but, before doing so, we take leave to ask your
Lordship’s attention to some brief preliminary observations.
(3) Two years, my Lord, have elapsed since the late Sir Anthony
Musgrave’s despatch was sent from this colony to the Secretary of
State ; and not only has nothing been practically effected towards the
redress of the grievances complained of in the petition, and the corres-
pondence following upon its presentation, but the damage done to the
interests of North Queensland by its subjection to a Southern adminis-
tration has accumulated, and continues to accumulate to an intolerable
degree. There is no other alternative—there can now be no other—
that will delay a deep-seated and angry feeling of discontent throughout
the North, than complete territorial separation. It is the only means
towards the satisfactory administration of its government by men
dwelling amongst their own people, versed in and identified with their
resources development and prosperity, and familiar from long and
daily experience with their requirements and wishes. The simplicity of
the remedy is in strict consistency with the equally simple machinery
required to carry it into effect.
(4) For what, my Lord, are they ? The first implies no organic
changes. It supposes the continuance of the laws now in force under
those fundamental ones upon which the constitution of Queensland was
created, and by which it exists, and in consistency with which any
change hereafter found necessary must be made. It calls for no more-
than the substitution of two governments for two territories, in place of
one administering the affairs of both; satisfying neither, and seriously
damaging the interests of the two. This division effected, each would
be able to deal more independently and freely with its own require-
ments, and with less strain upon its administrative resources than a
single one could hope for in attempting to manage the whole. As to
the machinery to be employed, the legislation of nearly half a century
has made ample provision. That which was sufficient in 1859, to
separate from New South Wales the districts north of the 29th degree
of south latitude, and erect them into the colony of Queensland, is just
as efficient now to separate the districts above the 22nd degree from
Queensland, and to erect them into a new colony, by whatever name it
may be called. Of course, nothing can be taken for granted, or
accepted without demonstration. We trust to be able to satisfy your
Lordship as to both the positions taken up.


(c), The correspondence in the Parliamentary paper may be
separated under two divisions. Firstly, that which relates to the
respective positions of the Imperial Parliament of the Crown, and o
Colonial Parliaments, with regard to the separation of colonies, and the
creation of new ones, and which includes your Lordships reply to the
deputation, and the subsequent despatch to the Governor of Queens-
land : secondly, that which relates to the statement of the case in
support ot the petition, and the objections made to it, which includes
Sir S W Griffith’s report, and the late Governor’s comments upon it,
and will’ be dealt with in Appendix Ato this letter. We quote your
Lordship’s reply to the deputation, so far as it bears directly on the
question at issue. Your Lordship observes .
We are advised that it would be competent for the Imperial Parliament to
mss an act for the division of the colony, but in our opinion it would be very
difficult and undesirable for Her Majesty’s Government to adopt any such
course until we had before us either some resolution, or address, or Bill, passed
bv the Legislature of the colony; until some overwhelming case wefe made
oht which "would justify such an interference. I cannot admit there is an
exact parallel between the present case and the case of Moreton Bay, because
in the latter case a special power was reserved to the Imperial Government to
make the separation which was subsequently found necessary; whereas we are
asked in the present case to exercise a latent power a power which would be
received with jealousy in all the large colonies; and a power which of late
“ we have never exercised. There is no instance in late years, since the
years we nave eatness they have, of the Imperial Legislature passing
C a°n Act inuring the adniiJistration of one of those great colonies,
except at the request of the Colonial Government.
And in your Lordship’s letter to the Governor of Queensland you
remark :
Imperial legislation, not supported by resolution or legislation of the
ColonAl Parliainent, for the purpose of taking away a portion of the territory
formally placed under the control of the local Legislature by the Constitution
S would be a very serious interference with that responsible Government
under which the settlement of the colony has been developed, and its obliga-
tions have been undertaken, and would only be justifiable if, after a long trial,
Mother means of removing any administrative defects should prove m-
CtreC Tt V will be necessary in the first instance to test fairly the prospects of your
establishing branches of Government departments in the Northern
districts and to ascertain by a careful system of book-keeping accounts
whether* after the expiration of a further term a reasonable proportion of the
colonial revenue has been expended m the Northern districts.
(6). We crave leave, with the utmost possible respect to your
Lordship, to inform you that we can in nowise agree with the conefu-
sions arrived at by your Lordship as expressed in your reply to the
deputation, and in your letter to the late Governor ot Queensland;
neither can we admit the accuracy of the statements, apparently sup-
plied to your Lordship, upon which those conclusions are founded
Not to controvert both would be dangerous towards Her Majesty s
Government; and weak and discreditable in those who stand pledged
to advocate, to the best of their ability, the interests of the North, and
the justice of its claims.


(?)• Your Lordship’s conclusions appear to be these: —(i) That
the Separation applied for cannot be granted except by Imperial legisla-
tion, supported by some address, resolution, or Bill of the Colonial
Parliament; because (2) to take away any territory formally placed
under the control of the local Legislature by the Constitution Acts
would be a very serious interference with the responsible Government
of the colony ; (3) your Lordship’s reply to the deputation affirms the
power to effect such a Separation to be a “ latent ” one, which has not
been exerted of late years, and if exercised now, unless at the request
of the Queensland Legislature, would be viewed with jealousy in all the
large colonies as interfering with their administration; (4) parentheti-
cally, your Lordship describes the separation of Moreton Bay to have
been made under a special power reserved to the Imperial Government
to make the Separation that was subsequently found necessary; (5) the
possibility of an “ overwhelming case ” justifying the action of Her
Majesty’s Government is suggested as superseding a necessity for the
approval of the Legislature, We trust that we have stated your
Lordship’s contention accurately and with sufficient precision.
(8) Before dealing in detail with the first and second points, we
beg to draw your Lordship’s attention to certain primary questions, the
answers to which would possibly be decisive on the principal points
concerned. (1) When the Imperial Legislature has, by statute vested
in the Crown a defined power, to be exercised through a prescribed
instrument, and that statute has never been repealed, but, on the con-
trary, reaffirmed by subsequent legislation—is not that power still
effective for the purposes for which it was designed ? (2) While the
legislation remains unrepealed, can the Crown divest itself, or can it be
divested, of its power, by any authority less than that by which it was
created ? If neither can be done, what remains but to administer it
according to the conditions by which its administration is controlled ?
(9) We presume to think that the consecutive evidence which we
have now to adduce will not only clearly show the nature of the powers
originally vested in the Crown, and that they remain intact in them-
selves, but that they have been extended in their operation, and are
consequently more effective for the purpose proposed, than they were at
their first creation.
(i°). Ihe power of the Crown, in relation to the formation and
division of new colonies, in the vast territory at one time under the
Government of New South Wales, was first defined with admirable
precision, in the 51st section of the Imperial Act sth and 6th Victoria c.
76, entitled “An Act for the Government of New South Wales and Van
Dieman’s Land,” and passed in the year 1842, That it may be clearly
understood we transcribe the whole of the section :
And whereas the said colony of New South Wales is of great extent, and
it may be fit that the territories now comprised within the said colony should
be divided into separate colonies ; and provision should be made for the tempo-
rary administration of the Government of any such newly created colony as,
not being comprised within the limits hereinafter mentioned, may not possess
a sufficient population for the immediate establishment therein of the form of
Government hereinbefore provided; be it therefore enacted that anything


hereinbefore contained to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall be lawful for
Her Majesty, by Letters Patent, to be from time to time issued under the
Great Seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, to define, as
to Her Majesty shall seem meet, the limits of the colony of New South Wales;
and to erect into a separate colony, or colonics, any territories which now are,
or are reported to be, or may hereafter be comprised, within the said colony of
New South Wales, provided always that no part of the territories lying south-
ward of the 26th degree of latitude, in the said colony of New South Wales,
shall by any such Letters Patent as aforesaid, be detached from the colony.
(u). The language of the section conveys its intended operation
clearly enough. The territory, at least nominally, under the jurisdic-
tion of New South Wales in 1842, comprised all Australia outside the
colonies of South Australia and Western Australia, The intention of
the framers of the Act was to vest absolutely in the Crown a general
power to define the limits of the future colony of New South Wales, as
far as definition was then practicable j and to create, in the remainder
of that vast area, any such colonies as, in the exercise of its discretion,
it might think proper. The reservation in favor of New South Wales
was, that no territory should be taken from it south of the 26th degree
of south latitude. Any interference by the Imperial Parliament-
much less by a colonial one—in the exercise of the power itself, was not
even so much as suggested. We take leave, moreover, to draw your
Lordship’s attention to the word “colonies,” its true application having
a most important bearing upon our subsequent contention; and it
certainly does indicate that the intention of the framers of the Act was
to grant a power to reduce the then limits of New South Wales to a
manageable extent ; to provide far further subdivision ; and not merely
to create only one more colony, in great part an unknown wilderness,
and nearly twice the area of that from which it was separated.
(12) We have next respectfully to draw your Lordship’s attention
to the Imperial Act 13th and 14th Victoria c. 59, passed in the year
1850, and entitled “An Act for the better government of Her Majesty’s
Australian colonies.” With its general provisions we have no concern,
but as bearing upon the point at issue it calls for notice. It reaffirmed
the powers vested by the original Act without the slightest abatement,
and it first suggested initiative application for the creation of a new
colony from the residents therein; on the weight to be attached to
which the Duke of Newcastle dwelt so strongly, nineteen years after-
wards.
(13) The next Act in the series is the Imperial Act 18th and 19th
Victoria c. 54, passed in 1855, and scheduling a Bill for the establish-
ment of responsible government in New South Wales, which had been
passed by the Legislature of that colony, and transmitted to England
for Her Majesty’s approval. The two form what is known as the old
New South Wales Constitution. The 7th section of the Imperial Act
runs thus: —
It shall be lawful for Her Majesty, by Letters Patent, to be issued under
the Great Seal of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, to erect
into a separate colony or colonies any territories which may be separated from
New South Wales by such alteration as aforesaid of the northern boundary


thereof*—and in and by such Letters Patent, or by Order-in-Council—to make
provision for the government of any such colony, and for the establishment of
a Legislature therein— in manner as nearly resembling the form and govern-
ment which shall be at such time established in New South Wales, as the
circumstances of such colony will allow ; and full power shall be given, in and
by such Letters Patent, or Order-in-Council, to the Legislature of such colony
to make further provision in that behalf.
I his Act was the last affirming only a general power in Her Majesty’s
Government to create new colonies in any part of the territories at the
time comprised in the colony of New South Wales, and to provide for
their government; and we beg to lay before your Lordship two impor-
tant facts connected with it. The power before granted was reaffirmed ;
the restrictive provision as to similarity of government was repealed by
a subsequent Imperial Act, hereafter referred to. Do either of these
indicate the slightest intention by the Imperial Government to abandon
its vested powers ?
(rq). Having, as briefly as possible, traced the course of Imperial
legislation relative to the separation of territory and the creation of new
colonies, from its commencement in 1842 to the enactment of the
measure which gave responsible government to New South Wales in
1 855, it becomes our duty to inform your Lordship on the circumstances
attendant upon the severance of the territory, now called Queensland,
from the parent colony in 1859, four years after the Act of 1855 came
into operation. For some time previously, efforts had been made to
place before the Imperial authorities the wish for self-government of the
population of Moreton Bay, and of the districts immediately behind it.
After 1855 these efforts became more concentrated, and the opposition
to them not less bitter, nor more unscrupulous, than that offered to the
claims of North Queensland at the present time. Sir Charles Fitzroy
and Sir William Denison, successive Governors of New South Wales,
wrote strong despatches condemnatory of the proposed separation.
The Legislature vehemently protested; but made no claim to subordi-
nate the exercise of a general Imperial authority to the approval of a
solitary colonial Parliament—the majority of its members interested in
preventing the self-government due to the people by whom it was
desired. And we regret to be compelled to assure your Lordship that,
whoever informed you that, in the case of Moreton Bay, “ a special
power was reserved by the Imperial Government to make the separation
that was subsequently found necessary,” either misunderstood or mis-
stated the tacts connected with it. Such a reservation was never made;
no special power was enacted or needed. The general powers vested
in the Crown were exercised in the particular instance; and Moreton
Bay had not been mentioned in the legislation preceding the issue of
the Letters Patent creating the colony of Queensland; nor was it in
the Letters Patent. Of the accuracy of this statement the Letters
Patent and the Order-in-Council afford full proof; and for the entire
satisfaction of your Lordship, we quote such portions of the Letters
Patent as will establish it.
*From the 26th degree of S. latitude to the 30th j 13 and 14 Victoria
c. 59 s. 34.


(15) The Letters Patent run thus :
Whereas by a reserved Bill the Legislature of New South Wales, passed in
the seventeenth year of our reign, as amended by an Act, passed in the Session
of Parliament holden in the eighteenth and nineteenth years of our reign,
entitled “An Act to enable Her Majesty to assent to a Bill as amended of the
Legislature of New South Wales to confer a Constitution on Neto South Wales
and to grant a Civil List to Her Majesty,” it is enacted, that nothing therein
contained should be deemed to prevent us from altering the boundary of the
colony of New South Wales on the north, in such manner as to us might seem
lit, and it was further enacted by the said last enacted Act, that if toe should at
any time exercise the power given to us, by any Letters Patent, etc., from time
to time, issued under the Great Seal of our United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Ireland, to erect into a separate colony, or colonics, any territories which
might he separated from our said, colony of New South, Wales, by such alteration
as aforesaid of the boundary thereof; and in and by such Letters Patent, or by
Order-in-Council, to make provision for the government of any such separate
colony; and for the establishment of a Legislature therein; in a manner as
nearly resembling the form of Government and Legislature which should be at
such time established in New South Wales, as the circumstances of each
separate colony would allow; and that full power should be given by such
Letters Patent, or Order-in-Council, to the Legislature of such separate colony,
to make further provision in that behalf. Now, know you that in pursuance of
the powers vested in us, etc., etc.
(16) The Letters Patent, my Lord, affirm that they were issued
by the Crown in pursuance of the powers vested in it by an Act of the
Imperial Parliament —the only authority competent so to vest them.
If they cannot be called into operation without the prior consent of a
colonial Legislature, this absurdity follows : that Imperial legislation is
subordinate to colonial approval ; a result which, if acquiesced in,
would throw the situations between the Imperial and colonial Govern-
ments into inextricable confusion, a consequence which must be unde-
sirable, and might be disastrous. It is proper, therefore, that we
should, with great deference to your Lordship, suggest that if the “ lex
consuetudino of Parliament is not conferred upon the Legislature of a
colony by the introduction of English common law, and there is no
distinction exists in this respect between colonial Legislative Councils
and Assemblies whose power is derived from the Crown, or created by
the authority of an Act of Parliament —then the Queensland Legis-
lature—the only Australian one concerned in our contention —must
show that the claim set up for it has a statutory foundation. On this
point, however, we trouble your Lordship no further than to observe
that the possibility of such a claim appears never to have been contem-
plated by the authors of the statutes which have been cited, and is not
even alluded to in the Consolidated Constitution Act of this colony,
passed in 1867 by the local Parliament.
(17) Of the Order-in-Council, of concurrent date with the Letters
Patent, it is only necessary to say that it made provision for the ad-
ministration of justice in Queensland, and for the regulation of
procedure relative to Bills reserved for Her Majesty’s assent —and was
# Fenton and Hampton. Judgment on appeal given by Lord Justice
Knight Bruce Right Hon. J. Pemberton. Sir Frederick Pollock (Lord Chief
Baron) and Lord Chief Justice Turner. —Moore’s Privy Council Reports, Yol. 11.


issued under the authority of the statutes relating thereto, in like
manner as the Letters Patent were issued.
(18) We have now to solicit your Lordship’s consideration of the
Imperial Act 24 and 25 Victoria c. 44, passed in 1861—two years
after the issue of the Letters Patent by which the colony of Queensland
was created—which is the last, and not the least important, of the
series of Imperial legislation connected with the division of old
Australian colonies, and the creation of new ones; whether the con-
tinuance of the powers vested in Her Majesty in that behalf, or the
consequences resulting from their exercise, are to be taken into
account. The causes of its enactment were these: Disputes arose
almost immediately after the Government of Queensland entered upon
its duties, as to whether the provisions in the Order-in Council complied
with the seventh section of the 18th and 19th Victoria c. 54; and the
validity of proceedings of the Queensland Legislature and Government
were impugned. The adjustment of boundaries between adjoining
colonies required regulation; and in connection with that necessity
was a dispute between South Australia and New South Wales respecting
the right to some territory which each claimed as its own; out of
which sprang a question as to the annexing power of the Crown where
territory remained unappropriated. Queensland and New South Wales
could not arrive, and seemed unlikely to arrive, at any arrangement as
to the settlement of their common and mutual monetary relations
(which, in fact has never yet been arrived at); and Queensland, having
a huge territory, not one-third of which was occupied, had applied for
the addition of that large area which lies between the 138th and 141st
degree of east longitude, and extends from the 28th degree of south
latitude to the 17th, on the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
(19) To deal with these complications, the Act 24th and 25th
Victoria c. 54 was passed by the Imperial Parliament in 1861, and as
we have said, two years after the issue of the Letters Patent creating
the colony. It validated all the disputed proceedings of the Legislature
and Government of Queensland under the Order-in-Council and Letters
Patent; it repealed the provision in the seventh section of the 18th and
19th Victoria c. 54, enforcing conformity by the Government and
Legislature of new colonies, to those existing at the time in New South
Wales, but left the other portions of that section in full force; it
provided for the settlement, of future boundary disputes in a simple and
effective manner ; but, so far from ignoring the previous legislation on
the subject, it recited the powers it had vested in the Crown, and added
to them a further power by Letters Patent, to “ annex to any colony
which is, or may hereafter , be established, on the continent of Australia,
any territories which, in the exercise of the powers hereinbefore
mentioned, might have been erected into a separate colony,”—reserving
to the Crown the right of determining the period for which such Letters
should remain in force, or of altering or revoking them altogether. In
its sixth section it provides for the adjustment or appointment of the
public debt or monies; “in the event of any territory being hereafter
separated from any Australian colony, and either erected into a separate


colony or annexed to any other colony,” if disputes arose as to either.
It is hardly necessary to point out to your Lordship that this section
distinctly recognises the power of Separation reserved to the Crown by
previous statutes, as continuing after the creation of the colony of
Queensland. If it does not, its language has no meaning; and it is to
be further noted that, from first to last, there is not the slightest refer-
ence to any right, active or latent, in any colonial Parliament, to
require that its consent must be obtained before the Crown could
exercise its powers, whenever it seemed necessary or desirable to do so.
(20) We have now to lay before your Lordship the circumstances
attendant upon the temporary annexation to Queensland of the ad-
ditional territory applied for by its Legislature, to which we referred on
the 19th paragraph of this letter. In the Letters Patent creating the
colony, its western boundary is said to be the eastern boundary of
South Australia, but in reality it was then, and is now, the 138th
degree of east longitude. An area was thus left between that parallel
and the then western boundary of Queensland —the 141st degree —and
bounded on the south by the 29th degree of south latitude, and on the
north by the Gulf of Carpentaria, which remained, apparently, outside
any defined jurisdiction. Actually it then formed part of the un-
appropriated country comprised within the colony of New South
Wales; which was bounded on the east by the 138th degree of east
longitude, on the north by the Gulf of Carpentaria and the Arafura
Sea, on the west by the 129th degree of east longitude, and on the
south by the 26th degree of south latitude; but, on the assumption
that the portion westward of the 138th degree was destitute of govern-
ment, and liable to degenerate from savage barbarism to civilised
lawlessness, the Government of Queensland applied for the annexation
of the portion described to their colony.
(21) The Duke of Newcastle, then Secretary of State for the
Colonies in the Ministry of my Lord Palmerston, at first refused the
application; but, in the interval of his refusal and the enactment of the
24th and 25th Victoria, Sir George Bowen, the first Governor of the
colony, pertinaciously urged that it should be granted. His Grace
possibly viewed with disfavor the addition of a large area to one
already enormous; and division rather than aggregation was the
traditional policy of the Colonial Office at that time, as a despatch
from him to Sir William Denison, dated the 18th August, 1855, and
relating to the separation of Queensland —coupled with the previously
expressed opinions of his predecessors, clearly indicated. He wrote
thus :
It will be desirable that the Crown should possess the power of sub-
dividing further the territory now created into the colony of Queensland by
detaching from it such northern portions as may be hereafter found fit to bo
erected into separate colonies.
The passage of the last mentioned Act smoothed his difficulties. His
Grace granted the application ; but on what terms is clearly shown by
the despatch dated 14th December, 1861, announcing that he had
done so. In it he writes; —


It must, however, be distinctly understood (as I gather from the 14th
paragraph of your despatch it is understood) by the Legislature of Queensland,
that the annexation of the territory, which will be revocable under the terms
of that Act, will probably be in fact revoked, when the growth of population,
or other circumstances, shall, in the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government,
render Separation desirable for the interests of the new territory. . . For
although, as you are aware, I do not feel myself at liberty, without the
strongest grounds, to alter the boundaries of colonies once fixed, without the
consent and acquiescence of the inhabitants, I am not prepared to abandon, on
the part of Her Majesty’s Government, the power to deal with districts not yet
settled, as the wishes and convenience of the future settlers may require.
The language of the Duke of Newcastle admits of no other con-
struction than that the non-settlement of territory included in the area
of a new colony at the time of its creation leaves the future settlers
upon it free to claim self-government; and the Crown, under the
powers vested in it, to grant their request “as their wishes and
convenience might require.” The 51st section of the sth and 6th
Victoria c. 76 authorises the creation of new colonies, even if they have
not sufficient population for the establishment of the form of govern-
ment prescribed by the Act itself. And there was no settlement or
occupation —and the two terms have very different meanings—above
the 22nd parallel of south latitude in Queensland on the 6th June,
1859, when the Letters Patent creating that colony were issued, while
the number of the present northern population is four times, and its
contributions to the revenue seven fold, the population and revenue of
Moreton Bay at that time.
(22). It is proper, for the further information of your Lordship,
before leaving this part of the case, to call your attention to the latest
exercise of the powers vested in the Crown, with regard to the appoint-
ment of Australian territory; the Letters Patent which, on the 6th
July, 1863, annexed to the colony of South Australia the remainder of
the area once comprised within the limits of New South Wales. After
reciting the powers vested in the Crown by the sth and 6th Victoria
c. 76, and the 24th and 25th Victoria c 44, it proceeds thus: —
Now know you that we have thought fit, in pursuance of the powers so
vested in us, and of all other powers and authorities to us in that behalf
belonging, to annex, and we do hereby annex, to our said colony cf South
Australia, until we think fit to make other disposition thereof, or any part or
parts thereof, so much of our said colony of New South Wales as lies to the
northward of the 26th parallel of south latitude, and between the one hundred
and twenty-ninth and one hundred and thirty-eighth degree of east longitude,
together with the bays and gulfs therein, and all and every the islands ad-
jacent to any part of the main land, within such limits as aforesaid, with the
rights, limits, and appurtances, and we do hereby reserve to us, our heirs and
successors, full power and authority, from time to time, to revoke, or alter,
these our Letter Patent, as to us or them shall seem fit.
Your Lordship wall see that the nature of the powers exercised in
both annexations follows the Imperial legislation we have cited, and
that no other authority is recognised, and no other machinery is
employed, than those prescribed in it to carry both into effect. A
minor, but still important, consequent of the two Letters Patent is that
neither confers a tenure in perpetuity—but only a tenure determinable
at the discretion of the crown, whenever circumstances may require its


change or revocation. The Governments of both colonies accepted
those tenures under the statutes cited; the Legislature of Queensland
specifically recognised the conditions attached to the grant; but legis-
latures and communities, like eminent politicians, sometimes con-
veniently fail to find in their memories what it would be inconvenient to
retain.
(23). We have now gone through the case for Northern Separation,
as respects the powers by whose exercise, as we believe, it can alone be
granted. We, of course, admit, wLat no one can deny, that the
Imperial Legislature can repeal or suspend any of its own enactments;
but, until it has repealed or suspended them, it is as much bound to
recognise their authority as the most insignificant individual in Her
Majesty’s dominions. In this case, laws, neither repealed nor sus-
pended, reserve certain powers to the Crown, and prescribe certain
grooves in which their exercise is to run. The language of four suc-
cessive Imperial Acts, from 1842 to 1861, strengthened by the express
declaration of one of the most eminent administrators of colonial affairs
—the Duke of Newcastle, himself necessarily, as Secretary of State for
the Colonies, a party to the framing of the last Act—clearly expressed
their intention. We venture to assert —with the greatest respect to
your Lordship —that such legislation, so expressed, acted upon when-
ever required, and still unrepealed, is not to be impugned as ineffective
or inapplicable; but to be carried into operation, in conformity with
the provisions it prescribes, and without reference to any outside sug-
gested interpretation of other control, from whomsoever emanating.
The Imperial Parliament excluded itself from interference ; the colonial
Parliament never had any status in the matter. The main questions
to be considered —as we venture to submit—are the people of the
districts claiming self-government fit for it ? Has the growth of popu-
lation, and other circumstances, rendered Separation desirable for the
interests of the new territory ? These questions are to be decided by —
whom ? According to the Duke of Newcastle, by Her Majesty’s
Government; according to the advice referred to by your Lordship,
they are not even to be considered until the consent of a colonial
Parliament has been graciously notified that Her Majesty’s Government
may take action. Whence comes this pretension, and where is the
authority for it ? Does it not, if it means anything, involve this general
proposition, that the Imperial Government shall not administer laws
passed by the Imperial Legislature, nor exercise powers reserved to it
under them, to deal with the creation of Australian colonies, without
the prior approval of a colonial Parliament ? Will it not, my Lord, be
asked whether the concession of such a claim can be otherwise than as
inconsistent with all constitutional precedent, as it would be opposed
to the letter and the spirit of Imperial legislation ?
(24). Your Lordship impliedly rebukes the North, because Her
Majesty’s Ministers are asked to “ exercise a latent power; a power
the exercise of which would be viewed with jealousy in all the large
colonies; a power which of late years we have never exercised.” We
beg to be pardoned, my Lord, for admitting that we do not quite


understand the bearing of the term “ latent ” upon the actual circum-
stances of the case. As regards the Imperial Parliament, its powers to
detach territory, and to create new colonies, may be admitted to be
“latent.” In 1842 it transferred them to the Crown ; and, until they
are resumed, latent its own powers must necessarily remain. But the
transfer then made has never been revoked. The reservation has been
jealously guarded by a series of statutes, and on the very few occasions
when the exercise of the powers vested has been called for, they were
found adequate to the purposes for which they were designed. The
capacity of settlements for conversion into colonies is of slow growth,
and they do not, unless under exceptional circumstances, attain that
position in a year. It took seventeen years of slow and intermittent
progress before the district of Moreton Bay had half the population, or
one-third of the revenue, which, we are informed, your Lordship has
stated as prima facie justifying the management of their own affairs by
the people of Western Australia —/.<?., a population of 40,000 and a
revenue of £40,000 a year. Little more than 28 years has gone by
since the temporary annexation to Queensland of the territory between
the 138th and the 141st degrees of east longitude—an area at least
equal to that of the colony of Victoria—and its people could not even
now comply with your Lordship’s moderate requirements ; neither can
the population of the huge tract of country annexed in like manner to
South Australia in 1863. It was then a necessary consequent, im-
posed by natural conditions, that the creation of new colonies should be
at long intervals, and that in the meantime the powers to create should
lie dormant; not because their reservation had lapsed, but because
there was nothing to call for their exertion, and it was not even asked.
But, my Lord, can any one deny that, in all that denotes what is called
material capacity for self-government, in revenue, in resources, in the
enterprise that prompts their development, in the skill that guides it, in
the commerce that follows on production, in the trade that waits on
both, the present position of the Northern districts of Queensland is
far-and-far beyond that attained by any of the Australian settlements,
when they were relieved of the absorbent protection of the parent
colony of New South Wales ? The “fitness” impliedly called for by
the law to which we appeal exists. The Northern people are within the
limits of their just rights when they ask for its recognition.
(25). Your Lordship suggests that the proposed division would be
received with jealousy by all the large colonies of Australia; because
“ there has been no instance of late years of the Imperial Legislature
passing an Act interfering with the administration of one of those great
colonies except at the request of the colonial Government.” We take
leave, my Lord, to again observe that colonial administration has no
status in the question really at issue. Powers reserved to the Crown
do not come within its jurisdiction. And, moreover, during the four
years the movement for self-government has been agitated, there has
not been, so far as we can learn, any expression by New South Wales,
or Victoria, or South Australia, which could be construed into hos-
tility to the exercise of a power which, until recently, has never been


questioned, and then by a Ministry interested in preventing its recog-
nition. On the contrary, the tendency of public opinion in the two
important colonies of New South Wales and Victoria, if we are to
accept that expressed by Sir Henry Parkes, the Premier of New South
Wales, and not dissented from by Mr. Gillies, the Premier of Victoria,
is, that such a subdivision of colonies of excessive area as would secure
at least ultimate equality of federal power must precede either Colonial
or Imperial Federation in Australia,
(26) We beg further to submit that the petitioners for Separation
never ar any time asked for the intervention of the Imperial Legisla-
ture. Such a request would have been as foolish as impertinent, in
the face of indisputable facts, and inconsistent with the contention of
the North from the first. Before even the Imperial Legislature itself
could supercede the powers reserved to the Crown by its own Acts,
the reservation must have been suspended or repealed. It is not for
the advocates of self-government in the North to insinuate doubt of the
intention of that reservation, or of the power of the Imperial Govern-
ment to carry it into effect. As we have seen, the Constitution of
Queensland was conferred upon it by the Order-in Council and the
Letters Patent which severed its territory from that of New South
Wales. If they were not adequate to the purpose for which they were
issued, the subsequent local administrative action must be in a curious
position. Admit that they were adequate at the time they were
issued, and that the power of issue reserved has not been withdrawn
or diminished ; the irresistible conclusion is that they are sufficient for
like purposes now. The operative chain is not deficient in a single
link. Imperial legislation reserves a general power to the Crown;
the Crown exercises it, creates a colony, and gives it a constitution by
which it is to be governed. It is hardly possible to conceive that the
effect of this would be the paralysis of the authority of both Legisla-
ture and Crown, by making its further exercise contingent upon the
consent of the Government existing under that constitution ; a Govern-
ment having no power, inherent or statutory, in the matter. Such a
singular administrative suicide has no precedent in the history of
British legislation. Is it desirable, my Lord? Might it not be
dangerous to attempt the creation of one now, or to afford the
slightest encouragement to any such attempt if made ?
(27) The development of settlement in the Northern districts
owes very little indeed to any Queensland Government. That develop-
ment resulted from the almost unaided discoveries of their extraordi-
nary mineral resources—resources of which the vast wealth and area
are beyond computation. When, up to the end of the year 1887, out
of £19,624,997, the total value of the gold produced in the colony,
the Northern districts contributed £12,537,255, settlement naturally
followed. Had not the terrible drought of 1888 to a very consider-
able extent suspended crushing operations, the exj)ansion of the in-
dustry during that year would have been greater than in any of its
predecessors; and, after all, the means for what aid has been osten-
sibly distributed in the North have been found—or the cost of finding
them more than paid—by the North itself.


(28). We do not propose to trouble your Lordship in this letter—
necessarily following your Lordship’s reply to the Northern deputation
and the subsequent despatch to the late Governor—with the statistics
indispensable before a just appreciation of Northern fitness to manage
Northern affairs can be arrived at. They will be found in the
Appendix B. But with respect to “obligations undertaken,” we take
leave to lay before your Lordship a view of the subject, which we
presume to believe has not hitherto been submitted to you. According
to the latest official apportionment of Queensland Loan expenditure
up to the 30th June, 1887, the total loan monies expended on “local
objects” was £16,029,434, out of which the North received only
£2,745,178. But the North, under the provisions of the Act 24th
and 25th Victoria c. 44 (1861), before cited, is jointly liable with the
South for the whole. We admit the obligation so far as concerns the
public creditor; but we are instructed to protest against the continua-
tion of a system which imposes upon the Northern people a con-
tinuously increasing liability for loans, when not one fifth of the
monies raised is applied to uses by which the North can benefit,
either now, or at any future time. The plain truth is, my Lord, that
the Queensland Government has, for a considerable period, been
materially assisted in the maintenance of its public credit by the
absorption of the Northern surplus revenue, as will be shown in the
Appendix B previously mentioned; and the Northern people are
being more and more injured as to their future financial status by
periodical increases of profitless liability. In their own interests, in
the interests of their successors, they are bound to use every lawful
expedient to prevent a further continuance of a system which entails
a cumulative burden upon both—a burden unjust to them and dis-
creditable to those who seek to perpetuate its existence.
(30). In the last few lines of your Lordship’s despatch to the
late Governor you practically suggest that the grant of self-government
to the Northern district would be only justifiable.
If, after a prolonged trial, all other means of removing any administrative
defects or inequalities should prove ineffective—lt will be necessary, in the
first instance, to state fairly the proposals of your advisers for establishing
branches of Government departments in the Northern districts, and to ascer-
tain by a careful system of accounts whether, after the expiration of a further
term, a reasonable proportion of the colonial revenue has been expended in the
Northern districts.
It has eventuated that the necessity suggested by your Lordship has
been but faintly recognised by any recent authorities entrusted with
the task of providing for it, or persistently rejected by the Legislative
Assembly. No separate divisional accounts have been kept; no ad-
ministrative financial departments have been established, and no
legislation passed to compel either. In the Session of 1887, Sir S. W.
Griffith had to withdraw his Financial Districts Bill—his most im-
portant measure on the subject. In 1888, there was a great tumbling
over of parties, consequent upon the general election, and in the
resulting transition to and from the Treasury Benches, the Parliamen-
tary leader of the Separationists in the two previous Sessions became
Secretary for Works and Mines in the Ministry of Sir Thomas


McHwraith. When Sir S. W. Griffith was about to introduce his Bill
in 1887, he was told by that gentleman that nothing would satisfy
him but Territorial Separation; in 1888, two or three days before the
close of the Session, he laid on the table of the Legislative Assembly
a so-called Decentralisation Bill, which in reality, if passed, would
have provided a very efficient series of steps towards more stringent
centralisation; and he gave a brief explanation of its purport, in
which nothing was explained. Your Lordship can thus see the atten-
tion paid to your recommendation. No one acquainted* with the
previous history of Queensland is surprised. The story is a repetition
of an old one, of which, we presume, your Lordship has not been
informed. The sources whence the majority of the provisions in both
the more recent Bills were derived are to be found in various measures
laid before Parliament by successive Ministries, in 1870, 1872, 1876,
and 1877, all being rejected or withdrawn The Bill of 1877 was
founded on the report of a fairly representative Royal Commission, of
which Sir Thomas Mcllwraith was chairman. Sir S. AV. Griffith was
Attorney-General in 1876 and 1877. But in no case could a majority
strong enough to pass such a measure in the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland be found. If eighteen years of effort and endurance, of
solemn promises and frivolous non-fulfilment, of disappointment and
betrayal, of inequitable and unjust dealing with Northern revenue,
and in the malappropriation of money borrowed for Northern use, do
not constitute a sufficiently long trial, what can be considered one ?
The Northern people, not being satisfied with it, want no more.
(31). As neither your Lordship’s reply to the deputation, nor
your despatch to the late Governor, alluded to the material condition
of the North, and only slightly noticed its financial and fiscal relations,
we leave their discussion for the Appendices before referred to; but
we regret that a sinister ingenuity has been exerted to make it appear
that the Petition for Separation referred only to questions connected
with future expenditure and disbursement of public money. Such an
artifice was, no doubt, adopted to escape reference to restitution of
past misappropriations of public monies, and to the peculiar liability
of the North in respect of the public debt. But, whatever may have
been the motive for such an assumption, it was without a basis, for
that Petition claimed, as the Northern districts still claim —to use the
Duke of Newcastle’s words —“the convenience and interests of the
settlers require,” that they should make their own laws, regulate their
own borrowings, fix their own tariffs, impose their own taxation,
decide their own railway routes, settle their own laud policy, limit
their immigration outlay; and, in short, manage their own affairs
under an administrative system chosen by a Legislature elected by
themselves. They claim no more than they are entitled to ask—not
by the permission of any Ministry (Whig or Conservative), but under
the Imperial Legislation which for nearly half a century has regulated
the creation of new colonies in Australia. They deprecate any inter-
ference with the exercise of the powers vested in the Crown by that
Legislation, equitable in its intention, wise in its provision for the
requirements of future settlers in districts unknowm at its first enact-
ment —and in largo areas remaining still little more than a wilderness,


but which give promise of hereafter supporting large populations and
disclosing new and wealth producing industries to enrich the world —
to gratify a grasping, monopolising, and not particularly honest
greed. The postponement of such objects would not only be a
grievous injustice to the settlers who had relied on the integrity of
Imperial promises so repeatedly implied and affirmed; but the sub-
jection of the exercise of the laws and powers created and reserved
for their benefit and reward to the consent of a hostile and interested
majority, in a colony which owes its own existence to their exercise,
would be to set a mischievous and dangerous precedent. It would
originate a discontent, which—as time went on, and as numbers
multiplied, and industrial power, and the wealth it creates increased
in the North —as experience teaches us they will —would expand into
a strength and bitterness that would be menacing indeed. Changes
rush on in such rapid succession that, in dealing with the present, the
proximate future must be taken into account. The insult to which
the subjection suggested would expose the Imperial Legislature would
be degrading; its ultimate consequences deplorable. Whether it
would be wise for Her Majesty’s Government to incur the risks of
either, it is for them to decide. We do not, my Lord, permit our-
selves to. doubt the care and caution which will distinguish their
consideration of the case, or the integrity and prudence which will
characterise their ultimate decision.
We have the honor to be,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient and humble servants.


APPENDIX A.
!•, There are two documents in the Parliamentary paper referred to in the
foregoing letter, whose examination it was thought it would be most con-
venient to deal with apart from the discussion of the questions treated upon in
the letter itself. The first document is a species of report on the Separation
case, to the late Governor of Queensland, Sir A. Musgrave, by Sir
S. W. Griffith, its then Premier. The second is a despatch from the Governor,
forwarding the report to the Colonial Office, and expressing in brief terms a
general concurrence in its statements and recommendations. The date of the
report is the 19th January, 1887 ; that of the despatch, the 20th of the same
month. How much consideration could have been given to a very lengthv
document, with tabulated appendices, like that submitted by the ex-Premier,
in the few available hours which elapsed between those dates, it is needless to
discuss ; and, as the despatch itself was merely a brief summarised recapitula-
tion of Sir S. W. Griffith’s opinions, it is unnecessary to comment upon it,
even if Sir A. Musgrave’s sudden and melancholy death did not almost
necessarily prohibit criticism upon the conduct of one no longer living and
able to answer for himself.
2. Sir S. W. Griffith’s report requires careful consideration, and none the
less, that not a few of its statements and arguments are inconsistent with his
subsequent speeches and proposals. It commences with challenging the
integrity of the signatures to the petition to Her Majesty for self-government
for North Queensland, affirming that out of the 10,006 affixed to it, not more
than 6000 were genuine ; and gives the reasons which to his mind justifies
that assertion. He denies that the North had any real grievance, either in
the delay of loan expenditure or deficient expenditure of revenue ; he suggests
that a desire for the unrestricted introduction of colored labor was still the
real motive for the Separation movement; he deplores the supposed loan
complications and damage to public credit which must follow any adjustment
of the public debt; and he deprecates the division of the colony lest it should
excite alarm ox - anger in the other Australian colonies. It is not necessai'y to
refute all these suggestions and assertions, or the tables appended in support
of them, at any considerable length of detail; inasmuch as, in some instances,
he has himself supplied the refutation; but, as briefly as possible, every one
of them shall be replied to.
3. As to the signatures, the ex-Premier states that immediately he re-
ceived a copy of them, ho had printed copies made and collated with the
electox-al x’olls, and distributed amongst the police for inquii’y ; and that, when
the work was finished, he felt assured that not more than about 6000 out of
10,000 were genuine ; and, further, that the final affidavit of their integrity by
the Committee of the Separation Council appointed to examine them could
only be taken as proving their own belief. The reply is that the collation
alleged was, if not impossible, altogether unreliable. The electoral boundaries
do not cori-espond with those of the police districts; but, on the contrary, an
electorate may compiase portions of half-a-dozen of these last; while no
boundaries of any kind, or municipal or electoral qualification, but simply a
residential one, and arrival at manhood, was insisted upon in a signatory.


There could, under such circumstances, have been no accurate, or even
tolerably reliable, collation of documents, and no accurate correction derived
from it.
4. The results of the inquiry made by the police are altogether valueless ;
in all North Queensland there were, even in 1887, according to the report of
the Commissioner of Police, only 204 spread over an area of not far short of
300,000 square miles. That vast area is for purely police —independently of
magisterial —purposes, separated into four main divisions, these divisions having
56 stations distributed amongst them. Of these stations, only seven have
more than three constables allotted to them, the remaining 49 having from
one to three each. In the Charters Towers district, the police were about one
to 1000; of necessity, their knowledge of the individuals must be compara-
tively small; and in localities to which they had been only recently appointed
or transferred, they could know little of the present, and still less of the past.
But, apparently relying upon opinions—for they could be no more —obtained
from such sources. Sir S. W. Griffith says that 3860 signatures to the Separa-
tion petition were not known to the police. Is it, then, to be assumed that
the remaining 6146 were known ? Is it really contended that the discrimina-
tion and memory which are indispensable in determining in the course of a
few weeks the truth or falsity of 10,000 signatures were ever possessed by
mortal man, whether Premier or police constable, especially when no means
existed for adequate comparison ?
5. And there were no means. The petition and roll of signatures were on
their way to England some time before the printed copies of the written copy
supplied to the Ministry were distributed. The examiners, whether clerks or
constables, never saw the originals. This being so, there was no means of
identifying any signature, or of effectually contradicting its authenticity.
You wish to prove that some one has forged, or improperly affixed, a signature
to a deed; but you produce no deed and no signature, and the presumed
signatory, and his personator, if there were one, are both, unknown to you.
Would not the evidence to that effect subject those who tendered it to a
suspicion that they were not quite sane P
6. Sir S. W. Griffith affects to depreciate the value of the affidavit made
by the examining committee of the Separation Council of their belief in the
integrity of the signatures. It was made from faith in the assurances given
by ten of their fellow members, who had personally collected a large number,
in the written statements of committees and secretaries of 20 leagues, and of
station owners and managers. Nearly 7000 signatures were thus collected and
verified. A considerable number were received at shops, offices, and other
places for voluntary signatures. Of those collected by agents, they were so
collected in the most important centres of population at times when the cessa-
tion of work left it more accessible than during the rest of the day, and under
the direct supervision of members of the Council or of the leagues employing
the collectors. The total amount paid for canvassing was a few shillings more
than £IOO. Finally, more than six weeks were spent in a renewed revision
and collection by six experts, aided by the pei’sonal knowledge of members
of the Council. No trouble was spared in testing the authenticity of the signa-
tures, which had taken more than twelve months to collect —a collection in
which more than 100 unpaid volunteers engaged; to be rewarded by specious
and cunningly-devised misrepresentation, and the plenteous crop of suspicion
and distrust which it was so carefully prepared to produce.
7. Sir S. W. Griffith denies that there has been any unreasonable delay on
the Railway Loan expenditure, a denial that is best met by a brief statement
of facts. There are three lines of great importance in North Queensland —
one to connect the harbor of Bowen with the line Lorn Townsville to Charters
Towers ; the second, from the rich pastoral and mineral district of Cloncuny
to the Gulf ; the third, from the port of Cairns to the town of Herbeiton and
the wonderful mining country around it. The history of each of them is, to
write modelately, not quite'in conformity with the ex-Premier’s assertion.
The first vote of £150,000 for the Bowen line was passed in 1882, and a second


vote of £lOO,OOO in 1884 ; but it was not until the 20th November, 1886, that
p ans for the first 30 miles towards Ayr of a line which passes over country-
presenting no important engineering difficulty were approved by Parliament
in four years after the first vote. One year afterwards, in October, 1887
tenders were called for the construction of the portion of the line sanctioned!
and it is now (April, 1888) nearly completed. The Government engineering
surveyors are in the field endeavoring to ascertain which may be the most
desirable route for the much longer remainder of this railway, and it is not
improbable that from two to three years more may elapse before it is finished
and opened for traffic, everything being, as has hitherto been, carried out at
the utmost convenient speed. The Cloncurry line furnishes another illustra-
tion of the value attaching to Sir S. W. Griffith’s denial that there had been
any delay, A loan vote of <£500,000 was passed for it in 1884. With the
exception of for 14 miles of railway—in reality a deviation to admit of its
serving both the Cloncurry and the Croydon traffic—a working survey and
plans of 28 additional miles, and a trial survey of which nothing has come, the
Cloncurry railway is still in the far future. To get practically nothin- at the
end of four years and a-half from a vote of £500,000 is, surely, indicative of an
unreasonable delay. The Cloncurry residents think so, and there are not
wanting those who thoroughly sympathise with them in that opinion.
•i 1882, the sum of <£200,000 was voted towards the construction of a
railway from Herberton to the coast; in 1884, £400,000 more was voted - bub
it was not until the 30th October, 1885, that the Parliamentary sanction was
given to the first section of a line from Cairns. It was a short section of eight
miles, the line running over very easy country, as maybe inferred from the
, c . ost °/ 0^® trud V,° n ’-7 1 V cll i y as contracted f o r in April, 1887, at a little less
than £20,000. Why it should have taken three-years and a-half to arrive-at a
contract of so small importance has not been explained* As to the second
section of this remarkable railway, the facts connnected with it have not yet
been sufficiently disclosed to found any useful discussion upon them.
9. Sii S. W. Griffith asserted that the proceeds of loan votes had been
equitably distributed between North and South; but where are his proofs,
when there are no reliable data published for an accurate account of the
distribution. A tabulated statement, purporting to give an account of the
apportionment of the loan fund, was laid before Parliament in the Session of
1888; it stated the votes for the different items; the expenditure being in some
instances not given in sufficient detail, but it did not apportion the proceeds
of loans to the objects for which the monies raised were borrowed. The
common-sense and honest procedure would have been to have credited the
different items with so much of the proceeds of any portion of a loan floated as
would be proportionate to the shares allotted to them in the general vote •
then, firstly deducting the expenditure from the proceeds of loan raised, and
secondly the amount of debentures or stock sold from the total sum voted, the
credit cash balance, and the credit balance of the votes, could then be readily
ascertained. J
10. It seems doubtful whether this could be done now with perfect’
accuracy; at least, that would be a legitimate inference from Sir S. W.
, *9 n 22nd October, 1888, Mr. Nelson, Minister for Railways, in the Assembly stated
referring to the second section of this line, and the deviations constantly making from the'originai
ap rn red plans ' ve . re hurriud for " ard f '”’ some or oSer-Ser
rfri .tin, « t°tf, h r COU d not SaJ 7~*u nd th . ere a Pl>eared to be such a desperate hurry to get the con-
forwardnesf ’’ th «!ir W° , tha . t f l . he work »>b r plans were not really in a proper state of
S ‘l, ~ • OndUh admitted, on the same day, that “ very I ikely they were prenared
rathei hurriedly, and gave, as an excuse, that the late Government had been “wickedly attacked”
de ay ; !v here does . the "Redness occur ? There is no question that, had the proper
exertmn been made, the preparation of the Parliamentary plans, which required very much more
than ordinary care, might have been commenced long lefore they were. But which is the most
e i d ~ t° C ? np a ‘" of w lat a PP eare d unnecessary delay in preparation, or to, in order to dulcify
comjilamt, enter upon a construction of one of the most difficult and costly lines in Australia upon
hurriedly prepared and imperfect plans and deficient information, and. as it appears from the
thnt' L J’i C - S 111 Han . mrd ~ m theda ? mentioned, not the least dangerous one. Tlic result appears to be
“dStS'lpS'iir’ 1 ' 1 * b,orb lh ° •** - 1, “ «%*-> «*»•>»" >"«


Votk.
Realised
Loan.
Expenditure.
Cash
Balance.
Unsold of
1884Xo an.
Great Northern ...
Bowen •
Cooktown
Herberton
Cloucurry
ill,455,373
257,549
357,348
600,000
600,000
£1,236,231
219,083
299,286
455,064
326.625
£1,078,867
23,232
291,323
170,830
32,393
.£157,364
195,851
7,963
284,234
294,232
£156,750
33,000
49,500
132.000
165.000
£3,170,270
£2,536,289
£1,596,645
£939,644
£536,250
Griffith’s speech on Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s budget on the 14th September,
1888. He said :
It would be very desirable, and I believe- in fact I am sure—it is absolutely necessary con-
stitutionally, that all the loan expenditure should be authorised by this House m detail for the
year in the same way as other expenditure. We have not been in the habit of doing this . and I
remember before my predecessor, Mr. Hickson, left office, I pointed out to him that, on considering
the matter, I was satisfied that not only he, but all previous Treasurers, require an Act of
Indemnity with regard to the loan money they have spent. All the loan money spent in tins
colony from the beginning has been expended without Parliamentary authority, and all the
Treasurers require an Act of Indemnity. Our Loan Acts are not Appropriation Acts at all, hut
Acts authorising the borrowing of money and the payment of it into the consolidated revenue.
To authorise the payment out of the consolidated revenue, another Act—an Appropriation Act, is
necessary and I am sure the control which that would give this House over loan expenditure
he of enormous value There is really no control now.
The present Minister for Railways, when sitting on this side of the House, often called attention to
the absurd charges made against loan expenditure; and I made it 1113' business, during the short
period' I was at'the Treasury, to inquire into the matter. I found one item of £lO,OOO charged to
one vote, and I could see no conceivable argument why it should be charged against that vote. It
the practice had been that the whole expenditure should be authorised in detail, as in the case of
revenue expenditure, I think some of these difficulties would not have occurred.
11. A system move productive of the worst form of log-rolling, and of the
corruption it engenders, can hardly have existed than that described, and
which still prevails. It practically left the disposal of millions of money to
the initiation of officials and the manipulation of Ministers dependent for then-
retention of office upon the support of mercenary politicians, in their turn
pressed by wire-pullers in their constituencies who_ had their local or personal
purposes to serve. One instance was adduced in a debate on the 2nd of
November, 1888, by Mr. O’Sullivan, member for Stanley, in the South, and one
of the oldest in the Assembly
Some rears ago there was a sum of £160,000 on the Loan Estimates for railways of the electorate
of Stanley and the whole sum was spirited away to Maryborough on the authority of the late
Mr Miles He had seen the authority in Mr. Miles’s own handwriting. That money was
taken away without any authority from the House, and sent to Maryborough. A Minister ought
to he made accountable for such a thing. He was in hopes that he would have seen that £160,000
restored to the list. If that money had been taken away without any authority, surely it ought to
be given back again. The money had been borrowed, and had not lapsed, but Mr. Miles, then
Minister for Works, used it for other purposes.
12. It will be observed that even with regard to railways the citation of
loan votes affords no proof of the ultimate distribution of the money when
raised, but simply that the borrowing was authorised. We can certainly go a
step further, and discover what has been borrowed, at what price, and the
expense attendant upon the transaction; and, having arrived at the amount
thus made available, we can deduct the known expenditure, and may ascertain
what the cash balance ought to be. But whether that balance really exists,
or whether it has, to use Mr. O’Sullivan’s phrase, been spirited away,There
are no means extant of ascertaining. The position of the Northern Railways’
loan fund on the Ist January, 1888, affords an illustration. At that date it
was, as to the Bowen, Northern, Cooktown, Harberton, and Cloncurry lines, as
follows: —
No account has ever been published which shows that the several cash
balances arrived at are represented by cash lying at the credit of the railways
mentioned; or, if not, which is most probable, how it has been disposed of.


North.
Sooth.
Customs returns for 18S5-6, as stated
Ditto according to Financial Districts Bill..
£242,157
302,196
£762,597
702,058
Sir S. W. Griffith asserts that the distribution of votes was equitable. Even if
this were the case, was the distribution of the proceeds equally so ? Until
this is shown, all that his contention comes to is this—that the Legislature
voted certain sums for purposes it prescribed. Intention is one thing, per-
formance another. Until he proves that the Legislative’s intentions have
been fulfilled, both as to time and application of moneys, his contention is
worthless, and no more need be written on this part of the" subject.
12. As regards revenue and expenditure. Sir S. W. Griffith gave tabular
statements of both, for the years 1884-5 and 1885-6. Space is not available for
an exposition of their errors, nor is it necessary now, since subsequently he
has abandoned the principles on which they were based, and admitted the
justice of the contention of the Separationists in the first annual report of
their Council in June, 1885. They affirmed the right of the North to a return
of duties paid in Brisbane on commodities consumed or used in its districts.
In his Financial Districts Bill of 1887 he proposed to enact that such a return
should be made. They contended for the separation of the railway receipts
and expenditure from the general consolidated fund account, of which they
primarily form no part; in his speech in the Assembly on the 13th September,
1888, he insisted upon the necessity for such a procedure, and gave excellent
reasons why it should be adopted. And he further asserted that “no tariff
will be satisfactory to the colony that does not make allowance for the different
conditions of the Northern and Southern parts.” So complete a departure
from the bases of his 1885-6 estimates renders them valueless now; and the
following illustration of the changes he proposed to legalise on one very im-
portant item is given, to show that it is unnecessary to go into any detailed
examination of statements which are for all practical purposes fast becoming
obsolete. It is a comparison of the return of relative Customs receipts of
South and North as stated in the ex-Premier’s tables before referred to, with
what they should have been had the equitable practice he sought to legalise
then been in force :
In the first instance, the Northern return is less than the Southern one by
>£520,440, in the second by £399,302 ; the relative amounts between the two
being altered by £121,078. It is unnecessary to enter into further detail,
which properly belongs to Appendix B, but enough has been adduced to show
the untenability of the ex-Premier’s assumption of comparative revenue, the
first item of which exhibits an error of more than one-third in the statement
of the Customs receipts.'
13. The absurdity of the allegation that a desire for colored labor is the
real motive for the Separation movement is scarcely worth alluding to. The
feeling of the North is asserted, and with truth, to be emphatically against
that kind of labor. Is it likely to be altered by self-government being granted ?
He must have more than the ordinary amount of partisan folly who can affirm
that. And, if it will not, will it not be in the power of the people, through
their representatives, to enforce compliance with the general opinion, which
there is no one able in the North to do now ? What then becomes of the
allegation ?
14. As to complications in the settlement of the monetary accounts between
the two colonies, it may be freely admitted, after the statement of Sir S. W.
Griffith himself, that there will be considerable difficulty in arriving at an
adjustment. There are often many complications to be unravelled, and many
obstacles to be surmounted, in the settlement of the accounts of great mercan-
tile and monetary institutions, but were they ever admitted as valid objections
to a thorough investigation, that all differences might be determined ? And,


moreover, no authoritative settlement of the respective liabilities of the old
colony and the new one can be made until self-government has been granted.
The Imperial Act 24 and 25 Victoria, c. 44 (1861) is imperative. It directs
that in case of any dispute arising as to respective shares in common obliga-
tions or moneys in the Treasury at the time of separation :
cwhtoappoilrt a Comw^Mwner^Md^U sli^l^^lawfulifor^HerMjijeat^toappomt^a^hird
tim'eand place first meeting of the Commissioners; and such Commissioners shall determine
tho proportion in which such moneys or debts shall be divided between the two colonies, and t e
award of such Commissioners or of any two of them when confirmed by Her Majesty in Count
shall be final and conclusive against both colonies.
Damage to present public credit from such a settlement can arise only from
doubt of the capacity of either colony to meet its own share of current obliga-
tions, Both are liable for obligations incurred up to the date of separation.
As to future ones, each must take care of itself, and will no doubt be able to do
so; but the suggestion of the ex-Premier that North Queensland should bo
controlled, as to the conditions of borrowing, by, or her wishes subordinated to,
the interests of the elder colony, is almost too childish to discuss.
15. Sir S. W. Griffith deprecated the anger of the larger colonies, but as
that phantasm has been exorcised in the principal letter it may be left to itself,
especially as the larger colones have too good sense to interfere with a separa-
tion which can do them no harm and may lead to future good 5 and as to the
creation of further colonies. Imperial legislation has provided that each case
shall stand upon its merits. The North is quite willing to rest upon its own.


APPENDIX B.
1■ 1 statistician may bo rather doubtful of the effect of what he writes
when he finds an expression of opinion from men of the high position of Lord
Knutsford that statistics are “ Ticklish things.” I think a great writer of our
own time Carlyle has described them as the dry bones of history. The
phrase was a deprecatory one, but certainly muscles and nerves would not be
worth much if they had no dry bones to rest upon. It is quite possible that
Sir Eawson W Eawson s work on the tariffs and trade of the British Empire
had a great deal more influence on the defensive organisation of that Empire
now beginning, than Lord Wolseley’s professional enthusiasm and Lord Eandolph
Churchill s declamation. They taught the public that the trade was of a mao-ni-
tude worth protecting, that cost was simply insurance on the life of the trade
When the people understood this they rose to the exigency of the occasion.'
Then came a breathing tune for many anxious watchers. There is no question
that the expressed determination of the British Government has had no small
effect in compelling a pacific policy on the part of the great Continental Powers
of Eiirope. Whoever is master of the seas can blockade the world ; that is the
position which seems to be determined upon by the Government of the old
country, and it is a happy circumstance for Australia that it has been.
It as well to draw attention to the importance of statistics, which are
after all accumulated facts. As Archbishop Whateley says, the so-called laws
of nature as laid down by certain philosophers were simply a collection of ob-
servations Lord Knutsford has laid down a sort of hard and fast line in deal-
ing with Western Australia, which seems not very logical and rests on no very
firm basis. I readily admit,” said his Lordship, replying to the recent
application of Western Australia for representative institutions, “ that in ordi-
nary circumstances and within reasonable geographical limits, a population of
40,000, raising a revenue of 400,000 may primafae-ie, be regarded as capable of
managing its own affairs. Encouraged by such an opinion, by so high an
official authority, the advocates of self government for the North find in the
condition of their people, stronger reasons than are embodied in that opinion,
although otherwise in consonance with it, why they should have its full benefit
in the consideration of their case. Their numbers are twice as great as that pre-
scribed as satisfactory ; their revenue is more than twice the specified amount •
they are settled within “reasonable geographical limits I” and what is more’
they have within those limits as large, if not larger, material resources for their
three great industries, pastoral, mineral, and sugar, than any other similar
territorial area in the world—the two last to be regarded as yet in their early
stages of development. With regard to the second, it is not improbable that the
oxpoit of gold alone will this year amount to a value of more than one million
sterling, and assure a pleasant prospect of future and accumulating increase
These are circumstances which justify a great deal higher appreciation than
the two conditions alleged in Lord Knutsford’s opinion, as furnishing a prim a
facie case for granting self-government to Western Australia.
2. History will supply the Colonial Office with indisputable precedents
which even more than .instify that opinion. In November, 1850, the then Pro


vince of Port Phillip was separated from the Colony of New South Wales, and
created the Colony of Victoria. This was before gold was discovered in it; the
population numbered 76,162, the value of the exports was ,£1,041,798, and the
revenue amounted to £259,223. On the first December, 1859, what had been
called the Moreton Bay District was proclaimed as the Colony of Queensland,
in the New South Wales Government Gazette. The population was estimated
at about 25,000 ; the exports, almost solely wool, valued at £500,000, and the
revenue was not, certainly, more than £160,000, The two colonies have
flourished exceedingly since they were left at liberty to manage their own
affairs ; and most certainly in their elements of prosperity when they started on
their career of independence, neither of them can be compared with the North
Queensland of to-day. Queensland had been self-governed thirteen years,
before its revenue and export trade equalled ours of the year 1888, although
its population was greater. Who will venture to forecast the position of the
North in the year 1900 ? Happy they of the present who live to see it;
happier still if they use it wisely, and rightly enjoy the prosperity and appreciate
the responsibilities, to be neither enjoyed nor shared by the many who will then
be mute, and most of them forgotten.
3. Let us, however, further consult experience on this subject. In 1872 the
population of Queensland —occupation being extended northwards far beyond
Bowen —was 133,583 ; the expenditure, £851,555 ; the revenue, £938,000. Expen-
diture bearing a ratio to population, and thdt of the North being about 70,000,
what ought the cost of Government to be ? Why, under £500,000 a year. Are
we unable to avail of the experience of our forerunners; less fit for the duties of
Government than the men of seventeen years ago ; Let whoso will debase
himself by the confession he shall not lack a memorialist. Let us come to the
present. Taking the Queensland estimates for 1887-88 —and they being on
what the people of 1872 would have thought a very extravagant scale, I esti-
mated our total outlay at £636,567, and I am certain that the North need not
go beyond the amount received; always supposing that its administrators were
honest and its legislators sane. We now come to the revenue. I take the
customs first. In the past nine months the Northern Customs have yielded,
excluding duties paid in Brisbane on commodities used and consumed in the
North, £320,345. Add to this the next three months’ pretty certain return,
aud we have, £426,193. Other items, such as excise, stamps, and licenses of all
kinds have returned not less than £203,378. Add in like manner one-third for
the next three months, and the total is £267,274, of which the North might
fairly claim £53,455. The territorial revenue of the colony for the last nine
months was £538,938. Of that, looking at the large land sales, the selections,
the pastoral and mining occupation, I am sure I am entitled to claim one-fifth
or £107,787. Add for the next three months £35,929, and the total is £143,711.
We next come to the railways, and their earnings furnish a certain quantity.
During the past nine months they have brought us in £111,781. Add for the
next three months £37,260, and we get £149,041. Postage, telegraphic receipts,
and other services of like kind yielded to the colony during the first nine
months of the financial year £188,975 ; add as before one-third for the next
three months, and the total comes to £241,967. Of that I claim one-fifth for
the North, or £48,395. What are termed “ other receipts,” such as fees, fines,
and miscellaneous for the whole year would amount to £187,346, according to
which we ought to receive £37,469. The total revenue would then be
£838,264, taking the basis of the last nine months’ receipts. On a presumed
expenditure of £636,567, that would leave a surplus of £221,697. If we kept
the expenditure down to the 1872 standard of Queensland, and I don’t see why
we should not, the surplus would be £358,264, Since the estimate of expendi-
ture was made twelve months ago, I have obtained more definite official infor-
mation than I had then, and we ought to be able to strike off extraneous items
amounting to £70,000. But I say again that from the want of separate accounts,
promised so long since, there will always be difficulty in arriving at perfectly
accurate conclusions. And moreover the drought has upset all calculations of
increase derived from the experience of the five years preceding 1887. Eor


instance of the customs receipts the first half year of 1887-8 in the North
exceeded those of the corresponding period of 1886-7 by 41 per cent. Its rail-
way receipts kept pace with the customs. No such increases have occurred,
leaving the new tariff out of the question, in the customs; and our Northern
railways, but for the traffic on the fragmentary Cairns line, mostly arising from
construction requirements, would as a group, for the last seven months have
shown no increase. It is a hard thing to have to send from two to three hun-
dred thousand a year from the North in times like these, but that is the busi-
ness of the Northern people and not mine.
A great deal has been written and said on the capital value of the colonies
in relation to the public debt. About eight years ago Sir Francis Dillon Bell,
then agent-General for New Zealand, read an elaborate paper on the subject.
He went beyond his own colony, and estimated the capital value of Queensland
at between =£50,000,000 and =£60,000,000. Other financiers better versed in the
condition of that colony and its statistics, made the sum on a careful valuation
more than =£100,000,000. I do not give the details of the estimate framed on
similar bases for North Queensland, having no space for them, and not wishing
to fatigue the reader, but my estimate amounts to more than .£75,000,000, while
the debt for which the new colony would be morally responsible after a fair
adjustment would not be more than .£3,000,000.
4. But I ask to be permitted to say that, as my health and ability allowed me,
I have, sometimes under very adverse circumstances, advocated the interest of the
North as regards self-government on the basis laid down by the old Convention.
As members of that body we knew, and could know nothing of party disputes,
which in reality had become personal ones between the leader of the Opposition
and the Premier, when Sir Thomas MTI wraith came into power. By an express
resolution of the Convention of 1885, the site of the capital, and all subjects of
local or party dispute, were excluded from the consideration of the Separation
Council. I only say what is due to that Council, that they loyally obeyed the
direction. I never heard one word said of party, or local, or class interest, during
the whole time I was connected with them, and yet some of them I knew held
strong opinions, and opposite ones, on all the points mentioned. Men who are
capable of self-restraint may be trusted to aid the people in asking for self-
government.
5. I might quote speeches ad infinitum which testify to the difficulties
which difference of climate —too much unappreciated —between North and
South Queensland impose upon the administrative department. “If I was a
North Queenslander,” said Sir Thomas MTlwraith two years ago, “ I could not
help being in favor of Separation.” Mr. Macrossan was still more emphatic; no
words of mine could give the power of his expression when Sir Samuel Griffith
brought in his Financial Districts Bill. Mr. Hume Black was, as he always is.
very precise in his definitions. He was to have nothing more to do with
MTlwraith factions, or Griffith factions. Both took the dictation of a great
leader, and with the humiliating circumstance that after all they are only the
apologists of a not very remarkable following. I use these terms with great
regret, but because they are just. There has been no promise made by them
since their accession to office of which they did not before-time affirm the im-
possibility of its fulfilment. When Mr. Macrossan says he will give to the
North the full disposal of its own revenues, he talks nonsense. He can no more
give the Northern members the control of the expenditure than of the taxes
from which the money is derived. The interest on the debt has to be paid, and
without the Northern revenue there would be some difficulty in finding it, and
he cannot interfere with the Imperial Act of 1861, which controls both the
adjustment of the debt and the basis fixed as to the proportion in which that
adjustment should be made. We are told that we ought to be satisfied.
Why ? Mr. Macrossan says that the North is handicapped—that it is taxed
beyond its rightful share—but it must be content to bear that until we get
Separation. Sir Thomas MTlwraith makes Federation a condition precedent to


Separation. The absurdity which follows is this : that with an inevitable
increase of burdon as loan goes on we are to wait for an unascertainable time
till the real amount can be adjusted. Does not Mr. Macrossan know that there
can be no authoritative settlement of the common pecuniary obligations of the
North and South until after Separation? If he looks at Clause 6of the 24 and
25 Victoria c 44 (1861) he can learn that for himself.
There needs little more to be said; a few words will sum up the whole.
The North can pay the expenses of self-government; it pays far more at the
present time to a Government in which it has very little voice, and cannot
exercise the slightest real control over. The North can claim this credit for its
people, that they would if left to themselves be the most solvent amongst the
Australian Colonies. They ask only that just right, that which the Im-
perial Legislature has given them—to have a real voice in their own taxation—
to spend °the proceeds as they who pay think best —and gladly acknowledg-
ing the wisdom, long of growth and mature in deliberation, of the insti-
tutions which grant, not a favor, but a right to participate in their benefits,
respectfully insist on its concession.
Hastings and Jones, Printers.






