





THE TRUTH IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY:
OR
THE LESSONS OF THIRTY YEARS’ EXPERIENCE PRESENTED
IN THE FORM OF
A GUIDE
TO
THE FORMATION AND CONDUCT OF ECCLESIAS,
IN
THE CHARACTERISTIC CIRCUMSTANCES OF AN AGE WHEN THE TRUTH
AS APOSTOLICALIY DELIVERED HAS BEEN
REVIVED
IN THE WAYS OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE, WITHOUT THE CO-OPERATION
AND LIVING GUIDANCE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT AS ENJOYED
IN THE APOSTOLIC AGE.
BY ROBERT ROBERTS, OF BIRMINGHAM.
(Editor of the Christadelphian.)
BIRMINGHAM :
ROBERT ROBERTS, ATHENAEUM BUILDINGS, EDMUND STREET.
1883.




A GUIDE
TO THE
Formation and Conduct of Ecclesias.
The object of the Gospel, as apostolically promulgated in the first
century, was to take out a people for the Lord’s use, in the age that
he will inaugurate at his coming. The mode in which the taking out
was effected, was by the preaching of the Gospel. Whoever believed
this Gospel, and yielded obedience in baptism, was, by that belief and
obedience, called to the kingdom and glory of God. But all the called
are not to be chosen. The choice is to be made at the Lord’s return,
the reason of the choice will be faithfulness in the chosen, exhibited
during life, subsequent to their taking of the name of Christ in
baptism. These things are all known to those who know the
truth.
1.—The Term “Eeelesia."
To help in the development, and give scope for the exercise of this
faithfulness, obedient believers were required to form themselves into
communities, which, in Greek, were called Ecclesias. There is no
exact equivalent in English for this term Ecclesia. It means an as-
sembly of the called. “ Church” (by which it is translated), has not
this meaning, and has become objectionable through association with
un-apostolic ideas and institutions. Consequently, the original term
has to be employed.
2.—The Name “Christadelphian."
In the same way, “Christian ” has become inexpressive, as the defi-
nition of a true believer. A Christian, in the first century, was one
who received the doctrine of Christ as apostolically expounded, and who
made the commandments of Christ the rule of his life. In our day,
it means an inhabitant of Christendom, without reference to indi-
vidual faith or practice. We escape this confusion by adopting another


name, which Jesus applied to his disciples. He called them “My
"brethren. ” (Jno. xx. 17; Heb. ii, 11) —therefore, brethren of Christ.
As the English form of this name would be acknowledged by
thousands who do not fulfil its conditions, it. is convenient to accept
it in its G-sek form (Anglicised)—Christadelphian— which none
will own to but those who endorse its implied testimony, that no one
belongs to Christ who does not believe the Gospel of the Kingdom,
and obey the commandments of Christ.
3.—The Apostolic Ministry.
To make the communities pf Christ’s brethren effective for their
objects, Christ, by the Spirit, appointed and qualified a variety of
officials, in the first century, whom Paul enumerates as—l, apostles ;
2, prophets ; 3, teachers ; 4, miracles ; 5, gifts of healing ; 6, helps ;
7, goverments ; 8, diversity of tongues. Their appointment by the
Spirit made them the responsible overseers of the one body, whom the
members were bound to obey. This ministration of the Spirit, and
this presence of divine authority in the ecclesias, continued during the
days of the apostles, and the generation next ensuing. After that, an
apostacy arose in the apostolic community, after the analogy of the
case of Israel, in their first settlement of Canaan ; who “ served
the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of
the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great
works of the Lord that he did for Israel” (Jud. ii. 7). The apostacy
prevailed more and more, as the Apostles, by the spirit, predicted
would be the case (2 Tim. iv. 1-4 ; ii. 17), until all trace of primitive
truth disappeared, and the spirit of the Lord was withdrawn from all
association with an empty Christian name. Whatever genuine
profession may have existed since then, has not been honoured by a
return of the Spirit’s witnessing and governing presence.
4.—Revival of the Apostolic Faith.
In the nineteenth century, when the times of the Gentiles are
nearing their end, and the era of the Lord’s return has approached,
there has been a revival of the original apostolic faith, through the
agency of Scriptural study and demonstration. This work has been
perfectly natural imits proximate features (see Life and JVorJc of Dr.
Thomas), but thoroughly spiritual and apostolic in its results. It
has been unaccompanied by any visible manifestation of the Spirit,
such as characterised the apostolic era, but is none the less the
evolution of the Spiiit’s work in its individual and collective achieve


ments. There is no reason to expect any recurrence of this manifesta
tion of the Spirit until the Lord’s actual re-appearance in the earth. On
the contrary, there are reasons for believing the divine programme
to be such that it cannot take place.
5. — Problems of the Modern Situation.
In this situation of things, there are problems which did not
embarrass the operations of the Gospel in the first century. People
come to a knowledge of the truth, here and there throughout the
world, by means of the published literature of the truth, which has
gone widely abroad. What are they to do on attaining to this know-
ledge ? They are members of the various religious bodies around them:
shall they continue in their accustomed association ? Reason itself
would answer this question even if there were no Scriptural guidance.
How can a man continue in association with a body with whose sen-
timents and objects he has ceased to have sympathy ? The Scriptures
prescribe that which impulse would dictate: to “come out” (2 Cor,
vi. 17) to have no fellowship (Eph. v. 11), to withdraw (2 Tim. iii. 5).
It is impossible that the truth could grow or live in the theological
communions of the day.
6.— What is the Solitary Man To Do ?
When the inevitable course of the earnest man is adopted, and he
finds himself outside the orthodox pale, the question presses, what is
he to do? If he is alone, his case will be more difficult than if there
are others to keep him company. His first difficulty will be about
baptism. He cannot ask former associates to baptise him. They would
cither refuse or misconstrue his submission at their hands. He has no
friend of the truth to whom he can apply for assistance ; and distance
may be too great an obstacle to his availing himself of the help of the
nearest. He naturally thinks it essential that he should be baptised by
one already in Christ; and he is in distress that he cannot obtain the
services of such. Tire best advice at such a stage is to let him get the
help of some devout, even if unenlightened, friend to put him under
the water. There have been cases where, unable to get even this help,
the believer has buried himself, though this is not to be recommended.
The example of Dr. Thomas in a similar position is doubtless a good
guide. He asked the assistance of a devout acquaintance, on the
understanding that the participation of said acquaintance could impart
no character or efficacy to the act about to be performed, which was


purely an act of obedience rendered by Dr. Thomas to God, to which
the acquaintance was but mechanically accessory.
7.—The Administration of Baptism.
Those who think the efficacy of baptism depends upon the adminis-
trator have been troubled by the question “Who has authority to
baptise ? ” There is no real ground for doubt on this point. Believers
in the nineteenth century have just the same “ authority ” in the
matter of baptism as believers in the first. The lapse of time has not
invalidated the appointment of Christ for the salvation of men.
Baptism as an act of obedience performed in an apostle’s presence had
no more acceptability before God than the same act performed miles
and years away. The act is to God, and not to men. It matters little
by whose actual hands assistance is rendered in the act of baptism.
“ Jesus made and baptised more disciples than John ” (Jno. iv. 1),
yet he did not himself perform the baptism. A parenthesis is added
to state this: “ Jesus himself baptised not, but his disciples.” Jesus
baptising, then, literally meant his disciples doing it at his command.
To with theapostles. Paul made light of the personal participation by
an apostle in the act of baptism. He says : “Christ sent me not to
baptise, but to preach the gospel ” (1 Cor. i. 17.) He also says : “ I
thank God that I baptised none of you but Crispus and Gains.” In
the house of Cornelius, Peter * ‘ commanded them to be baptised in the
name of the Lord ; ” but this is no evidence that Peter officiated. If
it was done at his command, that was enough.
Anyone can bury a dead man ; but only the constituted authority
can give the order. Anybody can do the hanging of a murderer if the
law issue the warrant. A Scriptural baptism is the burial of the dead
(Rom. vi. 4), such as have become so to sin by the power of the truth,
and such as recognise their death-state in Adam. It has been com-
manded, centuries ago, by the apostles, that all such should be buried
in baptism. It does not matter who performs the mechanical part. If
it is done in obedience to the apostolic command, it is an apostolic act.
The “ authority ” arises more from the state of the baptised than the
state of the baptiser. notion that a personal “ authority ” is
necessary to give validity to it, is a relic of the apostacy. Philip, not an
apostle, baptised the eunuch (Acts viii. 38.) The three thousand
who were baptised on the day of Pentecost, could not have been bap-
tised by the apostles, but must have had numerous assistants. The
apostles have assistants in the nineteenth century as well as in the
first. The lapse of time does not affect the principle.


8. — Form of Procedure.
Where more than one come to the truth at the same time, the best
course, in the absence of an enlightened assistant, would be for them
to baptise one another. As to the exact form of procedure, in such a
case, we have no New Testament guidance, and must therefore act
under the general apostolic exhortation to do all things “ decently and
in order.” Let persons in the position described (having assembled
for the purpose) read a selection from theapostolic Scriptures appropriate
to the occasion ; then, in few and suitable words, let one of them ask
God to recognise what they are about to do, thanking Him for the
invitation to become associated with His son. Then let one of their
number (all things being ready) ask the person about to be immersed,
“ Do you believe the things concerning the Kingdom of God and the
name of Jesus Christ ?” When the person to be immersed has
said, “Yes, I do,” let the imrnerser say, “ Upon this public confession
of your faith, you are baptised, by God’s commandment, into the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, for the remis-
sion of your sins,” and then let the act of immersion be performed.
Nothing depends upon a set form of words. It is the believer’s sub-
mission to the commandment of God that is counted to him for
righteousness and union with Christ. Still it is, however, seemly
that a Scriptural and appropriate description should accompany the
act performed. The use of the form suggested secures the exhibition
of some features of the institution easily lost sight of, and that are
important to always hold in view: 1, that it is from the commandment
of God, and not from the officiation of the imrnerser, that the act
derives its validity ; 2, that the essence of the act is the submission to
burial on the part of the baptised, and not the performance of the
burial by the imrnerser; 3, that there is, in the act, a public profession
of the name of Christ ; 4, that, until that moment, a man is “in his
sins 5, that after immersion his sins are forgiven, and that he is
called to newness of life.
9.—Baptismal Formula.
As regards the form of words, it is better to say, “ baptised into the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,” than
simply “baptised into the Lord Jesus,” for this reason : the first form
of words keeps the truth concerning Christ in the foreground—that he
is the manifestation of the Father by the Holy Spirit and that what
he did, he did not of himself as a man ; whereas, the latter leaves the
way open for the idea to grow up that Jesus came in his own name
(which he expressly says he did not), and not in his Father’s name


(which he expressly says he did). True, the formula is orthodox, but
then it is also apostolic, and essential to the full expression of the truth
concerning Jesus.
10.—Course After Baptism Alone.
After baptism, it is Christ’s will that the baptised should break
bread and drink wine every first day of the week in remembrance of
him. Supposing the obedient person is alone, he has no alternative
but to do this alone. It will not be quite so profitable an exercise
alone as in company with fellow-believers, but it will be much better
than omitting it altogether. That this solitary exercise can bo profit-
ably conducted is evident, from the following (revised) extract from an
account of such an exercise ;
“Compelled by circumstances to be separated from the brethren on
a certain first day, I thought the best way of making use of my soli-
tude would be to devote some part of the day to the worship of the
God of heaven, and to endeavouring to gain instruction from His holy
oracles, instead of simply enduring it as a weariness. The effort was
successful beyond my anticipations. I have reason to remember with
thankfulness that day alone. First of all, I opened with thanksgiving
for mercies received. After this, I read two of the portions of Scrip-
ture allotted for the day in the Bible Companion. Then, after thanks
for each, I partook of bread and wine in commemoration of the death
of Jesus Anointed. I next received a beautiful and comforting exhor-
tation by reading a ‘ Sunday Morning’ (See Seasons of Comfort.) It
gave me a true picture of the world in which we live, and of the duties
which devolve upon us, as being in the world, but not of it. I thus
had the advantage of the presence, in a certain sense, of a brother who
was absent. After reading this exhortation, not being able, all things
considered, to sing, 1 read one of the songs of Zion. Ido not think it
possible, with pen and paper, to convey an idea of the feelings with
which 1 fulfilled the command, ‘Do this in remembrance of me,’
for the first time, alone. All extraneous distractions removed, I felt
face to face with our beloved Elder Brother ; and though I could not
hear his voice, or look upon him with my eyes, I knew he was con-
scious of all I felt, and of all I said. Isolated from the brethren,
suffering ironi bodily afflictions, ‘lover and friend far from me,’ I felt I
could breathe forth my most inmost yearnings in prayer.
In the evening I had a clear, comforting, and instructive lecture from
our sleeping brother, Dr. Thomas, who, through the pages of Eureka,
brought to my mind much that is in the Prophets and Apostles. I
spent my 1 day alone ’ with great profit, and I feel sure, some of our
brethren, who are isolated, might spend their lonely first-days in the
same way. Those who are not isolated are not at liberty to worship
God alone. Paul tells us we are to break bread together in ‘ one
place’ (1 Cor. xi. 20 ; xiv. 23), i.e., the one place appointed by the
brethren. And, doubtless, he intended there should be one meeting


in every city where brethren might dwell. They were ‘to preserve
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace ’ (Eph. iv. 3) ; to ‘ be
of one mind ’ (1 Peter iii. 8) ; ‘to strive together for the faith of the
gospel’ (Phil. i. 27; iii. 17 ; Col. ii. 2). No brother or sister ought,
by breaking bread alone, to break this command. It is certainly our
duty to meet with the brethren when circumstances permit, but when
we have no control over these circumstances—when we are compelled
to be alone—shall we not be doing an acceptable thing to God by
remembering His Son in the breaking of bread and drinking of wine
on any first day of the week ?”
11.—After Baptism (in Company).
If more than one obey the truth together, the weekly breaking of
bread will bo an enjoyable exercise, and the nucleus of an ecclesia will
have been formed. A first necessity in such a case will be a room to
meet in. It will probably be sufficient at first for a company of two
or three, to meet in the house of one of them. But this ought not to
be continued longer than necessary. It is better for brethren to have
to leave their houses and repair to a neutral place, as regards the effect
on themselves ; and it certainly enables them more effectually to dis-
charge their function as witnesses of the truth than when their meet-
ings are in a private house.
12.—Objects of Eeelesial Work.
The objects of eeelesial operations are two-fold : I—the edifica-
tion (or refreshment, encouragement, strengthening, or building up)
of its individual constituents in the faith —“the edifying of itself in
love” (Eph. iv. 16) ; and 2—the exhibition of the light of truth to
“ those that are without. ” In this two-fold capacity, the ecclesia is
“ the pillar (that which upholds) and ground (that which gives standing
room) of the truth” (1 Tim. iii. 15). These two objects will always be
carefully pursued by enlightened and earnest men. Neither is to bo
lost sight of, and neither sacrificed to the other. Edification is the
more agreeable : but the testimony of the truth is the more dutiful
function. We must, therefore, resist the tendency to exalt the former
over the latter ; and, at the same time, be on our equal guard that we
pursue not the latter to the sacrifice of the former. There is a ten-
dency in young ecclesias to give the public testimony the more
prominent place; and in older bodies, perhaps the tendency is to prefer
that which is individually profitable to that which may seem to them
a bootless exhibition of divine matters to a heedless public. A right


condition of things gives both an equal place. Duty to Christ will
sustain older ecclesias in a course from which their individual prefer-
ences would withdraw them ; and the need of comfort, and the luxury
and service and worship will help the younger bodies to give due place
to breaking of bread and exhortation.
13. — Rules and Modes.
In all communities, large or small, there must be order and
mutual submission, in order to attain the objects of their existence.
In small bodies, few and simple rules will suffice. In large bodies,
there will be more need for precise and definite regulations, having refer-
ence to what duties certain persons will attend to, how such are to be
appointed, under what conditions their duties will be exercised, and so
forth. Two things have to be secured in the conduct of an ecclesia,
which are capable, in a wrong mode of working, of becoming incon-
sistent with one another, but which, with care, wisdom, and patience,
can be so reconciled as to both have their full and effective place. The
one is, Order, and the other, Individual Liberty. Both are essential
to the healthy and harmonious life of an ecclesia. The danger is that
one or other may be sacrificed, in the endeavour to secure either. Care
should be taken that neither is Secured at the expense of the other.
Let not order quench individual liberty, and be sure that individual
liberty is not allowed to destroy order. Both are to be secured by
appropriate arrangements, such as arc indicated in this Guide.
14.—Absence of the Spirit’s Appointments.
In the apostolic ecclesias, the Spirit of God, by the hand of the
apostles, or other Spirit-endowed person, nominated and appointed
such special brethren, in virtue of which appointments, the rest of the
body were bound to yield a ready submission to the rule and authority
so established. Such ruling brethren were appointed to permanent
office. Under this institution, the brethren were saved the trouble of
election, and the confusion inore or less incident in our times to the
absence of authority. In our day, until the Spirit speaks again, we
can have no such privilege ; and it is worse than useless to profess a
possession we lack. Our wisdom lies in recognising the true nature of
our case, and making the most of the unprivileged circumstances of a
time succeeding to a long period of divine absence and ecclesial
chaos.


15.—The Necessities of the Present Situation.
Much can be done by the loving co-operation of divinely enlightened
intelligence. In fact, little or no government would be necessary
were all who profess the name of Christ animated by a controlling
deference to the mind of Christ—a mind swayed by both the love of
God and the love of man. The simplest rules would be easy to carry
out in a community so constituted. But such a state of things cannot
be reached until Christ come, who will separate the unholy element
everywhere, and organise that magnificent body, his completed
ecclesia, whom he will “present to himself a glorious ecclesia, without
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing,” and with whom he will proceed
to the glorious work of governing the world in righteousness and true
beneficence.
In the mixed state of things prevailing at present, arrangement and
order are necessary. Without them, there will inevitably come, sooner
or later, misunderstanding," offence, disunion, strife, envy, and every
evil work. Even with order, wisely maintained, it is difficult to keep
these evil results at ba)’-.
16.—Mutual Consent the Basis of Order.
The only practicable basis of order in the circumstances existing in
our dispensation, is that of mutal consent, expressed in the process
known as voting, which literally means voicing, or speaking your mind.
If God would speak, as in the day of the Spirit’s ministration, there
would be no need for man to speak ; but, as God is silent, there is no
alternative but to make the best appointments we can amongst our-
selves, aiming in all things to come close to His mind and will, as ex-
pressed in the written word of the apostles.
The principle of government by consent can only be practically
applied by listening to the voice of the greater number, technically
described as “the majority.” There are well-founded objections to
following such a lead in certain matters : but in this matter, what other
principle can be acted on? Shall seventy-five submit to the contrary
wishes of twenty-five ? Is it not more reasonable that in matters of
general convenience, the lesser number should submit to the greater ?
Such an admission is doubtless a concession to the evil principle of
democracy ; but there is no other practicable alternative in the absence
of the voice of authority. And it is a principle that may work out
beneficent results if subordinated to the commandments of Christ,
which are all-prevailing with true disciples of Christ.


17.—Exercise of Authority out of the Question.
One principle ought to permeate all appointments in the house
Christ, and that is the one laid down Christ, when speaking of the
exercise of authority of one Gentile over another, he said, “ It shall
not be so among you.” “He that is greatest among you, let him
be as the younger, and he that is chief as he that doth serve.” The
appointment of brethren to certain offices is not the appointment of
men to exercise authority, but of men to serve. For this reason, it is
wise to speak of them all, in whatever capacity, as “ serving brethren.”
For the same reason, it is inexpedient to employ any technical term
around which ideas of personal importance are liable to gather,
or which have a tendency to create a cold officialism and obscure the
family relation in the truth. “ The committee,” for example, or “the
executive,” “registrar,” &c., is an abstraction which is liable to do
this. It is wise to attach the term “ brother ”or “ brethren” to every
office. It may sometimes seem uncouth or redundant ; but this is
more than compensated by its wholesome effect in helping to preserve
the family unity of the body of Christ. It keeps in view the fact
that official brethren are only brethren performing an office for
the good of the rest, and to some extent shuts the door against the
corruption which generated the apostacy, and developed the clerical
usurpation.
18.—Serving Brethren, not Rulers.
All official brethren are serving brethren ; but there are necessarily
different sorts of serving brethren, such as managing brethren, presiding
brethren, doorkeeping brethren, &c., but all are brethren. It is im-
portant to keep this feature constantly in the front. Christ places it
there: “ One is your master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren.”
This feature, with many other beautiful features originally appertaining
to the house of Christ, has disappeared from the religious systems
around us, bearing the name of Christ, Having returned to it, let us
hold on to it. There must be no authority, only service.
The spirit of the appointments involves this. The ecclesia does not
appoint masters, but servants. In principle, the ecclesia is the doer
or everything ; but, as it is impossible, it can. in its collective capacity,
do the things that are to be done, it delegates to individual mem-
bers the duty of doing them in its behalf.
19.—Suitable Qualifications.
In this delegation of official duties, it ought to be guided by the
apostolic and reasonable principle that men of suitable qualifications


should be chosen. Men chosen for the performance of particular duties
become more or less representative men to “those that are without
and since the ecclesia has a mission to “ them that are without,” it is
important that in these men, “ those that are without” should be able
to recognise an illustration of the spirit and principles that belong to
hrist. Furthermore, as regards those that are within, it is important
that the men to whom a special function is assigned by choice, should
be men likely to exercise a righteous and beneficial influence. If Paul
was careful to recommend that candidates for spiritual appointment in
the early ecclesias should have certain eligible qualifications, much
more needful is it that regard should be had to these qualifications in
appointments in a day like ours, when we are not privileged with the
visible indications of the mind of the spirit.
Those qualifications are thus described; “ Blameless, the husband
of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavour, given to hospitality, apt
to teach, not self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, no striker,
not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a brawler, not covetous ;
a lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate; holding fast the
faithful word ; one that ruleth well his own house, having his children
in subjection with all gravity ; not a novice ; moreover he must have
a good report of them that are without. ”
We cannot do better than have these qualifications always in view
when called upon to make a choice for any particular office.
20.—Ecclesial Control.
It is next important, in making this choice, that the right of the
whole ecclesia to control proceedings should not bo absolutely sur-
rendered into the hands of those chosen. To do this would be to
appoint masters and not servants, and lay a foundation for the evils
that have come from clerical domination. While appointing special
brethren to special offices, the ecclesia ought to retain a power
of regulation and control. This is done by making the pro-
ceedings of the arranging brethren subject to the periodical approba-
tion of the general body. Let the arranging brethren report their acts
once in three months to the general body, and if there is anything
objectionable in those acts, it is in the power of the ecclesia to re-
pudiate them. Yet, since the decisions of the arranging brethren must
often refer to matters requiring immediate attention, it is necessary
that their decisions should be valid, without the consent of the general
body ; and that such acts should not be subject to repudiation. The
two necessities are met by giving the arranging brethren the power to


carry out their decisions at once ; and the general body the power of
veto only as regards the future.
21.—Mode and Term of Appointment.
The mode and periodicity of appointment are of great importance.
If serving brethren are appointed too frequently, and in too open a
manner, there will be a recurrence of electioneering agitation, which
will prove hurtful to the whole body. The body exists for spiritual
objects ; the growth of love and holiness. The appointment of serving
brethren is for the promotion of these results, and their appointment
ought not to be conducted in a manner that will interfere with them.
The process ought to be quiet, and with as little general disturbance as
possible.
The first point (quietness) is secured by having all nominations in
writing, by having the ballot papers taken home and gathered after-
wards. Nomination in writing has also the advantage of excluding
frivolous proposals. There ought to be no proposing in open meeting,
and no discussion of the qualifications of candidates, and no canvass-
ing. The whole operation should be in quietness, and in secret, and
in love.
Freedom from too frequent disturbance, is secured in one of
two ways: either all the appointments ought to be for a period of
years (say four); or if the yearly process is preferred, it ought not to
affect all serving brethren each year, but only a proportion at a time.
Let a fourth of the whole retire each year (by alphabetical rotation in the
case of those at first appointed, and afterwards in the order of their
election). In this way, the agitation connected with appointments would
be reduced to a minium, while the principle of ecclesial control would
be retained. Practically, each brother appointed would be appointed
for four years. A safeguard against the possibility of a very unsuit-
able person being appointed for the length of time would be found in
the power of the ecclesia at any time to remove any brother from any
office, by the vote of a majority, on cause being shewn.
22.—Eligibility for Re-election.
There ought to be a power of re-election without limit. In the case
of the spirit-appointed officials of the apostolic ecclesias, their position
would be permanent, after the analogy of appointments to the Kingdom
of God. When a brother is peculiarly qualified, there is no reason
why, in our age, he should ever cease to serve. The power of re


election would enable us to approximate to the apostolic model as
nearly as is compatible with the system of periodic appointments.
23.—Arranging Brethren.
There must be arrangement, and it must be the work of some in
particular. If those appointed to do the work are called arranging
brethren, it will be a literal description, and not a name of honour.
Names of honour are to be avoided in the probationary stage of the
body of Christ. Seven is a convenient and scriptural number for pur-
poses of management. Their function would be to attend to all business
matters connected with the operations of the ecclesia. Their quali-
fications would principally require to be of a practical order. But as
the business they would have to do would be business with spiritual
objects, arranging brethren ought, above all things, to be men of a
truly brotherly spirit possessing a business turn, but chiefly the brotherly
character. It is not sufficient that they have a business turn : they
must be brethren first, arranging brethren afterwards. This is the
first qualification for all offices—a point liable to be overlooked in
young ecclesias. If it be asked, how is a brotherly spirit to be known,
the answer is, by the test of the commandments of Christ : are they
obeyed ? If so, the man has a brotherly spirit. Are they not observed
in the man’s conduct ? Then he is not a brotherly man, and not suit-
able for management, however great his practical abilities may be.
Good arranging brethren may often be found in men not possessing
the gift of public utterance. What is wanted is, the Spirit of Christ
and a good practical judgment. Such men ma} 7 quietly arrange many
things for the general good that would not occur to even brethren of
more showy gifts.
24.—Arranging Meetings Open to All.
Their deliberative meetings should be open at all times to the rest
of the brethren. Several advantages are secured by this. The growth
of a gap between the arranging brethren and the general body is pre-
vented ; the prevalence of the brotherly family feeling among all is
maintained. There being nothing secret, no envious curiosity can
arise, while, the way being open for any brother to attend and speak
(though not to vote), there is secured any advantage there may be in
the general wisdom. Any brother to whom a good idea may occur
having it in his power to attend and ventilate it, has the double
advantage of securing any benefit there may be in the general body ;


or relieving the brother’s mind by showing him that the advantage of
his idea is not available. Thus murmurings and surmisings are pre-
vented.
25.—Presiding Brethren.
The only reason for having presiding brethren as distinct from
arranging brethren, is, that some brethren may be qualified
to give their services as arranging brethren, who have not
the gifts to fill a public part. On the other hand, some may
be qualified to lead the assembly in its public exercises,
who are not gifted with practical talent. Some may have the quali-
fication for both offices. It is desirable to have a variety of presiding
brethren for the sake of preserving the fraternal character of the
assembly, which would gradually be lost sight of if there were only
one. It is also an advantage to the assemblj 7 to have the diversity of
style that is secured by a plurality. The duty of a presiding brother
is not so much to perform the exercises, as to supply the initiative in
their performance. He may perform them himself; but his office is
fulfilled if he call upon others to perform them. Thus he may pray or
call upon others to pray ; he may read or call upon others to read : he
may speak or call upon others to speak. The duty of his office is alike
performed in either case.
The advantage of this liberty lies here, that a brother may possess
personal worth, and gravity, and composure, and vocal enunciation
that qualify him to lead the assembly while destitute of the ability to
profitably engage in prayer or address the assembly. If he were com-
pelled to perform the two latter duties, his services would be lost to
the assembly. Being at liberty to exercise the presiding office in
calling upon others, the comfort of what qualifications he may have is
secured to the assembly, notwithstanding his lack in other qualifica-
tions. The presiding brother is, in fact, chairman, or master of the
ceremonies, though, if able, he is at liberty to supply the leading
parts.
It is important that his office be limited to the actual session of the
assembly, and carry no function with it beyond it. The way must be
fenced against priesthood in all directions. This is secured by his
function ceasing with the dispersion of the assembly. He should be
at liberty to appoint a substitute ; but only from the list of those whom
the ecclesial appointment has signified as suitable.
Presiding brethren stand prominently in the front of an
ecclesias’ proceedings. It is therefore necessary, in their appointment,


to have peculiar regard to the qualifications specified by Paul, as before
quoted. Men ought not to be appointed against whom the finger of
reproach can be lilted.
26.—Recording Brother-(Usually called Secretary)
It is necessary to have a brother to whom all communications in-
tended for the ecclesia may be addressed,and who shall present the same
to the arranging brethren, as representing the ecclesia ; to keep records
of all proceedings, whether of the arranging brethren or the general
body. The brother so appointed has no authority by reason of his
office. He is simply the organ of the ecclesia, by which the ecclesia
officially sees and hears, and, when necessary, acts. He becomes the
hand of the ecclesia only when the ecclesia, as represented by the
arranging brethren, imparts its volition to him by special or general
direction. He is iir all things subject to the arranging brethren, with-
out whose direction he has no power to act. He may have a standing
direction from them in matters of routine, in virtue of which he per-
forms acts without coming before them, such as arranging for conver-
sational interviews with a view to immersion, reminding brethren of
their appointments, &c., but in all specific matters coming under his
cognizance, his duty is to lay the matter before them, and ask their
direction before acting one way or other. It is part of his duty that
he take cognizance and record of all receipts and disbursements by the
treasurer.
A Recording brother necessarily exercises great influence in an
ecclesia, and, therefore, it is above all things necessary that he should
be a true and hearty brother, and not a mere technical expert.
27.—Finance Brother (usually called Treasurer).
As bolder of the bag, the principal requisite in a treasurer in any
community, is trustworthiness; but in an ecclesia of the living God
it is needful that besides this, he posst ss and exhibit the mind of
Christ. In his intimate relations with the rest of the brethren, he
influences them tor good or evil. He ought, therefore, not only to be an
exact registrar and safe keeper of all monetary matters, but an ardent
sympathiser with all the objects ot an ecclesia’s existence. He ought,
at the same time, to have all the qualifications valuable in a treasurer.’
He ought to have a proueness to defend the bag from encroachment, as
much as if it were his own purse. In this, he may render valuable


service to the whole body. A good Christadelphian treasurer will at the
same time never sink the brother in the treasurer. He will blend the
enthusiasm of a servant of Christ with the care and forethought and
accuracy of a banker. This will exclude parsimony and prevent
extravagance. For the rest, a clear and full record of all receipts and
payments, in conjunction with the Kecording brother, and an intellig-
ible report of the same at the periodical business meetings, completes
his part —an essential, honourable, serviceable, though humble, part
28.—Exelusion of Business from Sunday Meetings.
The great object to be aimed at in first day meetings is comfort and
edification in the things of the Spirit. All arrangements ought to
converge upon this result. Everything ought to be avoided that at
all interferes with it. All things are lawful, but all things are not
expedient. It is not expedient to introduce matters of business or
topics of debate at assemblies convened for the contemplation of
the things of the Spirit. They interfere with the placid con-
templation of these things, and, in time, have a tendency even to
displace them altogether. Without stringent care on this point,
ecclesial meetings are liable to degenerate into social clubs, at which
secular matters acquire ascendancy in the minds of members, and the
realities of God’s glorious will are driven into the distance. It ought
to be an absolute rule, that no business discussion should take place at
first-day meetings of the ecclesia. Let all business be banished to
another time.
29.—Fraternal Announcements.
Announcements concerning matters of fraternal interest are not
“business” in the sense of these remarks. They are acts of informa-
tion which may tend to edification. Such, for example, as the an-
nouncement that a brother from a distance is present for fellowship ;
or that a sick brother is improved in health ; or that a meeting of a
special character is to be held at such and such a time. All these are
spiritually interesting, and an interval ought to be provided for them.
The interval should come before the general prayer, for this reason :
matters may be announced—such as the sore trouble of some one, or
even death—which it would be desirable to make the subject of peti-
tion. And concerning brethren visiting from a distance, it is pleasant
thus to know that you are uniting your prayers with theirs—a pleasure
you would miss if you were left in ignorance of their presence.


30.—Mode of Conducting the Meetings.
Whatever interferes with the comfort of a meeting interferes with
edification. Edification is a delicate mental result, easily interfered
with, and requiring careful nursing. All the exercises ought to be
so apportioned that no needless fatigue should be inflicted on any.
For this reason, standing exercises ought not to succeed one another.
When a hymn has been sung (perhaps a long one) it is acceptable to
the assembly to sit down. Therefore another time should be chosen
for a prayer than just after a hymn. The reading ought to come be-
tween. In this way, a rest is provided, which leaves the mind more at
liberty than if the fatigue of standing through a hymn has to he suc-
ceeded by the fatigue of standing through a prayer (perhaps a long one
—hut prayers ought not to he long).
Both in prayer and reading, it is a great interference with the
mental concentration that ought to prevail, for late comers to enter
during those exercises. In some ecclesias, this evil is remedied by having
the doors closed during reading and prayer ; which has also the advan-
tage of helping the habit of punctuality.
On such points, Brother Shuttleworth makes the following sugges-
tions :
I. —COMMENCEMENT OF MEETINGS—
Unwise Way. —Begin 5, 10, or 15 minutes after the appointed hour,
and tea meetings at least 30 minutes after time. V
Wise Way. —Begin all meetings punctually at the hour. If presid-
ing brother not at his post, another to take his place, and com-
mence the meeting, and give way to him when he comes.
Reason for the Latter. —Punctuality imparts zest to the proceedings,
and gives a feeling of earnestness as to the matters in hand :
wastes no one’s precious time ; and promotes the happiness and
edification of the occasion.
lI.—WHO TO SELECT HYMNS —
Unwise Way. —One brother selecting all the hymns Sunday after
Sunday, such as helpers at harmonium or leaders of song.
Wise Way. —The presiding brethren to select the hymns each day in
their turn.
Reason for the Latter. —Secures variety of selection and a choice of
words, rather than tunes—which is the more important.


111. —THE .RELATIVE PLACE OF RINGING AND PRAYER —
Unwise Way.— Praying immediately after the first singing
Wise Way. —Dividing first singing from prayer by having reading
between.
Reason for the Latter, —Gives a rest between the two not so long-
to stand.
Iy.—NATURE OF HYMNS CHOSEN —
TJnwise Way. —Any sort will do : all good, no need for much selec-
tion. Hymns suitable only for brethren may be used at public
meeting, for presenting the truth to the stranger.
Wise Way. —The presiding brother will always have respect to the
nature of the occasion, or subject of the lecture. In the morning
he will open with Psalms of David, or some other general ascrip-
tion of praise to God—following, with others, upon the suffeiings
or priesthood of Christ, and, with others, on the comforts of the
truth, the desolation of Israel, or the coming of the Lord—as
each occasion may seem best to suggest, or call for. At night, the
presiding brother won’t ask the alien audience to tell lies by ask-
ing them to say, “Oh, how love I thy law, it is my study all the
day,” but will confine the selection to declaratory hymns, in which
even the stranger may join, such as “Zion’s king shall reign
victorious.”
v.— WHEN TO SELECT HYMNS —
Univise Way. — Leave the selection of Hymns to Sunday morning,
and keep all the meeting waiting while the presiding brother
turns over the leaves.
Wise Way. —Select the Hymns beforehand.
Reason for the Latter.— The comfort of the meeting preserved ;no
time wasted.
VI. —NATURE OF PRAYER —
Unwise Way.— To turn morning prayer into an exhortation to the
brethren; and Evening Prayer, into an exposition or running
Lecture to the outer-court worshippers.
Wise Way.—Let prayer be to God alone—one brother leading the
rest in thanksgiving and supplications to His name. And that
the subject matter of each prayer be appropriate to the occasion
Reason for the Latter. —That God may be glorified, and all may be
edified.


Vir.—WHEN AND WHAT SCRIPTURE READINGS TO SELECT —
Unwise Way. Select any chapter after it is time to begin the
meeting, and keep the meeting waiting perhaps five or ten
minutes.
Wise Way. —Read the Bible Companion chapters for the day
on Sunday morning (two out of the three portions); and the
same at week-night meeting (one portion).
Reason for the Latter. —No delay or embarrassment. Everybody
knows what is to be read. But the principal advantage is that
great and interesting variety of spiritual matter is afforded, as
compared with a plan that results in a very limited selection
with some chapters several times over in a short time.
VIII. —FRATERNAL ANNOUNCEMENTS—
Unwise Way. —To make them towards end of meeting—or with-
out any fixed place.
Wise Way. —To make them next after opening singing and reading-
Reason for the Latter.— Puts everyone in early possession of infor-
mation as to the state of the brethren, or other important matters,
—so that the prayers following may include intercession for such
as are sick : or the hymns altered and exhortation made appro-
priate in case of death having been announced.
IX. —GIVING OF THANKS FOR THE BREAD AND WINE—
Unwise Way. —To make no reference to the bread and wine at all
but pray and preach about everything that happens to come into
mind.
Wise Way. —To limit the thanksgiving to actual thanks for the bread
and wine as briefly and appropriately as possible, to the
exclusion of matter that would find its proper place in other
prayers.
Reason for the Latter. Seemliness before God and man, and the
comfort and edification of all concerned.
X. —GIVING THE RIGHT HAND OF FELLOWSHIP—
Unwise Way. —Doing it between giving thanks for the bread and its
distribution.
Wise Way. —Doing the same before thanksgiving.
Reason for the Latter. —Uniting the newly-received brother in the
whole act of breaking bread, instead of making him feel in a sense
outside till the bread is actually handed to him.


XI. —WHO TO EXHORT ON SUNDAY MORNING —
Unwise Way.— Leave it to the presiding brother whether qualified to
speak to edification or not.
Wise Way.— Let the presiding brother call upon the brother chosen
because qualified to do. Such brother may be a presiding brother
as well ; but do not make exhorting a part ot the duty of the pre-
siding brother necessarily.
Reason for the Latter.— Some brethren make good presiding
brethren who are not the suitable mouthpiece for exhortation.
Compelling such to exhort is to the hurt of all concerned.
XII. TIME FOR PRINCIPAL EXHORTATION—
Unwise Way.— Leave it till before the last hymn.
Wise Way.— Let it precede the breaking of bread.
Reason for the Latter.— Makes an edifying preparation for the break-
ing of the loaf.
XIII. —TIME FOR COLLECTION —
Unwise Way.— Have the collection after all is over.
Wise Way. —Let it follow close on breaking of bread.
Reason for the Latter.— The giving of our free-will offerings ought to
be sanctified as a part of our service.
Xiv. — MODE OF MAKING COLLECTION
Unwise Way.— Suddenly and unceremoniously pass the box round,
without a word from the presiding brother, or without his ever
standing up.
Wise Way.— Let the presiding brother before passing the box
round, rise to his feet, and invite the brethren, in a dignified and
loving way, to unite their free-will offerings for the service ot the
truth.
Reason for the Latter. —Imparts grace and profit to an important act
of service.
XV.—WHO TO APPOINT AS PRESIDING BRETHREN —
Unwise Way. —Appoint any brother who may greatly desire the
office, or whom it would much please to have it conferred ; his
being a novice to be no disqualification.


Wise Way. —Restrict the appointment to such as are supremely
taken up with the things of the Spirit, and who possess a natural
or acquired facility of address in prayer and otherwise, and who
are capable of rising to some extent above a school boy’s vocabu-
lary in divine things.
Reason for the Latter. —Promotes the up-building and comforting of
the saints, which is sacrificed by the “ a b c ” prattle of such as
talk to time like a machine.
XVI. —SUBJECT OF PRAYER—
Unwise Way. —To pray in the morning, for the success of evening
meeting.
Wise Way. —Let prayer refer to its own occasion. Ask in the even-
ing that the evening meeting have a blessing.
Reason for the Latter.— God does not require several hours’ notice, in
order to grant a blessing. Sufficient unto the day, is the good, as
well as the evil.
XVII. —THE CONDUCT OF ARRANGING MEETINGS —
Unwise Way. —Begin in a leisurely and informal way, without any
very nice respect to time. Begin anyhow and end same.
Wise Way. —Conduct the meeting with the same order and prompt-
ness as other meetings. Have a Chairman ; let prayer open and
close: and let everything be gone through in a way consistent
with earnest purpose and the fraternal spirit.
Reason for the Latter. —Too obvious to require specification.
31. — Introduction of New Brethren.
This apparently simple and joyful matter may be a source of
trouble if not wisely regulated. Looking at Philip and the eunuch,
some may think themselves justified in immersing a believing stranger
at a moment’s notice, without consultation with anyone, and intro-
ducing him afterwards as a brother to the brethren. Experience
proves such a course to be fraught with the seeds of trouble and mis-
understanding, and reflection will show that it is not justified by the
case of Philip and the eunuch. In the case of Philip, he was guided
and authorised by the Spirit, which no brother is in our day. And
in immersing and admitting the eunuch, there was no one to consider
but their two selves. It was a simple question of the obedience of
the eunuch, to which no one but the evangelist stood related. In


the circumstances of an ecclesia. it is different. A brother introduced,
is introduced to the fellowship of a number who have all equal rights
in the matter of giving or withholding fellowship. These rights must
be considered and provided for in the mode of procedure. It ought
not to be possible for anyone to be thrust upon their
fellowship without the opportunity of dissent. “Decently
and in order ” is a rule as applicable here as in other matters.
It is not difficult to apply it. Let a brother receiving an application
for admission, report the same to the Recording Brother, whose duty
it is to report it to the body. Let an appointment for interview be
made for the succeeding week. Let the result of the interview be
announced next first day. If the interview is unsatisfactory 7, the
matter is at an end. If satisfactory, let it be said so, and that im-
mersion will take place at such a time, if there be no objection. On
the following first day,—immersion having taken place,—the reception
of the new brother is signified, on behalf of all, by the presiding bro-
ther, just before the breaking of bread, extending to him the right
hand of fellowship. This act is done in the name of the assembly.
Some think it ought to be done in the name of Christ. They over-
look that that would be to profess his authority for the reception of
the particular individual. Such authority we do not possess. The
person received may be a devil, as Judas was : and Christ will receive
none such. We have authority to receive into the fellowship of the
assembly, but we have no authority to settle matters on behalf of
Christ. He is judge, and will settle those at his coming.
By the mode indicated, the door is closed against the disorder and
bad feeling liable to result from the sudden introduction of some per-
son against whom, it may be, some valid ground of objection is known
to some, who would raise it if they knew of the application.
But some ask, what if the person die during the delay ? Such a
question need not be allowed any weight against what is in itself
wise. We may surely trust that God will not allow the frustration of
his institutions through the wise and careful and peace-promoting ad-
ministration of them in the hands of his children.
32.—Cases of Sin and Withdrawal.
Withdrawal is a serious step, and ouglit not to be lightly taken
against any brother. It erects a barrier and inflicts a stain not easily
removed. It ought never to be taken until all the resources of the
Scriptural rule of procedure have been exhausted.


The rule laid down by Christ for the treatment of personal offences
(Matt, xviii. 15-17) is doubtless applicable to sin in general. Sin of any
kind on the part of a brother, becoming known to another brother, is a
sin against that brother—more heinous, indeed, when Scriptnrally esti-
mated, than a mere offence against himself. He is, therefore, bound
to take the course Jesus prescribes, as John plainly indicates in the
words, “If any man see his brother sin, a sin which is not unto death,
he shall ask, &c.” It is usual with some not to act upon this rule at
all. The usual way is to speak of the fault, whatever it is, to a third
party. This itself is sin. A brother’s part (if the case be serious
enough to speak of at all), is to be silent to all but the brother himself:
first, go to himself and discuss the matter between the two alone. If
this is successful, a brother is gained and saved, and the matter is not
to be mentioned to anyone else. If not successful, Christ commands
the interview to be repeated with the assistance of one or two others ;
and only in the event of these failing, is the matter to be mentioned
to the ecclesia, or those representing it. It is then the ecclesia’s part
to bring their whole influence to bear upon the offender ta forsake his
evil ways. Only when this has failed are we at liberty to withdraw. No-
thing is so effectual as this rule for stopping evil speaking and ensuring
merciful help to those who stumble, or the proper and timely
treatment of incorrigible sin. Each brother then becomes a seeing eye
and protecting hand of the ecclesia. There should be a stringent re-
fusal to hear an evil report concerning any one until the reporter has
taken the Scriptural course.
Withdrawal, too, when it comes (it must be noted), is not expulsion.
It is the apostolic form of separation, which though practically equiva-
lent to expulsion in its effects on the separated, is more in harmony
with the spirit enjoined by Christ upon his house, than the form in
vogue among professing bodies of all sorts. Withdrawal means that
those withdrawing do modestly and sorrowfully step aside from the
offender for fear of implication in his offence. Expulsion means
kicking out, which is a different thing, and implies and generates the
arrogant attitude of ecclesiastical excommunication. The careful pre-
servation of right forms in these things is a help to the preservation of
the right spirit.
38.—Examination of Applicants for Immersion
There is, of course, a need for ascertaining whether an applicant for
immersion understands and believes the truth. The validity of im-
mersion depends upon believing the truth. In apostolic times, this
belief was evidenced by the simple admission that Jesus was the Christ.
25
ECCLESIAL GUIDK.


The case stands differently now when nominal believers in Christ as-
sociate with their historical belief, doctrines subversive of the scheme
of truth avhich centres in his name. It is no longer sufficient lor a
man to say he believes in Christ, unless the statement mean that he
believes the truth concerning Christ. The simple confession ot belief
in Christ does not bring with it the guarantee it did in apos-
tolic times, that the doctrines embodied in Christ are received.
The apostacy has held sway for centuries, and still reigns with un-
diminished power; and through its influence, there exists around us a
state of things in which, while, so far as words go, there is universal
profession of belief in Christ, there is an absolute and virulent rejection
of the truth of which Christ is the embodiment. We must, therefore,
dispense with mere forms and phrases, and address ourselves to the
work of gauging the actual relations of things. We must find out the
truth of a man’s profession when he claims fellowship with us ; and
the genuineness of his faith when he asks to be immersed ; and this
now-a-days cannot be done without crucial test; for words have
become so flexible, and mere phrases so current, that a form ot words
may be used without any conception of the idea which it originally
and apostolically represented.
At the same time, we must beware of an attitude savouring of priestly
arrogance. We must distinctly recognise that the efficacy of the
candidate’s immersion in no way depends on the administration or
sanction ot those who may examine him. We cannot impart validity
to immersion by compliance, nor can we vitiate it by withholding
countenance, but, as a matter of order and self-protection, we are
bound to ascertain (and in these days to apply the test rigidly)
whether a man applying for immersion believes the truth of the gospel
or not. The attitude of enlightened believers of the truth might be
expressed thus : “We are under the law of Christ: that law requires
a man seeking baptism to be a believer of the Gospel; and it requires
of us not to receive into our fellowship those who do not believe the
truth, on pain of being held responsible for their unbelief. You ask
us to baptise you. As a matter of allegiance to Christ and defence of
our own position, we must ascertain whether you believe the truth.
We cannot be parties to your baptism, if you do not receive the truth.
We should be misleading } 7 ou and implicating ourselves.”
A specimen of the sort of conversation which is found effectual
for ascertaining the existence of the requisite qualification will be found
in the small pamphlet entitled “ The Good Confession: a conversation
between a Christadelphian and a believing stranger, with a view to
immersion into the name of Christ.’


34.—Basis of Fellowship.
Examination implies a recognised basis of fellowship ; that is, a
definition of the doctrines that are recognised as the truth. Examina-
tion would be objectless if there were no such definition recognised,
whether written or understood. It is necessary to have the truth
defined. It is not enough for an applicant to say he believes the
Bible, or the testimony of the apostles. Multitudes would profess
belief in this form, who we know are ignorant or unbelieving of the
truth, and, therefore, unqualified for union with the brethren of
Christ. The question for applicants is, do they believe what the
Scriptures teach ? To test this, the teaching requires definition.
This definition agreed to, forms the basis of fellowship among believers,
whether expressed in spoken or written words.
The history of creeds, which have supplanted the Scriptures in past
ages, naturallyleads some to feel an objection to this basis in a written
form, but it is obvious that there are advantages in connection with a
written form that outweigh the sentimental repugnance inspired by
ecclesiastical precedents. A mere understanding as to the definitions
oftruthtobe receivedis apt to become dim and indefinite, and the way is
open to the gradual setting in of corruption. So long as it is under-
stood that the written definition is not an authority, but merely the
written expression of our identical convictions, there is not only no
disadvantage, but the reverse, in reducing the faith to a form that
shuts the door against misunderstanding.
Such a basis of faith will be found at the end of this book.
35.—Disputes.
There ought to be no murmurings and disputings among the
brethren of Christ. It is forbidden. Nevertheless, in the mixed state
allowed to prevail in all ecclesias during probation, they are sure to
arise. Wisdom, therefore, requires that we be prepared to deal
with them in a proper manner when they arise. There is a way of
dealing with them that heals them, and a way that has just the
opposite effect. There is no more dangerous and prolific cause of dis-
tress and ruin in an ecclesia than the wrong treatment of causes of
dispute. This must be the excuse for giving the subject a lengthy
attention.
There are two sorts, both different, and yet both related as regards
the spirit and aim with which they ought to be treated. 1. In-
dividual offences. 2. Ecclesial differences.


No time ought to be lost in dealing with either one or the other.
The longer time that elapses in the application of a remedy, the more
difficult does the application of the remedy become. Individual
misunderstandings spread coldness beyond the persons affected ; and
ecclesial differences are liable to settle into chronic alienations, which
blight every good work.
36.—Individual Offences.
Christ has laid down the law very plainly for the curing of these ;
and it is the duty of the brethren everywhere to see it obeyed. They
ought to refuse to countenance those who disobey it. If a brother
takes offence at what another has said or done, he is bound to meet
that other brother in private interview for the discussion of the griev-
ance between the two alone. In most cases, this course stops alienation
at its first stage ; it either removes misconception, if that has been
the cause of the trouble ; or it leads to the admission of wrong on the
part of the offender, followed by forgiveness on the part of the offended.
Of course, there are many matters too trifling to be made the subject
of such a process. The man who recognises the infirmity of human
nature all round, and the evil nature of the few days we have to live,
is able to exercise that magnanimous charity that covers a multitude
of sins, heeding not all words that are spoken, and even practising the
habit of returning good for evil : —blessing always—cursing never,
either directly or by implication —as the commandments of the house
of Christ require.
But supposing an offence arise which a brother cannot thus over-
look, but which he feels to be a barrier between himself and the
offender, then he is bound to take the course indicated. He is not
at liberty to mention the matter to a third party, and he is not at
liberty to stand aside in a stats of alienation. If he do either the one
or the other, he makes himself as much an offender as he may imagine
the cause of his injured feelings to be. A man who disobeys the com-
mandment of Christ on one point, is as much a transgressor as the
man who disobeys it on another. Consequently, an ecclesia knowing
of such a case, is bound to persuade the offended brother to see the
offender in private, or to withdraw from him in case of refusal.
There is everything to be said in favour of Christ’s commandment in
this matter. It is humbling to the offended to have to go and see the
man who has offended him (and if he is too proud to submit to this, he
is self-condemned: for the proud are an abomination to God) ; and


it gives to the offender the best chance he could possibly have of mak-
ing any amends the case may call for. The act of the offended brother
in coming and seeing him has a conciliatory effect on him : and his
personal presence gives him the opportunity of thoroughly discussing
every point on the spot.
A communication through a third party (or still worse, a letter), is
on fulfilment of the law of Christ; offers none of its opportunities of
reconciliation ; is rather calculated to prolong and aggravate the irri-
tations of the case ; and ought not to be received as a compliance with
the law of the case. The brethren, refusing to listen to the merits of
the case one way or other, ought to insist upon the offended seeing
the offender, or dissociate themselves from his company.
The plea that it is of no use ought not to be entertained for one
moment. Such an impression ought not to be made a reason for dis-
obeying a plain commandment. Whether of use or of no use, an
offended brother is bound either to drop the quarrel, or see the offend-
ing brother. It is not as if the failure of the interview left him with-
out remedy.
His next step is (in case of failure) to take two or three other
brethren with him. Where the interview between the two parties
fails, this may succeed, because fresh influence is brought to bear with
fresh and conciliatory minds. The offended brother is bound to take
this step, as well as the other : otherwise he is disobedient. It may
be of no use, but it must be done. If it succeed, he has his reward.
If it fail, he has his remedy: he is to bring the matter before the whole
ecclesia. The ecclesia is then to admonish the offender if he be found in
the fault. If the offender refuse to hear them, it is their duty to separate
him from their fellowship by withdrawal.
Unless individual offences are strictly treated in this way, the com-
munity will constantly be in danger of disturbance and even disruption.
An offended man, allowed to ventilate his grievance among others, is
liable to enlist the feelings of others on his behalf, and the brother
against whom the grievance is entertained, is liable, in self-defence,
to urge his side of the case: and thus bad feeling is diffused, and
a state of mind generated that easily leads to division. Let
Christ’s wise rule be insisted on and the mischief is stopped at its
beginning.
Even in the interests of self-defence, Christ’s wise rule ought to be
insisted on. J Who is safe from slander if a brother may pour his evil
thoughts into the ear of a third person ? What righteous man would
suffer if every complainer were first compelled to make known his com


plaints to the person against whom they were directed? Nothing will
more effectually secure peace in a community than the maintenance
of Christ’s rule for dealing with offences personal or otherwise.
37.—Ecclesial Differences.
These are different from individual offences, and yet they stand
nearly related to these, and are best dealt with by the same general
rule that Christ lays down for them. They require most careful
treatment, otherwise the peace and well-being of an ecclesia is liable
to he destroyed by unwise steps inspired by motives commendable
enough. They are of two classes—internal and external.
38.—Dissatisfied Minority.
In this case, they arise from the dissatisfaction of a minority with
something that is done by themajority, or with something that is in the
power of the majority to alter. The minority feel strongly. Perhaps the
majority have appointed some brother to an office for which the
minority consider him unfitted ; or some proposal of the minority may
have been rejected by the majority, or some measure resolved on by
the majority that the minority greatly disapprove of. The impulse of
the minority in such a case is to stay away from the meeting, or wors
still, form a meeting of their own, Now it is obvious there must be
some rule of collective action, permitting of the co-operation of those
who differ in judgment on practical details. The law of Christ yields
such a rule.
39.—Absence and Separate Meetings Unlawful.
It is, in the first place, an imperative law that the brethren must be
one body, and that they must submit one to another. It is a law of
the house that each brother and sister must meet at the table of the
Lord on the first day of the week for the breaking of bread. Nothing
but denial of the truth in the assembly or overt disobedience of the
Lord’s commandments among them, can justify a brother or sister in
absenting himself or herself from the breaking of bread. Such will
deceive themselves if they think a private breaking of bread will be
accepted in lieu of breaking bread with the assembly. It is the latter
the Lord has required of us, and it is the latter we must render.
What is true of one is true of more. Nothing but rejection of the


faith or the law of Christ by the assembly can justify the formation of
a separate assembly. If the matters of difference incliningto this course
do not affect the question of the truth or the commandments, it is the
duty of the lesser to submit to the greater number. There is no other
practicable rule of action. In such a case, the minority will bear
their disappointment and conform to the decision of the majority. It
is their duty to do so by every law of association—human and
divine. They will be enabled to do it the more easily if they remem-
ber that it is a matter of apostolic command to submit one to another ;
to give place to disadvantage ; to overcome evil with good; to bless,
and curse not. Men of the apostolic stamp will not retort that this
is equally binding on the others. Men of the apostolic stamp will be
more bent on subjecting themselves to the apostolic law than imposing
it on others.
If, instead of submitting, they separate themselves, they put them-
selves in a false position from which worse things than those they
objected to, will come. Their action means that the greater number
ought to submit to the lesser, or that there should never be submission
to the wishes of others, and that a disappointed minority should
always leave a meeting where their wishes cannot prevail. Such a
doctrine is fraught with confusion and ruin, and is inconsistent with
the most elementary commandments of Christ.
40.—A Time to Separate, and How to go about it.
Suppose, however, the case is more serious than this : Suppose the
majority decide upon something that involves the denial of the truth,
or the violation of the commandments, the minority might have to
consider whether continued fellowship with the majority would not he
inconsistent with their duty to Christ. There is a time to separate,
as well as a time to hold together. Suppose such a time come, great
care must be taken in the mode of action, otherwise the right side may
get into the wrong posture, or put it into the power of the wrong to
appear the right to the embarrassment of relations with other
ecclesias.
It is a maxim of universal law (divine included) that no man is to
be judged without a hearing. If it is true of one man, it is true of a
number of men, and to be applied as scrupulously to an erring ecclesia
as to an individual delinquent. Suppose this rule is not acted on, —
suppose the aggrieved minority simply depart, without formulating
their grievances, and without giving the offending majority an oppor-
tunity of either justifying or removing the causes of offence, the


situation is afterwards embarrassed for the minority as regards other
ecclesias. Other ecclesias are in fellowship with the offending
majority ; and if there be not a correct mode of procedure, those other
ecclesias will not have it in their power to decide upon the issue. The
only thing they can have officially before them is the fact that a dis-
contented minority have left, which, prima fade, is itself an
offence.
The minority may feel that formality is superfluous in view of the
controversy that may have caused the secession. This feeling may be
natural to them, but ought to be set aside; there areothersto be considered,
and their own subsequent relation to them requires correct action. A
course must be taken which will secure the right form of those rela-
tions. The course to be taken is undoubtedly this : let the minority
reduce their charges to writing, and hand the same to the Recording
brother, and ask a meeting for the discussion of them, intimating that
a question of the continuance of fellowship is involved. If the meet-
ing is refused (and the charges be of a sort justifying withdrawal),
the minority have no alternative but to withdraw ; and let them in-
form other ecclesias of their act, and send to them a copy ot the
charges, which will put it into their power to consider whether the
minority are entitled to their recognition and sympathy. If, on the
other hand, the meeting is granted, as probably it will be, the discus-
sion of the charges may lead to their disproof or to the acknowledgment
and the removal of the grounds of them. It the discussion have no
such result, but the charges are established and owned to by the
majority, and the grounds of them persisted in, the course ot the
minority is clear : let them withdraw (it the case warrant it) and an-
nounce their action to all whom it may concern.
41. —Involved in another Eeelesia’s trouble.
An ecclesia may be at peace in itself, but may get involved in the
troubles of other ecclesias, through an incorrect mode ot action. The
simple law of Christ, to do to others as we would be done by, will
greatly help us to take the right and wholesome course. Let us sup-
pose, then, that some other ecclesia has withdrawn from a brother on
grounds that have seemed just to the majority thereof, is it right that
the brother so withdrawn from should be received by you ?
You can settle this by considering. How would you like
the said ecclesia to act towards a brother or sister you have withdrawn
from ? Should you like them to receive such ? There is only one


answer—No. And this yields this general rule that no ecclesia ought
to receive into fellowship a brother or sister that has been withdrawn
from elsewhere.
If you say “perhaps the brother or sister is unjustly withdrawn
from,” such a case is possible ; and the door ought not to be shut
against the consideration of such a possibility. But there is a right
way of dealing with such a supposition. And the simple rule of Christ
aforesaid will again be an all-sufficient help. Should you not like
your decision in the case of a brother withdrawn from to be held
good until it is proved a wrong one ? There is only one answer—Yes.
We ought, therefore, to respect the withdrawals of other ecclesias until
we have proved them unjustifiable.
But here again we must he careful. There is a right way and a
wrong way of trying such a case. Would you like the case of a brother
you have withdrawn from to be tried behind your back ? There is
only one answer—You would not. Therefore you ought not to hear
the case of a brother who has been withdrawn from, without the
presence of those, either actually or by representation, who have with-
drawn from him. If a with drawn-from brother comes to your ecclesia
and alleges the injustice of the withdrawal, if you are disposed to listen
to the case, your duty is (meanwhile withholding fellowship) to apprize
the ecclesia that has withdrawn from him, that he applies for your
fellowship on the ground of the withdrawal being unjust, and that you
wish to investigate the case concurrently with them. If the with-
drawing ecclesia refuse to grant such an investigation, they place
themselves in the wrong, and justify you in examining the case for
yourselves, in their absence. But an enlightened ecclesia would not
refuse. They would act on Christ’s rule. They would do as they
would like to he done by. If they were the withdrawn-from but de-
murring brother, or the doubtful ecclesia applying for re-
examination, they would like to have the opportunity of judging
for themselves, and would, therefore, grant that oppor-
tunity thus respectfully applied for. The result would tend
to peace. The concurrent re-examination would either manifest
the righteousness of the withdrawal, or the uncertainty and perhaps
unjustifiableness of it. In either case, the course to be taken by the
applying ecclesia would be freed from doubt.
42.—Ecclesias in Relation One to Another.
If a careful attention is given to these reasonable rules of procedure
between one ecclesia and another, there will be little danger of dis-
33
ECCLESIAL GUIDE.


agreement. The bond of union is the reception of the one faith, and
submission to the commandments of the Lord. It is nothing less than
a calamity 'when rupture on secondary issues sets in, where these
other conditions of union exist. It is not only calamitous, but sinful
somewhere.
There ought to be no interference of one ecclesia with another. At
the same time, they have reciprocal rights. Ecclesial independence is
a principle essential to be maintained. But, it is no part of that inde-
pendence to say that no ecclesia shall consider a matter that another
has decided upon, if that matter comes before the first ecclesia, and
challenges their judgment, and, in fact, requires a decision. In the
example already discussed, if a brother withdrawn from by one ecclesia,
applies for the fellowship of another, that other ecclesia is bound
to consider the application, and it is no infringement of the indepen-
dence of the first ecclesia, that it should be so, subject to the rules
and attitudes indicated. It would, in fact, be a renunciation of its
own independence, were it to refuse to do so. Respect for the first
ecclesia requires that it accept its decision until it sees grounds for a
different view ; and in the investigation of these grounds, it ought to
invite its co-operation, as already indicated. But the mere fact of the
application imposes upon it the obligation to consider and investigate
the matter, if there are prima facie grounds for doing so. The other
ecclesia would make a mistake if it considered such a procedure an
infringment of its independence. Such a view would, in reality, bo
a trammelling of the independence of every assembly; for it would
then amount to this, that no assembly had the right to j udge a case
coming before them if that case happen to have already been adjudi-
cated upon by another ecclesia. The judgment of one would
thus be set up as a rule for all. An ecclesia has no right to judge
except for itself. This is the independence not to be interfered with ;
but a similar right to judge must be conceded to all, and the exercise
of it, if tempered with a respectful and proper procedure, would never
offend an enlightened body anywhere. In the majority of cases,
the withdrawal of one ecclesia is practically the withdrawal of all, since
all will respect it till set aside, and since, in most cases a concurrent
investigation would lead to its ratification. But there may be cases
where a reasonable doubt exists, and where a second ecclesia will come
to a different conclusion from the first. What is to be done then ?
Are the two ecclesias that are agreed in the basis of fellowship to fall
out because they are of a different judgment on a question of fact ?
This would be a lamentable result—a mistaken course every way.
They have each exercised their prerogative of independent judgment:


let each abide by its own decision, without interfering with each other.
The one can fellowship a certain brother, the other cannot. Are they
to aggravate the misery of a perhaps very trumpery and unworthy
affair, by refusing to recognise each other, because they differ in judg-
ment about one person ? What sadder spectacle can there be than to.
see servants of the Lord Jesus frowning at each other, and denying each
other the comfort of mutual friendship and help, because they cannot
agree about a given action or speech of perhaps some unworthy per-
son The course of wisdom in such a case is certainly to agree to-
differ. An ecclesia acting otherwise—demanding of another ecclesia,
as a condition of fellowship, that they shall endorse their decision
in a case that has become the business of both—is in reality
infringing that principle of ecclesial independence, which they desire to.
have recognised in their own case. It would be to impose what might
be an intolerable tyranny upon the brethren ; for suppose it were to
happen, as it might happen, that a deserving brother or sister were
withdrawn from on insufficient grounds by an assembly that might
happen to be composed of persons not remarkable for breadth of judg-
ment, to what hopeless injustice such a brother or sister would be
subjected if other ecclesias were to be debarred from forming their own
judgment in the event of application for their fellowship.
43.—The True Secret of Success.
This lies in the rich indwelling of the word of Christ in each indi-
vidual member of an ecclesia—a state to be attained in our day only
by the daily and systematic reading of the Scriptures. When every
mind is influenced by the word, the worst rules work smoothly. When
it is otherwise, the best will miscarry. The system of daily reading,
laid out in The Bible Companion, has for years been followed by thou-
sands with increasing benefit. The brethren ought, above all things,
to help one another in its observance. It is with a view to this that
in more than one ecclesia, each new brother and sister is presented with
a copy of The Bible Companion on their entrance.
In one ecclesia, a copy of The Commandments of Christ is also
given to each new member. When the commandments of Christ are
remembered and acted on (and Jesus says none who fail to do so are
his brethren), it will be easy to carry out any system of rules. In
fact, a small company where Christ is in the heart ascendant, can get
on best without set rules. It is only because this is not universal and
when members increase, that rules become necessary.
35
ECCLESIAL GUIDE.


44.—Fraternal Gatherings from Various Places.
These are beneficial when restricted to purely spiritual objects {i.e.,
let the brethren assemble anywhere from anywhere, and exhort, or
worship, or have social intercourse together) ; but they become sources
of evil if allowed to acquire a legislative character in the least degree.
Ecclesial independence should be guarded with great jealousy, with
the qualifications indicated in the foregoing sections. To form
“ unions ” or “ societies ” of ecclesias, in which delegates should frame
laws for the individual ecclesias, would be to lay the foundation of a
collective despotism which would interfere with the Iree growth and
the true objects of ecclesial life. Such collective machineries create
fictitious importances, which tend to suffocate the truth. All eccle-
siastical history illustrates this.
s.—Marriage.
Marriage is not what the ecclesiasticism of Christendom calls “ one
of the sacraments of the Church.” Nevertheless, as a matter power-
fully affecting the spiritual relations of brethren and sisters, it is an
institution coming within the regulation of the law of Christ. Marriage
with the alien is forbidden both by the general tenor of many precepts,
and by express intimation of liberty to marry “ only in the Lord ”
(1 Cor. vii. 39). The law of Christ thus follows the law of Moses
(that other “law of the Lord,” in most points superseded, but
not in this). It was a strict injunction to Israel not to marry the
heathen on either side of the house. It is fitting that such a restric-
tion should extend to saints, because the reason dictating it in the case
of Israel after the flesh, is more powerfully operative among Israel after
the Spirit; “ They will turn thee away from following me.”
A brother ought not to marry a woman who is not a sister ; a sister
ought not to marry a man who is not a brother. The marriage of a
believer ought to be “ only in the Lord.”
The truth may come to man or woman in the married state ; in that
case, the man or woman is not to leave the unbelieving wife or husband
if there be willingness on the part of the partner to continue the asso-
ciation. This Paul plainly lays down (1 Cor. vii. 12-13). But if the
unbelievers depart, he says, “ Let them depart: a brother or a sister is
not under bondage in such cases : God hath called us to peace.” This
departing, however, does not release from the matrimonial bond. “Re-
main unmarried” is, in such a case, the apostolic command—
(Verse 11).


But what is to be done in the case of an unmarried brother or sister
who violates the apostolic law by marrying one not a believer (by which,
of course, we are to understand, an obedient believer—one baptised
into the faith of the gospel). This is a difficult point to decide. Some
are for taking no notice : others for withdrawing from the fellowship
of the offender. Both courses are open to objection. “Taking no
notice” is to wink at the breach of the law of Christ, and implicate
ourselves therein : a breach which gradually leads to other breaches
until there is, in most cases, a complete falling away of the truth. On
the other hand, the marriage cannot be undone ; and to refuse to
have anything further to do with the offender is to say that he has
committed an unpardonable sin. Should we be justified in taking
this ground ? If he defend his act as a Scriptural one, and contend
for indiscriminate right of marriage on the part of believers with
unbelievers, there would doubtless be no alternative but withdrawal,
for we may not make ourselves responsible (by fellowship) for
doctrines or maxims that are in opposition to the law of God.
But suppose there is a recognition of the Scriptural law in the
case, and an admission of wrong, extenuated by necessity of marriage,
and inability to find a sister, or some such plea, should we be justified
in for ever refusing such an offender, as if he were a habitual drunkard
or a thief ? There must be some middle ground in such a case, and it
is doubtless to be found in the practice of the London brethren.
Brother J. J. Andrew, at whose suggestion this paragraph is inserted,
says : “You know our plan (in the case of marriage with an alien hav-
ing taken place in our midst). "We pass a resolution of disapproval,
and send it to the brother or sister concerned. And, as a counter act,
marriages in the faith are announced from the table on Sunday morn-
ing, as an expression of approval by the ecclesia of the principle on
which they have taken place. It also serves, in a large ecclesia, as an
introduction to all, instead of spreading gradually in a private
manner.”
46.—Sunday School.
It is a matter ot apostolic command to bring up our children in the
enlightenment of the truth (Eph. vi. 4 ; Col. iii. 21 ; 1 Tim. iii. 3-4),
kc., and the apostolic precept is strengthened by every consideration of
wisdom, benevolence, and expediency. Though the precept doubtless
refers, in its primary application, to parental instruction, still it
necessarily extends to every method by which it may be carried out.
What we find to be true of secular education, is also true of higher


•education : we cannot effectually do all the work ourselves. We are
greatly helped by the assistance of others. Private endeavour is
greatly helped by the power that comes from co-operation in a collec-
tive capacity. The most eligible form of this co-operation, in the cir-
cumstances of modern society (indeed, almost the only available form),
is the Sunday School. The idea of objecting to it,because it is a popu-
lar institution, will not retain its hold where reason reigns. We may
as well give up the use of umbrellas, and a hundred other things, if we
are to avoid everything that is used by the orthodox community. A
Sunday School is a good thing, if the truth is taught in it. It is
because the truth is not taught in the popular Sunday Schools that
they are of no use to the brethren and sisters. Let them have Sunday
Schools of their own, and the difficulty is removed. There will, in this,
be an advantage both to the children and to the brethren and sisters
who take part. It is a work requiring and calling into exercise bene-
volence and patience, almost more than any other form of work. One
incentive to continue in it lies in the fact that it is one form of that
well-doing upon patient continuance in which, our entrance into life
everlasting is predicated. Another is to be found in the fact that,
although the fruits of the work are slow in coming, yet they do come
at last, in the acquaintance of the children with divine things, and in
the improving effect which this acquaintance more or less ultimately
produces.
The school should be under the auspices of the ecclesia. That is,
it ought not to be left to the private initiative and responsibility of
oneortwo brethren. Itisa work tbatthebrethren, in their collective capa-
city, should approve and encourage, and have control of, and which,
at the same time, should be sufficiently in the hand of the teachers as
to give them a complete interest in it. The control of the ecclesia
should only be a power in reserve. The practical arrangements should
be left with the teachers, with a power of appeal in case of anything
wrong. The ecclesia sufficiently identifies itself with the work in
recognising it, providing funds for it, and in appointing the superin-
tendent, secretary, and treasurer. The teachers, on the other hand,
who do the work, having the power to decide all the practical arrange-
ments, subject to the reserve power of the ecclesia, will sufficiently feel
that the work is theirs to be enabled to continue their interest in it
from year to year. By this form of matters, we get all the good that
the school is capable of yielding, while discharging our collective duty
as the servants of the truth.


SYSTEM OF RULES EMBODYING THE FOREGOING
SUGGESTIONS.
1- That we are a Christadelphian ecclesia.
H ia t we accept and profess the doctrines and precepts of
Christ, as taught in the apostolic writings, and defined in the annexed
Statement of Faith and Epitome of the Commandments of Christ.
3. That we recognise as brethren, and welcome to our fellowship,
all who have been immersed (by whomsoever) after their acceptance of
the same doctrines and precepts.
4. That we meet on the morning of every first day of the week for
the breaking of bread, worship, and exhortation ; and in the evening,
for the exhibition of the truth in its invitation to the alien to become
fellow-heirs of the hope of the gospel ; also on the evening of one day
in the week, for the study of the holy oracles, when the meeting is
not otherwise engaged ; also that we meet once a quarter to receive
and consider the reports of the serving brethren, and at special meetings
as may be required : the third quarterly meeting in the year to be also
the annual meeting for the appointment of serving brethren.
' )m That we mutually engage to submit to the order and arrange-
ments preferred by the greater number.
( 6.—That brethren holding offices among us shall be described as
seiving brethren; and that the denomination of each particular
office shall have “ brother” or “ brethren” associated with it (for the
sake of preserving the iamily character of our assembly in harmony
with the mind of Christ).
7- I hat in the appointment of these, we shall have in view, and
strive always to follow, the directions given by Paul as to the qualifi-
cations that ought to exist.
8. That our serving brethren shall consist of seven arranging
brethren, and four presiding brethren, a recording brother, a finance
brother, six doorkeeping brethren, two visiting brethren, and three
assistance brethren* (the function of the assistance brethren being to
investigate and relieve cases of need.)
9. 1 hat these shall be appointed for four years, except that each
year a fourth part of the whole (made into one list) shall retire, first
alphabetically, and afterwards in the order of their appointment.
10- That any brother may be elected for any number of times, who
has not lost the Scriptural qualifications.
These numbers will be varied in different ecclesias, according to the size of the
ecclesia, and the number of qualified brethren.


11. That the mode of election shall he by ballot, before which there
must be a nomination in writing, signed by seven brethren, and
handed to the Recording brother, to be read by him at the week-night
meeting fourteen days before the declaration ot the ballot. There shall
be no canvassing for votes. Votes obtained by canvassing shall bo
invalid. Nomination shall not be necessary in the case of retiring
brethren, whose previous service shall stand in lieu of nomination. All
names nominated (together with the names of retiring brethren who
have served for the previous year) shall be submitted in a printed
voting form to the brethren and sisters, who shall be required to write
the word “Yes,” after the names of those brethren whom they desire
to be appointed. They may write “No ” after any other name or names
if they please ; but it is not compulsory. Election to take place in the
case of those having the highest number of votes. In all elections of
serving brethren by vote, it shall require the voice of at least one-third
of those voting before a brother be considered appointed to any office.
In case of failure of election in any case from the application of this
rule, or from any other cause, the brother or brethren serving during
the previous year, to fill the vacancy, until such time as a further
election be made.
12. —That the function of the arranging brethren shall be to arrange
for the conduct of the meetings and decide all matters affecting the
working of the ecclesia.
13. —That they meet once a month, and as much oftener as they
may find necessary.
14. —That all their meetings be announced to the ecclesia : and
that the brethren and sisters be at liberty to attend and to take part
in the deliberations that may take place, but to have no vote in the
decisions that may be taken.
15. —That their decisions shall have immediate effect, but may be
reversed by the ecclesia at the quarterly meeting, only, however, in so
far as they ffect the future.
16. —That the arranging brethren shall (by the Recording brother)
read the minutes of their proceedings every three months, to the
brethren and sisters in quarterly meeting assembled, for con-
firmation or otherwise.
17. —That the Recording brother and Finance brother shall attend
all the meetings of the managing brethren, and have power to vote in
their decisions.
18. —That the presiding brethren shall do duty week by week in
alphabetical rotation, or provide substitutes from their own number: the


brother presiding on Sunday to preside at all meetings during the
subsequent week: the duties of the presiding brethren to be limited
to the conduct of the assemblies.
19. That the Recording brother shall (a) keep a record of all the pro-
ceedings of the ecclesia ; (6), receive and communicate all applica-
tions intended for the ecclesia or the arranging brethren ; (c), re-
mind the ecclesia of meetings to be held, or other matters affecting
them ; and presiding brethren and speakers of their several appoint-
ments ; ( d ), take note of all monies received by the Finance
brother, and sign orders as his authority for disbursement ; and
(e), generally keep the working machinery of the ecclesia in motion.
20. —That the Finance brother shall receive and disburse the funds
accruing in any way to the ecclesia, with the co-operation and cogniz-
ance of the Secretary, and to report quarterly to the ecclesia for confirma-
tion.*
21. —That the following order be observed at our first day meetings: —
Morning: 1, singing; 2, reading two of the Scripture selections for
the day by the Bible Companion ; 3, an interval lor brief fraternal
announcements ; 4, prayer ; 5, singing; 6, exhortation (not to exceed
half-an-hour); 7, breaking bread and drinking wine, after thanks by
the presiding brother for each ; 8, collection ; 9, singing ; 10, exhor
tation (not to exceed a quarter-of-an-hour) ; 11, singing; 12, prayer
Evening : 1, singing ; 2, reading; 3, prayer; 4, singing ; 5, lecture
6, singing ; 7, prayer.
| 21. —That no business be introduced for consideration at any Sunday
meeting, and that the doors always be closed during Scripture reading
or prayer.
' 23. —That special meetings may be convened by the Secretary at the
request of the arranging brethren ; or, by the written requisition of ten
brethren. At all such meetings it shall require a fourth part of the
ecclesia to form a quorum.
24.—That all applications for immersion or admission must be re-
ported to the Recording brother, whose duty it shall be to announc
the same to the ecclesia at the first Sunday morning meeting there-
after, and to make arrangements for the preliminary examination
necessary. The result of such examination to be announced on the
* “ We have a complete check on the correctness of the Treasurer’s accounts.
The presiding brother for the day counts the contents of the boxes and enters it,
initialed, in a book kept by the Treasurer, and at the end of the quarter a brother,
appointed for the purpose, audits the receipts and payments, comparing the latter
with vouchers. These checks did not arise out of any necessity for them, but with
a view to prevent anything wrong. They were proposed at different intervals
by Treasurers while in office.” —J. J. Andrew, London.


following Sunday ; after which, in the absence of objection, immersion
or admission to take place. This rule not to apply to persons from a
distance passing on.
25. —That in each district, a brother, chosen by the brethren resid-
ing therein, shall act as visiting brother, whose duty it shall be to
communicate at least once a fortnight with brethren absent from the
table, with a view to ascertain the cause of absence, and administer
comfort in cases of sickness, and aid in cases of poverty. Such visiting
brother to report on Sunday morning anything coming under his
notice which the ecclesia ought to know. (The appointment of visit-
ing sisters may also be found serviceable.)
26. That four brethren be appointed to confer, in conjunction with
the Recording brother, with persons applying to be immersed or ad-
mitted into the ecclesia, with a view to ascertaining if the requisite
•qualifications exist.
27. That all funds and property belonging to the ecclesia, shall
legally vest in the arranging brethren for the time being, as trustees
for the general body, to whose direction they shall at all times be
subject as to the disposal thereof.
28. —That any brother holding any office in the ecclesia, may be
removed at any time by the vote of the majority of the whole of the
■ecclesia.
29. —Behaviour unworthy of the name of Christ (see 1 Tim. iii. ;
Titus i.), shall, when proved against any brother, have the effect of
eancelling any appointment such brother may hold, without a vote of
the ecclesia; and the appointment shall in that case be treated as
vacant, and steps taken to fill it accordingly.
30. —That any brother departing from any element of the one faith,
as held by us, shall, on proof of the fact being given to the satisfaction
•of the arranging brethren, cease to be in fellowship, without a formal
vote of withdrawal, on the fact being announced to the ecclesia.
31. —That no accusation or matter of evil report against any brother
shall be listened to in public or private, until the brother bringing or
reporting the accusation shall have taken the course prescribed in
Matt, xviii. 15-18 ; and any brother refusing to take this course while
persisting in his accusation, or in alienation on account of it, shall
himself be considered and dealt with as an offender against the law of
Christ.
32. That absence from the established assembly of the brethren for
the breaking of bread, is an offence against the law of Christ: unless
the said assembly shall, by the approval of the majority thereof ex


pressed in formal vote, reject any element of the truth of the gospel, or
shall sanction doctrines or practices inconsistent with the command-
ments of Christ.
33. —That none shall, even for a legitimate cause, absent themselves
from the assembly, without first stating, in writing, to be addressed to
the Recording brother, the cause or causes of impending separation ;
and asking the same to be considered, with a view to their removal,
at a special meeting, at which they consent to be present and take
part.
34. —That no brother or sister withdrawn from by, or out of fel-
lowship with, another ecclesia shall be received in fellowship until the
cause shall have been investigated, and found such as to warrant
the reception ot the said brother or sister ; but that this investiga-
tion shall not take place without first asking the said other ecclesia
to take paid in the proposed investigation : that if the said
other ecclesia shall refuse their co-operation in the said investi-
gation, the matters in question shall be investigated without them ;
that if, on the other hand, they consent to take part in it, they shall,
after the re-investigation conducted in their presence, have equal
voting power with the first ecclesia, and that no decision shall be
valid without the concurrence of a majority of the assembly so consti-
tuted of the two ecclesias fused together in equality of numbers ; if
one ecclesia exceeds the other in number, the equality to be obtained
by counting off alphabetically the excess on whichever side it may be,
and not allowing that excess to vote.
35. That id case of another ecclesia, after either of these processes,
receiving into their fellowship any brother or sister from whom w r e
have withdrawn, or who may have separated from us, w r e shall not
consider it a cause of separation from them, but shall be content to
maintain our own withdrawal from the brother or sister in question.
Should they, on the other hand, receive such, without re-investigation
or without asking our concurrence in any re-investigation that may
take place, we ourselves shall apply to the said ecclesia for re-investi-
gation in the form defined by the last rule, and only in case of their
refusal shall w r e consider that their action in the case has furnished a
cause of separation.
36. —That marriage with the alien is an offence against the law of
Christ. That those who maintain the contrary are unfit for fellow-
ship with those who “consent to the wholesome words of the Lord
Jesus.” That when offence takes place in the matter, the ecclesia
shall signify their disapproval by resolution, sent to the offending
rother or sister ; after which the bx-other or sister shall only retail


their places among the brethren by admitting their offence. All com-
munications in the case to be in the form and spirit required by
Rule 31.
37. That any Sunday School established in connection with the
ecclesia shall be under the official cognisance thereof—the ecclesia to
annually elect a superintendent, secretary, and treasurer, who shall
appoint the teachers, and, in conjunction with them, manage the
school in matters of detail. Any brother shall have the power of
appeal to special meeting of the ecclesia, in case of objection to the
acts, proceedings, or arrangements of the superintendent and teachers.
38. That none of the foregoing rules be altered except by the vote
of a majority of the whole ecclesia ; and a month’s previous notice of
intention to propose such alteration must be given to the Recording
brother, who shall read the same at each intervening week-night
meeting.


A Statement of the Doctrines forming the Christadelphian
Basis of Fellowship.
I. —That the only true God is He who was revealed to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, by angelic visitation and vision, and to Moses at the
flaming bush (unconsumed) and at Sinai, and who manifested Himself
in the Lord Jesus Christ, as the supreme self-existent Deity, the ONE
FATHER, dwelling in unapproachable light, yet everywhere present
by His Spirit, which is a unity with His person in heaven. He hath,
out of His own underived energy, created heaven and earth, and all
that in them is.
11. —That Jesus of Nazareth was the Son of God, begotten of the
Virgin Mary by the Holy Spirit, without the intervention of man, and
afterwards anointed with the same Spirit, without measure, at His
baptism.
111. —That the appearance of Jesus of Nazareth on the earth was
necessitated by the position and state into which the human race had
been brought by the circumstances connected with the first man,
IV. —That the first man was Adam, whom God created out of the
dust of the ground as a living soul, or natural body of life, “very
good ” in kind and condition, and placed him under a law through
which the continuance of life was contingent on obedience.
V. —That Adam broke this law, and was adjudged unworthy of
immortality, and sentenced to return to the ground from whence ho
was taken—a sentence which defiled and became a physical law of
his being, and was transmitted to all his posterity.
VI. —That God, in His kindness, conceived a plan of restoration
which, without setting aside His just and necessary law of sin and
death, should ultimately rescue the race from destruction, and people
the earth with sinless immortals.
VII. —That He inaugurated this plan by making promises to Adam,
Abraham, and David, which were afterwards elaborated in greater
detail through the prophets.
VIII. —That these promises had reference to Jesus Christ, who was
to be raised up in the condemned line of Abraham and David, and
who, though wearing the condemned nature, was to obtain a title to
resurrection, by perfect obedience, and, by dying, abrogate the law of
condemnation for himself, and all who should believe and obey him.
IX. —That it was this mission that necessitated the miraculous be-
gettal of Christ of a human mother, enabling him to bear our condem-
45
ECCLESIAL GUIDE.


nation, and, at the same time, to be a sinless bearer thereof, and,
therefore, one who could rise after suffering the death required by the
righteousness of God.
X.—That being so begotten of God, and inhabited and used by God
through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, Jesus was Emmanuel, God
with us, God manifest in the flesh—yet was, during his natural life,
of like nature with mortal man, being made of a woman, of the house
and lineage of David, and therefore a sufferer, in the days of his flesh,
from all the effects that came by Adam’s transgression, including the
death that passed upon all men, which he shared by partaking of their
physical nature.
XL—That the message he delivered from God to his kinsmen, the
Jews, was a call to repentance from every evil work, the assertion of
his divine sonship and Jewish kingship ; and the proclamation of the
glad tidings that God would restore their kingdom through him, and
accomplish all things written in the prophets.
XII. That for delivering this message, he was put to death by the
Jews and Romans, who were, however, but instruments in the hands
of God, for the doing of that which He had determined before to be
done, viz., the condemnation of sin in the flesh, through the offering
of the body of Jesus once for all, as a propitiation to declare the
righteousness of God, as a basis for the remission of sins. All who
approach God through this crucified, but risen, representative of Adam’s
disobedient race, are forgiven. Therefore, by a figure, his blood
cleanseth from sin.
XIII. That on the third day, God raised him from the dead,
and exalted him to the heavens as priestly mediator between God and
man, in the process of gathering from among them a people who
should be saved by the belief and obedience of the truth.
XIY. —That he is a priest over his own house only, and does not inter-
cede for the world, or for professors who are abandoned to diso-
bedience. That he makes intercession for his erring brethren, if
they confess and forsake their sins.
XV. That he sent forth apostles to proclaim salvation through
him, as the only name given under heaven whereby men may be
saved.
XYL—That the way to obtain this salvation is to believe the gospel
they preached, and to take on the name and service of Christ, by
being thereupon immersed in water, and continuing patiently in
the observance of all things he has commanded, none being
recognised as his friends except those who do what he has commanded.


XVll.—That the gospel consists of “the things concerning the
kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ.”
XYIII. That the things of the kingdom of God are the facts testified
concerning the kingdom of God in the writings of the prophets and
apostles, and definable as in the next 12 paragraphs.
lat God will set up a kingdom in the earth, which will
overthrow all others, and change them into ‘ • the kingdoms of our Lord
and his Christ. ”
XX.—That for this purpose God will send Jesus Christ personally
to the earth at the close of the times of the Gentiles.
XXL—That the kingdom which he will establish will be the king-
dom of Israel restored, in the territory it formerly occupied, viz., the
land bequeathed for an everlasting possession to Abraham and his.
seed (the Christ) by covenant.
XXII. That this restoration of the kingdom again to Israel will
involve the ingathering of God’s chosen but scattered nation, the
Jews ; their reinstatement in the land of their fathers, when it shall
have been reclaimed from “the desolation of many generations the
building again of Jerusalem to become “the throne of the Lord” and
the metropolis of the whole earth.
XXIII. That the governing body of the Kingdom so established
will be the brethren of Christ, of all generations, developed by
resurrection and change, and constituting, with Christ as their head,
the collective “seed of Abraham,” in whom all nations will be
blessed, and comprising “ Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
prophets,” and all in their age of like faithfulness.
XX!y.~That a law will be established, which shall go forth to the
nations for their “instruction in righteousness,” resulting in the
abolition of war to the ends of the earth ; and the “fillino- 0 f the
earth with the knowledge of the glory of Jehovah, as the waters cover
the sea. 99
XXV—That at the appearing of Christ prior to the establishment of
the Kingdom, the responsible (faithful and unfaithful), dead and living
of both classes, will be summoned before his judgment-seat “to be
judged according to their works ;” “and receive in body according to
what they have done, whether it be good or bad.”
That the unfaitbfiu will be consigned to shame and “the
second death,” and the faithful, invested with immortality and
exalted to reign with Jesus as joint heirs of the kingdom, co-possessors
of the earth, and joint administrators of God’s authority among men
in everything, '


XXYII. —That the kingdom of God, thus constituted, will continue
a thousand years, during which sin and death will continue among
the earth’s subject-inhabitants, though in a much milder degree than
now.
XXVIII. —That the mission of the kingdom will be to subdue all
enemies, and finally death itself, by opening up the way of life to the
nations, which they will enter by faith, during the thousand years,
and (in reality) at their close.
XXIX. That at the close of the thousand years, there will be a
general resurrection and judgment, resulting in the final extinction of
the wicked, and the immortalization of those who shall have estab-
lished their title (under the grace of God) to eternal life during the
thousand years.
XXX. —That the government will then be delivered up by Jesus
to the Father, who will manifest Himself as the “All-in-all;” sin
and death having been taken out of the way, and the race com-
pletely restored to the friendship of the Deity.
Doctrines to be Rejected.
1. —That God is three persons.
2. —That the Son of God was co-eternal with the Father.
3. —That Christ was born with a “free life.”
4. —That Christ’s nature was immaculate.
5. —That Christ was of a different nature from other men.
6. —That the Holy Spirit is a person distinct from the Father.
7. —That man has an immortal soul.
8. —That man consciously exists in death.
9. —That the wicked will suffer eternal torture in hell.
10. —That the righteous will ascend to kingdoms beyond the skies
when they die.
11. —That the devil is a supernatural personal being.
12. —That the kingdom of God is “ the church.”
13. —That the Gospel is the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ merely.
14. —That Christ will not come till the close of the thousand
years.


15. That the tribunal of Christ, when he comes, is not for the
judgment of saints, but merely to divide among them different degrees
of reward.
16. —That the resurrection is confined to the faithful.
That the dead rise in an immortal state.
That the subject-nations of the thousand years are immortal.
19. That the law of Moses is binding.
That the observance of Sunday is a matter of duty.
21. That baby sprinkling is a doctrine of Scripture.
lhat “heathens,” idiots, pagans, and very young children,
will be saved.
23. —That man can be saved by morality or sincerity, without
the Gospel.
24. lhat the Gospel alone will save, without the obedience of
Christ’s commandments.
25. —That a man cannot believe without possessing the Spirit of God.
That men are pre-destined to salvation unconditionally.
27. —That there is no sin in the flesh.
28. lhat Joseph was the actual father of Jesus.
29. —That the earth will be burned up.
30. —That baptism is not necessary to salvation.
31- 1 hat a knowledge of the truth is not necessary to make baptism
valid.


THE COMMANDMENTS OF CHRIST.
When we believe the truth, we must next obey the commandments
If we fail to do this, the truth is not only no advantage to us, but
will be to our condemnation. A community in which the com-
mandments of Christ are not obeyed is not the house of Chiist, but
the synagogue of Satan, however correctly the truth may be discerned
as a. theory.
It cannot be too prominently held in the foreground, that Christ
has said, “Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I have
commanded you,” and “ Not every man that saith Lord, Lord, shall
enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of my
Father.” “ Many will say unto me in that day, Lord have we not
preached in thy name, and in thy name done many wonderful
works. Then will I profess unto them, I never knew' you ; depart from
me ye that w T ork iniquity.”
Now' the commandments of Christ may be divided into two classes
one of which, perhaps, calls for more attention than the other, on
account of the greater difficulty the natural mind expeiiences in the
obedience of them. There are those that commend themselves to all
men as beautiful and excellent, and which are more or less easy to
conform to. And there are those that go so directly against the grain
of human nature, that the obedience of them is each time an act of
self-crucifixion.
These latter are the most likely to be slipped over. We, therefore,
place them first. Their observance is in every way most important.
They effectually chasten the natural man and bring us into submission
to the will of God ; and they do this because they are contrary to
natural impulse. But, because they are contrary to the natural man,
they are liable to be overlooked or explained away, and, conse-
quently, to be disobeyed. All our other compliances are, in this case,
rendered of none effect. To keep the commandments that are easy
and agreeable, while habitually violating those that are otherwise, will
not take us out of the list of transgressors. Abraham s general,
righteousness of character would have been of no advantage to him,
had he failed in the test commandment concerning Isaac.
50
ECCLKBIAL GUIDE.


Class I. — Commandments Diffleult to Obey.
1. Love your enemies : do good to them that hate you.
2. Resist not evil : if a man smite thee on one cheek, turn to him
the other also.
3. Avenge not yourselves: rather give place unto wrath: and
suffer yourselves to be defrauded.
4. If a man take away thy goods, ask them not again.
5. Agree with your adversary quickly, submitting even to wrong
for the sake of peace.
6. Labour not to be rich : be ready to every good work, give to
those who ask : relieve the afflicted,
7. Do not your alms before men : let not thy left hand know what
thy right hand doeth.
8. Recompense to no man evil for evil: overcome evil with good.
9. Bless them that curse you : let no cursing come out of your
mouth.
10. Render not evil for evil or railing for railing, but contrariwise,
blessing.
11. Pray for them that despitefully use you and afflict you.
12. Grudge not: judge not: complain not: condemn not.
13. Put away anger, wrath, bitterness, and all evil speaking.
14. Confess your faults one to another.
15. Be not conformed to this world : love not the world.
16. Deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts. If thy right hand
otfen 1 thee, cut it off.
17. Servants, be faithful, even to bad masters.
18. Mind not high things but condescend to men of low estate.
19. Owe no man anything.
20 In case of sin (known or heard of;, speak not of it to others,
but tell the offending brother of the matter between thee and him
alone, with a view to recovery.
Class II.—Not easy, but less diffieult.
21. Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart.
22. Pray always: pray with brevity and simplicity : pray
secretly.
23. In everything give thanks to God and recognise Him in all
your ways.


24. As ye would that man should do to you, do ye also so to
them.
25. Take Christ for an example and follow in his steps.
26. Let Christ dwell in your heart by faith.
27. Esteem Christ more highly than all earthly things ; yea, than
your own life.
28. Confess Christ freely before men.
29. Beware lest the cares of life or the allurements of pleasure
weaken his hold on your heart.
30. Love thy neighbour as thyself.
31. Exercise lordship over no one.
32. Seek not your own welfare only, nor hear your own burdens
merely, hut have regard to those of others.
33. Let your light shine before men : hold forth the word of life.
Do good to all men as ye have opportunity.
34. Be blameless and harmless, as the sons of God in the midst of
a crooked and perverse generation.
35. Be gentle, meek, kind hearted, compassionate, merciful,
forgiving.
36. Be sober, grave, sincere, temperate.
37. Speak the truth every man with his neighbour : put away all
lying-
-38. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily as unto the Lord, and not
unto men.
39. Be watchful, vigilant, brave, joyful, courteous, and manly.
40. Be clothed with humility : be patient toward all.
41. Follow peace with all men.
42. Sympathise in the joys and sorrows of others.
43. Follow after whatsoever things are true, honest, just, pure,
lovely, of good report, virtuous, and praiseful.
44. Refrain utterly from adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
drunkenness, covetousness, wrath, strife, sedition, hatred, emulation,
boasting, vain-glory, envy, jesting, and foolish talking.
45. Whatever you do, consider the effect of your action on the
honour of God’s name among men. Do all to the glory of God.
46. Reckon yourselves dead to all manner of sin. Henceforth live
not to yourselves, but to him who died for you, and rose again.
47. Be zealous of good works, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, wearying not in well-doing,
48. Speak evil of no man.


49. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.
00. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt.
51. Obey rulers : submit to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s
sake.
52. Be holy in all manner of conversation.
53. Give no occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully.




CONTENTS.
PAG K
Introductory 3
Sec. 1. The term “ Ecclesia ” 3
~ 2. The name “ Christadelphiau.”... ... ... ... 3
~ 3. The Apostolic Ministry. ... ... ... ... 4
~ 4. Revival of the Apostolic faith.. ... ... ... 4
~ 5. Problems of the Modern Situation. ... ... ... 5
~ 6. What is the Solitary Man to do ? ... ... ... 5
~ 7. The Administration of Baptism. ... ... ... 6
~ 8. Form of Procedure. ... ... ... ... ... 7
~ 9. Baptismal Formula. ... ... .... ... 7
~ 10. Course after Baptism (alone). ... ... ... ... 8
~ 11. After Baptism (in company) 9
~ 12, Objects of Ecclesial Work. ... ... ... ... 9
~ 13. Rules and Modes... ... ... ... ... ... 10
~ 14. Absence of Spirit Appointments. ... ... ... 10
~ 15. The Necessities of the Present Situation. ... ... 11
~ 16. Mutual Consent the basis of order. ... ... ... 11
~ 17. Exercise of Authority out of the Question. ... ... 12
~ 18. Serving Brethren: not rulers ... ... ... 12
~ 19. Suitable Qualifications. ... ... ... ... ... 12
~ 20. Ecclesial Control. ... ... ... ... ... 13
~ 21. Mode and term of Appointment. ... ... ... 14
~ 22. Eligibility for Re-election. ... ... ... ... 14
~ 23. Arranging Brethren 15
~ 24. Arranging Meetings open to all. 15
~ 25. Presiding Brethren ... ... ... ... ... 16
~ 26. Recording Brother ... ... ... ... ... 17
~ 27. Finance Brother ... ... ... ... ... 17
~ 28. Exclusion of Business from Sunday Meetings ... 18
~ 29. Fraternal Announcements ... ... ... ... 18
„ 30. Mode of Conducting the Meetings ... ... ... 19
~ 31. Introduction of New Brethren ... ... ... 23
~ 32. Cases of Sin and Withdrawal... ... ... ... 24
~ 33. Examination of Applicants for Immersion ... 25
~ 34. Basis of Fellowship ... ... ... .„ 27
~ 35. Disputes ... .. ... ... ... 27
~ 36. Individual Offences ... ... ... 28


PAGE
Sec. 37. Ecclesial Differences ... ... ... 30
~ 38. Dissatisfied Minority 30
39. Absence and Separate Meeting Unlawful 30
~40, A Time to Separate, and how to go about it 31
~ 41. Involved in another Ecclesia’s Trouble ... ... 32
~ 42. Ecclesias in relation to one another ... ... ... 33
~ 43. The true Secret of Success 35
~ 44. Fraternal Gatherings from various Places ... ... 36
45. Marriage ... ... ... ... ••• 36
~ 46. Sunday School 37
A System of Rules embodying the foregoing Sugges-
tions ... ... .... ... ••• ••• 39
A Statement of the Doctrines forming the Christa-
delphian basis of Fellowship ... 45
The Commandments of Christ —
Class I.—Difficult to Obey ... ... ... 50
~ II. —Not Easy, but less Difficult ... ... 51




