



TABLE OF CONTENTS.
PAGE.
Preface
Christmas Day
1
Rambles Around Port Macquarie :
Along the Cliffs
3
. ' The Lover’s Walk
5
Notes of a Journey to Port Macquarie in the Year 1851
(5
Life’s Retrospect (a poem)
9
John Johnson’s Legacy (a local story)
10
Port Macquarie (a poem)
14
My First Recollections of Port Macquarie
15
The Industries of Port Macquarie
10
Port Macquarie Harbour
17
The Town of Port Macquarie
18
i
ooocooc
I No. i. | CirL IVI4 Cr I PRICB » is-1
*6.
. „ %
“THE PORT MACQUARIE NEWS.”
V
IDIECIEIMIIBIBIR 25, 1882.
PORT MACQUARIE:
ALFRED E. POUNTNEY, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, CLARENCE STREET.
■ COClg gggoOCOSCCOCOOCOOCOOCOOCOOCOOCKi
! 3 ,


“The Port Macquarie News”
IS PUBLISHED
EVERY SATURDAY MORNING,
AND dispatched on the previous evening by mail to Kempsey and surrounding districts ;
Hollands Plains, Wauchope, Ennis, Rawdon Island, Telegraph Point, and throughout the
whole of the Hastings River; also, to the district of Camden Haven, and all parts of the
Manning River—reaching the above places early on Saturday morning, and about as early as
the local newspapers of Kempsey and the Manning are published. The “Port Macquarie
News” also circulates extensively at all places on the Hastings, Wilson, Macleay, Nambuccra,
and Rellinger Rivers ; and all intervening districts. It thus ofters SPECIAL INDUCE-
MENTS AS AN ADVERTISING MEDIUM.
1 The terms upon which advertisements will be inserted may be obtained at the office of
“ The Port Macquarie News.” A liberal allowance is made for advertisements standing fot
over four consecutive weeks-—in proportion to the time continued.
A Specialty is made in publishing in “The Port Macquarie News” the LATEST
TELEGRAPHIC INTELLIGENCE, furnished by our Sydney and other correspondents;
and each issue is transmitted to all parts of the colonies by first mails.
The reading matter of “ The Port Macquarie News will be found to compare \ery
favourablv with any provincial newspaper in the Colony, and exceeds in the quantity and
quality of its articles and news items, a large majority of such papers.
THE TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION ARE;
I £■ f per annum, or ss. per quarter, payable within the period for which the paper is taken.
The Jobbing Department
S REPLETE WITH EVERY REQUISITE for the most elaborate work, and the
Prices Charged are Very Moderate.
A T ■~pr , ~p.TT!T~l
PROPRIETOR, PRINTER, AND PUBLISHER,
Olarence Street, Port Macqnarie.
Brunker and Wolfe, j.k.maodowau».
ACCOUNTANT AND GENERAL AGENT,
Auctioneers, Stock, Station, and Produce Agents,
FORT 3Vt^CQ,XJ^-RIR-
AQENTS FOR SALE OF MAKES a Specialty of Writing Leases, Agreements,
w-.i and Wills, Petitions, and similar Documents j also writes
Stations, Stock, Wool, Hides, Tallow, and Letters for Is, each, and upwards, according to length.
A T.T. STATION PRODUCE Engrossing neatly executed. Sets of Account Books
opened, written up, and balanced, «tc. Private lessons
_.. given to adults in Book-keeping and other branches.
SYDNEY AND MAITLAND, ADDRESS — OfflCC Of tMg PapCL


H. 0. BROWN,
GKEIsriBIR^A.IL,
Storekeeper,
Horton Street,
Port Macquarie.
INVITES THE INSPECTION
OF HIS
{ u10mer 5 a a 4 faille
TO HIS
»TEW STOCK
Grocery, Drapery, and
Fancy Goods.
THE BEST BRANDS
Tobacco, ad Tobacconists Materials, lie., lie.,
II GREAT VARIETY,
Agent for Liverpool and London and Globe Fire and
Life Insurance Co., and
Mutual Life Association of Australia.
G. HARRIOTT,
HERBALIST,
RAWDON ISLAND,
TREATS ALL DISEASES BY HERBS.
His Family Pills
ARE invaluable in all cases of Indigestion, Liver Com-
plaints, Bile, Sick Headache, Wind Oppression of the
Stomach, Pain in the Back, Heaviness after Food, Ner-
vousness, and Constipation. They are the result of the
experience of Twenty Years, are purely Vegetable, and
can be taken at any time without exposing the body to
the influence of climate. In boxes, Is., 25., and 3s.
Ague (Fever) Powder
Is successful in every case in which other remedies fail.
Is. per oz.
Anti-Bilious Powder
Is very effectual in all temporary or chronic disorders of
the biliary secretions. Is. per oz.
Anti-Cholera Powder
Is a certain Remedy for Dysentery, Diarrhoea- ?' \
Cholera in all its forms. No family should be 'without it.
Is. per oz.
Anti-Spasmodic Powder
Particularly deserves notice, as a persistent use of it will
Cure all Hysterical Affections, Fits, Convulsions, anol
any Derangement of the Nervous System. Is. per oz.
Hr. Collin’s Composition Powder
Is a specific, without parallel, in all obstructions caused
by Colds, it is in universal request. Is. per oz.
Cough Syrup,
As Medicine, this is the most effectual preparation extant
for removing a Cough, Hoarseness, or accumulated mucus
from the Lungs, or Bronchitis. In bottles, Is. and 2s.
Soothing Syrup for Infants
Is, Without doubt, the safest, and best, which a mother
can give to her offspring in cases of Convulsions, Cramp,
Colic, Gripes, Wind, or Flatulency, and Pains in the
Bowels. In bottles, Is. and 2s.
A large supply of English and American Barks and
Herbs on hand. Tinctures, &c., Ac.


OUR CHRISTMAS NUMBER.
n n W a t?
r £4 l A s >
In all publications that are not of the usual
class, and which may he regarded as experi-
mental, there is always observed an abun-
dance of room for improvement ; and in
•launching this “ Christmas Number of the
Port Macquarie News” into the hands of the
public, we are conscious of certain defects that
could not be avoided under the circumstances.
In offering the prizes advertised two months
ago, for competitive contributions, we made a
miscalculation, by which an abandonment of
our original plan became necessary- —after a
considerable time had elapsed; and after we
had purchased the prizes to be given to the
successful competitors. We found that the
several writers, upon whom we had relied,
would not compete, and that their chief rea-
sons were, because they did not wish their
names to be made public in the event of their
• /oral contributions being adjudged the best.
: they had no objections to
write for this special number incognito. It
then became necessary to hit upon some new
plan by which the special issue promised,
would contain the varied local matter which
the original idea pointed out as absolutely
necessary ; and, considering that this had to
be done within a few weeks of publication,
and during the heat and pressure of the recent
election fever, we are under the impression
that the venture, in a literary point of view,
is much in excess of what could have been
reasonably expected, and is indeed worthy of
Port Macquarie and district. We beg to
tender our sincere thanks to the writers of the
several contributions that have been inserted,
and also to those gentlemen who imparted
such information as aided us in the various
matters of local statistics. We had many
contributions from which to choose, and, as
local suitability was the prime factor in our
choice, there were, ot course, several well
written and instructive papers, and also
poems, that could not be inserted. These
shall, however, yet receive attention, and the
best of them shall be inserted, from time to
time, in the regular issues of the “ Port Mac-
quarie News.” It is also our duty to tender
our thanks to all those writers whose contribu-
tions are thus left out of this Special Number,
and, in an especial manner, to thank the adver-
tisers, without whose financial assistance the
“ Christmas Number,” now presented, could
not have been printed. The entire matter of
this Annual is local, excepting one article and
one poem, both suitable to the season ; and
these we consider necessary to vary the read-
ing, and at the same time to uphold the day
and season that called forth this special issue.
At the outset we expected contributions from
the Maeleay, and also from the Manning ; but
we did not receive any from these districts ;
neither have we received the quantum of adver-
tisements from thence that we were led to
expect. On the other hand, Port Macquarie
has nobly responded to our call, as will be
seen by the comparatively large number of
advertisements inserted, which relate to the
several business pursuits in this town and
district. As we have said, our present
“ Christmas Number” is of an experimental
character, and were we to publish one next
year, a different plan would probably be fol-
lowed. We had no precedents upon which
to model our venture, nor could we draw
much upon Australian experiences for a lesson.
We, however, flatter ourselves, notwithstand-
ing all drawbacks, that our “ Christmas
Number,” now placed in the hands of its
readers, will give a great deal of the local
information expected, and also afford such
interesting reading as may give that satisfac-
tion which we have endeavoured faithfully to
elicit. We also trust that this souvenir , of
Port Macquarie enterprise, may be preserved
as the first of the kind ever published in New
South Wales, north of Sydney.


guy.
Ix wishing all our readers “ A merry Christmas and a
happy New Year,” we would make a few remarks regard-
ing the early history of Christmas, and the manner in
which it is observed in many countries of Christendom.
It is generally conceded by learned writers upon the sub-
ject, that the 25th December is merely a suitable date
"fixed upon to celebrate the nativity of our Lord, and on
this point Chambers’ Encyclopaedia states that “ It is
almost certain that the 25th of December cannot be the
nativity of the Saviour, for it is then the height of the
rainy season in Judea, and shepherds could hardly be
watching their flocks by night in the plains.” It is quite
possible, however, that the climate of Judea may have
changed very materially during the eighteen hundred
and eighty-two years that have elapsed since Christ is
said to have been born ; and it is a well-known fact that
the climate of Europe, especially in its northern portions,
has changed, and was much warmer in the very early
a« - es than it now is. We have evidence of this fact in
the fossils that have been, of late years, unearthed in
vai’ious parts of Great Britain, Ireland, and other por-
tions of Europe ; and in the northern parts of Asia also,
notably those recently found in the colder regions of
Siberia. These fossils are the remains of animals to
whom a warm, or at any rate a mild, climate was an
absolute necessity, and without such conditions the vege-
tation upon which they subsisted could not naturally
have been produced. It is, therefore, not too much to
suppose that the climate of Judea, situated in Asia
i Minor, in comparatively close proximity to Europe, was
somewhat affected by the atmospheric currents that then,
as now, swept from one country to another ; and as neither
the Bible, nor other contemporaneous history, since the
5 delude, makes mention of frost, snow, or even rains in any
abundant quantity, but rather the contrary, we may safely
assume that at the period of Christ’s birth, the climate
of Judea was more equable, milder, and perhaps dryer,
than it is in our day. Be these things as they may—we
again quote from Chambers’ Encyclopaedia —“ The insti-
tution of this festival is attributed by the spurious
Decretals, to Telesphorus, who flourished in the reign of
Antonious Pius (138-161 a.d.); but the first certain
traces of it are found about the time of the Emperor
Coramodus (284-305 a.d.) While that ruler was keeping
court at Nicoraeda, he Iparned that a multitude of Chris-
tians were assembled in tbe city to celebrate the birthday
of Jesus, and having ordered the Church doors to be
closed, he set fire to the building, and all the worshippers
perished in the flames. It does not appear, however,
that there was any uniformity in the period of observing
the nativity among the early Churches ; some held the
festival in the month of May, or April, and others in
January!” Almanacs and dates are of comparatively
recent invention, and were not thoroughly systematized
until the era of printing; therefore, the precise dates of
events among the early Christians were not preserved
with that exactitude which prevails now ; and, besides,
even had the date of our Lord’s birth been known to his
disciples, and others of his contemporaries, the records
would have been destroyed amid the persecutions to
which all were subject. Again, the progress of time was
very differently reckoned by the ancients ; their years,
months, and days were generally arranged from the time
that the reigning monarchs ascended the several thrones ;
thus rendering it difficult, and, indeed almost impossible,
for modern historians to arrive at exact conclusions regard ■
ing the several periods, so as to wholly correspond with
modern systems of dates. The same remarks apply to
all the saints’ days with which almanacs, of the present
day, are so abundantly furnished. Before the change of
the “ styles,” which took place about the beginning of the
present century, Christmas Day was held upon the 6th
of January, which day is known among old people,
and still observed in some districts of Great
Britain, as “ Old Christmas Day,” or, as it is called in the
country districts of Scotland, “ Auld Yule.” The change
of “ styles,” however, changed all anniversaries twelve
days backwards, and hence the 25th December thus
accidentally inherited the honour which was formerly
held by the 6th of January. We again quote from
Chambers’ Encyclopaedia the following interesting facts,
viz.—“ Among the causes that co-operated in tixing this
period as the proper one, perhaps the most powerful was,
that almost all the heathen nations regarded the winter-
solstice as a most important part of the year; as the
beginning of the renewed life and activity of the powers
of nature • and of the gods, who were originally merely
the symbolical personifications of these. In more nor-
therly countries this fact must have made itself peculi
arly palpable : hence the Celts and Germans, from the
oldest times, celebrated the season with the greatest fes-
tivities. At the winter-solstice, the Germans held their
great Yule-feast, in commemoration of the return of the
fiery sun-wheel; and believed that during the twelve
nights, reaching from the 25th December to the 6th
January, they could trace the personal movements a !
interferences on earth, of their great deities -0< I in,
Berchta, &c. Many of the beliefs and usages of the old
Germans, and also of the Romans, relating to this
matter, passed over from heathenism to Christianity, and
have partly survived to the present day. But the church
also sought to combat and banish—and it was to a largo
extent successful—the deep-rooted heathen feeling, by
adding—for the purification of the heathen customs and
feasts, which it retained—its grandly divised liturgy,
besides dramatic representations of the birth of Christ,
and the first events of his life. Hence sprang the so-
called “ Manger-songs,” and a multitude of Christmas
carols, as well as Christmas dramas, which, at certain
times and places, degenerated into farces, or fools’ feasts.”
These festivals, and pantomines, are more elaborately de-
scribed in the Encyclopaedia Britannica,but as we do not have
this work in efur sanctum, we cannot quote the descrip-
tion. There was, however, held at this season in Eng-
land, the “ Feast of Unreason,” over which a Government
officer, with a facetious title, was appointed to preside ;
and in Scotland a similar feast was held, under another
name, to which was attached a similar presiding officer.
The holders of these sinecures, however, fell into dis-
favour, and the offices were abolished in both kingdoms,
long anterior to the Reformation, when the more objec-
tionable parts of the Christinas orgies, or festivities, were
curtailed. From those feasts—we give another quota


ition from the Encyclopaedia before us—“ also originated,
at a later period, the Christ-trees, or Christmas-trees,
adorned with lights and gifts, the custom of reciprocal
presents, and of special Clu’istmas meats and dishes, such
as Christmas rolls, cakes, currant loaves, dumplings, Ac.
-—also the familiar goose and *■' n modding —(the words
in italics ®re ours). Thus Christmas became an univer-
sal social festival for young and old, high and low, as no
other Christian festival could have become.” The
Roman Catholic, Episcopal, and Lutheran churches
celebrate the day by special services; but the Presbyte-
rian churches in Scotland, and the whole of the English
dissenters and non-conformists, reject it in its religious
aspect, as a “human invention,” and as “savouring of
papistical will-worshipalthough all classes in England
unite in keeping Christmas as a social holiday, on which
there is a complete cessation from business. In Scotland
the day is not generally observed, excepting as a Govern-
ment holiday, and the closing of bank offices. This arose
from the extreme reform principles which actuated John
Knox and the other stern leaders of the reform move-
ment in Scotland, who were not satisfied with anything
short of a complete sweeping away of every trace of
Romanism from the reformed national church. Sandy,
however, holds his “ festival of the season” upon New
Year’s Day, and asserts the right of getting as “ stag-
gerin’ fou” upon that day as John Bull does on Christmas
Day, and frequently exceeds John in the strength, if not
in the quantity, of his potations—judging from the com-
parative effects which these produce. Chambers’ Ency-
clopaedia further states that “ within the last hundred
years, the festivities, once appropriate to Christmas, have
much fallen off These at one time lasted, with more or
less brilliancy, till Chandlernas (over one month), and
with great spirit till Twelfth-day ; but now a meeting in
the evening, composed, when possible, of the various
branches and members of a family, is all that distinguishes
the day above others. ” The latter portion of the last clause
of this quotation may be true enough regarding the upper-
crust of society, but it is certainly not true regarding
the majority of the masses in England, and the colonies,
or in most countries where the English language is
spoken. For ourselves, we have perceived very little
difference in the manner of celebrating the Christmas
festivals during the past half century, unless it be that
the Good Templars, and other total abstinence societies,
have been, the means of restricting the numbers who
now engage in the pitiful and lamentable drunken orgies
which are but too common among Britons of the lower
order, wherever they are located, although they profess to be
something superior to similar classes in other nationali-
ties. Probably the most sensible, and rational way of
keeping Christmas Day, is the manner in which it is
observed among the descendants of the old puritans of
the New England States of America. In these states
there is a regular re-union of families, the members of
which come from all parts of the Union and Canada, to
be present at the family gathering, or festival, which is
held in the house of the parents, or other elder members
of the blood connexion ; upon which occasion the affairs
of the family are discussed, and enquiries made as to how
each sister, cousin, and aunt is getting on ; and whether
Amos is to marry Cynthia, or whether Phebe’s husband
continues to be “ excellent good,” and what trade or
business Zebulon, or Hezekiah, or Alvin, is at present
engaged in. Enquiries of this nature take up much of
the time, and is doubtless very interesting to those con-
cerned. It matters little to them whether such conver-
sation would be interesting to others or not. The day
passes pleasantly in such converse, until the feast, which
has been in preparation for weeks, sometimes months,
previously, is spread upon the table, and the sisters,
brothers, aunts, uncles, neices, nephews, and cousins,
accompanied by their progeny, sit around the family
board, at which many of those present had sat when
children, and listen with becoming reverence to the
paternal grace, and then partake of the stereotyped tur-
keys, mince pies, dough nuts, and other dishes specially
prepared for the occasion. No intoxicating liquors
desecrate, with their unwholesome effects, that family
circle, which is sacred to the finest feelings that ornament
human nature, and which is the nursery of those ebuli-
tions of patriotism and enterprise that spring upon the
New England soil, and perform good and wonderous
works in all parts of Uncle Sam’s dominions. After tea
the evening is spent in harmless frolic, indoors ;
and although the cold frosty wind may howl out-
side, and the snow lie deep upon the door-step
and cover the window casements, at this inclement
season, all are, for the time, happy, and the sounds of
innocent merriment resound throughout the stove-heated
apartments. The younger members are wholly in their
element with their games of forfeits, puzzles, Ac., and
exhibit great glee and satisfaction in showing to uncle
Reuben and Aunt Marion, the presents which Santa
Claus placed in their stocking the previous night, when
they were fast asleep. Later on in the evening the
Christmas-tree is uncovered and lighted, decked as it is
with horns of plenty, toys and nic-nac gifts, of every
variety, according to the means of the donors. One of
the uncles, who has previously attired himself with a
grey wig and artificial long grey beard, and clothes to
match, performs the part of Santa Claus, and distributes
the gifts, with which the tree is laden, to the young and ’
laughing children around ; and afterwards gives them a
kind and humourous lecture, which ends with a blessing,
and the offering up of a solemn benediction to the Most
High for guidance and protection. These latter cere-
monies close the proceedings, and give the hint for
retirement, which everyone takes, by proceeding quietly
to the bed prepared for his, or her, reception. Perfect
decorum, as well as sobriety, is maintained throughout,
and the several members thus brought together from all
points of the compass, rise in the morning without those
headaches which too commonly follow Christinas celebra-
tions elsewhere. To this mode of celebrating Christmas
Hay, the following lines from Burns, substituting the
word “Columbia” for that of “ Auld Scotia,” are
applicable ;
From scenes like these Columbia’s grandeur springs,
And makes her loved at home, revered abroad.
Among the foreign citizens and residents of the American
Union, those practices prevail to which they have been
accustomed in the land of their nativity, and the native
born Americans, who mix among them, generally follow
suit. In Canada, where the Presbyterians form the


most numerous and influential body of the people, Christ-
mas Day gives place to New Year’s Day, in the prominence
of its celebration; and the proceedings, on the latter day,
chiefly consist in visiting one’s acquaintances, calling at
their houses with the usual greetings, and partaking of
fruit, cakes, and liquors, which are displayed in great
variety on every parlour table, presided over by the lady
of the house, who stays at home throughout the day for
this special purpose. It is considered an insult, or at least
a slight, should a friend neglect this annual visit of
ceremony, and it not unfrequently happens that an omis-
sion of this kind is never forgiven. The ladies have their
visits of ceremony on the day following, and have their
gossip spiced by relating the names, quality, and
numbers of their visitors on the previous day. There
is not much revelry or intoxication; but a large
amoun f of tippling takes place among the gentlemen
on New Year’s Day, owing to the practice of par-
taking of liquor at every house where they call. In
the West India Islands, and the East Indies, the
heat of the climate prevents, to some extent, the
modes of celebi’ation which would otherwise be the same
as in England. Christmas Day is also duly observed in
the Catholic countries of Europe ; but religious services
and ceremonies, as well as Church festivals, are chiefly
the order of the day. In France, many of the carols
sung at the festivals are said to be grossly Bacchanalian ;
but, doubtless, less drunkenness obtains among the people
generally, upon this occasion, than in England, as the
French are not noted for this species of vice. In Ger-
many and Scandinavia, Clnistmas is less prominent; but
there are festivities suitable to the season, which each of
the nationalities of those divisions of Europe hold in their
own way, although few of the people of these national-
ities give way, at such times, to an extra over-indulgence
in intoxicating drinks. In Australia, many of the work-
ing classes hold their festivities of the day at a friend’s
residence, or out of doors, or, more generally still, at the
bars of the public houses, and we all know that over-in-
dulgence js far too common throughout the colonies. The
warm season, or summer-solstice of the southern hemi-
sphere, and also the want of homes for a large proportion
of the people, produce conditions that prevent, to a
considerable extent, the indoor jollification which would
certainly take place, in the majority of cases, were the
Christmas season cold, instead of hot. An extra sumptuous
dinner, and a cessation from ordinary labour, are generally
indulged in, and on the following day (Boxing Day) the
season’s sports usually take place. Boxing Day took its
name from the custom of making money gifts, on that
day, to persons of inferior condition, such as servants,
letter-carriers, Ac. The term, and also the custom, are
purely and essentially English, although the prac-
tice of making presents at this season, and at the
new year, is of great antiquity. The’ name, as
well as the day, is unknown in Scotland and North
America, excepting by those who have travelled
in England, or in some of the colonies where the custom
has been introduced. Since the year 1836, the practice
of giving Christmas-boxes has fallen greatly into disrepute
and disuse, and it is now chiefly confined to the city of
London, where old customs linger, and are most difficult
to be got rid of. During the period that Oliver Ci’omwell
and his Puritan Parliament were in power, Christmas
festivities were abolished altogether, and badges of Holly
and ivy were considered seditious emblems. After the
Restoration, however, Christmas celebrations were again
resumed, and drifted into their present jovial character;
and the idea was thpm \qvalent, as is too often the case
now, that in order to be supremely happy, and to hold
the Christmas festival as it should be held, it was neces-
sary to partake freely of “ friendship’s offerings” in the
shape of large doses of intoxicants, and, in the end, to
become gloriously drunk.
From the facts and reasonings given in the former part
of this article, we cannot come to any other conclusion,
than that the 25th of December is the day appointed by
the Churches and Government, to be observed; and that it
is observed, throughout Christendom, as the great anni-
versary to commemorate the birth of our Saviour. It
does not really matter much whether Christ was
born on that particular day of the year or not; and
although the plea of suitability of season docs not alto-
gether apply to Australia, we cheerfully unite with our
Christian brethren in all parts of the world, after our own
fashion, in celebrating the Nativity on this day ; and, in
doing so, we again wish all our readers a Merry Christmas
and a Happy New Year, with all the compliments of the
season, many returns of the same, and all the suitable
blessings of health, fortune, Ac., that can be showered
upon them.
gamMeisi ground Iwt
ALONG THE CLIFFS.
By Ellen Travel
From the Flagstaff Hill we proceed pm' : old but mill,
and in looking seacard observe Bird island about 300
yards out in the ocean, and nearly abreast of Windmill
Point. This island, or rather rock, has a particularly
lonely and bare appearance, and in boisterous weather the
sea breaks completely over it in clouds of spray that rise
high into space with every billow that dashes against its
rugged and precipitous sides. At some future period,
probably, a lighthouse will be erected on this rock, which
is the farthest advanced sentinel that guards the southern
approach to the harbour of Port Macquarie. The cliffs
here are high and precipitous, abounding in brush covered
precipices with grassy slopes intervening here and there.
No houses yet occupy these fine marine sites, where the
sea view is unsurpassed, and where, at the same time, the
red clay soil is rich in mineral fertilizers, and sufficiently
watered by periodical rains to make anything grow. We
cannot go nearer to the brink of the cliffs at this point,
but enter the “ Lovers’ Walk, ’ and follow it for a few
hundred yards, until we come to a path leading seaward,
which breaks off at right angles to the main thoroughfare.
We follow this well beaten path about 200 yards, and
then descend a brush covered slope, down which the path
winds, and where, at steeper places, steps have been cut in
the hard clay. We are now on the beach between Little
and Big Nobbies. The latter running out into the sea
and ending in a conical hill, with a monument on the top.


seen towering aloft from the spot where we now stand.
We walk along the beach, which is strewn with shells,
cuttle fish bone, sponges, and other marine productions,
until we come to the rocks that form the base of the hill
called “Big Hobby Point.” We have now some climbing
and scrambling to do over the rocks, to the dark and deep
cavern that penetrates through the centre of the hill on a
level with the ocean at all times of the tide. Although
this cave, or rather tunnel, penetrates to the other or
southern side, the northern entrance is the only one that
can be seen from the land. We gaze upon the surging
waters as they dash into the dark abyss, foaming and
roaring, whirling and eddying ; and listen to the subter-
ranean echoes which resound among the interior cliffs
that witnessed the dying agonies of the late Messrs.
Gardiner and Hume, who were drowned in that fearful
chasm in the year 1871. The water inside the cavern is
evidently of considerable depth, and at high tide the
waves rush through a narrow opening in the rocks,
unbroken, and plunge with fearful force into
the cave, which seems, at a short distance
inside, to divide into two chambers, formed of
jagged and irregular walls of rock. Against these walls
the billows dash with all their weight and fury, roaring
and shaking the superincumbent hill, as if impatient a,t
being pent up within the circumscribed limits of this
dark, deep, and unexplored ocean cave. We look upon
the scene for some minutes with awe, and then shrink
with a shiver as we remember the frightful fate of Messrs.
Gardiner and Hume, whose death agonies were experi-
enced amid the surging, hissing, whirling waters of tins
dreadful and awe-inspiring abyss. Leaving the unenjoyable
scene below, we now ascend a portion of the hill by
scrambling up a very steep incline, clinging to the tufts
of bunch grass, and such roots or bushes as here and
-there present themselves, and then descend on the other
side of a ledge until we find ourselve| on the sandy beach
which we had previously left. A winding path now led
us up the hill of Big Hobby, and after pushing our way
aloft for about 300 feet through brushwood and wild
grape vines, we stand upon the top, at the foot of the
monument which we had seen when we first came down
to the beach. From this point of observation we had a
magnificent view. The Flagstaff Hill, Windmill Point, and
Little Hobby stretched away to the north, separated by
beautiful bays of sand and rocky ledges, whose outlines
were clear and beautiful in the noonday sui shine, and
far away beyond these points were the distant beaches,
points, and mountains which border on the Macleay River,
looming in the ocean haze produced by the surf, and
seeming to our eye to be nearer than they really
are. On the south the entire expanse of Shelly Beach
was distinctly seen, with Fireplace Point as its southern
boundary ; and, indeed, this point bounded our vision
along the coast to the south. Looking seaward we see a
steamer passing majestically along, and within a mile of
where we now stand. Sails are also seen in the distant
south, one of them a mere speck scarcely distinguishable
from a rock or cloud. The ocean waves dash their spray
beneath us, and strike upon the jutting and jagged rocks
around, with an accumulated force gathered in a journey
of thousands of miles over the largest ocean on the globe.
There, within the depths of that great ocean which now
stretches before us, so blue, and, in the distance, so ap-
parently tranquil, what unknown scenes, teeming with
life, lie buried; what a theme for contemplation ; what a
field for science to explore ; and what a mystery it yet is,
even after all that the researches, soundings, and explor-
ations of navigators and scientific men have brought to light.
It would seem that the more w r e know of this immense
ocean world, with its deep valleys ; its level plains ; its
variety of living organisms; its fields of vegetable
growths on the lower levels, and on its mountains ele-
vated nearly to the surface ; the more the mystery, and
the more we want to known The monument beside us
speaks of human bodies that are buried in these heaving
waters, ever restless, ever moaning the requiems of the
dead within its depths, and always every year receiving
new accessions to the numbers of those who went before.
This monument is about twenty-five feet high from the
ground to the top. It is pyramidal in shape, and rests
upon a square pedestal four feet high. It is built of
brick, over which is a coating of cement, and at the
period of our visit, a few weeks ago, was in perfect
order, excepting the inscription, which has been some-
what dimmed by the weather. This monument was
erected through the instrumentality of the public school
teachers of the district, and others, to the memory of the
late Messrs. Gardiner and Hume, and the inscription
thereon reads as follows :—“ In memory of Henry
Gardiner, who was drowned in the cave below, in the
attempt to save the life of his friend, J. W. Hume, 25th
May, 1871. Both P. School teachers.” As we read the
inscription, we hear the rumbling sound of the waves in
the cavern below, and feel the hill tremble upon which
we stand. We now retrace our steps down the hill,
which has a soil of red friable clay, with a base of silurian
trap rock exposed near the sea level, and upon which the
surf beats. We continue our walk southward, over a
gravelly beach, and round a rocky point where a fine
fresh-water spring oozes out from the sides of the cliffs.
Several old copper mines and workings are situated here,
and we found good specimens of the ore. We looked
down one dark and slanting mine, that seemed to be of great
depth, and to penetrate below the sea, but how far we
did not ascertain. These workings have now been dis-
continued, for the reason, we presume, that they did not
pay. Shelly beach is of great length, and is a stretch of
sand, interspersed here and there with rocks of the same
formation as those on other parts of this coast in the
neighbourhood of Port Macquarie. The soil on the
cliffs is also the same red friable clay that prevails through-
out the district, and which is found to be very suitable
for grape vines and fruit trees. Maize and other crops
also thrive upon it. This soil has the peculiarity of
retaining moisture without forming into clods, or being
in any way “ cloggy” or muddy. The several beaches, at
the foot of the cliffs we have mentioned, are strewn with
cuttle fish bone, sponges, and shells of many beautiful varie-
ties, some of which are large; and south of Tacking Point,
we are informed, tons of pumice-stone are cast upon
the shore with every storm. We now return back to
Port Macquarie, well pleased with our journey along the
cliffs and wonder that the pleasant scenery of that locality,
where may be inhaled such fresh and healthy sea breezes,
is not oftener visited than it is.


IN THE LOVERS’ WALK.
By Dora Ellsworth.
We start from the Windmill Hill, Port Macquarie, and
enter this delightful promenade, or drive hedged by
shrubbery on both sides, which is here and there broken,
on the seaward side, so as to afford views of the rocky
shore and headlands, as well as the boundless ocean be-
yond. As we proceed onward, groups of Australian palm
trees meet our eye, and pleasingly diversify the surround-
in o- foliage by their graceful and waving fronds that
tower above the mass of undergrowth and bushes beneath.
The straight, tall, and slender stems of those palms shoot
heavenward through the thick scrub, and in some cases
reach a height of sixty feet before the spreading and
graceful fronds are reached, making a tout ensemble siini
lar to cocoa-nut palms in graceful beauty. Other
graceful trees and shrubs, decked with gay blossoms and
leaves of every shape, size, and shade of colouring, are
passed as we proceed, and the hard path whereon we
tread is level and dry, and carpeted with the fallen
leaves of the trees above us, whose branches arch the
drive, and modify with their shade the noonday heat.
Birds sci earn and chatter upon the boughs, or flutter and
skip around us in great variety of size and plumage.
There are among those warblers, chatterers, and scream-
ers, birds with strange names, uncouth names, and
familiar names ; birds with no names, and birds whose
names are only known to the ornithologist. Insects also,
of all colours, and of many kinds, flit and buz, hover and
fly from bush to bush, and from flower to flower, now
playing in the solar beams, which at places penetrate the
higher masses of foliage, and then darting into the
shade with the swiftness of an arrow, hover over a
tempting flower and alight upon it to taste of its
sweets. \V*e have now proceeded about a mile on our
quiet and solitary walk, and paths are seen to cross the
drive at all sorts of angles. Another road, similar to
that which we traverse, joins it from the west, and we
have from this a better beaten avenue to walk upon. The
bush becomes more open on the average, and tree ferns
frequently appear on both sides. These uncommon
growths, resembling stunted palms, betoken a moist soil
and a moist climate, and, in the rankness of the vegetation,
there is every proof that the facts correspond with the
appearance. At one of the openings in the scrub we ob-
tain a fine view of Big Nobby Point, with the conical
hill facing the sea, and the monument, erected to the late
Messrs. Gardiner and Hume, on its top. We plunge
a<rain into the avenue, which is here a dark glade, where
the sun’s rays can scarcely penetrate the dense and clus-
tering leaves that shade the path j but we are not long
before we arrive at a clearing, and a few cattle are seen
browsing on our right which proclaim the lands around to
belong to some farm, that from the road is not visible.
Passing this clearing, and a piece of open forest beyond
the drive, again enter a dense thicket, where we hear
the whip-lnce mono-note of the coachman bird resounding
in the deep and hidden recesses, the tinkling noise of the
bell-bird, and the peculiar notes of many feathered
warblers with which we are familiar. A house, or
rather a two-roomed hut, is now seen on our left, with a
small clearing around it; but no cultivation or improve-
ments, that we can see, farther than the house itself and
the felling of the timber. An open forest country now
presents itself, which continues for about a quarter of a
mile, and then our path winds along a ridge, with gorges
and deep dells on both sides. A larger growth of trees
now encircle us, and the trailing, climbing, and creeping
vines become very abundant. These encircle, and twine,
and twist, and climb up the tallest trees, shooting their
arms high into space, or hang from the tree limbs in rope-
like festoons, dangling and swaying in the breeze. A
little farther on, and we come to a fence close to our road
on the right. On our left is a beautiful green slope, upon
which are numerous patches of the palmetto dwarf palm,
whose fan-shaped fronds seldom reach twenty feet from
the ground, but whose bright green branches spread
horizontally to a considerable extent. The palmetto is by
no means a common plant in Australia, although it is
common enough in the Southern States of the American
Union —especially in the low lands not far from the
coast. Near the fence on our right, beautiful ground
flowers are seen, but they are mostly new to us, and v. e
cannot name them. However, among those strange and
wild beauties we perceive the yellow everlast-
ing flower, or wild chrysanthemum ; the butter-
cup, and the Australian dandelion. The horse
daisy, and the-tiny blue forget-me-not is also there. _I m
grass, washed and moistened by the recent rains, is ot
the brightest and greenest green, and the ferns upon the
slopes have a rank and spreading growth. Yet all
around is solitary, and undisturbed by cattle, or other
animals which usually follow in the wake of human
settlement. We have not seen a human being since we
left Windmill Hill, distant now about four miles A
few hundred yards further, and we come to another fence
on our left, enclosing a fine garden, filled with fruit trees
and vegetables which grow luxuriantly ripen the, i u
soil. A house is here also, and a very extensive clearing
at the back of it. On the other side, toward the west,
we see another, and larger house in the distance, situate
upon a hill, and surrounded by fenced paddocks of large
size, but perceive no cattle nor any one stirring about the
place. The road now passes the house on our left, and
winds onwards through the interminable stretches ot
forest, hill, and valley 5 but here we stop. Cloud shadows
flit across the roadway, and ominous rain clouds drift
athwart the sky. Mists gather and loom in the distance,
and every sign of the atmosphere portends an approaching
shower. Fences and open clearings are to the right ot us ■
open clearings and fences are to the left of us ; and a dog
barks at the door of the cottage beside us. We now turn
back and pursue the homeward journey, hurrying onward
to escape the threatening rain ; but in this haste we take
another road than the one by which we came, and find
out our mistake only when we come to places and fences
that we had not seen before. We now pass several
running creeks of clear water, flowing inland, and
over which the road passes by means of _ substantial
bridges; a few vineyards and houses, picturesquely
situated, are also passed, and finally v> e get
hack to the town of Port Macquarie much pleased
with our walk, which was full of instruction
and, doubtless, contributed much to an increased
health and strength. It is certainly strange that we


never met a human creature, from the time we left Port
Macquarie until we returned to it again, and it seems to
us that this walk, or drive, called the “ Lovers’ Walk, is
not sufficiently known, otherwise it would he more fre-
quently visited. From its quiet retirement, its lonely beauty,
its dry, level, and soft footing, and its arboreal shade, this
sylvan avenue is well termed the Lovers’ Walk, for there,
in these recesses, two fond hearts could beat in undis-
turbed unison, and enjoy the beauties of nature under
conditions that combine instruction with pleasure, and
healthy recreation with fitting opportunity for conver-
sation and contemplation.
§Vu Old immm?,
BEING NOTES OF AN EXPEDITION OY ERL AND
FROM WOLLONGONG TO PORT MACQUA-
RIE IN THE BEGINNING OF THE YEAR
1851.
These notes are in the form of a diary, and
they are now published, for the benefit of
all whom they may concern, in nearly the
same language as they were written thirty-
two years ago, and are as follow :
Friday, January 17, 1851.—Left Wollongong at day-
light with four horses. The morning was very fine,'and
the summer sun was just rising as we ascended Mount
Kiera. On coming near to the “ Stringy Bark House”
ouxJLiay mare, “ Electress,” had a very narrow escape
from being bitten by a black snake which was coiled upon
the road. About noon we crossed Jordan’s Creek, at a
very and passed through Appin, where we
remained a short time, and from thence proceeded to
Campbelltown, where we arrived about 6 p.m. on the same
day. We put up at a friend’s house, and, as we had no
sleep the night before owing to its being Agricultural
Show day at Wollongong, and the consequent excitement
throughout the night, we slept very soundly, although
our only beds consisted of our rugs spread upon the
floor.
Saturday, January 18 —We were up early, and
observed that a drizzling rain had fallen during the
night, and also that it still looked dark and ominous.
Indeed the lowering dark clouds strongly betokened more
wet, and we postponed our start until 9.30 a.m. In
spite of the rainy appearance of the sky, we made a
start at this hour, and passed through Liverpool, over
the Landsdown Bridge, and then proceeded on to Par-
ramatta, where we arrived a little after 2 p.m. Some of
our party went by steamer down the Parramatta River
to Sydney, and the others remained a,t a friend’s house
in Parramatta until Tuesday morning.
Tuesday, January 21.—We made another start early
this morning. We were now about to commence
a journey over a road that was altogether new to us, as
none of our party had been over it before, and it pre-
sented to our minds many difficulties and dangers, some
of which were doubtless imaginary, while others were
real. We left Parramatta at 8.30 a.m., and passed
through Dural, 13 miles, and on to “ Wiseman’s Ferry’'
(a name retained by this ferry to the present day—36
miles from Parramatta). The weather was very warm
throughout the day, but the road continued to be good
until within 16 miles of the ferry. It then became very
rough and stony —nothing was observable but mountains
and gullies. The road, in most places, had a winding
course on the sides of the mountains, and along the
ranges. As we drew near to the Hawkesbury river the
scenery was highly panoramic, and much grander than
we could have expected to behold in such a wilderness.
Our road kept winding along the tops of the ranges, at
an elevation nearly equal to some of the Illawarra
mountains. From our elevated position we could see
reaches of the Hawkesbury river flowing through the
valleys beneath us ; and at one place there was distinctly
seen a solitary vessel gliding over its silent waters, jud
following the many surpentine turnings that occurred in
its circuitous route. As we gazed upon the river from
the mountain on which we stood, we could plainly dis-
tinguish cottages and gardens, and also fields of maize
growing in the richest luxuriance in the distance, and
near the river. The day was very clear, and we coaid
see for long distances in several directions. As a conse-
quence, our imaginations loved to linger among these
delightful surroundings, which language is utterly unable
to detail with any degree of accuracy. In order to
descend to the valley beneath, the road still winded ; but
with a gradual descent, until at last we found ourselves
once more on a level surface, and slept at an accommo-
dation house on the south side of the ferry. Tins house
had been large and elegant at a former time, but when
we were there it was fast going to decay. It was built
by Mr.\ Wiseman, a gentleman who held a government
situation at the time the road was made to the fer
which took its name fx’om him.
Wednesday, January 22.—Left the accommoda
house at 7 a.m., and crossed the Hawkesbury by
punt, and, proceeding onward, we found the road to
gradually ascend, until we had attained an elevation
even greater than that we had passed over yesterday.
This road cost the government an immense sum of
money, and, in places, as we were told, the figures
reached the extraordinary sum of £6O per foot. Whe-
ther this large amount was actually expended or not, the
work must have been one of very great labour, and
probably with all the etceteras, did not fall much below
the sum stated. The road runs along the winding, and
in parts, abrupt and steep sides of the mountains ; now
over their shoulders, and again heading gulleys, and here
and there built with cut stone in order to bring it to a
level, and make the roadway more secure. The part of
the road, over which we passed to-day, traversed a
country which is wild and barren in the extreme. Noth-
ing was seen but wastes of sand and rocks, over which
grew worthless stunted timber. The land, as far as the
eye could reach, is not worth anything, for any purpose,
at this period of colonial history; and it is difficult to
imagine it will ever be valuable, or more so than it is at
present. Our track was very circuitous, and often when


winding along the slopes of a high range, we would look
back and trace the road we had passed over, and per-
ceived that we had come in a semi-circle at places, and
nearly in a circle at others. Our pace was necessarily
slow, owing to the rough state of the road, and its "v ai ied
and innumerable windings. About 6 p.m., with the sun
still an hour high, we began to descend into the AVol-
lombi district —a narrow belt of rich land, situated
between two lofty ranges. As we could find no conve-
nient place for camping, we pushed on till we came to
Smith’s public house, about seven miles from the town-
ship. It was almost dark when we came to Smith’s, and
we camped out at a short distance from the house. It
being dark, we had little choice of ground, and but a poor
covering against the rain which threatened in the dark-
ness by which we were surrounded —to come down plen-
tifully. We stretched our weary limbs, but our anxiety
regarding the weather forbade sleep. Under these
unenviable conditions we rested as best we could until
midnight, when the expected rain began to drop. AV e
then arose, and removed our camp to an unfinished house
near by, which we had noticed before the darkness had
finally set in. Here we lay down, and obtained a little
sleep. The rain ceased at day break, and we then kin-
dled a fire, partook of tea and such refreshments as were
most handy, and started again on our journey—37 miles
being the distance travelled this day.
Thursday, January 23.-—Just as the sun was appear-
ing above the horizon, and as seen through the distant trees,
we commenced our journey to Wollombi, a small town,
with two or three good buildings, and here we stayed to
make enquiries regarding the road over which we were
now about to proceed. From this township roads
branched off to different parts of the interior, and we
found the persons, of whom we made enquiries, to be
vexatiously ignorant about any place out of their own
district. We were at a loss to know which take,
even after all the enquiries we had made. Whether the
New England or the Maitland road was the right one for
ns, was the question that we had now to decide. At
last, however, we took the former, but before we pro-
ceeded far, we halted again to make further enquiries,
when, from the additional information received, we
turned back, and took the Maitland road. Our track
to-day was good ; the day was cloudy and pleasant foi
travelling, compared to the past two days that we had
been exposed to the scorching rays of an unclouded sum-
mer sun. Maitland is 36 miles from Wollombi, and as
our horses fared but poorly last night, we rested at an
early hour on the bank of a creex, five miles from the
town we had just left. There was an abundance of grass
and water, and the evening brought together black and
gloomy clouds that gave every sign of approaching rain.
"We made a shelter of green bushes, and turned in
early. We slept soundly throughout the night, owing to
having had so little sleep on the night previous, and that
in spite of drizzling showers that continued to fall at
intervals, more or less thick and continuous. The
weather, however, cleared up towards daylight. 38
miles made to-day.
Friday, January 24.—Started about 7 a.m., and
passed through West Maitland, and by way of the Pat-
terson Falls to Patterson, 22 miles. The country about
Maitland, and the Patterson district, is of good agricul-
tural soil, and the crops now look very well, and promise
an abundant harvest. The town of Patterson is small,
and contains a church, chapel, and a full share of public
houses. Two miles beyond the town, on our way to
Dungog, which from this point is 12 miles distant, we
went astray by neglecting to ask for Jones’ Crossing over
the Patterson river, and by this mistake we travelled five
miles to no purpose, and lost considerable time. There
was a slight drizzle of rain this afternoon, and we arrived
at Dungog at about 5 p.m. This is a miserable looking
town, containing 23 houses only; although the descrip-
tion given of it in Well’s Geography would lead one to
expect that it is a large and important village. We were
very much disappointed with the place, owing to having
read a description of it in the book mentioned, which
devotes nearly a page to setting forth beauties of the town
and district which are wholly imaginary, and in many
respects untruthful. The writer, or compiler of this
geography, has passed over many places of much more
importance, with only a few brief remarks, which prove
a carelessness in the obtaining of useful information, and
is to our minds very culpable. There is some good land
along the banks of the Williams River, but about the
town the soil is poor, and there is no grass to speak of.
We intended to have camped here, but as there was no
feed for the horses, we were obliged to push on for two
miles further, where, through the kindness of a Mr.
Lindsay, we were enabled to camp in his hut. He
allowed ns to put our horses into his packtock, where we
kept them till dark, and then placed them in a stockyard
all night, as there was no fence between the grass and the
cultivated ground. The distance travelled to-day was 41
miles, exclusive of the 5 miles we went astray.
Saturday, January 25.—The road turns off here at
Mr. Lindsay’s, in order to join the A. A. Company s line
of road to the Manning River. There are two tracks ;
one leads to within 4 miles of Stroud, near the wool
sheds, the other to Higgins’, 20 miles from Gloucester.
The latter was the one we intended to have taken, it
being shorter by 10 miles. We took the wrong one,
however, which proved very fortunate in the end, as we
intended to have camped out about two miles beyond
Gloucester ; but our going astray put in back so much
that it was getting late as we drew nigh to our destina-
tion, and the heavy clouds, which were gathering, soon
broke, and the rain began to descend, gently at first,
which made us push on with all speed. The thunder
became very loud, and the lightning very vivid. The
dark clouds followed each other so closely, that every
moment we expected the storm to burst upon us in all its
fury. AVe had barely time to reach the accommodation
house at Gloucester before the rain fell in torrents, and
the storm raged in its full force. Of course we went no
farther this night, but felt thankful that we were not out
in the bush. 30 miles to-day, and 12 astray. Two
travellers arrived during the evening, on their way from
New England to Sydney.
Sunday, January 26.—AVe awoke early this morning
after a most refreshing night’s rest. The night had been
rainy, and the morning cloudy, with anything but a fair
appearance. AAA started, however, about 7.30 a.m., and
shortly after we left the accommodation house the rain


began again, and the road proved very slippery by reason
of its late drenching. We had to cross the Barrington
four times within four miles. M e went up the bank of
the river, but found the path so exceedingly slippery that
we had to drive the horses before us—we could not lead
them, the track being so very narrow. In going up the
bank after crossing, the black mare slipped and struck
the writer on the ancle with her fore leg, by accident.
The place soon afterwards swelled, and became exceed-
ingly painful ; so much pain and inconvenience did he
suffer from this accident, that he could only walk with
great difficulty; nor was the ancle quite well for two
weeks afterwards. We had to lead the horses along the
most of the ranges. In some places the path was no
wider than a sheep track, and at one place, in particular,
we had to lead only one horse at a time, when a single
slip or false step would have been the death of any of
them—nothing could have saved them from rolling down
into the dangerous gullies beneath. Every time we
crossed the river, the path seemed more dangerous, and
the difficulties wc encountered were very trying to our
patience, and vexatious in the extreme. About 2 p.m.
we crossed the Manning River, and on going up the banks
on the opposite, or north side, the writer was forced to go
upon his hands and feet in order to force himself up.
How the horses managed to get up without accident, is a
puzzle which the writer cannot unravel. The rain still
continued to fall, and we had yet two miles farther to go
before we could halt, and glad were we on arrival at
Andrew’s public-house, where we changed our clothes
and remained for the night. The distance we came to-day
was 22 miles. This part of the road should on no account
be travelled over in wet weather, as the risk of accident
is at such times far too great.
Monday, January 27.—Cloudy morning, with a light
shower which passed off. When about 21, miles beyond
Andrews’ public-house, we unfortunately again took a
wrong road. As we drew near the river, instead of
turning baqk and going up the range, we kept onward.
Both roads lead to the same place ; the one we took
goes past Mr. Rowley’s, and is two miles longer than the
other; but we went fully 5 miles astray. After passing
Mr. Rowley’s woolshed about 2 miles, the Manning
conies into view on the right hand, and then the road
proceeds onward to Cedar Party Creek, and from thence
to Brimbin, where we stayed for the night at the house
of Mr. Bates. Distance travelled to-day, 32 miles.
Tuesday, January 28.—Again, as ill luck would have
it, we lost our path among the many cattle tracks going
to Mr. Cross’ station, only 7 miles distant, and went about
12 miles out of our way. Our road yesterday and to-day
was no more that a bridle-path, in some places so much
overgrown with grass as to be hardly discernable. We
had, however, a comparatively pleasant day, and crossed
over the short cut to Camden Haven by the high range,
instead of the low road which is much longer. After we
got through the brush on the top of the range, we fol-
lowed the latter until we came to the end of it—a distance
of 9 miles; then followed another range 3 miles long,
which brought us to a sawyer’s hut at Camden Haven,
where we remained for the night. Distance travelled
to-day, 30 miles.
Wednesday, January 29.—Showery during the night
and this morning, but it soon cleared up. There was
nothing of importance to note on this our last day of
travel, excepting that we were fortunate enough not to
go astray, and by following closely to the instructions and
directions given us, we made a short cut which saved us
2 miles in the distance to Port Macquarie, where we
arrived at 3 p.m. Distance to-day, 27 miles. We put
up at the Royal Hotel, then kept by Mr. Gibbons.
When we arrived at Port Macquarie, our impression of
the town was very favourable. There were five hotels, as
follows—Royal Hotel, kept by Mr. Gibbons, also other
hotels in Horton-street, kept respectively by Phillips,
Doyle, and Green, and one in Short-street, kept by Colley.
Mr. Halloran was C.P.S., (this gentleman is now Sheriff
of Queensland). He resided at Government House,
which was then in fine order. Only two vessels (schooners)
traded to the Port, viz., “ Elizabeth Cohen,” owned by
Air. Tozer, and the “ Mary Ann,” owned by Mr. Dalton,
of Sydney. The principal storekeepers were—Mr. Tozer,
whose place of business was where the ruins near the
Commercial Hotel, Horton-street, now stand, and Mr,
Cohen, who had his store where Mr. J. Condon now
resides. The roads and streets were then in very bad
order, although the houses and buildings were nearly as
numerous as they are yet. The Post Office was then in a
building, since pulled down, situate in Hay-street, near
where the lock-up is now placed. There were mails then
only once a week, and these were very irregular. Some-
times weeks elapsed without any. The Gaol was then
used only as a lockup. All the Court business of the
Manning and Macleay was transacted in Port Macquarie,
and all trade from and to New England and the
Macleay district passed through it. The Church of
England had as its pastor, the Rev. Mr. Cross, assisted by
Mr. O’Reilly. The Presbyterian Minister was the Rev.
Mr. Purves ; while the Wesleyans had no resident clergy-
man. The medical men wore Dr. Taylor and Dr. Mcln-
tyre ; the latter the father of Messrs. James and
John Mclntyre of this district. Major limes then lived
at his residence near Lake Inncs, and his house and
grounds were, at that time, in very fine order. Colonel
Grey resided at Huntingdon, where Mrs. Lindsay now
lives. Captain Waugh resided on his estate at Wauchope
.—then spelled Waughope. Lieutenant Geary lived at
Goolawa. At this present date all the above gentlemen,
so far as the writer is aware, are dead. Money was very
scarce when the writer first arrived in Port Macquarie,
so much so that it was exceedingly difficult to get change.
Storekeepers almost invariably gave their 1.0.U.’s for
balances coming to the purchasers. These pieces of paper,
although not a legal tender, passed from one to another,
and varied in amount from Is. to 10s. and upwards.
Very few settlers were then on the Hastings _ River, in
fact, the writer can remember only five families, besides
the large landed proprietors. The writer had occasion to
leave Port Macquarie, and returned after an absence of
nineteen years, when he found but little change in the
appearance of the town, or in the number of its buildings.
Time of journey from Wollongong to Port Macquarie,
11 days ; do. Sydney to Port Macquarie, 9 days ; dis-
tance travelled from Sydney, 310 miles; do. from Parra-
matta, 293 miles.
Directions. —In coming from Sydney, or from localities


south or west of that city, Parramatta should be made
the starting place in order to reach W iseman s Ferry.
Other directions are givei in the diary from which the
above notes were taken, but, as they are now long obso-
lete, it is unnecessary to give them.
The foregoing remarks of a journey overland
to Port Macquarie, undertaken so long ago as
the year 1851, cannot but have an interest to
those who are familiar with the present state
of the country passed over. There are many
and great changes during the 32 years that
have elapsed since January, 1851. Places
that were then of little account are now im-
portant, and vice versa. The roads in many
parts of the country traversed, have been
changed, and some of the old tracks improved;
but there are many old people, still living, who
can trace from these notes the road over which
the travellers passed. Doubtless, the many
wrong roads taken would add somewhat to the
difficulty of tracing, but a near approximation
to the road which had then to be travelled
could be arrived at from the elaborate
narrative which the notes compose.
The difficulties and dangers encountered, in a
wild and then comparatively untravelled region,
are graphically and truthfully described, and
although these are now farther remote from
the districts named, they are still common
enough in many parts of the Australian sea-
board, which the Government has hitherto not
considered worthy of improvement, or even
consideration.
BY A LOCAL POET.
Back through the lapse of byegoue years,
Our memory often strays ;
The path by which we came appears
Reflected to our gaze.
The welcome beauty of the flowers
That cheered us as we came ;
The open fields, and shady bowers,
And each refreshing stream.
The thorns and pitfalls that beset
An unknown rugged way ;
The friends and enemies we met
Throughout our youthful day.
The many varied ups and downs,
With oft a fitful turn ;
The kindness, and the angry frowns—
The wrongs and sorrows borne.
Each stage we see, and trace each mile ;
Familiar scenes appear;
Our eyes may brighten with a smile,
Or moisten with a tear.
The bright streaks glisten in the light,
With visions fresh and fair ;
But shadows hang, black as the night,
And painful horrors glare.
Yon tangled wood, that spreads afar,
Conceals a deadly stream ;
We shudder with the thoughts that mar
The beauty of our dream.
We see full many a Christmas spent
In pleasures, mixed with woe ;
And think how hoarded earnings went
Amid the festive show.
Full many a merry Christmas gone,
Our memory bringeth nigh ;
Full maxxy a face, with joyous tone,
And many a weeping eye.
Some good resolves at times we made,
With virtue for our guide ;
Perchance we trod the higher grade,
Yet oft we turned aside.
Etch golden mines we passed unseen ;
Rare chances oft we spurned ;
We think of what we might have been
Had our rash steps been turned.
When dangers gathered on the road,
And drove us to despair ;
Or, when too heavy was our load,
A helping hand was there.
Through that long vista of the past,
Both shame and glory loom ;
Sunshine and shade, from first to last,
Go with us to the tomb.
Lives there a man who looketh back
Upon his past career,
Who sees naught but an even track
Where no dark spots appear.
Port Macquarie, December Ist, 1882.


legacy.
A PORT MACQUARIE LOVE STORY.
BY A LOCAL AUTHOR.
About forty years ago, the writer, who was then a young
man under twenty, happened to be in Port Macquarie
visiting some of his relatives, and spending a portion of
his holidays granted by an educational establishment in
Sydney. At that period a stroll on the beach was fully
as fashionable as it is now, and the numbers of people
that frequented the sea shore, in those days, were greater
than they have been of recent date.
The incidents which the writer is about to relate, hap-
pened in the year 184—. he does not, for family reasons,
state the exact year ; but the month was November, and,
as the facts were noted in his diary at the time, he gives
the following extract from it :—-
“November 12th.—A clear lovely morning without
wind ; the air balmy, soft, and inviting. I accepted the
invitation of the morning, and went for a ramble along
the beach, and passed the Royal Hotel before anyone
was astir. Proceeding toward the roexs, 1 perceived, in
the distance before me, the form of a female, who was
leading a child.
As I approached the two figures, which were walking
very leisurely along among the rocks, 1 observed that the
elder of the two was quite a young girl of sixteen sum-
mers ; that she had a most graceful carriage, and had a
remarkably neat and rounded form. As I walked at a
much faster pace than she did, I soon came to that part
of the beach, where she was, and, as I came near, she
stooped to pick up pebbles. There was a something re-
markable about the girl, and yet 1 knew not what it was,
for I had not yet seen her face.
She was attired in a morning wrapper, and her raven
locks flowed in ringlets over her shoulders, in the custom
and fashion of the period. A feeling within impelled me
to approach, and I did so—pretending to look for pebbles
also. She started and looked me full in the face ; my
eyes met her’s, and a change came over me that I can
never forget.
The countenance that now beamed upon mo was one
of surpassing loveliness ; tlie skin was of alabaster purity,
the features regular, the eyes full, yet mild in expression,
and, taken altogether, no painter could have conceived a
model more lovely than she.
I hesitated to speak, and involuntarily my face blushed
the deepest crimson. My tongue refused its utterance,
for my heart was completely smitten.
The girl, with that quickness of perception which is
common to her sex, noticed my confusion and smiled.
The child that she'was leading looked at me timidly, and
clung nearer to its protector, while I stammered out
“ good morning.'’ A polite, yet diffident, nod greeted my
salute, and I was enabled to speak of the pebbles which
were spread at our feet.
Not a living soul was within sight, and for some time
the girl showed a timidity that I attributed to my being, t
to her, a thorough stranger. I was not so, however, for
she said that she had frequently seen me passing up and
down Horton-street, on my way to and from the beach,
where I was often engaged in the sport of fishing. She
seemed to know all about me, although I had no know-
ledge of ever having seen her.
After some unimportant conversation, during which I
feasted my eyes upon her beauty, and my ears upon her
charming voice ; we sauntered back towards the town,
along the margin of the water. She expressed herself
sorry to have interrupted my walk, but made no particu-
lar effort to have me continue it. I fancied from this
that she was nearly as much taken with me as I was with
her.
Our conversation became more animated as we proceeded,
and I learned from her dear lips that her father’s name
was Puckerbuck.
Ah ! Puckerbuck, thought I—Miss Puckerbuck—and
I mentally added “ ’tis a pity that such an angel should
bear this ugly name.’’ However the title did not cool
my ardour • nor allay the feelings that burned in my
breast, and took entire possession of my soul.
Too soon we reached the girl's home, and, alas ! too
soon our pleasant, and, to me, rapturous interview ended.
In the hurry of parting at the door of the cottage
where the girl lived, I had forgotten to ask for another
interview, and went to my bedroom thinking about Miss
Puckerbuck, and I could scarcely get the name out of my
memory, while the face and form of the girl was ever
present to my imagination. ’
Several days passed, and the impression faded some-
what, for I had not again seen her. But one day I
received a note addressed in a very neat handwriting,
and its contents read thus :
Port Macquarie, 18th November, 184-.
Miss Johnson presents her regards to Mr. Edward - , and
requests the favor of an interview, on the beach, at 3 o clock this
afternoon, if convenient for him.
Miss Johnson ! AVho, in the dickens, thought I, is
this Miss Johnson 1 ?
At the appointed hour I was there, and ray inamor-
soon followed in the same garb that she had on when
first met her.
I asked whether she had written me the note, and I
got an affirmative reply.
In answer to my enquiries as to the name, she expla n h!
that Puckerbuck was her step father’s name, and that
her mother had been twice married—the first husband’s
name being Johnson, whose daughter she was.
I was overjoyed by this explanation, inasmuch as I
vastly preferred the name of Johnson to that of Pucker-
buck.
After proceeding to the ravine on the west of Flagstaff
Hill, we went up the slope from the shore, passed the
windmill, and then down the green slopes on the seaward
side, where, upon a beautiful grassy knoll, we sat down
with the full view of the ocean before us, and B’rd
Island breaking the billows as they rolled onward toward
the shore.
The wind was still, and the surf murmured in gentle
undu’ations as it broke among the rocks.
Miss Johnson—not Miss Puckerbuck —imparted to me
some of her early history, with which I shall now acquaint
the reader, in nearly the girl’s own words.
She began by saying that her father was the son of a
rich London merchant, and that, contrary to his fathtr’s


wishes, he had married her mother in the town of Wan-
tage, Berkshire.
Her mother was, previous to her marriage, a housemaid
in one of the hotels of that town ; but after her marriage
she went to live with her husband in London.
Mr. Johnson, senr., not only withheld his consent from
the marriage, but also withdrew from any communication
with his son, and forbade the latter from visiting the
family mansion.
The elder Mrs. Johnson, the mother cf Miss Johnson's
father, had, at the time of her son's marriage, been dead
about two years, and there were none to take the part
of the younger Mr. Johnson in pleading with his obdu-
rate father.
Mr. Johnson, junr., had previously been a clerk in his
father’s office, and the consequences of the marriage were
a dismissal from the situation, and an entire alienation
from the familv.
The rest of ihis part of my story I give literally as
spoken by Miss Johnson herself, who related as follows;—-
“ My father’s circumstances at this time were of a very
forlorn nature. He had saved out of the salary allowed
him by his father about £BO, and on his arrival in London
with my mother had only about £35 left—having spent
the difference at Wantage, in expenses consequent upon
the marriage with my mother.
With this small sum a furnished room was rented by
the newly-married couple, in East India road, Blackwall,
where apartments were cheaper than in the city.
My father’s next difficulty was to procure a situation
as a clerk, and, after searching about London for several
weeks, was unsuccessful in finding anything to do that
was suitable to his capacity.
He had no references that he could give with any
degree of confidence, and he had also a great deal of diffi-
dence in his disposition.
There was an entire want of “push" in his nature, and
he could do nothing but what he had been used to in the
.outine of his father’s counting-house. In about two
months the money at the command of the young mar-
ried couple had dwindled down to £3, after paying all
bills up to date.
It was on a Saturday night, and everything looked ex-
ceedingly gloomy. •Starvation stared at them in the near
distance, and a resolve was made to pawn such valuables
as they possessed, including my father’s gold watch,
which had been a present from grandfather a year before.
As luck would have it, however, this humiliation was
not necessary, owing to an incident that happened a few
days afterwards.
My father had been walking in Hyde Park, and had
strolled down to the Serpentine, which he crossed by one
of the bridges thrown across that stream.
No sooner had he crossed than he heard a scream
behind him, and looking around saw a child struggling in
the water, and a girl screaming by the side of a deep
pond.
My father instantly ran and plunged into the pond,
and, although the water was very deep, he swam and
saved the child, which turned out to be the infant son of
a bookseller at the West End.
The nurse-girl in charge of the infant had, from some
carelessness, allowed it to drop from hei hands over the
bridge, and then went down to the edge of the water
screaming, but could afford no help to the struggling
child that was nearly drowned before my father reached
it. My father’s clothes were badly soaked, and in a
measure spoiled by the water.
He learned the name of the father of the child, and
went with the nurse to the house of the parents, whose
name was Walker.
Mrs. Walker, after having given directions concerning
a change of dress for her baby, and getting somewhat less
excited than she was at first, asked my father whether
he would accept the price of a new suit of clothes for his
kindness and humanity in saving the life of her darling
boy.
My father’s pride was touched, and instead of accepting
the gracious offer, requested to be furnished immediately
with a change of dry clothes, which he would return on
the next day.
These were at once furnished, and my father tied up his
wet suit in a cloth furnished for this purpose by the
child's mother.
My father then took his leave of Mrs. Walker, and
left his address at the request of that lady.
The borrowed clothes were duly returned the next day,
and my father returned home as usual by tea time, and
remained during the evening with the same gloomy fore-
bodings as on previous occasions.
Soon after tea, however, a postman’s knock aroused
him from his reveries, and, on the landlady opening the
door, my father heard his name pronounced. This proved
to be a letter from Mr. Walker, asking an interview on
the morrow with my father, as early after breakfast as
he could find it convenient.
My father lost no time on the following day to make
the acquaintance of Mr. Walker, at that gentleman .s
shop in Regent-street, about 10 o’clock in the forenoon.
Mr. Walker was writing at his desk when my father
called; but immediately that he was informed of the name
of his visitor he beckoned my father into a private room,
when the following conversation ensued.
Mr. Walker began by thanking my father for saving
the life of his only child, and asked what service he could
render in return, that would be acceptable.
Upon this my father related the position in which he
was placed, and also the circumstances that led to it. at
which Mr. Walker was very much affected, and promise I
to stand his friend ; and begged my father in the mean-
time to accept a cheque for £lO, to meet present expenses,
and to call that day week if he heard nothing from him
in the meantime.
It is needless to say that my father was only too glad
to accept the cheque, and got it cashed at the Bank
forthwith.
Several days passed in the hope that a letter would
come from Mr. Walker, but none came until the week
had passed, and my father again visited the shop of that
gentleman.
As before, my father was beckoned into the private room,
and was informed by Mr. Walker, that the latter had
seen my grandfather, on my father’s account, but was
sorry to say that the old gentleman was obdurate in the
position he had taken, and all Mr. Walker’s pleading,
on my father’s behalf, was of no avail. “ But,” he added,


12’ john Johnson’s legacy.
“I have managed to secure for you a situation in a wound up lie also stat^ 1 ”
merchant’s office in New York, at £300 a year , and u,ita\ma > e to
shall with pleasure supply you with the funds necessaiy
to proceed thither, if you are agreeable. The situation
is sure, and would be permanent \ but yon
consult Mrs. Johnson, for which
you two days, and, I’"'
that you sh^” 1 ’
wound up. Tie also stated that the executors were very
unfavorable to him.
Nothing more was heard of my father for four months,
and, at the end of that period, my mother wrote to Mr.
Walker to enquire what had become of my father, as he
had not returned any answers to the many letters which
she had written to him. It was nearly a month before
an answer came from Air. Walker, and io ran as follows:
“ I have managed to secure for you a situation in a
merchant’s office in New York, at £3OO a year , and
shall with pleasure supply you with the funds necessary
to proceed thither, if you are agreeable. The situation
is sure, and would be permanent ] but you had bettci
consult Mrs. Johnson, for which purpose I shall allow
vou two days, and, I may add, that I think it advisable
that you should accept of this chance.”
At the end of the two days my father of the
position offered, and in two days more he, with my
mother, sailed from Liverpool for the future scene of his
labour.
lie found all things to his mind upon his arrival in
America; settled down to his work comfortably, and
rented a house in the suburb of Brooklyn, where rents
were much lower than in the crowded thoroughfares
of the city.
Within a year afterwards I was born, so that you see
I am an American girl, a fact of which, I presume, you
were not previously aware. The years passed pleasantly
enough until I had attained to about 11 years of age.
I had been kept constantly at school, and I had for
two years previously attendeda high class female seminary,
and at the time of which I speak, had advanced to the
higher branches of an American lady’s education. I hat
is, I could play nicely upon the piano, work embroidery,
read French and German, write well, had a fair
knowledge of English grammar, and the more common
branches of an English education ; being assisted greatly
by nay father, who was well educated. At this period,
my father received a letter from Mr. \v alker, which
read as follows.
Ijoudon, 6th May, 18—
My Dear Sir, —I write in haste to inform you that your father
died on the 30th ultimo, and was buried yesterday. I understand
that, although he neglected you during his lifetime, he did not do
so at his death. He has left you a for a considerable
amount, together with, all his real estate, which I am informed is
very considerable. It will now be necessary that you should im-
mediately return to London in order to look afttr your interest
in this matter.
Yours very faithfully,
George A. Walker.
Upon the receipt of this letter, my father went imme-
diately to the office of his employers, and, handing them
the letter, asked for the necessary leave of absence, which
was granted at once.
VV CbO cti-l C Aj\J ULIVU.
Preparations were then made for my father leaving
by the next steamer for Liverpool, and he sailed on
the morrow with sufficient funds to keep him in London
for three months, if necessary, and also enough to bring
him back to New York. The savings from my fathers
salary had accumulated to a considerable sum during the
twelve years that he had been in America, and my
mother was, consequently, well provided for during his
absence in England.
Three weeks passed without hearing from my father ;
but during the fourth week a letter came announcing his
safe arrival, and also the fact that the money left him
amounted to £lOOO only, but that the real estate was,
at least, worth about £2500 more. The total value of
real and personal property left by the will was sworn
under £50,000 ; but the great bulk of it had been devised
to various charitable institutions, and he believed that a
considerable time would elasep before the estate could be
London, 15th OctoUr, 18 —,
Dear Madam, —I duly received your letter, and lam deeply
grieved to have to inform you that your husband, Mr. Johnson,
has fallen into very dissipated habits consequent upon his receiv-
ing £5OO, in cash, from the executors, upon the express condition
that another £lOOO, to be paid at the end of two years, will satisfy
him in all demands against the estate, and to give a release to
that effect to the executors upon the latter sum being paid to him
or to his heirs. He made this foolish arrangement under the in-
fluence of liquor, and has continued more or less tipsy ever since.
I am really sorry for you, and would do anything in my power to
help you ; but really Xdo not know how to advise you—the case
from my point of view seems so difficult as well as distressing. I
hope you will write me again expressing your wishes ; but, at
present, X cannot do anything with your husband, and he now
lives at a disreputable ‘house in the Commercial Road, always
more or less under the influence of liquor.
Your sincere friend,
George A. Walker.
Upon receipt of this distressing intelligence, ray mother
gave way to great grief, and one of the first things which
she did, was to take me from school, and then make
arrangements for proceeding to England. Everything
was sold off’ that could be converted into cash; and
before a week had elapsed, we were on the way to
England.
Lwas the only child, and ray mother left New York
without regret, as she had never liked the ways of the
people, and always kept harping about her English home.
Not so with me; for I knew no other home than
America, and I was extremely sorry to leave it.
Wheji the thin dark line of my native land faded
from my view, on the western horizon, I burst into
tears and prayed to God for protection ; for I had little
hope of liking England, as the specimens of English men
and English women that I had seen in America, were
anything but pleasant in my sight ; in fact I absolutely
hated them and everything English. I was yet of tender
years, but my hatred was intense.
Our voyage soon came to an end, and we were landed
upon the shores of misty, rainy, windy, England ; and
were glad to get lodgings in the first respectable looking
inn we could find.
These inns are very different in arrangements to
American hotels, and, although more c- they r- not
nearly so convenient, nor so clean usly
furnished.
The next day we proceeded to London, and obtained
apartments in a family hotel, similar to the one we had
left in Liverpool \ but as I have now to detail to you
several distressing episodes that change the nature of my
narrative, I will defer further particulars until we next
meet. Shall we now return home.”
Miss Johnson arose from her seat, and proceeded a few
yards, when I followed and offered her my arm, for the
first time, which she accepted with a ready grace that
enhanced her charms of person and manner, which, I
already felt, had taken possession of my whole being.


john Johnson’s legacy. 13
Neither of us spoke much in our homeward journey, son’s story, I turned my face towards the town, and in
each was busy with inward thoughts that remained un- the distance I beheld that lady coming slowly towards
uttered ; but which were only kept back for a more me, and she was alone.
fitting opportunity. She wore the same white wrapper, and it was easy to
We reached the cottage, where Miss Johnson resided, distinguish her unaltered appearance in the distance, for
as the shades of evening began to close, and just as she had a noble carriage peculiar to herself, although her
Yenus was beginning to be visible, amid the faint tracings features were not yet discernable.
■ of the reflection of the departed sun. I bounded down the slope with that ecstatic joy which
A good night, and warm shake of the hand were all only lovers can feel. I selected the greenest, softest,
that passed between us, as we separated for the night. cosiest, snuggest, and most protected spot I could find,
On rny way homeward a coarse looking man approach- and when 1 had succeeded in this, Miss Johnson joined
ed me, and said in a husky voice “ Say, mister, what d’ye me, and in a moment more we were seated,
want with that ere girl 1 I’ve seen ye a walkin’ wilier, “ My dear Edward,” she began, “ I was anxious to finish
an’ keepin’ o’ her out o’ tha’ ouse wen she should be at the narration which 1 partly related when last we met, and
’ome workin’. I want to know what yer intenshans as I have learned Ihit you are about to start for Sydney,
are i I shall try to finish it before we again separate, perhaps
I told the fellow to mind his own business, and en- for ever, or perhaps not, but as time and chance may de-
deavoured to pass on ; but he darted at me with the termine.
ferocity of a tiger, and clutched me by the throat with I interrupted her by saying that it would not be for
an iron "rasp. ever, if anything in my power could be done to prevent
The suddenness of the attack, and the novel position so sad a termination to our acquaintance, which, although
in which I was placed, unnerved me at first, but only short, had ripened into sincere attachment on my part,
for a moment, and a strength, most unusual to me, enabled She blushed deeply, but smiled, and I felt her elbow remon-
me to extricate myself from his clutches. strate gently by a slight push at my side.
A fierce attack followed on the part of the man, and a “ Well now to continue my story,” said Ada, for by
pugilistic encounter was the result. A few well dealt that name I shall now call her, “ I have already told you
blows, which I was fortunate enough to give him, brought most of the incidents that happened until the arrival of
the fellow to his senses ; for I could perceive that he my mother and myself in London.
was well gone with liquor. My mother lost no time in calling upon, Mr. Walker,
I got home without more molestation, and was glad and he generously went with her to the house where my
that the fight was not observed by any one that I mother was lodging.
p liew> Upon being admitted they were shown into a parlor,
CHAPTER II poorly furnished, and which bespoke little care in the
labour bestowed upon its appearance. It was dark and
Many a day passed, and many a walk I took along dingy, and the furniture gave every sign of age, if not of
the sea beach, and through the lover’s walk, glebe, road, respectability.
and other sequestered and lovely promenades, in of After sitting a few minutes, an elderly woman entered
seeing Miss Johnson, but they were fruitless searches. the room, and enquired the business of the visitors.
Many a time I passed the cottage where she resided, but Mr. Walker stated that he had come to visit,Mr. John
she was not to be seen. Johnson, and that he had brought Mrs. Johnson, who had
Time passed uneasily, and, at last, only a few days just arrived from America, to see her husband,
intervened until the time when it would be neccessary for The matron stated that she had no objections to any-
me to return to Sydney. _ _ one seeing him, for, in her opinion, Mr. Johnson had not
One day as I was sauntering about in front of my long to live, and was already speechless. He had not
lodgings, a boy gave me a letter which I opened and spoken to any one since the day previous, and would
read as follows : — _ probably die before the close of the present day. Mr.
Tuesday Morning. Walker asked whether he had been attended by any
My Dear Edward,—I shall meet you at 3 o’clock tins afternoon , /
in-the same place, near the Windmill, where we sat cm the occl medical man, and the woman answered that he had not.
m -3'n;u:ceytc A , . She stated that his funds had dwindled away, and she
. o a common name, thought I and did not want to incur an expense which she might have
' ;>'ran gem cuts for the interview, as to (^e^ra y herself.
-,■<> o’clock, and I had partaker of O Mr. Walker then proposed that my mother should ac-
m miy meal. V .. .iL_—- company the woman to the bedroom of my father, and in
I was soon on my way up Clarence-street, and passed the meantime he would seek medical assistance,
the massive gaol and other Cov unen + buildings with Mr. Walker then left the house, and my mother went
out so much as noticing them, so much -mummed were upstairs with the woman.
mv thoughts on the expected interview. ° They entered a dark and miserably furnished apart-
Lot only was I interested in Miss Johnson’s story for ment, where, upon a dilapidated bedstead, was placed an
its own sake, but I had an intensely increased interest hi apology for a matresa, lay my father in an apparently
the bearing it had upon one whom I now felt would some ( unconscious state. His eyes were _ wide open, staring
day oe my wife. wildly, and his whole frame was trembling in the paroxysms
When I arrived on the top of the slope where we had I ot ' a disease called delirium tremens, brought on by ex-
| sat during the narration of the former mart nr Miss Jnlr cessive drinking. My father was so far gone that he did


jm
v.;,* oay, ■ : y n-e <
and Inxurio
I : _
ors largely gave
-ific waters lave,
very side,
lowing pride.
'■ant west,
nquil rest,
■dthgold.
'qreen,
j
not recognise my mother, and she entered into a conver-
sation with the woman, but could get no direct answer
to her questions.
One thing was certain, however, to my mother’s
thoughts; her husband was there stretched upon his
deathbed, and that any money he had possessed was in
the hands of that old beldame, who now stood before her
the very image of guilt, and, as she imagined, the cause
of my father's ruin.
A noise was now heard below, and in a short time Mr.
Walker, with two medical men, accompanied by three
policemen, entered the apartment.
The medical men'examined my father, but pronounced
the saving of his life to be hopeless.
My mother expressed herself as anxious to have my
father removed to some other house, and Mr. Walker
generously offered to receive him into his own. A cab
was then called, and my father was placed as comfortably
in it as circumstances would permit.
In a short time a comfortable bed was prepared for my
father’s reception in one of Mr. Walker’s best apart-
ments, and he had every attention ; but his vital
powers were too far exhausted, and he died on the fol-
lowing day, without ever coming to a consciousness suf-
ficient to recognise any one around him.
Preparations were then made for the funeral, the ex-
penses of which my mother and Mr. Walker contributed
for jointly. He was buried at Wantage, in the family
burying ground of my mother’s family.
I attended the funeral, but had taken no part in
the previous proceedings, and was not permitted to see
my father until I saw his corpse.
The grief I felt was very great, and I took it so much
to heart that I could find no consolation but in reading
from the Bible such passages as bore upon my great
affliction.
My father had always been very kind to me, and I
had always looked up to him with every feeling of fil-
ial regard.
My hopes seemed to me to be now blasted for life. I
had no protector, save my mother, and in her I felt, for
several reasons, that I would now be but poorly provided
for.
My mother had about £4OO left, and with this sum
she determined to proceed at once to Australia.
In a week more, my mother and I embarked at
Plymouth, for Sydney, and after a long passage we arri-
ved at that city.
During the voyage my mother became acquainted with
a fellow passenger named Puckerbuck, now my step father,
who married my mother shortly after her arrival in
Sydney, and this man is the same that fought with you on
the evening of our last meeting. He is a bad husband,
and a bad man ; but you see he is my step-father, and he
is the father of my dear little step-brother, whom you
saw me leading on the day we first met.
We stayed but a few years in Sydney, and came on to
Port Macquarie a year ago.
Mr. Puckerbuck follows such labouring work as he can
get, and my mother takes in sewing.
Since we left England, ray mother received a letter
from Mr. Walker, stating that the £lOOO, which was to
be paid to my father in two years, would be paid to me,
when I became of legal age ; and that my father had,
before he took to his bed, made a will to that effect in the
event of ray mother marrying again. This is the reason
why Mr. Puckerbuck watches so carefully over me.
I have now concluded the early history of my life, and
I do trust, my dear Edward, that you do not think the
worse of me on account of my strange antecedents.”
“ Oh ! certainly not, my dear Ada,” I replied, “on the
contrary, I rather love you the more; for you have had
a history abounding in events that must have moulded
your nature into a strength that is out of proportion with
your years, and I am happy to perceive that through all
the vicissitudes which you have passed, you have preserved'
your character untainted by accidental vice, and have
received and preserved an education worthy of the best
j lady in the colony.”
After a few hours further conversation, of a nature
only known to lovers, we again returned home without
I incident or accident.
On the morning of the day on which I sailed for Sydney,
Ada and I pledged our troth, and since then vve have be-
come man and wife.
We received the £lOOO balance of John Johnson’s
legacy ; we have several children, and Ada still lives.
Our home is not at a great distance from Port Mac-
quarie, and two of our sons are engaged in certain profit-
able pursuits in the district.
John Johnson’s legacy was the cause of his death, by
leading him into dissipated habits ; and also the indirect
cause of my being blessed with a good and noble wife, who
is an ornament to her sex, and, having passed through an
eventful life, has become nerved to meet any change of
circumstances, and to act creditably under all conditions
and changes.
She is among the first to help the needy, with services
or gifts. She is forward in every good work, and has
brought up a family to love and respect her, in spite of
the many contrary examples by which she and they are
surrounded.
John Johnson received a legacy that killed him ; but
he has left a legacy named “Ada” who is worth the
largest money bequest, that ever deviser could bestow.
The beach and the Windmill Hill at Port Macquarie,
must ever have a place in our minds, as the scenes of my
early love with Ada; and the town itself, being the birth
place of our children, must ever be prominent among
life’s incidents, when we cast a retrospective glance over
the varied past.
Wiunuari'- S taLriT
By a Lady.
Mature, withfree and liberal hand, her favors largely gave
To thee, fair spot, upon whose shores, Pacific waters lave.
To fully paint each lovely view, obtained on every side, _
Would take an artist’s able skill, a patriot s glowing pride.
The chain of mountains as they rise, far in the distant west,
Tinged by the evening setting sun in calm and tranquil rest,
Send to the eye a beauty rare, as we the scene behold ,
Their cloud clad tops seem mantled o’er with crimson and with gold.
The sloping hills, when richly clothed in spring’s bright vernal green,
A picture form, to realise must by the eye be seen.
The ocean, as it stretches far, a never-ending sight,
Along thy coast its waves break high in crests of snowy white.


Thy harbour too—a shelter gives to vessels from the storm ;
As well as adding to the grace and beauty of thy form.
As blending with the Hastings tide its waters onward go—
Winding along its course it keeps an ever constant flow.
All, all these gifts from Nature’s hand, enchantment to thee give;
No human soul can but admire such beauties while they live.
It were a frozen mind indeed—a heart as hard as stone,
That could not warm to such a scene, kindled by it alone.
But ah ! decaying time has left its mark on works of man ;
We must exclaim as we explore, and thy old buildings scan.
Some that were built in years gone by, their owners passed away,
Have served the purpose of their time, now crumble to decay.
The ancient windmill by the sea, so shattered and forlorn ;
Has borne the force of many a gale, and weathered many a storm.
Conspicuous is the place it holds, as round the view ’tis ranged ;
If it were gone it would appear as if the Port had changed.
The flagstaff, from its lofty point, has many a signal given
To vessels as they gently sail, or when by tempest driven.
Has spoken by its waving flags, and warned of dangers nigh,
And guided to its sheltered port the vessels storms defy.
The dear old Church upon the hill, what holy memories cling
Around its sacred courts, from thence a hallowed radiance fling.
How oft within its walls is heard the Gospel's joyful sound ;
How many worshippers have knelt upon its holy ground.
But why need mention one by one when all we gaze on here—
When every spot with interest glows we view from far or near.
And may this happy Christinas time o’er all its blessing shed ;
May peace on earth —goodwill to men, its widest influence spread.
December Ist, 1882.
Py Jirsit pralkctiausi gflrt Pacpam.
Tins is a season of the year peculiarly suitable for a
retrospect of the past, I shall therefore crave a small
space in your Christmas Number of the Port Macquarie
News (the first paper ever published in Port) convey
to your readers my first recollections and impression of
this enchanting spot. I shall give no names or dates,
but it is a long time ago, suffice it to say that, on a
lovely summer afternoon, after a ride of about twenty-
four miles, in company of two friends, I got the first
view of Port Macquarie from the hill beyond Mr. Pount-
ney’s residence. (There was no Mr. Pountney there
then). I shall never forget the thrill of delight I had on
that occasion, as I looked at the grand Pacific breaking
in snowy wavelets upon the silvery sands of the beach,
with the delightful little town in the foreground. I
thought of Mahomed’s resolve when, from the top of a
high hill on his way to Damascus, he first beheld the
magical scenery in and around that city ; he suddenly
stopped on his journey, saying to his fellow travellers
that there was only one paradise designed for man, and
he was resolved not to take his in this woi’ld ; but not
being actuated by the same pious reflections as the pro-
phet of Mecca, and feeling somewhat dubious as to my
chance of getting into any other paradise, I resolved to
take the first opportunity that presented itself, and
experience what a paradise really was. I can vouch for
my two companions being of one mind with myself in
this excusable curiosity, so we proceeded towards the
town. We were not long before we began to realise the
truth of the adage that “ Distance lends enchantment to
the view, for on entering the town we found that some
of the buildings, which looked so imposing and stately at
a distance, were nothing but huge misshapen masses of
brickwork, large enough for the city of London, and
rapidly going to decay. With feelings of regret and
indignation at the apathy of the residents, in allowing
this beautiful spot, upon which nature had lavished so
many of her best gifts, to become almost like Goldsmith’s
“Deserted Village,” we wended our way to the “Royal,”
where we met with the utmost attention, and partook of
an excellent dinner; after which, the afternoon being
long, we took a stroll through the place, but could not
get rid of the feeling of regret as we passed now and
then some tumbling down hovel. These desolate tene-
ments began to appear in greater numbers. Groups, all
of the same pattern, evidently designed by the same
architect, and all suffering from the tooth of “ Father
Timewhile here and there these mouldering hovels
were fronted with scraps of gardens protected by pali-
sades, behind which a few sickly geraniums and
fuschias were struggling to bloom amid a
thicket of weeds. All this looked unutterably woe-
begone and miserable, but these feelings were soon so be
dsssipated by the prospect before us as we approached the
old Windmill and gazed fondly upon the “Deep and
dark blue ocean.” There was not a breath to ruffle its
placid surface, but notwithstanding its apparent calmness,
it sent up showers of spray about the brows of the rug-
ged masses of rock that guard the easteiii side of the
town. The scene was really beautiful, and indeed, I
believe there are few places in Australia more romantic
and picturesque than this spot. The high land, rifted
with a multitude of gaping chasms, and covered with a
bright mantle of many tinted foliage; the ever restless
sea, tossing fretfully on the time-worn rock, advancing
with a triumphant roar, and anon retreating with a
mutter of baffled anger ; the glorious sun sending his
golden glances through the spray, and sprinkling splen-
dours on the venerable hills; the old Windmill on the
green hill, and the tiny cottages dimly seen at a distance
through these bits of rural beauty, backed up by distant
ranges of very high mountains, whose dim peaks rose up
against the cloudless sky, made up the most lovely pic-
ture that could be imagined.
The foregoing remarks are drawn from the recollections
of many years ago. The beautiful scenery ; the refresh-
ing springs of pellucid water; the distant mountains ;
the sea-beaten shore ] the salubrious climate; are still
the same, and even the old Windmill is still in the same
place, but sad to say in the last throes of consumption.
How much longer it may serve as the best land-mark on
the coast is a question for the Marine Board to decide.
But, turn we now to the social and material progress
that has been affected in later years in and around Port
Macquarie.
At the time of which I have written above, there was
no telegraph line to the Port, and the roads to and from
it north, south, and west, were in a very primitive con-
dition ; there were few vineyards planted, and few indus-
tries of any kind were being pursued ; but what a great
change a few years have effected. Instead of the break-
neck roads of a few years ago, our roads will now bear
favourable comparison with those of any part of the


colony. The primeval forests for miles round have been
turned into luxuriant and profitable vineyards, support-
ing many happy and highly respectable families. Ihe
tumble-down buildings of old have, in many instances,
given place to neat trim looking buildings, but a great
deal yet remains to be done in this direction before we
can efface the traces of decay into which the town has
been allowed to fall. A few bushels of lime, a white-
wash brush, and more employment for Mr. Carney, would
effect a wonderful improvement in the appearance of the
town. But lam digressing. The telegraph lias been in
operation for years, and our new post office would not
disgrace any country town in the colony. A bank has
been established in our midst. Our hotels are large,
commodious, and well conducted ; and two of our churches
are even rather large for their congregations. We
have also a public school, conducted by an efficient stafi
of teachers. We possess good wharf accommodation, and
fish of every description to be caught in abundance at our
very doors; and last, though certainly not the least, the
advent of the Port Macquarie News, upon the respecta-
bility of which 1 beg sincerely to congratulate you. May
it have a long and prosperous career. All these taken
together indicate social and material progress; in fact we
possess advantages which ought to make us a happy and
prosperous community. Bet us therefore endeavour to
banish all petty spites and jealousies, and co-operate with
each other in the furtherance of any object which pro-
motes the public weal, or which may more immediately
tend to our own mutual benefit.
XMAS.
intetrtw of fort "#ti«p«rio.
An annual, such as the Christmas number of the Port
Macquarie News, would not be complete without an
article bearing upon the industries of the district, and we
will endeavour to give such statistical information concern-
ing them as has come to our knowledge. The timber
trade is probably the most important, and when we state
that a dozen coasting vessels are regularly employed in
conveying cargoes of 'log and sawn timber from
Port Macquarie to Sydney, the large importance of this
industry to the port and district can readily be conceived.
The “ Hamilton Saw Mills,” which belong to Messrs.
Hibbard and Haines, are the largest of the kind, north
of Sydney, and until the mills on the Mary river, in
Queensland, are reached. At this mill, which is situate
upon the Hastings river, 3 miles from Port Macquarie by
road, and 5 miles by the course of the river, there are
over 30 men employed ; and the large quantity of 45,000
feet of sawn hardwood is turned out per week. The
varieties of the timber sawn are —blue, and flooded gum,
blackbutt, tallow wood, aid colonial mahogany ; which
are manufactured in all the styles of flooring, weather-
boarding, scantling, Ac., required for the Sydney market,
There is attached to the engine of the mill, a planing
machine, which produces the tongues and grooves as well
as the ordinary planing and moulding. A steam power
cross cutting machine has lately been added, and this,
with a steam saw sharpening machine also attached to the
engine, make the auxiliary appliances very complete.
There are in fact, in connection with this mill, all the
requisites necessary for the manufacture of such kinds of
hardwood timber as can be sawn for the varied uses to
which this material can be put. The mill has been at
work over four years, and its various buildings are ex-
tensive. The works comprise—two steam engines of 20
horse power each, three circular saws, and two vertical
frame saws. There are 16 comfortable habitations for
the men, while the number of buildings is over twenty.
A steam punt is being built, and now nearly finished, on
the premises near the river bank and close to the mill,
which will be 65 feet long with 20 feet beam, and 4 feet
6 inches depth of hold. This punt is calculated to carry
16,000 superficial feet of logs from the upper tributaries
each trip ; and the future trade may be estimated when
such an additional carrying capacity is necessary. As
we have said, the mill site is 5 miles, by the course of the
river, above the Port ; and is also 12 miles below the junc-
tion of the Maria and Wilson. The site is elevated 12
feet above the level of the river Hastings, which is here
very wide, and the depth close to the bank is 12 feet.
The premises arc never flooded, and it is in contemplation
to erect thereon suitable wharves and other improvements.
In addition to the steam punt, there is also on the premises
a large new schooner being built and about half completed,
which is intended to be at once placed in the timber
carrying trade to Sydney. Messrs. Hibbard and Haines
also own a schooner of 62 tons register, and part of a
ketch of 35 tons. In addition to that manufactured and
shipped by the above firm, there is also a large quantity
of timber taken from Port Macquarie, on private account,
by vessels which proceed up the Wilson and the Maria,
as well as the Hastings, for that purpose; but in these
cases the timber is chiefly in the squared log—cedar and
other sbft woods being added to the list.
The Vine industry comes nextin order, and its exte nt may
be estimated by the following facts, viz. —There are over
thirty vinegrowers, with cultivated land under grapevines
ranging from one up to seven acres each. The whole
give a total of over 100 acres under grapevine crop, at
the present time. In addition to the above, large areas
are being prepared for the reception of vines, and, doubt-
less, another year will show a very large per centage of
increase. The larger growers manufacture wine for
export, and one of them, Mr. Geo. Francis, received for
his “ Isabella” grape wine, a bronze medal at the recent
Bordeaux Exhibition. The climate of Port Macquarie
which is more moist than in most parts of Australia, is
very favourable to the grape vine, and the rich chocolate,
and red friable soil of the district, is very suitable for the
rapid growth and strength of the plant, especially such
varieties as are used for the making of wine, and this in-
dustry having these extra and peculiar advantages to an
important extent in this district, must in time increase
to very large proportions. We are credibly informed
that the first vines for wine making in this district were
planted at Hamilton, on the Hastings River, about the
year 1835, and that the vines then selected were part of
the original Busby collection. This vineyard was highly
cultivated, and produced large crops up to the year 1870;
but, from soni-e cause which we have not ascertained, that
vineyard has been of late much less remunerative. The


next vineyard in importance, and the largest ever planted
here, was that known as “ Clifton.” The area of this
vineyard was 11 acres, and it was planted about the year
1840 by a Mr. Stokes, who, if we are correctly informed,
imported at that time, from America the now celebrated
“ Isabella ” vine. Some of the oldest inhabitants well
remember the first Isabella vine planted in the district of
Port Macquarie, at a place now known as Mrs. J.
Wallace’s, and formerly the residence of Mr. Stokes. This
vineyard was destroyed by bush fires about 7 or 8 years
ago. The late Major Innes was the next to cultivate the
vine on his Lake Innes Estate ; but all these early at-
tempts at the cultivation of grape vines in this district,
were in a measure neglected, and in some cases abandoned,
about the year 1851, when gold was first discovered in
Australia. Between the years '-IB6o' and 1870, several
new vineyard planting attempts were made in the district,
chiefly with the “ Isabella ” vine, which was then culti-
vated with much success ; and from that time to the
present, vinegrowing has been one of the principal indus-
tries of the district, and also one of the most profitable.
It may be noted that the most successful vinegrowers have
planted on the chocolate soil, which by many is considered
best for vine culture ; but we see many tine vineyards
upon the common red soil, as well as on all the soils of the
district, and hear no complaints of bad crops. The modes
of cultivation adopted in this district are various ; and the
pruning is on the espalier system, as the old “ gooseberry
bush ” plan is found not to suit the Isabella vine. 500
gallons per acre is considered a fair average crop; but, in
exceptional cases, 1,300 gallons of wine have been made
from one acre of vines. The 100 acres planted within a
radius of 20 miles from Port Macquarie, have produced
wines that bear a good reputation in Sydney ; and let us
hope that continued prosperity may attend the vine-
growers of the district ; and that the folly of enacting laws
to cripple this industry, may cease with the- present
government. The quantity of wine produced in this dis-
trict does not average less than 50,000 gallons annually, and
this average will doubtless very largely increase in future
years - if .we may judge by the activity at present going on
in the planting of new vineyards.
Farming pursuits are also largely followed on the
Hastings, and other localities of the district; and the ex-
ports from Port Macquarie to Sydney, of maize, fowls,
eggs, hides, pigs, ic., every week per steamer, are very
considerable.
Port Macquarie is well adapted for extensive and pro-
fitable fisheries upon its numerous beaches, channels, and
sand banks; and it may be considered certain that these
will be established at no distant date, —especially if more
liberal laws should supplant the present obnoxious
Fisheries Act of 1881.
This fine harbour, which is in south latitude 31degs.
36mins. and in east longitude 152degs. 56mins., was one
of the first discovered in New South \\ r ales, north of Port
Jackson, from which it is distant about 180 miles by sea. In
approaching the Port from the east, or north, there are no
hidden dangers of any kind, and the sea is perfectly open.
From the south it is also easily approached by keeping to
the east of Bird Island, which is a large rock 300 yards
from the shore, and looms high above the surrounding
waves. The bar is sufficiently wide and deep for the
usual coasting craft that trade to the Port from Sydney,
and these have a tonnage of from 220 tons down to 35.
The depth of water on the bar at high tide is 10 feet, and
at low tide 6|- feet. Like most of the harbours on this
coast, the bar is of sand, with an entire beach of sand on
the north, and rocks on the south, which are altogether
clear of the channel. When a vessel is once over this
bar, which is not more than 30 yards in length, the calm
and deep waters of the harbour are reached, where vessels
can anchor with safety. The wharves of the town are
about a quarter of a mile farther up, and 041 the southern
shore of the Port, opposite the town, whose
principal street abuts upon them, and is 10
feet above high-water mark. From these wharves
the basin branches into several arms, one having a sharp
angle to the south, and which receives the surplus waters
of a large fresh water lagoon. This arm follows the
course of the principal street of the town —in places quite
close to some of the houses. The chief channel, through
which flows the river Hastings, stretches away to the
north for about two miles, and then turns south-westerly
round a point of land, and back again, as the Hastings is
ascended, to within half a mile of the waters of the
harbour. The dividing promontory, or spit, is very low
and level, and covered with various kinds -of timber and
grass. On this promontory is situate “ Settlement Farm”
which is to some extent cultivated, and has in its sur-
roundings a number of enclosed grazing paddocks. Other
channels of smaller consequence branch northwards from
the wharves, and these are divided by extensive sand
banks, visible at low water, upon which innumer-
able sea fowls assemble. These channels, banks,
and beaches afford the best sites for fisheries
on the coast, as the entire harbour is literally
alive with fish of many varieties ; and of which the fol-
lowing list may give an idea of the several edible kinds,
viz. : —Schnapper, bream, three kinds, mullet, tiro kinds,
rock cod, whiting, flathead, jew-fish, pike, tailor, trumpet-
er, blackfish, guardfish, sole, salmon, lobster, crayfish, and
others ; besides these there are numbers of stingrays, sharks,
and other fishes which are caught, but not used for any
purpose ; although certain marketable products could be
manufactured from them, especially from sharks, which
yield a valuable oil. Schools of grampi also enter the
harbour, and during the months from October to February,
not inclusively, the harbour teems with colonial salmon,
which afford fine sport in spearing them, and in this use-
ful pastime, young and old engage with much zest and
gusto. In some seasons the salmon are more abundant
than in others; but in all years they are more or less
numerous within the harbour, as they resort to its more
shallow and quiet waters to spawn. This well-sheltered
natural harbour could be very easily improved by deepen-
ing the several channels, as all these have sandy and in
places muddy bottoms. There are no rocks to blast, and
the clearness of the water gives evidence that when once
properly dredged, the channelswould re main good for a very
long time. At present there are the remains of a sunken
steamer on the bar, which is a great obstacle to present


Ne Oblie, steamer
220
tons
Colleen Dhas, brigantine ...
103
9 9
C. Walker do.
88
99
Hastings, schooner
88
9 9
Summer Rose, brigantine ...
83
9 »
Lansdowue, ketch
... S'!
9 9
The Queen, schooner
72
9 9
Victoria do.
65
9 9
Empress of India, do.
62
99
Prince Alfred, ketch
56
9 9
Wonga Wonga, do.
37
9 9
Emily Ann do.
35
9 9
navigation ; but it is hoped that this impediment will soon he
removed, and the channel across the bax’ deepened so that
vessels drawing 14 feet may pass the bar in safety. This
wreck, being in the way, has caused the channel to be a
little more toi’tuous and less deep, although, even now, the
ordinary coasters pass inward and outward without much
trouble. That this Port lias just claims upon the
Covex’nmexxt for help in making it wliat it should be,
there is not a shadow of a doubt; and the fact of the
Cabinet Minister, whose duty it is to see aftex such things,
allowing this wreck to remain unremoved, proves great
carelessness and neglect on his part. The following is a
list of the vessels at present trading between Port Mac-
quarie and Sydney, viz. : —-
These figures give a total of 990 tons of coasting ves*
sells trading with Sydney, and another new schooner has
just been built on the Hastings, 3 miles from Port Mac-
quarie, by Messrs. Hibbard aud Haines, which, when
launched, will bring the total tonnage of the shipping, in
this trade, considerably over 1000, x'egistered. There is a
steam drogher continuously employed in bringing timber
to the harbour for shipment, and also a steam-tug for
towing and general harbour purposes, which is always
engaged in soxne kind of business connected with the port.
The imports, which chiefly arrive by the steamer “Ne
Oblie” once a week, are general merchandise, and the
exports are sawn and log timber, colonial wine, and farm
pi'oduce of all the usual kinds. These exports are vex*y
considerable, as appear by the fact that 12 vessels are now in
the continuous trade of the Port, axxd other’s ai’e also being
built in view of its rapid incx’ease. Tixxxber is the prin-
cipal article of trade at presexxt, axxd the sailing vessels
receive a large portion of their loading up the magnificent
system of navigable rivers comprised in the Hastings, and
its tributaries, the Wilson, the Maria, and others, whose
waters find their way to the channel of the Hastings, axxd
tJbenee through the harbourof Port Macquarie to the oceaxx.
There can bo xxo doubt that this naturally fixxe port could
be made one of the best on the coast, and any New South
Wales governmexxt who wilfully or carelessly neglects to iux-
prove its great natural capabilities, have much to axxswer
for, to posterity ; because harbours never remain as they
.ax’e, and, if not improved, the chances are that they be come
worse, and iix time may cease to permit vessels to pass
over their gradually shallowing bars. It is sixxcerely to
be hoped that Port Macquarie will not be much longer
ignored by the government, whose duty it is to attend to
these thixxgs. The removal of the “ Ballina” wreck, and
the coxxstraction of a short breakwater from the rocks oxx
the southern side, so as to contract the ebbing and flowing
waters, and thereby deepen the clxanxxel by increased
pressure of the tiTtes, should be the first steps takexx.
mt lauw 0i fort parqwam.
The old and unique town of Port Macquarie is situate
upon a peninsula, which is, probably the most healthy
and beautiful, as well as the most eligible, in many re-
spects, of all the marine sites of New South Wales. The
Pacific Ocean bounds the site on the east \ the waters of
its grand harbour ebb and flow on its northern and
western sides, and a long, narrow, fresh water lagoon, or
lake, partly divides it from the woodlands that stretch to
the south. From the heights within and around the town,
the views are unbroken, extensive, varied, and beautiful,
no matter in what direction the beholder may cast his
eye. Vessels “hug”the coastatthis point, and thesealways
form a varied feature of the view seaward ; while the
scenery inland, in all directions, is formed of woodlands
and mountaixxs, whose varied 'fcints and shadows form
landscapes truly magnificent. The several arras of the har-
bour, and also the fresh water lagoon, form the foregrouxxd
of the picture on thenorth and west beyond the town, and, in
many places, the bright green patches of vineyards, seen
surrounding snug homesteads, give a rural beauty seldom
seen to such advantage in Australia. The town, as seen
from these eminences, has a quaint, or fantastic, appear-
ance. The Episcopal and Presbyterian Churches are
prominent brick buildings upon a rising ground to the
east of the business pax’t of the town; and nearer to the
hax’bour entraxxce are seen, looming in majestic antiquity,
the large Government buildings that are now tenantless,
anti fast mouldering to decay through the w ant of that
attention which the Government would reasonably be
supposed to bestow. Hortou-street, the principal thor-
oughfare of the town, extends from the wharves, on a
level plateau, in a southerly direction, for half a mile, to
the Cemetery, where it terminates in the New England
road which passes over the effluent of the lake, or lagoon,
by a bridge. From Hortou-street various other streets
branch at right angles. Those to the west lead to the
south arm of the harbour, while those to the east gradu-
ally ascend to a higher plateau that fronts the sea and the
enti'ance to the hax’bour, and where are situate the pilot
station and the flagstaff. Horton and Clarence streets
contain the principal stores and business places, and
these ax'e all situate more than ten feet above the highest
tides. The climate is very fine, and the town is well
situated for drainage purposes. It is probably for these
I'easons, the most healthy town in Australia. There are
four churches and three hotels; all of which are large
and commodious. There are also about a dozen general
stores, and most of the necessary trades and professions
ai*e represented. Water and firewood are abundant, and
of good quality. The Court House, Post Office, Bank,
etc., are all sufficient in size for the business done ; while
the sea breeze fans the summer air, and renders it de-
lightfully cool and bracing at the season when the interior
towns are scorched with heat, or enveloped in the dust
clouds that in many places are so unpleasant. Port
Macquarie is free from dust, and as a sanatorium has
scarcely an equal.
Port Macquarie :
Alfred E. Pountney, Printer, News Office. —1882.


No. 1 Machine, polished and moulded table
6
10
0
No. 2 Machine for families or manufacturers
7
10
0
No. 3 Machine
6
15
0
,, Same Machine, drop leaf...
7
5
0
,, ,, half-cabinet
7
15
0
,, ,, di-op-leaf, 2 drawers
8
10
0
,, ,, 3 drawers
8
15
0
,, ,, 2 drawers each end
9
0
0
,, ,, half-cabinet, folding cover
9
5
0
,, ,, three-quarter cabinet ...
11
10
0
,, ,, full cabinet, oiled box cover ...
13
10
0
,, ,, folding cover
14
10
0
,, ,, ,, polished ...
15
0
0
No. 4 Hand Machine ...
4
10
0
G-. Litchfield,
General Storekeeper.
HAS OX RAND
HE Lilt BEST STOCK
Drapery, Grocery,
goods,
IRONMONGERY,
DUST TEE IE DISTRICT,
WHICH HE
OFFERS TO THE PUBLIC
AT THE
LOWEST POSSIBLE RATES
CONSISTENT WITH HONEST TRADING.
G. L. is in constant Communication with
Leading Sydney Houses,
AND CAN
SUPPLY HIS CUSTOMERS
WITH
Or O O ID S
OF THE MOST
FAiMlilAllil llSlili
BEST QUALITY'
ALL LINES OF TRADE.
Important to t!u Australian Public.
The Remington Manufacturing Company
OF ILION, NEWYORK,
MANUFACTURERS OF THE CELEBRATED
REMINGTON
Prize Sewing Machines
OF THE WOULD,
For Families & Manufacturers.
Leading Prizes Vienna, Brisbane, and Sydney
Agricultural Exhibition, and wherever exhibited.
THE peculiar merits of these Machines consist in their surpassing
Simplicity, Durability, and Certainty, which make
them the most reliable and practical Sewing Machines for Fami-
lies, Tailors, Leather Manufacturers, and in fact for all classes of
work. Their great simplicity renders personal instruction un-
necessary, and the inexperienced cannot fail to use them with
pleasure and profit. They cannot get out of order (with fair
usage), and are so constructed that they never need to be taken
to pieces to clean or oil, and will run for years without costing
one cent, for repairs. A large number of these machines have
been in use in the colony over Three Years, and, all are in admi-
ration of them ; the more they use them, the better they are liked.
tsr We guarantee Satisfaction to all Buyers.
They work comparatively without noise, and a child 10 years
old can run them with ease.
PRICE LIST OF THE
REMINGTON SEWING MACHINES,
Sold under American Retail Prices:
£ s d
No. 5 Superior Hand Machine
These Machines may he had on Liberal Terms, or a good
Discount for Cash. Agents liberally dealt with.
PACKING EXTRA, BUT AT LOWEST RATE.
J. CXJIES’XL.AuRkr,
General Agent for Australia & New Zealand,
592 GEORGE STREET,' SYDNEY.


MRS. J. WALLACE,
STOEEKEEPE
Clarence Street,
Port Macquarie.
Her -Stock includes Drapery, Groceries,
Stationery, &c.
ALSO
A Select Circulating Library.
ROYAL HOTEL,
Horton Street, Port Macquarie.
(50 yards from Public Wharf.)
SUPERIOR ACCOMMODATION POR VISITORS.
Roomy and well ventilated Apartments.
Large Room for Commercial Travellers to display samples.
EXCELLENT STABLING.
Jolin McDonough,
PROPRIETOR.
W. A. SPENCE,
General Storekeeper,
AND COMMISSION AGENT,
Clarence Street,
Port Macquarie.
AGENT for Keough’s line of Mail Coaches, Town and
Country Journal , Manning and Hastings Advocate , and
Macleay Chronicle.
«« WATWARi,
Baker and Confectioner,
Horton Street,
Port Macquarie.
A good Stock of Cordials, &c„ always on hand.
JOHN J. FENN,
Proprietor of the Pern Hill Vineyard,
FORT MACQUARIE, and the
BEIiAUBAB VII-TEYAED,
Hastings River.
Awarded Prizes at the Sydney and Melbourne
International Exhibitions.
Ms. Mffi HIE,
General Storekeeper,
Horton Street,
PORT MACQUARIE.
Henry Betts,
I GENERAL
STOREKEEPER,
Horton Street,
Port Macquarie.
EDWARDS & SONS,
Boot & Shoe Manufacturers, Tobacconists,
News Agents, and General Dealers,
HORTON STREET, PORT MACQUARIE,
AN assortment of English and Colonial Boots and Shoes
in stock. Sewing Machines and Pianos, by best makers,
supplied on Time Payments.


J 7
JAMES BLAIR,
Saddler and Harness Maker,
Horton Street,
Port Macquarie.
A Good Stock of Saddlery and Harness
Always on Hand.
Albert Sinfield,
i ■ 7
General blacksmith.
' H'aucliope. Hastings River.
IS Execute all Orders for BLACKSMITH-
ING, Iron..Plough Making, and Horseshoeing, on
Reasonable TerSis.
Agricultural Implements of all kinds Made and
Repaired.
All Orders executed with neatness and despatch.
C. W. FARRELL,
SHIPPING AND o
Family Butcher,
Clarence Street,
Port Macquarie.
Thomas Hayward,
Boot & Saddlery Warehouse,
Horton Street,
Port Macquarie.
A Good Stock of Imported Goods
Always on Hand.
Hamilton Saw Mills,
Hastings River, Port Macquarie.
A LARGE Supply of aID descriptions of Hardwood
constantly on hand for shipment and for sale.
Architraves, Skirtings, and Mouldings; Hardwood
and Beech—Dressed and Rough.
HIBBARD ct HAINES, Proprietors.
P. DANIHER,
General Storekeeper,
Horton Street, opposite the Post Office,
Port Macquarie.
Country Produce Bought and Sold.
ft lAisisiiwr
GENERAL STOREKEEPER,
Port Macquarie.
A NEW Supply of Garden and Flower Seeds
Always on Hand.
James A. Wallace,
GENERAL
storekeeper,
Rollands Plains,
WXX.SOX RIVER


c ,
D. \V BRIEN,
General Storekeeper,
Horton Street,
Port MacquariegK^
F
US IKT xs:
OF C
NEW SOUTH WALES.
Established 1817.
Capital paid up <£1,000,000
Reserve Fund 500,000
PORT MACQUARIE BRANCH.
HIGHEST Current Rates of Interest allowed on Fixed
Deposits.
Bills Discounted, Cash Credits Granted, Drafts Issued
and all kinds of Banking Business transacted upon terms
which may he ascertained on application at this Office.
Office Hours : 10 a.m. till 3 p.m. Saturday 10 a.m.
till 12 noon.
W. J. MACDONNELL,
Manager.
THE STEAMER “NE OBLIE”
Will Make Regular Weekly Trips
BETWEEN
POET,MACSUAHIE All SMUT,
Wind and Weather Permitting.
HAVING undergone extensive alterations, the accommo-
dation on this favourite steamer is now first-class.
G. LITCHFIELD, Local Agent.
COMMERCIAL HOTEL,
Horton Street, Port Macquarie.
The above Hotel is now d- ne up in first-class style.
LARGE SAMPLE ROOMS.
GOOD STABLING AND PADDOCKS.
N.B.—Buggy and Saddle Horses can always he had on
Moderate Terms.
J. XX. WIX.SOST,
PROPRIETOR.
JAMES GAe
Practical Boot and Shoe Ma^
Horton Street,
Port Macquarie
Sewn and Pegged Boots and Shoes Made to Order
Best of imported Ladies’, Gent’s, and Children’s go
Always on Hand.
IN addition to his usual large and general stock, D.W.B.
has on hand a tine assortment of
Christmas Cards, Toys, Nic Nacs, Ac., and also Watches,
Jewellery, as well as Fancy and Tobacconists Goods.
E A SFIIiA
Saddler and Harness Maker,
Horton Street,
Port Macquarie.
A GOOD stock of Saddlery and Harness is now on hand
for inspection..
Stock Saddles from £3 ss. upwards.
SHAMROCK HOTEL,
Corner of Horton and Clarence Streets,
Port Macquarie.
Denis Daniher, Proprietor
IMPROVED Accommodation for Boarders, and all
hotel requisites kept.


. .. -■ ' i ;
4
c / . ' ,
»'■ ; * ■ 7 .. ■ ,/ ■ _ C


