

The
Truth About the
Queensland
SUGAR
Industry
Issued by the
QUEENSLAND SUGAR DEFENCE COMMITTEE
National Bank Chambers
271 Collins St., Melbourne


Foreword.
Persistent and injurious attacks on the
Queensland Sugar Industry during recent months
have compelled the industry to defend itself by
setting forth the actual truth of its position. It
is hoped by all engaged in the business of sugar
production that the fair-minded people of Aus-
tralia who have read the slanders to which sugar
producers have been subjected will spare time
to peruse the following pages and judge for them-
selves between the industry and its detractors—
whose campaign of abuse and misrepresentation,
whatever its motive, has evidently not been in-
spired by a disinterested regard for the national
welfare.
Great care has been taken in the preparation
of the Sugar Industry’s defence to avoid even
the occasion of error and to set down none save
unchallengeable facts, and readers are assured
that every statement contained in this pamphlet
can be substantiated by indisputable evidence.
The industry earnestly appeals to the Aus-
tralian people for the favour of an* attentive con-
sideration of its case, being fully confident that
nought else is required to insure its permanent
occupation of that place in public esteem from
which its calumniators have sought to dethrone
it. The industry asks not for mercy but for
fair play and justice.


THE TRUTH ABOUT SUGAR.
Part I.
Without some knowledge of the salient historical
features of the Queensland Sugar Industry it is impos-
sible to appreciate the peculiar position occupied by the
industry in national affairs, and it is equally impossible
—without such knowledge—to judge whether the attacks
recently launched against the industry by sheltered
southern interests are just or unjust.
HISTORY.
The history of the Queensland Sugar Industry is
properly divisible into four periods. The first period
extends from the foundation of the industry in 1862 until
1900, when the Federation of the. Australian States
occurred and the fortunes of the industry passed into
Commonwealth control. This may be called the State
period. The second period extends from 1900 to 1914,
when the Great War broke out. This may be called the
National period. The third period extends from 1914 to
1919, and may be called the War period, and the fourth
period extends from 1919 until the present day. This may
be called the Control period.
THE STATE PERIOD.
On April 4th, 1862, Mr. John Buhot, of Brisbane,
crushed some sugar cane with a lever, then boiled the
resultant juice in a saucepan, and thus manufactured the
first pound of sugar ever produced from Queensland-grown
cane. In the following year Captain Louis Hope started
growing sugar cane in a substantial way, and on January
6th, 1866, he disposed of the first ton of raw sugar pro-
duced in Queensland. From that moment the industry
rapidly and steadily expanded, and, excepting for occa-
sional seasonal set-backs, it continued to increase and
prosper until the advent of Federation.
During the whole of the State period the industry was
carried on with the help of coloured labour, consisting of


Kanakas imported from the Pacific Islands. The employ-
ment of this cheap coloured labour (the minimum rate
of pay to the Kanakas was £6 per annum and found) was
absolutely necessary, in the absence of effective Customs
protection, in order to enable the Queensland industry to
survive in competition with the black grown sugar of the
East and West Indies, where the wages were trifling and
even at this day do not exceed 10/- per week. The
industry owes no apology either to Australia or the world
for its original dependence on coloured labour. It had to
choose between the Kanakas and extinction, and it cor-
dially welcomed the opportunity provided by Federation to
become a purely white industry. It is highly important,
nevertheless, to remember that during the State period,
when coloured labour was employed, the industry con-
tinuously expanded and flourished with little or no assist-
ance from the Government.
THE NATIONAL PERIOD.
For many years prior to 1900 the people of all the
Australian States, including Queensland, had embraced the
White Australian ideal. Recognising the imperative neces-
sity of effectively occupying tropical Australia with white
settlers in order to avert the peril of invasion, it was
unanimously agreed that the sugar industry, converted
from a coloured to a white labour industry, offered the
only practicable solution of the problem of national defence,
since no other industry possessed the inherent requisite
capacity to plant white cultivators on the soil of Australia’s
vast waste northern spaces. Queensland was loyally pre-
pared in the common national interest to make the change.
Considerations of economic self-preservation, however,
compelled her to stipulate, as a condition to entering the
Federation, that her still infant sugar industry should be
properly safeguarded by measures guaranteeing her in
perpetuity a profitable Australian market for the sugar
she produced. The condition was willingly conceded, and,
in 1900, the Commonwealth of Australia was established,
and the National Parliament thereby created assumed
perpetual control of the fate and fortunes of the Queens-
land Sugar Industry.
In 1901 a Federal Statute was enacted forbidding the
introduction of fresh coloured labour into Queensland
after 31st March, 1904. Three years’ grace was granted
to enable Queensland cane planters to make the change
over without ruinous sacrifice. In the same year a Tariff
Act was passed giving Queensland sugar a protection of


£6 per ton against foreign sugar. In 1902 an Excise Tariff
Act imposed a levy of £3 per ton on Queensland sugar for
revenue purposes, and in 1903 a Bounty Act refunded £2
(out of every £3 collected under the Excise Act) to the
growers in respect of all sugar produced by white labour
exclusively. The excise was subsequently raised to £4 per
ton and the bounty increased to £3 per ton. In 1902,
85.55 per cent, of all sugar produced in Queensland was
produced by coloured labour. By 1908 white labour pro-
duced 87.89 per cent, of the total, and soon afterwards
the industry was entirely white.
Hereabouts it should be noted that no bounty, in the
honest meaning of that term, was ever paid by the Federal
Government to Queensland sugar growers. The so-called
bounty was merely a rebate. .The Government taxed the
grower by excise £4 per ton, and rebated £3 (the alleged
“bounty”) as a reward for using white labour. The
Government, therefore, throughout the whole Excise-
Bounty era got the better of the grower, and the Treasurer
profited in the aggregate to the tune of over £2,600,000.
By 1912 the whole of the Excise-Bounty legislation was
repealed, and the Sugar Industry (long since become a
purely white industry) was permitted to function inde-
pendently under the slight and inadequate protection
afforded by the Customs Tariff.
From 1900 until 1914, when the Great War broke oat,
the Queensland Sugar Industry struggled onwards, steadily
progressing notwithstanding the lack of adequate protec-
tion, but progressing only with the utmost difficulty by
sheer force of the enthusiasm, energy and intelligence of
those who had undertaken the task of its development.
In order to meet the ever-increasing burden of Austra-
lian wages and labour conditions, recourse was had to inven-
tion, organisation and co-operation. The industry was
continuously obliged to fight for its life, fully conscious
that the moment it ceased to grow it must begin to die.
Slowly but surely it developed in efficiency and strength.
Co-operative effort amongst all engaged in the produc-
tion of sugar and patient organisation in all departments
of the industry’s activities facilitated the establishment of
numerous mills equipped with highly perfected modern
machinery, and the introduction of mechanical aids to
cultivation and harvesting in the fields. The State Govern-
ment of Queensland from time to time lent generous aid
to the growers, but it can be truly said that from 1900
to 1914 they owed nothing to the Commonwealth.
During all that time the industry faithfully carried out
its duty to promote the White Australia policy and realise


the national ideal. It extended cultivation, settlement and
effective white occupation to the farthest north of Queens-
land, and it supplied the Australian people with the best
sugar in the world. And it accomplished all this without
receiving more than a shadow of the help, protection and
encouragement which were promised to Queensland when
that State entered the Federation.
THE WAR PERIOD.
When the Great War came the Commonwealth was
forced to abandon its neglectful attitude to the Queens-
land Sugar Industry, for war conditions quickly conspired
to make the business of sugar production a matter of
positively vital consequence not only to Australia but to
the whole British Empire. The Commonwealth Govern-
ment was prompt to assert complete control over the
Queensland industry. From 1915 onwards it comman-
deered the entire Australian sugar output at a price far
below world parity fixed by itself; it placed an embargo
on the private importation of foreign sugar; it fixed prices
for both the wholesale and the retail trade, and it made
arrangements to finance any authorised imports that might
be required to make up any shortage in the Australian
crop. The workers were guaranteed good wages, and at
the same time the consuming public was firmly defended,
by the fixation of prices, from any possible attempts to
exploit the situation created by the war.
THE INDUSTRY’S WAR SERVICE
TO THE NATION.
In addition to contributing more than twelve per
centum of the manhood employed in the Queensland Sugar
Industry to fight at the front (within ten days of the
declaration of war the s.s. “Kanowna” left Cairns with
1500 soldiers), the industry rendered unparalleled economic
service to the Commonwealth throughout the whole period
of the war. From 1915-1919 inclusive the wholesale price
of sugar in Australia did not exceed £29/5/- per ton, and
the retail price to the consumer was 3|d. per pound.
The price of sugar in 1920 in England was 1/2 per
lb.; in Canada and the U.S.A. it was 1/3 per lb., and in
Italy and France V 6 per lb. On the basis of the English
comparison, the Queensland industry saved (or rather
made a present to the people of Australia) a sum of
many millions sterling—in the shape of cheap sugar.
This is an incontestable and irrefutable fact, for it is
obvious that had there been no control of sugar the


Queensland growers must have received the world parity
for their product, just as did producers of uncontrolled
commodities in Australia.
Of all the 'producers, both primary and secondary, in
Australia, the sugar growers alone derived no real advan-
tage whatsoever from the inflated conditions created by
the war. They watched every other industry profiting
enormously out of war prices whilst they struggled to make
ends meet fighting under the handicap of ever-mounting
wages and production costs which in every other industry
were promptly passed on to the consumer.
But although the sugar growers obtained no relief,
they ungrudgingly continued to serve the nation, and,
however unjust they felt their treatment to be, they
uttered no complaint. Nor did they complain when
it became apparent that other industries which use
sugar as a raw material were profiting prodigiously
at their expense. During the war the cheap sugar sup-
plied by the Queensland industry to the jam manufacturers,
fruit growers, condensed milk manufacturers, confec-
tionery makers and biscuit manufacturers of the southern
States enabled the latter to undersell all foreign com-
petitors, and it also enabled these southern industries to
market their surplus products overseas to the value of
£17,772,129.
Queensland growers, millers and refiners were always
fully cognisant of the great harvest of wealth they
were enabling the southern industries to win, but they
were rather gratified than resentful at the superior
good fortune of their uncontrolled fellow industrialists
of the south, and their voices were not once raised
in protest. It is a curious commentary bn their
magnanimity that they are now being maligned and
attacked by the very interests on which they conferred
such incomparable benefits.
THE CONTROL PERIOD.
Federal control commenced on 19th July, 1915. The
first agreement covered the years 1915-16 and 1916-17.
The second agreement covered the years 1917-18, 1918-19
and 1919-20. Under this the price paid the grower for
raw sugar was £2l per ton, the wholesale price
of refined sugar was £29/5/- per ton and the re-
tail price was fixed at 3£d. per lb. On 25th March,
1920, the wholesale price was raised to £46/1/6 per
ton and the retail price to 6d. per lb., and those
prices were confirmed by the third agreement, which


covered the years 1919-20 to 1923-24. The prices to con-
sumers fixed by the Government in 1920 were increased
simply in order to recoup the Government for losses
incurred through importing dear foreign sugar to make
up for the shortage in local production. It is important
to note that Queensland growers derived no immediate
advantage from the increases, and it was not until the
Federal Government realised that sugar production in
Queensland was seriously falling away, owing to the low
prices paid the growers and the continuously increasing
production costs, that it decided to raise the price of raw
sugar from £2l to £3O/6/8 per ton, with the avowed object
of stimulating production and preserving the industry
from collapse.
The retail price of 6d. per lb. continued until
November, 1922, by which time the Government had
recouped its losses and the retail price was reduced to
sd. per lb. Later on, when the fourth agreement, covering
1923-24-1926-27, was made, the price of raw sugar to the
growers was reduced to £27 and the retail price was
reduced to 4|d. per lb. The fifth agreement, which has
not yet expired, did not disturb the prices fixed by the
fourth agreement, which still rule.
From 1921 onwards, stimulated by the assurance of
a fair price for raw sugar to the growers, the Queensland
Sugar Industry has steadily progressed. There are now
8000 individual cane farmers engaged in the industry, of
whom 90 per cent, are British, and many of the remainder
are naturalised British subjects. During each crushing
season the industry employs 30,000 hands, and pays
£6,000,000 per annum in wages.
Approximately 120,000 people are directly dependent
on the industry for a living.
The amount of capital invested exceeds £50,000,000.
The area now under cultivation is approximately 250,000
acres. The annual production of the industry is approxi-
mately 538,000 tons of sugar, valued at approximately
£10,000,000.
WHY WAS THE EMBARGO IMPOSED IN 1915
AND SINCE THEN REPEATEDLY RENEWED
AND MAINTAINED?
It may be stated emphatically that the Queensland
Sugar Industry did not seek and did not welcome Govern-
ment control. The Commonwealth Government originally
commandeered the industry and placed it under the form
of control that still persists in order to ensure that the


people of Australia should have as cheap sugar as possible
during the war. The Government’s reasons for so acting
were that sugar is a commodity vital to the public welfare
and that it believed that the world’s normal production
of sugar would be seriously curtailed by the war.
The above-mentioned belief proved to be well grounded.
Very soon after the war started a world scarcity of sugar
developed, and long after the war ended sugar continued
to rule at famine prices in every country save Australia.
It was thought that as soon as possible after the peace
treaty was signed the Government control of the Queens-
land industry would be abrogated and a tariff substituted
sufficient to protect the industry from the competition of
black grown sugar when normal world conditions should
be restored. A move in this .direction, indeed, was actually
made in 1923, when the Customs duty on foreign sugar
was raised from £6 to £9/6/8 per ton. That duty, how-
ever, was never permitted to operate. The Government
continued to control the industry after the war ended in
order to recoup its losses on sugar imported during the
war, and, when the Government at length was in a posi-
tion to relinquish control without jeopardising the interests
of Australian consumers, the foreign production of sugar
had outstripped demand and sugar prices had fallen to
a level low enough to menace the existence of the Queens-
land industry notwithstanding the increased Customs pro-
tection granted by the 1923 tariff. Another factor
influencing the Federal Government in maintaining its
control of the industry was the series of violent fluctuations
that occurred in w T orld sugar prices following shortly after
the peace. As one Australian Prime Minister explained:
“Foreign conditions and violent price fluctuations in the
world’s market rendered it difficult, if not impossible, to
protect the Australian sugar industry adequately by any
Customs duty.”
In 1925 another Prime Minister, Mr. Stanley Bruce,
made the following statement: “ The experience of
the last 18 months had shown clearly that a tariff
duty, while effective in regard to products which
maintained a uniformly normal price, was not capable of
scientific accuracy when applied to sugar, which fluctuated
to an extent which rendered the duty at times abortive.
A tariff which would give a reasonable return to the Aus-
tralian producer when the world’s market price was low
would result in unduly large profits when the price was
high. On the other hand, if the duty was based on a high
parity, the sugar industry w_ould be seriously injured, if
not entirely destroyed, during the periods when low prices


prevailed. From June, 1923, to December, 192 U, the
world’s parity, plus Australian duty and refining costs,
alternate frequently betiveen the figures of £U7 and £35
respectively, a variation of no less than £l2 per ton, or
nearly £3 more than the Australian duty. A duty based
on an average parity—assuming a fair average could be
correctly determined—would not meet the problem, as the
inevitable foreign fluctuations would be reflected in Aus-
tralia in constantly changing prices (with a possible range
of £l2 a ton), which would be almost as disturbing and
harmful to southern manufacturers and consumers as
to the sugar industry itself.
“So far it was plain that, in fairness to producers and
consumers, the industry could be reasonably safeguarded
under a tariff only by means of a sliding scale of duties,
determined on the basis of the world’s parity from time
to time. This method has been closely examined by the
Ministry, but, after consideration of the experience of
other countries which had adopted it, notably that of the
United States of America, it was rejected as unsatis-
factory.
“The alternative to such a duty was the continuance,
with some modifications and certain definite safeguards,
of the existing arrangement.”
It is needless to remark that the conditions rendering
it all but impossible in 1925 to safeguard fairly the interests
of both producers and consumers of sugar in Australia
by means of a Customs duty exist in a gravely aggravated
form to-day. For since 1925 there has been a super pro-
duction of foreign sugar, with the result that the world
is now in the throes of a glut, and the price on the world’s
markets has fallen to under £ll per ton.
THE OUTLOOK FOR WORLD SUGAR.
Although there is a substantial surplus of sugar now
held in stock abroad over and above mankind’s immediate
requirements (hence the present low price level) it would
be foolish to imagine that these conditions will long
obtain. Already there is an international movement afoot
to organise all the great producing countries, including
Cuba and Java, on a programme intended to balance pro-
duction with consumption until the ever-increasing capa-
city of consumption overtakes the productive power of
the industry. One only needs to glance cursorily at the
economic statistics of the industry to realise that soon
or late (probably quite soon) such an organisation will
be effected.


In Cuba alone the capital investment in the in-
dustry exceeds £175,000,000, and the world’s aggregate
total of capital investment in the sugar industry runs into
thousands of millions sterling. This simple fact precludes
the idea that such an industry will be allowed for any
length of time to suspend its profit-earning functions.
Sugar is now selling far below the cost of production in
the cheapest producing country, but, beyond all doubt, the
industry will presently set its house in order and the world’s
price of sugar will be restored to a profitable level.
BUT WHAT ABOUT AUSTRALIA?
But, in the meanwhile, what will happen to the
Queensland branch of the Sugar Industry? The inordin-
ately low prices ruling in the temporarily glutted markets
of the outer world have inspired certain interests in
southern Australia to attack the Queensland industry and
demand that the embargo be abolished and the industry
left to the tender mercies of a Customs tariff—a thing
which Government after Government, after thoroughly
examining the question, has been moved to declare utterly
unable to defend the industry (in such circumstances as
we are now considering) from extinction. It suits these
interests to forget the great services rendered by the
Queensland industry to other industries and to the whole
nation during the war and the difficult period which
followed. They covet white sugar at black sugar prices—
and below black prices, for not even Java, paying coolie
wages of 5/- per week, can produce sugar at £lO per ton.
And they reck nothing of the fate of the Queensland
industry! But they would soon repent their selfishness
if the nation listened to their outcries and gave them their
desire. For nothing is more certain than that if the
Queensland industry were cast imperfectly defended to the
wolves of foreign competition it would perish, and Aus-
tralian consumers would eventually (and at no distant
date) be compelled to pay for black grown sugar whatever
price the recovered outer world producers might choose
to ask. And what of the White Australian policy?
THE WHITE AUSTRALIA ISSUE.
The Australian people are famed the world over for
their passionate devotion to the White Australia policy.
The first National Parliament in 1901 was returned with
an overwhelming majority pledged to banish coloured
labour from the Queensland sugar cane fields and to settle


Australia’s tropical north with white people. Thus, from
the very dawn of Federation, the sugar industry was
inextricably and permanently bound up with the White
Australian policy and became essentially a national industry.
The genetic inspiration of this development was fear of
invasion by the teeming hordes of Asia, the knowledge
that only by effective occupation can any country hope to
maintain its territories intact, and the further knowledge
that the sugar industry offered the only practicable means
of garrisoning Australia’s empty north. If in 1901 there
was reason to fear the rising tide of colour there is infinitely
graver reason to-day.
Ever since 1901 that tide has been mounting
steadily. The populations of China, Japan, Java and
India have increased by scores of millions in the
meanwhile, and the potential menace of the overcrowded
East has attained prodigious proportions. The one bright
feature of the picture is that since 1901 the formerly un-
defended Queensland littoral, by virtue of the sugar
industry, has been effectively occupied by a virile white
population. The question arises, can the Commonwealth
afford to denude that sturdy garrison by robbing the
industry which now supports it of the wherewithal to
function properly and of the incentive to expand? The
once empty north of Queensland, the most vulnerable part
of Australia, is now equipped with scores of thousands of
stout defenders.
Is it reasonable to suppose they would or could
continue to remain there if deprived of the hope of a
reasonably prosperous livelihood? It is universal know-
ledge that the maintenance of our White Ideal and
the defence of the Commonwealth are dependent on the
progress and growth of the sugar industry. All our party
leaders have repeatedly assured us that the White Aus-
tralia policy and the defence of the nation afford supreme
justification for effectively protecting the Queensland Sugar
Industry.
Nothing is more certain than that any blow struck
at the sugar industry must strike with equally destruc-
tive force at the White Australia policy and at the heart
of the problem of national defence.
THE ECONOMIC ISSUE.
The Queensland Sugar Industry occupies a peculiarly
important position in the economic structure of Australia.
It supplies the entire population with an indispensable
commodity vital to the well-being of the people. It is a


feeder to many other industries. Upon its security and
strength many great manufacturing establishments are
dependent, including foundries, machinery manufacturers,
engineering works, acetone factories, distilleries, etc., etc.
It provides the best market the southern States possess for
the disposal of their surplus secondary products , which
they send to Queensland in exchange for the sugar supplied
to the south. It maintains a busy coastal shipping trade,
which, but for the sugar industry, could not exist. It
provides wages for innumerable workers scattered in all
parts of the Commonwealth engaged in the business of
distribution. It creates a purchasing power of southern
goods, products and commodities equivalent at present to
£10,000,000 per annum. It helps to pay Australia’s foreign
interest bill by marketing surplus sugar abroad to the
value of approximately £2,000,000 per annum. It supports
in Queensland a population of 120,000 souls. It uses a
capital of over £50,000,000. It produces new wealth every
year at the rate of nearly £1,000,000 per month.
Let us see what would happen if the sectional and
foolish outcry for cheap foreign sugar were to result in
paralysing the Queensland Sugar Industry.
In the first instance, of course, the Australian people
would, for a time, enjoy the benefit of cheap sugar. The
average Australian householder would thereby save a few
pence per week. But at what a cost immediately to the
nation and eventually to the individual citizen?
In order to import that black sugar, Australia
would need to export gold or goods to the value
of £4,000,000 per annum, and the country would also
lose the £2,0.00,000 per annum now derived from the
sale abroad of Queensland’s surplus sugar. Australia,
therefore, would, in relation with the outer world,
be £6,000,000 per annum worse off than to-day, and
she would also lose the £10,000,000 per annum of wealth
and purchasing power now continuously created in Aus-
tralia by the Queensland sugar industry—its internal con-
dition would be worse off by that vast sum.
Is not that a rather heavy price to pay for an
evanescent boon of cheapness—which could only last until
sugar producers abroad set their house in order, when,
they would infallibly exploit Australia’s needs? One has to
remember that every penny the people of Australia pay
for Queensland sugar stays in Australia for the perpetual
use and enrichment of the Australian people, whereas, if
they import their sugar, every penny they pay for it must
go abroad and be lost to them for ever.


One more question, how could it profit the people
of the southern States even for a moment to import
cheap black sugar seeing that by that very act they
would extinguish £10,000,000 of purchasing power in
Queensland which is now chiefly utilised in buying the
goods and commodities that they produce?
THE MORAL ISSUE.
The Commonwealth owes a moral debt to the Queens-
land Sugar Industry of almost immeasurable gravity. The
Commonwealth in 1901 forcibly converted the industry into
a white labour industry and specifically guaranteed the
industry whatever protection might be required for its
maintenance and expansion. From the war onwards the
Commonwealth assumed complete control of the industry
and vigorously encouraged it to develop by every means
at its command. On the faith of the Commonwealth’s
assuranceis of adequate support and protection, thousands
of good Australians invested their all in the industry and
settled on the Queensland littoral, thereby providing the
tropical north with a defensive garrison of great present
and potential strength. Can the Commonwealth afford to
ignore its implicit and explicit promises or to default in
its moral obligations to people who trusted their fortunes
to the nation’s honour and integrity?
THE EMBARGO BOGEY.
The calumniators of the Queensland Sugar
Industry habitually exploit popular ignorance by
pretending that sugar is the only commodity pro-
duced in Australia that is protected by an em-
bargo. The truth is, however, that no fewer than
100 other Australian commodities and goods
(many of which have always enjoyed high Tariff
protection) are similarly defended from external
competition. The list of goods which are abso-
lutely prohibited from importation into the Com-
monwealth (without the express permission of
the Government) includes Glucose, Biscuits,
Cheese, Confectionery, all Canned and Dried
Bruits (excepting dates and figs), Canned Vege-
tables, Jams and Jellies, Canned Meats, Pickles,
Sauces and Chutney, Soap, Starch, Ales. Beers,
Potable Spirits, Wines, Manufactured Tobacco,
Cigarettes, Cigars, Matches, Portland Cement,
Threshers and Harvesters, Blankets,. Rugs, Bolts,
Nuts, Barbed Wire, Harrows!) Opal Sheet Glass,
Gas Stoves, Electric Stoves, Iron and Steel Beams,
Gelatine, Vinegar, Cornflour, Lemons,, Oranges,
Candles, etc., etc.


Part 11.
During recent months the Queensland Sugar Industry
has been victimised and seriously injured in public opinion
by the publication broadcast of numerous mis-statements
and false representations concerning its activities. In the
following pages the most important of these falsehoods
will be considered and refuted.
LIE No. I.—The charge has been repeatedly made that the
high cost of Queensland sugar has been responsible
for heavy loss of export trade by southern manufac-
turers who use sugar as a raw material.
REPLY.—Under the Sugar Agreement, sugar is
made available to export manufacturers at world’s
parity. If such manufacturers have lost their export
trade, therefore, their loss is not due to the sugar
industry, but to other factors of cost for which the
sugar industry is not responsible.
LIE No. 2.—The charge has been made that because of
the high price fruit canners have had to pay for their
sugar the per capita consumption of jam diminished
from 18 lb. in 1912 to 11 lb. in 1926.
REPLY.—This accusation was (inter alia) re-
mitted by the Federal Government to the Chief
Accountant of the Customs Department for investiga-
tion. That officer reported the charge to be inaccurate.
He pointed out that the tendency towards lower factory
jam consumption is world wide, being probably due
to a large increase in the consumption of alternate
foodstuffs. He also pointed out that during the period
mentioned the consumption of canned fruits in Aus-
tralia increased by over 100 per centum. And he
further pointed out that the decline in factory jam
consumption in Australia commenced while the price
of sugar was very low and constant and before Govern-
ment control was instituted in 1915.
LIE No. 3.—The charge has been made that jam manu-
facturers’ processing costs have been inordinately
increased by the increased price of sugar, and that
the sugar content of a 24 oz. tin of jam which cost
2d. in 1911 cost 4d. per tin in 1929—an increase of
100 per cent.
REPLY.—The same Customs Accountant examined
this charge and reported the figures quoted to be false.
He demonstrated that the cost of sugar in a 24 oz.


tin of jam in 1523 was 3d. per tin, and not 4d. as
stated, and he showed the Id. per tin increase since
1911 due to sugar only represented l-sth of the total
increase in the average selling price, which was 6.15 d.
in 1914 and 11.35 d. in 1928.
LIE No. 4.—Jam manufacturers complained that under
Government control the price of sugar was raised from
£lB per ton to £3O/6/8, an increase of £l2/6/8, which
imposed a crushing burden of £520,000 per annum on
the fruit canning and allied industries.
REPLY.—The Customs Department investigated
the charge and proved that the crushing burden
amounted not to £520,000 per annum but only to
£135,000 per annum, and the comment was made:
“Evidently those manufacturers whose products are
fully protected by adequate Customs duties consider
it equitable that Australian sugar should have no pro-
tection at all!” It is worth remembering that by
Customs duties now in operation jam manufacturers
enjoy a protection on the Australian market of £2B
per ton, and canned fruits 10/- per dozen tins—the
equivalent of £5O per ton.
LIE No. s.—The charge has been repeatedly made that
when the Government raised the retail price of sugar
to 6d. per lb. the cane growers earned fabulous resultant
profits.
REPLY.—Sugar was raised from 31d. per lb. to
6d. per lb. retail for the express purpose of recouping
the Federal Government’s losses incurred when it im-
ported foreign sugar at a very high price to make up
a shortage in the Australian crop. Sugar growers
benefited very little from the increased retail price.
LIE No. 6.—By constant reiteration of an utterly un-
founded falsehood enemies of the sugar industry have
caused thousands of pepole to regard the Queensland
sugar industry as a “Bounty-fed Industry.”
REPLY.—No bounty of any sort was ever paid
to Queensland sugar producers. Under the Excise and
Bounty (so-called) legislation—repealed in 1913—the
Government collected an excise tax of £4 per ton and
REBATED £3 per ton to growers complying with pre-
scribed labour conditions. The net result of all this
legislation was that the Government extracted
£2,692,329 from the pockets of sugar producers.
LIE No. 7.—The industry has been frequently and cruelly
maligned by misrepresentations of its wages and labour


conditions with intent to make southern people believe
that it willingly provides “ridiculously excessive”
wages to its employees at the expense of the nation.
REPLY.—AII wages and labour conditions in the
Queensland Sugar Industry are determined and fixed
by the Board of Trade and Arbitration, whose awards
sugar producers are compelled to observe by law.
LIE No. B.—High prices occasionally paid for land in sugar
districts are repeatedly quoted as conclusive proof of
the allegedly excessive profit-earning capacity of the
whole cane-growing industry.
REPLY.—It is admitted that some purchasers of
cane farms have paid high prices for their farms, often
far above the productive value of the land, but this fre-
quently happens in connection with all other primary
industries (soldier settlements afford an outstanding
example) without inducing anybody to use it as an
argument to accuse them of profiteering. It is only
the sugar industry that has been subjected to such
plausible but cruelly unjust attacks. As a rule the
sale of a sugar farm is a walk-out walk-in transaction,
and usually includes, in addition to the land and im-
provements, a crop to be harvested by the purchaser,
costly equipment, and, in many instances, a consider-
able parcel of paid-up shares in a farmers’ co-opera-
tive sugar mill, which, in the case of a number of such
companies, are inseparable from the land, and one
cannot be transferred without the other. Much of
the Queensland sugar land is comparable to the
most fertile soil in the other States, such as that of
the alluvial flats on the Snowy River in Victoria, and
the Hunter River Valley in New South Wales, which
frequently sell at £lOO per acre and over, without
crops and with a minimum of equipment, and no
adverse public comment is made. In any case, labour
and not land is the principal item in sugar production.
LIE No. 9.—The whole Commonwealth has been flooded
with statements suggesting that the Queensland Sugar
Industry has fallen very largely into the hands of
Italians.
REPLY.—More than 90 per centum of all persons
engaged in the Queensland Sugar Industry are either
Australian natives or of British birth. Another per-
tinent and significant fact is that the total Italian popu-
lation in the Commonwealth in 1929 did not exceed
32,348 souls.


THE SUGAR INDUSTRY’S DETRACTORS.
Practically all attacks directed against the Queensland
Sugar Industry have emanated from two important
southern industries which use sugar as a raw material—
the processors of fruit and the manufacturers of con-
fectionery.
The processors of fruit use approximately 27,000 tons
of sugar per annum in their business, while confectionery
manufacturers use approximately 19,000 tons per annum.
For export purposes these manufacturers are supplied
with as much sugar as they require at world parity. For
home consumption they are charged rates fixed by the
Government.
In 1912 the production of factory jam in Australia
was 85,890,929 lb., or about 18 lb. per capita. In 1925-26
it diminished to 67,388,784 lb., or 11 lb. per capita, but
in 1926-27 it increased to 85,687,291 lb., or 14 lb. per capita,
and the 1927-28 production increased still further. The
diminished production of factory jam since 1912 com-
menced when the price of sugar was very low, and is
obviously due to the enormously increased and ever-
increasing consumption of other food products; while other
responsible factors are (a) the competition of the jam-
making Australian housewife and (b) the competition of
small unregistered manufacturers of so-called “home-
made” jam. It has to be noted, moreover, that the pro-
duction of canned fruit in Australia increased from
23,866,993 lb. in 1920-21 to 57,583,021 lb. in 1926-27 and
exports similarly.
The confectionery industry has greatly and continu-
ously expanded during recent years, and no better refuta-
tion of its attacks on the sugar industry could be desired
than to cite a few facts recorded in the latest issue of
the Commonwealth Year Book, 1929. According to the
Commonwealth Statist there were only 32 factories in
New South Wales and Victoria in 1900, whereas to-day
there are 78 in New South Wales and 136 in Victoria, and
a total of 293 in the Commonwealth. The value of the
combined output of all confectionery factories was
£6,162,631 in 1923-24; £6,623,828 in 1924-25; £6,993,566
in 1925-26; £7,097,911 in 1926-27, and £7,300,429 in 1927-
28, the latest year for which statistics are available. The
above figures tell their own story. As these figures repre-
sent wholesale prices only, and do not provide for retail
profits, it is obvious that the Australian people must pay
a greater total sum for the confectionery they consume
than for the whole of the refined sugar that is retailed in
the Commonwealth.


THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF THE INDUSTRY.
Some of our land industries are of a composite char-
acter. They are secondary as well as primary. This
is the case with sugar in a very special sense, as sugar
production involves three separate and distinct, although
interdependent, interests —the canegrower, the raw sugar
miller, and the refiner. Queensland sugar mills are of two
classes —proprietary and co-operative. The price to be
paid by mills for cane is fixed by the Sugar Cane Prices
Board, which is a statutory tribunal. The price neces-
sarily varies with the quality of the cane and the price
of raw sugar, the grower receiving approximately two-
thirds and the miller one-third of the proceeds. The
refining is done on “toll.” The refiner supplies the
necessary sacks, pays an f.o.b. price for raw sugar
at Queensland ports, also freight, handling, refining and
distributing costs, and is allowed a fixed profit per ton of
sugar treated for the use of refineries (of which there are
six) and for the use of capital required to purchase and
store raw sugar, and to meet all the charges incidental
to his part of the business.
It is unnecessary to mention in detail the activities and
vicissitudes connected with cane-growing, which, how-
ever, may be described in general terms as market
gardening on broad acres. The Queensland sugar mills,
as a rule, are large, up-to-date, competently staffed, and
highly efficient. The Tully mill, in North Queensland,
the most recently erected, with tramways and equipment,
cost three-quarters of a million pounds sterling. The
audited refining accounts disclose greater efficiency in
Australia than in England or America, and also that Aus-
tralian refineries are satisfied with a smaller margin of
profit.
The refiner’s profit amounts to less than £1 per ton of
sugar treated, or approximately one shilling from each
consumer per annum, including the sugar supplied for
manufacturing purposes. If refining were done without
profit, the saving to each consumer would be less than
one farthing per week—a saving so infinitesimal that it
could never reach the consumer.
Shipping is an important auxiliary industry, as the
sugar consumed in the, Commonwealth is conveyed to the
refineries in Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia, and Western Australia in Australian
ships, officered and manned by Australians. Coastal
freights on raw sugar amount to about £750,000 a year.


The Royal Commission, appointed in 1929 by the British
Government, under the chairmanship of Lord Olivier, P.C.,
to investigate the sugar industry of the West Indies and
British Guiana, and advise His Majesty what steps should
be taken to protect the industry from destruction, reported
unamimously in March, 1930, as follows:
“The permanent policy which has commended itself to
us is the stabilisation of the price of sugar produced in
all non-self-governing Colonies by fixing it for the British
market at a proper figure, having regard to reasonable
costs of production.”
From the above, it is obvious that the British Royal
Commission, after mature consideration of all possible
expedients, deliberately recommended His Majesty to
adopt, in England, the very same policy that has been
practised in Australia ever since 1915, under the various
Australian Sugar Agreements, the latest of which is still
in force.
The Right Hon. L. S. Amery, M.P., a former Secretary
of State for the Colonies, in a statement he issued recently
concerning a Sugar Policy for the Empire, said:—
“A temporary cheapness can be bought too dearly.
Therefore, to my mind, it would be well worth while, at
a time like this, to carry our policy, if world circumstances
seem to require it, even further than we have done to
give such preference as will enable Empire production of
sugar to go on steadily. ... I cannot imagine that the
sacrifice of that which has been created through years, in
which so much money, so much personal hope, so many
lives have been embarked, can be worth any merely
theoretical satisfaction of Free Trade pedantry.”
