

The
Pastoral Homes
of Australia












THE PASTORAL HOMES
OF
AUSTRALIA
NEW SOUTH WALES & QUEENSLAND
COPYRIGHT.
Published by “The Pastokalists’ Review Propy. Ltd.,” Melbourne, Sydney and London.
1911


Printers:
JOHN ANDREW & CO.,
Sydney.
1911.


CONTENTS.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
PAGE
Introduction .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . . v., vi., vii., viii.
Abbey Green .. .. .. H. W. Curtis ~ .. .. .. .. 213
Bedervale R. J. C. Maddrell 125
Blue Nobby J. R. Black 289
Brooklyn .. .. .. .. H. W. Curtis .. .. . . . . . .. 213
Burra • • • • • • • - Groongal Pastoral Co., Ltd. .. .. .. 37
Burrawang Thos. Edols & Co., Ltd 177
Caloola .. .. .. .. R. G. Hassall .. .. .. .. .. 137
Durable . . .. . . .. F. W. Bacon .. .. . . . . . . .. 305
Eumbra .. .. .. .. Carter Bros. .. .. .. .. .. .. 201
Glencoe .. .. .. .. J. R. Black .. .. .. .. .. 289
Glen Legh .. .. .. .. Llangloh Want . . .. .. .. . . 241
Groongal .. .. .. .. Groongal Pastoral Co., Ltd. . . .. .. 37
Gunnee .. .. .. .. Warner, McLean & Bacon .. .. .. . . 277
Herbert Park Mrs. G. H. V. Jenkins 253
Jugiong .. .. .. .. Hope Osborne and Bros. .. .. .. .. 97
Kl mo •• .. .. .. James Robinson .. .. .. .. .. 85
Linton .. .. .. .. Carter Bros. .. .. .. .. .. .. 201
Linton .. .. .. .. A. B. Triggs .. .. .. .. .. .. 317
Marrar J. P. Cox 73
Mayvale .. .. .. .. Sawers & Wilson . . .. .. . . . . 225
Middlefield .. .. .. H. Strahorn .. .. .. . . , . . 185
Milchengowrie J. R. Black 289
Mundiwa R. H. Landale 1
Myall Plains J. R. Black 289
Nangunia .. .. .. E. J. Gorman .. .. . . .. , . . 17
Ohio .. .. .. .. J. A. Nivison .. .. .. .. .. .. 229
Olive Downs .. .. .. A. C. Macdonald .. .. .. .. .. 328 a
Redbank .. .. .. .. Ben. M. Osborne .. .. .. .. .. 113
Retford Park S. Hordern 149
Rockwood C. E. White 189
Roma .. .. .. .. C. E. White .. .. .. .. .. .. 139
Tiara .. .. .. .. E. Norton .. .. .. . . .. .. 265
Toganmain .. .. .. Exors. Thomas Robertson .. .. .. .. 49
Wallangra J. R. Black 289
Waterloo .. .. .. .. H. Strahorn .. .. .. .. .. .. 155
Werai .. .. .. .. McCrae Bros. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 25
Willandra .. .. .. ~ London Bank of Aust. Ltd. .. .. .. .. 61


QUEENSLAND.
PAGE
Alice Downs .. .. .. A. H. Whittingham .. .. .. • • ■ - 485
Bellevue .. .. .. .. Mrs. C. Lumley Hill .. .. .. • ■ ■ ■ 393
Biddenham.. .. .. .. R. D. Barton .. .. .. .. •• 449
Bimbah .. .. .. .. R. H. Edkins .. .. .. • • • • • • 325
Burleigh .. .. .. .. Ramsay Bros. .. .. .. • • • • 377
Cecil Plains .. .. .. Taylor Estates, Ltd. .. .. .. •• •• 409
Charlotte Plains .. .. .. Ramsay Bros. .. .. • • • • ■ • 377
Cressbrook .. .. .. J. H. McConnel .. .. ■ • • • • • 421
Corona. .. .. .. .. Groongal Pastoral Co., Ltd. .. .. .. 37
Darr River Downs .. .. E J Watt .. .. •• •• •• 313
East Talgai .. .. .. G. C. Clark .. .. .. •• •• •• 349
Elderslie .. .. .. .. Ramsay Bros. .. .. .. -. • • • • 377
Harrow .. .. .. .. Ramsay Bros. .. .. .. .. • • • • 377
Langlo Downs .. .. .. Cobbold St O’Brien .. .. .. .. • • 497
Listowel Downs .. .. .. Cobbold St O’Brien .. .. .. .. •• 497
Lyndhurst .. .. .. .. C. E. McDougall .. .. • • • • • • 329
Meteor Downs .. .. .. F. W. Donkin .. .. .. .. .. •• 461
Mitchell Downs .. .. .. Cobbold St O’Brien .. .. .. .. • • 497
Naryilco .. .. .. .. A. C. Macdonald .. .. .. .. .. 328 a
Oondooroo .. .. ■ • Ramsay Bros. .. .. • • • • ■ • 377
Strathmore A. H. W. Cunningham .. .. .. .. 473
Silsoe .. .. .. .. Groongal Pastoral Co., Ltd. .. .. .. 37
Westbrook .. .. .. .. F. G. G. Couper .. • • • • • • • • 337
Woolooga .. .. .. .. C. J. Booker .. .. .. .. •• •• 437
Yandilla .. .. .. .. W. F. Gore St Co., Ltd. . .. • • • • 361
CONTENTS— continued.


INTRODUCTION.
A FITTING preface to this volume is an explanation of its purpose. It is no mere
picture book arranged to please the eye ; neither does it lay claim to be a
standard history. It is, in brief, an effort to place on record for all time a
conception of Pastoral Australia as it is in this year nineteen hundred and
eleven. It has been a task of no mean proportions to procure such a variety of photo-
graphs. Immense distances have been traversed. The railway train, the motor car,
the station buggy, the tedious coach, camel teams and pack horses have all been re-
quisitioned, and these pages illustrate New South Wales and Queensland from their
northern to their southern boundaries. Change everywhere is persistent, but in com-
paratively young countries like Australia, the present merges into the past so unobtru-
sively that one is inclined to overlook the fact that history is being made even out of
the ordinary circumstances of life. The necessity for a work like this is a very real
one, because already too much that has counted in the growth of Pastoral Australia
has been allowed to slip away, quite unrecorded.
As a rule, when new landmarks arise the old ones are swept away. Though little
more than a century has passed since settlement became established in New South
Wales, the Mother State, a huge development has taken place. No one dare predict
the changes that the next half-century may bring to pass. There are still with us —
God bless them !- a few of those courageous men who faced the bush when it was as
the first white men found it. Their endeavours will stand for all time, and it is because
of them that the pastoral industry, as depicted in these pages, came to be. It is to
these venerable pioneers that the Editor is indebted for such glimpses of the past as
are weaved into the descriptions of the present. As before stated, this work does not
pretend to be historical, but it will not require many generations to make it so. All
too quickly the pioneers are passing from us, but they have lived to witness a develop-
ment of which they hardly dreamed. They have actually seen, or have heard their
forbears tell of the days before railways pierced the bush. They know of the rough
and tedious journeys on bullock drays and carts, when it took six weeks to do what the
steam horse does in but as many hours. They know of the lonely homesteads and the
joy experienced in entertaining passing friends, because that privilege was so oft


denied. They know how they got their stock together and penetrated a lonely land,
building their humble homes where water could be found. There are also those amongst
us who have had long acquaintance with the huge territory of Queensland, in which
State even to-day overlanding mobs of cattle travel for months on end, the distances are
so great, Though no noise of warfare dins the early pages of this country s history, a
conquest was none the less achieved, but it was an obtrusive one, against nature’s
silent forces. The native blacks, for a brief period, caused much suffering and trouble,
but they quickly faded away before the white invader. The text books tell of the
exploration of these States, and numerous works pay tribute to the early settlers, and
so it is left for these few lines to touch upon factors oft lost sight of, but which, never-
theless, have contributed to the present conditions of our pastoral life.
Of all the products that have made Australia’s greatness, the Merino Fleece stands
out in strong relief. The gold digging chapters in this country’s history are alluring
in their way, but the steady lever of development has been the golden fleece. And the
history of the fleece is very largely the history of these Pastoral Homes. The first
houses were crude enough, but they were loved as homes will always be. The main
problem then in life was to raise the means to support such homes, and in the Merino
sheep the solution lay. But the land had to be prepared for it, and the progress from
the wooden home to the brick or stone mansion has been a most fascinating evolution,
the underlying forces of which were necessity and experience. Necessity mocked the
early settlers, but experience often came to their assistance and pieced together the
pastoral industry of to-day. The first pastoralists were not daunted by the obstacles
they met, but they were forced to overcome them. The well-filled dams and lagoons, the
windmills, tanks, and troughing, and the artesian bores illustrated in these pages,
are not of mushroom growth, but were evolved by stages from the waterholes beside
which many pastoral homes had their small beginning.
Lack of water, especially in Queensland, was one of the early obstacles to be over-
come, and this volume bears witness to the success achieved. Then there was the bush,
the heavy gum trees which would not permit grass to grow underneath them. But
they were in time replaced by grass, not by hewing down each tree, as is necessary in
nearly every other country, but by simply nicking out a circle of bark from around each
trunk. When the timber died, grass and nutritious herbage at once appeared, and
the carrying capacity of the country was increased immeasurably. Since the first
tree was ringbarked, the custom has swept throughout the land, and while it has been
of untold benefit it has also been responsible for vandalism, from which the land will
always suffer.
Pastoralists, therefore, made important progress towards the present homes when
they discovered how to place water convenient to their stock, and when they learned


that by ringbarking the bush fine pasture took its place. These are now simple every-
day matters, but like many other things, they came to be out of pure necessity.
There will be noticed in these pages frequent reference to subdivision, also an
ordinary topic, but, like the other two, it has been one of the things which have counted
in the game. There are very few countries on this earth where such rich pasture grows
so naturally as in Australia. No laborious cultivation or costly sowing—-pastures of the
most nutritious kind cover the face of the land- just on the magic touch of rain. The
various plants and grasses, hardy as they are through fighting centuries of droughts,
require artificial help when browsed upon by stock. So, when fencing wire came in,
the process of cutting vast paddocks into small ones enabled grazing to be regulated,
which has meant the salvation of this country’s pastures. In the “ far out back,”
where paddocks still are measured not by acres but by miles, when seasons fail, the
stock, wandering where they list, cut up the shallow soil and it is carried off by the
first hot winds that blow, leaving only barren clay pans.
The Merino sheep was looked to to support the homes of the early days and to
provide for the homes which were to come. And while water was being provided for
him, while bush was being killed for him, he was not neglected as he stood. When
the Merino first came to Australia he was a miserable specimen compared with his
descendants of to-day. Captain Macarthur, who imported the first sheep to this country,
wrote in 1808 that his rams’ fleeces had increased from 3 lbs. to 5 lbs. in weight, but
to-day rams have been known to cut up to 40 lbs. and the face of the country has been
changed in consequence. To the lay mind a sheep’s fleece is neither here nor there,
but many of the Pastoral Homes of Australia would not be what these pages show
them now to be if stud rams fleeces had not increased in weight since Macarthur’s time.
It has all gone on so quietly that one can hardly realise how it happened. Men
classed their sheep in Macarthur s time, and saw five-pound fleeces carried through
the drafting gates. Men have stood at drafting gates through all the intervening
years, and have come to see sheep with jackets weighing 40 lbs. passing through the
gates. Thus, in the dusty sheep yards, untold wealth has been given to this country
by controlling nature’s underlying law that like must beget like. Stately Pastoral
Homes have been reared upon this law intelligently directed, albeit by dusty, sweating
sheepmen hidden in the Australian bush. And those who have toiled in the cattle yards
of Queensland, round the cattle camps, and behind the overlanding mobs, they, too,
have left their marks on the landscape depicted here. The breaking in of Queensland
required stout hearts and heavy purses, and it may perhaps be a matter for relief that
these pages do not portray the havoc wrought among those who failed.
So the change has come about, and so it still goes on. While cattle and horses
have played no small part in the pastoral development of this land, the real burden


has been carried by the sheep. He, himself, has been so changed that he has changed
the face of everything. When his fleece is twelve months old the idle woolsheds through
out the land awake to life ; glittering machines peel off his fleece, wool teams come
in to the Railway from far off parts, and in due time the wave of keen activity reaches
the ocean’s side. This wool is sold for gold, and these pastoral homes have cost much
gold. They are beautiful in design, and stand in beautiful surroundings. They are
intended to be homes. They are modern in their appointments, and most of them
possess telephones and motor cars which defy the obstacle of distance, which was, to
the first pastoralists, one of the hardest things to face. Surely such homes are .an
asset to the nation ? Surely they are a tribute to the country and to those who solved
its problems? If so, then they are worthy of being placed on record, before inexor-
able change lays its finger on them. For change must go on and no one can prophesy
how quickly. Already the Merino has been pushed off large tracts of country to make
room for wheat, which, in its turn, brings crossbred sheep. How far this wheat belt
can encroach upon Merino land must yet be proved, but it seems as though, as time
goes on, the Merino must go further and further west. Then will the solution of the
knotty problem of the huge territory “ out back ” become a necessity more urgent
than it is at present, and who can tell the class of homes that such necessity, aided by
experience, will evolve out there ? But when that time comes, if it ever does, what
will be the appearance of the country illustrated in these pages ? The Pastoral Homes
described herein may still be there, ever growing dearer as old age creeps o’er them,
but, if change should not spare them, then will these pages recall things as they were,
As old Omar Khayyam said—
‘ The moving finger writes ; and having writ
Moves on ; nor all thy Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a line,
Nor all thy tears wash out a word of it.”
"CAMDEN.”
Sydney,
December, 1911.


The Mundiwa a Estate.
The Property of Mr. R. Hunter Landale.
MR. R. H. LANDALE’S Mundiwa Estate is situated in the Deniliquin district, where
so many famous stations lie. It was once a part of Deniliquin Station, one of
the earliest runs to be taken up. Amongst the first settlers in those parts were
Messrs. F. and H. Gwynne at Murgha and Werai; H. Ricketson, at Cornalla, Barratta, and
Aratula; Peppin Bros., at Morago; W. Officer, at Zara; Phillips and Graves, at Warbreccan;
W. Lang, at Wagram, and R. Patterson, at Puckawidgee.
THE WOOLSHED.
Deniliquin Station was purchased by the late James Tyson from the Royal Bank in the
50’s, and in 1861 Mr. Tyson sold it to the late Mr. Robert Landale, and it has been in that
family ever since. The estate comprised about 100,000 acres, and Mr. Landale took his
brother Alexander into partnership; but in 1891 the partnership was dissolved, and the
estate was divided between the two brothers, Mr. Robert Landale taking that area now
known as Mundiwa, and Mr. Alexander Landale taking what is now known as Wandook.
The present owner, Mr. R. Hunter Landale, managed Mundiwa for many years for his father,
who died in 1903 and left the estate to him and to his youngest brother, Cyril. Subse-
quently Mr. R. H. Landale bought his brother out, and became the sole owner.
1


THE HOMESTEAD.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


1. GROUP OF STUD LAMBS.
2. WOOL TEAM.
3. BOLINDA DUKE OF PEARL 1.
4. GROUP OF STUD EWES.
3
The Mundiwa Estate, New South Wales .


Mundiwa now com-
prises 50,000 acres;
it lies on the Ed-
wards River, about
four miles from Den-
iliquin. The country
was once heavily
timbered with box,
but about 40,000
acres were rung
man}- years ago, and
on several occasions
since the run has
NEAR THE HOMESTEAD.
been suckered and the dead timber picked up and burned, and it is estimated that in this way
quite 255. per acre has been spent to date. Ihe nature of the country is open plains, carry-
ing clumps of boree timber, and the plains are intersected with picturesque pine ridges.
The soil is red and very rich, and in anything like a good season it produces luxuriant clover,
trefoil, and barley grass, with umbrella grass in the summer time.
The average rainfall is about 16m. per annum, which enables a fair amount of culti-
vation to be carried on. This, however, is only done for station requirements, and the area
put under crop every year does not exceed 100 acres. Wheat is the principal crop which is
grown for hay purposes; the results, of course, largely depend upon the rainfall, but a fair
year’s average is about if tons of hay per acre. A small irrigation scheme is in operation,
having recently been started, and already two heavy crops of amber cane have been taken off
and converted into
ensilage and stored
in pits. This year
lucerne has been
planted for the first
time, and it is the in-
tention of Mr. Lan-
dale to grow as
much hay and fodder
as possible, so as to
prepare for droughts
which may come
along.
THE STABLES.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CATTLE IN THE RUSSELL BEND PADDOCK.
The Mundiwa Estate, New South Wales,


ON E OF THE PA DDOCKS NEA R THE HOMESTED.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.
6


The estate is well supplied with water, hav-
ing about ten miles frontage to the Edwards
River, and in addition the Tuppal Creek flows
through a portion of the run.
One great feature of Riverina when it was
first settled was the scarcity of water for
stock purposes, and the most necessary im-
provements have been in connection with
water supply. Mundiwa has been no excep-
tion to this, and in spite of the natural water-
courses above mentioned, huge sums of money
have been spent to facilitate stock getting to
water easily. No less than eighty-seven tanks
have been excavated, and in addition three
wells and one bore have been put down.
THE LATE MR. ROBERT LANDALE.
As protection against the rabbit pest the whole estate is surrounded with wire net-
ting, and also subdivided with netting. The usual style of fence adopted is constructed
with pine posts and five or six wires.
All impro\ ements on Mundiwa are of a substantial nature. Ihe horse and cattle
yards are made of red gum posts and rails, and the stables and coachhouses are of brick
with slate roofs. Ihe stables comprise two large loose boxes and four single stalls, and
there is also a wooden stable containing ten stalls for the men’s horses.
I he cattle on Mundiwa comprise Shorthorns,
chiefly of the milking strain. In 1903 nine
cows were purchased from Mr. William Mor-
ton, of Victoria, and the same year a milking
strain Shorthorn bull was purchased from Mr.
Everard Browne, of Colac, Vic. This was an
imported bull named Royalist. In 1907, Mr.
Landale purchased a bull named Lord Love!
from Mr. E. A. Porter, Victoria, and in 1911,
Belinda Duke of Pearl 1., from Sir Rupert
Clarke’s Belinda Vale Stud.
For horse-breeding purposes two stallions
are kept. One is a pony named Robin, which
Mr. Landale purchased in Melbourne in 1905.
He has proved a good stock getter, his pro-
MR. R. HUNTER LANDALE.
7
The Mundiwa Estate, New South Wales.


ON THE EDWARDS RIVER.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD AND GARDEN.
9
The Mundiwa Estate, New South Wa/es,


geny being of a stamp which sells very readily A draught stallion, named Royal Duke, pur-
chased from Messrs. Hamilton Bros., of Finley, in iBgg, did good work at the Mundiwa
Stud, but the horse at present in use is Sir Edwin, purchased in Melbourne from Mr. T. T.
Thornton this year (ig 11). From time to time numbers of high-class draught mares have
been purchased from Victorian breeders, and, taking it all round, horse-breeding at Mun-
diwa has been very successful.
The Merino flock is by no means the least important feature of Mundiwa. It com-
prises about 40,000 sheep, all carefully bred on the Tasmanian strain. There are 18,000
ewes to breed from, and no expense has been spared in regard to maintaining the stan-
A GROUP OF MARES AND FOALS.
dard of the flock. On several occasions high-priced rams from leading Tasmanian flocks
have been introduced, and Mr. Landale has frequently purchased Tasmanian stud ewes.
Ten years ago Zara rams, also of Tasmanian strain, were introduced, and in igio 150
rams from that stud were turned into the flock. The average weight of fleece throughout
ranges from 8 lbs. to gibs. The lambing season is from April to May, and the percentage
is between 80 and 85.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW ON TUPPAL CREEK.
11
The Mundiwa Estate, New South Wales


THE AV ENUE.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE EDWARDS RIVER NEAR THE HOMESTEAD.
i 3
The Mundiwa Estate, New South Wales,


STANDING CROP.
| 4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


IN ONE OF THE STUD PADDOCKS.
The Munciiwa Estate, New South Wales .


ANOTHER VIEW THE AVENUE.
During the last five years, Mr. Landale has been putting Border Leicester rams with
the five-year-old ewes, an excellent freezer being the result. He first purchased rams from
New Zealand, but for the last two years he has been obtaining them from the well-known
flock of Mr. J. A. Cochrane, Ceres, Geelong, Victoria.
16
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Nangunia Estate.
The Property of Mr. E. J. Gorman,
NANGUNIA, the property of Mr. E. J. Gorman, is one of the best-known estates in
the Berrigan district. The area of the estate is 13,300 acres freehold, and it
is situated four miles from Berrigan and twenty miles from Cobram railway sta-
tion, on the Murray. Mr. James Hillas was one of the first owners of Nangunia, and used it
as a cattle station; it was sold to Mr. Angus Mackay, who disposed of it to Mr. Richard
Polwhele about 1862. Mr. Polwhele was killed through being run over by a horse bolting
HARVESTERS AT WORK.
with a dray in 1867, and Mr. Henry Godfrey became the owner. The property was man-
aged for a number of years by Mr. Edward Townsend, who died in 1885. Mr. Edward
Haines, whose father was for a time Premier of Victoria, managed for the executors of
Henry Godfrey until 1897, when it was sold to the present owner.
Nangunia was used entirely for grazing previous to 1897, but immediately it came into
the possession of Mr. Gorman he commenced wheat growing, which he has since continued
1


with very satisfactory results. The bulk of
the land on Nangunia is a strong clayey
loam, but there are several small patches of
open plain, which, although not as heavy
carrying as the timber land, are very fat-
tening. In the days before ringbarking
was understood the Nangunia plain was fa-
mous as a piece of valuable grazing land.
Rainfall records have been kept on
Lalaltee and adjoining properties by Mr.
Budd as far back as 1875, and they go to
prove that the average rainfall is consider-
ably less now than it was during the period
1875 to 1896 inclusive, when the records
give the average as 20 in. Taking the ave-
rage for the past thirty-five years, it is not
more than 18 in., yet this district has im-
proved more during the dry years than dur-
ing the years of heavy rainfall.
MR. E. J. GORMAN.
Nangunia is watered mainly by tanks, some of them being 17 ft. 6 in. deep. Owing
to the country being slightly undulating, and that the tanks hold like bottles, the water
THE HOMESTEAD
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


supply is ample during the driest times. A number of windmills are used to pump water
for cattle and horses.
1 he homestead contains nineteen rooms, including a billiard room, and is built of brick,
with hollow walls, and is very well ventilated. It is sewered by the septic tank system,
and has a hot and cold water service throughout. The garden embraces an area of five
acres, and includes vegetables, fruit, and flowers. A hedge of pepper trees on three sides
provide shelter from the prevailing winds; a tree lucerne hedge divides the vegetable and
SIDE VIES OF THE HOUSE.
fruit portion from the rest of the garden. A tennis court and golf links provide recreation
for family and visitors.
The property is divided into thirty-five paddocks, the boundary being wire-netted. Four
thousand acres have been cleared for cultivation. Married men with families are employed
to do the farm work as far as possible. Comfortable cottages are provided, and as the sys-
tem of farming consists of fallowing, and the conservation of fodder by means of ensilage
pits, and hay stacks, a large amount of labour is always required. A large supply of oats
is always kept on hand, as it is found that a crop of oats does well on land that is wheat
sick. The straw makes useful fodder; over 50 bushels to the acre has been harvested,
3
The Nangunia Estate, New South Wales.


leaving a heavy seeding for the following season, which provides an excellent crop for en-
silage. Land that has been cropped for a few years when allowed to go back to grass
shows a much heavier carrying capacity. Mr. Gorman has had as many as eight sheep to
the acre on a paddock where there was a heavy crop of wild oats and self-sown wheat, and
it has carried them for a considerable time. About fifty draught horses are kept, being
chiefly mares, and by having a stallion on the place Mr. Gorman generally gets from
twelve to twenty foals, which are worth up to when two and a half years old.
MOB OF SPEYED HEIFERS.
He also breeds a few thoroughbreds for picnic racing, four of his mares being in the
stud book, and are fashionably bred. One is by St. Swithan, one by Bundook, one by
Amhurst, and one by True Blue. He has given some attention to Bruce Lowe’s figure sys-
tem, and hopes to breed a top notcher some day. Mr. Gorman has laid the foundation
of a high-class Merino stud flock, having recently purchased fifty stud ewes from Mr. C.
D. Sanger, of South Wangamong. These ewes are in lamb to one of Mr. Sanger’s best
sires, so Mr. Gorman should have very satisfactory results. In regard to sheepbreeding
generally, he makes a specialty of breeding first cross sheep, selling the ewes when 2-tooth
to Victorian breeders.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MOB OF FIRST-CROSS EWES.
personal.
Mr. E. J. Gorman’s grandfather arrived in Melbourne with his family in and
he took up a block of land where Essendon now stands. His son, the late John Gorman
BROOD MARES.
5
The Nangunia Estate, New South Wales,


(father of the present owner of Nangunia) cc mmenced farming at Wallen, about thirty nrles
from Melbourne, where Mr. E. J. Gorman was born. In 1868 the family moved to Hughes
Creek, near Avenel, where the late Mr. Gorman put together a little property, which is still
held by his widow, and is known as Westbrook. It consists of 1280 acres of fertile agri-
cultural land, and an offer of £1 5 per acre was refused for it a few years ago. In 1878 the
Gormans made a move across the Murray, where they selected and purchased an area of
15,000 acres, which they named Galtee Park, and where the first wheat was grown in the
DRUGHT STALLION.
Berngan district for milling purposes. In 1890 the late Mr. Gorman retired, and the whole
of the property was divided between six of his sons. Mr. E. J. Gorman acquired an adjoin-
ing property of 2000 acres, known as Woodstock, where he went in for wheat growing on
a fairly large scale, although the wheat had then to be carted to Jerilderie, a distance of
twenty-six miles. He also started an auctioneering and stock business in Berngan, which
he conducted until he bought Nangunia in 189;. His father died in the beginning of 189;.
Mr. Gorman went for a trip through Europe to England, returning via America. While in
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


England he witnessed the Jubilee Celebrations. Upon his return from England he formed
a syndicate, and bought Nangunia, which then contained an area of 30,000 acres. Owing
to the fact that the owners were living in England, the property had been very sadly neg-
lected, most of it being covered with a dense pine forest. For the first two years Mr.
Gorman employed from fifty to a hundred men continuously scrub-cutting, fencing, tank-
sinking, and clearing for cultivation.
FARM HOMESTEAD.
He subdivided the property, and sold about 17,000 acres previous to 1900, when he
took over the balance of the property. Nangunia was the first large property to be sub-
divided for closer settlement in that part of the Riverina. In 1 896 he erected a new brick
homestead built on modern lines, and which is considered one of the most comfortable and
well-designed houses in the district.
He has always taken an interest in public affairs, and was the first president of Ker-
rigan Shire Council, which position he held for three terms, and is still a councillor. He is
president of the Agricultural Society, and was one of the founders of the Picnic Race Club,
7
The Nangunia Estate, New South Wales.


HARROWING FALLOW.
being president for the first three years. He was also the first president of the Golf Club,
and was chairman of the Murray Main Canal League, and presided at the conference held
in Corowa in 1901.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Werai Estate.
The Property of Messrs. Arhibald R., John A., and William McCrae.
WERAI, the property of Messrs. Archibald R., John A., and William McCrae, is
situated about thirty-five miles north-west of Deniliquin, and comprises
40,000 acres of freehold and leasehold country. In the early years under
the first proprietorship, it covered a larger embracing North Wakool, and was, more-
over, a cattle station. It is now practically devoted to sheepraising.
FLOCK OF SIX-TOOTH EWES AND LAMBS.
Werai was taken up originally in 1843 by the Gwynne Bros. (Henry, Richard, and
Frank), sons of Colonel Alban Gwynne. They met with many difficulties during those early
pioneering days, not the least being the hostility of the blacks, who caused such constant
trouble that the Government had to send troopers to disperse them. Many encounters took
place between the troopers and blacks before the Gwynne brothers were really freed from
their interference. One incident is related in connection with the hostility of the blacks
1


which occurred prior to the arrival of the troopers, which conveys an idea of what the
Gwynnes had to face when making a home at Werai. The blacks had planned an attack
upon the hut, which then constituted the homestead of the station. They had arranged that
the attack should take place at a time reckoned by the state of the moon. Fortunately,
their intention was revealed to one of the Gwynnes by a friendly black out of gratitude for
certain kindnesses shown him. Mr. Gwynne despatched a stockrider as quickly and quietly
as possible to Morago, the nearest station, for as many men as could be spared. Five men
arrived, and managed to get into the hut unknown to the blacks, who were gathering from
VIEW OF THE WERAL HOMESTEAD FROM THE SOUTH-EAST.
all quarters, and preparing for a general massacre of all on the station. With the reinforce-
ment that had arrived, there were now eleven people in the hut, and steps were taken to
prepare for the attack. The place was loopholed all round, and every precaution taken to
prevent the hut being fired. The defenders then waited for developments, and at the ap-
pointed time they saw the blacks approaching ostensibly unarmed and with friendly in-
tent, but actually dragging through the long grass, with the aid of their toes, spears and
other weapons. The watchers in the hut waited until the blacks stooped down to seize their
spears, then sent a volley into them, and before they could recover from their consterna-
-2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW IN THE GARDEN.
The Werai Estate, New South Wales.


MR. J. A. McCRAE. MR. A. R. McCRAE. Mr. W. McCRAE.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF HOMESTEAD FROM SOUTH.
5
The Werai Estate, New South Wales .


tion, a second volley rang out. Without waiting to remove their dead and wounded, they
turned and fled in sheer panic, while from the hut rushed the small band of men to com-
plete the rout. The affair was, of course, much talked of, and the Government sent Com-
missioner Bingham to investigate the matter. After careful inquiry, he reported that what
was done was justified by the circumstances.
The arrival of troopers, under Mr. Fred Walker, to patrol the district after this secured
for the Gwynnes peaceful possession of their land and stock.
After the Gwynne Bros, dissolved partnership, Werai remained the property of Mr-
Henry Gwynne until 1876, when he sold it to Dr. Stitt. It was during the proprietorship
FROUP OF MARES AND FOALS.
of Dr. Stitt that the property was converted into a sheep station. Upon his death, in iBBg,
the station was sold by auction, and was purchased by the present owners, Messrs. McCrae
Bros.
The flock consists of about 22,000 Merinos. When Messrs. McCrae Bros, purchased
the property, they heavily culled and introduced high-grade Tasmanian rams, and at the
same time founded a stud flock, high-price Tasmanian rams being purchased from Mr.
William Gibson, of Scone, and latterly from the late Mr. James Gibson, of Bellevue, Tas-
mania. At the present moment the stud is as nearly as possible a Tasmanian type of
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CHARACTER OF COUNTRY.
7
The Werai Estate, New South Wales


Merino. The sheep are large-framed, of
robust constitution, with lengthy fleeces
of fine combing wool. This stud, which
consists of about 800 ewes, is kept en-
tirely for the station’s requirements.
A small herd of about 150 head of
Shorthorns is run on the station. Be-
linda Vale bulls have been used in this
herd from time to time.
About thirty-five breeding mares
STUD RAM.
are also on the property, and for the past fifteen years the horses bred there have found a
ready sale on the In-
stallion used at pre-
Wellington, bred by
Bros-, of Camper-
The wool clip is
Melbourne, and is al-
top prices.
posed of excellent
is timbered princip-
natural grasses being
About 700 acres of
cultivation with
amber cane, all of
dian market. The
sent is Berar, by
Messrs. Manifold
down.
usually marketed in
ways amongst the
Werai is corn-
level country, and
ally with box, the
particularly good,
the estate are under
wheat, oats, and
which are irrigated if
THOROUGHBRED STALLION BERAR.
necessary, the water being obtained from Colhgen Creek by means of a 15-in. centrifugal
pump driven by a 12-h.p. Marshall engine.
The property is watered by the Ed-
ward River, which runs nine and a half
miles along one of the boundaries. The
Colhgen Creek runs through most of the
estate, and in addition to these natural
water supplies, there are various large
tanks, some of which can be filled by
channels from the pump. The station
is, therefore, exceptionally well provided
with water for all its requirements.
STUD RAMS.
8
The Pastora/ Homes of Australia.


WOOL TEANS LEAVING SHED.
9
The Werai Estate, New South Wales.


Werai is divided into twenty-five paddocks, and the boundaries are wire-netted,
while a cross netting fence divides the property. The rabbit pest is absolutely unknown
on the run.
The woolshed is a large weatherboard building with a stand of 20 Wolseley sheep-
shearing machines, installed in 1900. These are driven by a 10-h.p. portable Marshall en-
gine. Adjoining the creek has been constructed a brick and cement dip, where all the
sheep dipping is done.
VIEW IN GARDEN.
The homestead was built in iB6O by Mr- Henry Gwynne. It is a fine structure of
brick, its internal fittings being of cedar, and cost about £lO,OOO. It is lighted'by acety-
lene gas, and all its appointments are of the most modern description.
The garden, which was designed by Messrs. McCrae Bros., covers an area of about
two acres, and is admitted to be amongst the finest in the Riverina district. The water
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


IRRIGATED OATS.
for this and the vegetable garden is obtained from an elevated tank, which is filled with
the aid of a steam pump. For domestic purposes rain water from the roofs is conserved
in tanks.
IRRIGATED WHEAT.
11
The Werai Estate, New South Wales.


IRRIGATION CHANNEL.
Amber cane and oats grown on the property are converted into ensilage and stored
in large pits. The ensilage now in one of the pits has been conserved for the past eighteen
months. The station is connected with the Deniliquin Telephone Exchange. Werai is man-
aged by Messrs. A. R. and J. A. McCrae.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Groongal and Burra (A.S.W) and Corona,
Silsoe and Reeroogooloo (Q'land) Estates.
THE name of Learmonth has been intimately associated with the breeding of Merino
sheep since the early part of the last century. In 1838 Messrs. Thomas and Somer-
ville Learmonth settled down in Victoria, having taken up a tract of rich land in the
vicinity of Ballarat, where they eventually established their home at Ercildoune, and formed
with infinite care a stud of Merino sheep, the original of which were purchased from Mr.
Kermode, of Tasmania. This flock laid the foundation of many of the most valuable flocks
of Victoria of the present day, and as time went on its rams were widely distributed through-
out New South Wales. Early in 1865 the Messrs. Learmonth, together with their
younger brother Andrew, purchased Groongal from Messrs. Harvey and Cockburn, and
GROONGAL CATTLE.
Bringag-ee from Messrs. Harvey and Alleyne. These properties, situated on the northern
banks of the Murrumbidgee, about midway between Narrandera and Hay, were (with Bene-
rembah) originally taken up in the fifties by a Mr. O’Brien, of Yass, and consisted of about
35,000 acres of land held under lease from the Crown. The first manager of the property
under the Learmonths was Mr. McLarty, the father of Mr. Donald McLarty, the present
manager of Bundure. In 1870 Mr. George Mair was appointed manager, and remained in
1


THE HOMESTEAD, GROONGAL, N.S.W.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MR. FRANCIS CAMPBELL.
Managing Director.
MR. S. R. LIVINGSTONE-LEARMONTH,
A Director of the Company.
that position until the early nineties. Under Mr. Mair’s management 310,000 acres of
land were secured and made freehold in one solid block, and improvements were pushed on
and the stock continually improved, large numbers of stud rams and stud ewes being sent
up from Ercildoune.
The country consists of rich plains, interspersed with sand ridges covered with Murray
pine, and well sheltered with myall and kooba trees, and clumps of other timber, 'and has
MR. GEO. H. MAIR,
a Director of the Company.
MR. F. V. C. LIVINGSTONE-LEARMONTH.
a Director of the Company.
3
The Groongal and Burra (N.S.W.), Corona, Si/soe and Keeroongooloo (Q’land.) Estates.


a long frontage to the
River Murrumbidgee. Wa-
ter is obtainable anywhere
by means of wells, the
water rising to a uniform
depth of from 70 to 80 ft.
from the surface, and in
addition to wells, there are
a large number of tanks
and dams.
In 1889, Somerville
Learmonth having died,
CATTLE ON COOLER CHANNELS, KEEROONGOOLOO.
Wyvern, and Bringagee.
The brothers then drew
lots for them. Groongal
fell to Somerville’s estate,
Wyvern to Andrew, and
Bringagee to Thomas. The
latter property was sold
only last year (iqio) by
Mr. Thomas Learmonth’s
trustees to Mr. Albert
Austin, of Wanganella.
Groongal remained the
4
COCKAWANA WATER HOLE, KEEROONGOOLOO.
his trustees resolved to
withdraw his share from
the partnership, and the
then Learmonth Bros, re-
solved to dissolve partner-
ship, and Groongal was
divided into three blocks,
each of them having a
frontage to the river and
extending north about 30
miles. These three blocks
were known as Groongal,
BORING PLANT KEEROONGOOLOO.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MITCHELL GRASS, CORONA.
the amalgamation of the
two interests. The estate
still bears out its original
reputation as a sheep-
breeding country. Its stud
flock was in the early
eighties added to by the
purchase of judiciously
selected Tasmanian rams,
and later by the purchase
from Wanganella of a
number of very fine stud
CORONA WOOLSHED.
5
sole property of the estate
of Mr. Somerville Lear-
month until 1906, when
the then owners, the chil-
dren of the late Mr. Somer-
ville Learmonth decided
to join with Messrs. Mair
and Learmonth in their
Queensland and New
South Wales properties,
and the Groongal Pastoral
Company was formed, as
KEEROONGOOLOO CATTLE.
rams. The sheep are
large-framed and plain-
bodied, carrying heavy
fleeces of excellent quality,
and the wool always rea-
lises high prices.
There is also a high-class
herd of stud Shorthorns,
which has been constantly
kept up to the mark by the
purchase of highest-class
sires from the leading
The Groongal and Burra (N.S.W.), Corona, Silsoe and Keeroongooloo (Q’land.) Estates.


GROONGAL SHEEP.
MOB OF EWES AND LAMBS ON GROONGAL.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF RIVER SHOWING MEN'S QUARTERS.
THE MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER AT GROONGAL HOMESTEAD.
7
The Groonga! and Burra (N.S. IV.), Corona, Si/soe and Keeroongooloo (Q’tand.) Estates.


ENTRANCE TO GROONGAL HOMESTEAD.
PORTION OF GROONGAL GARDEN.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


KEEROONGOOLOO HOMESTEAD.
herds. Imported cattle were also included in the purchase of the estate in 1865.
Groongal has long been well known for the excellency of its horses, Melbourne, by Panic,
Homer, by Delhi—Poetess, Vengeur, by Chandos—First Lady, and Vino, by Haut Bnon—
Miss Westbourne (imp)., being amongst those that have been used. The draught horses
are also a very excellent lot.
Corona, an area of some 600
odd square miles, one of the
firm’s properties, is situated m
the Mitchell district of Queens-
land, and was purchased by
Messrs. George and James Man-
ia 1881, from the Peel River
Land and Mineral Company, and
two years later a one-third
share was sold to Mr. S. R.
Livingstone - Learmonth. At
that time that part of Queens-
land was quite undeveloped,
LEICESTER EWES AND LAMBS—BURRA.
9
The Groongal and Burra (N.S.W.), Corona, Silsoe and Keeroongooloo (Q’land.) Estates.


almost the whole of the country being occupied by cattle. On the purchase of the property
steps were immediately taken to dispose of the cattle and improve the country for sheep.
In 1 896 Silsoe, a property adjoining Corona, was purchased, and has since been worked
in conjunction with Corona. A portion of Corona and Silsoe has been resumed by the
Government, and is occupied by grazing farmers, but there still remains a solid block of
348,000 acres including about 62,000 acres purchased land, one of the best properties in the
famous Mitchell district.
CATTLE WATERING ON GROONGAL.
Keeroongooloo, on the Cooper, in the South Gregory district, Queensland, is another fine
property owned by the company. It contains more than a million acres. In a good flood
year fully a quarter of this area is irrigated by the waters of the Barcoo and Thomson Rivers.
Keeroongooloo comprises some of the best fattening country in Australia.
Burra, which was purchased by Messrs. Mairand Learmonth, is also one of the company’s
properties, and is a fine estate, situated on the highlands in the Tumbarumba district, New
South Wales. When purchased some thirteen years ago it was in a very rough state, and
a large sum of money has been spent in improving the place. It is now well improved, con-
sisting of rich basaltic and granite lands interspersed, and with about a 40-111. rainfall, will
no doubt become a great potato and dairying country.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BURRA HOMESTEAD
CORONA HOMESTEAD.
The Groongal and Burra (N.S.W.), Corona, Silsoe and Keeroongooloo (Q’land.) Estates.
I 1


THE STABLES, GROONGAL.
Andrew Learmonth, Thomas Learmonth, and Somerville Learmonth first settled at
Lawrence Park, Aloorabool, Victoria, and from there they took up Buningyong, and then
Ercildoune. They owned at various times stations at Glenelg and Wycheproof, in Victoria,
and in New South Wales, Nyang, on the Edwards, and Teryaweynia, on the Darling.
Mr. Francis Campbell, the general manager, is a son of Mr. Colin Campbell, one of the
first Victorian settlers as far back as 1838. He went to Groongal first in 1875, and on leav-
ing there 111 1881, took up the management of Corona for the Messrs. Mair, retaining this
until he was appointed managing director of the Groongal Pastoral Company m 1908.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Toganmain Estate.
The Property of the Erecutors of the late Thos. Robertson.
A BOUT midway between Hay and Narandera on a fine stretch of flat country is situated
/ \ Toganmain Station, the property of the Executors of the late Thomas Robertson.
It comprises about 167,000 acres, and is certainly one of the best properties
in the Riverina district, which is noted for the great size and heavy wool-cutting qualities of
the sheep.
THE HOMESTEAD.
Toganmain has a frontage of fully thirteen miles to the Murrumbidgee River, and in
various parts of the run over thirty wells and tanks have been constructed and windmills
erected, so that there is an abundant supply of water at all seasons.
The property is divided into about seventy paddocks, and is fenced completely with
rabbit-proof netting. In the past considerable trouble was experienced with the rabbit pest,
but a systematic warfare has been waged against it, and although the fight was a long
and costly one (the total figure is over £10.000), it is satisfactory to know that at the
present time the pest is practically extinguished.
1


The flock on Toganmain consists of about
100,000 Merino sheep. It was established by
the introduction of Havilah and Wanganella
blood. Mr. Robertson has bestowed considerable
attention on the stud flock, which consists of about
2000 ewes from which he has had excellent
results. From this stud he rears about 600 rams
annually. In 1910 a start was made with sending a
few of the stud rams to the annual sales at Sydney,
where they attracted considerable notice, and good
prices were realised.
In addition, Mr. Robertson uses some of the
Merino ewes for crossbreeding with Lincoln rams,
which are also bred on the station, and he markets
from this source annually about 5000 fats, which
always realise good prices.
THE LATE MR. THOS. ROBERTSON.
With regard to the wool a medium quality of good staple is grown. Last year (1910)
the clip averaged 10 lbs. per sheep, and realised the top prices for the district in the Mel-
bourne market.
About 100 Shorthorn cattle are run, and about
200 horses, including 50 brood draught mares.
I he homestead at Toganmain was built about
twenty years ago. It is a brick building, and re-
plete with every modern convenience. The sewer-
age system is on the septic tank plan, and the water
supply for domestic purposes is obtained from the
river. The homestead garden is well laid out and
well attended to, and is a very attractive feature of
the place.
The woolshed, about three-quarters of a mile
away from the homestead, is an iron building with
fifty-five stands of sheep-shearing machines, which
are driven by a 12-h.p. steam engine.
From the woolshed to the river bank, a distance
of perhaps three-quarters of a mile, a horse tram-
MR. J. S. ROBERTSON.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD, TOGANMAIN, N.S.W.
3
The Toganmain Estate, New South Wales.


SHORTHORON CATTLE.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOODSHED AND A FLOCK OF EWES.
way runs. This conveys the wool to the wharf knd shed, where it is either loaded into
barges or, if the river is not navigable, stored until the barges arrive. The wool goes by
river to Echuca, on the Murray, and is then forwarded by rail to Melbourne, where it is sold.
A well-equipped scour is also situated at the river end of the tramway, and here is
treated all the dirty and stained wool. The scoured article is also sent to Melbourne by the
same route.
FersonaL
The Toganmain property originally
belonged to Sir Arthur Macleay, from
whom it was purchased in the early
seventies by the late Mr. Thomas
Robertson.
Mr. Robertson arrived in Victoria on
the 2 I st January, 1840, with his father,
Mr. Thomas Robertson, sen., and two
brothers, James and John, and one sis-
ter (afterwards Mrs. William Skene).
Mr. Robertson, sen., and his sons at
once entered into pastoral pursuits,
purchasing ewes at 30s. a head, and
A TOGANMAIN STUD EWE.
5
The Toganmain Estate, New South Wales.


THE SHEARING BOARD.
THE WOOL TABLES.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


THE WOOL SCOUR.
DRYING WOOL.
7
The ToQa.nma.in Estate, New South Wales•


A GROUP OF STUD RAMS.
TOGANMAIN STUD EWES.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


taking up land on Broken River, near Ben-
alia. This venture did not prove satisfac-
tory, and they left the district, and brought
the stock across to Mt. Mitchell, which they
had purchased from Messrs. Learmonth
Bros., of Ercildoune. Mr. William Skene (in
later years the Hon. William Skene, M.L.C.)
had married Miss Robertson, and was in the
partnership for a time. About the year 1851
Mr. Skene sold out, and it became the well-
known firm of Robertson and Sons.
In later years they owned Victoria Valley,
Yarram Yarram, East Loddon, Gazette,
Pleasant Banks, and Eockhart. Mr. Ihomas
Robertson resided at East Loddon for some
time, and afterwards went to Yarram Yar-
ram, where he resided until the dissolution
STUD LINCOLN EWES.
9
BRIDGE ON CREEK.
The Tofjanmain Estate, New South Wales.


THE MURRUMBIDGEE RIVER.
of partnership in 1873, when he acquired Brewarranna, in New South Wales, then a very
large station.
On selling this later
on, he purchased To-
ganmain, which he held
until his death, in 1904,
at the age of eighty
years.
Mr. Robertson had
married Miss Grace
Duncan, and had a
family of three daugh-
ters and two sons. One
son died in infancy,
and the other, Mr.
John Seymour Robert-
son, resides at Togan-
THE PUNT.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


WELL AND WINDMILL.
SHEEP WATERING AT DAM.
11
The ToQa.nma.in Estate, New South Wales,


main, having had the
management of the
station practically ever
since his father’s death.
Born in 1882 at St.
Kilda, Victoria, Mr. J.
S. Robertson’s early
schooling was conduct-
ed in that State, and he
completed his educa-
tion in England at
Cheltenham and Cam-
bridge. Returning to
Australia, he gained his
early pastoral expen-
THE WOOL TRAMWAY TO RIVER.
ence on the Lachlan with Mr. Curtis Reid, of Cowl Cowl, an experience which well fitted him
for the responsible management which at a comparatively early age he was called upon to
undertake at Toganmain. He married in 1907 Beatrix, the youngest daughter of Mr. J. B.
Bettington, of Brindley Park, New South Wales.
THE STAFF.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Willandra Estate.
WILLANDRA Station is one of the most notable of the large holdings in the
Western Division of New South Wales. It lies in an area where things are
done on a large scale; in fact, where they have to be done on a large scale on
account of the distance from rail communication and the comparatively low rainfall.
Willandra lies about 35 miles west of Hillston, one of the most important towns on the
Lachlan River, which is the eastern boundary of the Western Division; in area it is 257,758
acres, and it lies between the Lachlan and the Willandra Creek. The country in this part is
absolutely level, and if the season is at all favourable it looks like a large bowling green.
It is a land of space, and distances are not measured by bends in the road or hills, as in the
THE WEIR ON WILLANDRA CREEK, NEAR THE HOMESTEAD.
Eastern Division, but by clumps of timber, which may be five, ten, or twenty miles apart.
The land is very fertile, consisting of black and red soil plains, interspersed with clumps as men-
tioned above. These timber belts comprise box trees chiefly, but on the river frontage there
are very fine belts of red gum.
Carefully-compiled records show that this is a very low rainfall country; figures from
1893 to 1910 show a yearly average of 11.19. This being so, it can easily be imagined that
water supply is a great factor in station management.
1


TWO-TOOTH SALE RAMS, EN ROUTE FOR QUEENSLAND.
MOB OF TWO-TOOTH SALE RAMS AT THE WOOLSHED.
2
She Pastorat Homes of Australia .


It is reported that the famous bush-
rangers, Ben and Bill Hall, used to
bring stock to graze every winter on
Willandra, and the Willandra and Mer-
rowie Creeks were often used as win-
ter country by people as far away as
Bathurst.
As regards water supply, Willandra
has been well improved. The pro-
perty is watered by the Lachlan River,
FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAMS.
and the Willandra and Merrowie Creeks, and in addition the management has put down
eighteen wells, which are pumped by windmills.
Water can be obtained on almost any part of the estate at an average depth of 110 ft.
Well shafts measure
they are timbered
The water is raised
galvanised iron and
ed into troughs, at
The cost of each of
(including well, wind-
&c.) works out at
The Willandra Creek
four miles, which
its value as a source
Some years ago
4 ft. by 2 ft., and
with Murray pine,
by windmills into
earth tanks, and turn-
which the stock drink,
these watering places
mill, tank, troughing,
from ,£2OO to
is dammed every
materially increases
of water supply,
rabbits swarmed over
STUD EWES.
this portion of the Western Division, and formed one of the greatest problems for pastoral-
ists there. Enormous sums of money were spent on wire netting, and, as far as Willandra
is concerned, all the boundary fences and the main subdivisional fences were netted. The
general style of wire fence adopted on
the station is made with box posts 12
ft. apart and five or six wires. The
cost of such a fence on this country
ranges from £2O to £3O per mile.
The subdivisional netting fences
divide the property into three separate
blocks, the out-station, Bellingerambil,
being one, the homestead another, and
Thollolloboy, saltbush country, the
third.
TWO-TOOTH STUD RAMS.
3
The Willandra Estate, New South Wales.


In anything like a good season the Willandra country produces a great quantity of feed,
there being a large variety of nutritious herbage and grasses. In spring, with fair ram, there
comes a tremendous growth of barley grass, trefoil, white top, crowfoot, and daisy weed. Ihe
latter is not so valuable in its green state as when dry in summer. Stock eat it readily, and
do well on it. Convolvulus creeper, saltbush, and cotton bush also provide good summer
food. There are, altogether, about 40,000 acres of saltbush country on Willandra. In
winter the main standby is barley grass, trefoil, plain and white top grass.
THE HOMESTEAD.
The homestead is a wooden building, situated on the Willandra Creek, and surrounded
by a garden which gets a plentiful supply of water from a well, in addition to the creek.
Peaches, apricots, grapes, quinces, oranges, lemons, strawberries, and all descriptions of
vegetables flourish by the application of water to this fertile soil. Altogether, between 200
and acres are put under cultivation, and advantage is taken of every shower of rain to
plough up the land and leave it fallow. Wheat is sown about the end of March, chiefly for
hay. Crop returns depend upon the season and the rain, and they vary from half a ton per
acre with an 8-in. total of rain, to 2 tons per acre with a 15-in. rainfall. Only a small area
is irrigated, chiefly for lucerne, which gives splendid returns. Whenever the season permits,
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


a large quantity of the natural herbage is cut and converted into ensilage, which is stored in
excavated pits covered with clay. Grass hay is also cut and stacked whenever the season
renders it possible, and very sweet stuff is made from the herbage, barley grass, trefoil,
white top, corkscrew, annual and perennial salt bush, white daisy, &c., which comprise the
Willandra pasture.
One of the most important departments in connection with this estate, and one by
which it is now well known to the public, is its stud Merino flock. Ihis was started about
1893 by Mr. Arthur Laird, brother of the present manager, by the purchase of a few Wan-
LAUNCHING THE BOAT.
ganella ewes and a ram. From time to time high-priced Wanganella rams have been intro-
duced, and the flock is absolutely pure to that one strain.
It is, however, only of recent years that the Willandra stud has come so prominently
before the public. In 1906 it won the grand champion ewe prize, and a champion ram prize
at the Hay Show, and in 1907, the first year Mr. Frank Laird, the present manager, had
charge, he sent four entries to the Sydney Shew, winning two third prizes. These sheep
were sold at the subsequent sales, and made an average of £l4O 9s. In 1908 Mr. Laird
had two entries at the Sydney Show, and he took first in the plain-bodied class, and third in
5
The Willandra Estate, New South Wales.


SHEEP CROSSING THE BRIDGE.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


the open unhoused class. 1 hat year he sold eleven rams at the sales, and they averaged
T 49 3s. At the 1909 Sydney Show he showed two sheep, but was unplaced; nevertheless,
at the sales Ins ten sheep averaged £123 18s. The top price was igo guineas and the lowest
puce 55 guineas. In 1907 Sir Samuel McCaughey purchased a Willandra ram at Sydney Sales
lor 240 guineas. This ram left great stock, and one of the best rams on Willandra, Golden
fleece, is by him. In 1910 sixteen rams averaged £gg Bs. 3d.
Ihe first thing one notices about the Willandra sheep is their immense size. They are
tremendous, and symmetrical, and active with it all. Then, again, they have splendid
STUD EWES.
backs, and they carry a dense long staple of good quality right over the back and rump,
where so many sheep are slack. The thighs and arms are a revelation m such a plain type
of sheep. Mr. Laird is keeping to clean faces and plain bodies. One could spend days look-
ing through the Willandra Stud, there are so many good sheep. The wool is all long and free,
and, considering the country, remarkably free from dust. The studs are entirely grass-fed
—they get no different treatment from the ordinary station sheep. They are very hardy, as
the following facts will show:—ln 1908 350 2-tooth rams travelled no miles to Carrathool
along a very bare stock route. They went by rail from Carrathool to Sydney, a distance of
7
The Willandra Estate, New South Wales.


TWO-TOOTH RAMS IN PADDOCK.
FLOCK EWES AND LAMBS ON PLAIN.
GROUP OF STUD RAMS.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.
8


425 miles. They were shifted from train to steamer in exceptionally heavy rain, and had
a rough voyage to Rockhampton. They were stuck on a sand bar, without water, for a day
and a half, and then trucked to Longreach. From there they had to travel to Rodney Downs,
where they arrived without a single loss.
fhe improvement in the Willandra Stud has naturally had a marked effect on the ordi-
nary' station sheep. In 1893, with a 12-in. rainfall, the whole flock cut 6 lbs. 50Z., an d in
1908, with only gin. of rain, the average was 9 lbs. 1 oz. This shows decided progress, and
the following shows the great influence rainfall has on the growth of wool. Ihe average in
1893 was as given above, but the following year, 1894, 23 in. of rain fell, and the average
STATION TEAM OF TWENTY-SIX HORSES THREE ABREAST.
went up to 8 lbs. i iozs. In 1895 the rainfall was only 8 in., and the average dropped to 6
lbs. 14 ozs. In 1903, on 13 in. of rain, the average was 9 lbs. 6ozs., and in 1906, on 19m.,
it went up to 10 lbs. 9 ozs. But the next year only 8 in. fell, and the average came down to
7 lbs. 5 ozs. In 1909 the whole flock averaged 1 1 lbs. 8 ozs., and last year (1910) 10 lbs.
7 ozs. Stud rams cut up to 35 lbs., stud ewes up to 25 lbs., and 2-tooth stud rams up to
29 lbs. The whole flock of 43,000 grown sheep cut I2lbs. 8 ozs. (1911).
There is no difficulty in getting rid of young rams bred on Willandra, the demand
exceeding the supply. They are ideal sheep for Queensland properties, being big, clean
headed, good horned, with strong constitutions, long staple, robust wool, cutting heavy-
weights. The wool on sheep bred on these hot, dry, open, dusty, burry plains is under a
9
The Willandra Estate, New South Wales,


WILLANDRA CREEK, WITH WINDMILL IN BACKGROUND.
FOUR-TOOTH STUD RAM.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


great disadvantage when placed beside wool
from clean country, yet Willandra wool in 1909
sold up to I2|d. As fats they hold their own.
A lot of six-year-old ewes recently sent to Syd-
ney sold up to 18s. 5d.; 1100 averaged 17s. 3d.
and were reported by the agents as being as
good as any ewes ever seen in Sydney market.
Very good horses are bred on Willandra, the
mares being specially well bred. Among the
sires which have been used there are Lycurgus
by Priam from Lady Carlyle; Bluegum, by
Morambra from Flora, by Angler; Elmora, by
the Barb from Mermaid. The blood sire now
on the station is Cosenza, by Andria (imp.)
from Nance O’Neil, by Harmonist. The draught
HEAD OF A STUD RAM.
stallion now in use is a New Zealand-bred horse called Lord Macarthur
IPersonal.
Mr. Frank Laird, who manages Willandra, was born at Mt. Fyans in the Western Dis-
trict of Victoria, his father, Mr. John Laird, then managing that estate for Mr. W. B. Cum-
STUD RAM NO. 205.
11
The Willandra Estate, New South Wales.


A STUD RAM, “GOLIATH.”
ming. It was Mr. John Laird who selected the famous Belle Vue ram Sir Thomas, when
purchased by Mr. Gumming. Mr. Frank Laird as a boy was at Katnoka and Glencoe Sta-
tions, which his father managed for Mr. Riddoch, in South Australia, and was educated at
Flinders School, Geelong. He gained his first pastoral experience as a jackeroo on Glencoe,
and was successively appointed overseer and manager. He subsequently had some ex-
perience farming on his own account, and in 1906 he was offered and accepted the manage-
ment of Willandra.
SHOWING THE FLEECE.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


The Marrar Estate.
The Property of Mr.J.P. Cor.
MARRAR, the property of Mr. John P ercy Cox, is situated on the south-western rail-
way about twenty miles north of Wagga Wagga, and twenty miles west of Junee,
and is within four miles of the township of Marrar.
The property is located in the centre of a fine pastoral, grazing, and agricultural district,
and comprises about 10,200 acres, much of which is particularly suitable for farming pur-
COWS AND CALVES AT DAM.
poses. The estate consists of gently undulating country. In the early days Marrar was
very heavily timbered with yellow and white box, but this has been largely ring-barked and
cleared. The carrying capacity of the property is about one sheep to the acre. The estate
i


THE MARRAR HOMESTEAD, FACING EAST.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED.
is watered by about twenty dams, and from this source a very fine supply is constantly avail-
able for all the station requirements.
Marrar was originally taken up by Messrs'. Rankin Bros., the well-known pioneers, who
were connected with other big holdings. The property was later on sold to Mr. A. G. Jones,
who held it for some years, and then disposed of it to Messrs. Lavender and Wilkinson.
It was during this proprietorship that the estate was considerably improved. At the time
THE HOMESTEAD, WITH HAYSHED, STABLE AND MEN'S QUARTERS.
3
The Marrar Estate, New South Wales.


A FRONT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


they took possession of it the run was
a wild tract of country, with a tremend-
ous growth of long grass on it. A few
shepherds’ huts were the only build-
ings to be seen there. Messrs. Laven-
der and Wilkinson were the first to put
up sheep fencing in the district. Mar-
rar was then sold to the late Mr.
Richard Cox, who remained in posses-
sion until his death, when the estate
was managed by the executors. The
Government more recently resumed a
ANOTHER VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
portion, the balance now representing the present Marrar Station owned by Mr. J. P. Cox.
A MOB OF 2-TOOTH MERINO WETHERS.
The woolshed on Marrar was built about thirty-four years ago, and is constructed of
wood and iron. It is fitted with eight stands of sheep-shearing machines, which are
driven by an 8-h.p. oil engine. Shear-
ing generally commences early in
October. The flock was originally a
Merino one, built up principally on the
Wanganella blood, and during the
time the property was managed by
the executors sheepbreeding was car-
ried on to a large extent, but of late
years Mr. Cox lias not been breeding,
as he has been devoting his attention
to dealing in sheep. The homestead
is a fine stone building of about
THE DAM AT THE HOMESTEAD.
5
The Marrar Estate, New South Wales.


CHAFF AT MARRAR RAILWAY STATION.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A PANORAMIC VIEW ON MARRAR.
7
The Marrar Estate, New South Wales.


STATION COWS AT THE DAM.
STATION HORSES AND MILKING COWS
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


MARRAR BULLOCK TEAMS.
The Marrar Estate, New South Wales.


A STATION TEAM.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MARRAR BULLOCK TEAMS AT THE RAILWAY STATION.
The Marrar Estate , New South Wales,


twenty rooms, erected in the early years by the
father of the present owner.
Mr. Cox has put about 1800 acres under
wheat, and the return from this area has been
as high as 21 bushels to the acre. This is
worked on the share system, and the results
have been exceedingly good, and an additional
area of about 1000 acres has been cleared, and
will soon be ready for cultivation. The ad-
joining property to Marrar, of 13°° acres, sold
recently at 12s. 6d. an acre.
personal.
Mr. J. P. Cox was born at Wagga Wagga
on the 10th January, 1878, and was educated
at St. Ignatius College, Lane Cove River,
MR. J. P. COX.
Sydney. After leaving college, he gained a little commercial experience in Wagga Wagga,
and at the expiration of three years returned to Marrar. At the age of twenty-one he
succeeded to the estate, but did not work it for about three years. During that period he
leased it to Mr. A. B. Triggs.
Mr. Cox takes an active part in furthering the interests of his district in every possible
way. Whatever means advancement is always sure of his support and encouragement.
He takes a great interest in all kinds of sport, and is the owner of the well-known steeple-
chaser Grafnax.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Kimo Estate.
The Property of Mr. James Robinson.
ONE of the best-known stations watered by the famous Murrumbidgee River is Kimo,
( the property of Mr. James Robinson. Situated just three miles from the town
of Gundagai and railway station, and forty miles from Wagga Wagga, it is very
conveniently placed to Sydney and Melbourne markets, and possessing, as it does, a fifteen-
mile frontage to the river, it ranks as one of the most valuable estates in those parts.
It runs back from the river in a northerly direction for at least eight miles, and its front-
MR. J. P. COX. THE HOMESTEAD.
age contains from one end to the other deep alluvial flats stretching back to the high lands
fully a mile in extent. These alluvial lands on the Murrumbidgee are of the very richest
description, and there are considerable areas of them fitted for growing maize, lucerne,
or any other crops. In flood time the flats are covered by water from 4 to 20 ft. deep,
which presents the appearance of a big inland lake. Although they may cause ruinous
damage in other parts, the floods so saturate the Kimo flats and deposit such a rich layer
x


of fertilising material that they are for years afterwards
capable of supporting a larger number of stock than most
areas of a similar size in New South Wales.
The area of Kimo Estate is about 21,500 acres free-
hold, of which fully 4000 acres comprise river frontage flat
lands, where the drift can be reached at a depth of from
12 to 20 ft. The question of water supply has never been
a troublesome one. Besides the very reliable source —the
river—lagoons extend many miles through the property im-
mediately skirting the highlands of the northern fringe, and
then there are numerous dams, tanks, and creeks. The rest
MR. JAMES ROBINSON.
of the estate, other than the river flats, is nearly all cleared, heavily grassed, sound and
healthy for sheep and cattle, and very fattening. It grows the best and most profitable kind
of wool, which has always been amongst the high priced lots in the Sydney market. The sta-
tion is divided into about fifty paddocks, all securely fenced, and with water in all of them.
In ordinary seasons about 30,000 sheep are shorn and depastured, and about 1000 cattle
and 200 horses are also carried. When it is considered that all this stock is carried on a little
over 23,000 acres, it will be seen that the land must indeed be of the very richest character.
As dairying is very much on the increase in the district, and Kimo being so close to the town
of Gundagai, where there is a co-operative butter factory, the value of the estate must be
very considerably enhanced in the future. The property, being so compact, is .very easily
worked.
Fhe homestead is situated on the main road between Wagga Wagga and Gundagai,
and stands back 111 fine large grounds; the house is very commodious and is built of brick
and weatherboards. Gas and water are laid on all over the house, the water coming from a
never-failing supply pumped from a permanent spring to a reservoir about 250 ft. above the
house. There are also two good gardens'growing flowers
and vegetables. The homestead is connected with Gunda-
gai by telephone as well as all parts of the station and
most of the adjoining stations. The distance from Gun-
dagai is about eight miles over excellent roads. The man-
ager’s residence, a very comfortable house, is about ten
miles from Gundagai. It is built of brick, and has nine
rooms, as well as offices, &c., with adjacent outbuildings;
water and gas are laid on, the water being pumped from
a permanent spring to a reservoir about 150 ft. above the
house. This place is also connected by telephone with
MR. WALLACE ROBINSON.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD AYRSHIRE HERD.
LUCERNE PADDOCK WITH THE WOODSHED IN THE DISTANCE.
3
The Kimo Estate, New South Wales,


GENERAL VIEW OF COUNTRY.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Gundagai and all outstations, as well as
the two dairies.
There is a very large and up-to-date
woolshed fitted with twenty of the latest
pattern Wolseley machines, with accom-
modation for about 4000 sheep; the shed
was only recently erected. There are
also three good huts, a five-roomed bache-
lors’ quarters, and a good overseer’s cot-
tage. Near the shed is a large sheep dip
40 ft. long, with covered-in draining
STATION-BRED ROMNEY MARSH FLOCK RAMS.
sheds, and within four miles of the railway is an up-to-date wool scour with all appliances
complete. There are three sets of sheep-drafting yards and two sets of cattle yards, and
STRETCH OF RIVER FLATS.
these, with two very modern dairies, complete the mam improvements on Kimo. One of
the dairies is four miles from the co-operative factory, and the other is four miles from a
private factory. Both consist of all the necessary sheds and cottages, as well as good yards
and machinery for separating. One dairy
is fitted with L.K.G. milking machines.
The fencing on the station is kept in
perfect order, and consists for the most
part of post and six wires, and in some
cases also iron droppers. The frontage is
fenced off with rabbit-proof netting.
There are four paddocks, about 100 acres
of lucerne, and about 150 acres of wheat
wire netted.
Tobacco and maize have been exten-
ROMNEY MARSH STUD EWES.
5
The Kimo Estate, New South Wales.


FLOCK OF ROMNEY EWES AND LAMBS.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


A GROUP OF HORSES.
The Kimo Estate, New South Wales.


sively and successfully grown on the frontage, as well as other kinds of root crops.
There is a complete telephone system on the property, the main exchange being at
Abington, the manager’s residence, where there is a switchboard. There are eleven
telephones, and most of the adjoining places can be connected as well as Gundagai, where
there is a continuous service.
Gbc Stock.
Sheep, cattle, and horses are run on the property. The sheep are principally Merinos
and Romney Marsh sheep of excellent quality, the latter being founded from a New Zea-
land stud. The Merinos came from the late Thos. Gibson’s Eskvale flock. In 1909 M r - Ro-
“ABINGDON,” THE RESIDENCE OF MR. WALLACE ROBINSON.
binson bought the strong-wool ram Conjuror from Mr. Percy Grubb, of Bengeo, Tasmania.
The Kimo stud flock was formed by Mr. E. Martin in 1889, who classed it for over twenty
years, and before his sight failed he was known as one of the best experts among sheep in
New South Wales. Some of the stud rams that have given good results are Rob Roy by
Wellington, Golden Crown by Golden Horn, and Loyalty by a son of Royal Hero. Loyalty
was purchased for 280 guineas from Eskvale, Tasmania, and some of his sons, including
Admiral, and others, have brought very high prices. Mr. Wallace Robinson, manager, has
bred a good strong style of wool, just the class to swell the station banking account. The
8
T he Pastoral Homes of Australia .


following figures are interesting, in that they show how well the sheep cut, notwithstand-
ing the fact that the district does not produce large sheep:—-
lbs. ozs.
4546 Crossbred Wethers, 4,6, and 8 tooth, cut net ... ... ... 9 4
2119 Merino Wethers, Kimo-bred, 8 tooth ... ... ... ... ... 11 2
2075 Merino Wethers, Kimo-bred, 4 and 6 tooth ... ... ... ... 10 o
3013 Merino Lambs, pure Kimo blood, cut ... ... ... ... ... 3 l 4
1196 Merino mixed 2 tooth, Kimo-bred cut... ... ... ... ... 8 9
4060 Merino Breeding Ewes cut, 3to 8 years ... ... ... 8 5
3805 Kimo-bred Crossbred Lambs cut .. ... ... 2 8
5284 Crossbred Breeding Ewes, 2 and 4 tooth ... ... ... ... 8 6
No photos are given, as all the stud Merino ewes and rams were shorn at the time the
other pictures were taken.
MOB OF COWS AT NO. 2 DAIRY.
Owing to the river flats being so rich crossbreds are bred and fattened extensively, the
favourite cross being the Romney Marsh ram and the Merino ewe. About 35,000 sheep
have been shorn in the best season. The foundation of the Kimo Stud Romney flock
was laid by the pick of fifty ewes from the stud flock of the late Hon. James Ful-
ton, of Ravenscliffe, Otago, N.Z., the whole of which stud was purchased from the trustees
by Mr. J. D. Hill, the well-known Romney judge, of Yass, and one ram sired by a ram im-
ported from England by Mr. Hill. Since then a very high-class ram was purchased at a
9
The Kimo Estate, New South Wales ,


YARDING SHEEP TO BE SHORN.
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


big cost from Mr. Ernest Short, of Parorangi, Feilding, N.Z., who has been so successful
at the Buenos Aires Exhibition with his Romney sheep. The Romney sheep have proved
to be very profitable at Kimo, as the high prices gained for them and their wool are ample
proof.
Cattle.
Mr. Robinson has paid more attention, if anything, to cattle than sheep. Being con-
vinced that Polled Angus were the best for butchering purposes after visiting some of the
best studs and shows in Scotland with his son, he decided upon this breed of cattle for
STALLION “SIR NEWTON.”
market, but owing to the advancement of dairying in the district, he sold the whole of his
valuable herd, numbering about 300 head. They were a splendid lot, and no expense was
spared in making them the best. Two cows and a bull were brought from New Zealand, and
purchases were made from the herd owned by Air. D. G. Clark, Victoria, who imported some
of the best Polled Angus cattle that ever came to Australia. Mr. Robinson now keeps
about 1000 head of cattle, mainly for dairying purposes, about 300 cows being milked.
An Ayrshire stud herd was formed from the well-known herds of Coolangatta and
Greystanes, and they are a very select lot. The Ayrshire-Shorthorn cross is the most used
at the Kimo dairies.
11
The Kimo Estate, New South Wa/es*


There is also a stud of draught horses on the place, the sire being Sir Newton, a horse
bred in Victoria.
In former years Kimo was well known in the show rings of the south and at S} dney
for its cattle, sheep, and horses, and especially for the fats produced there. A large por-
tion of the station office is lined with prize certificates gained at various shows.
personal
James Robinson was born in 1834 at Fintona, County Tyrone, Ireland, and came to
Australia with his parents, arriving in Sydney, after a six months’ voyage, in March, 1839.
His father purchased the Bloomfield property at Wollongong, from Henry Osborne, of
Marshall Mount, and established the family there, whilst he looked round for some suitable
land to settle on and make a home.
In 1841 Mr. Jas. Robinson’s father purchased Coppabella Station, on the Upper Murray,
from Mr. Henry Osborne, of Marshall Mt., Wollongong, sold the Wollongong property, and
took his family to their new home, making the journey of about 35° miles by
roads, which were very rough, being unmade and without bridges. Mr. James Robin-
son was the only son, there also being seven sisters, most of whom married pastoralists
in the various States. A comfortable home was made at Coppabella, and Mr.
Jas. Robinson here heloed his father until the latter’s death in 1868, when Mr.
Jas. Robinson then became the owner of Coppabella, which he retained possession
of till 1872. Mr. Robinson has seen many rough times in the old days, and
says that he had often to clean and grind his own wheat, and make a damper
before he got his supper. Stores were received from Sydney only once a year and
then by bullock team, the trip taking six months. In 1870 Mr. Robinson purchased Kimo
Estate from Mr. Granville Collins, the place being then quite unimproved; in fact, there was
not more than £2OO worth of improvements on the place. Immediately possession was
given, Mr. Robinson employed a lot of men, and set to work to improve the property by
ringbarking and clearing as well as fencing and putting up all necessary buildings. Mr. Ro-
binson was the first man to do ringbarking on the Murrumbidgee. Since then very large
sums of money have been spent on the place, and everything is now up to date in the
shape of improvements.
Mr. James Robinson married, in 1856, a daughter of Mr. John Brown, of Colstoun,
Paterson River, and, in 1890, a daughter of Mr. D. H. Evans, formerly of Wangaratta.
There was a son and three daughters of the first marriage, and one son of the second.
Mr. Wallace Robinson, who manages Kimo for his father, lives on the property at
Abingdon, and is married to the youngest daughter of the late Dr. Hester, of Wangaratta,
Victoria. He has a family of five, and the eldest son is now working on the property.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


The Jugiong Estate.
The Property of Messrs. Hope Osborne and Brothers.
JUGIONCi Estate is the name of Messrs. Hope Osborne and Bros.’ fine property, situated
near Jugiong, on the Murrumbidgee River, twenty-five miles north of Gundagai. The
grandfather of the present owners, the late Mr. Henry Osborne, received a grant of
land in the lilawarra district called Marshall Mount, and was one of the most enterprising men
of his day. Amongst other properties he owned Brookong, Urangeline, Wagra, and The Point
WIDGEONGULLY HOMESTEAD.—EASTERN VIEW.
at Jugiong, which was willed to Mr. Ben M. Osborne, sen., father of the present owner. Mr.
Henry Osborne was of opinion that the coal measures on his lilawarra Estate would in due
time become of great commercial value. That he was right in this conjecture is shown in
the present-day coal-mining operations at Keira, Bulh, Bellambi, and Mt. Kembla.
Mr. Ben M. Osborne, sen., in 1869, commenced to put the Jugiong property together
by purchasing from William Macansh, the south portion of the Jugiong Holding, now known
as Benangaroo. In 1873 he purchased Widgeongully from the late James Bring, and in
1


1875 Redbank portion of the Jug-
iong Eiolding came into his possession
by purchase from William Macansh.
In 1887 he purchased Gunnong
Jugrawah, which was originally taken
up by Thomas Howe, brother of Ed-
ward and William Howe, who first
squatted on Widgeongully and The
Point. In this way Mr. Ben M. Os-
borne, sen., formed the property into
a compact block.
In 1906 he divided the estate
amongst his five sons, who worked
STUD STALLION, RITCHIE (IMP).
JE£e
the property conjointly—Hope Osborne receiving Widgeongully; Ben M. Osborne, jun. Red-
bank; Dr. J. K. Osborne, Benangaroo; Oliver T. Osborne, Bundarbo; and Henry C. Os-
STUD EWES AND LAMBS ON JUGIONG ESTATE.
borne, Gunnong Jugrawah. During
1907 Mr. Ben M. Osborne, jun., se-
ceded from the partnership, and now
the four remaining brothers work to-
gether, with Widgeongully as their
head station.
Jugiong Estate comprises some
64,000 acres of rich river flats, undu-
lating and hilly country, and is excel-
lently watered by thirty-two miles
double frontage to the Murrumbidgee
River, and numerous creeks The
whole estate is surrounded by a wire
WALLASSEY PING PONG (IMP.).
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BRIDGE FOR CROSSING SHEEP OVER THE MURRUMBIDGEE.
The Jugiong Estate, New South Wales.


BROOD MARES.
4
The Pastora/ Homes of Australia.


MR. HOPE OSBORNE
MR HENRY CHARLES OSBORNE.
MR. B. M. OSBORNE, SENR.
5
MR. O. T. OSBORNE.
DR. J. K. OSBORNE.
The Jugiong Estate, New South Wales■


netting fence, and subdivided into forty-five paddocks,, most of the subdivisional fences be-
ing netted. The flock averages 75,000 sheep, the Merino portion of the flock being of pure
Havilah descent, of which a small stud is kept.
It having been found that crossbreds flourished on the rich river flats, in 1906 Eng-
lish Leicesters were introduced to cross with Merino ewes, with very satisfactory results.
A stud flock of English Leicesters were purchased from the late Wm. Grant’s Elloughton
Grange flock, Timaru, New Zealand, to provide rams for station use. Crossbred lambs
fatten readily.
JUGIONG SHEARING SHED.
The wool from the estate always commands a high figure in the Sydney market, Me-
rino fleece fetching up to I4fd. and crossbred fleece up to in 1909, and I3|d. was
paid for crossbred lambs, which constituted a record for the season.
A stud herd of Norfolk Red Polled cattle is kept, and was originally formed by im-
portations from Lord Rothschild’s Tring Park herd. Since then additional bulls have been
imported from time to time. Young bulls always find a ready sale. There is also a small
stud of Shorthorns kept, and besides the studs Mr. Osborne runs about 1500 head. The
herd cattle were originally Shorthorns, but the owners found that by crossing with the Red
Poll better results were obtained owing to the earlier maturity of the progeny ,
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GLIMPSE OF RIVER.
The Jugiong Estate, New South Wales.


VIEW OF BUNDARBO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


“TOPSY,” MOTHER OF THE HERD.
The Jugiong Estate, New South Wales.


NORFOLK RED POLLED HEIFERS.
ihe Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Ihe breeding of horses forms an important adjunct to their business, the Osbornes
being great horse lovers. Amongst the stallions at present on the property are imported
Ritchie, bred at the late Mr. John Gubbin’s stud, Ireland, by Blairfinde (full brother to
Galtee More) from Income, by Insonomy; and Wallassey Ping Pong (imported), bred by
John Grund, Esq., Seacombe, Cheshire. The last-named was the champion pony at the
Royal Sydney Show, 1909. The stock from both sires show excellent promise.
A Suffolk Punch stallion, The Dane, bred by Mr. R. H. Dangar, of Neotsfteld, is also
used, and the Messrs. Osborne expect to have a Percheron stallion doing duty next sea-
son. The mares on the estate are a select lot, including many importations.
SHEARERS’ HUT.
Mr. Ben M. Osborne, sen., born in 1837. was the head of this branch of the Osborne
family. He married Lucy, daughter of the late Mr. Charles Throsby, of Phrosby Park,
Moss Vale, and had a family of five sons and seven daughters. He now lives at Hope-
wood, Bowral, and takes no active share in station management, but still retains his in-
terests in Illawarra and Bundarbo South, on the Murrumbidgee.
Mr. Hope Osborne, managing partner of the firm, the eldest son of Ben M. Osborne,
sen., was born off the Cape of Good Hope in 1869. He was educated at the Sydney
Grammar School, and at an early age took up pastoral work, a pursuit in which he has
t 1
The Jugiong Estate, New South Wales <


MASTER ANTHONY HOPE OSBORNE.
r 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


RIVER SCENE.
r 3
The Jugiong Estate, A'e w South Wales.


GLIMPSE OF RIVER.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ANOTHER GLIMPSE.
The Jugiong Estate, New South Wales.


been engaged ever since. In 1898 Mr. Hope Osborne married Mary, daughter of the late
Mr. Clement Sabine, a well-known pastoralist of South Australia, and his family consists
of two girls and one boy.
Dr. J. K. Osborne was born in 1878, and was educated at King’s College, Goulburn,
and Sydney University, and since obtaining his degree there has followed medical research
in Europe.
BUNDARBO STABLES.
Mr. Oliver Throsby Osborne, born 1880, was educated at King’s College, Goulburn,
and studied at Sydney University. He managed Kulki Station, in the Riverma, for six
years for his father, and now resides at Bundarbo.
Mr. Henry Charles Osborne, born in 1884, received his education at King’s School,
Parramatta. He lived abroad for five years, and is now about to take up his residence at
Gunnong Jugrawah.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Redbank Estate.
The Property of Mr. Ben M. Osborne, Junior.
R EUBANK, the property of Mr. Ben M. Osborne, jun., is part of what was once
known as the Jugiong run, which was purchased by the late Mr. Henry Osborne,
grandfather of the present owner, in the forties. Mr. Osborne then owned Mar-
shall Mount, Illawarra, and also bought The Point and Widgeongully about 'the same
period. He sold Widgeongully shortly after to Mr. Armstrong, who resold to Mr. James
B. M. OSBORNE, JUNR., AND R. B. FUTTER.
Pring, uncle of the present Justice Pring. Mr. Osborne sold the Jugiong holding to the
late Mr. William Macansh in the fifties, and he died in 1859, leaving the family m possession
of only 1500 acres freehold, The Point, which was left to Mr. Ben M. Osborne.
In 1869 Mr Ben M Osborne purchased from the late Mr. William Macansh the south
portion of the Jugiong holding south of the main southern road. In 1872 he purchased
Bundarbo and Nanango from the late Mr. J. p. Sheehan, which were subsequently sold.
1


In March, 1873, he purchased Widgeongully from Mr. James Bring, and in May, 1875, he
bought the northern portion of the Jugiong Holding called Redbank from the late Mr. W.
Macansh. This now gave Mr. Ben M. Osborne possession of all the property previously
held by his father in this district, that is, Bundarbo, The Point, Widgeongully, and Red-
bank, which he converted into freehold, about 90,000 acres, including Gunnong-Jugrawah,
which he bought in 1887 from the executors of the late Ihos. Howe, grandfather of Mr.
Cropper, the present secretary of the A.J.C.
THE HOMESTEAD,
In 1906 Mr. Osborne divided the property between his five sons, Redbank, comprising
about 20,000 acres, coming to Mr. Ben M. Osborne, jun.
This property is situated about 230 miles from Sydney, 20 miles south of Harden,
on the mam southern line, which is the junct'on of the Harden-Blayney line, connecting the
great southern and western systems.
The general aspect of the country is undulating to flat; the whole area is practically
virgin land, the soil varying from rich volcanic to fertile loams. The timber is principally
white box, with scattered gum, apple, and yellow box. The bulk of this timber has been
judiciously ring-barked, useful timber and ample shade trees having been preserved. Large
areas have been cleared, and all fallen timber is being picked up and burnt off, giving the
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


paddocks a park-like appearance. The average
rainfall from records extending over twenty-
four years is 23 in. per annum. The property
has a double frontage to the Cumbarmurra
River or Jugiong Creek, which is absolutely
permanent in all seasons; it is also watered by
the Gunnongbar Creek, on which the new
shearing shed is erected, and other never-fail-
mg springs, besides numerous wells served by
windmills and tanks and dams in every pad-
dock.
Ihe homestead is built of pise, and is in
all respects a fine building; considerable ad-
ditions have been effected during recent years
by the present owner. The interior arrange-
ments are upon the most up-to-date lines, be-
ing fitted with acetylene gas and hot water
throughout. An orchard has recently been
MR. BEN, M. OSBORNE, JUN.
DURHAM POLLED CATTLE.
3
The Redbank Estate, New South Wales.


A GROUP OF STUD RAMS.
THE WOOLSHED.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


planted, and the garden is one of the
finest in the district, water being laid
on. The pine plantation is a feature of
the property, and was planted by the
late Mr. Wm. Macansh.
The whole property is enclosed by
substantial new wire netted fencing,
and the subdivisions are of a like char-
acter, no expense having been spared
in this direction, as Mr. Osborne consi-
ders that close subdivision combined
with ploughing and digging out is the
only practical method of dealing with
rabbits.
STUD RAM BY SON OF SYLVESTER.
, The flock consists of 20,000 Merino sheep. The 8.M.0. wool always commands high
prices in the Sydney market. The foundation of the flock is from ewes purchased from the
late Mr. Bayley, of Havilah, and Havilah and Cox rams have been used. In iQO/, when
Messrs. Salting Bros.’ Cunningham Plains, flock was dispersed, the pick of the stud sheep
were secured by Mr. Osborne, and some of the best flock ewes. Since then two high-class
Tasmanian rams have been introduced. It is Mr. Osborne’s ambition to produce an even
type of sheep carrying a fleece of medium quality. I here is also on Redbank a pure herd
REDBANK FLOCK RAMS.
5
The Redbank Estate, New South Wales.


REDBANK TENNIS COURT.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


of Norfolk Red Polled cattle. The foundations of this herd were cattle imported by Mr.
Ben M. Osborne, sen., three cows and one bull from Lord Rothschild’s Tring Park, and
since then other importations have been made by the present owner. The whole herd
comprises about 300 head (which were first crossed with Durham cows); they are now all
polled and true to type and colour. The horses bred are only utility sorts. The blood
horse Fanshawe and Grey King, an imported Welsh pony, are the stallions in use.
About 400 acres are cultivated, the stock depending chiefly on natural pastures. The
lambing season is from April to July, and the marking is generally about 80 per cent.
THE CHILDREN’S PONY.
{Personal.
Mr. Ben M. Osborne, jun., was born at Berrima on 4th November, 1874. He is the
second son of Mr. Ben M. Osborne, and was educated at the King’s School, Parramatta,
and the Sydney Grammar School. After leaving school he joined the Commercial Banking
Company of Sydney, Limited, and after eighteen months with that institution resigned the
position to take up duties on Redbank. He managed the estate for his father from 1897 to
1906, in which year he took over the property on his own account. In 1899 he married
Elsie Evelyn, youngest daughter of the late Mr. Samuel Dickinson, The Hall, Croydon, and
has two children, a boy and a girl.
7
The Redbank Estate, New South Wales.


STUD EWE HOGGETS.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SIDE VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
The Redbank Estate, New South Wales-


Ihe na,me of Osborne is very closely identified with the development of the south-eastern
portion of New South Wales. It was as far back as 1829 that the late Henry Osborne,
youngest son of Archibald Osborne, of County Tyrone, got a grant of 2000 acres in the
Illawarra called Marshall Mount, and later on he got another grant of 2560 acres in the
Kangaroo Valley. He was a worthy type of pioneer, for he had ten sons and three
daughters, of which Mr. Ben M. Osborne, sen., is the sixth child. Mr. Ben M. Osborne, sen.,
was married in May, 1866, to Lucy, daughter of the late Mr. Throsby, of Throsby Park,
Moss Vale. He had seven daughters and five sons, Mr. Ben M. Osborne being the sixth
child in the family.
CATTLE ON THE DAM.
The late Mr. Henry Osborne is one of those early settlers who accomplished great things.
In the late thirties he took a mob of his cattle and horses overland all the way from the
Illawarra to Adelaide, being eight months on the journey. On his return from this great
feat he started accumulating land as I mentioned in the first paragraph. He also lived
in the bushranging period, and his district came in for considerable attention from the out-
laws. In 1864 or 1865 the Hall, Gilbert, and Dunn gang were out on the Jugiong run, and
they stuck up the mail coach at Deep Creek on Redbank. The next day they held up the
mail again on Cooney’s Creek, near Jugiong. Troops were out, but got scattered, and
1 o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GROUP OF STUD EWES.
Parry, a policeman, was killed. The bushrangers kept all passers-by, nearly 100, waiting
for the mail, and opened up cases of wines, &c., and treated all victims. The policeman
from \ass, who was to guard the English mail, hid in a scrub fence on Widgeongully. Gun-
dagai sent out forces too late. Sergeant Parry refused to surrender, and was shot while
galloping off. In the early fifties, during the gold fever, bushrangers used to hold up men
coming back from the diggings at Jugiong, and one day they shot a man and robbed him.
RED POLLED CATTLE.
11
The Redbank Estate, New South Wales,


STUD RAMS BY SYLVESTER.
Mr. Henry Osborne coming along took the man to Yass, where it was found that the bush-
rangers had overlooked some gold in the man’s saddle, and this was sent home. The late
Mr. James Osborne was held up the same day, but got off lightly, only losing his horse,
which found its way back to Bundarbo.
Mr. Macansh’s house on the Jugiong run was attacked in his absence by Bourke, who
robbed the Yass coach the same day. Leaving the district after this, Mr. Macansh pre-
pared himself against further attack by keeping four loaded guns over his fireplace, and
surrounding his house with lattice work, through which he said he could fire on the bush-
rangers without being seen. These were stirring days, and the fine old pioneers were a
match for them.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bedervale Estate.
The Property of Mr. Ro bert J. C. Maddrell.
AT a point about two and a half miles from Braidwood, and about fifty-five miles from
/ \ Goulburn, is situated Bedervale Station, the property of Mr. Robert John Coghill
2 V Maddrell. This .estate was taken up by the late Captain John Coghill in the year
1832, and then comprised 5600 acres. The area later on was increased to 33,000 acres by
Captain Coghill and his son-in-law, the late Mr. Robert Maddrell. The early history of
Bedervale was closely associated with the pastoral development of New South Wales, and
A VIEW OF BEDERVALE FROM THE HOUSE.
formed an important link between the pioneering days of the early colonists, and the more
settled period of the pastoral industry. That period which proved incontestably not only
that sheeprearing and woolgrowing could be undertaken with success in Australia, but
demonstrated also that the industry could advantageously compare with the undertakings
of the Old World.
i


THE BEDERVALE HOMESTEAD.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Bedervale consists of gently undulating
country of an excellent grazing character. Ori-
ginally the estate was heavily timbered with
eucalyptus trees, but during past years a sys-
tem of ringbarking has been adopted, and
most of the property is now cleared. Experi-
ments with suitable grasses have been tried
from time to time, and at present the grasses
principally grown are kangaroo, rye, white
clover, and rib.
During most of the time Captain Coghill
was in possession of the property he used it
exclusively for sheepraising, but later on he
also grazed cattle. His flock consisted of pure
Merinos, and he made a study of a special
method of inbreeding which produced rams of
such a class that a considerable demand arose
THE LATE MR. ROBERT MADDRELL.
for them, and records of sales show that they were purchased by many of the then lead-
ing pioneer flockowners.
The late Mr. Robert Maddrell, father of the present owner of Bedervale, was born in
the Isle of Man, in 1818, and arrived in New
South Wales in 1849 at the age of thirty-one.
He entered upon pastoral pursuits as soon as
he arrived, and ultimately became manager of
Bedervale. Upon the death of Captain Cog-
hill he came into possession of Bedervale, and
continued to work it along the lines adopted
by Captain Coghill, until the year 1873, when
the wet seasons decimated the flock of sheep.
Cattle were then depastured in their place.
The flock on Bedervale originally com-
prised 12,000 Merinos, in addition to which
there was a herd of about 600 head of cattle,
but of recent years the station has been de-
voted entirely to cattle-grazing. The present
estate is divided into twelve paddocks, all of
which are netted and subdivided into several
3
MR. ROBERT J. C. MAUDRELL.
The Bedervale Estate, New South Wales.


THE DRIVE LEADING TO THE HOMESTEAD.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


areas, the rabbits having been dug out of all these divisions, and all possible cover des-
troyed. In the year 1864 a large portion of the original property was cut up into holdings
and leased to tenantry. Many of these areas are still occupied by tenants for farming and
grazing purposes. The Bedervale homestead was built by Captain Coghill in 1847. His
grandson, Mr. R. J. C. Maddrell, the present owner, has considerably improved the dwell-
ing by several additions as well as by installing an acetylene gas plant, and also a com-
plete system of water supply.
THE LATE CAPTAIN JOHN COGHILL.
Mr. John Hepburn, the author of an interesting account of a journey in the early days
in Australia, refers to his meeting with Captain Coghill and some members of his family.
In 1836 Mr. Hepburn formed one of a small party of pioneers to travel with a mob of cattle
to Port Phillip. It was the first venture of the kind that had taken place and the little
party was hemmed in with all manner of difficulties. They were in absolute ignorance of
the country through which they were to pass, and beyond the scanty information and
guidance derivable from the tracks of Mitchell’s exploring party, who had passed through
some time previously, there was little to assist them in finding the way. But whoever heard of
the early pioneers of Australia giving up a project they had once taken in hand? Difficulties,
dangers and obstacles only served to increase their resolute determination to succeed. Mr.
Hepburn was typical of those fine men of the early days who took their lives in their hands
and went forth into the unknown. He and his companions, in face of dangers and trials
of every conceivable kind, ultimately reached their destination, and taking up a run across
the Yarra, formed what was the first cattle station in Victoria.
5
The Bedervale Estate, New South Wales’


A VIEW OF THE COUNTRY.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A WESTERN VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
7
The Bedervale Estate, New South Wales,


THE HALL OF BEDERVALE HOMESTEAD.
s
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


About the middle of 1837,” Mr. Hepburn writes, “a perfect mania took place; the
price of sheep advanced to 60/- per head. I met with another old tar, Captain Coghill, who
was an old colonist, and we entered into partnership. I proceeded to his station to gain
information and await the arrival of my family from England, determined to take them with
me at all risks. On January 15, 1838, we started from Strathallen, New South Wales, with
1400 ewes, 50 rams, 200 wethers, 2 drays, 18 bullocks, 1 cart and horse, 1 saddle horse, 2
brood mares, and 10 men. In travelling we found the greatest hospitality from the settlers.
Mr. William Coghill had mustered his sheep on the Murrumbidgee, to accompany me to Port
Phillip. After joining Coghill’s party, one of my drays broke down, and while delayed Mr.
William Bowman overtook us, and arrangements were entered into for the three parties
to keep company until all were settled in the new country. After leaving the last settlement
on the Murrumbidgee, we took a route more to the eastward of my former track, several
parties having preceded us on this route, Ebden, Howey and Hamilton. We crossed the
Murray at the spot where Hume and Hovell had crossed in 1824 (Albury). At this point we
overtook Mr. W. Hamilton, who had been eight days in crossing his sheep, and had suffered
some small loss. Bowman had 5 000 sheep, Coghill 2000, making with mine nearly gooo, and
we crossed the lot in 2J hours without the loss of a sheep. We followed the track of those
before us, and in a short distance came on the Major’s line (Mitchell’s), which was easily
recognised at this time.”
“At the Goulburn we met a large party of natives. Mr. David Coghill and myself
being in advance, came suddenly on them. In an instant 100 spears were pointed towards
us. We halted to consider what to do; we got boldly oil our horses, took our guns in one
hand and a bush in the other, and advanced slowly towards them; the women and children
fled, but the men stood their ground. After a short parley, in which not a word was under-
stood on either side, the natives began to lay down their spears, and approached us with-
out fear, put their hands on us, and felt the horses’ skins. After spending an hour amongst
them, my cart, with Mrs. Hepburn, hove in signt. Shortly after the sheep appeared. The
shepherds were dreadfully alarmed at first, but this soon wore off. I had nets for the sheep.
I set these up, pitched the tents, and sent a man back to inform Bowman that we were come
to an anchor for the night. Next morning, March 2, 1838, we crossed the river, all safe,
without any molestation from the natives. Here we overtook Mr. John Harrison and Mr.
Hamilton, who had pushed on to get the choice of the country.”
IPcrsonal.
Mr. R. J. C. Maddrell was born at Bedervale in 1849, and received his education at
Macquarie Fields under the Rev. Geo. F. Macarthur. After the completion of his studies he
returned to Bedervale, and became actively engaged in pastoral pursuits under the guidance
9
The Bedervale Estate, New South Wales.


10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE DINING ROOM.
i:
The Bcdervalc Estate, New South Wales.


and supervision of his father. With the experience thus gained he soon became qualified to
take a responsible position, and his father accordingly appointed him his superintendent.
He remained in this capacity for eight years, when he married Katie, third daughter of the
late Mr. Edward J. H. Knapp, surveyor and civil engineer, and there are six sons and
five daughters by the marriage, dhe Strathallan Estate, originally purchased from the late
Captain McKellar, was handed over to him at this time, and he worked the property for
himself for about twenty-five years. At the death of his father in igoo, at the age of
eighty-two years, the Bedervale Estate was divided into three portions, and Mr. Maddrell
received 17,000 acres. Since 1906 about 5 000 acres of this area have been subdivided and
sold.
Captain Coghill arrived in New South Wales in 1814, and settled in the Camden dis-
trict, then known as the Cowpastures, on the Kirkham Estate. There he entered into
partnership with the late Mr. John Oxley, and carried on sheepbreeding and agriculture for
some years. Captain Coghill was a member of the first elective Legislative Council for the
counties of St. Vincent and Auckland, in New South Wales, and was also an original mem-
ber of the Australian Club founded in 1838.
SIDE VIEW OF BEDERVALE HOMESTEAD.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Caloola Estate.
The Property of Rowland George Hassall
THE Braidwood district has always loomed large in the public eye by reason of ils
many rural attractions and salubrious climate and mining operations. With an
altitude of over 2500 ft. above sea level, it possesses an equable temperature.
Largely agricultural and pastoral, the district is also rich in mineral deposits, and from all
these industries it derives considerable importance. The pastoral operations are particu-
larly prosperous. Caloola, which has been leased by Mr. Rowland George Hassall for many
years, is situated in this district. This property lies seven miles to the south of Braid-
wood. The estate has belonged to the relatives of the Hassall family from the day it was
originally acquired by the grandfather of the present owner from the Crown. In the early
CALOOLA BULLOCKS AT ARALUEN.
part of last century, when the fine hardy pioneers of those days were pushing out into the
then unknown districts beyond the coastal range, grappling with difficulties and dangers
innumerable, the Hassalls did their full share of the work which proved the value of the
pastoral resources of New South Wales.
Mr. Hassall’s property comprises about 12,000 acres of undulating and hilly country.
The Araluen country is timbered with red gum, yellow box, and apple tree, and the Jembai-
cumbene portion with ribbon gum and cabbage gum.
The Jembaicumbene Creek runs practically right through the property, and with springs
which abound on the estate furnishes a never-failing supply of water, abundant for all the
requirements of the station. Caloola is divided into eighteen paddocks, some of the boun-
daries of which are wire-netted. The natural grasses, which consist of kangaroo and rye,
1


CALOOLA HOMESTEAD.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia -


A FLOCK OF MERNO WETHERS.
have proved highly nutritious for the stock, and so far there has been no necessity to feed
them on any other class of food.
The flock on Caloola consists of 10,000 Merinos, the wool from which is forwarded to
Sydney and sold there. The clip averages about 10 lbs. per sheep, and commands a good
price at the annual sales. In addition to the sheep, Mr. Hassall depastures about 1000
head of cattle, of which fully 600 are fattened and forwarded to market every year. The
first draft of fat bullocks that was sent to England alive was fattened on the Araluen pro-
perty.
The homestead is a well-built structure, and is situated in a fine garden, in which are
some splendid poplars and elms.
Gold-mining operations are still conducted in the district, and gold-dredging, which at
one time was a very common feature there, is still to be seen. A few dredges are at pre-
sent at work on the creek running through Caloola.
The Hassalls in the early years of Australia were associated with those who made the
history of the young settlement. With Macarthur and Marsden and others of that time,
they contributed their share of the good work that was done by those early pioneers. One
of the first mission-
aries to the South
Sea Islands was the
Rev. Rowland Has-
sall, the great
grandfather of Mr.
R. G. Hassall. He
sailed from Eng-
land in the ship
“Duff” to Tahiti in
the year 1796, but
STATION PETS.
3
The Caloola Estate, New South Wales.


CALOOLA FROM MAJCR'S CREEK ROAD.
JEMCAICUBENE CREEK FROM CALOOLA.
4
The Pastoral /Homes of Australia.


PORTION OF CALOOLA PADDOCK.
CORNER OF CALOOLA HOMESTEAD.
5
The Caloola Estate, New South Wales.


MRS. R. G. HASSALL.
MR. R.G. HASSALL.
MASTER FOWLAND THOMAS HASSALL
MISS HELEN ADELE HASSALL.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BULLOCKS IN PADDOCK, ARALUEN.
VIEW OF PADDOCK FROM BELLE VUE.
7
The Caloola Estate, New South Wales.


the hostility of the natives there was so great that he was ultimately driven off the island,
and, proceeding to Australia, settled with his family in Parramatta. A son of the Rev.
Rowland Hassall, Thomas, also a clergyman, married the eldest daughter of the Rev.
Samuel Marsden. A son of this marriage, James Hassall, also became a clergyman, and
in his published reminiscences he says:—
“In the year 1826 my father purchased a property, Denbigh, in the neighbourhood of
Camden, then called the Cowpastures. Upon it was a house partly furnished, built by a Mr.
Hook, who died there. The house was similar to an Indian bungalow. Immediately
round it was a paling fence, 7 or 8 ft. high, to keep out bushrangers and assigned servants.
After my father bought the place this fence was removed, and the house completed.”
VIEW OF CALOOLA FROM JEMBAICUMBENE CREEK.
Speaking of an experience he had on Christmas Day in 1827, he says:—
“We drove from Denbigh in the morning to a service at Kirkham, the property of
Surveyor-General Oxley. Service was held in a large loft over the stables. The assigned
servants, about fifty, all attended. In the afternoon we started for Parramatta in a cart
which held the whole family. It was a very hot day in a season of drought, and we children
cried for water.” At Nonerah they came upon some dirty water. “It was a basin of yel-
low mud,” he says, “and our mother would not let us drink. We passed by the orphan
school, reaching Parramatta about dark, after a miserable Christmas Day journey.”
S
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE MILL POND.
OCERSEER'S COTTAGE AT ARALUEN.
9
The Ca/oola Estate, New South Wales.


ARALUEN FROM TOP OF MAONTAIN.
PADDOCK AT ARALUEN,
io
The Pastoral Homes of Austra/ia c


A recent writer, speaking of the blacks in the early pioneering days, says:—
At this time ‘blacks,’ as they were quaintly called, were so numerous in this dis-
trict that a corrobboree in Denbigh paddocks, in which four or five hundred aboriginals
took part, was not an unusual incident. They appear to have given the Hassall family no
cause for serious anxiety. this supports the contention that had the aboriginals been
better treated in the aggregate we should have different results to those that now obtain.
Ihe elder Hassall often employed from one to two hundred at a time to burn off dead tim-
ber. Ihey worked from g a.m. until 3 p.m., finishing up with a good meal of ‘hasty pud-
ding, hominy soup, and vegetables.’ According to the younger Hassall, they never did
MR. HASSALL'S FAVORTE HORSE.
any mischief at Denbigh. Decently treated and well fed as payment ‘in kind’ for their
work, the aboriginal tribes in the Camden district seem to have responded by showing res-
pect for the property of that sturdy old pioneer parson, whose rectory was at Denbigh,
and whose parish appears to have been (in 1826) vaguely describeci as ‘that part of New
South Wales south of Liverpool.’ ”
Another son of the Rev. Rowland Hassall, Jonathan, married Miss Rouse, of Beau-
desert, Mudgee, and finally settled at Berkshire Park, South Creek, Windsor, where Mr.
Rowland Hassall, the father of Mr. R. G. Hassall, was born. Mr. Rowland Hassall in course
of time went to Braidwood, and, joining Mr. T. J. Roberts, formed the well-known firm of
11
The Caloola Estate, New South Wales.


Hassall and Roberts, and became the managing partner of the firm. He took a very pro-
minent part in all matters affecting the development of the pastoral industry and the pro-
gress of the district. He was a fine sample of the men of the Hawkesbury River, who did
so much for pastoral Australia. Throughout his long life he devoted considerable atten-
tion to whatever went for the betterment and advancement of the industry with which he
was for so many years associated. He died in 1904 at the age of eighty-five.
Mr. Rowland George Hassall was born at Exeter, and has been connected with the
property ever since. He managed it for some time prior to his father s death, and when
that event occurred he succeeded to his estate. His early training on Caloola and his sub-
sequent experience have well fitted him for the prominent part he takes in pastoral affairs.
Mr. Hassall is considered to be one of the best judges of horses and cattle in Australia,
GROUP OF PONIES AND CHILDRENEN.
and for many years he has acted as a judge of those classes at the Royal Agricultural
Show, Sydney. He acts in a similar capacity at the Melbourne Show. Mr. Hassall is a
justice of the peace and president of the Tallaganda shire council, chairman of the Pas-
tures Protection Board, and is identified with every movement that has for its object the
improvement of the district.
Mr. Hassall married in 1892 the third daughter of Mr. John Mackellar, of Braidwood,
son of Captain Mackellar, of Glenderuel Castle, Argyle, Scotland, and has two children,
a son and daughter.
r 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Retford Park Estate.
The Property of Mr. Samuel Hordern.
FEW names are better known throughout the length and breadth of the Common-
wealth of Australia than that of the late Mr. Samuel Hordern. It is associated
with one of the biggest mercantile establishments in the Southern Hemisphere,
the building up of which has been a commercial triumph of no mean order, requiring from
Air. Hordern exceptional powers of organisation and the faculty to choose proper mana-
gers for the various departments of the concern. Mr. Samuel Hordern possessed in no
HEOFERS AND BULL PUR CHASED FROM LORD ROTHSCHILD.
ordinary degree all the characteristics necessary for the achievement of the wonderful
success which as a business man was his. One would have thought that the demand upon
his time which such an immense undertaking necessitated would have precluded his giv-
ing any attention to outside matters, and yet, notwithstanding the worry and turmoil of
his big commercial enterprises, we find him building up and practically supervising the
operations of a stud farm. It was his ambition to improve and maintain the breed of
dairy cattle and horses, and in this, as in all else with which he was associated, he intro-
duced a thoroughness and earnestness which everyone admired. As an exhibitor at the
Royal Agricultural Society’s Annual Show he was a familiar figure, and his entries in-
variably secured the principal prizes. His importations of first-class stock did an im-
i


mense amount of
good in the interests
of high breeding in
dairy cattle, and
Retford Park, his
country residence,
where he had his
stud farm, was well
known to all who
were in any way
interested in well-
bred stock.
Retford Park is
BEAUTY'S QUEEN, BY PRINCIPAL OF OAKBANK.
situated near Bow-
ral, and comprises
about 1666 acres of
land in an almost
ideal position. It
was acquired by the
late Mr. Samuel
Hordern in 1880,
when it was practic-
ally all bush land.
The homestead was
erected in 1887, and
the property has
HARVESTING AT RETFORD PARK.
NETHER CARAIG SILVER CREST, IMPORTED AYRSHIRE.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


MR. AND MRS. SAMUEL HORDERN.
been improved from year to year, until it now presents a park-like appearance. The
estate is divided into twenty-six paddocks, all well supplied with water from various creeks,
dams, and springs.
Elpon the death of the late Mr. Samuel Hordern, his son, Mr. Samuel Hordern, leased
Retford- Park from the trustees of his father’s estate with the intention of continuing the
stud farm operations started by his father, and with the determination to preserve the best
traditions of the place. With this object in view he disposed of all stock whose pedigrees
were in the least doubtful, and in 1910 during his visit to England he purchased what
has been described as one of the most valuable lots of British pedigree stock ever sent
to Australia.
Mr. Hordern bought the prize-winning hackney stallion Gartonius from Mr. R. P.
Evans, of Woodhatch, Reigate. Gar-
tonius is one of the best sons of Garton
Duke of Connaught, from Julia 11929,
by Dagenham 4214. He is a dark chest-
nut, and has a record of fifteen firsts and
eight seconds, including first London,
1905, second London, 1906, and reserve
for champion gold medal at English
Royal Shows of 1906 and 1907.
Erom Miss Lort, Castlemai, Carnar-
von, he bought a valuable animal in the
Welsh pony stallion Traveller’s Joy, full
of prize-winning blood, being sired by the
TRAVELLER'S JOY, IMPORTED WELSH PONY STALLION.
3
The Retford Park Estate, New South Wales.


champion Sir Horace 5402 from Biddy Brown 1564, a
winner of over twenty first prizes, by Sir George
Traveller’s Joy himself has been a great winner in the
best of company, and has also proved himself a great
sire.
In Jersey cattle Mr. Samuel Hordern’s purchases
represented only the very best, including Lord Roths-
child’s Champion of St. Peter, first prize and champion
bull at the Royal Society’s Show. Mr. Syvret’s
Matilda’s Noble, the first prize two-year-old bull at
Jersey Royal Agricultural Society in April last, by that
great bull Noble of Oaklands. In females Lord Roths-
child supplied four beautiful heifers, viz., Pontorson
12th, second prize Royal Show, Liverpool, by Barris-
THE LATE MR. SAMUEL HORDERN.
ter 7719 from Pontorson nth, by Franc Frefs Jolly 8187; Pearl, third prize in same class,
by Warder’s Champion 9495 from Amina’s Pearl, by Clarencia’s Lad 8467; Royal Bess,
second prize yearling heifer Liverpool Royal, by Royal Guide 4104 from Oakland’s Best,
by Favori 6854; and Noble’s Twylish 2nd, by the champion bull Noble of Oaklands 9366,
the sire of numerous prize-winning stock.
In Ayrshires Mr. Hordern got a few animals of the highest class, viz., the prize bull
Nether Craig Silver Crest, second Royal and Highland Shows, first Kirkcudbright, first
Dumfries, first Monkton, and second at Ayr, 1910, bred by Mr. John Cochrane, by Auch-
cnbainze Lord Osborne 6088 from Nether Craig Forest Queen (a 1000-gallon cow), by Not
Likely of Hillhouse 4469, the champion bull of Scot-
land for three years. Also four heifers, viz., Loch-
fergus Rosebud, by Beuchan Peter Pan 7140, winner
first Royal, first and champion Highland, first Thorn-
hill, first Kilmarnock, first Ayr, and champion cup
for best bull, and sold recently for the highest price
ever paid for an Ayrshire bull, from Beuchan Beauty,
by Ivanhoe of Beuchan; Lochfergus Rhoda, by Beu-
chan Peter Pan 7140 from Beuchan 2nd, by Snow-
ball of Southwick 3492; Crofthead Annie Laurie, first
Ochilton and second Cumnock, by Crofthead Excel-
sior from Crofthead I ibbie 3rd, by Crofthead Royal
Star 6313; and Clenshamrock Meg, first Cumnock,
first New Cumnock, first Dalbeattie, by Safeguard of
4
MR. SAMUEL HORDERN.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOUSE AT RETFORD PARK.
5
The Retford Park Estate, New South Wales.


Wynholm 4798, first
at the Highland,
Kilmarnock, Ayr,
and Glasgow
Shows, from Glen-
shamrock Rigg 2nd,
by White Prince of
Glenshamrock.
Forming part of
the Jersey herd at
Retford Park are
the following fe-
males: Ledas Show-
NOBLES TWYLISH II AND ROYAL BESS (IMP.).
drop (imp.), Jersey Queen, Miss Trenton 2nd, Miss Trenton 3rd, Roseys Angel, Miss
Kirkham 2nd, Coquette lll.—prizewinners at R.A. Show 7 . Also some very choice young
heifers, including Ledas Angel, Ledas Picture, &c., prizewinners at last R.A. Show. There
are also several good cows of the Skipper, Pomonas Daily, Rosey Dawn strain, and
a couple of the Bessie Black strain by the same bulls as the above.
LEDAS SNOWDROP (IMP.) CHAMPION HERSEY COW, 1909, 1910, AND 1911 R.A.S.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


AVENUE ON ESTATE.
7
The Retford Park Estate, New South Wales,


VIEW OF HOMESTEAD.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


FROUP OF BROOD MARES AND FOALS.
9
The Retford Park Estate, New South Wales,


DISTANT VIEW OF HOMESTEAD.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


Other bulls of the Jersey herd are: —Cherry’s Pride 11., Dinahs Lad, bull by Ethel-
bert 6th, dam Golden Marie (imp.). Also several nice bull and heifer calves by Cherry’s
Pride 2nd, Dinahs Lad, &c., from Jersey Queen, Miss Trenton 2nd, Miss Kirkham 2nd,
Beauty of Jerseyholm, Ledas Snowdrop, May, Dawn of Retford, etc.
Ihe other cows of the Ayrshire herd at Retford Park include Beauty’s Queen, a cow
with a record of 58 lbs. milk for twenty-six weeks; several young cows by Glen Elgins
Gallant Scotchman from cows by Borcheskies Pride (imp.), Hover of Southwick (imp.),
&c.
%
The other bulls of the Ayrshire herd are Glen Elgins Gallant Scotchman, by Glen
Elgins Jamie, a big prizewinner, and a young bull by Remarkable (imp.), from Pretty
Polly, a champion cow.
In addition to Gartonius and Traveller’s Joy, the stud horses at Retford Park com-
prise;—Radnor, by that great horse Login Briton (imp.), dam by Childe Harold (imp.);
Retford Briton, a typical cob, by Login Briton (imp.), dam by Llandor (imp.); Lord
Glasgow, a beautiful type of draught horse, bred in New Zealand; also Prince Charlie (Hun-
garian pony).
The mares consist of imported English hunters, imported English hackneys, mares by
the Duke (trotter), Login Briton, imp. (cob), Goldtop, &c.
ENTRANCE TO GROUNDS.
11
The Retford Park Estate, New South Wales.


STALLION BOXES.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


“MISS ELMOS,” BY THE DUKE—ELMOS VERMONTINA, DAM OF PATRICK G, 2.20.1/5 LADY BRITON, DOREEN II.
GARTONIUS (IMP.).
>3
The Retford Park Estate, New South Wales.


Draught horses are also
bred at Retford Park, and
every year drafts of four-
year-olds are sold at the
Camperdown yards, and
command good prices. A
few Hungarian ponies are
also bred on the estate.
Retford Park has a fine
record of prizewinners at the
MAILDA'S NOBLE (IMP.) JERSEY BULL.
prize Jersey cow,-4 years 3
months; second prize Ayr-
shire cow, 4 years; first prize
Ayrshire bull.
Year 1896. —Reserve
champion Ayrshire cow;
champion and first prize Jer-
sey cow Bessie Black (imp.);
first prize Ayrshire heifer.
Sydney Royal Agricultural
Show, a few of which are
enumerated below.
Year 1893. —Champion
Jersey bull (class 97); cham-
pion Ayrshire cow (class
93); champion Jersey cow
(class 101); first prize Ayr-
shire cow; first prize Jersey
bull, 17 months old; first
CHAMPION OF ST. PETER.
'4
ROSY’S ANGEL.
1 Pastoral Homes of Australia .


LORD GLASGOW, CLYDESDALD STALLION
cow; second prize Jersey
bull, under 1 year.
Year 1899. —Second
prize Ayrshire heifer, 1 and
under 2 years; first prize
Ayrshire cow, 3 years and
over; reserve champion Ayr-
shire cow, 3 years and over;
first prize Jersey heifer, un-
der 1 year.
Year 1910. —first prize
Cob (mare or gelding) over
RADNOR, BY LOGIN BRITON (IMP.).
' 5
Year 1897. —First prize
Ayrshire heifer; first prize
Ayrshire cow; champion and
first prize Jersey cow May
Blossom; H.C. Jersey heifer;
second prize Ayrshire cow;
champion Ayrshire cow.
Year 1898. —Second
prize Ayrshire heifer; second
prize Jersey cow, under 3
years; second prize Ayrshire
TWO YEAR OLD COLT, FULL BROTHER TO PATRICK G AND LADY BRITON.
14 and not over 15 hands,
in saddle.
Year 1911. First prize
and champion, Roadster
Hackney Stallion Gartonius
(Imp.); first prize Hackney
Pony Stallion, Traveller’s
Joy (Imp.) ; first prize and
champion Roadster Hack-
ney Mare (Imp.) ; second
prize Cob in Saddle; first
prize Cob in Harness.
The Retford Park Estate, New South Wales,


Year igio. Second prize,Cherry’s Pride 11., Jersey bull, 4 years and over; First and Cham-
pion, Leda’s Snowdrop (imp.), Jersey cow, 4 years and over, in milk; First Prize, Beauty of
Jerseyholm, Jersey cow, 3 years and under 4, in calf, dry; 1 bird Prize, Miss Kirkham IF,
heifer, 2 years and under 3 years, in calf, dry; Second Prize, Rosy’s Angel, heifer, 1 year
and under 2 years.
Year 1911. First Prize, Nether Craig Silver Crest (imp.), Ayrshire bull, 3 years and
under 4 years; Second Prize, Cherry’s Pride IF, Jersey bull. 4 years and over; Second Prize,
Champion of St. Peters (imp.), Jersey bull, 3 years and under 4 years; First and Reserve
Champion, Dinah’s Fad, Jersey bull, 2 years and under 3 years; Second Prize, Matilda’s
Noble (imp.), Jersey bull, 2 years and under 3 years; Second Prize, Goldbert Silver, Jer-
sey bull, 1 year and under 2 years; First and Champion, Feda’s Snowdrop (imp.), Jersey cow,
4 years and over, in milk; First and Reserve Champion, Miss Trenton 111., Jersey cow,
4 years and over, in calf, dry; Second Prize, Miss Trenton IF, Jersey cow, 4 years and
over, in calf, dry; First Prize, Pearl (imp.), Jersey cow, 3 years and under 4 years, in milk;
First Prize, Feda’s Angel, Jersey heifer, 2 years and under 3 years, in milk; Second Prize,
Rosy’s Angel, Jersey heifer, 2 years and under 3 years, in calf, dry; Second Prize, Noble
Twyhsh (imp.), Jersey heifer, 1 year and under 2 years; First Prize, Royal Bess (imp.),
Jersey heifer, 1 year and under 2 years; First Prize, Beauty of Retford, Jersey heifer calf,
6 months and under 12 months.
Mr. Hordern is forming a thoroughbred stud, and has the following thoroughbred
mares Istria, by Haut Brion out of Trieste (he paid £1275 for this mare): Collett, by
Gossoon out of Collarette.
personal.
Mr. Hordern, who succeeded his father in the control of the firm of
Anthony Hordern and Sons, was born in 1876. He was educated first at the
Sydney Grammar School, and after at Bath College, Bath, England. Upon complet-
ing his education, he entered his father’s business, with which he has been connected ever
since. Although his business responsibilities have been great and absorbing, he has found
time in his early commercial career to indulge in a few hobbies. For some years he was
actively interested in yachting, and even now he is still connected with it, and is a mem-
ber of the Royal Sydney Yacht Club and the Prince Alfred Yacht Club. He is president
of the Automobile Club of Australia and a member of the council of the Royal Agricultural
Society. Although a very busy man, he manages to find time to identify himself .more or
less with public matters, and is associated with many charities. Following the footsteps
of the late Mr. Samuel Hordern, who was the first to introduce high-class homing pigeons
into Australia, Mr. Hordern has taken a great interest in homing pigeons, and has suc-
ceeded in securing all the principal prizes for races from 96 to 600 miles. His birds are
from the best blood in England. He secured the first prize in the Military Homing Race
offered by the Federal Government, the distance flown being 365 miles. One of his birds
won the race from Cunnamulla, in Queensland, to Sydney, and from Morgan, South Aus-
tralia, to Sydney.
Mr. Hordern married the eldest daughter of the late Sir John See, and has a family
of two daughters and one son.
r 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Middlefield Estate.
The Property of Mr. Hugh Straborn.
MIDDLEFIELD, the property of Mr. Hugh Strahorn, is situated fifteen miles to the
south-west of Uandaloo, and about forty miles from Narromme. This estate
was taken up originally by Mr. G. M. Lee, who retained possession of it for
many years. In 1908 it was acquired by Mr. Strahorn. It comprises 50,000 acres of
hilly country, heavily timbered with pine, box, gum, ironbark, and in some parts a little
YARDING WOOLLIES AT THE SHED FOR SHEARING.
myall. Mr. Strahorn also possesses Waterloo, formerly owned by Campbell and Reid hav-
ing an area about 10,000 acres, C.P. and C.L. principally, and situated fifteen miles from
Middleheld, on the Bogan River. Mr. H. A. Baird manages both properties, which are well
stocked with sheep and cattle.
T


The boundary of Middlefield is all wire-netted, as are also most of the fifteen pad-
docks into which the estate is subdivided. It is very well watered by numerous springs,
creeks, tanks, and dams, and in this respect no trouble is ever experienced. There are
various kinds of grasses on the property, and the herbage under favourable conditions is
both plentiful and good. The homestead, which is situated in a pleasant position, was
erected by Mr. Lee, and possesses every comfort and convenience. The woolshed is built
of iron and wood, and contains twenty stands of Wolseley shearing machines.
WOOLLIES GOING INTO THE SHEARING SHED.
The flock consists of about 8000 pure Merinos, founded originally from Mungery blood.
Mungery was formerly one of Mr. Strahorn’s properties, and in the early 5 ears of his
ownership comprised 180,000 acres of freehold and leasehold, and carried as many as
95,000 sheep. This property, the area of which had been reduced to 55,000 acres, however,
was sold a few years ago to the Government for closer settlement purposes, and passed
out of Mr. Strahorn’s hands.
2
The Pastoral Homos of Australia.


BOGAN RIVER ON WATERLOO STATION.
3
The Middlefield Estate, New South Wales.


MANAGER'S RESIDENCE, WATERLOO.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


MR. HUGH STRAHORN.
MR. R. B. STRAHORN.
MR. N. W. STRAHORN.
5
The Midd/eheld Estate, New South Wales.


The wool is despatched to Sydney,
where it is marketed, and commands an
excellent price.
In addition to the sheep on Middle-
field, Mr. Strahorn runs a small herd of
cattle, which he fattens for the market.
Mr. Strahorn was born in the Dubbo
district, and during the many years he
resided at Mungery he identified himself
with the advancement of the district, and
furthered in every way the interests of
the various public institutions with which
he was either directly or indirectly asso-
ciated. He is the eldest surviving son
of the late Mr. John Strahorn, who came
to Australia from Cumnock, Ayrshire,
MR. H. A. BAIRD.
MANAGER COUNTINGOUT.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


MR. STRAHORN AND MR. BAIRD AT SHEARER’S HUT.
7
The Middleheld Estate, New South Wales.


THE SHEARING BOARD.
CLASSING THE WOOL.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


AMOKE OH !
WOOL PRESSING.
9
The Middlefield Estate, New South Wales •


VIEW OF MIDDLEFIELD.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SHEARERS’ AND SHED HANDS’ COOK.
11
The Middlefield Estate, New South Wales,


Scotland, and who became identified with pastoral matters after his arrival. He was one
of the many pioneer pastoralists who in the early years did so much for the sheep and
cattle industry, upon which the wealth and prosperity of Australia has so largely depended.
He has two sons, Mr. Robert Bruce Strahorn and Mr. Nicholas William Strahorn, and
five daughters, Mrs. John Strahorn (of Glen Isla), Mrs. Arthur Martell (of Dobrone), Mrs.
W. W. Penzer (of Lower Quambone), Mrs. Hugh C. Strahorn (of Eulandool), and Miss
Jessie Letitia Strahorn. Mr. Strahorn resides at “Derowie,” a private residence situated
about ’forty miles from Dubbo.
12
The Pastoral Homos of Australia,


The Burrawang Estate.
The Property of Thomas Edols & Co. Limited.
NO estate has better claim to be included in the Pastoral Homes of Australia than
Burrawang, the property of fhos. Edols and Co., Limited. 1 his station has
long been famous as an example of woolgrowing on a large scale, and it has
earned a wide name for the quality of the stud Merinos and Shorthorn cattle it has pro-
duced. The fine herd of Shorthorns was dispersed early in 1910, but the Merino stud
still exists, and drafts of rams from it each year spread the fame of Burrawang further
afield.
The estate is situated on the Lachlan River, about thirty-five miles from Forbes and
forty miles from Parkes. It comprises about 103,000 acres of freehold land, and a few
GROUP OF STUD RAMS.
thousand acres of leasehold, but when the late Mr. Thomas Edols acquired it in 1873 it
embraced an area of 520,000 acres, and by extensive improvement and judicious manage-
ment it carried as many as 273,000 sheep, cutting 4993 bales of wool.
Interesting light is thrown on the early settlement of Burrawang by Mr. James McCon-
nell, writing from Fiji a few years ago. He said: —“Mulguthrie and Burrawang Stations
were first taken up by Mr. Lloyd, of the old sugar works, Sydney, and sold by him to
1


the late Mr. Augustus Morris, who sent me there in the year 1865 to take charge of the
sheep and prepare these runs for a sheep station. Mulguthrie was at that time stocked
with cattle, and Mr. James Augustus Parker was in charge. On my arrival on the station
I assisted to inoculate about 2000 head of cattle (pleuro was very bad at that time in the
Ruerina) at the Burrawang yards. There were about 8000 sheep on the run. These I con-
demned, being old culls, and shortly after this I took them down to the Lachlan, and deli-
vered them to Mr. Langloh Parker, in charge of Mr. Augustus Morris’ Yanga Station on the
Murrumbidgee. On my return Mr. Morris directed me to go to Queensland and buy 30,000
sheep for Mulguthrie. These I bought from Messrs. Beck and Brown, on the Mooni River,
MR. FRANK EDOLS’ HOUSE.
Queensland. The season was very wet, yet I landed them in good condition, less than i
per cent, short, by adopting—the first time in overlanding—the novel plan of bridging all
rivers and creeks. I had to erect about 100 of these. On my arrival at Mulguthrie, it
was decided to make Burrawang the head sheep station. Accordingly, under my direc-
tions, the first shearing shed was erected there, and I took charge of the shearing. Trundle
at that time was only occupied with wild cattle and wild dogs. Hundreds of these I poi-
soned, and started the first sheep station there on a hill or rise a short distance from a
lagoon. Shortly after the first shearing, Mr. Morris sold the stations to Dr. Youl and Mr.
Martin, of Melbourne, and I delivered the sheep to Mr. Harry Youl, and I think Dr. Youl
sold his share to Mr. Martin.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


MR. C. H. EDOLS’ BURRAWNNG HOUSE.
PANORAMIC VIEW OF BURRAWANG.
The Burrawang Estate, New South Wales.


“About a month before Ben Hall was shot in Strickland’s paddock, he and his mates,
Gilbert and Dunn, stuck up Mulguthrie Station. They took away from the station the
famous horse Goldfinder. This horse was taken away from the bushrangers by Sir Fred-
erick Pottinger, with a load of gold on his back a few days after they had stuck up the
Forbes gold escort.”
When the late Mr. Thomas Edols took up Burrawang much of the property was a
dense scrub, with stony rises and hills. Dingoes and marsupials were numerous, and the
latter, of -course, affected the carrying capacity in no small degree, while thieves were a
AN IRRIGATION PLANT.
source of constant trouble. Bush fires also involved considerable worry and expense. Mr.
Edols tackled the improvement of this big area in a characteristically plucky manner, and
through his enterprise and the continued efforts of the present owners the carrying capa-
city has been so much increased that the estate carries more sheep, and carries them better,
than seemed likely to be ever possible when 520,000 acres were held. The wise expendi-
ture of money has effected this transformation. In fencing, killing, and clearing scrub
and timber, and the sinking of tanks, vast sums have been expended, while much land that
was originally swamps has been converted into rich sweet pasture land by the construction
of over 100 miles of drains. The paddocks for stock number some 150; all other improve-
-4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SHEEP TROPHIES.
5
The Burrawang Estate, New South Wales.


BURRAWANG LAGOON.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ments have been on an equally extensive
scale.
The late Mr. Thomas Edols was
born at Bridgewater, Somersetshire, in
1819, and left the old country at the age
of thirteen, for Tasmania, where some of
his early life was spent, afterwards go-
ing over to Victoria, where he occupied
a farm known as Edolstone, at Cowie’s
Creek, near Geelong. It is interesting to
record that this holding in 1857 was
awarded the first prize given by a local
exhibition for the best-managed farm in
the district.
BURRAWANG STUD RAM.
Subsequently Mr. Edols purchased a station known as Upper Regions, Bonnigar, in
the Western District of Victoria, where nearly all his family were born. This property was
afterwards sold, and in 1873 he purchased Burrawang from the Hon. J. G. Francis and
William Martin, which at the time was practically unimproved, and of small carrying capa-
city. Mr. Edols possessed great courage, and was a match for all the great difficulties
which beset his huge undertakings in those early days.
In 1895 the property was formed into a limited liability company, and during the lat-
ter years of his life the late Mr. Thomas Edols gradually relinquished the active manage-
ment of the estates to his four sons, Frank, Hedley, Ernest, and Edward, and under their
control the development of the property was continued. The last named of the four died
some years ago, and Mr. Ernest Edols recently disposed of his share in the estate to his
brothers, so that the management is now entirely in the hands of Messrs. Hedley and
Frank Edols, respectively managing director and chairman of directors of the company.
They take deep in-
terest in the affairs
of the district, and
among the promin-
ent positions they
have held may be
mentioned the presi-
dency of the Forbes
Pastoral and Agri-
cultural Association.
The soil on Bur-
BURRAWANG STUD EWES, 2-TOOTH.
7
The Burrawang Estate, New South Wales.


rawang consists of both black and red,
and a large proportion of it is admirably
adapted for cultivation. Agricultural
operations have been earned into effect
on some parts of the property, mainly for
hay-growing, where water for irrigation
is not available, and results have been
encouraging. The country now presents
the appearance of open, lightly-timbered
plains, converging towards the Lachlan
River, where the rich black soil flats and
drained swamp lands provide splendid fat-
tening areas, growing excellent herbage
and many of the best grasses. The na-
BURRAWANG STUD RAM.
tural water supply is good, there being large frontages to the Lachlan River, the Gunning-
bland, Billabong, and Goobang Creeks, and a large lagoon, and with the assistance of
tanks and wells there is now permanent water in every paddock on the property.
On a large lagoon (a branch of Gunningbland Creek) stood the original homestead,
which has now been demolished. On its site now stands the station church, while sur-
rounding are the residences of the many station employees, the store, office, &c., present-
ing the appearance of a small township. Near by are two homesteads, replete with all the
latest requirements that tend to make home life comfortable. One of them is the residence
of Mr. Hedley Edols, while his brother, Mr. Frank Edols, occupies the other on the oppo-
site side of the lagoon. They are surrounded by well-kept flower and fruit gardens, the
variety of flowers being extensive, and
the roses particularly fine. The lawns
are well kept, and laid down with buffalo
grass, while in the fruit garden, apples,
pears, peaches, nectarines, grapes, and
other fruits grow to magnificent propor-
tion, helped by an abundant supply of
water drawn from the lagoon near by and
laid all through the gardens. Close to
the outstation is an irrigating plant on
the bank of the Lachlan, irrigating a large
area, and at present there are stored in
various pits in different places on the run
BURRAWANG STUD RAM.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


OUTSTATION, LACHLAN RIVER.
THE WOOLSHED.
9
The Burrawang Estate, New South Wales.


1800 tons of ensilage, together with 500
tons of hay stacked in the fields, thus forming
the nucleus of a reserve fund to combat dry
times.
Telephones are erected all over the run,
connecting the homestead and all out stations
and the town of Forbes (which is the tele-
graphic centre for the station business),
Parkes, Condobolm, &c. One telephone line
runs to the top of Burrawang Mountain, where
an outlook station is formed, commanding a
general view of the whole run, and in times
when there is a likelihood of bush fires break-
ing out, a man is stationed there watching,
and in the event of a fire being located all
centres are immediately communicated with,
advising the particular part of the station
MR. C. H. EDOLS.
affected, a bell is rung at the head homestead, and all hands turn out.
The Burrawang woolshed is recognised as one of the largest and finest in the State.
It is fitted with eighty-eight stands of Burgon over-head gear and Wolseley hand-pieces,
driven by a powerful steam engine. In the
year 1910 it put through 100,000 sheep. Ihe
grown sheep, 73,631, cut an average of 10 lbs.
Gbc Stub jfloch.
Not by any means the least attractive part
of Burrawang is the fine Merino stud flock the
firm has established, comprising over 14,000
ewes of a most valuable type. They are big,
deep-framed, and roomy, carrying fleeces ot
a quality representing years of skilful work on
the part of the breeders. When the run was
owned by Messrs. Francis and Martin, the
sheep on the place had a large dash of South
Australian blood in them, most of the ewes
having been purchased from Mr. Hurtle
MR, FRANK EDOLS.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE STATION CHURCH.
BURRWANG STUD EWES AND LAMBS.
11
The Burrctwang Estate, New South Wales.


Fisher, Mount Schanck, S.A., while some came from the Liverpool Plains. In 1875, 500
rams were purchased from Mr. C. B. Fisher, South Australia, and 300 from Mr. Nicholas
Bayly, Flavilah, N.S.W. In the latter mob there was found a ram of such high character
that it was decided to use it in the stud flock, and the experiment proved completely suc-
cessful. Competing at the Forbes Show, this ram beat one bought in Tasmania for three
figures. Later, Mr. Edols purchased rams from the late Mr. James Gibson, of Belle-
vue, but the Tasmanian strain did not prove suitable, and the progeny was discarded. In
1880 six rams were purchased from Messrs. Austin and Millear, Wanganella, and one of
these rams, old “Bestwool,” laid the foundation of the present high standard of the flock.
At the same time 700 2-tooth rams were purchased from the same source, being mostly
of the Premier and Warrior strains, considered two of the best on Wanganella, and deli-
vered to Burrawang in 1881.
Two more high-class rams were bought from Wanganella in 1887, but since that year
no other purchases have been made.
When the Burrawang stud was formed, Mr. Frank Pitt, of Tasmania, was the first sheep
classer, followed by Mr. Charles Gibson, son of the late Thos. Gibson, of Eskiale, Tas-
mania. After that Mr. Hedley Edols assumed control, and he has been classing the flock
for the last twenty-five years. The late Mr. Thos. Edols always impressed upon his sons
never to forget that “whatever filled the eye filled the bales,’’ and the present big-
framed, bulky Burrawang sheep is the outcome of strictly adhering to that advice.
The Burrawang sheep are well known at the Sydney sales. Last year (1909) six
young rams averaged £144 7s. 6d. per head. At the last sales Thos. Edols and Co., Ltd.,
had a fine draft in, which averaged 9s. 6d., which was the highest average for any
one New South Wales breeder’s sheep sold at auction during the sales, and a Queensland
purchaser of one of these rams told the writer he would not exchange it for any ram at
the Sydney sales. The great attraction about the Burrawang sheep is their uniform and
robust appearance. They have bold fronts and level, well-topped frames, well-sprung ribs,
and great depth of body.
Between 1882 and 1890 150 Burrawang sheep shown at Forbes won fourteen cham-
pionships, forty-six firsts, fifteen seconds, and twenty-four special prizes, these being about
equally divided amongst the ewes and rams. The sheep are unhoused and purely grass-
fed, and are bred to suit the severe conditions in New South Wales, Queensland, and other
States.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Rockwood Estate.
The Property of Mr. T. E. White.
ROCKWOOD, the property of Mr. Clarence E. White, comprises 20,000 acres, situ-
ated in New England, 12 miles east of Uralla, and 16 miles south of Armidale.
It was purchased by the present owner’s father, the late Mr. Frederick White,
from Mr. R. G. Higgins, and it has remained in the family ever since.
The nature of the country is principally slate, basalt, and ironstone formation, ana
it is timbered with stringy, bark, red and white gum, and box. It is situated in a good
ROCKWOOD FLOCK RAMS.
rainfall area, the average being about 28 in. per annum. The water supply causes no anxiety,
for in addition to artificial sources of supply, the property is watered by the Mihi and
Gostwyck Creeks.
The improvements are of a substantial nature. The estate is surrounded by a rabbit
and dog proof netting fence, and six, seven, and eight wire fences, costing about £4O pei
mile, are used for subdivisional purposes.
1


The whole area has been ringbarked, but
care was exercised to preserve the more valu-
able timber and useful shelter belts. Ihe
estate, in consequence, looks very beautiful,
especially as in addition to the natural timbei
numerous varieties of English trees particu-
larly suited to that climate have been planted.
Good sheep yards have been constructed
on various parts of the run, and the necessary
cattle and horse yards are to be found close
to the homestead. dhe woolshed is of the T-
shaped modern design, fitted with sixteen
stands of Wolseley machines, driven by a 10-
h.p. steam engine. Attached to the woolshed
is a weather shed, with space enough to
MR. C. E. WHITE.
cover 2500 sheep. Close by, and conveniently situated, is an up-to-date sheep dip, on the
SHEEP AT THE BORE WATER.
long-swim principle, 5° ft- i n length. The
stables are near the homestead, and they
have accommodation for ten horses.
The Rockwood homestead is one of
those comfortable old buildings which
add no small degree of charm to Austra-
lian pastoral life. It is built of wood, and
was erected about half a century ago. It
stands in about an acre of garden and
orchard, but it is shortly to be replaced by
a new and modern building.
STATION BUILDINGS.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE CREEK AT COCKWOOD.
3
The Rockwood Estate, New South Wales .


THE APPROACH TO THE HOMESTEAD, ROCKWOOD.
SHEEP AT TANK, ROMA,
4
The Pastorai Homes of Australia.


Rockwood is all good sound sheep
country, being hilly and well watered. It
is practically free from injurious grass
seeds, and it is really ideal wool-growing
country. The flock, which comprises about
17,000 pure Merinos of pure Havilah and
Harden Vale blood, cuts one of the best
fleeces which come into the Sydney market.
The wool branded F.R.W. over MIHI has
always been amongst the top average
prices, and the whole flock cuts an average
ON THE PLAINS, ROMA.
of between 8 lbs. and 9 lbs. The average price for the clip (fleece and piece) last year
(igio) was 12.g8d.
clip, locks included,
sheep are a good
mg percentage rang-
per cent, and 85 per
fatten well on the
weights ranging
lbs. In addition to
Mr. White runs about
shires, chiefly Tas-
These he uses for
Merino for the pro-
per lb., or for whole
iOtjd. per lb. The
hardy type, the lamb-
ing from between 78
cent. The sheep
natural grasses, the
from 50 lbs. to 52
the Merino flock,
400 pure Shrop-
manian strains,
crossing with the
duction of fat lambs.
THE ARTESIAN BORE AT ROMA.
The blowfly gives trouble at Rockwood, as it does everywhere else, and Mr. White finds
dipping and crutching to be the best precautionary measures to take.
Mr. White runs a herd of about 400
Hereford cattle on Rockwood; he is a great
believer in this hardy breed. He breeds
what horses he requires for station use,
producing very useful sorts by putting pony
stallions on half Arab and blood mares.
As it now stands, and managed by
Mr. White, Rockwood is one of the most
successful pastoral holdings in the Armi-
dale district, which contains many notable
estates. But its present improved state is
FAT SHROPSHIRE LAMBS en route TO MARKET FROM ROMA.
5
The Rockwood Estate, New South Wales,


STUD SHROPSHIRES AT ROCKWOOD.
6
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SIX-TOOTH WETHERS.
entirely the result of huge expenditure of capital and energy on the part of previous and
present owners. When the property was first taken up it was of comparatively little
value on account of being so heavily timbered. What it is now the accompanying illus-
trations faithfully show.
Rockwood is essen-
tially a breeding pro-
perty, and in order to
have resources for fat-
tening the stock bred
there Mr. White recent-
ly purchased Roma Sta-
tion, comprising about
9600 acres C.P. and
C.L. land, in the Narra-
bri district. This es-
tate was once part of
Rdgeroi Station, and it
comprises light choco-
COTTAGES ON ROMA ESTATE.
195
The Rockwood Estate, New South Wales,


ROCKWOOD HOMESTEAD AND GROUNDS.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


late soil, which produces rich pastures.
The rainfall is good, the average being 23
in. per annum, but, like most of the coun-
try in those parts, the natural water sup-
ply was very meagre. The principal im-
provements, therefore, are in connection
with obtaining water, and Roma is now
supplied with drains from an artesian bore,
giving 500,000 gallons per twenty-four
hours, and with windmills. The bore cost
to put down, and this is only one
A FINE YARD OF LAMBS AT ROMA.
of the items of expenditure this country demands in order to carry stock with safety
Ihe whole estate is enclosed by six and seven wire fences.
JERSEY MILKING HERD, ROCKWOOD.
9
The Rockwood Estate, New South Wales,


DRAWING FIREWOOD.
HEREFORD CATTLE.
xo
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GENERAL VIEW OF ROCKWOOD HOMESTEAD.
CATTLE ON LAGOON AT ROMW. WATER SUPPLIED FROM BORE.
11
The Rockwood Estate, New South Wales,


ROCKWOOD STUD HOGGETT EWES WITH RAMS.
The country was naturally devoid of timber, and the willows and pepper trees, which
beautify the vicinity of the homestead, were planted by previous owners. The natural
grasses and herbage are very rich, and it seems that t;he property is well suited for Mr.
White’s purpose, which is to fatten stock bred on Rockwood.
I 2
Tho Pastoral Homos of Australia.


The Linton Estate.
The Property of Messrs. Carter Bros.
LIN ION was originally a portion of the Ironbark Estate, which was taken up by Mr.
Mortgage about the year 1840, and sold to the late W .L. Spencer. Messrs. 0. H.
and A. W. Carter, the present owners, acquired that portion now known as Linton
in 1888.
Linton is situated at the head of Nangarah Creek, a tributary of the Manilla River,
and is distant twenty-two miles east of Barraba. It was here the famous bushranger,
“Thunderbolt,” spent some time before launching out on his deeds of outlawry, being em-
VIEW OF HOMESTEAD LOOKING NORTH.
ployed on Ironbark Station breaking in horses prior to 1866. He never interfered with any
residents thereabout, although he kept a supply of horses at Bullseye Creek, near where the
present Linton homestead stands.
The area of Linton is about 12,000 acres C.P. and 6000 acres leasehold. It was ori-
ginally heavily timbered with ironbark and box.
1


THE HOMESTEAD.
Ihe soil is light chocolate, with black soil flats, and the average rainfall is 28 in.
Ihe property is watered by Nangarah and Welsh s Creeks, and numerous perennial
springs and dams. The homestead stands on a most picturesque site near Nangarah
Creek, and is surrounded by hills, and with the many cottages (the homes of employees)
STUD EWES AND LAMBS ON LINTON.
and the sheds and
other necessary build-
ings, forms quite a
little village. Tele-
phonic communication
is established between
the homestead and Bar-
raba. Ihe house was
built some twenty-two
years ago, and the
present occupier, Mr.
O. H. Carter, contem-
plates the erection of a
new building in the
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


near future. Surrounding the house on three sides is a trim and well-kept garden, while
a choice collection of beautiful pot plants and ferns, the pride of Mrs. Carter, add to the
beauty of the home.
The vegetable garden is situated about a quarter of a mile from the house on the bank
of the creek, and is in the hands of a very able Chinese gardener, sufficient vegetables
being grown to supply not only the wants of the homestead, but also those of the employees,
who are all married men with families. Adjoining the vegetable garden is a fine orchard,
in which grow peach, apple, quince, nectarine, apricot, plum, and pear trees, and a fine bed
of strawberries, all of which thrive excellently.
MR. CARTER’S FAVOURITE PAIR OF BUGGY PONIES
The estate is subdivided into thirty paddocks, securely enclosed with six-wire fences,
erected at a cost of £3B a mile.
The whole property has been ringbarked and suckered at a cost of Bs. an acre, and the
timber on a large area has all been burned off. The sheep and drafting yards are spacious,
and provide every convenience for dealing with a large number of sheep in an expeditious
manner. They are built of box and ironbark timber, and are of very substantial con-
struction. In proximity are the woolshed and weather shed. Wolseley machines, worked
by steam power, are installed, stands for ten men being provided.
3
The Linton Estate, New South Wales.


“THEO.”
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The cattle are chiefly of the Durham breed, the bulls having been purchased for many
years past from Mr. G. Baker, of Laura Station.
Ihe horses on the station, though stable-fed, are turned loose at night, and during the
winter months are rugged with best weather-proof rugs.
Ihe owners have always made a point of breeding only from the best mares. The present
sire is the pony stallion Theo, bred by. Mr. F. J. White, Saumarez. He is a beautiful dark
bay, standing 14 hands, and very powerfully built, perfectly docile in temper, and quiet enough
MRS. CARTER AND BUGGY.
for a child to manage. This fine little stallion was awarded first and champion prize at the
Armidale Show of 1908. His pedigree is;—
5
The Linton Estate, New South Wales.


Fifty acres are under cultivation, wheat
and oats being grown for hay, while about 12
acres are under lucerne. Ihe farming plant
includes disc ploughs, harrows, steam chaff-
cutter and bagger, mowing and reaping
machines, corn-cracker, &c. About 150 tons
of wheaten chaff are at present stored in a
large shed for future needs. The firm also
have a steam saw plant, with which all the
timber required on the station is cut.
The principal grass is what is locally
known as “Red Grass,” while clover and herb-
age abound on the flats. Paspalum is being
distributed over the run as an experiment.
The Linton flock consists of 16,000 sheep
of pure Brindley Park blood. In 1897 the
MR. O. H. CARTER.
fleeces averaged 6 lbs. 6 ozs., but as a result of skilful breeding and judicious management,
a steady yearly increase has been shown, and last year the average was 3 lbs. more than
it was thirteen years ago, and the highest prices are always obtained for this wool. The
lambing average taken for a number of years is 88 per cent.
Eumbra, which was lately purchased by
Messrs. Carter Bros, from Mr. H. Duncombe,
joins Linton on the south. It originally formed
a portion of the Glen Riddle Estate, owned by
Mr. E. Lloyd, who sold it to Messrs. Harden
and Eastwood, who disposed of it to Mr. E.
K. Rutledge, from whom it passed into the
possession of Mr. H. Duncombe.
On a portion of this property, known as
Crow Mountain, gold was discovered as early
as 1858, and for a number of years
a large quantity of that precious metal was
obtained. In extent Eumbra is about the same
as Linton; it is timbered with ironbark, box,
and appletree, while the soil is of a red, loamy
nature, well watered by Crow and Eumur
ADMIRAL CARTER.
6
the Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GROUP OF HEIFERS.
The Linton Estate, New South Wales,


STUD EWES.
Creeks, a fi outage to the Ahamlla River, besides dams and numerous springs.
The homestead consists of a comfortable house, occupied by Mr. D. Sutherland, the
general manager for the owners. A fine orchard similar to that at Linton flourishes here
also. Eumbra is subdivided into twenty-five paddocks, securely enclosed with six-wire
fences, erected at an average cost of from £3B to £4O a mile. The timber has been killed
at a cost of Bs. an acre.
The woolshed, recently erected, is one of the most commodious and up-to-date in the
district. Wolseley machines to accommodate twenty shearers have been installed, while
there is an abundance of wool room. The weather sheds provide cover for 3000 sheep.
Arrangements have been provided for conserving 40,000 gallons of water, which is laid on
to the engine-room, the dip adjoining the shed, drafting yards, and shearers’ quarters.
The sheep are of the same strain as those on Linton, and of about the same number.
When the present owners bought Eumbra, the flocks consisted of Havilah blood, but these
were disposed of to permit of the introduction of the Brindley Park strain.
Special mention must be made of the arrangements made by the owners for the edu-
cational wants of the children of their employees; a fine school has been built by them,
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GENERAL VIEW OF LINTON.
VIEW LOOKING WEST
The Linton Estate, New South Wales.


BOTTLE-FEEDING THE ORPHANS.
furnished on a most elaborate scale, and handed over to the Educational Department.
Every year a splendid assortment of books and other prizes, the gift of the owners, is dis-
tributed among the pupils.
IPcrsonal.
The present owners of Linton are Mr. O. H. Carter and Rear-Admiral A. W. Carter,
the firm being known as Carter Bros. They are sons of the Rev. T. G. Carter, Vicar of
Linton, near Maidstone, Kent, England.
Mr. O. H. Carter arrived in the colony early in the year 1878, and spent two years on
Gordonbrook Station, in the Clarence River district, gaining colonial experience. He then
joined the Bank of New South Wales, and after serving eight years with that institution,
severed his connection with the bank in order to engage in pastoral pursuits.
Rear-Admiral A. W. Carter joined the Navy on the 15th January, 1870. He was pro-
moted sub-lieutenant on 20th June, 1875; lieutenant, 13th December, 1879; commander,
Ist January, 1894; captain, 30th June, 1899; retiring with the rank of captain on the 28th
January, 1905. He was appointed rear-admiral on the retired list on the sth November,
1908. He served with the Naval Brigade in the Soudan, with the Nile Expedition for the
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STATION FLOCK RAMS.
EUMBRA SHEARER’S QUARTERS.
11
The Linton Estate, New South Wales.


EUMBRA WOOLSHED.
relief of General Gordon 1884-5, and received the Egyptian medal with Nile clasp and Khe-
dive’s Grand Star. He was lieutenant on the “Calliope” on the occasion of the great hur-
ricane at Apia in 1889, when that vessel, by a splendid piece of seamanship on the part
of her crew, escaped the fate of most of the other warships then in the harbour. The
Admiralty expressed admiration at the officers’ behaviour on that occasion, and specially
referred to Lieutenant Carter. He retired from the Navy in order that he might assist his
brother in the management of their joint property.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Brooklyn and Abbey Green Estates.
The Properties of Mr. H. w Curtis.
BROOKLYN, now the property of Mr. H. W. Curtis, was originally a portion of
what was known-in the early days as Cameron’s Creek, first taken up by a Mr.
Mclntyre about sixty or seventy years ago, or between 1840 and 1850. It is
situated about twelve miles north-east of Armidale, on the bracing New England table-
lands, and lies about half-way between the capitals of New South Wales and Queensland,
A MOB OF EWTHERS READY FOR SHEARING.
on the main Northern line between the two cities. Adjoining it are Herbert Park, the pro-
perty of the Executors of the late Mr. G. H. V. Jenkins, and Thalgarrah, owned by Mr.
A. E. Bigg. These two estates formed two-thirds of the property, Cameron’s Creek, of
which Brooklyn was originally the remaining third. Cameron’s Creek, after being held
by Mr. Mclntyre, was for some years in the hands of Messrs. Bone, Anderson, and Legh,
I


and in about the year 1875 the late Mr. Henry Edward Bigg purchased from them some
11,000 acres, and named that portion Thalgarrah. Then, about 1884 and 1885, the late
Mr. Jenkins bought 25,000 acres from Messrs. Legh and Anderson, and called his
estate Herbert Park. Five years later Mr. Curtis acquired 12,000 acres of the old
property, naming it Brooklyn. The estate is composed of undulating and fairly ridgy
country, well timbered. In the earlier days this country carried very thick timber,
mainly box, red gum, stringy bark, and white gum. Since then, however, a good
deal of time and money has been spent in ringbarking and burning-off, greatly
improving the appearance and stock-carrying capacity of the estate.
BROOKLYN, LOOKING NORTH.
Brooklyn is subdivided into about twenty-five paddocks, and is very well watered by
the Gyrah River, which runs through a portion of the property. Baker’s Creek has its
head waters in the hills close at hand, and the supply from these sources is supple-
mented by other streams, namely, Bine Pot Creek and Spring Creek, and a large number
of dams.
The grasses are mainly natural ones, although Mr. Curtis has made successful experi-
ments with lucerne, having cultivated some too acres.
2
The Pastoral Humes of Australia.


THE BROOKLYN HOMESTEAD.
THE BACK GARDEN.
215
The Brooklyn and Abbey Green Estates, New South Wales.


A BROOKLYN PANORAMA.
FLOCK RAMS.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Zbc Jflocfc.
Brooklyn carries a Merino flock of some 10,000 sheep, originally founded on Harben
Vale blood, and rams of that strain are introduced into the flock from time to time. Shear-
ing takes place in November, and lambing about September, the average percentage of
A VIEW OF WOOLSHED AND RIVER.
lambs running to about 75 or 80 per cent. The clip is sold in Sydney through the agency
of the Pastoral Finance Association, and the prices received for the wool give returns that
place Brooklyn well up in the first flight. Last year Mr. Curtis ranked second on the list
of those selling through the Pastoral Finance Association, Ltd., in fact, the wool always
commands a good price.
The woolshed is built of wood and iron, and situated within sight of the homestead,
and is fitted with eight Wolseley machines driven by a 6-h.p. engine.
The homestead is a lath and plaster building, and is altogether a very fine residence,
beautifully fitted with every convenience, and lighted by De Laite’s air gas. It is ap-
proached by a drive with a pretty avenue of hr and other trees, and in addition to its
other comforts is connected by telephone with the Armidale Exchange and Post-office.
5
The Brooklyn and Abbey Green Estates, New South Wales.


SADDLE AND HARNESS HORSES AT BROOKLYN.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


Hbbey (Breen.
This is another of Mr. Curtis’ properties, lying from four to five miles from Llangoth-
hn railway station, about thirty-five miles further north than Armidale. It comprises 7000
ABBEY GREEN POLO PONIES SPELLING.
acres of tolerably open country, with a fair amount of timber, which is chiefly white
gum. The country, or part of it, on
the estate is very suitable for potato
growing, and Mr. Curtis cultivates
the homely vegetable. A thousand
head of cattle are run on Abbey
Green, also 3,000 sheep and 100
head of horses. The cattle are a
Durham-Devon cross, Dangar bulls
being used which produce a nice
useful type of beast. Among the
horses are some blood animals, and
the stallion used principally is
Rossmore, who has given very good
ROSSMORE. —BY Juanica from a Spectator Mare.
7
The Brooklyn and Abbey Green Estates, New South Wales.


A MOB OF DE VON COWS ABBEY GREEN.
A PANORAMA OF ABBEY GREEN.
8
The PastoraS Homes of Australiao


THE ABBEY GREEN HOUSE.
9
The Brooklyn and Abbey Green Estates, New South Wales.


results. Rossmore is by Juanica from a mare
by Spectator.
The property is watered by various
streams, and in addition to a number of
lagoons on the place itself, it is fronted by
Ben Lomond Lagoon. The homestead is a
comfortable cottage, where the manager, Mr.
Frederick Curtis, resides. He was educated
at the Armidale School, and is the son of Mr.
H. W. Curtis.
IPcrscmal.
Mr. Henry Welch Curtis was born in 1862,
at Elmstone Court, Kent, England, and is the
eldest son of the late Mr. Frederick Thomas
Curtis, who had a barrister’s practice in Kent.
MR. H. W. CURTIS.
Mr. H. W. Curtis received his education at lonbridge, and left England for Australia in
1880 in the “Sorata.” This vessel was wrecked at Cape Jervis, South Australia, on that
trip, and luckily only one life was lost.
Mr. Curtis was jackeroo for two years on
Brooklyn, when it belonged to Messrs. Bone,
Anderson, and Legh, and later on he was en-
gaged at Newstead South, the property of
Mr. Anderson. After leaving there he man-
aged for the late Mr. F. R. White, of Rock-
wood, for five years.
He is the president of the Armidale Rac-
ing Club, and president of the local pastoral
and agricultural society, and takes a genuine
interest in all matters connected with the dis-
trict. In 1888 he married Emily Augusta, the
only daughter of the late Mr. H. E. Bigg, of
Thalgarrah, Armidale, and has a family of five
—two sons and three daughters. As has al-
MR. F. H. B. CURTIS.
I o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ABBEY GREEN ROSSMORE YEARLINGS.
ABBEY GREEN DEVON HEIFERS.
I i
The Brooklyn and Abbey Green Estates, New South Wales.


MARES AND FOALS AT ABBEY GREEN.
ready been mentioned, the elder son, Frederick, is managing one of his father’s pro-
perties, and the other, Harold, who was also educated at the Armidale School, and King’s
School, Parramatta, is engaged on Brooklyn.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Way Vale and Lindsay Estates.
The Property of Messrs. Sawers & Wilson.
THE Barraba district is well known to all interested in pastoral and agricultural
pursuits as one of the many fine tracts of country of New South Wales upon which
sheep raising can be conducted with considerable success. Its capabilities had,
of course, to be gradually demonstrated in the early years, when much doubt existed as to
what the district was capable of. In the early pioneering days, the persistent energy of
those who went far afield to discover suitable country for the pastoral industry, was ac-
THE MAY VALE HOMESTEAD.
countable for the discovery and utilisation of splendid areas of fine sheep country which
have during the past three or four decades contributed so much to the wool industry of
Australia.
May Vale, the fine property of Messrs. Sawers and Wilson, situated in the heart of the
Barraba district, is one of these properties. Located about sixteen miles from the town of
Barraba, it occupies a pleasant and attractive position, and forms part of a big stretch
of country particularly suitable for the production of fine wool.
i


The property, which is divided into over
twenty paddocks, comprises about 11,000
acres of freehold and C.P. land, and con-
sists of ridgy, undulating country. Ori-
ginally heavily timbered, it is now ring-
barked and partially cleared, and the boun-
daries are nearly all fenced with rabbit and
dog-proof fencing. Ihe cost of this fencing
has been about ;Tioo per mile. Watered
by a number of creeks and permanent
springs, and with a rainfa 1 ! of about 30
inches, it is never in trouble about its water
supply.
May Vale is worked in conjunction with
the adjoining Lindsay property or leases,
MR. W. SAWERS.
and the flock consists of from 35,000 to 40,000 pure Merinos of the Havilah blood. The
shearing takes place from September to November, and the wool is marketed in Sydney,
where the SW over May Vale clip is well known and appreciated. On some occasions re-
cord prices are obtained.
The present homestead of May Vale is a comparatively new building, having been erected
about four years ago. It is built of brick in the villa type, and is installed with acetylene
gas, electric bells, and a telephone. A fine feature of the homestead is its beautiful garden,
orchard, and lawn.
Mr. Clifford P. Wilson, the Junior partner of the firm, is the manager of May Vale, and
succeeded Mr. Sawers in that position.
GROUOP OF STUD EWES.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


A GENERAL VIEW OF MAY VALE.
CATTLE WATERING AT HORTON RIVER, LINDSAY.
THE HORTON RIVER, LINDSAY.
3
The May Vale and Lindsay Estates, New South Wales.


STATION-BRED RAMS.
Lindsay, the adjoining property belonging to the firm, comprises about 52,000 acres
of improvement lease, freehold, and conditional purchase, and is situated about 3,200 ft.
above sea level. It was originally very heavily timbered, but a large portion of it is now
ringbarked and cleared.
Fcrscmal
Mr. W. Sawers was born in Stirlingshire, Scotland, in 1844. Arriving in Australia at
the age of twenty-one, he entered immediately into pastoral pursuits under the late Messrs.
White, of Bando, Liverpool Plains. Mr. Sawers, in conjunction with the late Mr. H. C.
White, first acquired Bundabulla, an estate of 160,000 acres, carrying about 50,000 sheep.
About 1873 Mr. White sold his share of the property to Mr. Ebenezer Orr, and Mr. W.
A. Wilson, and the firm was styled Sawers and Orr until 1878. At that date this partner-
ship was terminated by the auction sale of Bundabulla, which was purchased by Mr. Saw-
ers and Mr. Wilson, who then became the sole proprietors, and retained possession of it
until 1909. Mr. W. A. Wilson recently transferred his interest in May Vale and Lindsay to
his sons, Plumpton and Clifford Wilson; and transferred his interest in all properties of
this partnership to Ins sons, W. P. and C. P. Wilson in 1907.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


The Ohio Estate.
The Property of Mr. J. A . Nivison.
THIS New England estate is situated about two miles north of the township of
Walcha, on the Great Northern line, and is owned by Mr. James Alexander Nivi-
son, eldest son of the late Mr. Abraham Nivison, who took up the property in 1836.
Previous to this Ohio belonged to Mr. Boughton, who originally took it up. The size of
the station has altered very little since its first occupation; it then comprised about 35,000
acres, and the area is still about the same.
PANORAMA OF THE STATION.
Ohio is fourteen miles from Walcha Road railway station, where there is a siding for
trucking stock. It is 320 miles from Sydney, and 3200 ft. above sea level, so that the
dry, hot climate of the Western Plains is avoided. New England enjoys the happy me-
dium, and with a regular rainfall, is very favourably treated with regard to climatic con-
ditions. Of course, there are dry spells, as there are everywhere else, but as a. general rule
1


POLO PONIES ENJOYING A SPELL
the pastures always look green, and even in dry weather stock are usually in good con-
dition, -- although pastures may be brown. In proof of this, during the very dry season
of 1906 the stock on Ohio were all fat, testifying to the excellent character of the coun-
try on which they were running. Walcha may be said to be the centre of some of the
finest sheepraising and woolgrowing country in the New England district.
Like most stations on the New England tableland, it is open and undulating well-
grassed country, which in the early days was thickly timbered, consisting mainly of
stringy bark, gum, box, peppermint, and apple tree. However, it has since all been ring-
STUD EWES.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


FRONT OF HOMESTEAD.
ANOTHER VIEW OF HOMESTEAD.
The Ohio Estate, New South Wales.


barked. There are
low stony and gra-
velly rises, and open
stretches sloping
into alluvial flats
along water front-
ages. The soil is
mainly clayey loam
on the rises mixed
with gravel, and
darkish loam on the
lower lands.
With regard to
the fencing, the
boundary is a seven-
DISTANT VIEW OF CREEK.
wire fence, and partly netted, which is due to the fact that rabbits are, practically speak-
mg, an unknown quantity on Ohio. All the grasses on the station are natural, with the
exception of about 500 acres, which have been planted with rye grass, and in dry seasons
this has been found to do very well.
Ihe property is subdivided into about fifty-five paddocks, together with a number of
smaller ones; the latter, however, are used for stud purposes. About 500 acres are placed
under cultivation for wheat and oats as well as lucerne, solely for station use.
ft be Stock,
A flock, consist-
ing on an average of
somewhere ' about
35,000 sheep, runs
on Ohio. It is a pure-
ly Merino flock, and
was. first established
in 1868 with picked
Ohio ewes and Scone
rams bred by Mr.
William Gibson, of
Tasmania. From time
to time rams from
the same property in
Tasmania have been
HOMESTEAD AND STATION BUILDINGS.
4
Ihe Pastoral Homes of Australia,


CREEK IN FRONT OF HOUSE.
The Ohio Estate, New South Wales.


added to the Ohio flock, and now the stud
runs to about 1000 head. Mr. Nivison finds
his market locally. The wool is similar in
every respect to that of the Scone sheep, and
prices are always in the front rank. The
sheep carry a heavy fleece, as much as gf lbs.
being cut this last season, and the last two to
three years have given a return on the average
of is. per lb. The lambing season is early in
September, and the percentage ranges from
80 to go per cent. Crutching is done, as a
rule, twice a year, generally in March and
August, and consequently the fly is not a very
great cause for anxiety, very few losses hav-
MR. J. A. NIVISON.
mg been experienced since the method was adopted.
The woolshed is a galvanised iron structure, built only four or five years ago, and
fitted with fourteen stands of Wolseley machines, which are driven by an 8-h.p. steam en-
gine. There is shelter in the shed for 4000 head of sheep, so that good provision has been
made against interruption of shearing by wet weather. This is a very necessary step, the
question of shearing wet sheep being such a vexed one between shearers and sheepowners
nowadays. Shearing takes place in the beginning of November, and shearers have no cause
to grumble at their
Ohio quarters, which
are very commodious
and comfortable.
Mr. Nivison runs
about 500 head of
Durham cattle on
Ohio, and sells the
fats annually, usually
about 100 head. He
breeds a few horses,
but only for working
and station use.
The property is
watered by a double
VIEW FROM HILL.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


VIEW OF WOOLSHED.
The Ohio Estate, New South Walos.


VIEW OF CREEK.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


frontage to Grace’s Creek, Ohio Creek,
Bergen-op-Zoom Creek, and Apsley River.
Water holes abound, and, what is more
to the point, they are very seldom dry.
In addition to these already good sup-
plies, there are eighteen large tanks,
ranging from 200 up to 1800 yards, and
by means of this perfected system of
water supply, every paddock on the
estate is permanently watered. The
average rainfall is about 31 in.
The homestead is an old stone building
CORNER OF HOMESTEAD.
begun in 1838 by Mr. Nivison’s father, and finished two years later. It has two floors, con-
tains about twenty-five rooms, and is very substantially built, some of the walls being 2 J ft.
thick. The surroundings of Mr. Nivison’s home are surroundings to be proud of; a beauti-
ful garden five acres in extent—was first laid out by his father, and he now keeps it up
to the high standard set by him. In addition there is a very fine lawn and tennis court,
and the house is approached by a drive about 400 yards long, through an avenue of elms
planted some fifty years ago. The house is lighted throughout by acetylene gas, and Mr.
Nivison was one of the first pastoralists in New England to introduce this system of light-
ing homes in the country. Ohio is m telephonic communication with the township of Walcha.
Water is laid on from the Ohio Creek to the homestead, stables, shearers’ quarters, gar-
dens, woolshed, &c., being
pumped by a Rider-Erics-
son hot-air engine.
personal.
Mr. Nivison was born
at Ohio in July, 1848. His
father was a pioneer
among New England pas-
toralists, having settled
in that district nearly
three-quarters of a cen-
tury ago, when he first
took up the ownership of
the station. Mr. Nivison
received his education
from Mr. Savigny, of the
THE PUMPING STATION.
9
The Ohio Estate, New South Wales.


FLOCK RAMS.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF HOMESTEAD FROM FRONT.
] I
The Ohio Estate, New South Wales.


SHEEP YARDED FOR SHEARING.
Collegiate College, Cook’s River, and after completing his course there, at once went in for
pastoral pursuits, his first experience being the management of Yarrowitch Station. This
station was then the property of his father, and was situated about thirty-two miles south
of Walcha.
After leaving Yarrowitch he managed Ohio for his father until 1878, when he took it on
lease until the latter’s death. It then became his property, and he has held it ever since.
In 1878 he married Mary Maude, the youngest daughter of the late Mr. Thomas Perry,
of Bendemeer Station, situated between Uralla and Tamworth. The family consists of six
daughters and five sons. The eldest son, Norman Nivison, is now managing Ohio for his
father, and all the other sons are engaged cn the estate. Mr. Nivison has a 16-20 F.N.
motor car.
Mr. Nivison was for nineteen years the licensing magistrate of Walcha, and has for
many years been a member of the Pastures Protection Board.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Glen Legh Estate.
The Property of Mr. Ll angloh Want.
GLEN LEGH, the property of Mr. Llangloh Want, is situated in a very picturesque
part of the New England district, and is a typical pastoral home. Consider-
able attention has been bestowed upon that portion adjoining the homestead,
and the result is a most attractive scene.
Glen Legh in the early years formed part of Blair Hill Station, formerly owned by
Dumaresq Brothers and Major Innes. The country was first taken up by Mr. John
YOUNG HORSES.
Mann, a surveyor who accompanied Major Mitchell in his exploration trip between Liver-
pool Plains and the Toowoomba Ranges, during which he traversed the New England table-
land. Major Mitchell, as was his custom, made an exhaustive survey of the country over
which he travelled by means of triangulation, and prepared a contour map of New England,
showing the leading physical features. His method was to clear the tops of the most con-
I


spicuous mountains, leaving one tree for
sighting purposes. One of these sight sta-
tions was on One Tree Hill, Ben Lomond, and
another on Mount Mitchell. It is most prob-
able that there was another on Blair Hill,
which may have been named after a member
of the party, as the Mann River was after Mr.
Mann. Early settlement soon followed in
Major Mitchell’s track, and the different hills
marked by the explorers were used as land
marks by the first pioneers-
In the early ’seventies this property was
held under occupation license by Pat Anderson
and Augustus Fraser, who had it stocked with
cattle. About 1873 it was purchased by the
late Christopher Legh, who soon afterwards
introduced sheep into the stocking. About the
MR. LLANGLOH WANT.
VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD TAKEN FROM FRONT.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


year 1877 he built the house now the homestead in what was known as the Forest Pad-
dock, and named it “Forest Hut.” Soon after Mr. Legh had become possessed of it, the
tide of free selection threatened to overwhelm it; he was consequently forced to secure it
by the means then available, viz., purchase at auction and conditional purchase. For the
latter he made use of the members of his family, and those selections on which the pre-
sent house stands were taken up by his two eldest daughters.
About the year 1884, Mr. Legh divided the run, and sold the old homestead and the
upper portion to Mr. Andrew Coventry.
GENERAL VIEW OF HOMESTEAD FROM DISTANCE.
Mr. Want purchased Glen Legh in 1907 from Mr. John McDonald, of Mungie Bundle,
who purchased it during the disastrous drought of 1892-3 from Mr. D. McAllary, as relief
country for his Moree stock. During the period the drought was at its height, the property
carried about 15,000 sheep and 1000 head of cattle.
Glen Legh comprises some 7000 acres freehold of undulating country, and heavily
grassed hills, timbered with box, peppermint, black and white sally, and white gum.
With the exception of those portions used as shelter camps, all the timber is ringbarked
and suckered. The soil largely consists of rich fertile volcanic loams, suitable for all kinds
of crops.
3
The den Legh Estate, New South Wales.


DAIRY PADDOCKS.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW ON RIVER FRONTAGE.
RIVER FRONTAGE VIEW ON MANN RIVER.
The Glen Legh Estate, New South Wales-


The present improved grasses on the property are the result of heavy stocking and of
the importation of foreign grasses, consisting of rye, cocksfoot, prairie, Kentucky rib, fox-
tail, and the very valuable phularis grass, pink and white clover, and different herbage-
these grasses are greatly responsible for the sweetened and improved condition and heavy
carrying capacity of the New England district. Mr. Want has put down in grass some 400
acres, and frequently drops seed over the naturally grassed paddocks. He is of opinion
that English grasses, ringbarkmg, and draining, and heavy stocking have revolutionised
New England from a stock-raising standpoint. Country which ten or fifteen years ago would
haidly keep stock alive on the native grasses, now carries and fattens a few sheep to
the acre.
DRAUGHT MARES AND FOALS IN ENGLISH GRASS PADDOCKS.
The annual rainfall on Glen Legh is about 36 inches. The property has a frontage
to Mann River, and from this and a number of permanent streams it obtains all the water
for its requirements. For the use of the homestead and garden the water is steam-pumped
from a stream below the house.
The property, which is subdivided into 22 paddocks, has a rabbit netting boundary
fence, which was erected at a cost of £B6 per mile. The division fences of the various
paddocks, where not netted, have from six to eight wires in them.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CROSSBRED SHEEP.
GENERAL VIEW.
The Glen Legh Estate, New South Wales.


GARDEN VIEW.
VIEW OF GARDEN IN FRONT OF HOMESTEAD.
8
The Pastoral Homos of Australia,


GENERAL VIEW.
MOB OF 500 HEREFORD BULLOCKS.
9
The Glen Legh Estate, New South Wales.


Mr. Want has introduced share farming on to his estate, with highly satisfactory
results. Altogether, 570 acres are under this system, viz., 300 acres for dairying pur-
poses,, 120 acres for the cultivation of oats and maize, and 150 acres for pig raising.
Potato growing has shown exceptionally good results- In addition to what is reserved for
share farming, there are 50 acres farmed for the homestead requirements.
The flock consists of about 10,000 crossbreds, 3,000 ewes bred from, Romney
Marsh rams being used. The lambing season is August. In addition to the sheep, about
2000 cattle, mostly Herefords, are run on Glen Legh, with the assistance of an adjoining
leasehold.
VIEW IN GARDEN.
Mr. Want breeds some very fine draught Clydesdale horses, the Clydesdale stallion
being an importation from New Zealand. There is a great demand for the progeny, some
of the three-year-olds fetching as much as Zioo per pair. He is also breeding some very
good trotting horses, a trotting stallion being used with good quality 14.2 mares, produc-
ing useful little horses for harness or saddle.
Glen Legh is composed of exceptionally heavy carrying country, four thousand acres of
which being ideal farming land, suitable for the cultivation of cereals and potato growing,
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


and the balance being unsurpassed for stock raising and fattening. Its carrying capacity
is remarkably good. In the winter months it will carry as many as two sheep to the acre,
while during the rest of the year it cannot be overstocked.
Clen Legh is a typical pastoral home, and has the advantage of being in a charming
district, with an altitude of 4000 feet above the level of the sea, and the additional advan-
tage of being in close proximity to the Great Northern Railway and the town of Glen
Innes.
PART OF WOOESHED WITH SHEARERS'S QUARTER IN DISTACE.
personal.
Mr. Llangloh Want is a son of Mr. George Frederic Want, and was born in Sydney
in 1875. He was educated at Sevenoaks, in the County of Kent, England, and at Ton-
bridge. At school he took great interest in sports, and at the former school tied for the
Challenge Sports Cup, and played cricket for Tonbridge. After the completion of his edu-
cation, he travelled for two years in various parts of the world- Returning to Australia, he
studied for the law in the ottice of Messrs. Minter, Simpson and Co. (formerly Want and
Johnson), and he also gained some commercial experience in the wool and shipping office
11
The Glen Legh Estate, New South Wales.


HOME PADDOCKS.
of Messrs. John Sanderson and Co. The call of the bush reached him, and leaving the city
he sought pastoral experience on various stations in New South Wales, Victoria, and
Queensland, finally settling in the New England district, and purchasing Glen Legh. Mr.
Want married the third daughter of Mr. Richard Newton, of Brisbane, and has one son,
now six years of age.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Herbert Park Estate.
The Property of the Executors the Late Mr. G. H. V. Jenkins.
HERBER F PARK, the property of the Executors of the late Mr. G. H. V. Jenkins, is
situated on the Guyra River, about twelve miles east from Armidale, and com-
prises an area of about 12,300 acres of freehold. Being at a 4400 ft. elevation,
the climate is perfect; bright sunshiny days, blue skies, light air, and cold bracing nights
describe it with fairness. The estate was purchased by the late Mr. G. H. V. Jenkins from
Messrs. Christopher Legh and Duncan Anderson in 1884. It comprises splendid hills oi
CHILDREN ON THE PONY.
basalt and slate formation, with fertile agricultural flats in between. The timber is chiefly
red gum, box, stringy bark, and apple. With the exception of what has been left for use,
all the timber has been ringbarked and dead for years. Suckers, seedlings, and scrub have
been kept down, and all blackberries, briars, and other noxious weeds have been grubbed.
The whole of the estate has been drained by harrow and plough, and for years there have
been no signs of fluke or footrot on the run. The timber originally was very thick, and the
i


CLARIBELLE’S OPTICIAN.
Shown three times, winning three champions.
work of ringbarking, draining, and fencing,
to get the country into its present state, has
been very costly. Shelter belts of timber
have been left in every paddock, while along
the river and moist places willows have been
planted. They form good shade, at the
same time sucking up any stagnant water
left from the draining. The whole estate is
amply watered by a double frontage of about
eight miles to the Guyra River, a beautiful
clear stream running over a pebbly bottom,
by about three miles frontage to the Wollomombi River, and by the Armidale Gully, and
several springs which convey water into troughs through a system of pipes. 1 here are also
several dams, including one holding a million gallons, in rising ground at the back of the
house, which was intended to supply extra water by gravitation to the garden if necessary.
Rainbow trout have been introduced into the rivers, but so far the results have not been appar-
ent. The annual rainfall is about 35 inches. About 2000 acres around the house have been
cleared of all dead timber and trees, leaving only groves and clumps of wattle for shelter and
ornament. What once was a scrub is now like an English park.
The homestead, with detached kitchen, is of the bungalow type, and built of hardwood
cut on the estate, with lath and plaster walls. It contains about twenty rooms, lighted
throughout with acetylene gas. Embosomed as it is among shady trees and beautiful
shrubs, with various flower beds, lawn and tennis court, the house is a picture of quiet com-
fort and good order. A chapel built of brick with tiled roof and dedicated to the memory
A FEW FAVOURITES AT HERBERT PARK.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOUES AND CHAPEL.
3
The Herbert Park Estate, Hew South Wales.


THE GERDEN IN FRONT OF THE HOUSE.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia c


of Mr. Jenkins’ mother, forms the south wings of the house. The boundaries of the
garden are shaded and sheltered by various pines and evergreens. Water is laid on every-
where from tanks fed by windmills. The garden contains most of the trees and shrubs that
grow in cool climates, and the orchard, sloping away to the river edge, was last year fufl
of healthy trees literally breaking down under the weight of peaches, nectarines, apples,
plums, pears, in various stages of ripeness, and mixing their foliage and fruit with chest-
nuts, walnuts, filberts, and fruits of colder climes. This year the fruit has suffered from
the late frosts.
A SUSPENSION BRIDGE.
The estate is fenced and sub-divided into about twenty paddocks, chiefly with No. 8
seven-wire fences, the orchard and cultivation paddocks being wire netted. Arrangements,
however, are now being made to extend the wire netting.
The shearing shed is an up-to-date building, the main shed being 85 x 40 ft. with wool
room, engine and experts’ room running aft. It is built of heavy stringy bark and box tim-
ber, and stands Oft. off the ground, so that sheep run under as well as over. Twelve stands
of Wolseley machines are used, worked by a 12-h.p. Hornsby engine. Everything at the
shed is systematically carried out, and, with the exception of the wet sheep cry, over which
there is the usual waste of time, there is never any trouble with the shearers. Sixteen
hundred sheep can be put under cover in ten minutes if a storm is threatening, and there is
5
The Herbert Park Estate, New South Wales.


also an outside weather shed to cover sufficient sheep for a day’s shearing should the nighi
prove wet or cold. The men’s quarters are comfortable and commodious, and, like the
shed, built well off the ground.
The sheep dip is built of heavy sawn slabs, puddled behind with clay, with a. depth of
sft., and 40-ft. swim to the cemented draining pens. Three men are all that are needed
for the dipping. Soft rain water is laid on from tanks at the shed.
Among the improvements near the house is a dairy stable 3Gft. x 26ft., containing six-
teen stalls, with loft for fodder above. Each stall is fitted with manger with name of the
INTERIOR OF CHAPEL.
cow and latest monthly milk test over her head. The floor is cemented so that it can be
easily flushed from one of the stand pipes close by. There are also stables and shelter
sheds for the saddle, buggy, and cart horses.
The average number of sheep kept on Herbert Park is about 14,000, reduced at shearing
time by sales to about 12,000. The flock is of pure Havilah Merino blood, rams for many years
having been purchased from the late Mr. F. R. White, of Harden Vale. The sheep cut clean
and weighty fleeces, and the average price is always near the top.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


FLOCK EWES AND LAMBS.
7
The Herbert Park Estate, New South Wales.


JERSEY CATTLE AT DAM.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The lambing average ranges about 80 per
cent., the season covering September and
October. The drop is usually about 4000, and
the hoggets this year cut well over /lbs. per
sheep. The sheep are under the charge of
Mr. George Davis, who takes great pride in
them. He has been on the estate since the
late Mr. Jenkins bought it from Messrs. Legh
and Anderson.
There is a small herd of Pure Jerseys on
Herbert Park, many of them descended from
the cow Lassie’s Queen, imported by the late
Colonel Wright, and Thyme, imported by the
late Hon. Jas. White.
MR. G. H V. JENKINS.
One of the bulls lately used was Clanbelle’s Optician, 114 J. 5.8., bred by the late Mr.
Frank McCulloch, and purchased from Mr. Chirnside. He has taken three champion prizes,
and has lately been sold to Mr. Higinbotham, of Tilbuster. The sires since in use are
Defender (imp.), 2288 H.C. J.H.8., and Magnet’s Defender, 160 J. 5.8., whose dam is Magnet
27th, the winner of many prizes. The Herbert Park Jerseys have always taken a promi-
nent position at shows. Lassie’s Queen took first prize and reserve champion at the R.A.
Show, Sydney, 1901; first prize and reserve heifer two years and under three, R.A. Show,
1902; first prize cow, three years and under four years, R.A. Show, 1903. Dainty Kitty,
second prize R.A. Show, Melbourne, 1897, and first prize R.A. Show, Sydney, as a cow four
CULTVATION PADDOCK ON THE GUYRA RIVER, ABOUT HALF-A-MILE FROM THE HOMESTEAD
9
The Herbert Park Estate, New South Wales.


years old in calf. Thyme 111., first prize as
two-year-old, Armidale, 1904; champion
cow, Armidale, 1907.
Nearly all the saddle and harness horses
are bred on Herbert Park or Tara. They
are, as a rule, strong and of the weight-
carrying stamp, the mares used being chiefly
by a coaching stallion called Wild Wave. No
stallion is now kept at Herbert Park, but the
few mares are sent to the best weight
carrier available.
A STUD JERSEY BULL.
About 100 acres are kept under cultivation and are worked entirely by Mr. James
White, who has been on the estate many years. Sufficient lucerne, oats, hay, maize, and
potatoes are grown for station use, and generally there is a surplus of maize and potatoes
for sale. At the present time there are about 200 tons of oats and lucerne in the sheds.
Many of the principal grasses—blue grass, barley, couch, crowfoot, and others, also herbage,
have made their appearance since the ringbarking. They do not grow to any great length,
but they are sweet, and sheep and cattle do exceedingly well, and keep their condition during
the winter months.
GUYRA RIVER AND SUSPENSION BRIDGE.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


personal.
The late Mr. G. H. V. Jenkins was the
eldest son of the late Dr. R. L. Jenkins, of
Nepean Towers, and is descended from the
Jenkins, of Llanharran, and Richard Jen-
kins, of Pant-y-Nawel, who is 1622, married
Anne Came, of Ewenning. The Pant-y-
Nawel Estate has been in the hands of this
branch of the Jenkins family for many gene-
rations, and is now held by his cousin, Mr.
STUD COW.
Blandy Jenkins. Among interesting documents in the Pant-y-Nawel safe is a letter from
Queen Elizabeth asking the Jenkins of the time to safeguard her messenger across that
pare of Wales. In his youth Mr. Jenkins was well known in connection with the Nepean
Towers Shorthorns, of which he had the management. He was fond of horses, shooting,
cricket, and sports generally. He used to ride over jumps at the Sydney Show, and he
won a Christmas Cup for pigeon shooting at the Sydney Gun Club. Mr. Jenkins was a J-P-
-for New South Wales and Queensland, and at various times filled the office of president of
FRONT OF MOUSE.
I 1
The Herbert Park Estate, New South IVa/es.


A PART OF THE DAM.
the Armidale Agricultural and Pastoral Association. He was formerly a director of The
Armidale School, and was also a member of the General, Provincial, and Diocesan Synods
of the Church of England, and a delegate to the Pan-Anglican Congress in 1909. He was
asked by the freetraders in Armidale to run for the Federal Parliament (28th September,
1903), but declined.
Mr. Jenkins married in
1883, Beatrice Mary,
second daughter of the
Hon. R. C. Herbert,
Orleton, Wellington,
Shropshire, and has
two sons at present
at school in England,
and two young
daughters. Mr.
Jenkins died on the
nth February, 1910.
GOO D FRIENDS.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


T he Tiara Estate.
The Property of Mr. E. Norton.
THE first owners of Tiara, situated on the- New England tableland, were Messrs.
McNabb Bros., from whom it was purchased in 1853 by the Hon. James Norton,
of Elswick, Petersham, in conjunction with others. This syndicate owned Water-
loo, the adjoining station, at that time. As young Edward Norton, the present owner, was
not in very robust health, his father sent him to Tiara in August of the same year. The
district at the time of his arrival was still practically untouched by the hand of man—
HIGHT-CLASS RAMS ON TIARA FROM TASMANIA AND MESSRS. LITCHFIELD BROS OF COOMA.
one vast sheepwalk, where one could ride for hundreds of miles without seeing any sign
or trace of civilisation. The only indications of mankind were rude shepherds’ huts and
roughly-constructed sheepfolds. Tiara is situated on the Port Macquarie Road, about
twenty miles from the township of Walcha, and at that time this now prosperous town con-
sisted solely of a small store and post-office combined, a public-house, and a blacksmith’s
:


shop. The population now, within the municipal area, is about 1200, and Mr. Norton is
one of the few old residents surviving. In 1857 his father made over the stations Waterloo
and Tiara to the present owner and his brother, the Hon. A. Norton. Some years after
coming into possession the latter sold out to Mr. Edward Norton, and preferring Queens-
land to New South Wales, went there to live, and he is now residing in Brisbane. Waterloo
long ago passed out of the hands of Mr. Norton, and was resold several times before it
finally came into the possession of Mr. A. A. Dangar, who still holds it.
The area of Tiara is 22.000 acres subdivided into about 30 paddocks, and the bound-
ary is fenced with rabbit-proof wire netting. In the early years the country was not so
FRONT VIEW OF THE HOUSE AND PART OF THE GARDEN.
heavily timbered as it has become of more recent years. The soil has become so enrich-
ed by sheep manure assisted by various other agents that trees have sprung up in great
numbers, and extensive ringbarking has been resorted to. The whole estate has been ring-
barked and suckered as well—much of it a second time —and besides this Mr. Norton has
been compelled to grub a large portion of it at a heavy cost. This country carries a good
growth of grass; rye, prairie, and wild grasses forming the staple support of the stock
run on the property. It is well watered by creeks and dams, and is blessed with a good
annual rainfall, averaging about 36 inches.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE STATION.
3
The Tiara Estate, New South Wales.


GROUPS OF PURE HEREFORUS ON TIARA.
4
7he Pastoral Homes of Australia,


Zbc Stock.
The flock is a Merino one, bred in the
first instance, that is after Mr. Norton’s ar-
rival, from the progeny of imported German
rams, and later from Tasmanian and Collaroy
blood. The wool is of high character, and has
been sold in Sydney for some years, where it
always realises a good price, being well up
in the first flight of the fine New England
wools, which are as a rule high in the list of
prices obtaining at the time. Some 11,000
sheep are put through at the annual shear-
ing, which takes place in November. The
machines used are Wolseleys, eight stands,
driven by a 6 h.p. steam engine. The lamb-
ing season is in September, and the percent-
MR. E. NORTON.
age of lambs ranges from 75 per cent, to 80 per cent.
Tiara may be said to be divided into two distinct parts. On the one sheep are run,
and on the other between 1500 and 1600 pure Herefords. The cattle are bred from bulls
originally purchased from the late Charles
Reynolds, of Tocal, on the Paterson River,
New South Wales. The first draft was made
in 1854, and ever since —a period extending
over nearly sixty years, the owner of Tiara
has purchased his bulls from Tocal, a fact
which speaks well for the excellence of that
strain. The last introduction was the bull
Wonder, imported by Mr. Frank Reynolds.
The E.N. brand is known pretty well through-
out New South Wales, and the high reputation
of the cattle enables Mr. Norton to dispose of
his surplus without any difficulty whatever.
Besides sheep and cattle the run carries
about eighty head of horses. This is not an
important feature of the property, as they are
only bred for station use. Nevertheless, Mr.
MRS. E. NORTON
5
The Tiara Estate, New South Wales.


A SIDE VIEW OF HOMESTEAD.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia„


A MOB OF HEREFORD BREEDING COWS.
7
The Tiara Estate, New South Wales.


A YOUNG STUD BULL AND A HERD BULL.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW OF THE WOOLSHED.
Norton has had at times some very good horses on the property, such as of The Barb and
Goldsbrough blood, and a dash of Arab. At present there is a half-bred stallion by a blood
horse from a pony mare in use on the station, and his progeny have turned out to be a
good type of useful station horse. The pony cross is found to be best adapted to the style
of country that Tiara consists of.
The homestead is a comfortable old house, but its chief glory lies in its beautiful
garden, which is well worthy of the distinction it possesses of being one of the finest in the
district. This distinction rests mainly on its wonderful show of roses, of which there are
over ioo different choice varieties.
IPcrsonal.
Mr. Edward Norton was born in Sydney in 1832, and his father, the late Hon. James
Norton, M.L.C., was a well-known solicitor and a very old identity of Sydney., and a large
property owner. Mr. Norton was educated at various establishments, the first being Cape’s
School, Edgecliff Road. Later on he went to King’s School. After the completion of his
9
The Tiara Estate, New South Wales*


A MOB OF STUD COWS AND COWS AND CALVES
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


YOUNG STUD BULL BRED BY MR. F. REYNOLDS, OF TOCAL, BY "WONDER" (IMP.)
II
The Tiara Estate, New South Wales.


THE PRIVATE CEMETRY.
education he was articled to his father with the object of studying for the law. Owing to
his indifferent health, however, this idea was relinquished, and he was sent to the country
to manage Tiara, and the law was abandoned for the land.
He married Miss Alice Ann Wilkinson, and has eight sons and three daughters living.
The sons have followed in the footsteps of their father, and are all engaged in pastoral pur-
suits.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Gunnee Estate.
The Property of Messrs. Warner, McLean and Bacon.
PERHAPS no district in New South Wales has advanced so much of late years as
Inverell, and this progress is due mainly to the growth of settlement occasioned
by the subdivision of a number of properties near the railway line. Grazing
has given way to more agricultural pursuits, and where was once a large tract of coun-
GUNNEE STUD EWES.
try given up almost entirely to sheep and cattle, many successful farms are now in evi-
dence. The district is admirably suited for farming and agriculture, being blessed with a
generous rainfall, and possessing very rich soil.
i


MR. A. F. WARNER.
MR. F. W. BACON.
Gunnee is an instance of this pro-
gress. The estate is about 20 miles from
Inverell, lying on the A4oree-Inverell rail-
way line, and four miles from Delungra.
Messrs. Warner, McLean, and Bacon are
the owners, and for many years they
have been identified with a large num-
ber of pastoral undertakings. Mr. War-
ner is at present at Gunnee, and manages
MR. J. MCLEAN.
the property. He has all his life been
closely associated with pastoral pur-
suits, his father, the late B. J. T. B. War-
ner, being one of the well-known squat-
ting pioneers of New South Wales. The
latter was the son of the late Lieu-
tenant J. Warner, who came out to the
colonies in the ’forties with a de-
tachment of his regiment. Mr. Fran-
cis W. Bacon, late of Dumble Station,
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE GUNNEE HOUSE. —BUILT 1874.
3
The Gunnee Estate, New South Wales,


A GENERAL VIEW OF HEAD STATION.
Goodooga, and Chairman of the Co-operative Wool and Produce Company, and now living
in Sydney, is an experienced pastoralist, and a man whose opinion on stock and station
matters generally is highly valued. Mr. J. McLean, recently of Collymongle Station, has
spent the greater part of his life among stock, though he at present lives in Sydney, and
often gives a good account of
himself at the Gun Club.
Among the early settlers
of the district were the
Campbells, of Inverell Sta-
tion and other properties; the
Andersons, of Newstead
North and Newstead South;
and the Gordons, now own-
ers of Gragin; also F. R. Gib-
son, formerly owner of Gun-
nee, who bred and owned
some very high-class Here-
ford cattle, and built the pre-
sent homestead.
GUNNEE STUD RAM.
4
Pastoral Homos of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED AND YARDS.
5
The Gunnee Estate, New South Wales.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE GUNNEE ESTATE.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


GUNNEE-BRED STUD RAMS.
Gunnee originally covered 40,000 acres, but a portion was sold to several energetic men,
who now have particularly nice homes, and are very prosperous. The property was sub-
divided, and cut up into areas ranging from 100 to 500 acres, and in 1908 a portion was
offered, and about 11,000 acres sold to about twenty-seven purchasers, a number of them
availing themselves of the ten years’ terms offered. Of these all but one have since paid in
cash, and they appear to be doing particularly well. Two of the settlers’ homesteads are
illustrated herewith. They are all improving their properties rapidly, wheatgrowing and
dairying being their
principal occupation.
The estate is now re-
duced to 21,000 acres,
which, with the excep-
tion of a solid block of
about 7000 acres, on
which the homestead
stands, is available for
purchase by settlers in
measured blocks of
suitable areas, or for
share farmers on libe-
ral terms. The coun-
try is undulating and
GUNNEE RAMS (UNDER 12 MONTHS OLD, CARRYING 6 MONTHS WOOL).
7
The Gunnee Estate, New South Wales.


PORTION OF ONE OF THE LUCERNE PADDOCKS.
TYPICAL VIEW OF REEDY CREEK.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


KURRAJONG COUNTRY. —LUCERNE IN FOREGROUND
9
The Gunnee Estate, New South Wales.


A MOB OF 2-TOOTH FLOCK EWES.
IDEAL CHOCOLATE SOIL COUNTRY CLEARED OF TIMBER.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


SETTLER'S HOME (MR. G. K. HOLDEN'S), TWO YEARS AFTER PURCHASE.
principally black and chocolate soil, fully three-quarters of the estate being first-class agri-
cultural land, with an abundance of natural and artificial grasses, upon which stock thrive
splendidly. About 1500 acres have been put under lucerne, and good crops are invariably
obtained.
Besides this and some 2000 acres cleared for cultivation, a very considerable area has
had the dead timber burnt off (the country was originally well timbered) and then ring-
barked, only shady and ornamental trees being left, which are invaluable for sheltering
stock, and which give the property a most attractive appearance. Mr. Warner has now
made the property a splendid example of share farming, wheat being the chief product.
About 1000 acres are under this crop, and several share farmers are growing maize and wheat
on about 800 acres, and are doing so well that the owners are to extend the scheme, and
share farms are available for men who have a plant of their own, the terms being one-
third to owners and two-thirds to the share farmers.
The Gunnee
homestead is a fine
brick and stone resid-
ence, and among
other improvements
on the property are
commodious men’s
quarters, sheds,
stables, etc., also a
shearing shed with
SETTLER'S HOME (MR. JAS. DEACON'S), 18 MONTHE AFTER PURCHASE.
11
The Gunnee Estate, New South Wales,


18 Wolseley ma-
chines driven by a
qi-b.h.p. Hornsby oil
engine. Water is
laid on to the shed,
drafting yards, and
sheep dip; also to the
head overseer’s cot-
tage, men’s quar-
ters, and flower and
vegetable garden.
The estate is
subdivided into about
fifty paddocks, and
those that are not
BANNOCKBURN DAM.
naturally watered have either wells with windmills and troughing or dams and tanks. Apart
from the natural water supply which is provided by Reedy and other creeks, there are
numerous springs and wells, and in the latter abundance of water is found at from 16 to
80 feet.
Sbc flock.
The flock consists of about 30,000 pure Merinos, bred principally from Wanganella
stock. A pure Merino stud, bred from the same source, was established in 1903, when
1200 very high-class stud ewes and twenty-eight rams were purchased from the Wanganella
Estate, and have since been supplemented by the purchase of some very fine rams and
ewes from the same place. These sheep have each year been carefully classed and mated,
and as the climate and country is admirably suited for stud sheep raising, the result is that
to-day the Gunnee studs are ideal sheep, and the flock rams, which are for sale each year,
are typical Wanganellas, particularly suitable for Queensland requirements, with that at-
tractive appearance and bloom that one does not see in many parts of Australia. Both
winter and spring lambings are the rule, and always with excellent results, about 90 per
cent, being the usual drop. In 1908 the percentage from about 8000 flock ewes was
and one paddock of about 2000 ewes marked the very high percentage of io6i. The shear-
ing takes place in October, and for the past five years the clip has averaged from 9 lbs. 14
ozs. to a shade over 10 lbs., according to season.
As showing the carrying capacity of this 21,000 acres of country, besides the 30,000
sheep, about 300 to 400 head of cattle and 190 head of horses are kept; the latter are prin-
cipally draughts. The Clydesdale stallion Miller, purchased from a well-known Victorian
breeder, is used, and his stock meet with ready sale to local farmers at remunerative prices.
Droughts are not felt at Gunnee as in other parts, and the stock are invariably in excellent
condition.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Wallangra, Blue Nobby, Milchengowrie and
Glencoe Estates, N.S.W.,
and Myall Plains Estate, Queensland.
The Property of Mr. John Richard Black (The Wallangra Pastoral
Company ).
WALLANGRA Station, the property of Mr. John Richard Black (The Wallangra
Pastoral Company), is situated on the Mclntyre River, in the Warialda dis-
trict, about 40 miles from Inverell, the postal address being Wallangra, In-
verell. Telephonic communication is established between the station and Wallangra post-
office, and thence to Warialda.
DRAUGHT HORSES AT WALLANGRA.
The estate originally comprised about 150,000 acres, and was taken up in the early
years by one of the pioneers of the district. Passing through the hands of various owners,
it was in 1876 purchased by Mr. Black and his partner, Mr. William James Russell. When
T


THE WALLANG RA HOMESTEAD.
7
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MR. J. Y. BLACK.
MR. A. H. BLACK.
MR. J. R. BLACK.
3
MR. J. H. BLACK.
MR. R. A. BLACK.
The Wallangra, Blue Nobby, Milchengowrie and Glencoe Estates, New South Wales,
and Myall Plains Estate, Queensland.


the latter gentleman died, Mr. Black purchased his interest from the executors of the
estate, purchasing also at the same time Mr. Russell’s interest in another property, Blue
Nobby, which had been owned in partnership, situated about 24 miles from Wallangra. In
1907 Mr. Black sold a portion of Wallangra, consisting of 20,000 acres, to Messrs. Ross
Bros., of Germanton.
Wallangra now comprises some 7000 acres of freehold and 4000 acres of leasehold.
The country, which is gently undulating, is of black and red soil and basaltic formation.
The timber is almost wholly ringbarked and cleared, and the grasses on the estate consist
CATTLE, CROSSING RIVER AT WALLANGRA.
of trefoil, blue grass, and other nutritious natural herbage. The property is watered by the
Mclntyre River, and numerous wells from which water is procured at a depth of 20 to 50
ft. The estate is divided into about seven paddocks.
The sheep on Wallangra and Blue Nobby are all Merinos, and about 30,000 from both
stations are shorn annually. The fattening properties of Wallangra are used extensively,
and the sheep after a couple of shearings are sent on to Milchengowrie, where they are
topped off preparatory for market.
The shearing shed at Wallangra is a fine structure of wood and iron, and contains
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED AT WALLANGRA.
THE BROADWATER, NAMOI RIVER.
5
The Wallangra, Blue Nobby, MUchengowrie and Glencoe Estates, New South Wales,
and Myall Plains Estate, Queensland.


THE HOMESTEAD, BLUE NOBBY.
FAT SHEEP AT DAM, BLUE NOBBY.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


twenty-four stands
of Wolseley sheep-
shearing machines.
The wool is mar-
keted in Sydney,
and invariably com-
mands a high price.
At the 191 o sales
the price went up
to iqid. per lb.
The average clip
represents about
800 bales.
FAT CATTLE ON BLUE NOBBY.
The Wallangra homestead, which is erected on a granite ridge, was built originally by
Mr. Russell, but it has from time to time been improved and enlarged, and is now fitted
with all modern requirements. A well-arranged flower garden adds considerably to the
appearance of the place.
Wallangra is managed by Mr. Black’s eldest son, Mr. John Yamala Black.
Blue Nobby, which belongs to the same proprietary, is worked in conjunction with Wal-
FAT SHEEP ON BLUE NOBBY.
7
The Wallangra, Blue Nobby, Milchengowrie and Glencoe Estates, New South Wales,
and Myall Plains Estate, Queensland.


CATTLE AT DAM, MILCHENGOWRIE.
DRAUGHT TEAM, BLUE NOBBY.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


langra, and com-
prises about 16,000
acres freehold and
14,000 acres of
leasehold country.
This station is man-
aged by Mr. Black’s
second son, Mr.
James Humphrey
Black. In addition
THE MILCHENGOWRIE HOMESTEAD.
to the sheep at Wallangra and Blue Nobby there are about 500 Shorthorn cattle. Some
very fine draught horses are also bred on these estates, forty well-bred mares being kept
for this purpose. The draught stallion Warwick is used. This fine animal came from
the well-known stud of the Wienholt Estates Company, Queensland.
Milchengowrie, another property owned by Mr. Black, is situated close to Boggabri,
on the Namoi River, and consists of 12,000 acres freehold. The adjoining property,
Glencoe, of about 7000 acres, is also owned by him. Upon these two properties there
are about 20,000 Merino sheep. These two stations are managed by Mr. Black’s third
son, Mr. Alexander Henry Black. Milchengowrie was acquired by Mr. Black in 1899. It
is a particularly fine property, and well suited for sheep-rearing, and possesses a never-
failing water supply.
The four properties referred to in the foregoing are as far as practicable inter-
worked, and the stock travelled from one to the other for fattening and other purposes.
A fifth station, Myall Plains, is located in Queensland. This property is managed by
Mr. Black’s youngest son, Mr. Richard Alfred Black. It comprises 60,000 acres of lease-
hold, situated
about 25 miles
from St. George.
The stock on it
consists of 35,000
Merino sheep.
The rams in
use are from the
Welltown stud.
THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN AND PADDOCK ON MILCHENGOWRIE.
9
The Wallangra, Blue Nobby, Milchengowrie and Glencoe Estates, New South Wales,
and Myall Plains Estate, Queensland.


A RIVER VIEW, WALLANGRA.
SHEEP IN PADDOCK ON PLAIN, MILCHENGOWRIE.
I o
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE NAMOI RIVER, MILCHENGOWRIE.
THE WOOLSHED, GLENCOE.
The Wallangra, Blue Nobby, Milchengowrie and Glencoe Estates, New South Wales,
and Myall Plains Estate, Queensland.


GLENCOE PADDOCK.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The estate, which is all wire-netted, is a particularly good one, and produces
excellent results. The shearing shed was built by Mr. Black, and contains sixteen stands
of Wolseley sheep-shearing machines. The wool is marketed in Brisbane.
An artesian bore which was sunk on this property some time ago struck water at
3000 ft., and discharges 1,500,000 gallons per day.
Mr. John Richard Black, the principal of the Wallangra Pastoral Company, was born in
Ireland in 1832, and came to Australia in 1839 with his father, Lieutenant Humphrey
Gunn Black, who was born in County Longford, Ireland. The voyage to Sydney was a
THE MYALL PLAINS HOMESTEAD.
rather eventful one, for at the Cape of Good Hope the ship was wrecked, but fortunately
no lives were lost, although all the passengers’ and crew’s effects went to the bottom.
Lieutenant Black settled at Windsor, and there Mr. Black received his education. In 1851
he went to Queensland to gam pastoral experience, and in 1854 took charge of Wyaga, a
station owned by Messrs. Russell and Taylor. When this property was sold he took over
the management of another of the firm’s properties, Dunmore. During the time he was
with Messrs. Russell and Taylor, he purchased from his father 800 mixed sheep. At the
expiration of the eight years’ service with that hrm these sheep had increased to such an
extent that his flock numbered 8000.
13
The Wallangra, Blue Nobby, Milchengowrie and Glencoe Estates, New South Wales.
and Myall Plains Estate, Queensland.


SHEET MUSTERED AT THE WOOLSHED ON MYALL PLAINS.
RAMS AT TANK, MYALL PLAINS.
*4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MR. AND MRS. R. A. BLACK, ON VERANDAH, MYALL PLAINS.
SHEEP, CATTLE, AND HORSES AT TANK, MYALL PLAINS,
l 5
The Wallangra, Blue Nobby, Milchengowrie and Glencoe Estates, New South Wales.
and Myall Plains Estate, Queensland,


BIN MOB OF SHEEP ON PLAIN, MYALL PLAIN.
In 1862 he joined Mr. Edward Lamb in partnership, and with him took up Yamala at
Peak Downs, about 500 miles north of the Darling Downs. This partnership continued for
eleven years, at the end of which they sold the property, and Mr. Black for a few years
took no active part in pastoral matters. He again became actively engaged in pastoral
pursuits, and purchased Wallangra, Milchengowrie, Blue Nobby, Glencoe, and Myall
Plains, and ultimately formed the estates into a company, which he called the Wallangra
Pastoral Company, and appointed his sons to the management of the various stations, re-
taining for himself the managing directorship of the whole concern.
Mr. Black purchased a residential property at Strathfield, near Sydney, and named it
Yamala.
Mr. Black married in 1867 Miss Josephine Pens, daughter of Mr. Gilbert Cory, of the
Paterson, and his family consists of two daughters and four sons.
t 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Dumble Estate.
The Property of Mr. F. W. Bason.
DUMBLE, the pastoral property owned by Mr. F. W. Bacon, is in the Brewarnna
district, New South Wales, close to the township of Goodooga, and about
seventy miles from the Brewarnna railway station.
This estate was first taken up by the late Mr. H. C. White, of Bando, who told the
story about the blacks being so bad that he had to camp out several miles from the
Bokhara River, and thought it more prudent not to light a fire rather than run the risk of
having his camp rushed by them.
THE HOMESTEAD AND FLOWER GARDEN.
The property next passed into the hands of the Forresters, and was stocked with
cattle. They also owned the well-known Bangate Station on the Narran, which adjoins
Dumble on the eastern side. Bangate was owned for main rears b\
1 langlo Parker, a fine type of a pastoral.st, and one of the kindest-hearted and most hos-
pitable men in the back country. Dumble passed from the Forresters to Messrs. J. F. and
Robert R, Doyle, members of a large family who practically owned all the country from Goo-
dooga to Brewarnna. Mr. Robert Doyle was the resident partner and manager, and h.s
1


GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD, DUMBLE, N.S.W.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


homestead was on the Bokhara River quite close to the present township of Goodooga. Ihe
old garden is now leased by the station to a Chinaman, who grows a fine supply of fruit and
vegetables. Mr. Doyle formed the present Durable homestead, which is about a mile and
a quarter from the township, and commenced what is now one of the prettiest and most
extensive gardens in the district.
In February, 1881, Durable was purchased by the late Messrs. F. A. Wright and Ed-
ward Fleaton, founders of the great carrying firm of Wright, Heaton and Co., and Mr. F.
W. Bacon, who at once went in for large improvements.
There are some twelve or fifteen tanks ranging from 3000 to 10,000 cubic yards,
which were built at prices beginning at iqd. a yard, and some years later at lod. a yard.
MR. F. W BACON.
The property, which is very rich fattening country, consists mainly of chocolate and
black soil plains, onginalh covered with old man salt bush, very little of which is now
left except in the horse paddocks. The timber is mainly box, coolabah, gidyea, and
myall.
The rainfall for the last thirty years averaged something over 16 inches. An artesian
bore has been put down during the last twelve months. It is not yet completed, but it has
reached a depth of 3050 ft. for a flow of over 1,000,000 gallons. This bore is placed on
a high ridge, and the drains are capable of watering nearly all the country east of Bokhara.
The boundary of the property is fenced with wire netting, but subdivided with a wire
fence. About 1000 acres have been ringbarked and cleared near the homestead, and 300
to 400 acres cleared for the plough. Mr. Bacon puts in 150 to 300 acres for hay, but only
3
The Durable Estate, New South Wales ,


GENERAL VIEW OF THE STATION BUILDINGS.
THE FOOTBRIDGE ON THE BOKHARA RIVER.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD
THE MOSQUITO HOUSE.
5
The Dumble Estate, New South Wales,


gets about three
good crops in nine
or ten years, but as
chaff costs £7 to
£1 o delivered, it
pays, even if only
10 cwts. to the acre
is harvested. Mr.
Bacon uses a disc
cultivator, and has
THE BOKHARA RIVER.
and warm in winter.
There is a beautiful
fruit garden, where
splendid figs, mul-
berries, oranges, le-
mons, mandarins,
tomatoes, limes,
shaddocks, olives,
grapes, peaches, and
apricots are grown.
The flower garden
and well-kept couch
grass lawns are very
BRINGING STATION STORES FROM BREWARRINA.
about 100 acres under fallow this year. A
paddock has been fenced for lucerne, and
has been irrigated by a 6-h.p. engine driv-
ing a centrifugal pump, but it has not been
a success, as the clay sub-soil is too close
to the surface. Good crops of millet and
farmers’ friend have been grown by irri-
gation for feeding working bullocks and
milking cows, but as irrigation can only be
carried on while the river is running, it is a
very uncertain quantity. It is proposed to
try fodder crops out at the bore.
The homestead is a very cool, comfort-
able collection of buildings, the principal
house being of pisa, very cool in summer
TANK SINKING NEAR BALLANDOOL.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE ORANGE TREES AND FLOWERS.
THE IMBERGEE DAM.
7
The Durable Estate, New South Wales,


ON THE WAY TO THE SHEARING SHED.
DUMBLE.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


attractive features of the homestead. Water is supplied from the Bokhara River, and
raised by a pump for the gardens and homestead use. The vegetable garden in charge
of an English gardener who has been at Dumble for the past four years, is on a scale which
permits of abundance of vegetables being kept for the use of the station hands.
In November, 1910, Mr. Bacon sold Ballandool, a leasehold property just over the
Queensland border, to Mr. Edmund Jowett, with 24,000 sheep, so that the usual Dumble
clip of 850 to 1000 bales will not exceed 500 to 650 in future.
BRIDGE NEAR BALLANDOOL.
There are now on Dumble only about 20,000 sheep, all the progeny of Boonoke and
Wanganella ewes and rams. There is a small stud flock of pure Boonoke ewes, the pro-
geny of 700 single stud ewes purchased from the late Mr. F. S. Falkmer, of Boonoke, in
1891. The station sheep, comprising breeding ewes and two-tooth mixed sheep, have cut
for some years from 81r to 10 lbs. per head of dry white wool. In 1909 200 bales of fleece
averaged 1 3Td. in Sydney, 12-Jd. for broken, and gfd. for bellies and Ist and 2nd pieces.
The surplus sheep have always found a ready sale, as Mr. A. B. Triggs has for the last
seven years bought all the sale sheep without inspection.
In consequence of the latter part of 1910 being very dry, a great many sheep were
sold in wool off shears, so that Dumble after having about 8 inches of rain in January
9
The Oumb/e Estate, New South Wales.


and February, 1911, and being only about one-third stocked, looks splendid. All the old
fattening grasses, blue, barley, Flinders, and Mitchell are in great luxuriance.
personal,
Mr. Francis William Bacon, of Durable, is one of the best known of our pastorahsts
in Queensland, New South Wales, and Victoria, and his name is known in pastoral circles
in all the States. He was educated at Scotch College, Melbourne, and his parents in-
tended that he should study for the bar, but as his health failed, he was, in 1866, sent to
Warbreccan Station, near Deniliquin, the property of Messrs. Shanahan and Jennings, of
which Mr. H. H. Kelly, now of Carrawilla, was the manager. Mr. Bacon stayed on at War-
breccan to gain station experience, and took some long droving trips to and from Bilhlla Sta-
TWO GREAT LOADS LEAVING DUMBLE.
tion, near Wilcannia, under the late Mr. R. W. Broughton, the well-known inspector at Hay.
Then, in 1870, he obtained charge of Belubla Station, near Tocumwal, on the Murray, and
had an unpleasant experience of the great floods of that record wet season. Later, in
1872, he returned to manage Warbreccan Station, and on Messrs. Shanahan and Jennings
purchasing the Westbrook Estate, on the Darling Downs, in March, 1874, was sent up to
take delivery of that property, and afterwards he spent six months inspecting and reporting
on stations on the Barcoo and Thompson, in Western Queensland. After a stay at Westbrook
for twelve months, he took charge of Goorianawa and Baradme Stations, and remained there
1 o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


until they were sold and delivered to Messrs. Maguire and Co,, Mr. Cuthbert Fetherston-
haugh being the managing partner. After the break-up of the 1877-78 drought, Mr. Bacon
started in business in Gunnedah as a stock agent, and, with the assistance of his brother
Alfred, rapidly put together a fine business, which is still carried on by Mr. Alfred Bacon.
Mr. F rancis Bacon, however, always had a hankering after the old life, and in Febru-
ary, i 88 1, he entered into partnership with the late Messrs. F. A. Wright and Edward Hea-
ton, of Wright, Heaton and Co., and purchased Dumble Station, containing 100,000 acres
leasehold and 32,000 sheep, and in 1895, after the death of Mr. Heaton, he purchased the in-
terest of that gentleman, and in 1896 acquired Mr. Wright’s interest and the whole of this
fine property. Prior to this, Messrs. Wright, Heaton, and Bacon had acquired a property in
THE FORD.
Queensland about twelve miles from Durable, known as Ballandool, of about 70,000 acres
of leased land, and Mr. Bacon has been thus sole owner of these properties for the past six-
teen years.
Mr. Bacon has taken a keen interest in all matters affecting the pastoral industry. Early
in 1894 he entered into an extensive correspondence about meat freezing, and on his own ini-
tiative called a meeting at the Hotel Australia, in Sydney, when a provisional committee
was formed, which led to the formation of the Graziers’ Meat Company, afterwards known
as the Stockowners’ Meat Company, which, however, subsequently came to grief.
Mr. Bacon took a prominent part in forming the Co-operative W00I& Produce Company,
11
The Dumble Estate, New South Wales .


Ltd., Sydney, and has been chairman of board of directors from inception of the company in
1897 to the present day. Mr. Bacon takes a keen interest in the question of land reform, and
in 1891, when, in spite of low prices, and when sheep were being boiled down for tallow, the
Land Board raised the rents from 40 to 80 per cent, in the Brewarrina and Bourke districts,
Mr. Bacon called a meeting of graziers at Goodooga, and formed a Crown 1 enants’ Associa-
tion. He was also instrumental in getting similar committees formed at Bourke, Cobar,
Wilcannia, Wentworth, and all western centres. He later on called a conference of delegates
from these organisations to be held in Sydney, and laid their platform before the late Mr.
Henry Copeland, Minister of Lands, who adopted its principles in his Amending Land Bill.
When the great drought of 18g7 to igo2 threatened all pastoralists, and especially the
western men, with disaster, Mr. Bacon took a prominent part in working up the agitation
which led to the appointment of the Royal Commission, and ultimately to the Western
Lands Act, which practically saved the whole division—one-third of the State—from ruin.
WOOL TRAIN ABOUT TO LEAVE BREWARRINA.
Early in igoB Mr. Bacon, with Messrs. A. F. Warner and J. McLean, purchased Gunnee
Estate, consisting of 31,000 acres of freehold land, near Inverell, with a fine flock of 30,000
sheep of the Wanganella-Boonoke type; 11,000 acres have since been sold for closer settle-
ment.
Mr. Bacon is also chairman of directors for the South Australian Land Mortgage and
Agency Company, and a large shareholder in the company. This company owns Kamilaroi,
a large cattle station in the Bourke district, New South Wales; Glengarloon (cattle), in the
Wide Bay district; Gordon Downs and Hamilton Downs (sheep), Queensland; besides other
properties in Queensland and South Australia.
Mr. Bacon was a member of the Stock and Pastures Board of Brewarrina for twenty-five
years, and of the Stock Board’s Council of Advice for eight years. He was also one of the
founders of the Goodooga Cottage Hospital, and its president for many years. He is a J.P.
of Queensland and New South Wales.
Mr. Bacon and his family during the past fifteen years have resided principally in Syd-
ney.
[Since the above was written Duinble has changed hands, the new owners being Messrs. Croaker & Garvin. Ed. P. lI.A. ]
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Mr. A. B. Triggs,
Pass.
THOUGH, owing to the rapid development of agriculture and the consequent in-
crease in the value of land, the problem of how to improve the grazing capabilities
of our wool-raising country is bringing about great changes in Australian methods,
it may be said without undue national conceit that our Commonwealth is not surpassed, if
indeed equalled, by any country in the world in the matter of wool production.
It is perhaps the only industry in which we yet take the lead. Our climate and, in some
cases, our natural grasses made it inevitable that we should take a foremost place as a wool-
producing country, but it is to the splendid qualities of the men who formed, and those who
have carried on, the industry that we must especially look for the secret of our pre-emin-
ence.
“LINTON,” THE RESIDENCE OF MR. A. B. TRIGGS
I


For a very long time one was wont to regard the Australian pastoralist as a caste in
whom the squattorial instinct and culture were transmitted from generation to generation,
and it was once undoubtedly true that the descendants of the grand old pioneers were most
fitted for, and naturally took the lead in, all matters appertaining to stock and “country”—
m the old days the word “estate” was seldom used in connection with great stations.
Even now the old time-honoured names recur again and again where graziers foregather,
but a new class of pastoralist has arisen. The old-school squatter became —not always
too successfully—by reason of the vastness of his financial undertakings, a man of business;
but of late the business man raised and trained far from the great silent bush and the vast
"SOUTHERN," SOUTHERN ASPECT.
flocks of Merinos, which are still the backbone of Australian prosperity, has successfully
invaded what was once the almost exclusive domain of the bushman born.
Of all those who have without previous knowledge of and training in pastoral pursuits
become prominent and successful stock and property owners there is probably none whose
career has been more phenomenal or has had a greater beneficial effect upon the industry of
the State than Mr. A. R. Triggs. Born in 1868. he is the son of the late Mr. James Triggs,
of Bedford Park, Chiswick, London. He commenced his education at Chiswick College,
2
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia,


going thence to Worthing, on the Sussex coast. Coming to Sydney in 1887, he entered
the service of the Bank of New South Wales, and soon became accountant of the Yass branch.
Mr. Triggs would probably have become a prominent man in the financial world had he
remained a banker, and there can be no doubt that he would have been a good pastoralisl
lost.
It was a bold step to take when, doubtless to the surprise of his official superiors, Mr.
Triggs decided to abandon banking, and become —in a very small way —a stockowner.
If the young accountant had spent his whole life in the study of Merino sheep, grazing
land, and the operations of the stock market, he could not have been more successful
than he has. From his
hrst introduction to the
country life of Australia he
must have had a keen eye
for the possibilities of judi-
cious stock operations. He
surely from the first planned
his modus operandi, looking
far ahead, for from his
earliest turnover a well-
ordered scheme appeared to
unfold itself in the acquisi-
tion of a chain of properties,
either by purchase or lease,
which enabled him to oper-
ate fearlessly in sheep.
When seasons were unfavor-
able, and grass scarce on
one estate, stock could be
moved to another not too
far away, the various pro-
perties forming a well-
planned series of stepping-
stones which almost invari-
ably landed his travelling
flocks at their destination in
safety. No matter how bad
the roads might be his drov-
ers always knew there was
an oasis not very far away.
ENTRANCE HALL OF "LINTON," THE RESIDENCE OF MR. A. B. TRIGGS.
3
Mr. A. B. Triggs, Yass, New South Wales.


MR. A. B. TRIGGS.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MRS. A. B. TRIGGS.
Mr. A. B. Triggs, Yass, New South Wales.


MISS JESSIE TRIGGS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia


Mr. Triggs has carried out the principle of not putting all his eggs in one basket to per
fection, for his baskets are so placed that his eggs are not broken when moved from one
to the other. Ihere is perhaps no buyer of sheep who can operate with such absolute con-
fidence, and his ability to purchase when it would be unsafe for others to do so has un-
doubtedly been the means of maintaining the values of sheep in various parts of New South
Wales.
From one station alone he purchased the surplus stock to the extent of at least 250,000
sheep in recent years, and many an owner has to thank Mr. Triggs’ system for pulling him
out of a tight comer.
DORA, GORDON, ANNIE AND INIGO TRIGGS.
Mr. Triggs must have realised from the first that owing to the variations of seasons in
different localities sheep are always to be bought at profitable rates if one has the country
ready to receive them not too far distant.
Amongst others, he owns the following properties: Wirchilleba, Tara, Eremeran,
Moonagee, Merri Merrigal, Yarrandale, Willie Ploma, Wee Jasper, Long Plain, Curran -
gorambla, Uabba, North Merrowie, North Whoey, and Ballandry.
It is almost needless to say of so capable a man as Mr. Triggs that he is a great believer
in improvements. Frequently it is remarked that the necessarily conservative systems
7
Mr. A, B, Triggs, Voss, New South Wales.


THE LIBRARY.
THE BILLIARD ROOM.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MR. TRIGGS' PRIVATE OFFICE.
THE SECRETARY'S ROOM.
9
Mr. A. B. Tricjgs, Yass, New South Wales-


of banks have a somewhat warping effect upon a considerable number of the officials; on
the other hand, a banking career has this great advantage, that it affords many oppor-
tunities for framing a correct estimate of the personal and business characters of men, and
doubtless such experience must have been of service to the subject of this sketch; at any rate,
Mr. Triggs has proved himself to be just as good a judge of men as he is a buyer of sheep
and country.
Perhaps the most marked feature in Mr. Triggs’ phenomenal career has been the abso-
lute confidence reposed in him by all with whom he has had business relations. It is a fact
known to the writer of this sketch that many hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of stock
of which he was the vendor have changed hands without even having been inspected by the
THE CHIEF INSPECTOR, MR. HUGH STEWART.
purchasers at prices based solely on the report of his own inspectors. When it is borne in
mind how considerable a margin there often is between the valuations placed upon stock by
vendors and purchasers it is difficult to conceive a higher tribute to the integrity of Mr.
Triggs or the knowledge and skill of his employees, this brings us to the interesting
topic of Mr. Triggs’ staff. Only with the aid of absolutely efficient and reliable lieutenants
would it be possible for this captain of pastoral finance to conduct the large operations that
he carries to such successful issues. We have said that Mr. Triggs has proved himself a
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE ACCOUNTANT'S ROOM.
THE RECORD ROOM.
I T
Mr. A. B. Triggs, Yass, New South Wales.


INTERIOR OF GENERAL OFFICE.
good judge of men; how good is partly evidenced by the fact that the whole of his gigantic
transactions in stock and property are conducted with the aid of but two secretaries, an
accountant, and four other clerical assistants. For their work no more capable men
could be found than the members of the outside staff, on each of whose ipse dixit purchasers
are often ready to close without inspection or investigation. Mr. Triggs’ principal inspector,
Mr. Flugh Stewart, has been with him from the very inauguration of his business, the suc-
cess of which Mr. Triggs is wont to say would have been impossible but for the loyal and
able assistance rendered by him and the other members of his staff.
It is no exaggeration to say that there are few men that Australia has better reason to
be proud of than this Englishman who decided some years ago to launch the barque of his
life on a sea to which he was almost a stranger.
A country whose trade, commerce, and public life were conducted on the lines which Mr.
Triggs laid down for his own guidance from the inception of his business, and has never
departed from, could not fail to be a great one.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Olive Downs, Naryilco From Greek, Woodburn
and Tenapera Estates.
The Property of Mr. A. T. Macdonald.
OLIVE DOWNS is situated 111 the Western Division of New South Wales. It has an
I area of about 650 square miles, held under the Western Lands Act. Ihe
station is about 240 miles from Broken Hill, and was purchased by Mr. A. C.
Macdonald in March, 191 1, together with 26,500 sheep, 100 horses, and 200 cattle, from the
estate of the late Mr. Johnson, solicitor, Sydney. Mr. Johnson took the property over from
his partners, Messrs. Hassell and Price, who had held it since 1880, when they stocked it
with sheep. The country is generally regarded as some of the finest out in the western
part of New South Wales. Mitchell grass grows in abundance, and all the tablelands are
well covered with it. The water improvements consist of wells, tanks, and the Warri Warn
and Twelve-mile Creeks, the latter running through the main portion of the holding. Olive
Downs is divided into six large and three small paddocks.
A MOB OF CATTLE ON TUNAPERA.
The sheep on Olive Downs are Merinos, bred from Boonoke rams, which have been
used for many years. The price the wool brings each year is a splendid testimony to the
judgment of the late manager, Mr. E. B. Davis. Previously, the sheep have been shorn by
hand, but machines were recently erected. Shearing usually begins about the middle of
August.
Mr. Macdonald’s idea is to throw his five stations into one, making an area of 2000 square
miles, and shearing before many years between 50,000 and 100,000 sheep. He has secured the
services of Mr. Clifford Lipsett, late of Elsinore, and under his management the owner ex-
pects to have the place in a few years one of the most up-to-date “Out West.” Mr. Mac-
donald believes in improving the country by providing water and by fencing.
1


IBaiyilco.
This property has an area of 1000 square
miles, and is situated 270 miles north of
Broken Hill. Naryilco was first taken
up by Messrs. Bates and Cramsie in
1876, who put cattle on it. They
afterwards sold it to Messrs. Cormack
and Amos, who stocked with cattle
and sheep, and in 1886 it was pur-
chased by Messrs. Morphett Bros.,
who also stocked with cattle and
sheep. In 1890 or 1891 some 70,000
sheep were shorn. The Trust and
THOROUGHBRED STALLION “EQUIFORM.”
Agency Company were the next purchasers, and the company gradually worked off the sheep,
and stocked with cattle and horses. In 1907 Mr. Macdonald purchased Naryilco, with 4500
cattle and 200 horses, and since then he has carried it on with cattle and horses.
The country consists of sandhills and thick mulga, with stony Mitchell grass downs.
The plains are covered with all varieties of grasses, also swamps and lakes. The country
is suitable for both sheep and cattle. The run is fenced on three sides with a Government
rabbit netting fence, maintained by the Government. It is enclosed on the north side by
a good six-wire fence. The property is divided into fourteen large and six small paddocks
watered by numerous creeks, lakes, swamps, and wells. Ihe country is very fattening in
average seasons. The first sale made by Mr. Macdonald, two months after buying the
A MOB OF CATTLE ON WOODBURN.
2
place in 1907, was
1000 head of bul-
locks on the ground
for £g per head cash.
This private sale is
considered to be a
record for the back
country.
Naryilco home-
stead stands on the
Warri Warn Creek, a
very pretty site. A
large dam makes the
water supply at the
house almost perma-
The Pastoral Homes of Australia -


THE HEAD STATION, OLIVE DOWNS.
THE NARYILCO HOMESTEAD.
3
The Olive Downs, Naryilco, Frame Creek, Woodburn and Tenapera Estates, N.S.W.


SHEEP ON MT. KING, OLIVE DOWNS.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


nent- The owner believes in the cultivation
of vegetables, and a horse-power water-
lifter does good work. Lucerne grows
luxuriantly, and a small paddock is kept
for the horses. Vegetables of all sorts
grow splendidly, and this year water-melons
up to 40 lbs. in weight were in great
abundance.
jfvome Creek
This property, which has an area of
300 square miles, is situated in New South
Wales on the border, and adjoins Naryilco.
It was purchased at the same time as
Naryilco, and is worked in conjunction with
it. The country is similar to that of Naryilco,
MR. A. C. MACDONALD.
being suitable for sheep and cattle. It is watered by Frome Creek, Pinaroo Lake, and
numerous other fine waterholes, also one splendid well, which is capable of watering from
30,000 to 40,000 sheep. The holding is divided into four large and three small pad-
docks, and netted on the north side by the Queensland border rabbit-proof fence.
YOUNG HORSES AT WOODBURN.
5
The Olive Downs, Naryilco, Frame Creek, Woodburn and Tenapera Estates, N.S. W.


FLOOD WATER ON TENAPERA.
HBloobbuvn.
Woodburn was purchased by Mr. Macdonald in igo6 from the New Zealand Loan and
M.A. Company, Limited, without stock. The previous owners were Messrs. J. and W.
Caldwell, who stocked with sheep, cattle, and horses. This is a very fattening piece of
country, and suitable for all stock. A large portion of it is lignum swamp country, which is
filled by the Bulloo flood waters. It joins Naryilco on the west side (which is netted), and
is worked in conjunction with it.
tenapera.
This station has an area of 500 square miles. It was taken up in 1908, and held
under occupation license until this year, when Mr. Macdonald secured under lease. This
is a splendid piece of cattle country, and one of the most fattening, enjoying the advantages
of the overflow of both the Wilson River and Cooper’s Creek. The country consists princi-
HORSES WATERING AT NARYILCO HEAD STATION.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CATTLE ON TENATERA FLOOD WATER.
pally of lignum swamps, sandhills, and stony downs, and is watered by some fine holes in
the Wilson, Cooper’s, and Warn Warn Creeks, and numerous other creeks and dams. It is
fenced on the south side by Government netting fence, on the east by a five-wire adjoining
Nocatunga and Bransby, on the north by Durham Downs, and on the west by Nappa Merrie,
It is divided into two paddocks, and is about 60 miles from Naryilco.
Cattle.
The first cattle taken to Naryilco' were Herefords, but they were neglected, and con-
sequently the standard of breeding went back. When Mr. Macdonald purchased the place,
MOB OF CATTLE ON WOODHURN.
7
The Olive Downs, Naryilco, Frame Creek, Woodhurn and Tenapera Estates, N.S.W.


the; herd was a mixture
between Herefords and
Shorthorns, but with the
aid of good bulls pur-
chased at Netley and
South Comongin, and cull-
ing heavily in cows, the
herd is now a good one.
When the cattle go down
to market everyone re-
marks what a difference a
few years have made in
the Naryilco herd.
EQUIFORM YEARLINGS.
Iborscs.
Mr. Macdonald breeds horses extensively, and has 1000 head. At the present time he has
four draught stallions, one Suffolk, and two thoroughbreds, and judging from prices obtained
each year in Adelaide, the progeny suit the trade. Since sending his horses to South Aus-
CREEK AT NARYILCO HOMESTEAD.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


(U
T oxophiiite
Longbow
Legerdemain
C/5
3
Daughter of
West Australia
J2
S
Brown Bess
o>
Oxford
Birdcatcher
.
2!
Honey Dear
_
Hartstrom
Mountain Dawn
—
Arco
— H
—
Sterling
Oxford
1
if _
Whisper
r d
i fe
Chillianwallah
Newminster
a
C/5
Lady Gough
G
o
*4- »
0
Rasicrucian
Beadsman
u
Madam Eglantine
S'
•5
Buccaneer
s
Formosa
Eller
o
—
Stockwell
' 5
O'
u
Doncaster
Marigold
o
U3
5-*
D
Fhormanby
0
Rouge Rose
Ellen Home
/O
0^
o
r\
>
—
Macaroni
Sweetmeat
Jocose
Thormanby
rt
Sunshine
Sunbeam
D
<55
Galopin
Vedette
5
Flying Duchess
C
m
St. Angela
King Tom
5
u
an
Adeline
i
C/3
Scottish Chief
Lord of the Isles
Miss Ann
C/3
I>% £
•«
a7
j s
Hawthorn Bloom
Kettledrum
£
Lady Alice Hawthorn
tralia, they have never averaged less than £2O per head, and last year in the John Bull yards
his draught colts sold up to £s6 10s., when in very plain condition. Mr. Macdonald has
found that horse-breeding pays better than any other stock. He bred a lot of thoroughbreds,
and has a number of highly-bred stud-book mares. The sires consist of (1) Pilgrim, by Pil-
grim’s Progress from Harmony, by Panic, &c. He has done stud duty for a number of years,
and what few of his stock have reached the metropolis have done well, besides winning a
number of races in the country. (2) Equiform, by Multiform from Stressa, is one of the
handsomest horses ever bred by the late Mr. Stead, of New Zealand. The sporting writer
in the New Zealand papers said when he was shipped for Victoria, “he is the finest colt that
has ever left the island.” There was also a splendid photo of him in the New Zealand
papers. Equiform did no good racing, having been injured as a two-year-old, but Mr. Stead
had tried him before the accident, and found him very fast. His remarks when selling him
were, “I sell him as a stud horse. If I thought he would stand training you could not tempt
me with .Z 5000.”
9
The Olive Downs, Naryilco, Frame Creek, Wood burn and Tenapera Estates, N.S.W.


CATTLE FOR MARKET FROM WOODBURN.
SALE HORSES.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Some of his stock are
now eighteen months old,
and are greatly admired
by all lovers of the
thoroughbred. It is Mr.
Macdonald’s intention to
send them down to Ade-
laide and Melbourne to be
trained. Mares : the
brood mares are by the
following sires:—St. Swi-
thin, Yarrabee, The Le-
vite, Light Artillery, Pil-
DRAUGHT STALLION "CLYDE."
grim, Far Niente, Warloo, Mendacious, St. Jude, Sunrise, Prince Consort, Corralmga, Sir
Oliver, and Drum Major.
personal.
Mr. Macdonald was born at Longwood, Victoria, in 1862, and was the second son of
the late Donald Macdonald, of Hartheld
Estate. He was educated at the State
School, which he left when thirteen years
old. At the age of fifteen years he
joined the Railway Department in the
Survey between Benalla and Yarrawonga,
under the supervision of Mr. Maurice
Kernot, and remained at this business for
three years. As nothing seemed to in-
terest him but stock, he got his father,
who then managed Avenel Station for the
late Mr. Lloyd Jones, to speak to him
about allowing him to go to Bulloo Downs,
the Queensland cattle station owned by
Messrs. Jones, Green, and Sullivan. This
Mr. Jones did, and in September, 1880,
Mr. Macdonald started for Adelaide to
join one of the drovers from the above-
named station. They arrived at the Bul-
loo in October, and Mr. Macdonald com-
WOODBURN HUT.
11
The Olive Downs, Naryilco, Frame Creek, Woodbur n and Tenapera Estates, /V.S. IV.


MOB OF SHEEP ON HALFPENNY'S TANK.
menced duties as “jackeroo” at £i per week. He liked the cattle work, but soon had to
take charge of the store and books, owing to the number of travellers passing to the Mt.
Brown diggings. He did not care for the indoor life, but, as it was part of his education,
took to it kindly for three years. He then became stockman, and from that soon worked his
way into a higher position. In five years he was in charge of the station, with upwards of
40,000 head of cattle, for three months, while the manager was away. He did so well that
the firm presented him with a handsome bonus, in addition to his salary. A few years
afterwards Mr. Macdonald again had full charge, and held the position till the place was
sold to Mr. Kidman. Altogether he was twenty-three years with Messrs. Jones, Green, and
Sullivan, and the Bulloo Downs herd was considered one of the finest in Australasia for its
size. Bulloo Downs had a magnificent herd of stud cattle, bred from the finest progeny
money could buy, and Mr. Macdonald got a good knowledge of stud cattle breeding, which
has proved invaluable to him. When Bulloo Downs was sold, Mr. Macdonald purchased
Onepah, a sheep station in New South Wales (adjoining Bulloo Downs), together with all the
Bulloo Downs horses, with the exception of fifty head, which were sold with the place. He
went in for horse-breeding at Onepah with success. He afterwards leased the station to Mr.
Lethbridge, and purchased Naryilco, trome Creek, and Woodburn.
Mr. Macdonald, like the typical Australian he is, confesses to being very fond of all
sport, but particularly horse racing. He is president of the Tibooburra Jockey Club, and a
member of all the leading amateur clubs in the district, also of the V.R.C., in Melbourne. He
seldom misses the Melbourne Cup, the Newmarket Handicap, or in fact any of the important
events. He is a justice of the peace for both Queensland and New South Wales, and an
acting honorary inspector of stock for Queensland. Mr. Macdonald is considered by many
to be a keen judge of cattle and horses, a trait inherited from his father, who was one of the
best judges of his time. Mr. Macdonald married in 1907 the eldest daughter of the late
Robert Gardiner, Kilcowera, Queensland, and they have two sons.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Lyndburst and Dulacca West Studs.
The Property of Mr. T. E. McDougall
THE Darling Downs is generally admitted to be one of the finest districts in Queens-
land, if not in all Australia. It was discovered and named by Allan Cunningham,
whose starting point was Segenhoe, on the Hunter, in 1827, And it was here that
Patrick Leslie, the first pioneer to follow the footsteps of the discoverer, “squatted” in 1840.
He “took up” all the country from Toolburra to Killarney, in the valley of the Condamine,
“including all tributaries” —about a million acres.
GROUP OF LYNDHURST PRIZE SHORTHORNS AT THE WARWICK SHOW.
In the pick of this rich valley stands the Lyndhurst Estate, which is owned by the family
of the late Mr. M. S. McDougall, whose widow residing on the property, has a life interest
in it, but has for a number of years leased it to her fourth son, Mr. C. E. McDougall, who has
managed the estate since the death of his father in 1882.
The area of Lyndhurst is 700 acres, of which 500 acres are under cultivation, mostly
lucerne, subdivided into numerous paddocks; about too acres are irrigated during dry spells.
T


Mr. McDougall has
for the past twenty
years had a lease of
The Grove, a pro-
perty adjoining
Lyndhurst, of 200
acres, almost all un-
der lucerne, and has
now secured another
ten years’ lease of
the above property.
The Glen, a pro-
perty of 1500 acres,
LYNDHURST HOUSE AND PART OF THE GARDEN.
six miles from Lyndhurst, and owned by Mrs. McDouga.ll, is also leased to Mr. C. E. Mc-
Dougall, and worked in conjunction with Lyndhurst.
Thoroughbred horses and pure Shorthorn cattle are bred on the estate. The stud of
horses was started by Mr. C. E. McDougall in 1886, when he purchased Archie from the
late Mr. A. F. Smart, and secured a number of high-class blood mares to mate with him.
Archie was a great success at the stud, and produced numerous winners. Later on, Brase-
nose (half-brother to Gozo), Musketoon (Trenton, ex Mona, imp.), Ardon (Tartar, ex
Ardea), were purchased and used in the stud, all proving good sires. In 1905 Mr. McDougall
commissioned Mr. J. E. Brewer to purchase him a sire in England, and he secured Ladurlad,
by Ladas, ex Tressure, by Bend Or. This horse has proved an unqualified success, and is
the leading sire in Queensland, his yearlings selling well at both Brisbane and Sydney
annual sales. His stock
have already won nearly
all the principal races in
Queensland, including
Hopeful Stakes, Derby,
and Cup.
Ardon was sold to Mr.
R. H. Dangar, of Neots-
field, some years ago, but
after last season Mr. Mc-
Dougall repurchased him,
and he and Ladurlad are
the lords of the harem at
present.
STUD COWS IN ONE OF THE LYNDHURST PADDOCKS WITH THE IMPORTED
BULL, "CLIPPER'S DUKE," IN FOREGROUND.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD COWS ON THE BANK OF THE CONDAMINE RIVER AT LYNDHURST.
Ardon is the sire of Barallan, admitted to be the best racehorse ever bred in Queens-
land, and Mr. McDougall was anxious to get Ardon back to mate with Barallan’s dam,
Beryl, and her daughter, Accident, in the hope of producing another smasher such as
Barallan.
The stud consists of over twenty high class stud-book mares, including Collarette
(dam of Collarit), Yosemite (sister to Haut Boy), Rhyney (by Grafton from Hempie),
YEARLING BULLS AT DULACCA WEST.
3
The Lyndhurst and Dulacca West Estates, Queensland .


BLOOD MAKES AND FOALS. “LYNDHURST."
Beryl (dam of Barallan), Bonny Belle (dam of Braw Laddie, Q.T.C. Derby),
Azore (sister to Tetupha, Queensland Cup), Tiara (dam of Musket, Q.T.C.
Derby), Hardee (Brisbane Cup), Jessie (Brisbane Cup), Blue Stocking (Havoc, ex Blue Bon-
net), Merrythought (imp.), Glint (dam of Jack Smith), Accident (Archie, ex Beryl), Monk-
shood (half-sister to Dreamland, Mentor, and Wakeful’s dam), Miss Dido (sister to Dundonald),
&c.
The stud Shorthorn herd was formed in 1893 by the purchase of ten heifers from Mrs.
Waddel, of Benvenue, Singleton, and a year later a further purchase of twenty-three heifers
from the same stud, all being descended from pedigree cattle purchased from the studs of
Messrs. Baldwin and Dangar. In 1902, at the break-up of the Canning Downs stud, Mr.
McDougall purchased fifty high-class
pedigreed stud cows and heifers, all
running back direct to four cows im-
ported from England by the late Hon.
J. D. Macansh, and in it) o / a further
purchase of twenty cows was made at
the break-up of the Wooroowoolgen
stud, and in 1908 thirty-three cows at
the break-up of the Gordon Brook stud,
and ten cows at the break-up of the
Durham Court stud.
The sires used in the stud since its
inception have been first class, and in-
LADURLAD (IMP.)
By Ladas from Tressure by Bend Or.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


EIGHTY RED STED COWS AT DULACCA WEST.
elude Prince of Goolhi (a winner of over twenty prizes in N.S.W.), Beverley Duke 20th, Beau
Tregunter the 31st, and Lord Russell the 44th (all bred by the late Mr. J. H. Angas, South
Australia), Blood Royal (inbred to Dangar’s famous Lord Walnut family), Bapton Patriot (im-
ported by the late Mr. H. C. White), Earl of Wyndham sth (imported from New Zealand),
Baldwin’s Peer (by the 525-guinea bull Spicey Peer), and Clippers’ Duke (imp.).
The Lyndhurst stud now consists
of 150 head of high-class pedigree
cows, almost all descended from the
four cows imported from England by
the late Hon. J. D. Macansh, the other
purchases and their progeny having
been sent to Dulacca West to form that
stud.
The Lyndhurst cattle have been
very successful at the Downs and
Metropolitan Shows. There is a great
demand for the young stud bulls, and
LYNDHURST ROYAL PEER. TWO-YEAR-OLD BULL.
Two First Prizes, Brisbane, 1909 and 1910; First and Champion,
Warwick, 1911; First, Brisbane, 1911.
5
The Lyndhurst and Dulacca West Estates, Queensland.


YEARLING FILLIES BY LADURLAD.
they find ready sale at from 50 to 150 guineas. At the recent Brisbane Show (iqii) one
bull eighteen months old sold for 110 guineas, and three the same age at 100 guineas each,
one calf at 51 guineas. They are robust, strong-constitutioned, with great depth of flesh
combined with quality.
Malacca Wee t Stub.
In 1905 Mr. McDougall purchased Dulacca West leasehold of 50,000 acres, situated on
the Western line, near Yeulba, and 150 miles from Toowoomba. It is all good cattle country,
being timbered with myall, appletree, and bngalow, splendidly watered by three never-failing
creeks. The run was at
once improved by ring-
barking, fencing, and sub-
dividing into numerous
paddocks, and the stud
herd formed 100 head of
pedigreed cows, being
sent out from Lyndhurst
with the bulls Blood Royal
and Sturdy Jock, the lat-
ter a grandson of Imperial
Purple, and purchased
from Messrs. Bracker, of
YEARLING COLTS BY LADURLAD.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Warroo. The herd has
been replenished each
year from Lyndhurst and
purchases from Gordon
Brook, Wooroowoolgen,
and Durham Court, in New
South Wales. Last season
300 stud cows were put
with the bulls. The herd,
with heifers one and two
years, now consists of
about 500 head. The
sires used since its incep-
A GROUP OF BLOOD MARES AT LYNDHURST.
tion are Blood Royal, Earl of Wyndham, Sturdy Jock, Ringleader (bred by Mr. Holmes),
Earl of Warrion (bred by Messrs. Robertson, of Colac, Vic.), Earl of Summerton (bred by AH.
D. Mclntyre, Wagga), Nandyllian Duke (bred by Major Smith, Nandyllian, out of the im-
ported cow Pitlivies Carnation), Lord Russell, Kirklevington Count 33rd, Duke of Connaught
26th (the latter three bred by the late Mr. J. H. Angas, South Australia), Bapton’s Pride, by
Bapton Patriot (imp.), Zaretans Duke of Derrimut sth (a pure Summerton), Oxford Peer (by
Spicey Peer, and bred by late Mr. C. Baldwin), Prince Albert and Prince Royal (bred by
Messrs. Burgess Bros., by Duke of York, ex the champion cow Princess Floss), and Clippers
Duke 2nd,
The young bulls find
ready sale at good prices,
last year 200 one and two
year old being sold in one
line to the Trustees of the
late Mr. D. Mclntyre for
Dalgonally Station, Nor-
manton, Q., the number
being made up in Lynd-
hurst-bred bulls.
Mr. McDougall sends a
draft of bulls from Lynd-
hurst to Dulacca West as
LADY RUSSELL
First and Champion Cow at Brisbane, Warwick, and Toowoomba Shows.
7
The Lyndhurst and Dulacca West Estates, Queensland.


weaners each year. They are all stud bulls,
and, for that matter, every cow in the
Dulacca herd is descended from pedigree
stock, many of them running back direct to
imported cows.
No females have been sold either from
Lyndhurst or Dulacca West; Mr. McDougall
prefers to cull heavily and spey, and fatten
the culls. Dulacca West also carries about
iooo head of mixed cattle and 200 horses,
the latter being principally active draught,
with a few stud-book mares and well-bred
mares suitable for breeding remounts, fhe
draught sire now in use is Ivanhoe, a son of
the champion New Zealand bred horse of
Mr. C. E. MCDOUGALL.
that name. So So, by Schimmel, ex Cooee, by Wallace, ex Cooya, by Nordenfeldt (and thus
possesses three strains of Musket) is used with the blood and light mares.
Dulacca West is managed by Mr. J. G. McDougall, who is a tip-top cattle man, and a
great Shorthorn enthusiast.
IPersonal.
Mr. C E. McDougall is one of the best-known men connected with the pastoral industry
in Queensland. He was born on Texas Station, which was taken up by his father and his
brothers. All his life has been associated with pastoral work and stock-raising, and his
skill as a breeder has
made the Lyndhurst
cattle and thoroughbred
studs famous throughout
Australia. In 1890 Mr.
McDougall started the
stock and station busi-
ness known as Messrs.
McDougall & Co., and very
great success has been
the result. The firm now
sell annually large num-
bers of horses, cattle and
sheep, besides effecting
huge transactions in land.
COLLARETTE, WITH SISTER TO COLLARIT AT FOOT.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Westbrool Estate.
The Property of Mr. F. G. G. Couper.
WESTBROOK, the property of
Mr. F. G. G. Couper, has
always been a noted station on
the Darling Downs, and is closely asso-
ciated with the early history of those parts.
It was first occupied in 1840 by Mr. John
Campbell, who came over from Kittah
Kittah, a station he had formed near Beebo,
on the Dumaresq.
In 1845 Mr. Campbell sold the pro-
perty to Mr. Henry Isaacs (one of the
Cowrie Isaacs), who sold it in 1853 to Mr.
John Donald Maclean, who took Mr. Wil-
liam Beit into partnership, and worked the
property for several years. Mr. Maclean
died suddenly in 1868 when Colonial Trea-
surer of Queensland, and on the death of
Mr. Beit some two years after, the property
was sold by the executors (of whom Sir
Arthur Hodgson was one) to Messrs.
THE DUKE OF CORNWALL.
Shanahan and Jennings. Westbrook then comprised about 85,000 acres, but Messrs.
Shanahan and Jennings cut it up for closer settlement. Westbrook is now about 45°° acres in
extent, and is situated 12 miles from the prosperous and rapidly-growing city of loo-
woomba, which has an average rainfall of 32 in. The property is only 5 miles from West-
brook Siding, on the main line from Sydney to Brisbane, and is a nicely sheltered block,
1


with a lot of rich creek flats, equal to anything on the Downs for growing lucerne. There is
a very small proportion of unploughable land. Ihe soil is chiefly black, with a little brown
and red, and the estate is lightly timbered, there being just sufficient to make nice shelter
for stock and to give a park-like appearance to the country. The timber consists chiefly
of apple, box, and Moreton Bay ash.
The station is well watered by the Westbrook Creek, which flows right through the
centre of the property, and Spring Creek bounds it on the north side. The dairy slock are
THE HOMESTEAD.
watered from five windmills, which pump the water from bores varying from 15 ft. to 204 ft.
in depth. Mr. Couper engaged a water diviner before he built his dairy cottages and cow
bails, and the diviner found and guaranteed a sufficient quantity of water at a charge of Bs.
per foot for boring.
The Westbrook homestead is a solid stone building, with slate roof and cedar doors
and ceilings. It was built by Messrs. Maclean and Beit in 1867, but Mr. Couper has
greatly improved it in the way of water supply and septic tank arrangements.
The property is boundary fenced, and subdivided into numerous paddocks with usual
post and wire fences.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ENGLISH LEICESTER EWES
3
The Westbrook Estate, Queensland.


A GROUP OF MARES AND FOALS.
There are three dairy farms with sixty cows on each, and a fourth dairy, just com-
pleted, built on the “Eschelon” patent, is installed with milking machines.
CLYDESDALE STALLION —THE DUKE OF CORNWALL.
4
Mr. Couper is partial to the
Ayrshire Shorthorn cross for milking
on the Downs; he started with Short-
horn cows, and used Ayrshire bulls,
but is now using Milking-Shorthorn
bulls, purchased from Talgai West, on
the progeny, with satisfactory results.
Horse-breeding is carried on,
two Clydesdales and a pony stallion
being used. The Clydesdale stallion
Duke of Cornwall has become quite a
famous horse on the Downs, as he is
credited with leaving more good
stock than any horse that has yet
come into Queensland. Mr. Couper
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WESTBROOK HOUSE FROM A DISTANCE.
5
The Westbrook Estate, Queensland.


DAIRY COWS.
purchased him at Palmerston North, New Zealand, and he is by Glengyle from \ iolet 2nd.
The other stallion is Maxim, bred in New South Wales. The pony stallion is De Wet, by
Little Wonder.
Mr. Couper has
about 600 acres in lu-
cerne, and about 250
acres are kept under cul-
tivation for growing
green feed for dairy
cattle. He considers
Algerian oats the best
for winter feed on the
Downs, as they seem to
stand any kind of wea-
ther. This crop does
not pull out easily, and
makes nice chaff after
MR. COUPER'S FAMILY.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


DAIRY COWS ON WESTBROOK.
7
The Westbrook Estate, Queensland.


DAIRY COWS IN YARD.
being fed off all the
winter. He grows
maize and sorghum
in the summer for
the cows and pigs,
and does all his
ploughing with disc
ploughs.
About iooo ewes
are kept for breed-
ing fat lambs, Eng-
lish Leicester rams
being used on Me-
rino ewes and South-
down rams on the
Leicester - Merino
A DAIRY FARMER'S FAMILY.
s
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


AT MILKING TIME.
cross. Mr. Couper has 200 pure English Leicester ewes kept for stud breeding, also twenty
pure Southdown ewes. He considers August about the best month for lambing, as the
lucerne generally has a pick on it then, and the lambs as a rule can all be fattened off before
the worms get bad in the autumn.
Though Mr. Couper’s experience is that the Downs land is more suited for dairying
and pig raising than
for sheep, prime
lambs can be raised
if there is sufficient
cultivation and if the
land is not stocked
too heavily. The rea-
son a good many of
the Downs farmers
have failed with their
lambs is on account
of keeping too many
sheep. When a dry
A GROUP OF ENGLISH LEICESTER EWES
9
The Westbrook Estate, Queensland •


ENGLISH LEICISTER STUD RAMS.
STUD SOUTHDOWNS.
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW ON WESTBROOK.
11
The Westbrook Estate, Queensland.


spell sets in their lucerne gives out, and
the lambs are turned on to the dry grass,
and they fall away at once, and perhaps a
big percentage die of worms, or get too
much of a check to be fattened until they
are too old to dispose of as lambs. Mr.
Couper sells lambs to the freezing works
at Brisbane at per lb. dressed weight, and
has never had a lamb rejected.
The Westbrook woolshed is fitted
with shearing machines driven by a trac-
tion engine, which is also used for plough-
ing.
In regard to labour, Mr. Couper em-
ploys seven married couples, who, with the
assistance of their families, do most of the
farm and dairy work.
MR. F. G. G. COUPER.
personal.
Mr. F. G. G. Couper was born at Havelock North, Hawke’s Bay, New Zealand, in
July, 1868, and was educated at Wellington College. His father was the late William
Couper, a very early pioneer in New Zealand, who landed in the North Island just at the
outbreak of the Maori War, and eventually purchased a fine property on the Tuki Tuki River,
in the Hawke’s Bay District.
When twenty-one years of age, Mr. Couper purchased a portion of the well-known
Oroua Downs Estate, near Palmerston North, New Zealand, and took an active interest in
drainage matters. He sat on the Sluggish River Drainage Board, and helped to start the
Glen Oroua Co-operative Butter Factory In 1899 he cut his property up into eleven farms,
and coming to the Darling Downs, purchased his present holding.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The East Talgai Estate.
The Property of Mr. Geo rge C. Clark.
THE old estates in the more settled parts of Australia are fast disappearing under the
reign of closer settlement, and in a comparatively few years there will be little to
remind one of the days when the Darling Downs of Queensland were rolling graz-
ing lands, where sheep and cattle roamed unchecked by roads, rising townships, and closely
cultivated farms. As the railway runs out from Warwick on to the plains going north, the
traveller is borne over undulating country extensively cultivated, and, with a town or a vil-
lage dotted here and there, the sober colour of the grass and trees being relieved by the
STUD RAM SUED AND HAY SHEDS.
bright green patches of lucerne and crops, and timbered ranges stretching away in the far
distance. It presents a fine picture, and to anyone with an eye for pastoral country, the Dar-
ling Downs must surely appeal. This district is, roughly, about 1400 to 2000 ft. above sea
level, so is in reality a tableland, and its area has been computed to be over 4,000,000 acres
of rich, black, red, and chocolate soil, ranging to 60 ft. in depth. Nearly all the properties
on the Darling Downs are connected with the early settlement of these parts. Among the
1


oldest was Talgai, originally taken up about
fifteen years after the Downs were first dis-
covered and named by Allan Cunningham, in
1827 and occupied by Mr. Gammie, and later
by Hood and Douglas and Clark and Hanmer
as one of the original squattages. When the
Darling Downs lands were alienated in the six-
ties the Clarks secured about 32,000 acres of
the eastern portion of the run, and on this
property, named East Talgai, the late Mr. Geo.
Clark founded that Merino flock now so well
known to woolgrowers.
When he first came to East Talgai there
were only an old sheep camp and shepherd’s
hut where the head station now stands. There
was practically no fencing other than the boun-
THE LATE MR. G. CLARK.
daries, so all sheep had to be shepherded. Asa matter of fact, East Talgai was one of the
first places to introduce the paddocking system into the district. There was a blacks’ camp
in the creek near the present head station, but the natives were never troublesome in the late
Mr. Clark’s time.
In 1890 the run was split up, the Clarks
retaining about 9000 acres around the home-
stead, and the remainder being sold to the
Scottish Australian Investment Company, and
which is now known as Talgai West. In the
same year the late Mr. Clark went to reside in
Melbourne, and Mr. G. C. Clark became the
owner of the station, his uncle, Mr. Chas.
Clark, who had been in partnership with them,
severing Ins connection with the firm. East
Talgai has been lately further reduced in area,
and now only consists of about 5000 acres.
The estate is lightly timbered with box and
apple tree, and is watered by Dalrymple Creek
and numerous wells. The boundaries are
fenced with marsupial and dog-proof fencing,
and the property is subdivided into numerous
small paddocks.
MR. GEO. C. CLARK.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia „


THE HOMESTEAD.
3
The East Talgai Estate, Queensland.


THE WOOLSHED AND DRAFTING YARDS.
STATION BUILDINGS.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD RAMS.
Zbc jfloch*
The East Talgai Merino stud was formed by the late Mr. Geo. Clark in 1870 with
thirty special ewes and
three rams purchased
from the late Mr. R. Q.
Kermode, of Mona
Vale, Tasmania, and
forty-five ewes and se-
veral rams from the
same breeder in the
following year. In 1876
several high-class rams
were obtained from Mr.
David Taylor, St. John-
stone, Tasmania, and
on subsequent occa-
sions within the next
WELSH PONY STALLION “PERFECTION."
5
The East Talgat Estate, Queensland.


A MOB OF STUD EWES.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


GROUP OF STUD EWES.
few years a few rams and ewes were purchased from that stud. These importations were
the foundation of the stud, and, with the exception of two or three very high-class sires of
Tasmanian blood since introduced, and one ram of Wanganella strain, bred by Messrs.
Litchfield Bros., of Hazeldean, N.S.W., which has lately been tried as an experiment, no
other blood has been introduced. All other sires have been bred within the stud, it being
the firm opinion of Mr. Clark, as it was of his father, that the best way to fix a distinctive
type and build up an even flock of sheep is to rely mainly upon selection and culling, and
that the indiscriminate
purchase of rams, how-
ever good, is a mistake
in a well-established
stud. In 1890, when
portion of the estate
was sold, the number
of stud sheep was re-
duced to some 2000 to
2500 breeding ewes.
At the end of 1906
Mr. Clark purchased
Yanna, a grazing farm
on the Warrego River,
and most of the second
THE VERANDAH.
7
The East Talgai Estate, Queensland.


stud ewes were remov-
ed to this property,
leaving only about
2000, mostly special
studs, at East Talgai.
The stud sires are bred
and grown on the latter
property, and then sent
to Yanna, where the
bulk of the flock sale
rams are now bred.
The object that
Mr. Clark has in view
is to maintain a type of
sheep of good frame
THE DRAWING ROOM.
and constitution, not too woolly about the head and face, with a general absence of body
wrinkles, and covered with a dense medium quality fleece of good length. Some few
years ago (though no Vermont blood was introduced) several wrinkly, heavily-woolled
THE BUNYA WALK.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MOB OF STUD RAMS ON EAST TALGAI.
9
The East Talgai Estate, Queensland.


sires bred in the stud
were used, but, though
the weight of fleece
was much increased,
there was a tendency to
get too many hard,
short-woolled sheep,
and within the last two
years all undesirable
sheep of this class have
been eliminated from
the stud, and great at-
tention has been paid
to keeping up length of
staple and style and
THE FRONT VERANDAH.
brightness of wool. The great object of breeding at East Talgai has throughout been
the production of flock rams suitable for use in any part of Queensland, and the rams
have always found a ready sale in the hot districts of the west. Several small consign-
ments of stud and flock rams have within the past two years been sent to South Africa.
East Talgai stud rams generally cut from 20 lbs. to 30 lbs., and special ewes up to
20 lbs. All the ewes on East Talgai, including some very old sheep, and shorn in August
at the end of the winter before lambing, when the wool is usually very dry and harsh,
average about 11 lbs. or upwards, and at the last shearing on Yanna all sheep, mostly
ewes, averaged io|
lbs.
Cultivation.
There are on East
Talgai about 400 acres
under lucerne, and
about 200 to 250 acres
are kept under cultiva-
tion with barley, pump-
kins, maize, &c. A fair
amount of lucerne hay
is made, and the sta-
tion is well supplied
with sheds for storing it
GRASS TREES ON DALRYMPLE CREEK.
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


LAGOON AT BACK OF THE HOUSE, YANNA.
YANNA WOOLSHED.
The East Talgai Estate, Queensland.


Mr. Clark keeps a
good herd of about 100
graded Polled Angus
cows, and some hun-
dreds of fat bullocks,
most of which are pur-
chased as stores, are
turned off every year.
He owns about 4000
acres of rough country
near the main range
about 28 miles from
Talgai, and he uses
this as a run for cattle.
THE HOUSE AT YANNA.
Years ago the late Mr. G. Clark used to breed draught horses, and had a very fair
stud of mares, but they were dispersed in 1890. At the present time a Welsh pony
stallion is kept, and, mated with well-bred mares, is producing very promising stock.
Joanna.
Yanna, consisting of about 20,000 acres on the Warrego River, is situated about 50
miles below Charleville, and was purchased ac the end of 1906. It is part mulga and part
open frontage country to the river, watered by a good artesian bore, with a flow of about
il million gallons and 20 miles of drains. It is subdivided into a number of small pad-
docks, and is a well-improved little property, carrying about 5000 sheep, mostly studs.
It is enclosed with rabbit netting, and the railway runs right through the property, the sid-
ing being only a few hundred yards from the house and woolshed, which is fitted with six
Wolseley machines. Mr. H. F. Tapson is managing the property.
IPersonal.
The late George Clark was born in 1835, and was the second son of the late Geo.
Carr Clark, of Ellinthorpe Hall, Ross, Tasmania, who came out from England in 1822. In
the early sixties the elder son, Chas. Clark, came to Queensland, and was for a time a
partner in Talgai; he was there joined by his brother George, and they became partners
in East Talgai. Both brothers sat for several years in the Legislative Assembly in Queens-
land. In 1890 the property came into the hands of the present owner, who is the only
son of the late Mr. Geo. Clark, and was born in 1864. He received his education at Haw-
thorn Grammar School, Melbourne, and was married in 1888 to his cousin, a daughter of
the late Chas. Clark. His family consists of six sons and four daughters.
x 2
Tho Pastoral Homos of Australia.


The Yandilla Estate.
The Property of Messrs. W. F. Gore & Co .
IN the early part of the year 1841 St. George R. Gore and a Mr. Walter Kemble decided
to take some sheep up on to the Darling Downs, which was at that time all new
country. They were living in Sydney at the time- In June of that year, accompanied
by Ralph T. Gore, a brother of St. George, they left Sydney, having purchased some sheep
from Macarthur. St. George remained with the sheep on Fraser’s Creek, on the Big River,
VIEW OF WOOLSHED BUILDINGS.
for the lambing and shearing, while the others pushed on and took up the country on the
Condamine, which has since been called Yandilla. After the lambing and shearing were
over, St. George brought the sheep on, reaching Yandilla about Christmas of the same
year.
i


In 1842 St. George went to Sydney to bring Mrs. Gore to the station. Ihe Kembles
were bought out at this time, and Mrs. Baldock (grandmother of the present manager
of the estate) and Robert Gore, another brother of St. George, bought in. St. George and
his wife left Morpeth in April, 1842, for Yandilla, and were four months on the road. I hey
took some sheep with them, bought from a Mr. Mclvor, and reached Yandilla in August of
the same year-
St. George remained at Yandilla until 1846, when he left to live on Bodumba, which
he had purchased, and Ralph Gore continued at Yandilla. Mr. St. George Gore later on
THE HOMESTEAD.
lived at Lyndhurst, near Warwick, and was a member of the Legislative Assembly of
Queensland for some years.
In 1846 Mr. Robert Gore brought his wife and two children up from Sydney to Yan-
dilla. They left the station on a visit to Sydney in 1847, and were lost in the wreck of the
“Sovereign,” at the South Passage of Moreton Bay.
Mr. St. John Gore, another brother, bought in to the station in 1846, and also lived
at Yandilla for a short time. In iB6O Ralph Gore went home, and died there, and a Mr.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia »


Owen managed the station until he was murdered in 1866. The murderer was caught and
hanged. Soon after this Mr. Francis A. Gore assumed the management. He did much
to improve the property and stock, and it was during his management that the firm of “Gore
and Co.” bought land so largely, both privately and from the Government. He was the
eldest son of the Rev- W. F. Gore, the youngest brother of St. George Gore, and who was
for many years rector of All Saints, Parramatta, N.S.W. In 1904 M r - Francis A. Gore
died, and the management of Yandilla was taken up by the present manager, Mr. G. R.
Gore, also a son of the Rev. W. F. Gore.
PART OF THE HOMESTEAD GARDEN AND LAKE.
No records give the original area of the land taken up as Yandilla, but it must have been
quite 250,000 acres. Tummaville was bought about the year 1846 from Messrs. Rolland
and Taylor. This property adjoined Yandilla. During the year 1841 Messrs. Russell and
Brookes were at Cecil Plains; Messrs. King and Sibley took up King’s Creek, later on
known as Clifton; Messrs- Hodgson and Elliott were at Eton Vale, Mr. John Campbell at
Westbrook, Messrs. Hughes and Isaacs at Cowrie, and Messrs. Leslie and Fairholme at
Foolburra.
3
The Yandilla Estate, Queensland,


HOMESTEAD AND TREES (WINTER)
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


As the years went on the Government re-
sumed more and more of the Yandilla lands,
until, in 1880, a large area was put up to
auction by the Government, and Messrs. Gore
and Co. bought some 60,000 acres, having
previously bought about 28,500 acres pri-
vately. In 1906, for family reasons, it was
decided to subdivide and sell the estate, and
from that year on this policy has been carried
out by the present manager. There are still
about 24,000 acres of the estate left, but it
has been decided to sell the whole, when Yarn
MR. GERARD GORE.
dilla, as the home of the Gore family, will have completely passed away.
The sheep on Yandilla came originally from Mr. Macarthur and from Mr. Mclvor. For
some years afterwards the flock was added to by purchases from Messrs. Cox and Betting-
ton. In 1858 the late Mr. Thos. Shaw came to class the flocks, and made great improve-
ments. After his arrival some unclassed ram lambs were bought from the North British
Australian Company, of Rosenthal, and some rams were bought from Talgai. In iB6O
some rams believed to be Fisher blood, which had come from South Australia, were pur-
chased in Brisbane. They were large sheep, with a good covering of long, robust wool
In 1867 some rams were bought from the late Mr. Ihos. Shaw, of Wooriwyrite, and they
and their progeny were kept separate. As, however, they did not appear to be as good as
THE HOMESTEAD ACROSS THE LAGOON.
5
the station-bred
sheep, they were dis-
carded. In 1882
some Tasmanian
rams were bought
from the late Mr.
James Gibson, of
Bellevue, but their
progeny were disap-
pointing. In 18go a
high-class double
stud ram was bought
from Messrs. Austin
The Yandilla Estate, Queensland,


and Millear, of Wanganella. This sheep was a son of Premier IT, and made a great im-
provement in the Yandilla flocks, his type generally proving very suitable to the rich country
of which the station is composed.
In 1 goo a lot of Collaroy stud ewes and some high-class rams from the same station
were bought, and from these, added to from time to time by further purchases of ewes
from Collaroy, the rams for use on the station were bred, the result being that at the pre-
sent time the flocks largely approach the pure Collaroy type.
The Y 7 andilla wool brand—GßE over Darling Downs —has long since made a name for
itself in the London market, where it has always been sold. In one sale eighty-five bales in
THE CHURCH ON YANDILLA.
one lot fetched the fine price of is. sd. per lb. The wool has been exhibited at many ex-
hibitions, and has taken many prizes.
Yandilla is situated on the valley of the Condamine, about 56 miles west of Warwick and
45 miles south-west of Toowoomba. The country is composed of black soil plains, inter-
spersed with belts of timber, and is remarkable for the heavy growth of blue grass during
the summer months, and of trefoil, carrots, and prairie grass during the winter. The country
is eminently suitable for the fattening of stock, so much so, that Messrs. Gore and Co.
were enabled to turn off some 20,000 fat wethers every year. As a rule, these were sold
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


through the Brisbane yards, and almost invariably topped the market. One lot of 6000
wethers were frozen, and averaged 56 lbs. all round.
A herd of pure Bates Shorthorn cattle, all derived from imported stock, has also been
kept on Yandilla. These cattle have taken many prizes at shows, and the bulls have always
found a ready market.
Some cultivation has been carried on at Yandilla for many years past, but in 1884 it
was decided to largely increase the area in order to grow sufficient lucerne and wheat to
enable Messrs. Gore and Co. to store large quantities of hay for a protection against dry
YANDILLA STUD RAMS.
spells. To get this done as quickly as possible, a very fine steam ploughing plant was pur-
chased from the well-known hrm of John Fowler and Co., of Leeds. This splendid plant
reached Yandilla early in 1885, and for many years was kept hard at work. As a consequence
some 2000 acres were put under cultivation, and very large quantities of lucerne and wheaten
hay were stored.
The water supply on Yandilla is chiefly of underground origin. A wonderful supply is
struck at from 50 to 100 feet on any part of the station. The supply is so great that
Messrs. Gore and Co. determined to try it for irrigating purposes. The water was analysed
7
The Yandilla Estate, Queensland.


DRAWING ROOM.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF GARDEN.
9
The Yandilla Estate, Queensland.


and found to be excellent for the purpose, and a large well was sunk from which water at
the rale of 25,000 gallons per hour was pumped, and about 150 acres of lucerne irrigated.
During the disastrous drought of 1902 this proved of immense value, and large numbers
of sheep were fed on the crop. The crops chiefly grown on Yandilla have been lucerne,
wheat, maize, and rape, all of which have done remarkably well.
Two Tiffin boring plants have been at work on Yandilla, each boring a-12in. hole, which
is cased with 1 lin. casing. The Condamine Valley is all alluvial, there being, as far as
Yandilla is concerned, about 50 ft. of soil, under which comes the water supply. No stones
are met with in the boring, consequently it is easy for the Tiffin borers to get down to
water in a few days. Windmills are erected, and in many cases circular earth tanks are con-
SOME FINE CATTLE.
structed on the surface. These tanks hold some 50,000 gallons of water, a pipe through
the embankment leading the water to the troughs.
There is a fine timber overshot dam at the homestead which backs the water up Grass
Tree Creek for quite three miles, the lake in front of the house adding much to the beauty
of the spot. Many ornamental trees have been planted about the homestead, notably
some very fine specimens of Pinus halepensis, insignis, and pinea. Plantations of casuarina
have also been grown, but the chief glory of the homestead garden lies in the group of mag-
nificent white cedars. These, to be thoroughly appreciated, must be seen in the summer,
when their beautiful dense foliage casts a grateful shade over the walks and grass tennis
lawn.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia „


THE LAGOON.
] I
The Yandilla Estate, Queensland.


A GARDEN PATH.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A strong taste for mechanics has always been a marked trait of the Gores, and it has
not been missing in the present generation. A steam launch has been built and engined on
the station, and the present representative of the family at Yandilla has made a very sweet-
toned pipe organ, everything, even to the pipes themselves, being made by himself in his
own workshop;
personal.
The present manager for the family, Mr. Gerard R. Gore, is the fourth son of the late
Rev. W. F. Gore, and was born at Parramatta, N.S.W., in 1855. He went home with his
LUCERNE PADDOCKS.
family in 1862, and was educated at Marlborough College and Heidelburg University, in
Germany. He passed into the Academy at Woolwich, intending to go into the Royal En-
gineers or Royal Artillery. However, it was thought advisable that he should join his elder
brother, Francis, at Yandilla, and this he did, assuming the position of overseer under his
brother after some years of "colonial experience.” After the death of his brother, in 1904,
he took up the management, and formed another link in the long chain of Gores, who for
seventy years have so carefully taken charge of the old property so long in their hands.
Mr. Gore in [BB2 married the third daughter of the late Lewis A. Bernays, C.M.G.,
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland, which position he held from the very birth
*3
The Yandilla Estate, Queensland.


THE FRONT GARDEN (WINTER)
The Pastoral Homos of Australia ,


CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD (SUMMER)
■5
The Yandilla Estate, Queensland•


YANDILLA STUD EWES.
of Queensland as a separate colony. There are two daughters by the marriage, the younger
of whom is married to Mr. J. E. Trude, of Brisbane.
Mr. Gore is a member of the Jondaryan Shire Council, of the Darling Downs Rabbit
Board, and is on the committee of the Royal Agricultural Society of Queensland. He is on
the executive of the Darling Downs Pastorahsts’ Association, and is that body’s representa-
tive to the United Pastorahsts’ Association of Queensland, of which he is a member of the
executive council.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Harrow, Oondooroo, Elderslie, Burleigh, and
Charlotte Plains Estates.
The Properties of Messrs. Ramsay Brothers.
THE properties in Queensland owned by Messrs. Ramsay Bros, are generally ad-
mitted to be among the best of the many fine stations in that State. Ihe firm
consists of Messrs. M. F. Ramsay, R. C. Ramsay, E. L. Ramsay, A. D. Ramsay,
and N. Ramsay. Mr. W. A. Macvean, late of Thurulgoona, acts as general manager for
all the firm’s western properties.
The properties owned by Messrs. Ramsay Bros, are Harrow, Oondooroo, Eldershe,
Burleigh, and Charlotte Plains.
GENERAL VIEW OF THE OONDOOROO HOMESTEAD.
Harrow originally formed part of Eton Vale, which was taken up by the late Sir Ar-
thur Hodgson in 1841, and was one of the earliest stations on the Darling Downs. Mr.
Robert Ramsay bought a half share from Mr. John Watts in the early sixties. In 1893
Sir Arthur Hodgson took the east side, including the head station, and Mr. Robert Ramsay
took the western portion, and the present head station of Harrow was built by his son, Mr.
M. F. Ramsay, on the site of Sir Arthur Hodgson’s first camp on the Darling Downs in
1841. At the time of the division the estate consisted of about 76,000 acres of freehold
land, with Cambooya, on the Sydney to Brisbane main line, in the centre of the property.
T


THE HOMESTEAD, HARROW.
THE HARROW WOOLSHED.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


The estate has now
been reduced by
subdivision to about
13,000 acres of rich
agricultural - land.
Harrow has always
been managed by
Mr. M. F. Ramsay
or one of his bro-
thers, and at the
present time is un
der the manage-
ment of Mr. R. C.
THE CHARLOTTE PLAINS HOMESTEAD.
Ramsay. The stock just now consists of about 17,000 sheep, 100 horses, and 300 cattle.
THE STATION BUILDINGS ON ELDERSLIE.
Oondooroo was purchased from the Scholhcks in 1886, and at that time comprised
MARES AND FOALS ON CHARLOTTE PLAINS.
3
1025 square miles.
This area, however,
has been consider-
ably reduced by Go-
vernment resump-
tions, and the es-
tate now covers 650
square miles. The
stock has varied
between 240,000
sheep and 41,000,
the number at the
end of the 1890
The Harrow, Oondooroo, Elderslie, Burleigh and Charlotte Plains Estates, Queensland .


THE MANAGER'S HOUSE ON BURLEING.
MUSTERERS IN THE BED OF CAMBRIDGE CREEK, BURLEIGH.
4
Tho Pastora/ Homes of Australia,


drought. The flock
at present numbers
about 140,000. The
estate comprises
rich, rolling .downs
watered by artesian
bores, tanks, and
overshot dams, and
is situated about
eighteen miles from
Winton. The Olio
and Oondooroo rail-
way stations are on
VIEW OF OONDOOROO COUNTRY.
the run. Oondooroo has always been well known throughout the northern parts of
Queensland for the thoroughbred horses bred there. The sires used were Dirleton by
Panic, Weatherby by Malta, Burton by Trenton, Balgone by Darebin, Magnet (imp.), and
several others. This station was managed by Mr. R. C. Ramsay until the end of 1907,
when Mr. N. Ramsay took charge. Oondooroo was the pioneer in the west of telephones
(erected in 1891), motor bicycles, and motor cars, and was the second station to adopt
shearing machines (in 1889). Oondooroo was also the first station to show the possibili-
ties of carting water by rail for sheep in a drought.
Elderslie, near Winton, was purchased from the trustees of the late Sir Samuel Wilson,
and comprised about 2500 square miles, an area which has been considerably reduced by re-
sumptions until it now stands at 1400 square miles. It has carried as many as 25,000
head of cattle, and as many as 250,000 sheep. The draught horses bred on this station
SHEARERS QUARTERS, OONDOOROO.
5
have made a name
for themselves, and
command a ready
sale. The estate
consists of first-
class downs coun-
try, with large
tracts timbered, but
the whole of the
property is practic-
ally good sheep
country. Until 1910,
when he left the
The Harrow, Oondooroo Elderslie, Burleigh and Charlotte Plains Estates, Queensland.


HORSES AT WATER TROUGH, CHARLOTTE PLAINS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


GROUP OF HEAVY DRAUGHT HORSES.
7
The Harrow, Oondooroo. Elderslie, Burleigh and Charlotte Plains Estates, Queensland.


WINDMILL, TANK AND TROUGHING, AT BURLEIGH.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MANAGER'S HOUSE AND QUARTERS, ELDERSLIE.
c /
The Harrow, Oondooroo, Eiderslie, Burleigh and Charlotte Plains Estates, Queensland.


COLONEL, BY RHYMER.
STACKING LUCERNE HAY AT HARROW.
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


CHARLOTTE PLAINS, FRONT VIES.
district, Mr. A. D. Ramsay had managed Elderslie.
Burleigh, situated about 40 miles from Richmond railway station, was purchased in
1904, and comprises about 868 square miles. It is all fenced, and well watered by dams,
bores, &c. The stock has ranged from 14,000 to 19,000 head of cattle. Burleigh has
never suffered from ticks or red water, although both at times have been very bad in
the district.
GENERAL BROWN, HEAVY DRAUGHT STALLION.
11
The Harrow, Oondooroo, Elderslie, Burleigh and Charlotte Plains Estates, Queensland.


A TYPICAL VALLEY, CHARLOTTE PLAINS.
The Pastoral/ Homes of Australia


MUSTERERS ON CHARLOTTE PLAINS.
The Harrow, Oondooroo, Elderslie, Burleigh and Charlotte Plains Estates, Queensland,


A STATION TEAM, ELDERSLIE.
Ihe Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A GENERAL VIEW OF HARROW.
'5
The Harrow, Oondooroo, Elders/ie, Burleigh and Charlotte Plains Estates, Queensland.


HORSES, WINDMILL AND TANKS AT HARROW.
Charlotte Plains, comprising 1000 square miles, was purchased in igoo for relief
country for the Oondooroo sheep, and a large portion was immediately fenced in for that
purpose. The stock on this property has varied from 13,000 to 20,000 cattle. This sta-
tion has always been kept lightly stocked, as it is held in reserve for the sheep on Oon-
dooroo and Eldershe. Charlotte Plains is situated about 35 miles from the Marathon rail-
way station.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bellevue Estate.
The Property of Mrs. C. Lumley Hill
This excellent pastoral property is one of the best in the Commonwealth. It is
situated on the Brisbane River about thirty miles from Ipswich and fifty-three
from Brisbane. It occupies a position particularly well adapted for a stud farm.
Bellevue, from its position on the river bank, has an excellent water supply. The home-
stead is built upon,an elevated site commanding a magnificent view of the surrounding
country —Brisbane Valley and Taylor’s Range. The garden is well laid out and full of
MRS. LUMLEY HILL.
choice plants and vegetables. The home contains every luxury and comfort that modern
skill can invent. Numerous guests enjoy the unbounded hospitality of a popular hostess,
and the excellent shooting and fishing in the district, in addition to other sport. Mrs.
Hill is herself an expert with gun and rod.
i


BELLEVUE HOUSE.
BELLEVUE GARDEN.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The late Mr.
Charles Lumley Hill
decided to devote it
exclusively to the
breeding of pure
Hereford cattle, and
with this object in
view he bought the
Durundur Estate
herd. The herd was
built up by careful
selection, and repre-
sents the best blood
procurable. Some of
the blood can be
Brisbane River, Bellevue Station, and one of the Stud Bulls.
traced back in direct lineage to the historical Cressy herd of Tasmania (1825) and the pure
breed herd formed by Mr. Hobler on the Hunter River near West Maitland. The more re-
cent additions were selected from approved strains in Australia and New Zealand, while
the blood of direct importations from English herds have comprised such Royal Agricul-
tural Society celebrities as Horace 3rd, Freetrader, and Prince Alfred, all prize winners.
The foundation females were selected, regardless of expense, from descendants of the most
BELLEVUE STATION
3
The Bellevue Estate, Queensland.


STUD COWS.
fashionable lines procurable, principally from the herds of Messrs. J. D. Cox, of Cullen-
bone, Mudgee, New South Wales; F. S. Reynolds, of Tocal, New South Wales; George
Rouse, Beaudesert, Mudgee; White Bros., Edinglassie; George Coder, Abbey Green, New
South Wales; and the Honourable William Miles, Parkhead, Dalby. The first sires used
with these cows were carefully selected from the herds of Messrs. A. and J. Dangar,
Baroona, Singleton (through whom, by the bull “Glenlee” (37) was introduced the blood of
the celebrated cow “Minerva,” perhaps one of the best cows ever introduced into Australia);
John Nowlan, of Eelah, West Maitland (the importer of “Pearl Diver” and several first prize
winners of the R. A. Society, of England); and F. S. Reynolds, Tocal. As will be seen
from the pedigrees, other new lines of blood have been introduced from time to time. The
Edinglassie cows were
descended from cows im-
ported by the late Hon-
ourable J. White, care-
fully selected by him
from herds of her late
Majesty the Queen, Shaw
Farm, Windsor; Messrs.
J. S. Arkwright, Hampton
Court, Leominster; J.
Bennett, Ingestone; T.
Duckham, Baysham
Court; H. Gibbons, Hamp-
ton Bishop, Leominster;
J. B. Green, Marlow,
BELLEVUE YARDS—BRANDING.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


STUD YEARLING BULLS.
Herefordshire; A. Rogers, the Rodd, Kington, Herefordshire; and T. Rogers, Coral, Here-
fordshire. The cattle bred from the cows from the Abbey Green herd were descended
from high-class representatives of the herds of Messrs. Rae, of Monaughty; Philip Turner,
of the Keen; and Mr. Perry, of Cholstrey, all breeders of note. The Abbey Green bull “St.
Slair Lad” (144), one of the handsomest animals ever bred in Australia, gained champion-
ship of the yard against all breeds at the first show of the National Agricultural and In-
dustrial Association of Queensland, Bowen Park, in 1876. Ihe progeny of Messrs. Cox and
Rouse’s cows were descendants of two of the first Hereford cattle imported into Austral-
asia in 1825, by the late J. U. Toosey, of Cressy, Tasmania, namely, “Beauty,” “Match-
less,” and an unnamed cow, and the foundation bull “Billy,” from which sprang the cele-
brated Cressy herd above referred to. Through “Defiance” the Cullenbone and Beaude-
sert herds introduced a large infusion of the blood of the celebrated “Jerry” and “Star,”
two of the best and most impressive sires of the breed of that period. “Defiance” proved
a most valuable and potent sire, and the cows of his get were distinguished by their excel-
BELLEVUE CALVES MUSTERED FOR BRANDING.
5
The Bellevue Estate, Queensland,


lent form and type. As
will be seen by reference
to the pedigrees, the fami-
lies of “Duchess” and
“Olivette” were descend-
ed from these cows. The
cattle from the local
cows were descendants of
cows bred by the late Mr.
Charles Reynolds. Many
years ago Mr. Reynolds
purchased the entire pure
herd of Mr. Hobler, above
referred to, and, as is well
MISS JOAN TAYLOR.
STUD HEREFORDS.
THE MISSES EVELYN AND CECILE TAYLOR.
6
known, the Focal herd
has since maintained first
place among the Here-
ford herds of Australia.
Through “Carlisle” (923)
by his son “The Captain”
and his daughter “Colum-
bine,” the beautiful dark
red colour and mossy
coat, with uniform white
markings, so highly priz-
ed by modern Hereford
breeders, were introduced
into the Focal herd, and
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


through it to many of the
tribes of the Durundur
herd. On these favourite
strains were grafted
“Radnor” and “Royal
Head,” two prepotent
animals; both prize win-
ners of the Royal Agricul-
tural Society of England.
“Lord Ashford” was also
used. This bull was a son
of “Lady Ashford,” a di-
rect ancestress of the ce-
lebrated “Lord Wilton,”
whose dam, “Lady
CATTLE CAMP.
Claire, was imported by Mr. Stuckey into New Zealand, and died in the Durundur herd
some years ago. Mr. Miles’ Herefords were formed by the purchase of a bull and five pedi-
gree cows bred in I asmania. Of the sires that have in recent years been in use in the Dur-
undur herd may be mentioned “Blood Royal” (7424), “Cansbrook” (11,981), “Prince
Leopold” (12,544), “Horace 3rd” (5982, imp.), “Duke of Chippendale” (12,090), “2nd
Duke of Chippendale” (198), “Coral” (13,709), “Holmwood Horace 6th and 9th,” “Lree-
trader” (14,543), “Goldfinder” (15,341), “Prince Alfred” (12,534), “Laird of Lynhales”
(35 7), and “Dutiful”
(334). The latest addi-
tions were “Duke of Clar-
ence” (331), and “Allan-
dale” (292), both bred by
Mr. Beattie, Mount Ait-
ken, Victoria; and “Cyn-
thius” (324), and “Sui
}enens” (434), both bred
by Mr. James Stuckey, Te
Rangitumau, Masterton,
New Zealand. Unlike
many Hereford herds, the
Durundur herd is in no
sense a graded herd, built
LADY CLAIRE, DAM OF THE CELEBRATED BULL "LORD WILTON."
7
The Bellevue Estate, Queensland.


Group of Bellevue Cattle on the bank of the Brisbane River.
up on a shorthorn foundation. The extensive stud herd is absolutely pure, without any
admixture of other breeds, and the demand for stud animals of the herd for many }/ears past
shows the favour in which it is held by Hereford breeders throughout Queensland and the
other States. In addition to strictly maintaining purity of pedigree, the cattle are remark-
able for robustness of constitution, and the herd has for many years achieved great suc-
cess in the show ring.
Since this noted herd has been located at Bellevue, it has been wonderfully improved
in every manner, especi-
ally by the importation
into it of several fine pure
bred Hereford bulls, in-
cluding that famous and
grand animal “Field Mar-
shal’’ (340), who has an
unbroken record in Vic-
toria and New Zealand,
who was bred by Messrs.
Buchanan and Levett, of
New Zealand, and also the
well-known bulls “Spark
XXXII.” and “Bugler”
(21,254, imported from
BELLEVEUE CATTLE CROSSING RIVER.
8
r/ie Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Hereford, England); “Ma-
jestic,” by “Rossmore”
(19,065, imp.), who won
first prize at the Sydney
Show in 1907; “First Ad-
miral” and “1 he Ad-
miral,” by “Rossmore”
(imp.).
There is always a
good demand for stud
bulls. The breeders re-
cognise the great value of
the Hereford for grazing
purposes, as they are
much more prolific, and
CHAMPION HEREFROD STUD BULL "THE ADMIRAL.”
fatten much quicker than other breeds. Iheir strong constitution qualifies them to pass
most successfully even through the most trying Australian seasons and droughts. Many
bleeders have used Hereford bulls in their herds in preference to other breeds.
The whole of the Bellevue stud herd was successfully inoculated three years ago
against tick fever. Bulls and heifers have since been sold and introduced into various parts
of the Commonwealth, including the Northern 1 erntory and Western Australia, and other
thickly tick-infested areas, and have proved themselves absolutely immune.
The records of the
Bellevue stud herd will be
found in the volumes of
the Australian Hereford
Herd Book (vols. i, 2,3).
Bellevue comprises
about 14,000 acres, all
subdivided into small pad-
docks. One hundred acres
are under cultivation, the
soil of which is exception-
ally fine for all farming
purposes. The crops grown
for the stock are princi-
pally panicum and lucerne.
HEREFORD STUD BULL “WONDER IOTH.”
9
The Bellevue Estate, Queensland.


Most of the timber on the estate is ringbarked. A saw-mill has recently been erected near
the Coominya Railway Station, and a contract entered into for the purpose of cutting up
the timber.
Ihe stock consists of 700 breeding cows, 200 first-class stock with pedigrees, and
1000 others all pure bred. Ihe young stock is sold and sent to all parts of Queensland.
Mrs. Lumley Hill intends carrying on the Bellevue Hereford stud on the same lines as
the late Mr. Charles Lumley Hill, by the introduction of new and fashionable blood from the
leading breeders of England, with the intention of raising the stud to the level of the
highest standard in the Commonwealth.
In addition to the Hereford stud, there is also the celebrated blood stallion “Elected,”
who has won prizes all over the State, as well as being first and champion at the Royal
Agricultural Society’s Show, in Sydney, 1904; first and champion, Brisbane, 1903, 1904,
1907, and 1908; also first and champion, Toowoomba, 1903 and 1906; first, Ipswich, 1903.
When this handsome thoroughbred horse failed to elicit the reserve placed on him at
the late Hidden Vale sale, Mr. Cotton, actuated by sentimental regard for his old favour-
ite, decided that he should have a good home, where he would be well cared for. For this
reason, he was made a present to Mrs. C. Lumley Hill, of Bellevue, where, needless to
say, he will have the kindest treatment so long as he lives.
“LORD CLARE.”
IO
Ihe Pastoral Homes or Australia.


CHAMPION GEREFORD BULL “FIELD MARSHALL."
There are also a Suffolk Punch stallion and 25 mares kept on Bellevue for breeding
purposes. The stallion is “First Mate.’’
Sire—“ Mariner,” by “Clinker,” ex “Matched”
Dam—“Saltby,” by “Ironside,” ex Mare bred by W. J. Dangar, Neotsfield,
N.S.W.
HEREFORD BULL “WONDER 11TH."
The Bellevue Estate, Queensland •


Mrs. Hill, in conjunc-
tion with Mr. M. J. Dur-
ack, also owns Lissadell
Station, a property in the
Northern Territory, about
120 miles from Wynd-
ham, carrying about
30.000 head of cattle,
and is a shareholder in
Cecil Plains, on the Dar-
ling Downs, carrying over
100.000 sheep, cattle,
and horses. One of the
finest properties on the
Darling Downs.
STUD COWS AT BELLEVUE CROSSING.
The pastoral world deeply regretted the death of Mr. C. Du m ley Hill. He was. an
invaluable member of the pastoral community, because he was a fighter. In the ’sixties he
fought nature in the Never Never country. As a lover of good stock, no man was his
superior. He always gave the best he had for the furtherance of the industry, and his death
meant a big loss. Few persons were more closely associated with the development of the
pastoral industry in Queensland than was Mr. Lumley Hill. In the early days of Queens-
land’s history, when her future appeared to solely rest upon the prosperity of the great
YEARLING STUD BULLS.
12
r#Be Pastoral Homes of Australia.


cattle stations out
west. Mr. Hill, like a
few other well-known
squatters, braved the
droughts, and fought
against the many ob-
stacles which appear-
ed to bar the way of
progress. They con-
quered, and because
they conquered, the
BELLEVUE STUD BULLS.
future of that part of the State was assured. Each of those men who in the early days
risked his capital in some venture “way back of the setting sun,” as somebody has des-
cribed our Western Plains, was in his own way helping materially to build up the future
greatness of Queensland, ana Lumley Hill never shirked his duty. Drought and hunger
were unknown words when he looked on the unknown West. He arrived in Queensland in
1863. The following year he went to Northampton Downs Station. In the earl} sixties
he assisted in forming stations at Isis Downs, Ruthven, Albilbah, and other places on the
Barcoo and Thompson Rivers. Afterwards he secured possession of Westland Station,
Rosebrook, Avington, and Thornleigh, and in the early ’eighties he formed Tissadell Sta-
tion in the Northern Territory of Western Australia, and sent cattle from Queensland to
INNOCULATION FOR TICK FEVER.
r 3
The Bellevue Estate, Queensland ■


stock it with. He was one
of the first to overland
cattle from Western Aus-
tralia to Queensland, a
distance of 2000 miles.
In the early days of
Queensland pastoral set-
tlement he took a strong
hand in suppressing
wholesale cattle stealing
by an organised band of
white cattle duffers, des-
cribed by Rolf Boldrewood
in “ Robbery Under
THE MISSES EVELYN, AND CECILE TAYLOR.
TROPHIES.
MOB OF CATTLE AT BIGGS'S CROSSING.
l 4
Tho Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Arms.” Mr. Lumley Hill was the first
to ascertain and give information res-
pecting the mob of 1140 head of cattle
which were stolen from Bowen Downs,
driven down Cooper Creek, and sold
near Adelaide. He issued the warrants
for the arrest of eight of the thieves,
and committed them for trial at Roma,
called by Rolf Boldrewood (Noma). He
also undertook punitive expeditions
against the blacks for the murder of
his friends and neighbours, Messrs.
Welford and Fanning.
He was returned to Parliament in
"ELECTED.”
,1879, as the first membei
for the Gregory, but re-
signed in 1883, in order
to visit England. In 1885
he was elected for the
Cook, sitting until 1888.
He took a keen interest in
the National Association
and Meat Export Com-
panies, was a staunch
Conservative in political
opinions, and his pen was
often wielded with excel-
lent purpose for his party.
STUD HEREFORDS.
"THE ADMIRAL” AND HIS SON.
[ 5
The Bellevue Estate, Queensland.


CATTLE IN PADDOCK.
He was a man of social instincts, and one of the finest
hosts in the country, possessing to a high degree that
charm of making his guests feel that he was truly at
home at Bellevue, which he of recent years made his
home.
During his last years he took a very keen interest in
the stud Hereford herd at Bellevue, and his famous
beast “Field Marshal,” perhaps the most perfect speci-
men of a Hereford sire ever seen in this State, will be
remembered by many.
In the year 1901 Mr. Lumley Hill married Mrs.
Condamine Taylor, of “Bellevue.” He was born at Tick-
hill Castle, in Yorkshire, in the year 1840, being second
son of Colonel Charles and Lady Frances Hill. His
mother was a sister of the ninth Earl of Scarborough.
THE LATE MR. C. LUMLEY HILL.
He was educated at Rossall School and Oxford University. Mr. Hill died on the 28th
October, 1909, and leaves no issue.
16
The Pastoral Homos of Australia.


The Cecil plains Estate.
The Property of the Taylor Estates Co. Limited.
ONE of the first properties to be taken up on that great stretch of magnificent
country, the Darling Downs of Queensland, was Cecil Plains, the property of
the Taylor Estates Company, Limited. Ihe days that have passed since its
first occupation have seen such vast changes gradually taking shape till now the waving
wheat fields of close settlement and agriculture convey no idea whatever of the huge
grazing areas that comprised the Darling Downs seventy years ago. In 1841 this splendid
THE CECIL PLAINS HOMESTEAD.
district of 4,000,000 acres was held by a mere handful of men. There was no sign of
habitation, and stock roamed and grazed unmolested over country which within the short
space of seventy years has become dotted with growing towns and is now fast being cut up
into small farms, leaving only a few of the old original properties. Even these have been
lopped and cut till they are but mere skeletons of what they were when the first pioneers
built their huts on the Downs.
i


inis new country was considered
by those down south to be useless for
sheepraising, but how incorrect their
ideas were has been conclusively proved
by the fact that the pick of the sheep
for Western Queensland are now drawn
from the flocks on the Darling Downs.
This country- was not for ever destined
to be a sheepwalk, but it was not till
the seventies that any real progress
LEAVING THE HEAD STATION.
was made in agricultural pursuits. Then people gradually began to discover that the plains
were capable of producing as much as 45 bushels of wheat to the acre.
The march of
closer settlement
then began, and
gaining momentum
as it progressed it
has swept out most
of the old estates till
very few are left, and
even those may go at
any time. Cecil
Plains still remains,
FLOCK RAMS ON CECIL PLAINS.
although it is only half the size it was when it was first taken up by Henry Stuart Russell
in partnership with Gerald Brooks in 1841. It was then used chiefy as a cattle run, as the
prevailing opinion was that it was use*
less as sheep country. Opinions have
changed, however, since then, and the
revenue that has accrued from fal
sheep and wool since its inception as
a sheep run amounts to a princely sum.
In 1850 the Hon. James Taylor entered
into partnership with Mr. Stuart Rus-
sell, and bought him out in 1850. The
property was first stocked with sheep
in 1865, when shepherding was the
rule and paddocking was adopted
CHAMPION BLOOD STALLION TUNGAN.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


CLIFFORD HOUSE, THE RESIDENCE OF MR. JAS. TAYLOR, IN TOOWOOMBA.
3
The Cecil Plains Estate, Queensland.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
THE WOOLSHED.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


three years later. About that time the Gov-
ernment resumed the southern and best half
of Cecil Plains, but Mr. Taylor reacquired a
good deal of it when the land was auctioned.
The estate now comprises about 130,000
acres, of which 100,000 acres is open black
soil plain, interspersed with valuable clumps
of timber for shade, heavily grassed in sum-
mer chiefly with blue and oat grass, and carry-
ing a magnificent growth of herbage in winter.
The Condamine River and North Branch run
right through the property, a distance of fif-
teen miles, and the former separates the plains
from what was originally very heavily timbered
country, but now rmgbarked. Underground
water is easily obtainable, and numerous wells
MR. JAMES TAYLOR.
with windmills and large receiving tanks supplement the river supply. During the drought
of 1902 not one well failed of the twenty or more situated in the various paddocks.
MR. TAYLOR AND THE MANAGER ON A TOUR OF INSPECTION.
5
The Cecil Plains Estate, Queensland.


HOMESTEAD WITH MANAGER AND FAMILY.
GOING TO TOWN.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE PURE-BRED STALLIONS, “BOWSTRING,” “BULLER,” AND “TUNGAN.”
BOUNDARY RIDER’S COTTAGE AND FAMILY.
The Cecil Plains Estate, Queensland.


SHEEP RIVER TO BE SHORN.
YARDING SHEEP FOR SHEARING.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


No cultivation is carried on, although there are stretches of country eminently suitable
for wheat farming at a very low cost, and perhaps at no very distant date Cecil Plains will be
a succession of wheat and lucerne paddocks, supporting thousands of people, for there can
be no doubt but that the Darling Downs country is fully capable of supporting a hundred
times the population at present existing there.
Over 100,(J00 sheep are depastured on Cecil Plains —Merino and crossbred, the latter
being Lincoln-Merino. The chief object of the owners after woolgrowing is to turn off
prime wethers for the Brisbane market. The sheep are big framed and specially suitable
THE SHEARING BOARD.
for killing purposes, about 25,000 fats being turned off the property annually. Rams have
recently been introduced from the Collaroy and Wangamong-studs for the Merinos, and
have been put to Welltown ewes. The wool is marketed in London, where the brands of
“Taylor” for Merino and “Clifford” for crossbred wool have been favourably known for over
half a century. Ordinary shearing commences about November, lasting some ten weeks.
Breeding ewes are shorn in September, just before lambing, and lambs in February. The
average weight of fleece throughout the whole flock for five years is 81bs. 3ozs. The wool-
shed is a large building fitted with all the latest appliances connected with the shearing of
9
The Cecil Plains Estate, Queensland-


a big flock. An up-to-date press is installed, and the 28 Wolseley machines are driven b}’
a 6-h.p. Robey engine. The dip is adjacent to the woolshed.
In addition to sheep, about 2500 Shorthorn cattle are run on the property. Ihe bulls arc
drawn from the famous Queensland strain, Warroo, the property of Messrs. Bracker. A
large number of fats are turned off every year, and they find an excellent market in
Toowoomba.
The owners of Cecil Plains also pay no little attention to horsebreeding. Ihe thorough-
bred stallion Tungan, by St. Swithin out of Crusade, has been put to a good lot of station
COUNTING OUT.
mares, and his stock promise to be very active and shapely animals. Tungan has secured
the blood stallion championship on two separate occasions at the Royal Agricultural Show,
Toowoomba. Altogether, there are about 500 horses, blood and draught, on the property.
The draught stallions are Buller and Bowstring. Buller is a Clydesdale, and was bred by
the Wienholt Estate Company at Maryvale, and is a fine specimen of his breed. Bowstring
is a Suffolk Punch, bred at Croxley, on the Darling Downs. He is only a young horse, but
his stock so far seem to be of the right type.
10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


AT THE TABLES.
The homestead is one of the original homes on the Downs, and is occupied by Mr. I
K. Williams, who manages the property for the company.
SHEEP DIPPING.
11
The Cecil Plains Estate, Queensland.


TEAMS LOADING WOOL.
IPersonal.
The three directors are Mr. James Taylor (chairman), Mr. G. G. Cory, and Dr. Edwin
Roberts. Mr. Taylor lives in Toowoomba, his residence being Clifford House. He is the
only surviving son of the late Mr. James Taylor, and was born at Toowoomba in 1660. He
was educated at the Brisbane Grammar School, and was brought up to pastoral pursuits
on his father’s property under that gentleman’s able guidance. All his life he has been
actively engaged on Cecil Plains, and in no small measure has assisted in making the pro-
perty what it is to-day. He takes a keen interest in the affairs of the district, is president
of the Toowoomba Turf Club, vice-president of the Royal Agricultural Society of Queensland
and is trustee of the Toowoomba Grammar School, treasurer of the Darling Downs Pas-
toralists’ Association, &c. Mr. Cory also lives in Toowoomba, and Dr. Roberts at Croxley.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Cressbrook Estate.
The Property of Messrs. J. H. McConnel & Son.
IN 1840 David Cannon McConnel, a younger son of a large family of eleven, being just of
age, arrived in Sydney with his capital.
Having bought cattle, sheep, and outfit, he started straight away overland for the
north, and was the first white man to cross the main range from the Downs; his companions
on this trip were convicts—the only labour then obtainable. The range, now the boundary
between New South Wales and Queensland, was crossed at what has since been named
McConnel’s Gap.
CATTLE ON THE RIVER.
Finding the downs very dry at that time he pushed on, the pioneer of the present road
down from Toowoomba, and took up Tarampa and Rosewood as one run, but this was soon
sold in favour of Cressbrook, one of the few Queensland stations which has remained in the
same hands from the beginning. Since 1840 reverses and bad times have not been infre-
-1


THE OLD SHEEP DAM.
2
Tho Pastoral Homos of Australia.


quent, but British pluck, a good head
and good country have staved off the
insolvency which has been the lot of
so many who came out in the early
days and lost all.
Cressbrook is situated on the Up-
per Brisbane River, sixty miles from
Ipswich, the same distance from Too-
woomba, and eighty miles from
Dalby. Fifteen miles away, between
Cressbrook and Ipswich, is the town-
STUD SIRES AND THE STOCKYARDS.
ship of Esk, which, formed in the eighties, was for many years the terminus of the Brisbane
Valley branch railway, and is still a principal place for selling store cattle. Seven years ago a
WEANED FOALS IN LUCERNE PADDOCKS.
railway extension from Esk to Blackbutt was commenced, and will soon be completed. This
extension passes through part of the old Cressbrook property, and loogoolawah, the near-
est railway station, is only two and a half miles distant from the homestead.
Less than a year after Cressbrook
was taken up Francis and Frederic
Bigge took up Mount Brisbane, an ad-
joining property down the river, and
about six months later the land ad-
joining Cressbrook on the other side
was taken up by John Balfour, and
called Colinton.
A lock-up was built on Cress-
brook, the old posts of which aie still
standing; here cases were tried and
TWYFORD LEGACY.
3
The Cressbrook Estate, Queensland.


offenders sentenced, the adjudicators being always representatives of the two stations
which were not responsible for the transgressor. If anyone from Colinton had been
“caught,” one or both of the Bigges and Mr. D. C. McConnel judged, and so forth. This
method always proved satisfactory. The blacks were very numerous and troublesome,
and many stories of adventure might be told, the extent of their most serious misdoings
being nine or ten murders. Much trouble was prevented by keeping as hostages at Cress-
brook two black boys—John Bull and Bungaree—with the threat that they would be shot
if damage was done.
As the result of various land Acts all leasehold has long since disappeared. Cress-
brook, until 1876, carried about 60,000 sheep and 10,000 cattle. The breeding cattle
were kept chiefly at Durundur, a station nearer the coast which afterwards became the
property of John McConnel, an elder brother of Mr. D. C. McConnel. By 1880 the sheep
had all been sold, and from this time on only cattle were kept. When the leasehold be-
gan to disappear, Mount Marlow, a station on the Barcoo, was taken up, but in 1879 this
was sold to James Taylor. Glenhaughton was purchased, and all the breeding stock, ex-
cept stud cattle, were removed there, and are there now.
A large and valuable stud of some 300 Shorthorns had been kept at Cressbrook before
1879. This stud was founded on cows bought from the Australian Agricultural Company,
and above forty bulls and cows imported from England. The MC brand of Cressbrook
bulls was well and favourably known throughout Queensland. On their removal to Glen-
haughton, a drier district, the Shorthorn herd did not thrive so well; in dry seasons the
cows would not walk back to grass from the water, so Herefords were tried, and proved
much more useful on the drier country. Messrs. Bell and Dangar, of Noorindoo, bought
the stud Shorthorn herd, and Mr. McConnel started a Hereford stud from cows procured
from the principal breeders in New South Wales. This stud has been carefully kept up.
During the last nine or ten years some eight bulls, personally selected by Mr. J. H.
McConnel, have been imported from England, and at the present time the Cressbrook herd
are the principal prize-winners at Queensland shows, and will compare favourably with
any other Hereford herd.
In 1871 the eldest son, Mr. J. H. McConnel, took over the management. In 187 G he
married the eldest daughter of Mr. William Kent, of Jondaryan, and the partnership of
Messrs. D. C. McConnel and Son was formed, and continued for some six years after
Mr. D. C. McConnel’s death in London in 1884. Then Mr. J. H. McConnel exercised his
right of purchase, and bought out the whole business, in which he was joined by his three
brothers and one sister in the firm of D. C. McConnel and Sons. In time it became evident
that the various partners would soon wish to separate, so with the intention of increasing the
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


value of the freehold
(some 62,000 acres),
Mr. J. H. McConnel
started on Cress-
brook (at what is
now Toogoolawah),
a condensed milk
factory, for which
milk was procured
from farms started
on Cressbrook by
Mr. McConnel, and
from some which
had been sold to out-
siders. At the pre-
MR. EDGAR MCCONNEL’S COTTAGE AND GARDEN.
sent time there are, on the original Cressbrook property, over thirty farms, which supply
milk regularly twice a day to the factory. In 1905 the factory, with 3000 acres of land,
was sold to Nestle’s Anglo-Swiss Company, by whom it is now run most successfully, as
many as 5000 gallons per day having been put through in a good season. At the same
time another change in partnership was made —Mr. J. H. McConnel bought 20,000 acres,
including the homestead, and this is practically all that now remains. The rest is settled
in small holdings of from 80 to 500 acres each. This year (1910) a new partnership—
A CORNER OF CRESSBROOK HOUSE AND GARDEN.
5
J. H. McConnel and
Son—has been form-
ed, and Mr. Edgar
C. McConnel now
manages Cress-
brook.
Cressbrook is a
natural, undulating
basin surrounded by
hills, many of which,
being impenetrable
to stock, act as na-
tural boundaries. The
basin is well watered
by the Brisbane Ri-
The Cressbrook Estate, Queensland.


A RIVER SCENE.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ver, a number of creeks, and chains of lagoons, one at least of which is fed by a spring,
and was a source of fear to the blacks. The largest of the creeks—-Cressbrook Creek—
has its source near loowoomba. There is also on Cressbrook a large supply of under-
ground water, and in those paddocks which have had to be so subdivided that parts of
them are without surface water, bores have been sunk (water is usually found at 40 to 60
ft.) and overshot dams built. Ihe water is pumped into the dams generally by oil engines,
but in some f hree or four cases by air motors, so that the dams are kept always full and
generally running over.
Cressbrook is fortunate in possessing extensive alluvial appletree flats, some of which
stretch over a mile back from the river. This is perfection of land for lucerne and prairie
grass, also for potatoes and maize, so that those farmers who have secured land on Cress-
brook have done well, and some are now putting two farms where there was only one, and
are getting a double return. The whole country is volcanic, and the low undulating ridges,
consisting of deep black chocolate and red soil, are almost as rich as the flats. At a time
of very large floods a large area, of the run is under water, but were it not for these con-
tinual additions of rich deposit the flats would lose their value, and, as the water tias never
been known to lie more than twenty-four hours on the land, it does not kill the lucerne.
Large areas of these fiats are now being laid down in lucerne for fattening cattle and
sheep. There are at present on Cressbrook about 400 acres in lucerne, and nearly as much
in prairie grass, all for cattle fattening; and it is proposed to continue laying down large
areas in lucerne. An ordinarily beefy bullock will fatten in two months on lucerne, which
carries quite one and a half, and in some cases two, beasts to the acre, so that putting
the margin of profit at 30s. per head, it means three beasts every four months, or £3 per
acre. This method can be followed for at least eight out of the twelve months; for the re-
maining four months it is found advisable to preserve the lucerne by resting it or making
hay; in this way one sowing will last fully ten years. The hay so cut is put in long, low
stacks on the grass land adjoining the lucerne, and the cattle, having access to both hay
and lucerne, fatten very much quicker.
The whole property is subdivided into a large number of small paddocks, and it has
been found that under this system more cattle can be carried, that they fatten more
quickly, and that the sorting of them into different classes for fattening is simplified.
There are over 150 miles of fencing on the 20,000 acres of Cressbrook; the fences
consist mainly of four wires —two barb and two plain. A few about the head station for
sheep (of which a small flock is kept for killing purposes) are 4 ft. netting.
Ringbarking has been done all over the estate, but much of the country is open, and
some treeless. The tops of all the ridges have been left unrung, and here and there
/
The Cressbrook Estate, Queensland.


A RIVER VIEW.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia „


patches of 10 or 12
acres of trees give
the country a park-
like appearance.
These patches have
purposely been left,
as if only an acre or
so is left unrung the
trees generally die.
There is a good
deal of pine scrub
land on the moun-
tains. There are
also silky oaks and
a few cedars, but
DAIRY COWS ON LUCERNE.
the latter were mostly cut down in the early days of settlement. A year ago a sawmill
was started in Toogoolawah, and timber-getters have been busy hauling pine from the
scrubs to the mill.
Ticks are fairly numerous, but losses are almost unknown. Having the railway at the
door, cattle for fattening are brought by rail from clean country, and passed through the
dip into paddocks, which prevents any chance of redwater ticks. Ticks are harmless un-
less they have been hatched off redwater cattle, or cattle so-called immune or inoculated.
Mr. J. H. McConnel
considers that in-
oculation for red-
water only serves
to perpetuate the
disease. For six or
seven years he ino-
culated on some of
his outside runs, but
gave it up when he
found that when he
depended solely on
dipping the losses
were minimised. At
the worst time of
THE SUGARLOAF.
9
The Cressbrook Estate, Queensland.


RIVER FLAT.
I 0
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


the year dipping every three weeks is neces-
sary; this is tiresome, but it also serves to
clean the cattle of other pests, and to keep
them very healthy. There are five dips on
Cressbrook—three on different parts of the
run placed at a corner adjoining several pad-
docks, one on one of the farms, and one at the
head station—so that it is not necessary to
travel the cattle any distance before and after
dipping them. Some of the paddocks have
been so clean for years that dipping has been
MR. J. H. MCCONNEL.
quite needless. The dips are of concrete, with steps fading into them, and a drop of only
2 ft. or so at the bottom. This is sufficient to put the animals’ heads under water. The
big plunge dips, though in every way suitable for male cattle, are apt to be injurious to
cows. Were it not for the red deer, of which there are over a thousand on Cressbrook
(seven were sent by Queen Victoria to the Queensland Government in the seventies, and Mr.
D. C. McConnel gave them a home, with the present result), the paddocks would all be clean;
but, unfortunately, the red deer foster the ticks, carrying them into the paddocks adjoining
the range from the neighbouring country. Deer, however, are not susceptible to redwater,
and so the ticks from the deer, being a generation without redwater, do not transmit red-
water to the cattle.
Cressbrook has always had the best of horses. In the old days the Sailor blood was
always good. Sailor was a thoroughbred steeplechase stallion, imported by the Bigges, of
Mount Brisbane.
Since then Reugny,
winner of the Liver-
pool Grand National,
and other equally
good sires have been
used. It has been
found that blood
horses grow so much
better on the Daw-
son country that all
the light mares have
been sent to Glen-
haughton; at Cress-
STUD WEANER HEIFERS.
11
The Cressbrook Estate, Queensland.


brook only draughts (Suffolk Punch) and trotters are being bred. The unbeaten Plarold,
son of Childe Harold, from Miss Patchem, died three years ago at the age of twenty-three.
Warwick Antrim is now being used on the Harold mares with great success, and a very
fine stallion, Plenipotentiary, by Harold out of Peony (also by Harold) is being kept to go
back again on the Warwick Antrim fillies out of Harold mares.
The head station is supplied with water from a good lagoon by steam boiler and pump.
The water is pumped into two tanks of 6000 and 20,000 gallons, from which it is distributed
all over the homestead, and even to some of the nearer paddocks for watering stock.
There are oil engines—fixed and portable—which are used for running refrigerating
machinery, chaffcutters, saw-bench, &c.; also a traction engine for ploughing and hauling
heavy waggon loads of timber to the sawmills, two and a half miles away. There are two
large silos on the station, and several on the farms. The ensilage is usually chaffed maize,
but chaffed lucerne is equally good, and both are found to be excellent fodder.
There are fine stockyards and a dip at the homestead, a large number of boxes and
stalls for housing and feeding the large stud of Hereford cattle, loose boxes for stallions,
hay sheds and barns for storing fodder of different kinds, draught stables, sheds for machin-
ery and drays, &c., house and stockman’s stables, harness rooms, coach-house and motor
garage, butcher’s shop and general store; also carpenter’s and blacksmith’s shops, and
refrigerating room.
The bookkeeper and storekeeper live in the “quarters”; there is a comfortable hut for
the single men, and at least a dozen cottages for the married folk. Comfortable and con-
venient offices are in a detached building in a central position. There is a telephone, and
until a few years ago Cressbrook was a telegraph station; telegrams are now received and
despatched by telephone from Toogoolawah.
In 1901 an undenominational chapel was built to commemorate the silver wedding of
Mr. and Mrs. J. H. McConnel. A service is held every Sunday whether there is a visiting
clergyman or not.
The homestead is surrounded by many trees; some natural, others planted from time
to time since Mr. D. C. McConnel began by planting in 1 842 a bunya bunya by his house;
this is now an old and large tree, and a landmark in the district. Trees are still being
planted by Mr. J. H. McConnel in lines and groves, by workmen’s cottages, in fields and
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


LOOKING UP THE RIVER TO THE HOMESTEAD.
The Cressbrook Estate, Queensland.


stableyards, both for shelter and effect. Some of these are indigenous to the district,
such as silky oaks, bean trees (Moreton Bay chestnut), cedars, bunya pines, and grow in the
scrubs around; others, as celtis, wattle, English oak, and jacaranda, seem to thrive equ-
ally well.
There are two houses ai the homestead—one, the old house, is used by Mr. J. H. McCon-
nel. Part of this house was built in 1840, and, having been added to from time to time as
need arose, the building is consequently very rambling and picturesque. Ihe second
house, known as “The Cottage,” though old, is newer than “The House”; it is a bun-
galow-roofed, brick-nogged house, and is lived in by Mr. Edgar McConnel, who, m 1909,
married the youngest daughter of the late T. de M. Murray-Prior, of Maroon. Both houses
were built at a time when red cedar was abundant, and not so highly valued as at present,
and in “The House” especially cedar predominates, some of the outer walls being great
slabs, which fit between the sleepers and the roof gables.
There are good vegetable, fruit, and flower gardens at both houses; each cottage on
the station has its own garden plot, and some of the cottagers grow vegetables, too. In
front of the two houses the ground slopes across rich lucerne and prairie fields to the river
50 ft. lower, and five miles away is a beautifu 1 line of blue hills.
IPcrsonal.
James Henry McConnel was born in 1850 at Buhmba (then known by the native name
of Toogoolawah), Brisbane. At the age of three years he went with his parents to Eng-
land, where they lived for the next ten years. During that period he attended the Edin-
burgh Academy, and was for a short time at school at St. Hehers, Jersey. He returned to
1 Queensland in 1864, and for four years studied under tutors at Cressbrook. At the end of
1 this time he again went to England, and studied for two years at Emanuel College, Cam-
bridge. He was obliged to leave the University in 1870 before taking his oegree in order to
help his father at Cressbrook, and in the following year he took over the management of
the station.
After his marriage in 1876, Mr. J. H. McConnel again \lslted England, and in recent
years has travelled twice to and from the old country.
T 4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


BACK OF HOMESTEAD AND STUD COWS.
■5
The Cressbrook Estate, Queensland.


HEADS OF BULL AND COW.
Edgar Cannon McConnel was born at Cressbrook in 1881 . He studied at the Bris-
bane Grammar School, and was for nearly three years at the Agricultural College at
Downton, England.
i 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


The Woolooga Estate.
The Property of Mr. C. J. Booker.
THE Woolooga Estate, now the property of Mr. C. J. Booker, was originally taken
up by Messrs. Lord Bros, in the early sixties. At that time the property com-
prised 20,000 acres, but its area was increased by succeeding owners. The
ownership was at one time in the hands of the late Lady Tozer, from whose estate it was
purchased by Mr. Pat. Lillis. The property ultimately came into Mr. C. J. Booker’s posses-
CROSSING WIDE BAY CREEK ON WOOLOOGA.
sion. Four years ago, however, the Government resumed the property for closer settle-
ment purposes, and Mr. Booker purchased back an area of about 2500 acres, which com-
prised the homestead and surrounding stud paddocks. That portion of the estate retained
by Mr. Booker is now largely used for stud purposes. It is here that his Shorthorn and
Welsh pony studs and his Southdown sheep are kept. It is used also as a depot for hand-
ling fat cattle from the Mungy and Lochaber leaseholds in the Burnett district.
1


Woolooga is situated about 140 miles from Brisbane, and about 5° niiles from Mary-
borough, on the foothills of the range dividing the Wide Bay and Burnett Waters. The
Kilkivan branch railway line, running into the famous South Burnett district, passes
through the estate. Wide Bay Creek meanders through the property, on the banks of
which are rich alluvial flats. These fine flats make the estate deservedly celebrated as one
of the best fattening properties in the State. I hat the Woolooga property is a highly valu-
able one from an agricultural and dairying standpoint is indicated by the fact that although
THE IMPORTED BULL “WOLMERS PRINCE,” AND MILKING SHORTHORN HEIFERS.
the Government only resumed it four years ago, it is now occupied by a number of prosperous
dairy-farmers, who have in that comparatively short period made considerable headway.
Widgee, the adjoining estate of 35,000 acres, has also been resumed by the Government.
This was recently thrown open, and is almost wholly taken up by a splendid type of settler.
Woolooga was once heavily timbered, but many years ago it was ring-barked and burnt
off. The result is that the property now presents a very park-like appearance.
The rainfall on the estate averages about 39 in. It is naturally well watered with
running streams all over the place, and is considered to be one of the most abundantly sup-
plied properties in the district.
2
The Pastoral ii amis of Australia.


WIDE BAY CREEK, WOOLOOGA.
The Woolooga Estate, Queensland.


THE IMPORTED BULL “POLOMUS” AND COWS.
The homestead is built of timber sawn on the property. The garden is well laid out, and
surrounds the house. A very fine orchard and a vegetable garden occupy a position on the
side of a volcanic ridge not far from the homestead, and fruit and vegetables sufficient for
the requirements of the station are obtained from them.
The property is subdivided by wire netting into a number of small paddocks, ranging
in size from 80 to 400 acres, many of these paddocks being sheep crook
WIDE BAY CREEK.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW FROM THE HOMESTEAD.
RAILWAY BRIDGE OVER WIDE BAY CREEK, WITH WOOLOOGA HOMESTEAD IN THE DISTANCE
The Woolooga Estate, Queensland *
5


FLATS ON WIDE BAY CREEK.
MUNGY BULLOCKS FATTENING AT WOOLOOGA.
6
The l 3 astoral Homes of Australia,


MR. C. J. BOOKER
New Zealand, and two imported heifers
from the stud of Mr. C. E. Wodehouse,
Wolmers, England. Bulls have been
selected from the Angas stud, from the
stud of the late Mr. John James, New
Zealand, and Messrs. Dugdale, Vic-
toria. Two years ago a Wild Eyes bull
was imported from Great Britain, and
his calves are showing great promise.
The herd of Shorthorns on Mungy,
another property belonging to Mr.
Booker, in the Burnett district, was
established by the late Mr. William
Sly. These are big robust cattle, and
show abundance of quality.
The Woolooga bulls find ready sale
throughout Queensland, particularly in
the north, and their tick immunity gives
buyers confidence. The young bulls
are inoculated as weaners by an expert
from the Department of Stock.
Mr. Booker keeps a very choice
The cattle dip at Woolooga was one of the
first put down to cope with the tick trouble,
which was so acute twelve years ago. It is
constructed of a sawn hardwood frame, with
side and bottom of 6 x i \ tongued and grooved
pine. The dip is still in a first-class state of
preservation, the dip mixture evidently acting
as a preservative on the pine.
The Shorthorn cattle herd was founded by
purchases of stud cows from the late Mr.
Charles Baldwin, Durham Court, New South
Wales, from W. F. Gore and Co., Limited, Yan-
dilla, Queensland, and also several cows from
MRS. C. J. BOOKER.
7
The Woolooga Estate, Queensland.


stud of ponies, the
original sire being
Cupid, well known in
the northern dis-
tricts of New South
Wales. The present
sire is Dandy Lion, a
stout, good-actioned
son of Old Dandy,
of Victoria, whose
stock is showing
great promise. Woo-
looga ponies have
been prizetakers at
many shows in the
MUNGY CREEK BULLOCKS.
district, and at the National Show of Brisbane
The Southdown stud flock was founded on sheep purchased from Mr. C. E. McDougall,
Lyndhurst, and strengthened from time to time by importations from the flock of the late
Colonel McCalmont, England, and from Tasmania.
THE HOMESTEAD.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia „


LAGOON AND CREEK ELATS, WIDE BAY CREEF.
The Woolooga Estate, Queensland.


The only cultivation done at Woolooga is for hay, providing feed for stock —wheat, oats,
barley, lucerne, pannicum, and maize being grown. The district is a fine potato growing one;
two good crops a year can be taken out of the alluvial flats, viz., during spring and sum-
mer.
IPersonal.
Mr. Charles J. Booker is the second son of the late Mr. C. E. S. Booker, who was one
of the early pioneers of the Burnett and Wide Bay districts, and who owned C urra, Clifton, and
Aphis Creek cattle stations. He was born in 1865, and was educated at the Ipswich
Grammar School, under the headmastership of Mr Donald Cameron.
FLATS ON WIDE BAY CREEK.
After leaving school, Mr. Booker spent two years on Curra, Clifton, and Aphis Creek
Stations, gaining practical experience. About this time Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
took possession of New Guinea, and an exploration movement was started in
Queensland. Mr. Booker joined the first party, organised by Captain Fowlis, to investigate
the timber resources. After spending some months on the rivers nor’-west of Port Moresby,
Mr. Booker had the unenviable experience of being bushed in a jungle on the Edith River, and
was out fourteen days without food and four days without water. This, combined with a
subsequent attack of fever, had a severe effect on Mr. Booker’s health. He returned to
xo
The Pastoral Homes of Australia .


A COSY CORNER.
A DAIRY HERD.
11
The Woolooga Estate, Queensland.


A DISTANT VIEW OF THE HOMESTEAD.
Sydney, and joined the wool and stock firm of Messrs. F. L. Barker and Co., with whom he
put in seven years. He then returned to Queensland and joined his brothel, Mr. E. G.
Booker, taking over the management of the Woolooga E-state, and Mungy and Lochaber cattle
runs on the Burnett.
Mr. Booker is a member of the Queensland Legislative Assembly, and takes a keen
interest in public affairs. His intimate knowledge of the State was very useful when the
Government’s railway proposals were before the House in 1910. He was able to speak with
considerable authority on the character of the country through which it was proposed to
carry the railways, and was thereby in a position to render a large amount of help when the
measures were under consideration. He is a member of the Perry Shire Council, and vice-
president of the Wide Bay and Burnett Pastoral and Agricultural Society, also a directoi of
Walkers’ Limited, at Maryborough, the famous iron works employing 500 men and turning
out a locomotive per week for the Queensland Railways.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Th e Biddenham Estate.
The Property of Mr. R. D. Barton.
BIDDENHAM, the property of Mr. R. D. Barton, is known to Queensland stock owners
as a well-cared-tor estate, on which is to be found an exceptionally high stand-
ard of stock. The illustrations in this article speak for themselves, illustrating
the manner in which Mr. Barton has tackled the problem of improving his estate so that
it will produce its best.
Biddenham is situated on the Nive River, some 500 miles west of Brisbane. The
nearest township is Augathella, on the Warrego, ten miles away, and the nearest railway
station is Charleville, -52 miles south of the estate.
MOUNTAIN SUB-ARTESIAN BORE.
Biddenham comprises some 120,000 acres, and it is divided by the Nive River, which
runs through the centre of the property. For a distance of twenty miles, curiously enough,
the river divides the station into two distinct classes of country. On the east bank it is
principally sand, scrub, and mulga, and is only cattle country. On the western side of the
river the country consists of open downs and heavy patches of gidyea and bngalow scrub,
and is first-class wool-growing country.
1


THE HOMESTEAD.
MILKING COWS ON WATERHOLE AT THE HOUSE.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


Biddenham was originally taken up by a
surveyor named McFarlane somewhere in the
’seventies, and later on it passed into the
hands of Messrs. Peddle and Freene, who held
it until it ruined them, a process which did
not occupy many years. In 1906 Mr. R. D.
Barton purchased it, and by the judicious ex-
penditure of capital in improvements he has
made the property one of the best watered in
the locality.
The country is generally well suited to
Merino sheep. On the downs portion the soil
MR. R. D. BARTON.
is black and rich. It grows a good class of wool, and fattens quickly.
The rainfall averages about 22 inches per annum, and, if well distributed, is ample
for the requirements .of that country. As the station now stands, the stock are well sup-
plied with water- In addition to the river, there are seven sub-artesian bores ranging to a
depth of 500 ft., and four overshot dams and several tanks. The supply from the bores
is drawn by steam pumps or windmills, and the water is distributed through troughs.
TENNIS COURT AND PORTION OF HOUSE AND GARDEN.
3
The Biddenham Estate, Queensland.


BUILDING AN OVERSHOT DAM.
BOTTLE TREE DAM.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


VIEW OF MYALL COUNTRY WITH BIDDENHAM HILLS IN THE DISTANCE.
Mr. Barton has erected an overshot dam
on the Nive River close to the house, and
it is the first work of its kind attempted on
a sandy river in those parts, and he is just-
ly proud of it. When the station was pui
chased by Mr. Barton, there was only a
small sand well on the run, from which
all the stock got water, and the water for
the head station was carted from this well
a distance of eight miles, and the only
means of drawing the water was a wind-
lass and two men. The general type of
fencing is of the best.
The whole estate is surrounded with
rabbit-proof netting, on the top of which is
TROUGHING AT MOUNTAIN BORE.
VIEW SHOWING EXTENSIVE MITCHELL AND BLUE GRASS DOWNS.
5
The Biddenham Estate, Queensland.


20,000 GALLON TANK AND TROUGHING AT STONY CREEK.
RING TANK, 25,000 CUBIC YARDS ON STONEY CREEK SUPPLYING TANK.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


10 MONTHS OLD STUD RAM, CARRYING 6 MONTHS’ WOOL.
DE-HORNING FLOCK RAMS.
The Biddenham Estate, Queensland.


marsupial netting to keep out the native dogs. The posts are all of gidyea timber, which
lasts practically for ever. The property is subdivided into nineteen large paddocks, the larg-
est of which is 20,000 acres, and ten smaller for stud purposes, besides a small horse pad-
dock at each of the bores for horses required for mustering sheep or drawing wood. It is
Mr. Barton’s intention to further improve the estate by ringbarking the heavily timbered
portions, and the destruction of marsupials. The shearing shed is of wood and iron, and
is fitted with twenty Wolseley machines driven by an 8-h.p. steam engine, which is also
used for sawing timber.
BOATING SCENE
The flock comprises 25,000 Merino sheep, which for the last twenty years have been
bred from rams from Mr. A. L. Faithfull’s Springfield stud, near Goulburn, New South
Wales, so it is practically a pure Springfield flock- The average weight of fleeces for the
53,000 sheep, including 18,000 lambs, many of which were bought, was lbs., and the
previous season the Biddenham clip was among the top prices in Sydney, Mr. Barton getting
per lb. for greasy, and 22d. for scoured.
In addition to the sheep, Mr. Barton runs some first-rate cattle and horses. He has a
small stud of Shorthorns, and has spared no expense in regard to the purchase of sires.
8
77i0 Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The most recent addition was a young bull bred by Fhos. Edols and Co., Limited, Burra-
wang, New South Wales, for which was paid. Ihe foundation of the herd was laid
by purchasing pure cattle from South Comongin, Queensland, and it now comprises about
300 head.
ihe country is especially suitable for horsebreeding, despite the fact that the winters
are rather severe. The blue grass and the Mitchell grass which flourish on Biddenham are
excellent for the horses, and the soil and nature of the country contribute towards making
them big-boned and hardy, with small hoofs. Mr. Barton breeds both hackneys and
GENERAL VIEW OF HOMESTEAD AND OUTBUILDINGS.
draughts, the hackney stallion at present in use being Cherub, for which Mr. Barton paid
The draughts are favourably known to carriers, who buy all the colt foals as year-
lings.
■Personal.
Mr. Robert Darvall Barton was born in 1843 at Boree Station, New South Wales. He
is the eldest son of the late Robert Johnson Barton, at one time a sea captain in the East
Indian trade, but who eventually took up Boree Nyrang in 1838, in the Orange district of
9
The Biddenham Estate, Queensland,


New South Wales. Mr- R. D. Barton received his education at King’s School, Parramatta,
to which school he used to ride at twelve years of age—there being no train, and when he
finished his schooling he returned to Boree, where he obtained his first pastoral experience,
and he certainly got an all-round education as far as live stock are concerned. Amongst
other things he did was to take a mob of cattle from Boree to Victoria overland when onl\
seventeen years of age—a task of no small magnitude. Later on he formed and stocked
with 8000 sheep Scruby Range, a station near Wyalong, and after that he managed Gurley
Station, in the Moree district, for five years. After this he started on his own account. In
BROOD MARES AND FOALS.
1872 he entered into partnership with Mr. W. C. a’Beckett, in Nelgowne Station. About
ten years later Mr. Barton sold out, and Mr. a’Beckett still owns what is left of that pro-
perty.
On leaving Nelgowne Mr. Barton took a trip up to the Gulf of Carpentaria, but not find-
ing suitable property there, returned to Orange, where he managed the freezing works for
a couple of years. In 1886 he purchased Barren Station, comprising 100,000 acres, be-
tween Walgett and Narrabn, and he remained there for twenty years. In 1906 he pur-
chased Biddenham, where he now resides-
-10
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MYALL SUB-ARTESIAN BORE.
VIEW OF PARRATAMA OVERSHOT.
11
The Biddenham Estate, Queensland.


BIDDENHAM-BRED CATTLE WATERING AT WARREGO WELL (A never-faling Water Supply,
and the only water the rum when purch in 1906).
Mr. Barton married a daughter of the late John Smith, of Gamboola, Molong, and his
family consists of four sons and two daughters. The eldest son, John a’Beckett Darvall,
is a doctor at Narrabri, and the second son, Roger Darvall, manages Albilbah Station, on the
Lower Barcoo, near Isisford. The third son, Maurice Darvall, holds Burren Station, which
now comprises 20,000 acres. The fourth son, Alan Darvall, like his eldest brother, is a
doctor. The eldest daughter is the wife of Mr. Herbert Britten, for many years headmaster
of All Saints’ College, Bathurst; while the other daughter is the wife of Dr. Harry Lee, of
Wollongong.
J 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Meteor Downs Estate.
The Property of Mr. F. W. Donkin
QUEENSLAND is a country of vast area, and those men who have been, and still are,
breaking in the back country, control vast estates. The distances from civilisation
are sometimes so great, and the means of transport so primitive, that much of
it is only country for the big man. Stock must have plenty of room, and an attempt to raise
sheep and cattle successfully on small areas in Central or Western Queensland could only
end in failure. The lives and the efforts of the earlv pioneers of Queensland, of those who
succeeded, and of those who failed, could they be compiled, would give the world a most in-
teresting record of the ups and downs of squatting life. Stock-raising in Queensland has
PORTION OF A MOB OF 109 FAT COWS SOLD TO LAKE’S CREEK WORKS.
brought fortunes to some men and ruination to others. Men who have gone out back placed
all they bad at the mercy of nature, just as climatic conditions varied, so did the fortunes of
these men. But Queensland contains many successful men who have weathered the struggles
of the early days, and they now find their pluck and endurance rewarded by the fine estates in
their possession. They now lie at the root of the great wealth of Queensland.
Meteor Downs, owned by Mr. F. W. Donkin, is now one of the best-known Queensland
Stations. It is situated about twenty-eight miles east of Springsure, and adjoins the village
of Rolleston, named after the late Sir Christopher Rolleston, who was at one time part owner
of Albinia Downs, Meteor Downs, as it now stands, really comprises what were once two
1


separate stations, the other property being
Albinia Downs. These stations were once
owned by Mr. William Kelman, but they sub-
sequently fell into the hands of the late Mr.
James Tyson, in his time the wealthiest squatter
in Australia. On his death Mr. Donkin pur-
chased the area comprised by these two stations,
and they now form one estate. Meteor Downs.
The area of Albinia Downs is 47,000 acres free-
hold, and Meteor Downs, 80,000 acres freehold.
There are in addition 300 square miles of lease-
hold country, so that the estate comprises a
large area. It is, perhaps, the largest freehold
estate in Queensland.
The country is slightly undulating in nature,
and the soil is of a rich volcanic nature. It is
lightly timbered, chiefly with stunted bloodwood
and silver-leafed ironbark.
MR. F. W. DONKIN.
All the freehold land is enclosed with a netting fence. 6 feet in height. It is divided into
about thirty paddocks, many of which are also netted. All told, there are about 120 miles of
netting fence on the property. Some of the leasehold country is fenced with the freehold, but
the remainder is left open as a cattle run. The freehold is watered by the Meteor, Canopus.
Albinia and Panorama Creeks, hut a great deal has been done in regard to water supply. There
are about thirty wells, averaging 40 feet in
depth, and pumped by 12-feet windmills, fur-
nishing a permanent supply of good water.
Each mill is furnished with a 20,000-gallon
tank, and each tank delivers the water into
cattle and sheep troughs. Boring has been
experimented with, and good supplies have
been obtained at 20 feet, 55 feet, and 230 feet.
Perfecting the system of water supply on
Meteor Downs represented a heavy expendi-
ture, hut it is one of the necessities for suc-
cessful management.
The improvements all through are of the
best, The woolshed is considered to be the
GOSSIP (2 YEARS OLD),
By Gozo (imp), out of Gossamer by Gossoon (imp), bred by
Dr. Spooner Hart,
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
The Meteor Downs Estate, Queensland.


THE VERANDAH.
finest in Queensland, with one exception (that of Tinenburra). It was erected by the late
hlr. Tyson at a cost of £6OOO. It is built of wood and galvanised iron, and is 100 yards in
length. 1 here is room on the board for 100 stands, hut 30 Wolseley machines suffice for Mr.
Donkin s requirements. An 8-h.p. steam engine drives the machines, and when not so engaged
works a sawing plant.
Mr. Donkin runs about 90,000 sheep on Meteor Downs, all high-class Merinos. He has es-
tablished this flock since the disastrous drought, which ended in 1902. The ewes came prin-
cipally from Logan Downs, and for many seasons Mr. Donkin used rams bred by Mr. Chas.
Mills, of Uardry, Hay, N.S.W. He recently formed a stud flock, from which to breed rams
for station use. The ewes he purchased from Mr. George C. Clark, of East Talgai, Hendon,
and the rams he bought from Mr. j. S. Horsfall’s famous Widgiewa flock. As far as character
of wool is concerned, Mr. Donkin aims at producing a good quality of long combing wool.
With the exception of last season (1909) he has disposed of the Meteor Downs clip in London,
and he has always been well up in whatever prices have been ruling. There are two lambing
seasons in that part of Queensland, viz., autumn and in spring, and the percentages in anythin"-
like fan seasons aie lemarkahly good. Last year (1909) the stud flock averaged 106 per
cent, of lambs, and the ordinary station flock gave 80 per cent. The shearing season usually
commences about the first week in September.
In addition to the sheep, Mr. Donkin runs about 6000 cattle of the Hereford breed. He has
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


THE OLD PORTION OF HOMESTEAD.
5
The Meteor Downs Estate, Queensland.


THE BUSH HOUSE.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


purchased high-class bulls and heifers from Mr. Frank Reynolds’ well-known Focal stud, and
he finds the Hereford breed suits his country admirably. As much as £8 per head has been ob-
tained on the station for fats. Altogether, the cattle have about 300 square miles of country
to roam over.
The principal grass on the estate is blue grass, one of the most valuable of all the indi-
genous grasses. Mr. Donkin does not go in for the production of artificial fodder, with the
exception of about 100 acres under lucerne, pumpkins, and Cape barley. This little bit of cul-
tivation is done without the aid of irrigation.
Meteor Downs is about 1000 feet above sea-level, and the average
rainfall taken at Rolleston extending over ten years has been 28.83
inches; since the 1902 drought, however, the average has been brought
down to about 27 inches.
As can be well-imagined the management of a station as big as
A 12FT. AIKMOTOR, SUPPLYING 20,0000 GALLONS TO TANKS AND TROUGHING. THERE ARE 15 SUCH
ON METEOR DOWNS.
Meteor Downs requires the use of a large number of horses. Mr. Donkin breeds all he requires,
and as horses are needed for a variety of tasks, he breeds many types. He has two fine Clydes-
dale stallions on the property. One was bred in New South W ales, and the othei in New
Zealand. He has also a Hackney stallion bred by Capt. Philip Charley, of Belmont Park, Rich-
mond, N.S.W. Tie also has two thoroughbred stallions —one is Piccadilly, purchased for him
by Mr. Frank D. Brown, of the Almac Cob stud N.S.W., and the other is Gossip, by Gozo (imp.),
ont of Gossamer by Gossoon (imp.). Altogether Mr. Donkin has about 45® hoises on the station,
and about 70 foals are bred annually.
personal.
Mr. Frederick William Donkin was born in London in 1839. and is the eldest surviving
son of the late Rev. Thos. Donkin, who lived for many years at Prospect, near Parramatta.
He came to New South Wales with his father in 1853, and shortly after his arrival entered the
7
The Meteor Downs Estate, Queensland.


GROUP OF STUD RAMS—All cut over 30 lbs. of Wool.
office of Messrs. John Beit and Co. He remained with this firm for about a year, and then en-
tered the Colonial Secretary’s office, where he remained until 1858. Deciding, however, to take
up squatting pursuits, he went to Queensland, and on Franklin Vale Station he gained his first
pastoral experience. In 1859 he made his first start on his own account, and he did it in a most
original way. In those days fences were a very unknown quantity, and he purchased 1000
ewes and travelled
them out westward
for about four years
before he succeeded
in getting a station of
his own. Mr. Don-
kin obtained the ewes
from Weranga Sta-
tion (now overrun
with prickly pear),
and then started out
west with only one
shepherd to assist
him. Everywhere he
went he was received
SPECIAL STUD RAM.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSHED.
The Meteor Downs Estate, Queensland.


THE SHEARING FLOOR.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


RECEIVING AND CATCHING PENS HOLDING 3000 SHEET.
THE WOOL SHED.
The Meteor Downs Estate, Queensland.


A MOB OF EWES.
with much kindness, and was given every assistance. The first year he got as far as Wal-
Inmbilla, where he shore his flock, and the second year at Deepwater, adjoining Mt.
Abundance Station. The third year he shore them at Mitchell Downs. After four
years’ travelling he sold all but 'lOOO maiden ewes and settled on Langlo Downs in
March of 1863. This property comprised an area of 400 square miles, and before Mr. Donkin
sold out to Sir William McCulloch, in 1881, his flock had increased to 30,000 sheep. After the
sale of Langlo Downs, Mr. Donkin spent some years in England and New Zealand, and in 1886
he purchased Goomhurra, on the Darling Downs. This estate comprised 14,000 acres of good
agricultural land, and the Government bought it in 1901. The following year Mr. Donkin
purchased Meteor Downs.
In 1879 he married Alice, the daughter of the late Rev. Colin McCulloch, of Brisbane.
His family consists of three sons. The eldest, Lahgloh Donkin, has a property in South-
land, New Zealand, and the second son, D’Arcy Donkin, manages Meteor Downs. The third
son, Douglas, is now completing his education. Mr. Donkin has recently sold about 17.000 acres
of Albinia Downs to Mr. James Houston, of New South Wales, and it is his intention to gradu-
ally reduce the area of his freehold.
I 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Strahmore Estate.
The Property of Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt and Cunningham.
THERE are so many attractive districts in Queensland, and so many, too, in the
vicinity of excellent ports, that it is a matter of considerable surprise to most
people that those districts are not more largely known and appreciated. That
their pastoral advantages have been largely availed of is, of course, due to those line men
of the pioneering days who went out into the unknown seeking suitable areas for sheep
and cattle raising. It is now about half a century since the first Commissioner for Lands
was appointed to the Kennedy district. Starting in the early part of 1861, he left Rock-
hampton on his first official tour of inspection. With him and his assistants were also a
TYPE OF DOWNS COUNTRY, SHOWING BUSH HAY.
number of gentlemen who were taking advantage of such an opportunity to search for suitable
pastoral country. The journey was not accomplished without considerable vicissitudes, for
the party was travelling in practically unknown territory. Apart from the discomforts and
risks inevitable from the exploratory nature of the tour, the party suffered considerably
through the occasional attacks of the natives, and only by the exercise of the greatest
vigilance did they escape serious consequences. Having reached Port Denison, Mr. Ed-
ward Cunningham formed a party consisting of himself and Messrs. W. P. Stenhouse,
i


THE HOMESTEAD ON THE BANKS OF STRATHMORE CREEK.
The Windmill lifts water from Creek for garden, etc.
Philip Somer, M. Miles, and Allingham, to conduct further search. They crossed the
Bogie River, and travelling north-west, struck the Burdekin River, which they crossed. Di-
verging a little to the south-west, they passed and named Mount Dalrymple, and after a
number of attempts
managed to cross the
Leichhardt Range, and
at last struck the Up-
per Burdekin River at
its junction with the
Suttor River, near Mt.
McConnell. It was at
this point that the ill-
fated explorer Leich-
hardt, seventeen years
previously, had cross-
ed on his expedition to
Port Essington.
The party proceed-
THE WINDMILL LIFTS WATER FROM CREEK FOR GARDEN, ETC.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD.
The Strathmore Estate, Queensland.


PELICAN CREEK.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


USEFUL SORTS.
ed further, and struck the River Cape, at which place Mr. Phillip Somer marked out an
area of igo,ooo acres. Continuing their journey, they came to the Fletcher River, where
Mr. Allingham selected 200,000 acres, which he called Hillgrove, and which is still owned
by the same family. Mr. Stenhouse marked off an area on the Clark River, and Mr. Miles
selected some at the junction of the Fanning and Burdekin Rivers. Mr. Edward Cunning-
ham took up that magnificent piece of country known as Burdekin Downs, Mr. Cunning-
ham stocked up his area, and several
years later purchased a third share in
Woodhouse Station, which had origin-
ally been taken up by Mr. Hall-Scott,
and was, at the time Mr. Cunningham
purchased his interest, owned by
Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt and Co.
Mr. Cunningham took over the
management of the property, making
his residence there, selling Burdekin
Downs in 1873, and henceforth devot-
ed all his time to the management of
Woodhouse, until his death in 1898.
THOROUGHBRED STALLION, ACUMEN.
5
The Strathmore Estate, Queensland.


Mr. Arthur Henry
Wickham Cunningham
succeeded his father as
managing partner.
About this time
the ticks put in their
first appearance, and
within twelve months
tick fever carried off 85
per cent, of the herd,
several properties in
the district losing 90
per cent, of their stock
from the same cause.
The remaining few
TYPE OF COUNTRY.
stock were immuned, but the numbers were so much diminished that it was impossible to
carry on without restocking, and in 1903 Mr. A. H. W. Cunningham, in partnership with
Messrs. Gilchrist, Watt and Co., purchased Strathmore from the Union Bank of Australia,
ANOTHER VIEW OF COUNTRY, SHOWING MT. HERBERT (THE FLAT-TOP MOUNTAIN).
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOMESTEAD FROM THE CREEK.
The Strathmore Estate, Queensland.


MT. WICKHAM.
s
The Pastorai Homes of Australia.


GROUP OF STRATHOMORE-BRED DRAUGHT FILLIES, 3 YEAR OLD.
Limited, restocked both properties, since when they have been worked in conjunction under
the management of Mr. Cunningham.
Strathmore was originally taken up by Messrs. Sellheim and Toussant, from whom it
was purchased by Messrs. De Saks Bros., who worked it for some twenty years, and then
transferred it to the Union Bank. Strathmore is situated about seventy-five miles west of
Bowen, and comprises about 2000 square miles of country. The property is mostly open
black soil plains, and gravelly, ironbark ridges, with also a quantity of brigalow scrub land.
The Burdekin, Bowen and Bogie Rivers run through the property, and give the station a
double frontage to each
of these rivers. The
principal grasses on the
property are blue,
Flinders, and spear.
Started by the ori-
ginal owners as a sheep
station, it was soon
discovered to be un-
suitable for sheep, and
in the early part of its
history it was convert-
ed into a cattle run,
which it still is. Strath-
more is worked in con-
THE VEGETABLE GARDEN.
9
The Strathmore Estate, Queensland,


junction with the ad-
joining property, Wood-
house.
The herd consists
of 36,000 head of
Shorthorn cattle, and,
roughly speaking,
about 8000 calves are
branded each year. Al-
though the stock are
immuned to the fever,
the ticks worry the
stock, and five dips are
kept constantly going.
In addition to this
GOOD GRAZING COUNTRY.
herd, the station carries about 900 horses. A thoroughbred stud is established there, the
stallions used being Marble Arch (imp.) by Isinglass out of Mall by Ladas; Floriel (imp.)
by Clommell out of Cherry Field (Clommel is by Florizell 11., who was sold to the Austrian
STRATHMORE CREEK.
I o
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


ANOTHER VIEW OF THE CREEK.
TYPCAL DOWNS COUNTRY.
11
The Strathmore Estate, Queensland.


BLACK SOIL PLAINS.
Government for £15,000); Aristo (bred in New Zealand), by Soult (imp.) out of Lady
Cecelia; Acumen, by Australian Peer; Metograph, by Grafton, and others. There are about
200 brood mares, all of excellent breeding. The station is becoming well known for the
class of draught horses it is producing. Most of the horses bred on the station are sold
to India. Those not sold there are disposed of each year in Australia.
The property is well watered with the three rivers already mentioned, but other pro-
visions are made for the watering of those areas remote from the river frontages. For
this purpose seven windmills and tanks have been erected, a plentiful supply of water
being obtainable at a depth of about 70 ft. In conjunction with Strathmore, Glen Prairie,
a property adjoining Marlborough Station, near Rockhampton, is worked under the man-
agement of Mr. P. B. Munroe
Mr. Cunningham takes an interest in sport, and the Bowen River Amateur Race Club
meeting which is run on the station is very popular, and is regarded as the annual holi-
day of the district. The prize money available each year for this meeting is £250, the
most appreciated race of the event being the Ladies’ Bracelet, which this year was won
by Mr. Cunningham’s The Masher. The Patron’s Cup was won by Mr. Daly’s Corkscrew.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Alice Downs Estate.
The Property of Mr . A. N. Whittingham.
CENTRAL Queensland, with all its territorial advantages and with its exceptional
geographical position, has loomed large in the world’s eye for the past twenty
or thirty years. This has been largely due to its marvellous wealth of pastoral
and mineral resources. In very few countries is there such ready response to the efforts
of those connected with the pastoral industry, and when at various periods devastating
droughts have temporarily retarded development, the recovery has always been quick. Its
A FIRE-CREAK MACHINE.
mineral resources, too, whether they be gold, copper, coal, or precious stones, have always
tended to advertise the wonderful richness and productiveness of the State, and the result
is that from whatever standpoint Central Queensland is viewed, she presents an alluring
appearance. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that her pastoral opportunities should
have been so largely availed of in past years by those who sought out suitable land for
sheep and cattle runs. One of the best-known sheep runs in the Blackall district of Central
x


THE LATE MR. JOHN WHITTINGHAM.
THE LATE MR. GEORGE WHITTINGHAM.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MR. A. H. WHITTINGHAM.
MR. HAROLD J. WHITTINGHAM.
The Alice Downs Estate, Queensland


IN FRONT OF THE HOMESTEAD.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A CORNER OF THE HOMESTEAD.
Queensland is Alice Downs. This property is situated about twelve miles from the town-
ship of Blackall, and comprises 270 square miles of leasehold land and 24,000 acres free-
hold. Originally taken up by Messrs. John and George Whittingham, in 1878, the station
was owned by them until 1903, when it was purchased by Mr. George Whittingham’s two
THE HOMESTEAD LOOKING EASTERLY.
5
sons, Messrs. Arthur
H. and Harold J.
Whittingham. Later
on, viz., in 1909, Mr.
A. H. Whittingham pur-
chased his brothers’ in-
terest, and became the
sole proprietor. The
property is composed of
gently undulating coun-
try, broken here and
there with low ridges,
and lightly timbered
with boree, gidyea
scrub, and edible bush-
The Alice Downs Estate, Queensland.


es. The estate has a
frontage of eight miles
to the Barcoo, and in
addition to this source
of water supply there
are three artesian and
four sub-artesian bores
on the property. The
artesian bores go to a
depth of 3000 ft., and
the sub-artesian from
140 to 250, and have
a splendid flow. The
first of these bores was
sunk in 1888 to a depth
THE SHEARERS' QUARTERS
of 2900 ft., and has a flow of 500,000 gallons per day; this bore has been flowing incess-
antly ever since—a period of twenty-two years. Since that date some seven bores, with
flows of over 1,000,000 gallons, have been put down in the vicinity, and the old Alice
Downs bore still flows as well, if not better than ever —which is in itself a forcible argu-
ment against the proposed legislation in Queensland of controlling the flow of bores.
Practical experience has shown that to interfere with the flow of bores in any way can
only lead to disastrous consequences. The property is wire-netted and subdivided into
about twenty-five paddocks. The station is at present managed for Mr. Whittingham by
Mr. D. W. Gaukrodger.
BORING PLANT AT WORK ON ALICE DOWNS.
First supply struck at 1760 feet; estimated flow, 100,000 gallons per day.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WASHPOOL WATERHOLE.
The Alice Downs Estate, Queensland.


THE WOOLSHED.
St och.
The flock, consisting of about 80,000 Merinos, was bred from Tasmanian blood, and
from time to time addi-
tions have been made
from the same source.
From the Merino stud
flock which Mr. Whit-
tingham has on the sta-
tion he breeds his own
rams for station use.
The lambing takes
place about April, and
the percentage aver-
ages about eighty.
A herd of about
iooo Shorthorn cattle
is also run on the sta-
A FEW EWES AND LAMBS.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


A VIEW OF SKELETON CREEK.
tion. The bulls used in connection with this herd are all pure and well bred. One bull,
Gloucester Field Marshal, has taken the champion prizes at the Rockhampton, Longreach,
and Blackall Shows.
Some very good
draught horses are also
bred on the property,
a New Zealand-bred
stallion being used. The
blood stallion in use on
the station is Mentor
IT, by Mentor out of
Canary.
Mr. Whittingham
has lately been elected
a member of the
Queensland Turf Club
Committee, and his rac-
ing stud is well known,
AN OUT STATION.
9
The Alice Downs Estate, Queensland.


THE ONE MILE SHEEP YARDS.
and manv good performers have come from it. Some of them, as, for instance, Victory,
Faith (who was bred on the station), and Governor Bligh have distinguished themselves,
and brought many a blue ribbon to Mr. Whittingham. His racing colours are blue and
gold hoops, with gold cap.
NO. 1 BORE, FLOW 750,000 GALLONS PER DAY.
10
The old homestead
building, erected in
1885, is built of pisa,
and is an exceedingly
well-designed struc-
ture, recently improved
by the addition of two
pine buildings. The
whole establishment,
with broad verandahs,
is lighted with acetylene
gas, and the sanitary
arrangements are upon
the septic tank system.
There is also a very
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE STORE, QUARTERS, AND HUTS.
good tennis court and extensive flower, fruit, and vegeable garden. Water is laid on to
the garden and various buildings, stables, etc.
The woolshed is situated about a mile from the homestead. It is a wood and iron
building, with all the latest improvements and with the necessary accommodation for the
shearers required by the Act. There are twenty-eight stands of Wolseley shearing
machines, driven by a io-h.p. steam engine. Water is laid on in the shed, huts, yards,
&c. The shearing takes place in August, and the clip is forwarded to Brisbane and sold
there.
Mr. A. H. Whittingham is the eldest surviving son of the late Mr. George Whitting-
ham, of “Merton,” Caulfield, Victoria, and was born in Dunedin, N.Z., in 1869. He was
educated at Geelong
Grammar School and
Trinity Hall, Cam-
bridge, where he studi-
ed medicine, also going
through a medical
course at the London
University. Finally de-
ciding, however, to re-
linquish the idea of a
professional career, he
determined upon going
in for pastoral pursuits.
With this object in
view, therefore, upon
A MO B OF DRAUGHT MARES.
11
The Alice Downs Estate, Queensland.


A GROUP OF THE STAFF AND VISITORS.
his return to Australia, he started gaining station experience under the able tuition of Mr.
F. E. Vandalour on Canally Station, Balranald. Having acquired a very extensive know-
ledge of pastoral matters, he took over the management of Alice Downs in 1901, when the
property was owned by his father and uncle. When, in 1903, the station was purchased
by him and his brother, Mr. H. J. Whittingham, he continued the sole management until
1908, when he appointed the present manager, Mr. Gaukrodger. In all public matters
Mr. Whittingham takes very great interest, and his business tact, combined with a wide
knowledge of men and things, has secured for him a number of important public appoint-
ments. As president of the Central and Northern Queensland Pastoralists’ Association,
vice-president of the United Pastoralists’ Association, president of the Blackall Hospital,
president of the Barcoo Race and Amateur Race Clubs, and chairman of the Kargoolna
Shire Council and the Barcoo Marsupial Board, he has had ample opportunity of giving ef-
fect to his progressive ideas, and all these associations and institutions have benefited by
his connection with them. He has naturally taken considerable interest in his pastoral
work, and the efforts he has made to maintain the high standard of his Merino flock have
been successful to a very high degree.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Mitcbell Downs, Langlo Downs, and
Listowel Downs Estates.
The Property of Messrs. Cobbolb and O'Brien.
OF the many large pastoral properties in Queensland few are better known than
Mitchell Downs, Listowel Downs, and Langlo Downs, the properties of Messrs.
Cobbold and O’Brien.
Mitchell Downs was originally taken up in the early years by Mr. A. Morey, from whom
it was purchased by Mr. R. VV. Stuart, who held it till about 1881, when it was sold to the
Western Queensland Pastoral Company, who disposed of it in 1907 to the present owners.
Originally Mitchell Downs was a very large run, and had eighty miles double frontage to
the Maranoa River, but large areas have been resumed and selected at various times. The
area at the present time is about 44> 000 acres of freehold and secured lands, together with
THE HOMESTEAD ANS WOOLSHED AT MITCHELL DOWNS.
a leasehold of about 250 square miles and grazing right to about 100 square miles. It is
situated in the Maranoa district, the homestead being about two miles from Mitchell Rail-
way Station. The railway line runs east and west through the property, the stock road
along the railway line being fenced off. The homestead is connected by telephone with the
Mitchell post and telegraph office.
The freehold portion consists of open undulating plains with sufficient timber for shade
purposes. It is rich brown and black loamy soil, heavily grassed with blue, Mitchell, and
other nutritious grasses, and is well and permanently watered by tanks, four sub-artesian
bores, and the Maranoa River. Sub-artesian bores on the property have been very suc-
T


A MUSTERING PARTY AT OLD LISTOWEL DOWNS.
OUT STATION AT WOOLSHED, LANGLO DOWNS.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia ,


cessful. In three of the bores put down the water rises to within about 20 ft. of the surface,
and there is an inexhaustible supply. The water from three of the bores is lifted by wind-
mills. A 10-in. hot-air engine, with a 20,000-gallon supply tank and sufficient troughing, is
used for watering cattle in the bullock paddock. Ihis plant is capable of watering 1000 to
1 200 bullocks.
The leasehold is not suitable for sheep, hence horses and cattle are bred on it. It is
watered by the Maranoa River, Aurichen Creek, and several large dams, two of which stood
well right through the big drought, which broke in 1902. Ihe average annual rainfall is
about 24 in.
MITCHELL DOWNS CATTLE ON THE MARANOA RIVER.
The homestead consists of a good roomy old house, but it has seen the best of its
days. New six-roomed bachelors’ quarters have lately been erected, and a contract for a
new homestead has just been let.
The freehold portion of the estate is enclosed with a good and substantial rabbit and
dog proof fence of I|-m. mesh rabbit netting, 8 in. in ground and 3 ft. out, and with 2 ft.
of marsupial netting above, which cost about £B5 per mile. The leasehold is enclosed with
an ordinary cattle fence.
The freehold i.s subdivided into twelve sheep paddocks, and the leasehold into four large
paddocks for cattle and two horse paddocks. Very little ringbarking was done until
3
The Mitchell Downs, Langlo Downs, and Listowel Downs Estates, Queensland.


A WELL AT MITCHELL DOWNS.
EXCAVATED TANK AT MITCHELL DOWNS, MR. F. A. DESHON IN FOREGROUND.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


the last year, when over 3000 acres of
thickly-timbered country were rung at
about Is. Qcl. per acre, and it is the in-
tention of the owners to have more
done from time to time.
The yards for working both sheep
and cattle on the property are ample
and convenient. The cattle consist of
about 8000 head, principally well-bred
Shorthorns. The annual draft of
bullocks are all sold as fats.
Until a few years ago, only well-
bred saddle horses were bred, thorough-
bred sires always having been used, but
THE CLYDESDALE STALLION AT MITCHELL DOWNS.
of late years a number of well-bred mares have been crossed with a Suffolk Punch horse, and
the progeny bring high prices. Some good Clydesdale horses are also bred, and a very fine
stamp of a Clydesdale Stallion is now in use.
The sheep consist of about 25,000 of a large plain-bodied type, which cut heavy fleeces
of a bright free wool, with a great length of staple, and which invariably brings a high
price. Since the present owners have been in possession of the station the wool has been
sold in the Brisbane market. The sheep have all been worked up from crossbred ewes
(Lincoln-Merino), and large plam-bodied Merino rams have been used for a number of years,
from which a most profitable type of sheep has been produced. The fat sheep are always
eagerly sought after, and command top prices.
The lambing percentages average about 75 to 80 in ordinary seasons, but after the end
of the drought, which broke up in 1902, double lambmgs a year were tried with great suc-
cess, and as high as 150 per cent, have been marked in a year. The usual time for lamb-
ing is April and May.
LOOKING SOUTH-WEST FROM MITCHELL DOWNS HOMESTEAD. A FAIR SAMPLE OF THE FREEHOLD
5
The Mitchell Downs, Lang I o Downs, and Listowel Estates, Queensland.


THE MILKERS AT MITCHELL DOWNS.
SHEEP AT LISTOWEL DOWNS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia,


Since the present owners purchased the property a good and up-to-date woolshed has
been erected, with a 12-stand plant of machines and a 5-h.p. portable steam engine. Water
is laid on to the woolshed, yards, and shed, and during shearing the yards are kept watered
to allay the dust.
Very little cultivation is done. A crop of 50 to 60 acres of wheat or oats is put in
occasionally, which is all made into hay. When the season is favourable both oats and
wheat do very well.
Listowel Downs was taken up in the early sixties by Messrs. Berkleman and Lambert,
who gave it its name after Listowel, in Ireland, the town of their birth. About 1 898 they
transferred Listowel Downs to the Union Bank, who in turn sold it in 1906 to Messrs. Cob-
bold and O’Brien. The property is situated in the Warrego district, and comprises an area
MR. F. E. COBBOLD.
of 656 square miles. It is located 65 miles south of Blackall and 140 miles north-east of
Chaileville, the former town being connected by rail with Rockhampton, the latter with
Brisbane.
The country consists of open downs, in the valleys between the hills, with boree and
gidyea ridges, rising up into rough ranges, forming the watershed of the Barcoo and
Bulloo, the Bulloo water running in the Blackwater Creek past Adavale, near which town it
joins the Bulloo, the Barcoo water running in Hope and Bride Creeks to join the Barcoo
near Blackall. The average rainfall since 187; i s 19.55, ranging from 45 in. in 1891 to
2.75 in 1902.
7
The Mitchell Downs, Langlo Downs, and Listowel Downs Estates, Queensland.


THE NEW LISTOWEL DOWNS HOMESTEAD FROM ACROSS THE WATER.
THE OLD LANGLO DOWNS HOMESTEAD,
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


When the property was first taken up there were good waterholes in the creeks, but
these have all silted up. Within three weeks after rain there is no natural water left on the
run.
During 1910 the Langlo Downs homestead was shifted half-way between old Listowel
Station and Langlo Downs, both properties being now worked from the new centre. The house
was shifted in sections 28 miles, and re-erected on its new site without loss or breakage.
The homestead water supply is obtained from a tank of 22,000 yards capacity, pumped up
into iron tanks on a stand 45 ft. high by a 14-ft. windmill. It is carried all over the build-
ings, garden, and yards in and 1 in. piping.
MR. P. O’BRIEN.
The fencing consists of five and six wires dividing the run into thirty-two sheep pad-
docks and numerous horse paddocks. The boundary is wire-netted, costing over 15,000
for the 177 miles of boundary fence, some portions over rough ranges costing £lO2 a mile.
Large tanks have been sunk by the station plant of four McCaughey scoops. This
plant has been going continuously since 1903. The tanks are nearly all ring tanks, with
pipe inlets, the water being pumped into troughs by windmills. Artesian wells have not yet
been tried, though it is in contemplation to try the sub-artesian supply in the near future.
The run is within the known artesian area.
The grasses consist of blue and Mitchell grass on the downs and lower ridges, with
star and other light grasses on the ridges.
The sheep on Listowel consist of 66,000 Merinos, and were of pure Havilah blood till
9
The Mitchell Downs, Langlo Downs, and Listowel Downs Estates, Queensland.


THE LISTOWEL DOWNS.
THE LANGLO DOWNS WOOLSHED AND HUTS.
IO
fhe Pastoral Homes of Australia.


BROOD-MARES AT MITCHELL DOWNS.
CATTLE WATERING AT TROUGHS ON MITCHELL DOWNS.
11
The Mitchell Downs, Langlo Downs, and Listowel Downs Estates, Queensland.


1904, when Boonoke
rams were mtroduc-
ed. The sheep are
plain-bodied, the
wool being rather
short, but very
dense, and of fine
quality. The aver-
age weight of fleece
is 7 lbs. 14 ozs., and
has realised up to
During 1909-
10 season it topped
the Brisbane market
at two sales. The
THE HOMESTEAD, LISTOWEL AND LANGLO DOWNS.
TANK SINKING PLANT AT WORK.
I 2
ihe Pastoral Homes of Australia.


MITCHELL DOWNS, SHEEP IN LOOK-OUT PADDOCK. ANOTHER SAMPLE OF THE FREEHOLD.
A VIEW OF HOMESTEAD FROM ACROSS THE WATER AT MITCHELL DOWNS.
!3
The Mitchell Downs, Langlo Downs, and Listowel Downs Estates, Queensland.


lambing season is generally during the months of April and May, the average lambing be-
ing between 70 and 80 per cent., rising the present season to 99 per cent.
The property is managed by Mr. C. W. Mitchell, who was for ten years with the
Union Bank, and who acted as their pastoral inspector in Queensland from 1903 to 1907.
His pastoral experience was gained on Momba, near Wilcannia, N.S.W., and Mulwala, on
the Murray.
Langlo Downs, another of Messrs. Cobbold and O’Brien’s properties, consists of 584
square miles of country, with 65,000 sheep of Haddon Rig blood. This station is worked
in conjunction with Listowel. Langlo Downs is about three-fourths Mulga country, balance
lightly timbered Downs, well watered naturally. The mulga is a good standby for the
stock of both runs during dry years.
MT. EDINBURGH, LANGLO AND LISTOWEL DOWNS.
personal.
Mr. Francis Edward Cobbold was born in Suffolk, England, in 1853. His first experi-
ence of station life was at Albemarle, on the Darling River, in 1873-4. He stocked and
managed various stations in Queensland from 1875 to 1889, and joined the firm of O’Brien
and Co. in 1890, which included his present partner and the late William Steele and Ed-
ward Hunt. The firm now became O’Brien, Cobbold and Co., owning Forest Home, Car-
-14
T/ze Pastoral Homes of Australia.


pentaria Downs, Authoringa, and Riversleigh. After the deaths of Messrs. Steele and
Hunt, Messrs. Cobbold and O’Brien successively purchased Lilydale, Miranda Downs, and
Magowra, and part of Inverleigh, later selling a group of four—Forest Home, Carpentaria
Downs, Miranda Downs, and Magowra—with 65,000 cattle, to the Queensland Meat Ex-
port and Agency Company. In 1904 Mr. Cobbold visited England, America, Mexico, and
Argentina, returning to Australia in 1905, when he joined his partner again in the pur-
chase of Langlo Downs. In 1906 they bought Listowel Downs, and in 1907 bought Mit-
chell Downs, and now work them in partnership. In 1909-10 he visited Japan and Great
Britain. Messrs. Cobbold and O’Brien, with Mr. R. C. Cain, of Melbourne, jointly owned
and recently sold Inverleigh. comprising 2500 square miles, and 25,000 cattle to Inver-
leigh, Limited.
CATTLE IN FATTENING PADDOCK AT MITCHELL DOWNS
Mr. Patrick O’Brien was born in County Limerick, Ireland, in 1844, and came to
Australia in June, 1863, landing in Keppel Bay, Rockhampton, where he followed various
occupations, until he started overland for Normanton in 1867, thence to Cloncurry, where
he started business as butcher and storekeeper. In 1870 he went to Georgetown, tak-
ing with him 200 head of cattle. In 1875 he joined the late William Steele and Edward
Hunt in the ownership and operation of the Cumberland gold mine, a highly successful ven-
ture, sold in 1888 to an English company. In 1903 he retired from active life, and now re-
sides at Renja, on Lane Cove River, Sydney, N.S.W.
T 5
The Mitchell Downs, Langlo Downs, and Listowel Downs Estates, Queensland.


He was first married in 1875 at Georgetown, and had one daughter, now Mrs. A. J.
Cobcroft, wife of the manager of the Commercial Bank, Warwick, Queensland.
His present wife, whom he married in 1900, was formerly Miss Mary McGrath, of los-
wich, Queensland.
THE SHEARERS’ HUTS, LISTOWEL DOWNS WOOLSHED.
r 6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Darr River Downs Estate.
The Property of Messrs. J. H. Coleman and E. J. Watt.
DARR RIVER DOWNS holding was originally taken up in 1873 by Messrs. Travers
and Gibson. It was in the first instance stocked with cattle, and some years
later was sold to Messrs. Taylor, Rowan and Co. Mr. Rowan, however, dis-
posed of his interest in the property, and a new company, styled Taylor, Fiskin and Co.,
was formed. This company retained possession until 1909, when they sold the property
to Messrs. Coleman and Watt, of New Zealand, the present owners.
The history of this station is a very interesting one, and is typical of many of the mag-
nificent pastoral properties in Queensland. Mr. Cordon managed the property whilst under
EXCAVATING A TANK ON DARK RIVER DOWNS.
cattle, and when sheep were put on it Mr. Walter Banning took over the management. It
was during his management that the tragic event took place which resulted in his death.
Mr. Bunning was suddenly attacked and murdered by an insane traveller who happened to
be on the station. His brother, Mr. George Bunning, then took up the management,
and held that appointment until the station changed hands in 1909.
When Messrs. Coleman and Watt purchased the'station they appointed Mr. J. G.
Richardson to the management, and he still holds that position.
1


THE HOMESTEAD, DARR RIVER DOWNS.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia -


DAIRY CATTLE ON DARK RIVER DOWNS.
3
The Darr River Downs Estate, Queensland .


FLOCK RAMS, DARR RIVER DOWNS.
7000 DARR RIVER DOWNS WETHERS ON THE NINE-MILE WATERHOLE.
4
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


PUTTING DOWN AN ARTESIAN BORE 32 MILES FROM HOMESTEAD.
5
The Darr River Downs Estate, Queensland.


Darr River
Downs comprises
about 51,557 acres
freehold and 330,000
acres leasehold. It
is situated 46 miles
from Longreach, in
the Mitchell district,
and consists of un-
dulating downs,
lightly timbered, with sufficient shade for stock.
The rainfall ave-
rages 13 in. The
property is watered
by four artesian
bores, sixteen dams,
and various natural
waterholes. The wa-
ter from the artesian
bores runs a dis-
tance of 60 miles
through portions of
the different pad-
docks. There is a
fifth artesian bore
THE WOOLSHED.
6
DRAUGHT STALLION, LAIRD OF DYSART.
First Prize 2-Year Old Colt, Hawkes Bay Show, 1909. Bred by
Mr. R. D. D. McLean, Maraekakaho, N.Z.
SHEARERS AND ROUSEABOUTS’ QUARTERS.
now in progress.
The homestead
is a neat stone house
of nine rooms, with
kitchen and various
extra rooms; also
comfortable bache-
lors’ quarters, con-
taining accommoda-
tion for ten or twelve
men. The cooks’
and servants’ quar-
ters comprise seven
rooms. The out-
buildings, office,
store, blacksmith’s
and carpenter’s
shops, buggy sheds,
engine shed, motor
garage are commo-
dious, and solidly
built of stone. The
stables are also built
of stone, with nu-
merous loose boxes.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE MANAGER AND HIS STAFF.
7
The Dctrr River Downs Estate, Queensland ■


The station is divided into thirty-two paddocks. The boundary is fenced by post and
six-wire fences. The cost of erecting fences was between and Z4O per mile. Ihe
dam building cost about 3s. per cubic yard for stonework and is. per cubic yard for earth-
work. There is no cost for raising water, as all stock are allowed access to the dams
The sheep yards and drafting pens are capable of working 20,000 sheep.
Horsebreeding has been carried on for years on Darr River Downs, and there are now
about 350 horses, including foals. The sires used have been Break of Day and Alpine.
The horses are bred for station use, and are a good, serviceable class. There are also
about 100 head of draught horses, all active and sturdy. Messrs. Coleman and Watt
have recently imported a draught stallion and a thoroughbred stallion from New Zealand.
MR. E. J. WATT.
The flock consists of 124,000 pure Merinos principally of Tasmanian blood. The pre-
sent owners have largely replaced the ewe flock by purchases from Barcaldine and Peak
Downs, and they have also purchased a number of Boonoke stud and flock rams. The
lambing percentage averages about sixty.
At the 1910 shearing 100,000 full-grown sheep averaged 8 lbs., and the price ob-
tained for the clip was up to I2d. for greasy and to 24-jd. for scoured.
■Personal.
Mr. James Henry Coleman was born in Norfolk, England, and arrived in New Zealand
at the age of eighteen years. He gained his first experience in pastoral matters with the
Venerable Archdeacon Williams, at Te Aute. He still resides at Napier, N.Z., where he
has always taken considerable interest in all pastoral and agricultural affairs. As president
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE WOOLSCOUR.
of the Hawke’s Bay Agricultural and Pastoral Association he has at various times been
able to further the interests of the agriculturists and pastoralists of his district. Although
he has never been very prominently identified with public movements, he has always lent
THE BUSH HOUSE.
9
The Darr River Downs Estate, Queensland.


THOROUGHBRED STALLION “KING BILLY."
TACKAROOS AND QUARTERS
IO
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


his aid and influence to everything that had for its object the advancement and develop-
ment of the district, and he is regarded as one of the best men in Napier. Mr. Coleman
has a high reputation in New Zealand as a judge of Shorthorn cattle, and on many occa-
sions he has acted in that capacity at the shows in various parts of the Dominion. As a
member of the Hawke’s Bay Jockey Club he has always taken an interest in horse rac-
ing. He is the donor of the Coleman Shield, annually shot for by teams of the various volun-
teer and rifle corps of Hawke’s Bay.
Mr. E. J. Watt was born at Auckland, New Zealand. Educated first at Christ College, Christ-
church, N.Z., he afterwards proceeded to England, and entered Jesus College, Cambridge,
THE MANAGER, MR. J. G. RICHARDSON.
where he took his degree as Bachelor of Arts. He was called to the bar at the Inner
Temple, but has never practised. Upon returning to New Zealand, he settled at Has-
tings, and entered upon pastoral pursuits. Mr. Watt has been a member of the Napier
Harbour Board, and of the Hawke’s Bay County) Council, but is not now connected with
them. He is a steward of the Hawke’s Bay Jockey Club, and is one of the best known
men in the New Zealand racing world. He has an extensive stud, and has bred many use-
ful horses by Merriwee. Maori King and Bridge have carried his colours at Randwick.
Mr. J. G. Richardson, the present manager of Uarr River Downs, has been interested
for many years in the management and supervision of large sheep stations in Western
11
The Darr River Downs Estate, Queensland.


MAKING BUSH HAY.
Queensland. He was with the Fairbairn Pastoral Company for twelve years, being over-
seer at Barcaldine Downs for seven years; then he managed Peak Downs (Clermont Dis-
trict), under Mr. Charles Maclean, the general manager for the company. Mr. Richardson
was appointed by Messrs. Coleman and Watt to take over the management of Darr River
Downs in 1909.
12
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The Bimbah Estate.
The Property of Mr. R. N. Edkins.
OF the many fine pastoral properties in Central Queensland which have contributed
so much to the prosperity of the State, Bimbah, near Longreach, has done its
full share. Well managed and in a good position, it has been one of the big
factors in the commercial expansion and development of the Central District.
TYPICAL COUNTRY ON ITCHOORA HOLDING.
Bimbah was selected by Mr. Rowland H. Edkins in 1890, and is situated on the Thomson
River, fourteen miles north of Longreach, and 423 miles west of Rockhampton. It was ori-
ginally part of the Mount Cornish section of the Bowen Downs lease, which was used as the
cattle fattening or head outstation.
1


During the twenty-one years of Mr. Edkins’ occupancy of the property he has made
extensive improvements. A large homestead has been erected as well as a fine woolshed,
and the usual station buildings, all constructed upon up-to-date principles. A liberal sys-
tem of bores and dams has been adopted all over the property. Mr. Edkins has been parti-
cularly successful in selecting bore sites. Many bores have been put down with splendid re-
sults on land previously considered by diviners to be absolutely unsuitable for boring. At
Malboona a daily supply of over 20,000 gallons of splendid water has just been obtained from
MR. ROWLAND H. EDKINS.
a bore on the highest watershed between the Diamantina and Thomson Rivers. Several
shallow bores are now being put down, and from these good daily supplies are being ob-
tained. Windmills are extensively used on the estate, and water is laid on to the house,
garden, tennis court, woolshed, and yards.
The property is divided into numerous paddocks, each paddock having permanent water
m it. Mitchell, Flinders, and blue grasses well cover the whole of the estate, while boree,
gidya, and vine trees form excellent shade.
2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


THE HOUSE AND GARDENS, LOOKING SOUTH.
THE HOUSE AND GARDENS, LOOKING WEST.
3
The Bimbah Estate, Queensland.


AN OVERSHOT DAM ON THE MAIN CHANNEL OF THE THOMPSON RIVER.
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


WINDMILL AND PUMP AT A SPRING ON ITCHOORA OUTSTATION.
A SUB-ARTKSIAN BORING PLANT.
5
The Bimbah Estate, Queensland.


A GROUP OF PURE-BRED SHORTHORNS.
6
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


The flock consists of Merinos carrying a fair weight of high quality fine wool, for which
high prices are obtained each year. In 1899 Bimbah scoured wool on the Australian market
realised 30id., and one line of sheep averaged 2/§d. for whole clip. In 1910 one lot brought
averaging 24§d. The rams used have been imported from yood southern studs. About
40,000 lambs will be marked this (191 1) year.
Some very fine draught and blood horses as well as ponies are bred on Bimbah, and four
draught, four blood, and two pony stallions are in use. Bimbah-bred horses have gained a
reputation by winning numerous races in the State, including the Queensland Cup.
THE STABLES.
personal.
Mr. E. R. Eclkins (father of the present owner of Bimbah), one of the oldest and best-
known pioneers, went through Queensland in the early sixties, taking up and stocking several
stations. He afterwards became interested in Lawn Hills, Katandra, Roxborough,
Dunrobin, Undilla, &c. He lived for several years near Burketown, then brought cattle from
the Gulf in 1871 to stock up Mount Cornish and to assume the management of that station
on behalf of a large pastoral company. The Mount Cornish cattle eventually became fam-
ous, and the stud was recognised to be one of the best, as well as one of the largest, in
Australia. Mrs. E. R. Edkins, with her son, then a child in arms, accompanied her hus-
-7
The Bimbah Estate, Queensland.


THE STATION HOMESTEAD WATER SUPPY.
8
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


TYPICAL COUNTRY, DILLULLA HOLDING.
The Bimbah Estate, Queensland.


GENERAL VIEW OF THE STATION AND OUTBUILDINGS.
TYPICAL COUNTRY ON RAPHOE HOLDING.
THOROUGHBRED BROOD MARKS.
io
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.


ERECTING WINDMILL, TANK AND TROUGHING AFTER COMPLETION OF BORE.
band in the overland journey from Burketown to Muttaburra, suffering many hardships on
the trip. It is not difficult to conceive what those hardships were when it is remembered
that hooded rivers, natives, and fevers had to be faced. Arriving at their destination, Mr.
Edkins made a homestead at Mount
Cornish, which became known for
some time as the Mud Hut, but
finally developed into one of the
leading homesteads of the west. With,
the exception of eight years spent at
Tasmania and Victorian schools, Mr.
Rowland H. Edkins has lived on the
Thomson, and takes a leading part in
all public matters, being president of
the Longreach shire council, vice-presi-
dent of the Pastoralists’ Association
and president of several sporting
clubs.
LOADING WOOL AT THE SHED.
11
The Bimbah Estate, Queensland -


PERMANENT WATER HOLE ON DILLULLA.
THE BIMBAH WOOL TEAM.
Twenty horses drawing 77 bales of greasy wool weighing
16 tons 2 cwt.
Mrs. R. H. Edkins
is a daughter of the
late Mr. John Rule, one
of the old pioneers of
Western Queensland,
and one time part
owner of Aramac Sta-
tion. Mr. Edkins’ fa-
mily consists of three
children all at school
in Sydney, two girls
being at Normanhurst,
and a boy at King’s
School.
1 2
The Pastoral Homes of Australia.












