

NATIVE MINISTEE;
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
ABRAHAM HAYUKITU,
OF FIJI.
BY THE REV. JOSEPH WATERHOUSE.
“We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.”—
St. Paul.
LONDON;
PUBLISHED BY J. MASON, 14, CITY-ROAD;
SOLO AX 66, PATERNOSTER-ROW.
283.




NATIVE MINISTER:
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
ABEAHAM NAYUKITU,
OF FIJI.
BY THE EEY. JOSEPH WATERHOUSE.
“We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.”
Sx. Paul.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY J. MASON, 14, CITT-RO^lD;
SOLD AT 66, PATERNOSTER-BOW.
283.




PREFACE.
During the time of awaiting the “John
Wesley,” which is to call at Eewa for the
writer and his family, to convey them to the
Australian colonies, the following sketch of
a lamented colleague has been written; and
it is sent forth with the hope that it will
interest the children connected with the
Wesleyan-Methodist Sunday-schools generally,
and those of Australasia in particular.
J. W.
Lytlmlle, Rewa, Fiji,
Sept. Uth, 1857.
283.


THE HEATHEN’S CEY.
Haek ! what cry arr<sts my ear P
Hark ! what accents )f despair!
’Tis the Heathen’s d’ing prayer,—
Friends of Jeais, hear !
Men of God, to you ve cry;
Eests on you our tearful eye;
Help us, Christians, cr we die, —
Die in dark depair!
Suitoh - .


THE NATIVE MINISTER
HIS COUNTRY.
Within fourteen days’ sail of the
Australian colonies lies the archipelago
of Fiji, having a burning climate, and
inhabited by a people who, before they
heard the Gospel, surpassed all other
savage tribes in cruelty, reckless blood-
shed, and cannibalism.
There are about two hundred islands in
the group, the half of which are inhabited.
Two are each about three hundred miles
in circumference. One of these is called
“ The Large Land ; ” the other, perhaps
owing to its denser population, is known
by the name of “ Large Fiji.”
Yiti Levu, or Large Fiji, is a very fine
island, enriched with lovely hills and dales.
It is well wooded, and well watered by a
283.


great many rivers, which empty them-
selves into the sea. Two of these are of
imposing appearance; but no European
has yet been permitted to trace them to
their sources. There is also an inland
lake, which is connected with a river.
The population of this island alone is
now ascertained to exceed one hundred
thousand.
The inhabitants of Large Fiji are
abundantly provided by a bountiful Pro-
vidence with daily food. Yams, dalo,
sweet potatoes, bread-fruits, bananas, and
arrow-root are very plentiful. There is no
deficiency of fruit in its season: —Brazilian
plum, a sort of sour apple with a very
large and fibrous core in the middle; the
Papaw fruit, wdrich eats like a sweet
melon; the guava or Malay quince, which
is juicy hut tasteless, and lull of seeds; the
Fijian dawa or plum, which is much liked
by foreigners; a small kind of figs ; a wild
pine-apple, which is indigenous to the
soil; oranges, lemons, shaddocks. Amongst
their drinkables may he named sugar-
cane, cocoa-nuts, and the kava root. The


ivi, or Tahitian chestnut, is made into
bread. Nor are they destitute of animal
food ; for we occasionally find them eating
pork, wild ducks, turtles, pigeons, parrots,
fish, crabs, craw-fish, eels, shell-fish,
snakes, bats, rats, dogs, and cats. Alas !
they also are man-eaters , devouring one
another.
Thus it is evident that it is by no means
difficult to the natives to partake of a
varied and abundant diet. Yet they are
sometimes without food; frequently on
account of war, sometimes owing to the
avariciousness of the Chiefs, but generally
as the result of their sad improvidence.
It is true that the inland tribes are
without cocoa-nuts, and cannot manufac-
ture salt. But they can purchase these
articles from those who live at the sea-
side. These their luxuries are, however,
generally bought with blood; salt and
nuts being given as the price of an army.
A thousand men have destroyed a town,
and killed many of its inhabitants, for a
payment of less than one pound of salt
per man !
283.


They are an industrious race. They
cultivate yams and dalo, and attend care-
fully to their gardens. They build nice
houses, suitable for the climate, which
they thatch with grass or leaves, and which
last for several years if they escape the
hurricane. They build canoes, make nets,
engrave clubs and spears; they grow and
manufacture arrow-root and tobacco; they
make earthen cooking-pots and pitchers,
prepare salt, and plait mats. To manu-
facture their clothing, they beat the bark
of a shrub until it is as wide as calico.
The youths have their games, and the
middle-aged have their novel-rehearsers.
Singing and dancing add to their amuse-
ments. War, however, is the great business
of their lives. Yet they are a very polite
people among themselves; and a rude
Fijian is rarely met with.
HIS GODS,
Fijians pay great attention to the
services of religion; and their false religion
—sanctioning, and even commending,
283.


polygamy, strangling, war, cruelty, and
revenge—is the great source of the
troubles which afflict their land.
Their gods may be classed thus :
1. gods, originally; 2. deified spirits;
3. idolized objects.
Of the first class, one is supreme—
Ndeng-a. Perhaps this is a perverted
idea of the true ana only God, Jehovah,
It is with the second class we have most
to do in this sketch. All the hundred
thousand inhabitants of Large Fiji worship
the spiiits of their deceased parents.
Amongst thousands of them you see no
temple, you hear no report of a self-
originating god; but the people adore and
worship those who were unable to save
themselves from death. For it is of no
consequence whether a man dies a natural
death, or is clubbed; whether he is
poisoned, drowned, or carried off by an
epidemic; his family worship him. If
he he a man of rank or renown, his clan,
and perhaps other tribes also, will regard
him as a god. But the Gospel has come
to make known the true God, “ the
283.


Father of spirits,” unto these perishing
thousands.
The worship of spirits is not confined
to the adoration of those deceased who
had arrived at mature years. The souls
of boys, and even of infants, receive divine
honour.
In many towns you will find what may
be termed “an oracle.” This is some-
times the soul of some very young infant,
not a day old, which is consulted on
certain questions : —such as, the probable
prospect of a man’s recovery from illness,
the chance of war, the perpetrator of a
theft, the whereabouts of one who is
missing, &c., &c. The infant soul is said
to communicate to its Priest audible
replies to these and similar inquiries.
Property and food are presented con-
tinually to all these spirit-gods. _ You
may sometimes hear the son praying to
his late parent, “ Father, forgive me! ”
You will not be much astonished at
these poor creatures for supposing that
their deceased friends have the power to
succour and bless them , when you consider
253.


that professing Christians rank some
amongst their number who themselves
worship the spirits of men, and trust in
the mediation of saints. Whilst you
compassionate the ignorant Fijian, pray
also for those of our own countrymen
who worship saints and angels. The
Fijian idolater and the Roman Catholic
Christian are both guilty of dishonouring
God ; yet not in equal degree. For the
Infallible has declared that “ that servant
who knew his Lord’s will, and prepared
not himself, neither did according to His
will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
But he that knew not, and did commit
things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten
with few stripes. For unto whomsoever
much is given, of him shall he much
required : and to whom men have com-
mitted much, of him they will ask the
more.” (Luke xii. 47, 48.)
Can you not, however, trace the doctrine
of the soul’s immortality in this article of
their faith? The Fijian is taught by
tradition that the soul lives after the death
of the body. The Missionaries and the
28 3. b


Bible teach them that, after death, the
soul, instead of being deified, awaits “ the
JUDGMENT.”
EARLY DAYS,
Amongst this class of Heathen was
born the writer’s late fellow-labourer. At
birth he received the name of Na-vuki-tu.
When he became a Christian, and was
baptized, after proper instruction and the
customary probation, he chose the name
of Abraham.
All his boyhood was spent in amuse-
ment. He was trained to reverence the
spirit-gods.
When a young man, he heard that a
new religion had been embraced by some
of his fellow-countrymen. “ I knew no-
thing of religion,” says he, in a letter;
“ for pride and self-esteem filled my heart.
When I heard the report of Christianity,
I hated it in my folly ; for I was unac-
quainted with its great end. * * * I
perceive that my evil heart was at enmity
with God; for I hated Christianity. I


used to say, ‘ And does the bread of you
Christians fall from heaven, that you
worship the God of heaven ? ’
“ One day our tribe sailed to Nandy,
and I was one of the voyagers. I went
to a town in which a Native Teacher
resided, and there heard that a young
woman was then preparing to embrace
Christianity. I became a false teacher,
and said to her and her friends, ‘ Why do
you become Christian ? That religion is
foolishness. Our town was a strong
town; but we are now weak on account of
Christianity.’ When they heard my lying
doctrine, they replied, ‘You are true:
Christianity is indeed an evil.’ Thus did
I wickedly do the work of the devil,
and prevent the people from renouncing
idolatry.”
All this time, from his youth to the
period when he heard of Christianity,
“ there was only one thing,” continues he,
“ which absorbed my soul, —the desire to
hill a man." The killing of a fellow-
man is considered to stamp the Fijian
YOUTH WITH MANHOOD.
283. B 2


MANHOOD AND CONVERSION.
“After we returned home,” continues
Abraham, “ I went one Sunday, out of
curiosity, to hear the preaching. I did
not then know that Jesus was preached.
I heard of a most terrible place. I heard
of hell. ‘ Hell-fire! hell-fire! ’ was all I
could think of, and all I could remember
of the sermon. ‘ Hell-fire ’ sounded in my
ears ever afterwards.
“ One day I was presenting a sin-
offering to my god, when Noah saw me,
and laughed at my folly. I was ashamed
of myself; but did not know that the
Lord was working in me.
“ One day a seer dreamt that I was shot
in a fight. I believed the dream would
come to pass, and I thought of the ‘ hell-
fire.’ My mind became distracted. At
one time I thought I would lotu; * at
another I thought I would not, lest my
friends should say I was afraid of war.
Then I thought I would make atonement
for my sin to my idol, the god of my
* That is, become a Christian.
283.


fathers. I presented six sin-offerings:
the vision had only appeared three times.
One morning after I had repeated my
offering to my god, I had a narrow
escape from the enemy. I had gone forth
longing to realize the wish of my heart in
the killing of a man, when I was surprised
by a concealed enemy, who nearly cap-
tured me. As I fled, I seemed to hear
the words ‘ hell-fire.’
“ I began to dislike war. That day I
was faint-hearted, ill at ease, and indis-
posed to attend to my daily work.
“ One Sunday one of my friends died.
When I gazed at the corpse, I thought
again of 1 hell-fire,’ and determined to lotu.
When I went out of the house, the drum
was beating to assemble the Christians;
and a Chief said to me, * Go and bathe,
and join us Christians to-day.’ This was
after I had resolved to forsake idolatry.
“ I heard the sermon. But I was con-
ceited, and one of the over-wise ones. 1
became a diligent reader, and used reeds
for my lamp at night, until I could
read the Testament. But I was con-
283. b 3


ceited, both in my reading and in my
prayers.
“ One Sabbath, Paula Yea preached on,
‘ It shall be more tolerable for the land
of Sodom in the day of judgment, than
for thee.’ Under this sermon I was con-
vinced of my own sinfulness, and of the
anger of God excited against me. I
trembled lest my soul should perish, and
our town also.
“ I was reconciled to God on the day
that the Rev. John Hunt administered to
us the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper.
“ One day I was seized with illness,
and my friends wished to make inter-
cession on my behalf with my former
gods; but I would not consent. I felt
that I would rather die with Christ, than
live with the devil.
* *■ *
“ Mr. Hunt then sent me to a town
to instruct the people. Here I had a
remarkable deliverance. One Sunday,
when we were praying, just after the
conclusion of the sermon, a powerful man,
at the instance of a Chief who hated our


religion, raised his large club over my
head, and endeavoured to break my skull.
But he missed his aim, and the stroke left
me uninjured. As the man was at my
back, I did not know what was going on.
He feared to make a second attempt.
But Susanna, my wife, saw it all, and
burst into tears. When the service was
over, she told me of my escape, and I
acknowledged the omnipotence of God.”
On Sept. Ist, 1851, the writer first
met with Eparaama, or, according to
English orthography, Abraham. He was
then labouring at Nairara, a town within
ten miles of the residence of a noted
cannibal, now deceased. On his journey
to Nairara the writer saw a field of stones
which had been placed as memorials of
those whom this inhuman Chief had eaten.
For every individual eaten on his premises,
(he himself being the principal consumer,)
a stone was placed in an open field. These
stones number between nine hundred and
one thousand ! Think of one man eating
parts of a thousand people ! The writer
was in the same neighbourhood, August,
283 .*


1857 ; and found that two brothers had
been eaten a few days previously. Pray,
dear reader, that this shocking lust may
speedily be purged away from all Fiji.
RESIDENCE AT OVALAU.
In 1858 Abraham was brought to
Ovalau, in order to be near the Mis-
sionary, and to receive training for the
Missionary work, whilst he assisted in
preaching and conducting schools. He
had been chosen from among several, on
account of the spirituality of his mind.
No one could be with him long without
perceiving that the awful realities of
eternity were ever present to his mind.
Daily was he preparing to meet his God.
Whilst at Ovalau, as Abraham himself
observes, “unexpected trials and almost
overwhelming calamities were our lot.”
The kind, good, faithful Elijah Yarani,
whose history is known to most of the
friends of the Fijian Mission, was barbar-
ously murdered by his own people, the
mountaineers of Ovalau. As the writer
288.


was living at that time under Elijah’s
protection, the rebellious tribe proposed
to sack the Mission-house, out of respect
to the memory of the Chief whom they
had slain. First, they murder their lord ;
then they pretend that they are angry at
the melancholy event, and must needs
burn our house as a testimonial of their
love to the departed! This is only illus-
trative of the strange customs of Fiji.
But, though our earthly protector was
an unsightly corpse, God remained to
defend us. Elijah’s enemy himself, Tui
Levuka, ordered the rebels (then in his
pay) to respect our property ; and the
white residents, generally unfriendly to-
ward Missionaries on account of their
opposition to the Fijian slave-trade,
solicited the same favour from their
friends, the wild men of the woods. Thus
were the Mission families preserved from
all but fear.
After the removal of our colleague, Mr.
Binner, to Lakemba, affairs assumed a
blacker aspect. The Missionary’s inter-
ference with the popular custom of


cannibalism had prejudiced the common
people in general against him and Chris-
tianity, under the apprehension—by no
means unfounded—that their pleasures and
their wars would be curtailed and abbrevi-
ated by his influence over the Chiefs. The
Mission-house became a second Noah’s
ark. All who feared they would be killed
fled thither for refuge; and, of course,
they received shelter. Soon the Teachers
followed with their families. Abraham
was compelled, against his own wishes, to
be of the number. Joshua, the only
surviver of the Missionary vanguard that
invaded Fiji in 1836, being the com-
panion of the Rev. Messrs. W. Cross and
D. Cargill, was another. He had a very
narrow escape. Fearful for the Mis-
sionaries’ safety, he said to his wife,
“ Charlotte, let us go to the sea-side : we
may be killed in the way ; but let us
venture, that we may all die together at
Mr. Waterhouse’s.” A few hours after
he had left, the lamented Elijah entered
the town; and Joshua would have been
killed with him, but for his absence.
283.


The rebels searched for Joshua in his
house. Not finding him, they distributed
his property amongst themselves.
In a few days affairs became more
settled ; Abraham remaining at the
Mission-house, whilst the other Teachers
were removed to a place of security.
RESIDENCE AT MBAU.
A strange Providence opened our way
to the metropolis, and Abraham accom-
panied the writer to Mbau. But, owing
to family-affliction, he remained at Yiwa
for a season. Having buried his only
boy, he came to the city soon after the
conversion of the noted Chief Thakombau.
Previously to this propitious event,
Abraham frequently attracted our admira-
tion by his quiet but firm protest against
the idolatry of the city. One day he
accompanied me to the house of a Chief,
in which the King happened to be seated.
In conversing with those assembled, the
King referred to certain of their gods;
Abraham immediately addressed the Chief,
253.


saying, “ These, Sir, are not gods: they
are vanity.” Thakombau looked at him
with surprise, but was evidently not
displeased with his consistent jealousy for
the Lord of hosts.
When the temples were despoiled of
their ornaments, the sacred forest levelled,
and daily family-prayer introduced in
many of the houses, Abraham’s assistance
was willing and valuable. In September
following, he was directed to visit the
island of Ngau, one of those few places
in which (the Fijians believe, as taught
by tradition) the custom of cannibalism
originated. He found an assembled tribe
in the very act of worshipping a tree
which had been decked out in native
drapery. Abraham preached unto them
that “we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or
stone, graven by art and man’s device.”
One hundred men immediately bent the
knee to the Great Creator.
For nine long dreary months Mbau
was almost besieged. Abraham was often
without food till four o’clock in the after-


noon. As soon as I knew this, he was
removed to our own premises. There
did the little company watch and pray,
not knowing what a day might bring
forth. A public prayer-meeting was held
every night and morning, and the spiritual
leaders of the people endeavoured to
impress the populace that they should he
as much alarmed for their souls’ welfare
as they evidently were for their bodies.
Desertion was frequent. The city was
hemmed in. Sometimes the Sabbath-
service was abruptly concluded as the
men were called to battle. Many nights
the alarm was given that an enemy was
in the town. At those places on the
adjacent coast of Large Fiji where
preaching was kept up, the people came
armed to the service, ready at a moment’s
notice to engage with the foe. On such
occasions there was more reason to be
afraid of the loaded fire-arms in a crowded
house than of the enemy that were hourly
expected.
All this time Abraham laboured zealously
to bring souls to Christ. He was a man
283. c


of one aim,—the salvation of soms.
Speaking of this period, he says, “ Sur-
rounded by danger and death, I knew no
fear, and felt quite willing to die for the
Lord.”
The year 1855 brought peace to our
borders, and prosperity to our churches.
Abraham was in labours more abundant
during the years 1855 and 1856. Many
were the seals to his ministry. Every
week he met classes numbering from one
to two hundred of those who were desirous
of spiritual instruction; and he preached
from five to seven times. He visited all
the sick ; attended the Teachers’ lecture,
and wrote down the sermon ; and devoted
one evening to the instruction of young
Preachers. Every alternate week he also
conducted a school, morning and after-
noon. In May, 18>6, he was appointed
Superintendent of a iranch of the Circuit.
The second Sabbdh in January, 1857,
was a high day witl Abraham. He was
present at the moning service, when he
witnessed the marriage of the great Chief-
tain, Thakombau. He listened with
283.


great feeling to the preparatory sermon,
which was founded on 1 Thess. ii. 13:
“For this cause also thank we God with-
out ceasing, because, when ye received
the word of God which ye heard of us,
ye received it not as the word of men,
but as it is in truth, the word of God,
which effectually worketh also in you that
believe.” By this act the Chief
SOLEMNLY SET ASIDE NO LESS THAN
eighty wives. What hath God wrought!
Abraham offered up the concluding
prayer, weeping tears of gratitude. He
had laboured hard to instruct the King.
At a love-feast, Abraham gave ex-
pression to his feelings. He said he
thought he was too happy, and that the
Lord would probably bring him into
tribulation. His happiness was but the
foretaste of heaven.
LAST DAYS AND DEATH.
In April, the Chief, at considerable
inconvenience to himself, went with a
small fleet to rescue the Rev. J. S.
283. c 2


Fordham from his perilous position at
Nandy. The plac< was in danger; and
the Chief was desious of scattering the
enemies of the Cristian township, so
as to relieve the VEissionary from the
pressure of anxiety Abraham was one
of the Teachers apminted to accompany
the expedition. It was remarkably suc-
cessful. The war vas conducted on the
principles of humaiity. The unresisting
were spared; the cead, instead of being
eaten, were buried; and the repentant
were pardoned. Eighteen towns were
destroyed by the Ting, and the enemy
W'as humbled.
One day, Abraham held an interesting
service with more than one hundred of
the vanquished, who, in acknowledgment
of the extreme forbearance that had been
shown to them, bent the knee to the only
true God.
At the siege of Wainunu, Abraham
had wretched quarters. It was optional
with him to sleep comfortably on board
the war-canoes, or to remain ashore with
the besieging army. He chose the latter,


in order that he might be the more
“ instant in season and out of season.”
Through this he caught a severe cold, and
returned home very ill.
On the 14th of May he again entered
his own dwelling at Mbau. He had not
slept for several nights. Yet it was
thought he would be better after proper
treatment, and rest for a few days. He
told his wife, that, when at Yanua Levu,
he had a dream that some were running
a race, and that he had won it. This, he
thought, referred to his death.
On the 16th, in the evening, we were
surprised to find him no better. He
complained of neglect on the part of his
attendants, who would keep him waiting
for food several hours when he was
hungry. Afraid that his recovery would
thus be retarded, we resolved to supply
him with food from our own house.
Sunday morning, the 17th, he was
seized with involuntary muscular action
in the arms, and with loss of speech.
Cordials and arrowroot were given, after
which he dozed. When he awoke, he
283. c 3


spoke and seemed better. Nourishment
was supplied everyhour, but about three
p.m. lock-jaw set in
19th. Late in t e evening there was a
slight improvemen in the appearance of
his eyes. He gav an audible response,
when asked whener he realized the
power of Jesus to sve on earth from sin.
On the 20th we ejoiced to find him no
worse. Toward theclose of prayer, whilst
the writer was beseching the Lord to
grant that Abrahai might be permitted
to make known te state of his mind
before death, he r<ponded in an earnest
Amen. It was a met affecting scene. He
recovered his speea, and talked freely,
especially of the lo\ of God.
During the following day, he told the
people not to harasdiim, or do anything
that would ruffle hitemper, as he desired
to go meekly intethe presence of his
Maker. When ot asked him if he
wanted anything t drink, he replied,
“Jesus said, If anman thirst, let him
come unto Me, and rink.”
22d. Last night 1 awoke in a state of
agitation. He hac dreamt that angels
283.


came and whispered round his couch.
“They brought no medicine, but pro-
nounced the name of Jesus. They said
to me, ‘ When medicine fails, go to the
great Saviour.’” He would have said
much more, but was commanded to keep
quiet and try to sleep. Yet he asked,
“How am Ito go to Jesus? By prayer,
or by death ? I think I shall die.”
In the morning he began to exhort all
who came into the house to seek the
Saviour whilst He may be found. His
affectionate warnings and earnest en-
treaties moved deeply all who heard him.
As though he knew his hours were
numbered, he invited his fellow-country-
men to seek the world’s Redeemer. “ O!”
said he, “ the Lord knows that I have
been anxious to do more for you young
people: but you have trifled with instruc-
tion. Be wise in Bible-truths, and then
proclaim them earnestly.”
He urged all to he in earnest.
When Isaac read to him the 17th
chapter of St. John, he was much struck
with the following verse :—“ And this is
283.


life eternal, that they might know Thee
the only true God; and Jesus Christ,
whom Thou hast sent.” He asked, “ ‘ Where
is that ? ” —as though it had been .‘applied
afresh to his mind with peculiar forrce.
Humanly speaking, he now bid fair for
recovery, and all felt grateful to God for
the pleasing prospect. But at four o’clock
in the afternoon he had a sudden parox-
ysm of pain. After taking suitable medi-
cine, he fell asleep. At eleven o’clock P. m.
he awoke speechless; was seized with
violent disorder, and died within five
minutes. Shadrach inquired, “Are you
dying?” “Yes.” “Do you know your
Saviour ? ” “ Yes.” “Is Jesus with you ?”
“ Yes.” He then leant back, and expired.
Next morning, the earthly remains were
buried at Yiwa, being deposited near the
grave of Yah-ta-ah, the Fijian Princess.
The Rev. Messrs. Malvern and Wilson
assisted at the services held at the funeral.
His death was much lamented. The
King offered a place of burial within the
precincts where some of the Chiefs have
lately been interred, —a great mark of


esteem: but it was respectfully declined.
Representatives from the various families
in Mbau attended the funeral. The ladies
brought a large quantity of white sand, to
make a mound on his tomb. On Friday
the Teachers erected a neat reed-fence
round the burial-place.
Two remarks must close this memoir.
The chamber where the good man meets
his fate” is hallowed in every zone. No
one could approach the couch of the dying
Abraham without feeling that he was
drawing near to a man of God
Abraham was a man of prayer. When in
health, he was unusually earnest and im-
pressive in his supplications that the Lord
would bestow the Holy Ghost, the Com-
forter. Those prayers were answered when
his tongue could perform itsofficeno longer.
CONCLUSION.
1. Draw a contrast between yourself and
Abraham. —He never neglected the work
of the Lord, though the performance of
his duty involved him in trouble, danger,
and exposure to death under a worse
form. Perhaps you are afraid to reprove
283.


sinners, though you live in Australia, or in
England, where a bad word would he your
utmost punishment.
2. The way to test the happiness which
believers in Christ profess to enjoy is to
MAKE A TRIAL FOR YOURSELF. —All the
sermons you may hear, and the instruction
you may receive, will not be of any avail,
if you do not try for yourself. “If any
man will do His will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God.” (John
vii. 17.) Abraham’s piety, happiness, and
subsequent usefulness were owing to his
thus doing or obeying the will of God.
8. Use your tongue for God whilst you
can. —So did Abraham: and, when unable
to speak, how thankful he must have been
that he had put forth every effort when he
had the opportunity!
4. Think of poor Fiji, where remembrance
is most valuable , —at the throne of grace,
the mercy-seat. Devote half an hour
every week for prayer to God on behalf
of Abraham’s distracted country. “ Freely
ye have received, freely give.”
THE NATIVE MINISTER.


*
'
<


'
•
* /
f
4**
»
•#
i
t>
« •'*
■ ■*
*
> ' •;
L_
J
