

(feMNCtncK, *
£> '%**'%» -
'CTi n r«tn
Ml* —?
THE CHARACTER
OF THE WiUTINOa OF THE
EEY. E. D. MAURICE,
skew:; by an examination of his
SERMON
ON THE
"Jlacrife of Cain aitir .i-Uui."
CHARLES PERRY, R.D.,
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE. ,
t&tClOUa :
HEATH & CORDELL, MALOP STREET.
MDCCCLIX.




SHEWN BY AN EXAMINATION OF HIS
SERMON
ON THE
'‘Sacrifices jjf Cam aitfi Jpel.”
CHAELES EE EEY, D.D.,
BISHOP OF MELBOURNE.
HEATH & CORDELL, MALOP STREET.
MDCCCLIX.




PREFACE.
The peculiar form of this publication seems
to require an explanation of the reasons which
have led me to adopt it. I will therefore briefly
state them.
Mr. Maurice’s books have attracted the
attention and admiration of a large number both
of the clergy and laity of the Church. Nor is
this to be wondered at; for they possess many
attractive qualities. They are written in simple,
forcible language; they contain many just and
striking observations ; they breathe a generous
and candid spirit; they seem to have been
dictated by a sincere and deep conviction of the
truth and practical importance of what they are
designed to teach ; they appeal strongly to the
human sympathies of the reader; they virtually
claim to explain, in a manner which has
never been done before, the true import of the


Bible ; and lastly, and above all, they pretend
to solve the mystery of God’s dealings with man,
and to remove those “ difficulties of belief," which
perplex and torment so many thoughtful minds-
But, while they have thus found many enthu-
siastic admirers, they appear to others, and to
myself among the number, to teach doctrine
directly opposed to that of the Bible, and
subversive of the fundamental principles of the
Gospel. They are therefore, in my opinion and
the opinion of those who think with me, exceed-
ingly dangerous; and we feel it to be of the
highest importance, that the Church, and espe-
cially the Clergy, should be warned against their
seductive and pernicious influence. But how is
this to be done ? The most natural course would
seem to be to point out, and refute, the errors
which they contain. It is however exceedingly
difficult, if not impossible, to deduce from Mr.
Maurice’s writings his opinions on any theological
subject; so as to be able to state them with the
precision necessary for their refutation, and not
at the same time to incur from him and his
friends the charge of misrepresentation. One
eminent divine, Dr. Candlish, who certainly
would not wilfully misrepresent, and, it might
have been supposed, would not be likely to
misunderstand the contents of a volume which


he had undertaken publicly to criticise, has been
complained of by Mr. Maurice on this ground.
Another able writer, Mr. Rigg, after remarking
“ that Dr. Candlish had not attained to a funda-
mental comprehension of the drift of Mr. Maurice,
and was consequently very often at fault as to his
real meaning,” relates how he himself discovered
the clue, which guided him through the labyrinth
of Mr. Maurice’s speculations. Patient and
repeated readings of Mr. Maurice’s principal
works, aided by conversations with a near kins-
man and friend, enabled him, he tells us, after a
time, to attain to a distinct and assured compre-
hension of the peculiar philosophical mysticism
on which Mr. Maurice’s theology was founded;
and which, though no where distinctly explained
by Mr. Maurice, he perceived to be always
assumed and implied. Mr. Maurice would
probably deny “ the Neological Platonic Ra-
tionalism,” which this author ascribes to him,
as emphatically as he has denied the heretical
opinions, of which he is accused by Dr. Candlish.
But supposing Mr. Rigg to have really dis-
covered, as he thinks he has, the “ master-
key ” which fits “ all the locks,” a discovery,
which it required so great labour to make, is not
likely to be generally available, either for con-
vincing Mr. Maurice’s disciples of their master’s


errors, or for preventing earnest young men from
joining his school.
Some other means seems therefore to be
required for breaking the charm, by which Mr.
Maurice holds so many minds in subjection;
and it has occurred to me, that none is so likely
to be effectual as a careful and minute examin-
ation of some particular portion of his works;
conducted with the view, not of refuting the
theological opinions of the author, but of point-
ing out the inconclusiveness and sophistry of
his reasoning. Judging from the parts which
I have read of his various works, and which
may, I think, be regarded as a sample of
the whole, my conviction is, that such an
examination will show them to abound in
unwarranted assertions, inconsequential rea-
soning, and erroneous conclusions. I believe that
it will disclose in them inconsistent assump-
tions ; new and unauthorised significations of
words ; summaries of results, which never have
been arrived at; confused ideas ; emphatic
language, which conveys no distinct meaning ;
references to statements assumed to have been
made, and conclusions to have been arrived at,
for which the reader looks back in vain; and
last and worst of all, strange and unaccountable
misinterpretations of the Word of God. These


are, I am aware, serious charges, and such
as I may justly be required to prove. I
acknowledge the obligation; and accordingly
I now submit to the judgment of the public
the following strictures, which are the result
of the kind of examination to which I
have alluded, applied to the first sermon in Mr.
Maurice’s volume upon Sacrifice. I have selected
this sermon merely because I happened to be
reading it a few days ago, and because it affords
a fair specimen of his style, and mode of reason-
ing, For the purpose of my argument I would as
readily take a sermon upon the Gospel of St.
John, or an essay, or any other portion of his
works.
In the strictures which I have passed upon
his writings, I would beg not to be understood
as accusing Mr. Maurice of any intentional
sophistry or disingenuousness. I believe him to
be a sincere and earnest, and withal a truly
benevolent man; but one who has never humbled
himself as a little child to receive the teaching
of God in the Scriptures. He appears to have
thought by his own vain reasoning to penetrate
the counsels of Him, concerning whom the
Apostle has truly said, that His judgments are
unsearchable , and His ways past finding out; and
thus, unconsciously to himself, to have exem-


plified Milton’s description in the lines quoted
by him in this sermon :
“ Others apart, sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate ;
Fixed Fate, Free Will, Foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.”
- It may he that, instead of discussing such
questions with others, he has pondered them in
his own mind; but the result is the same: He
has found no end in wandering mazes lost. He
cannot think, or write, upon the things of God
with clearness or precision ; because his mind
is always obscured by the clouds of his own misty
imagination. When he treats of other subjects,—
as in those parts of his prefaces, where he is
vindicating himself from the attacks which have
been made upon him; and in passages of his
works, where his metaphysics have no place,—
no writer can surpass him in perspicuity.
One word respecting his disciples. It may
be asked, “ How, if his writings be so full as
you allege them to be of sophistry and false
reasoning, can so many intelligent persons read
them with pleasure and admiration?” Audit
may be added ; “Is it not presumptuous in you,
when you acknowledge that they are so greatly
admired, to make such allegations against
them ? ” To the first of these questions I reply.


that I can only explain the fact of so many
intelligent persons admiring Mr. Maurice’s
writings by the hypothesis, that however intelli-
gent they may be, they do not use that mental
exertion which is necessary for tracing his
hidden trains of thought, and for detecting his
sophistries. They are content with a superficial
notion of the drift of his books, and do not
take the pains to obtain a clear perception of
the author’s meaning in each particular sentence
and expresssion. Being pleased with the general
sentiment and style, they allow themselves to be
carried away by his graphic descriptions and
plausible reasoning, without stopping to test the
accuracy of his- statements, or the soundness of
his arguments. To the second question I answer,
that whether I have been presumptuous in making
such allegations must be determined by the result
of my attempt to prove them. By that result
lam willing to be judged. All that I ask is
an attentive perusal, and an impartial decision.
I have printed Mr. Maurice’s sermon #continu-
ously upon the left hand pages, so that it can be
conveniently read through by itself without the
train of thought being in any way interrupted.
This, I would suggest, should be first done, as
being only fair to him. I would then ask that
it be read again, paragraph by paragraph, with


my strictures upon it. This is only fair to me.
When any one has thus tried the cause, he will
be competent to pronounce judgment upon it,
and I am prepared to accept his decision,
whatever it may be.


%Z ~ Zf/y£
4j/a #/*r
fi & t~cT} ■""’
SEKMON
Efje 'Sacrifices of Cain antr
STRICTURES THEREON.


S E R M 0 N.
THE SACRIFICES OF CAIN AND ABEL.
(Lincoln’s Inn, Quinquagesima Sunday, Feb. 26,1854.)
Genesis iv. 3—7.
e And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit
of the ground an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he also
brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof. And
the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering: but unto Cain
and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth,
and his countenance fell. And the Lord said unto Cain, Why art
thou wroth ? and why is thy countenance fallen ? If thou doest
well, shalt thou not be accepted ? and if thou doest not well, sin
lieth at the door.’
HI. I believe the teaching of the Bible on the
subject of Sacrifice is very methodical. By
mixing together texts concerning it, which are
taken at random from any book between Genesis
and the Apocalypse, we confuse our minds, and
often end with holding the notions which we
should have held if no such words had been
written. Perhaps, if we have sufficient reverence
for the book to follow in the steps which it marks
out for us, we may. learn something from it. We
shall not learn, even then, if we forget that all
true words —the truest most of all—only speak
to us when they speak in us, when they awaken
us to thought, self-questioning, wonder, hope.


IF 1. This introductory paragraph is well
calculated to attract the curiosity and raise the
expectation of the reader. But will its statements
bear the test of careful consideration ? First :
The expressions mixing together and at random
imply confusion. But, as the teaching of the Bible
is perfectly consistent from Genesis to the
Apocalypse, we may infer, that what was
obscurely intimated in the Patriarchal and
Mosaic dispensations is clearly and explicitly
stated in the Christian ; and therefore it is
reasonable to apply the light of the New to
elucidate the dark places of the Old Testament
Scriptures. By thus comparing (not care-


It is not, therefore, an idle form which preachers
use —if it is, it must be a blasphemous form—
when they ask that the Spirit of God ma| quicken
and raise the hearty which the word of God is
sent to illuminate. To imagine that any book
or any living voice can give, if there is not a
receiver, or that it can give, except according to
the measure of the receiver, is to contradict all
experience and all reason.
IF 2. The passage I have read to you is the first
in the Bible which refers to a sacrifice. It has
stirred up a number of doubts in the minds of
men. I will refer to a few of them, and I will
say how far I think this story will resolve them,
how far it obliges us to seek for further light,
which it does not impart, and which it ought not
to impart.


lessly by mixing together) texts on the subject of
Sacrifice, which are taken from various hooks of the
Bible, we shall not confuse but enlighten our
minds. Secondly ; the statement that we often
end with holding the notions, &c., surely needs to
be explained by some specific illustrations, in
order that we may know what to understand by
it, and what degree of truth there is in it.
Thirdly ; it is well that the writer tells us what
he means by speaking in us ; viz., awakening us
to thought, &c., for the words properly express no
such idea. If it did not sound offensive, I should
call the expression a cant phrase. Lastly : the
statement, It is not an idle form, &c., is certainly
true. But why therefore ? How is this a con-
sequence of the preceding statement ? Other
words may awaken us to thought, &c., without the
influence of the Spirit of God. Why then may
not the Word of God 1
IT 2. The word sacrifice does not properly
include, as the writer throughout this sermon
assumes it to do, all offerings to God ; and
although in our English version of Hebrews xi.
4, it seems to be applied to Cain’s offering ; yet
this, as Archbishop Magee has shown in his note
upon the passage, is not the case in the original
Greek. In Hebrews v. 1, and viii. 3, gifts, among
which Cain’s offering is to be included, are
expressly distinguished from sacrifices.


IT 3. (1.) The first question is this: What did
Cain and Abel know about sacrifice ? Were they
told by a special revelation that they were to offer
something, and what they were to offer ? or had
that revelation been made to Adam, and did they
receive the knowledge by transmission ? You
say, 4 It may be very well to form guesses upon
4 this point, but who can give us any satisfaction ?
4 The Scriptures are silent; what can we do but
‘ set up one speculation against another ? ’ The
objection is"a plausible one, to a great extent a
substantial one, confirmed by the experience of
those who have travelled this road. But yet men
will ask themselves again and again, 4 How did
4 this knowledge respecting the way of approach-
-4 ing God reach men in early days ? ’ They will
feel that this demand has very much to do with
another : 4 How do we become possessed of it
4 now ? Can we have that knowledge ? Is it
4 not all a dream ? ’ The most practical issues
appear to be involved in some way with this
inquiry ; however we may wish to avoid it, we
find it continually coming round to us and con-
fronting us.
IT 4. We are bound, 1 conceive, never to assume
the existence of a decree which is not expressly
announced to us. A decree is an open, explicit,
formal tiling ; if it is to be obeyed, it must be


IT 3. The writer here mixes together questions,
which are really quite distinct frdm one another,
and thereby does very much confuse the minds of
his readers. For it is one thing to ask, What
did Cain and Ahel know about sacrifice, and how
did they acquire that knowledge ? and a totally
different thing to ask, What do we know about
it; and whence has our knowledge of it been
obtained ?
Instead of the questions, Can we have that
Icnowledge ? Is it not all a dream 1 The writer
might as well have suggested; Is all Scripture
given hy inspiration of God ? Are we not follow-
ing cunningly devised fables, when we read the
history of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine
of the Apostles concerning it ?
II 4. The remarks in this paragraph are
very just.


set forth in intelligible terms. The book of
Genesis has already recognised that principle.
The command not to eat of the fruit of the tree
in the midst of the garden, is strict and definite.
It is proclaimed as the precept which the parents
of the race were to recollect and follow ; the one
which they could not disobey without bringing
death upon themselves. If another precept of
wider range and greater permanence, as definite
and positive, was made either then or speedily
afterwards, would the historian have left those
whom he wrote to instruct, to guess or divine it ?
IF 6. But is it at variance with his principle, or
with the style of his narrative, to assume that a
revelation of God had preceded any acts of theirs,
and was the cause of them ? I am most anxious
■to lead you to notice this distinction ; it is so
important for the understanding of this subject,
and of the whole of the doctrine of Scripture. I
think you will find that throughout the Scrip-
tures, an announcement about this or that act
which it behoves a man to do or to leave undone,
is called a statute or an ordinance. It is said to
proceed from the Lord; He makes it, He
enforces it. But a revelation is a discovery of
Himself to a creature whom He has formed to
know Him. Such revelations, when they mark
out great epochs in the history, as that to Moses


IF 5. The reasoning in this paragraph is
altogether sophistical. In H 3 the writer pro-
poses as the first question for consideration ;
What did Cain and Ahel know about sacrifice ?
Were they told by a special revelation that they were
to offer something, and what they were to offer ? or
had that revelation been made to Adam, and did they
receive the knowledge by transmission ? In answer,
after stating in IT 4 why we ought not to assume the
existence of a decree upon the subject, he suggests
(see IT 6) that we may properly assume that a revela-
tion of God had preceded any acts of theirs, and was
the cause of them. A revelation here therefore ought
to bear the same meaning with a special revelation,
in IT 3 ; but by his subsequent definition of
the term, and his remarks upon it in this


in the bush did, may be recorded with especial
solemnity; but they are implied in every part of
the narrative. It is constructed upon the
.assumption that they occur continually. The
postulate of the Bible is, that man could not be
what he is, if God did not hold converse with
him ; that this is his distinction from other
creatures ; that this is the root of all that he
knows, the ground of what is right and reason-
able in him. You cannot read the Bible
narratives simply without perceiving that this is
the maxim from which they start; people who
will not acknowledge it as a true maxim, talk of
the language they find in the sacred writings as
characteristic of a Semitic people, or of the
infancy of civilization ; but they cannot help
perceiving that it is there, and that the essence,
as well as the outward form, of the history
depends upon it.
*1 6. Although, then, we should certainly have
expected Moses to inform us plainly if there had
been a direct ordinance to Adam, or his sons,
concerning the offering of fruits or animals, we
have no right to expect that he should say more
than he has said, to make us understand that


paragraph, he prepares the way for the new and
unauthorised signification, which he puts upon it
in the 7th paragraph. Thus the attentive reader
is perplexed, and the incautious one deceived.
The definition of a revelation, that it is a
discovenj (by God ) of Himself to a creature He has
formed to hnoiv Him , is incorrect, because not
sufficiently comprehensive. The revelation of
Nebuchadnezzar’s dream to Daniel by God was
certainly not a discovery of Himself ; nor can a
large portion of the revelations to the Prophets,
recorded in the Old Testament Scriptures, be so
described.
Although it is clear from the Bible narratives ,
that God did frequently, in the early age of the
world, hold converse with man ; yet it certainly
cannot be inferred, that He holds converse with all
men , in all ages of the world, in the same manner
that He formerly did with # the Patriarchs. This,
which the writer’s language implies to be the
'postulate of the Bible, will, I think, when plainly
stated, be rejected by all as manifestly untrue.
IF 6. This much more deep , &c. These words
convey a fallacious idea. A revelation is not a
more deep and awful hind of communication than
a direct ordinance , for a direct ordinance may
be the subject-matter of a revelation ; as, for
example, all the ordinances of the Mosaic law.


they received this much more deep and awful
kind of communication. If he has laid it down
that man is made in the image of God—if he has
illustrated that principle after the fall, by showing
how God met Adam in the garden in the cool of
the day, and awakened him to a sense of his
disobedience —we do not want any further assur-
ance that the children whom he begat would be
born and would grow up under the same law.
We should want a very distinct assurance, and we
should have reason to be very much startled and
perplexed if we received it, that this was not the
case. Certainly, we have no such intimation.
The history of Cain, as I shall show you presently,
affirms in the most simple and distinct manner,
that he as well as his brother was under the
divine teaching, that he knew he was, and that
he did not lose that knowledge till he had
brought himself in!o an utterly inhuman
condition.
IT 7. Do not, I beseech you, try to realize this
conviction, by imagining these two men to be
different from others of their kind. Conceive of
them just as the Scripture represents them—one
as a tiller of the ground, the other As a keeper
of sheep. They are working just as men have
worked in all countries and in all generations


It is the fact of a communication being made by
God immediately to ourselves, or mediately through
a fellow-creature, which renders it more or less
awful.
The fact that God after the fall met Adam in
the Garden, or rather summoned him and his wife
into His presence, of itself in no wise authorises
the inference that He would continually commu-
nicate in like manner with the children whom
he begat; which is, I suppose, what the writer
means by their growing up under the same laic.
What is here meant Cain being under the
divine teaching ? The history, by the appeal of
God to Cain quoted IF 11, to which T suppose the
author alludes, shows that Cain was under the
moral government of God, and knew the conse-
quence of doing well, and of doing not well. But
does it show more than this ? Again; did Cain
afterwards lose this knoivledge of his responsi-
bility to God ? Or did he ever bring into
an utterly inhuman condition ?
IF 7. This description has much graphic
beauty, by which the imagination of the reader
is pleased, and his reason liable to be lulled
to sleep. But divested of its poetry what does it
really mean ? Simply this : that we are to
understand by the revelation, which we may
assume (see IF 6) to have been made to Cain and


since. They look now and then to the sky over
their heads ; generally they are busy with the
stubborn earth, which they are weeding of its
thorns and thistles, or with the animals they are
watching and folding, and following when they
wander. To such men there come thoughts of
One who is ruling them as they rule the sheep,
who in some strange way makes the seeds grow
which they pi;t in the ground. These thoughts
are altogether wonderful; they cannot weigh
them nor measure them ; at times they are
crushed by them ; at Mines they are lifted up by
them. No doubt their parents have told them
that they havb a Lord, and that He sees them,
and that He is ordering their ways. Surely it is
He who is making them feel His presence, urging
them to confess Him. How shall they confess
Him ? What is the simplest of all possible
methods, in which they can manifest their sub-
jection 2 Ask yourselves : Is it speech ?Is it
some vehement phrase of thanksgiving, some
passionate petition ? These may come in time,
but they cannot come first; they are not the most
childlike way of testifying homage, not the one
which ordinary human experience would lead us
to look for, when One has revealed Himself to us
whom we perceive but dimly, yet with whom we
feel we have to do. Acts go before words. The


Abel concerning sacrifice, not any extraordinary
communication made to them by God, but only
those thoughts of God, which come to all men in
the course of their daily labours; and by which
God makes them to feel His presence, and urges
them to confess Him. If this notion of a revelation
be followed out to its legitimate results, we must
understand the words, The Lord said unto Cain,
to mean no more than that the Lord suggested
certain thoughts to Cain’s mind. In like manner
we must explain all the communications, which
•the Bible records to have been made by God to
the Old Testament Saints. Is this to have
sufficient reverence for the hook to folloiv in the steps
which it marks out for us ? When the writer’s
meaning is thus distinctly stated; will the reader
acquiesce in his idea of a revelation ? Will he
himself avow and defend it ?
Again ; is it true that a man, whose mind was
occupied with these thoughts of God, would
in the first instance testify his homage in the
manner here represented ? Would he be likely
to testify it so at all, unless he were instructed
by God in some more distinct manner than by
thoughts which he could not weigh nor measure ; by
which at times he was crushed, at times lifted up ?
In particular, would a man, who, like Abel, was
not authorised to kill an animal even for food,


shepherd takes the sheep ; he desires to present
it to this Ruler, who must be near him, whom
he must find some way of acknowledging. The
tiller of the ground takes the fruits of the earth;
he would present these. You ask why one mode
of presenting them occurs to him rather than
another ? I cannot tell, any more than I can
tell you why one mode of tillage, or one mode of
folding the sheep occurs to him rather than
another There is no doubt one mode which is
better than another ; it ifiay be shown him in
due time, if he has not found it. Whatever he*
discovers on that subject, or any other, he receives.
It is wisdom which is imparted to him, light
which comes to him from the Source of light.
I do not see what one can say different, or more,
in the other case. There, too, the suggestion of
the mode in which the service is to be performed
is welcomed as divine; yet it is felt to be natural
and reasonable. AVhen once it has been prac-
tised, it seems as if there could scarcely be
another mode. The historian, however, does not
tell us in what way Abel or Cain offered their
gifts; he merely says that they did offer them.
Everything is done to make us feel that we are
not reading of a time when laws have been
established which prescribe the nature and
method of sacrifice, —that we are in a much more


suppose, without some other kind of revelation
than this, that the taking away of the life of an
innocent lamb would be acceptable to Him who
is the author of life ? Surely a man must have
strange thoughts of the Creator, if they lead him
to such a conclusion.
How is a man to distinguish this light which
comes to him from the Source of light from the
ignis fatuus of his own vain imagination, or from
the fatal illusions of the devil ?
Is it felt to he natural and reasonable that man
should slay an animal, and bring the body as an
acceptable offering to the Lord ? It is true
that the historian does not tell us in ivhat icay
Abel or Cain offered their gifts ; but we may infer
from the subsequent account of Noah’s sacrifice,
Genesis viii. 20, and from the whole Scriptural
narrative, that the firstlings of his flock and of the
fat thereof were offered by Abel as a burnt offering.
The animals must have been killed; or why is
mention made of the fat ?


elementary stage of culture; but that the
Teacher in each stage is the same, and that we
shall recognise Him in more advanced periods, if
we understand His lessons in this.
IT 8. (2.) It has been asked again, “ Was not Abel
right in presenting the animal, and Cain wrong
in presenting the fruits of the earth ? Must not
the first have been obeying a precept, and the
second transgressing one ?” I must apply the
same rule as before. We are not told this; we
may not put a notion of ours into the text.
Moses does not inform us that Cain’s was an
illegitimate kind of offering. It would have been
strange if he had; for the fruits of the earth were
offerings which the law that was given to the
children of Israel required, as well as those of
sheep arid oxen. The latter may have had a
deeper significance ; I shall hope to consider
that significance on some future occasion. But
the former had certainly their own honour, and
the notice of them here is not a disparaging one.
It would appear from the narrative, as if each
brother brought the gift which most suited his
occupation. The pastoral occupation may
suggest more living and human thoughts than
that of the mere husbandman. The care of
animals, with their caprices and their affections,


HB. These two questions, Was not Abel
right, <&c. 1 and Must not the first have been, dc, ?
which the writer here proposes, and with which
he afterwards deals, as if they were identical, are
essentially distinct from each other. For God
may have given Cain and Abel a revelation,
although he had not enjoined upon them a
precept concerning sacrifice ; and Cain may have
done wrong in not attending to that revelation,
although he may not have transgressed a direct
commandment.
We are not told this ; we may not put a notion
of ours into the text : This remark conveys a
useful caution, which it would be well if the
writer himself always remembered, and acted
upon, in the interpretation of the Bible. In
the present case, however, the maxim does
not apply. For, as we are not told why God was
.displeased with Cain and his Offering, but are
left discover the reason for ourselves, we
are obliged to have recourse to conjecture; and if
the reader refers to the observations in IF 3,
beginning, You say, It may he very well, dc., he


may call forth a patience and a sympathy which
are rarely found in him who is only busy with
the inanimate clods. But our Lord revealed
divine analogies in the sower and the seed, as
well as in the shepherd and the sheep. It is not
safe to disparage any work, or not to own it as
pregnant with wisdom and mystery. God is
surely present in all. It cannot be that he who
in dependence and submission offers Him of the
fruits of the ground, which it is his calling to
rear, is therefore rejected, or will not be taught a
deeper lore by other means, if at present he
lacks it.


will perceive that the writer himself acknowledges
this necessity, and that his whole subsequent
argument is founded upon it.
It would have been strange, dc. The writer
in this and the two following sentences, as
also in the last sentence of the paragraph,
assumes that Cain had not the means of under-
standing the deeper significance of animal offer-
ings. In opposition to this notion we may
submit another, viz., that he lacked a deeper lore ,
because he lacked faith to receive the divine teach-
ing. This latter notion is, in my opinion, the
correct explanation of the conduct of God
towards Cain ; but it does not seem to have
occurred to the writer’s mind, who argues (most
inconclusively) that, because offerings of the
fruits of the earth were enjoined together with
sacrifices for sin by the Mosaic law, therefore
they cannot have been in this particular case an
illegitimate hind ofi offering ,
The remarks which follow upon the pas-
toral occupation are in themelves just, and
expressed with the writer’s usual elegance and
force of language; but they are quite out of place
in thefargument. They have nothing to do with
the question under consideration, whether or not
Cain was wrong in presenting the fruits of the
earth unto the Lord.


IF 9. (3.) In saying this, I have anticipated a
third, and still more serious question, which is
raised by the words, And the Lord had respect unto
Ahel and to his offering; but unto Cain and to his
offering he had not respect. In their haste to deter-
mine why this difference was made between two
brothers, many have resorted to the notion of
some disobedience or ignorance on the part of
Cain, in the choice of his gift. I have tried to
show you that this opinion is not sanctioned by
the passage in which we should have looked for
some confirmation of it. The words of this
clause are still more repugnant to it. When it is
said, unto Abel and to his offering, unto Cain and


The observation, It is not safe to disparage ,
dc., is not only irrelevant, but conveys the idea,
that those who suppose Abel’s offering to have
been accepted by God because he had, and Cain’s
to have been rejected because he had not, faith
to receive the deeper lore which God would have
taught them both, do thereby disparage the works
of God. There is nothing to justify the writer
in making such an insinuation.
What does the writer mean by saying, God
is surely present in all 1 In what manner is
God present in all his works, so that the fact can
in any way bear upon the subject of this
argument ?
IF 9. Where, and how, has the writer antici-
pated, this third question■}
Why in their haste 1 May not those who adopt
this explanation have considered the subject as
carefully, and come to their conclusion as deli-
berately as the writer himself.
When it is said , Unto Ahel, and, dx. This sen-
tence is in itself perfectly simple and intelligible;
but regarded in connection with the following
paragraph, the argument of which is based upon
it, its is by no means clear. For a
long time I was quite unable to discover its real
import, and now I am not sure that I have suc-
ceeded. The antithesis which the words express


to his offering, we are led to think, that at all
events, the distinction is to be first sought in the
persons; that the things which they bring are
quite secondary.
IT 10. It is needful to clear our minds of- this
confusion, though I am well aware that, when it
is removed, the difficulty acquires a more terrible


is between persons and things ; but this does not
suggest any such difficulty as the writer supposes
to follow concerning the simple sovereignty of God.
There must have been some other idea in his
mind; and, if I am right in my conjecture, this
was a distinction, which he does not mention
but silently assumes to exist, between persons
and characters. He imagines, as I understand
him, that men are led to think that God
accepted the person of Abel, and rejecte f d the
person of Cain, irrespectively of the character of
each. Now, if he had plainly stated this as an
inference from the # words, And the Lord had
respect unto Abel, and, dx., its unreasonableness
would have been palpable. But by concealing it
under.language, which*according to its obvious
meaning conveys quite a different idea, he leads
his readers on unwittingly, until they find them-
selves plunged, they know not how or why/ into
a deep discussion concerning the inscrutable
decrees of God. This is either a contrivance of *
the most artful sophistry, or, as I am rather dis-
posed to regard it, the result of that confusion,
which his metaphysical notions have produced in
the writer’s mind.
■
IT 10. What is the confusion here referred to?
These brothers, then, ice say to ourselves, dx.
A man must either be determined to find an


character than it had before. ‘ These brothers,
then,’ we say to ourselves, ‘ without having done
‘ good or evil, each testifying his gratitude in his
‘ own way, in the way which was most natural to
‘ him, are said to be respectively accepted and
‘rejected, merely because it pleased God to
‘ accept one and reject one. Are we not then
‘ met at the very threshold of the Bible—in the
‘ very infancy of our race—with that tremendous
‘ assertion of arbitrary power, of simple sove-
‘ reignty, at the root of all things, which has
‘ driven, and is driving, its thousands to despair,
‘ its tens of thousands to Atheism ? Are not the
‘ foundations of moral order and distinction,
‘ sapped at the very opening of the records from
‘ which we derive our belief in righteousness and
‘ evil ?’ Ido not suppress the statement of this
doubt, because I know how many are racked by
it, and how many merely escape the torment by
assuming that the subject is one which has
nothing to do with them, and which it is safer
not to think about. Would to God we all felt
how much it has to do with us; how unsafe it is
to put such a subject at a distance from us; how
impossible it is for us to see into the nature
of it, till it is brought near to us, close to
our inmost being ! There was never a more
faithful description than that which Milton gives


example of the simple sovereignty of God in every
incident of Scripture History ; or he must be
continually haunted with the idea of that
tremendous assertion of arbitrary power, which,
the writer asserts, has driven, and is driving, its
thousands to despair—its tens of thousands to
Atheism; for him to draw this inference from
the narrative of Cain and Abel. It is quite
impossible to discover by what logical necessity
the writer has been led to invest the difficulty
with this terrible character.
Abel’s way of testifying his gratitude to God,
instead of being most natural, would seem to be
most unnatural, if he acted only upon a merely
human impulse. As I have already remarked,
nothing but the supposition of a Divine revela-
tion, in the proper sense of the term, can account
for his killing an animal under the idea of thereby
propitiating the Creator.
The writer commends the faithfulness of
Milton’s description in the lines quoted; but
by emphasising the words, apart, sat on a hill
retired, he perverts the poet’s meaning. For
Milton certainly intended to indicate the results
of all such reasoning upon Providence, kc.,
whether carried on by speculative philosophers ,
who suppose that they have no concern with the
croxvds wandering below, or by men who feel how


of the way in which evil spirits discuss such
arguments :
‘ Others apart, sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Will and Fate;
Fixed Fate, Free Will, Foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.’
All ‘ who sit apart upon a hill retired,’ to amuse
themselves with such reasonings, supposing that
they have no concern with the crowds who are
wandering below—supposing that these are topics
for the wise to speculate about, not realities for
living and suffering men—enter upon them
in the same temper as those of whom our poet
writes, and whether their starting-point is a
philosophical or a theological one, arrive at the
same result. Only it is much more frightful
when they talk their cruel metaphysics in the
name of God; when they put Him in place of
the Fate which others more reverently speak of;
when they pretend to build up a faith on the
assumption that He is a being whom men
generally cannot and should not trust.
IF 11. Brethren, the Bible does not lead us in
this way ! It shows us how we may find another
and more excellent way. Cain and Abel, in this
early portion of it, are brought before us as both
presenting their offerings to God. But the effect


much the subject has to do with themselves. He
would represent all alike as finding no end, in
wandering mazes lost.
* 11. The historian has not time to speak of
such trifles. What idea does the writer intend
to convey by this sentence ? He must have had
some particular object in it; otherwise why is
it introduced here ?


is different. They feel it to be different. We are
not told how they came to feel it; whether any
outward sign or token satisfied the one, and left
the other discontented. The historian has not
time to speak of such trifles. He only makes us
understand that they did know it, and that Cain
was very wroth, and his countenance fell. Thereby
he at once connects the story with human expe-
rience,—with the experience of each human
being. It is a fact which we cannot dispute,
which all the world’s history confirms, that some
have been the better for their prayers, and some
very much the worse ; that some have brought
sacrifices and have gone away with their counte-
nances shining as they had been angels, full of
affection to their fellow-men, ready to do them
all good, —that others have gone away with their
countenances moody, discontented, wrathful,
ready to wreak their vengeance on the first crea-
ture they met. There are these extreme differ-
ences, —there may be many degrees between each
extreme, —denoting that a blessing or a curse has
followed the offering. It is so in what we call,
formally, religious services ; it is so with every
ordinary work and service among our fellow-
creatures. The Bible would not be a true book,
if it did not exhibit this difference to us. We
should look to see it exhibited early in such a


Surely it is a strange notion , that the Sacred
Historian, by intimating that Cain knew the
effect of his offering, and was angry at it,
intended to connect the story with human expe-
rience, —with the experience of each human being.
We wonder what the writer can mean; and our
wonder is not lessened, when we are told that
this connection is found in the fact, that some
have been very much the worse for their prayers,
and gone away with their countenances moody, dc.
Are we to believe that God intended by the
history of Cain and Abel simply to exhibit the
different effects of prayer ? And does the
writer mean to say, that, while some have
been the better for their prayers, others have been
(apparently for no assignable cause) very much
the worse ? Surely, if men are not the better
but the worse for their prayers, it is because
they have not prayed aright. There has been
in them the .evil heart of unbelief; and the ser-
vice which they have rendered unto God has been
only a lip service, and therefore a mockery of the
Most High. The writer would perhaps, if ques-
tioned, acknowledge this; but then why not
express it ? Why use language from which so
different an inference would be naturally drawn ?
We are left to find out much of the explanation,
<f-c. Yet the writer seems, in IF 1, to condemn


record ; for it must be one of those primary
characteristics of human beings which will go
through all periods, but which, by some means,
make themselves manifest from the first. Having
set it before us, we are left to find out much of
the explanation from its own after revelations. It
does not anticipate the discovery which it is to
make to us by degrees, of the nature of Him who
was governing both the shepherd and the tiller
of the ground. It does not anticipate the dis-
covery it will make to us, of the mystery of evil,
and of the sense of righteousness and good,
which lay in the hearts of both—because they
were not shepherds and tillers of the ground
only, but men. It does, however, hasten at once
to remove that which would make all these after-
revelations incredible and self-contradictory. It
does say, that God spake to Cain, and said,
‘ Why art thou wroth I and why is thy countenance
fallen tim If thou doest well, shalt thou not he
accepted ? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth
at the door.’ It does denounce at the very
outset, the notion of a self-willed arbitrary
being, who is making decrees for men,
what they shall be, or what they shall not
be ; who of his pleasure is choosing one and
rejecting another. It does set before us *a
righteous Being, who holds discourse, with His


the use of these after-revelations, for the explana-
tion of God’s dealing with Cain and Abel.
It does not anticipate, dc. The latter part of
this paragraph contains a series of emphatic
sentences, which, while they fill the imagination
of a cursory reader with vague general ideas,
suggest many questions to the careful critic. I
shall not now, however, discuss any of them,
but only point out, that in two instances the
writer has perverted the Scripture by putting
notions of his own into the text.
If thou doest well, dc. Whatever be the
meaning of the latter part of this verse, it cer-
tainly does not represent man as only following
wrong when he yields to the sin which lieth at the
door .-
When he denied that he ivas his brother’s
keeper, and became his murderer: The idea
conveyed by these words is not that of the Bible
narrative; and, for the purpose of conveying it,
the writer has inverted the order of that narrative.
The Bible does not say, that Cain denied that
he was his brother’s keeper, and became his
murderer ; but that he murdered his brother,
and then denied that he was his keeper.
I would remark also, that, while the writer
mentions many things which he says the Bible
in this narrative makes us perceive, he omits to


creatures, who treats him as a being made for
right, and capable of following right; as only
following wrong when he yields to the sin
which lieth at the door , and not to that righteous
Guide who is close to the same door, urging him to
take the true and upward path. It does make us
perceive that Cain defied that righteous Being
and chose the evil guide, when he denied that’he
was his brother’s keeper, and became his mur-
derer. It does show us that the issue of this
crime , not of some fatal necessity, was, that he
went out of the presence of God; that he became
shut up in his Atheism.
IT 12. And thus, my brethren, the Bible brings
this history to a test which we may all use, if we
will; by which we may prove whether it is true or
not; by which we may rid ourselves of hard and
artificial interpretations of it. We know—we posi-
tively know—what the Cain offering is, because
we have presented the like ourselves. We have
prayed; and then have complained, just as the
Jews did, that it has all been in vain, that no
good has come of it. We have made sacrifices,
and we wondered that we got no reward for them.
Perhaps we have been angry that, being so good,
we have not been more favoured by fortune and
circumstances. Perhaps we have been angry
that, trying so hard to make ourselves good, we


notice what it most clearly shows us; viz. that
Cain was an ungodly man, not only when he
killed his brother, but when he presented his
offering to the Lord.
U 12. And thus : These words intimate that
what follows is a conclusion drawn from what
has gone before. Is it really so ? Ifi the prece-
ding paragraph the writer has affirmed it to be a
fact which we cannot dispute that some (without,
as would appear from his language, any assign-
able cause) have been the better for their prayers,
and some very much the worse. He has also told
us of what the narrative in his opinion teaches
us concerning the nature of God as a righteous
being, and of man as a moral responsible agent;
and has referred to the subsequent conduct of
Cain, as explaining, not why his offering was
rejected, but why he afterwards went out of the
presence of God. and became shut up in his


have succeeded so little. Perhaps we .have had
a general notion that God could not be persuaded
to be gracious to us and to forgive us, in spite of
all the sacrifices we have offered, and that we
must try others which are more costly. In all
cases, the countenance has fallen; in all cases, we
have gone forth with thoughts that were anything
but gracious and brotherly to our fellow-men.
We have thought of them as more in the favour
of Heaven, on one ground or another, than we
were ; we have felt envious and spiteful to them,
if we have done them no actual mischief. Assur-
edly, this is the Cain spirit in us all ; assuredly,
we have often been led by it; and, if so, have
we not had a proof, the clearest which could be
given, that it was not an arbitrary Being we were
opposing, but a righteous and gracious Being ?
Was not our sin that we supposed Him to be an
arbitrary Being, whom we, by our sacrifices and
prayers, were to conciliate ? Was not this the
false notion which lay at the root of all our
discontent, of all the evil thoughts and acts
which sprung out of it ? We did not begin with
trust, hut with distrust; we did not worship God
because we believed in Him, but because we
dreaded Him —because we desired His presence,
but because we wished to persuade Him not to
come near us.


Atheism. Now how do these statements bring
this history to a test which ice may all use, if
we will; by which we may prove whether it is
true or not ; by which we may rid ourselves of
hard and artificial interpretations of •it ? The
following assertions, We *know, dtc., We have
prayed, dec., whether they be true or not, are in no
wise confirmatory, but quite independent, of what
has preceded them. They speak of a Cain offer-
ing as something evil; whereas it has not been
hitherto represented in that character, but rather
the contrary. (See Us. 7 & 8.) They speak of
certain feelings following our worship in a
manner which implies, that, although described
as the consequence, they are to be regarded as
the cause, of the-rejection of our prayers; but
although these are denominated the Cain spirit,
several of them have not been previously alluded
to in the sermon, and the rejection of Cain’s
offering has been nowhere in it attributed to
them.
Hard and artificial interpretations of this history:
Surely the writer’s own interpretation, if indeed
it can be called one, is the most hard and artificial
of any. According to him, the narrative only
records an incident of every day’s occurrence.
A man prays, and complains that no good comes
of it. He is angry with God, and goes forth


IT 13. And does not this experience, brethren
enable us to understand the nature of that true
and better sacrifice which Abel offered ? Must not
alhits worth have arisen from this, that he was
weak, and that he cast himself upon One whom
he knew to be strong; that he was ignorant, and


with thoughts that are anything hut gracious and
brotherly to his fellow-men. And this, the writer
would persuade us, is all we are to learn from
Cain’s partin the transaction !
Assuredly, this is the Cain spirit, dc. I have
tried in vain to follow the reasoning in the
latter part of this paragraph. How does our
having been led by the Cain spirit afford a proof ,
the clearest that could he given, that it'was not
an arbitrary Being ice were opposing, hut a
righteous and gracious Being 1 And how does
it appear, that our sin was, that we supposed
Him to he an arbitrary Being, dc. ; and that
this was the false notion which lay at the root of
all our discontent, dc. ? And, again, how is it
deducible from any of the preceding statements
or reasoning, that we did not begin with trust,
hut with distrust ? The writer here endeavours
to impart to his readers certain notions of his
own by assertions put into the form of questions;
but these assertions are wholly unsupported by
his reasoning.
IT 13. To all the questions in this para-
graph, except the first and the last, we readily
answer in 'the affirmative. The sacrifice of
Abel was the expression of his helplessness ,
dependence, confidence; and if sinfulness, which
seems implied hr the sense of icrong of the


that he trusted in One, who he was sure must be
wise; that he had the sense of death, and that
he turned to One whence life must have come ;
that he had the sense of wrong, and that he fled
to One who must be right ? Was not his sacri-
fice the mute expresssion of this helplessness,
dependence, confidence ? And was not the
acceptance of it, the pledge that the Creator is
goodness and truth, and that all creatures have
goodness and truth, so far as they disclaim them
in themselves and seek them in Him ?
IT 14. If this be the case, we have had a
glimpse into the nature of sacrifice, and into
its connection with the nature of every human
creature, which we may hope will expand into
clearer and brighter vision.
IT 15. We have seen that sacrifice has its ground
in something deeper than legal enactments. We
may have to consider how such enactments affect
it; how they may strengthen or weaken the prin-
ciple which is implied in it. We have seen that
sacrifice infers more than the giving up of a thing.
We shall have to ask how th eperson who presents


preceding question, had been added, the descrip-
tion would have been complete. But this con-
clusion does not, as the first question intimates,
follow from any previous statements or reasoning
in the sermon. On the contrary, after reading
the previous pages, it comes upon us with a
startling, although an agreeable, surprise.
The last question however makes us painfully
sensible, that the writer does not mean all that we
could wish to understand by those which precede
it; for it notices only the goodness and truth of
God as the Creator, and leaves altogether out of
sight His mercy as a Redeemer. It also puts all
creatures into the same category, without reference
to the wide difference between those who have
fallen from, and those who still retain, their
original holiness. From it we should infer the
opinion of the writer to be, that Adam before the
fall would have presented an offering to God with
the same feelings as Abel afterwards. Surely
this is not the doctrine of the Bible,
IT 15. In this paragraph the writer describes
the progress, which he considers has been
made in his sermon toward understanding the
subject of sacrifice. Let us examine the several
particulars :
First — Sacrifice has its ground in something
deeper than legal enactment, i.e., in an inward


it may be enabled to give up himself, and into
what errors he may fall in his effort to do that.
We have seen that sacrifice has something to do
with sin, something to do with thanksgiving. We
must ask the Bible to tell us what it has to do
with each, and how, in its application to each of
these purposes, it may be perverted. We have
contemplated it in the case of two individuals.
We ought to inquire whether the principle of it
belongs to society, and how the social and the
individual sacrifice are connected, how they may
be separated to ,the peril of the community and
its members. We have seen that sacrifice is
offered by man, and yet that the sacrifice becomes
evil and immoral, when the man attaches any
value to his own act, and does not attribute the
whole worth of it to God. It will be our duty to
ask, how it is possible that man should present
the sacrifice, of which God is at once the Author
and the Accepter. These are questions which
the history we have considered to-day suggests,
but does not answer. We shall have reason
enough to be thankful for it, if it has discovered
to us a principle which can never forsake
us> or be contradicted, at any step of our
future progress ; which will receive illustra-
tion as much from our own lives as from the
word of God ; which we deny whenever we


divine impulse, which man the creature
to testify homage to God the Creator by an
offering. (See IT 7.) Is the reader satisfied
with this doctrine concerning the origin of
animal sacrifices ?
Secondly— Sacrifice infers more than the giving
up of a thing. In looking over the sermon, lam
unable to find where the writer shows this.
There is not in any previous passage a word
about the giving up of a thing.
Thirdly— Sacrifice has something to do with sin,
something to do with thanksgiving « If the sermon
any where show us this, it must be in IT 7, where
the writer intimates that the thoughts of God
which came to Cain and Abel would naturally
suggest to them this the most childlike way of
testifying homage to their Creator; and in IT 13,
where, without any previous preparation for them,
he announces, in his favourite form of a series
of interrogatories, the views which he would have
us hold concerning the nature of that true and
better sacrifice which Abel offered. Let the reader
consider these two paragraphs attentively, and
judge how far they help us to perceive
the connection of sacrifice with sin and with
thanksgiving.
Fourthly — Sacrifice is offered by man, and yet
the sacrifice becomes evil and immoral, when the man


try to interpret the one without the aid of
the other.
IT 16. My brethren, we are told in the Gospel
for to-day, that l as Jesus was going up with His
twelve Apostles to Jerusalem, he said to them, The Son
of Man shall he delivered to the Gentiles, and shall he
mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on ; and
they shall scourge Him, and put Him to death; and
the third day He shall rise again.’ The twelve
Apostles, says the Evangelist, ‘ understood none
of these things, and this saying was hid from them,
neitherunderstoodjthey the things which were spoken.’
Those who were to be teachers of the world had
not yet learnt the mystery of sacrifice. They
heard of it from the lips of Him whom they
called Lord and Master. His words at present
fell dead upon their ears. But the story goes
on —‘ And it came to pass, that as He was come
nigh unto Jericho, a certain’blind man sat hy the
wayside begging : and hearing the multitude pass hy,
he asked what it meant. And they told him, that
Jesus of Nazareth passeth hy. And he cried,
saying, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on
me. And they which went before rebuked him, that
he should hold his peace. But he cried so much the
more, Thou Son of David, have mercy on me. And
Jesus stood and commanded him to he brought unto
Him ; and when he was.come near, He asked him


attaches any value to his own act, and does not
attribute the whole worth of it to God. Where is
this set forth in the sermon ?
Lastly —lt has discovered to us a principle
which can never, &c. What is this principle ?I *
am unable to discover it in the sermon.


saying, What wilt thou that I should do unto thee ?
And he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight.
And Jesus said unto him, Beceive thy sight; thy
faith hath saved thee.’
* IT 17. That blind man entered into the meaning
of sacrifice, into which the Apostles had not yet
entered. He felt his blindness. He trusted in
a He could believe that that Deliverer
had given Himself up to bear his infirmities and
carry his sicknesses. He could expect that there
were wonders of His mercy, which a still more
complete sacrifice would be needed to reveal.


II IT. The writer affirms, tliat the blind
man whose eyes Jesus opened entered into the
meaning of sacrifice , into which the Apostles had
not yet entered ; and he infers this from the fact
that the blind man felt his blindness , and trusted
in a Deliverer. The conclusion is not warranted
by the premises. These by no means prove that
the blind man could believe that that Deliverer had
given Himself up to bear his infirmities and carry
his sicknesses; or that he could expect that there
were wonders of His mercy which a still more
complete sacrifice would be needed to reveal. The
Apostles had certainly shown on many previous
occasions quite as strong a faith as that blind
man , in the power and love of Jesus. What
ground is there then for the inference, that he
understood more than they of the mystery of
sacrifice ?




CONCLUDING REMARKS.
I have now finished my task. As I have said
in the preface, I believe this sermon to be a
fair specimen of Mr. Maurice’s writings ; and I
appeal to those who have attentively perused it
with my strictures upon it, whether I have not
shown it to be characterised by all, or almost
all, the faults, which I have alleged to abound in
them. Is then the author, of whose works it is
a sample, to be depended upon as a true philo-
sopher, a sound reasoner, or a faithful expositor
of the sacred volume ? Is a writer who thus
covertly insinuates what, if plainly stated, would
be at once rejected as false, and whose pages
are so full of sophistical and inconclusive
reasoning, qualified to be a teacher of divine
truth ? This is the character which Mr. Maurice
has assumed. He stands before the public
as a religious instructor. If he had merely
promulgated some harmless speculative notions
in philosophy, I should not have undertaken
to point out his fallacies; but he is labouring


to establish a system of doctrine in religion,
which I regard as altogether unscriptural, and
subversive of the truth of the Gospel. This
is the reason why I have penned these strictures.
Still I almost shrink from publishing them ; not
because I doubt erf their justice, but because I
fear lest they should seem harsh and uncalled for
from a bishop of the Church. The recollection
of my ordination vow to be ready with all
faithful diligence to banish and drive away all
erroneous and strange doctrines contrary to God’s
ivord , and the hope of preserving some whom I
dearly love from having their minds corrupted from
the simplicity that is in Christ, have, however,
confirmed me in the determination to put them
forth.
In conclusion, I would add a few general
remarks, which the work in which I have been
engaged suggests. To read Mr. Maurice’s books
appears to me to be of necessity either a disagree-
able task, or a dangerous indulgence. On the
one hand, whoever sits down to peruse one of
his volumes with the critical attention which
is requisite to detect its sophistries, will soon
find the employment so painful, and, as far as he
himself is concerned, so unprofitable, that he will
pursue it no further than is absolutely necessary
for the object which he has in view. When he


has satisfied himself as to the character of the
book, and learnt enough of its contents, to be
able to state to others the grounds of his judg-
ment upon it, he will gladly lay it down, and
never for his own pleasure take it up again. The
fact of these writings being admired by so many
intelligent and well-educated men, to which I
have already alluded, is not inconsistent with this
statement. It only shows that a superficial mode
of reading and thinking upon religious subjects
prevails to an extent, which, if our actual expe-
rience did not convince us of it, we should hardly
have believed to be possible. For I do not
understand how men, whose practised intel-
lect would discover the slightest flaw in a
legal argument, can listen with patience to
such reasoning as is contained in the ser-
mon, upon which I have been commenting.
I do not understand how men, who, in all their
intercourse with their fellow-men upon the ordi-
nary affairs of life, are accustomed to express
themselves, and to require of others to express
themselves, in plain and unambiguous language,
can, in a discourse upon the realities of eternity,
be satisfied with the vagueness and mistiness of
Mr. Maurice’s well-turned sentences. Still less
do I understand how men, whose office requires
them daily to read and iveigh the Scriptures, can


turn from the sacred volume to lose themselves
among the mazes of a philosophy, which, by what-
ever name it may be designated, is nothing else
than a branch of that science falsely so called
which some professing have erred concerning the
faith.
On the other hand, to those who read Mr.
Maurice’s works with pleasure the perusal of
them is, I do not hesitate to say, a dangerous
indulgence. I know that, in the opinion of some,
the mind is enlarged, the knowledge of human
nature increased, and a power of discerning and
appreciating truth under its manifold phases
acquired, by the indiscriminate perusal of all
sorts of authors. But this opinion is opposed
alike to sound reason and general experience.
The books that we read, like the companions
with whom we converse, can scarcely fail to
exercise an influence for good or for evil upon
our understandings and our hearts. Just in the
same manner as evil communications corrupt good
manners, does the habitual perusal of sophistical,
immoral, or heretical books corrupt the mind;
—imbuing it imperceptibly with the pernicious
ideas, or doctrines, which are contained in them.
It is true that, as a man of strong bodily consti-
tution may be nourished and invigorated by a
variety of meats, which others of weaker diges-


29
*
tion could scarcely taste of with impunity; so
a man of powerful intellect may read with
advantage a multitude of books, which would
confuse or mislead those of an inferior capacity.
But, nevertheless, no wise man should choose
to spend his time upon works, from which he can
derive little or no improvement, and against the
injurious tendency of which he has perpetually
to be upon his guard. No one can find pleasure
in a book which he sees to be full of fallacies
and mis-statements. Whosoever, therefore, reads
Mr. Maurice’s writings of his own accord, for
his own gratification, must yield himself more
or less passively to their influence ; and
whosoever does thus yield himself will almost
certainly imbibe their spirit, and adopt their
tone. He will after a time begin to indulge
in the same misty speculations, and to clothe
his ideas in the same equivocal language. He
will attempt to establish in the same manner
what he fancies to be important principles by
means of false premises or fallacious reasoning.
Worst of all, while endeavouring to bring the deep
things of God within the limited range of his own
finite understanding, he will gradually lose his
hold upon the great truths of the Gospel, pervert
the plain meaning of God’s Holy Word, and }
unless restrained by divine grace, virtually deny


30
*
the Lord that bought him. This, I fear, has been
the case with many, who once promised to become
able ministers of the New Testament, but who,
through the subtle poison which they have drunk
in from Mr. Maurice, have become blind leaders
of the blind.
I would again say that I do not mean to
condemn the man; I am speaking only of the
teacher. My desire and prayer for Mr. Maurice
is, that the God our Lord Jesus Christ , the Father
of Glory , may give unto him the spirit of wisdom
and revelation in the knowledge of Him. The eyes
of his understanding being enlightened ; that he may
know what is the hope of His calling, and what the
riches of the glory of His inheritance in the Saints.
So shall he become what, however at present
misled, I am sure he desires to be, a good minister
of Jesus Christ, —a faithful steward of the mysteries
of God.
PRINTED BY HEATH AND CORDELL, GEELONG.




