

A NEW BOOK EVERY
WEDNESDAY.
— i-21.
21. WHITEFRIARS STREET, LOHDOH, E.CL
STOCK BACK NUMBERS,
AS THEY ALWAYS SELL.


AUSTRALIAN HISTORY PROMOTIONS
Brian W. McDonald


THE BLACK BUSHRANGER.
A STORY OF THE AUSTRALIAN BUSH.
By HERBERT MAXWELL.
4
Es.
V
“COJIE ...” A REVOI/VEE-BULLET PIERCED HIS BRAIN WHILE THE WORD WAS YET ON HIS TONGUE.
MARVEL. Vol. IV.—No. 92.
CHAPTER I. to extraot sufficient nourishment out of the arid soil to enable
Boulter’s Coppice-Whitefoot-Mores the Cattle- toward* the close of a hot summer’s day rod*
thief —A Change Of Plan- a solitary horseman. Glad enough, to all appearance, was h*
]Tar away to the north of Queensland, in Clonourry County, to find shelter from the hot sun, which, even at that period of
there is a thick wood known as Boulter’s Coppice. This wood the day, shone with wonderful power and heat,
is of no great extent, although it is a well-known landmark. The horse, no less than its rider, was well content to enter
War the country all round supports nothing but the barest the cool shade of the coppice, and at once evinced its satisfoo-
fierbage—a little rank grass, an occasional stunted tree, and a tion by a prolonged neigh.
large variety of hardy thistles, which, somehow or other, manage “ Yes, yes 1” said the horseman, who had dismounted,


addressing his steed as he patted its neck. “ You know, aa
well as I do, that our long ride for the present is over; and if
any horse ever deserved a rest, a good feed, and a drink of
good water, you do.”
So perfect was the sympathy between the horse and the man
that the former seemed to understand completely the words
spoken to it. It whinnied again, and, rubbing its nose in its
master’s hand, followed him towards the tiny stream of
sparkling fresh water that trickled through the coppice. Here
the traveller took off the horse’s bridle and saddle; shook out
of a bag a goodly supply of com, which the horse, after slaking
its thirst, began to feed on eagerly.
“ That is right, White foot. You will want all your strength
and ail your speed to-night, maybe; so eat and drink while
you can.”
Having attended to the requirements of his horse, the traveller
proceeded to make himself as comfortable as circumstances per-
mitted. He bathed in the cold stream, ate the provisions he
had brought with him, and then, lighting his pipe, strolled
through the coppice, his horse the while mopping the grass and
roaming at will, but never going very far from its master’s side.
As he walked the traveller attentively examined the ground,
stopping every now and then to inspect different spots more
closely, where the grass had been trampled down, or where
sticks and twigs seemed to have been disarranged. Presently
he came upon the ashes of a burnt-out fire, which at. once riveted
his attention.. The footprints here were clear and distinct, and
he proceeded eagerly with his investigation, unconsciously
speaking bis thoughts aloud.
“The ashes still contain perceptible warmth,” he said, “and
here are marks of upturned heels all round the fire. Let’s see
how many ? One, two, three, four—that’s blurred, but it looks
like one—five, six, seven ! Just the number of the gang. Last
night it was fresh and the wind chilly, and so they lay round
the fire with their legs crossed and their feet to the blaze. If
my information was correct, and our fellows come up to time,
we shall catch every man.”
As he spoke he took out his watch, and, while he was still
looking at it,. the sounds of horse-hoofs on the hard, stony
ground beyond the coppice reached his ear.
“ I here they are!” he exclaimed, as he listened carefully;
“unless—unless it is the gang come back to their nest sooner
than they were expected.”
A low whistle brought Whitefoot quickly to his side, and
horse and man were soon sheltered behind a screen of thick
foliage, from which the ordinary pathway through the coppice
might yet be kept in view.
But the. traveller’s momentary anxiety was speedily allayed.
He recognised the new-comers for the friends he expected, and
at once moved out to greet them.
“ CHad to ?ee you, Curtis,” he said to the foremost rider of
the party. How many men have you brought with you? Four,
I see. That makes us six. Six to seven. Still, we shall have the
advantage of a surprise on our side; and this time we ought to
nab the rascals—every one.”
{ 1 hope so, upon my word, Mr. Jephson,” replied Curtis.
“ And I would have brought more men if I could ; but I dared
not leave the station without one or two men to guard it. But
horses—l could not have mustered more if I had been paid for
them: all the rest, except these five, being dead heat.”
“ Oh, it is all right! we shall do very well as we are. By
the way, you got my communication all right, of course?”
“ Oh, yes ! some three hours ago; and at once set off, accord-
ing to instructions. But how did you hear that Bowen’s gang
were to rendezvous in this place ?”
“ Well, upon my word I can’t tell you exactly. But when I
returned to the station after my morning’s round I found this
note awaiting me. Here it is. I’ll read it to you.”
Jephson pulled out of his breast-pocket a piece of crumpled,
dirty paper, from which he read as follows :
“If Inspector Jephson wants to lav his hands upon Bowen’s
gang he ought to be at Boulter’s Coppice to-night. The gang
are going to stick-up the monthly coach that carries the gold
from the mining-fields to the Brisbane Bank at that- spot. The
coach is timed to pass Boulter’s Coppice at midnight.”
“ And is there no signature?” asked Curtis.
“None whatever.”
“ Ho you know who brought the note to you?”
“ Yes; I naturally inquired, and the police trooper on duty
told me that a black fellow had been inquiring for me, and,
being told I was not in, left this note for me.”
“ And the treoper did not know the fellow?”
“ No ; he is new to the station, and knows none of the horse
and cattle thieves in this part of the country.”
Curtis was silent for a moment. Presently he spoke again :
“ You know,” he said, “ there is a black fellow in this very
gang?”
“Yes; all the world knows that. Mores his name is; and
be is a perfect demon for cunning and devilry of all kinds.”
“ Hasn’t he a grudge against you?”
“ Not more so, I expect, than against all honest men.”
CHAPTER 11.
The Gang—Mores’ Revenge—The Fight with the
Troopers—Capture and Escape.
“A DEAD MAN’S GIFT; 0R ' A H^F&®T^ u s B Ei 'n n ex t t he w^ l k ds of the
“But didn’t you catch him in some horse-thieving business,
and get him a month’s hard labour?”
“ Yes; the rascal got off with a month, when he ought to have
had a couple of years. But he put on such an innocent air,
and defended himself altogether so cleverly, that we could not
bring much home to him. Hence his light sentence.”
“ Well, I don’t suppose he owes you any special favour for
that one month hard.”
‘‘ I don’t suppose he does. But why do you insist upon it ?”
“ Because I think it may have teen Mores himself who
brought you that note.”
“It may have been. But what of that?”
“ Simply this. If he did bring it it is bound to be a plant.”
“ Then you think they won’t turn up here?”
“I don’t say that. But I think, if they do come, we are
likely to find ourselves caught in a trap; and that it is more
probable they will capture us than we them.”
Curtis , stopped, and Jephson became thoughtful. There
seemed to be much sound sense in what Curtis urged, although
this idea had not occurred to him personally. He knew this
black fellow. Mores—who came from no one knew where—was
one of the most daring and successful cattle-thieves in all the
country round, and yet at the same time so cunning and eo
wily that he always managed to evade pursuit and escape
capture. It was, to say the least of it, not impossible that he
might have devised such a bait for the police officers, whom he
naturally looked upon as his deadliest enemies.
“ Curtis,” said Jephson, speaking with a thoughtful air, “I
begin to see there may be much in what you say. The only
quevStion is, was-it Mores who brought me that note?”
“ That we have no means of knowing. There are not. many
black fellows about here ; and those there are are not very
likely to help the police without some ulterior object.”
“ Tliat is true. And, now ( come to think of it, the messenger
must have known tliat I should be out on my rounds at the time
he called. And if it were Mores, he would be sure to know
that the trooper on duty was a new hand, and that, therefore,
he. could show himself at the station with impunity. Besides,
it is just the sort of game that would commend itself to Mores.”
“I suppose,” answered Curtis, “you have not been able to
inform the people of the mining-camp of this rumour of an
intention to rob the coach?”
“ No; there is no telegraph laid on there as yet. And, of
course, I reckoned upon taking the rascals by surprise here and
preventing it.”
“Well, it is now seven o’clock. We ought to decide quickly
what we mean to do. If the affair is a plant, they will probably
attack us with overwhelming numbers, and rob the coach after-
wards; if the thing is not a plant, and we go away, they will
be able to ‘ stick-up ’ the coach equally well. It is hard to know
what to do.”
“I have it,” replied Jephson, after a pause. “We’ll clear
out of this at once, and go and meet the coach. There are
always three, troopers with it—one on each side, the driver and
one inside. That will make our party nine, and Bowen’s gang are
not likely to number many, if any, more. Then, if they attack
the coach, they will find nine to deal with instead of three. If
they don’t there will be no harm done, beyond the fact that we
shall have had a long ride and a hard day’s work for nothing.”
Inspector Jephson’s plan was immediately acted upon. The
horses that had been running loose were quickly caught and
mounted. Whitefoot—whom the rest and the good, feed he
had eaten had completely restored—led the way, apparently as
fresh and capable of travelling as when he started.
The sun by this time had sunk completely out of sight, and
the brief twilight that followed the sunset was rapidly merging
into night as the party of police officers set off to meet the
monthly coach from the goldfields.
Was the letter received by Inspector Jephson a “plant”?
Our readers will have no difficulty in deciding the point for
themselves when we introduce them to a scene that took place
in Boulter’s Coppice some two hours after the police troopers
had left that spot to meet the Brisbane coach.
It was now pitch dark, and Bowen’s gang had just entered
the wood. Their horses had been left at some distance ; partly
because, riding through the trees would have been difficult and
dangerous, and partly because it was easier to steal upon the
police party they expected to find there unobserved if they
approached them on foot.
The gang numbered ten: but one had been left in charge of
the horses, and so there were only nine available for the work-
in hand.
Silently, slowly, warily they crept on and on, from tree to
tree, until the whole coppice had been explored; but, needless
to say, they did not find any trace of Inspector Jephson or his


troopers. At last Bowen, the chief of the gang, called his men
together and held a whispered conference with them.
“There is no one here. We’ve been over every yard of
ground,” he said. “ Mores, your little plan has failed, 1 expect.
You won’t be able to settle accounts with Jephson tins time.”
For a moment the black did not reply. When be did he
answered, sullenly enough:
“ Then if not now some other time. Sooner or later I’ll cry
quits with that man. If he’s twigged the game, and fought
shy of coining here, then the reckoning is postponed, thafc.s all-
But,” he added, as if the idea was a cheering one, and had only
just occurred to him, “ the night is young yet. It wants quite
three hours to the time at which the coacli passes here, and
Jephson may come before then.
“ Not he. He'd have been here before this if he was corning.
No, Mores, your bait hasn’t caught on this time. Jephson isnt
exactly a fool.
‘ ‘ What’s made the fellow so suspicious, 1 wonder ? growied
Jem Mandy, the biggest man in the gang, and the best rougn-
rider in the colony. “A few weeks ago he’d follow any trail,
likely or unlikely, that seemed to lead to the capture oi Bowen a
gang’. ”
“ Ay, but he is getting a bit shy by this time. He has been
sent off on the wrong tack too often; and, in all probability ha
looks upon Mores’ letter as a blind, to draw off bis attention,
and leave the coast clear for a job wove planned someu here
©ls€i. . • 1 i J.
“ You bet he has smelt a rat. Boulters Coppice is the last
place you are likely to find a police trooper in to-night.
“ Why didn’t you think of all this before?” snarled Mores.
“ You can all be precious smart and clever when it is too late.
“ Not at all, Mores, my boy,” replied Bowen. “ And don’t
you lose your temper. W e are not a bit too late, for the swag
we shall get from the coacli will be good pay lor our night s
work. We should have been very glad, of course, if, m the way
of business, we could have helped you to a little private revenge ;
but as apparently it is not to be, you d do well to make the beet
of it, and dry up.”
“ Mores doesn't forget that Jephson’s pull on a revolver on
one occasion was just half a second quicker than his own,”
remarked Ned Dawson.
“ And that an agreeable month, ‘ at her Majesty s expense,
was the result,” added Ranee, another of the gang.
“ And that at times an old bullet-wound stings and throbs
in a way that is particularly unpleasant,” continued Jem
Mandy.
“ There will be some stinging and throbbing amongst some of
you if this goes on, ’ growled Mores. .
“ Yes, boys, you have had about enough of this chaffing,
put in Bowen. “We don't want to have any bullets Hying
about till this job is over; and so we may as well arrange the
reception we are going to give tlie Brisbane coach.”
The chaffing ceased, and the gang got to business. Mores’
good temper was quickly restored; for, although he was by no
means popular with his confederates, the value of his advice
in such an affair as the one on hand was highly esteemed ; and
few men could arrange the “ stioking-np ” of a coach, or lifting
a herd of cattle, or robbing a bank with such masterly cunning
and skill as he. Mores was, in fact, an extraordinary man.
He knew every rough track and by-path in. the country as
no other man did : lie had as many wiles and shifts to escape as
a fox pursued by the hounds; he could ride at a gallop in the
dark, over a boulder-strewn country, where other men dared
scarcely follow at a walk. He had long acted with Bowen’s
gang in every affair of importance they had undertaken, and yet
not a man of them knew the exact locality of the haunt to which
he retired with his share of booty when the affair was over.
Tie was silent and unsociable. Cruel arid unrelenting by
nature, be never forgave or forgot a slight or an injury. Fie
was proud of his superior skill and astuteness, and looked down
upon his associates as mere brainless ruffians, whom he used
for bis own purposes, and who were inevitably fated to be
hanged, as they deserved. He would have no share in their
“sprees,” which always followed a successful “job” at pome
bush-tavern or other. In a word, although he acted with them
and was the most dangerous rascal of them all, he bated and
despised the lot.
His unpopularity is therefore easy to understand; and when
for once his precautions failed, and he fell into the toils of
Inspector Jephson, his companions were never tired of chaffing
him about it, of poking fun at bis misfortune, or of asking him
the “ latest news of Inspector Jephson.” To stop their mouths
and take away this reproach was now his object, and so he had
suggested and arranged this combined job of inveigling the
police into a trap and of “stioking-up” the Brisbane coach—
the first for his own private satisfaction, the second for the joint
benefit of himself and bis comrades.
The gang had fidgeted away the time till nearly twelve
o’clock: all except Mores, who. perhaps disliking his company,
had undertaken to rid® along the road and meet the coach.
“ Hallo! there is the clattering gallop of Mores’ Lag. Don’t
you hear it?”
The men were on their feet in a moment.
“ Well, how long before the coach comes?” asked Bowen, as
the black rode up.
“ Ten minutes, I take it, as near as possible. X saw the light
of the lamps as the horses slowly climbed Barerock Pitch; then
I galloped back. We ought to get ready.”
“ Every man to his station,” ordered Bowen. “ And mind,
on this occasion no blood is to be spilt if it can be avoided.”
The few minutes that elapsed between the completion of the
preparations and the appearance of the coach’s glimmering
lamps were fraught full of excitement; for even with the
boldest and most hardened the nerves are apt to tingle, the
blood course faster, and the heart beat quicker as the moment
for action approaches.
“ Steady, now ! Here they are I”
The coach was heipg driven at only a moderate pace. The
glare of the lamps showed the driver the fallen tree that had
been -placed across the track, and he was able to pull up in
time to avoid injuring his horses or overturning the coach.
The next moment he was aware of the presence of the bush-
rangers, four of whom immediately rushed to the horses’ heads.
“ Throw up your hands !” shouted Bowen to the driver.
“ Oh, all right,” was the cool reply. “It is not likely lam
going to fight a dozen of you.”
“You are the Brisbane coach, governor?” continued Bowen,
somewhat taken aback by the driver’s indifferent manner.
“Oh, yes! lam the Brisbane coach,” was the answer. “It
is not necessary to ask who you are.”
“From the goldfields?” was the next question.
“ Oh, yes! from the goldfields, with the month’s takings for
the Brisbane Bank. You gentlemen of the road are in luck
tills time.”
“ Then what has become of your escort?”
“They are inside taking a snooze. They didn’t expect to
meet Mr. Bowen and his friends this journey.”
“Then they had bettei wake up quick. We are going to
lighten the coach. It won’t take us long, and then you can
continue your journey.”
“ Here, you troopers!” he bawled. “ Come out of that sharp,
if you want to save your skins; or we will riddle your hides
and this blessed old vehicle with bullet-holes! Here Jim, Ned,
Ranee! let down the steps, and give the gentlemen a helping
hand to get out!”
Now all this time there had been no sound or sign of move-
ment from the inside of the coach, and the three members of the
gang singled out by their leader advanced boldly to the door
and threw it open.
“ Come out of ”
Ranee was going to add the word “ that ”; but it never passed
his lips. For a revolver-bullet pierced his brain while the word
was vet on his tongue, and at the same moment Ned Dawson
and Jem Mandy both received severe shot wounds.
“You fools, you shall pay dearly for this!” cried Bowen.
“ And you, vou smooth-tongued rascal, shall be the first !” And
as he spoke he levelled his revolver at the driver’s head.
But the driver—who knew the part he bad to play to be »
ticklish one, and foresaw that he was likely to be the first
victim when the shooting began—had taken his precautions;
and the instant the first shot was fired had leapt to the ground
and disappeared in the darkness.
A nurse passed Bowen’s lips as lie perceived, for the first time,
that the driver’s seat was empty.
“Bring them down!” he cried. “Blaze into them! Kill
them all! And look out! that driver is sneaking around some-
where.”
As he spoke he discharged every barrel of his revolver at the
body of the coach, an example which was immediately followed
by the rest- of the gang: and in a minute the track was covered
with splintered wood and shattered pones of. glass.
But by this time the conch was empty. Inspector Jephson
and the eight police troopers having descended from it to carry
on the fight in the open : and the gang were not slow to perceive
that they had nine troopers to deal with instead of three.
“Now, men!” shouted Jephson. “Shoot these murderous
ruffians down ! That’s Bowen! go for him! And where is
that thief Mores?”
“Here! to settle old scores with you,” replied a voice from
behind.
Jephson turned sharply round to fane his foe. and received in
the upper port of his left arm the bullet that would have other-
wise shattered his spine and killed him on the spot.
T-Te thought he was at the mercy of the black—for his own
revolver had dropped from his band—when two of the troopers
intervened to save him : and Mores, after firing two rapid shots,
disappeared, with the troopers in hot pursuit after him.
But the survivors of the gang now understood that they were
fighting a hopeless battle. Bowen, the leader, wounded in two
places, had been pounced upon bv the plucky driver, and, after
a severe struggle, had been secured.
(( fIS TIJE OH I !PrOT¥ Have you ever heard of Garibaldi, the great Italian soldier?
11l 1 IIL UJIUOII Us LIOLSI II ■ The Story in “PLUCK” published on Saturday deals with
the career of this remarkable man.


Ranee and one other had been killed outright, while Curtis
Jiad succeeded in disarming and capturing another. This
accounted for four out of the nine, and the remaining five were
not prepared to continue such an unequal contest.
With one accord they plunged into the depths of the coppice,
and made for the place wherq the horses had been left. This
they succeeded in reaching, and presently the sound of horses
gall oping hard told thei troopers that further pursuit would he
fruitless.
‘ Have you got Mores ?” was the first question Jephson asked
i® ? en were 01106 more gathered round him.
No; he got away,” replied Curtis. “I got a clear sight
on him. twice; but he twists and doubles like a hare, and I
nnssed him.
“ Did he ride away?”
<< xT° ai l* sure; I did not actually see him.”
. ?’, ae suddenly exclaimed a voice which all knew
to be Mores. “ And if I hadn’t lost my shooting-iron, you and
i, Jephson, would have been more than quits by this time!”
rr 7°, l ey . r6V °lver-shots was instantly fired at the sp>ot from
wmen the voioe seemed to come; but the scream of jeering and
a most demomao laughter that immediately followed showed
tnat not one of them had found its intended billet.
, A mmutes later the troopers again heard the clatter of
« rs f-b°°fs on the hard ground, and knew that Mores had made
good his escape.
CHAPTER 111.
Ten Years’ Penal Servitude-An Old Man of the
Woods Whitefoot’s Change of Masters —The
“ Chasm.”
It was a month after the events described in the last chapter.
Jepiison and Curtis were sitting together in their quarters at
oona. iiotn men had gained a step in promotion for their
snare in break mg up the notorious Bowen gang; Jephson was
now Commissioner Jephson, and Curtis had advanced from a
simple sergeant to the rank of inspector.
Both men had just returned from a criminal trial that had
caused the greatest excitement throughout the colony, and were
now discussing the various incidents of this case, in which they
had been important witnesses.
len years penal servitude!” remarked Jephson. “The
fellow ought to think himself well out of it. He deserves to
be Ranged over and over again.”
No doubt ;_ but there was no evidence of murder produced
vPn, i r ls m orally certain that he has been concerned
m the killing of a number of people ; but there was absolutely no
proof of any kind. Bowen and his gang always acted on the
p inciple that dead men tell no tales,’ and when murder had
. q 6. done it was done wholesale. No one was spared who
might have given awkward evidence afterwards.”
~ . y ’ they have been the curse of this* part of the colony for
the last two years.
. “ H OW that , t : he is fairly broken up, and its leader
“ lere to be a respite from these outrages.”
■. 0l !?, ht to be. But I doubt if there will be any real
at large property while that villain Mores is still
«P 6 - S a puzz^e —that rascal.”
catch him ” & hUnt him down to his own den we shall never
Where on earth he, and the others who escaped. got away to
on that night is a profound mystery. The whole country for
forty miles round was literally alive with troopers. We sent
warning telegrams to every station, and every settlement and
\ mage, however small and yet no man caught so much as a
glimpseof any one of them. They disappeared as suddenly as
if they had gone under the earth.”
Gaol I ?” UPP ° Se B ° Wen Wiil work out llis bit of tij ne in Portman
“ Y nd ?, ukt ® dly - Portman is the only place for such a daring
rascal. But they will be able to keep him there safe enough.”
I wonder whether Mores has quitted the country?”
I don t think it possible.”
“He has been very quiet of late, then.”
Yes; he has to lie low, no doubt. There is a description of
him m every station and bush-township in the country; and
every trooper is keen about earning the five hundred pounds
the Government offers for his capture.”
Well, we must keep our eyes open. We shall come upon
the rascal when we least expect it.”
“ I am convinced we shall hear of him before long.”
Jephson rose from his chair, for he had to ride to a distant
station on police business, and Whitefoot, ready, bridled and
saddled, was waiting for him in the yard below.
< < tt7u S and ke wa lhed over to the window of the room
•What a stunning animal he is!” exclaimed Curtis with
admiration, as he and Jephson looked down at the beautiful
horse. I say, J ephson, if you ever want to part with him ”
“Part with him!” interrupted the latter. “I would just
as soon think of parting with my right hand I”
“Hallo!” exclaimed Curtis. “Who is the old man of the
woods talking to your groom?”
“ I haven’t the remotest idea. Probably one of the few old
blacks to whom the Government allows a small pittance every
week.”
“ Most of them,” laughed Curtis, “ are rather shy at approach-
ing police headquarters.”
“This old chap seems quite at home with the groom; and
h© evidently knows a piece of good horseflesh when he sees it.
Look with what admiration he walks round Whitefoot.”
The decrepit old black, whom both the police officers watched
with great interest, suddenly displayed his admiration for the
horse in a startling way.
He dealt the man who was walking the horse gently up and
down a tremendous blow on the back of the head with an iron
instrument which he suddenly produced from beneath his rags.
Then, snatching the bridle from the hands of the stunned groom,
leapt lightly upon Whitefoot’s back; and, using his implement
as a spur, drove it into the animal’s sensitive flanks, causing it
to plunge madly and then dart, like an arrow from the tow,
out of the yard gate into the open track beyond.
“He’s bolted with it!” cried Curtis.
Jephson said nothing; but he instantly threw up the window
and fired his revolver at the audacious thief who had stolen his
horse from under his very nose.
But the distance was great, and his hand shook with excite-
ment; consequently the bullet went wide.
But a strange transformation had taken place with the rider
on Whitefoot’s back. He suddenly snatched from his chin the
long, false beard that hung there; he cast off the loose rags
that flew out behind him, and displayed to the two astonished
police officers the well-remembered features of Mores, the black
bushranger.
“It’s Mores, by heaven!” exclaimed Curtis vehemently,
“Shoot! here’s a rifle! I cannot,” said J ephson.
“But I may hit Whitefoot!”
“Better that than he should fall into the hands of that
blackguard.”
Curtis took the rifle and did his best. But the excitement
under which he laboured was not conducive to accurate shooting.
He fired many shots. Once he grazed the horse’s neck, and once
he touched the thief’s leggings. That was as near as he got.
And before very long horse and rider were far out of range.
“He’s gone! hopelessly gone! unless some of our fellows are
lucky enough to come across him.”
“ But send out a party in pursuit!” urged Curtis.
“ What! To catch Whitefoot? You might just as well
send out a ’bus horse to catch a Derby winner! There isn’t
a horse in this part of the world that can even touch him for
speed.”
“At all events, telegraph to the nearest stations the news
that Mores is on the road again. His hiding-place is not likely
to be less than twenty miles off, and someone may intercept
him between this and then.”
It was easy to see that Jephson had little faith in the measures
suggested by Curtis. But nevertheless he proceeded to carry
them out. _ He telegraphed the news to every station within
twenty miles, and he instantly despatched four experienced
troopers to follow in Mores’ track.
“ The country will be too hot to hold him after this,” suggested
Curtis, by way of consolation.
“ It would have been too hot to hold any ordinary man long
before this,” replied Jephson. “But this rascal seems to be a
devil incarnate ; and, with such a horse as Whitefoot between
his legs, he is in a better position than ever for evading pursuit
and capture.”
While the two police officers were tending the unfortunate
groom—who eventually succumbed to the terrific blow on the
head he had received, thus adding another murder to the long
list of Mores’ crimes—-we may as well follow that worthy in
his flight to the lair where he had remained so long undiscovered
by the pxfiioe.
“ Get along!” he said to Whitefoot, as he prodded the horse’s
glossy coat with the cruel implement he held in his hand.
“ Get along! You have got another master now, and you wili
have to know the difference.”
The high-spirited, mettlesome animal, whom a gentle word
or a slight shaking of the reins was enough to persuade to do
his best, bounded furiously forward in a series of mad leaps
which must have unhorsed a less dexterous rider than Mores.
The savage treatment which he was suddenly called upon
to suffer, in fact, rendered Whitefoot positively infuriate. Ever
and anon he lashed out wildly with his heels : hut the barbarous
goad held by the black, and used with unsparing hand, curbed
these ebullitions of temper, and sent the gentle animal careering
wildly onward, as if mere speed could relieve him of the demon
whose legs so tightly gripped his sides.
At length Mores’ fit of senseless passion subsided. The goad
lay idly in his hand. Whitefoot, whose spirits for the time had
FOR BRAVE MEN ANO WfiMFM The ' E s. to . r of “ PLUCK” awards a Silver Medal and hand.
. 1 ' * **slUr VVUlfiLlii some Diplomas every week. Full account of last Awards
appears in “ PLUCK ” published on Saturday.


THE “HALFPENNY MARVEL.”
been broken, was suffered to proceed at a less furious rate,
having ceased to fight against his rider. Mores chuckled to
Ihimself over the success of his daring project.
Had I only known,” he said to himself, “that Jephson was
at the window before I knocked the groom over, I could have
puts a bullet through him as easily as I settled the other fellow.
But thats to come, he added presently; “that’s to come, and
before very long. Anyhow, I have got his nag, which is pretty
good as a first instalment of the debt that has to be wiped out.
And won t Mandy and Dawson and the rest,” he went on,
TIIEEE WAS A RUSH TO THE ENTRANCE. A DOZEN BULLETS WENT WHISTLING
AFTER THE HORSE AND ITS RIDER.
pursuing a new turn of thought, ‘ ‘ look blue when they see I
have won my bet? Ay, ay! the dull cowards, they hate me
but they can’t do without me. I’ll use them! I’ll use them’
every one! and when I’ve done with them I’ll sell them to the
police. Ho, ho! it is not bad form to be a bushranger when
you have a headpiece on your shoulders, and no one to think
of that you cure two straws about. I’ll use them! and Mores’
gang shall be twioe as widely known and talked about as ever
Bowen s was!
Such were the thoughts that occupied the busy brain of this
inhuman scoundrel as he drove Whitefoot onward many a weary
mile.
CHAPTER IV.
It was late in the day—having traversed a distance of more
On bursting through the bushes, a singular sight met their view Tn th* «»/« n,* i
with two others, who, having already tied his feet toaether IfZZZnZ In the cent tc of the glade a man was struggling frantically
stood by yelling with laughter . From the ™ h£hind Mm , while a fourth
and fro in the breeze .”—See “A DEAD MAN’S GIFT ” next week ’ ommous noose at the end , sivayed gently to
than twenty miles from the police quarters at Troona—that he
dismounted, and led Whitefoot by the bridle up a stony path
that seemed to lead nowhere save to the top of a rocky eminence.
When he had gained the summit all further progress appeared
to be barred, for a sheer precipice, at least three hundred feet
deep, stretched away at his feet. Beneath, looked in by
precipitous cliffs on every side, lay a small valley, whose rich,
luxuriant grass had to all appearanoe never been trodden by the
foot of main Here was Mores’ lair, haunt, or refuge, to which
he retired in perfect safety, however hot the police pursuit
—— after him might be.
/ \ This little-known region—many miles
from any human habitation, and never
'fffSf ; / \ visited except occasionally by squatters in
(Jfff If // \ searc h °f strayed cattle—was popularly
fj\ I J l I known as the “Chasm,” and the most
i/ J / I I vigilant police officer would have as soon
/ 7 / / thought of looking for the notorious Mores
V / /in such an unlikely spot as of looking for
/ S l him in the moon.
/ V “Now, steady, beast! You’ve got to
j J come _! ” exclaimed Mores, as he dragged
/ J the frightened and unresisting animal down
I I the tiny pathway, the existence of which
J a was well concealed by the thick fringe of
// j trees that lined the brink.
j j Once started, the descent was easy; for
J y:.*. { the natural difficulties had been in a great
measure overcome by the long and patient
labours bestowed upon it by Mores during
his periods of enforced retirement.
\ Down this tortuous path he led the worn-
/ out Whitefoot, and before many minutes
/ had elapsed both were installed in the
I spacious cave which served the purpose of
I bedroom, living-room, and stable, where
/j the survivors of Bowen’s gang were dis-
\ covered preparing their evening meal,
Mores and the Gang—Departure-
Monotony—Ned Dawson’s Exploit.
A shout of surprise went up from the
cave> when Mores was seen at the entranoe
leading in the prize.
“By heaven, he’s got the horse !”
“ And he’s won the wager ! ”
“ He’s got the deuce’s own luck ! ”
“ How did you manage it ? ”
“ Are the troopers after you ? ”
“ The beast is werth running a bit of
risk for ! ”
Such were the questions and comments
that greeted the black on his arrival, to
each and every one of which he vouchsafed
no reply, save to demand a drink, which,
to tell the truth, after the severe exertions
he had gone through, he stood sorely in
need of.
k & “Well, boys,” he said presently, after he
«*) ' had received the much-needed refreshment,
J “ I have performed the first of the two con-
ditions which you set me. The second
=®||||pg!!p 8r remains to be accomplished. When that
has been fulfilled, remember then that you
—r" are all absolutely at my orders. I become
» the leader of the band.”
“That’s right,” said Mandy, after a
pause. *
t “But it isn’t accomplished yet,” said
Ned Dawson, as if he didn’t much relish
fENT whistling the idea of serving under Mores’ command.
“ We’ll stick to our word,” added another.
“ But Bowen isn’t out of gaol yet. If you
can manage that, you are a darned sight cleverer chap than I
take you for.”
Mores’ face was a picture of passion, with difficulty restrained.
And, although his features betrayed unmistakably his real
sentiments towards his comrades, he spoke to them in a voice
that showed no traces of anger.
' v:t f a square bargain,” he said, “and I suppose
you 11 stick to it. I made a pretty good beginning on the night
we stuolc-up the Brisbane coach by guiding you all to this
piaoe and showing you the secret pathway into it. Had it not
been for me the troopers would have nabbed you, everv one
the next day. Then, when I claimed to be the leader of the
£ an ff’ you said that I must prove I was smart enough for the


post-. And you suggested two tests. One, that I should steal
Jephson’s horse, Whitefoot; that was a pretty stiff job, but I’ve
done it ”
“ Tell us how you did it,” interrupted Dawson.
“ Presently,” replied Mores. “ And, two, that I should get
Bowen out of gaol. Well, I am going to set about that in a
few days, when Whitefoot has recovered from the gruelling he’s
had today. When I've done that, I take it you are my men;
and the gang will be Mores’ gang, not Bowen’s.”
“ lie speaks fair enough,” said Jem Mandy, when Mores had
finished. “If he can do what he intends to try—that is, to
srack Portman Gaol—he’ll be the smartest man I’ve ever heard
tell of in the bushranging line ; and J. don’t see”why we shouldn’t
follow him, although he is the son of a gun and as black as
your hat.
“That’s enough of jawing,” put in Ned Dawson. “Give us
the yam. We’ve been cooped up here in this blessed hole so
many days that news of any kind, especially of Mr. Commis-
sioner Jephson, will be very welcome.”
Mores now related an account of his proceedings in the
matter of Whitefoot’s capture, and the story elicited unqualified
expressions of admiration from the whole gang.
“And so you plugged the groom with that piece of iron?”
said one. “ You’ll be a bold chap if you venture inside Portman
after that.”
“ I should have liked to have seen old Jephson’s face when he
saw you running away with his favourite nag, ’ said another.
“ I wish I had seen his face sooner,” remarked Mores, with a
diabolical grin. “ I guess my revolver would have spoiled the
look of it for all time.”
And so the talk went on, everyone having some word of praise
to bestow upon Mores for the cool presence of mind he had
displayed m the theft of Whitefoot; while the black himself,
under the influence of the lavish encomiums showered upon him,
seemed disposed to be genial and merry with his companions
in a way he had never been before.
“And when do you start for Portman?” asked Jem Mandy,
who was especially impressed by Mores’ daring.
“In two days’ time,” was the answer. “ Whitefoot ought to
be fit and well enough for anything then.”
“And when do you expect to be back?”
“ I shall be away ten days—perhaps a fortnight.”
“And are you going to do it all by yourself?” asked Ned
Dawson, who did not attempt to hide his belief that Mores
would fail.
“ Yes; unless one of you will come and help.”
There was a dead silence when these words fell from the
black’s lips; no one seemed particularly anxious to volunteer.
And Jem Mandy, who was least disinclined to offer his services,
was restrained from doing so by the loud demands that presently
poured in upon Mores that he should explain his plan.
“‘ll us your plan!” shouted Dawson loudly. “Let us see
whether it will hold water. If it is good enough any one of us
will go with you. But no man is going to run—in the dark,
blindly—into such a place as Portman.”
“ I can’t and won’t tell .you my plan,” replied Mores, as that
old look of supreme hatred for his companions, which had lately
vanished from his face, again came into it.
“ Then you can go to the gallows your own way,” concluded
Dawson; “ for we are not such fools as to follow a man when
we don’t know where he is leading us.”
Mores said no more. Perhaps he had no plan out and dried,
and did not like to say so, or perhaps he was not anxious to
have a companion. However it was, no more was said about it;
and two days later, riding Whitefoot and leading a spare horse,
he left the Ohasm on the errand from which no one expected
him to return.
One last word Mores did say; but it had nothing to do
with the job he had undertaken.
“Now, look here, boys. The secret of the path into the
Chasm must never be known. That is a matter of life and death
to all of us; so whatever you do while lam away, be careful.
If you go out of the valley hide your tracks before coming back
again ; and if by chance any trooper or stockman should stumble
upon the secret by accident he must never go away again. You
understand? That’s all!”
And so saying, be rode off up the steep incline, dismounted
half way, led his horse over the most difficult part, and finally
disappeared amongst the trees at the summit.
The days dragged slowly with the men in the Chasm. They
were young, active, stalwart men, and they found the life they
had been leading now for many weeks becoming intolerably
monotonous.
A week passed. Then the ten days went by that Mores had
fixed upon for the time of his return.
When a fortnight had passed, and Mores had not returned,
and no word of any kind had been received from him. the gang
resolved to wait no longer. Mores had been nabbed; that was
the general impression. Tt would be worse than useless to
©xnect him to turn up again. Besides, the hue and cry of the
police after them must have well-nigh dwindled away to nothing
CHAPTER V.
WHAT IS DEAREST TO THE HEART OF EVERY MAN? LIBERTY! ft was for Liberty that
Garibaldi fought. See a splendid Story of this great and good man in “PLUCK” on Saturday.
uy this time; and so they would make a new effort on the old
road, and “ stick-up ” a coach again. Not the Brisbane monthly
coach, that carried the gold with its escort of armed troopers,
but something less formidable; one of the regular passenger
vehicles, that earned travellers with well-stocked purses—
harmless, peaceful individuals that were not likely to resist
or give trouble when ordered to hand over their valuables.
Ned,Dawson was the moving spirit in the enterprise; and,
as he had private opinions of his own about the man most fitting
to be chosen as leader of the gang, was anxious to show that he
had no mean qualifications for the post, and to signalise the
absence of Mores by the performance of some successful exploits
This time Boulter’s Coppice was not chosen for the
rendezvous, but a place called Peter’s Pitch, where the road
ran up a sharp slope between two tough fences of stout timber,
where the coach was compelled to go slowly, and the passengers
generally walked up to ease the horses.
Not a man remained in the Chasm. But by night, and ia
parties of two, they made their way to the place of meeting;
while two out of the eight remained at a deserted shepherd’s
hut with fresh horses, in case the others were hard pressed ia
pursuit.
All went well. The six men arrived at Peter’s Pitch -without
accident, and without having attracted the smallest suspicion.
They had several hours to wait, for the coach was not timed
to pass before midnight.
'Die delay was tedious, and more than one bottle of spirits
had been consumed; although m Bowen’s time there was a
rule, strictly enforced, that no drink of any kind should be
taken on such expeditions.
When midnight came, and the glimmer of the lamps was seen
slowly ascending the hill, every man of the gang had had more
liquor than was good for him, and much more than enough to
unfit him for the delicate and dangerous work in which he was
to take a part.
“ Stand, and bail up!” shouted Dawson to the driver.
Seeing two or three revolvers looking his way, the man had
no alternative but to comply. The coach stopped; and vague
cries of terror arose from the people inside, amongst whom
were several women, when the appearance of three armed men
at the open door warned them of the cause of this sudden
stop,pa ge.
“ Don’t move! don’t etir! or I shall be forced to let a little
daylight into you!”
Two watchful revolvers kept the whole of the passengers in
absolute stillness.
“ Now come out, one by one. Do you hear? Not too fast!”
“ Jem, hold the bag, and I will search them.”
The passengers alighted in the order in which they were
seated, and every one was compelled to contribute some valuable
or other to the capacious bag which Mandy had brought with
him for the reception of these offerings.
When all had alighted the bag was well-nigh filled. There
were several gold watches and a large number of silver ones.
There were bank-notes and cheques, many gold coins, and a
large sum in silver. These, with a- goodly stock of bracelets,
brooches, watch-chains, and other trinkets, made a very valuable
haul indeed, and the gang were entirely satisfied with their
night’s work.
It only remained for them to get away with the booty in
safety.
“Bail Up!”—A Fight and a Rush—Ned Dawson’s
Fate—The Police-trooper’s Death—Mores Again.
Up to thi° noint the operation of “ stieking-up " the conch
had been performed in a fairly workmanlike and skilful manner.
Then the liquor that had been drunk began to tell, and the
gang went all to pieces.
When the passengers had been stripped of all that was worth
taking, every member of the gang crowded round Jem Mandy,
anxious to see with their own eves the amount and the value of
the booty the, bag contained. This conversation was so engrossing
that the" passengers, standing huddled together, were unnoticed
and forgotten.
Gradually it dawned upon them that they numbered two
to one to the bushrangers; and the more resolute, recovering
from their frieht, instantly proposed that they should make an
effort to repossess themselves of their property: and the proposal
being agreed to. the gang, as they crowded round the spoil,
were amazed to hear a stern command bidding them, in their
turn, “ Bail up!”
But so far gone were they in drink and recklessness that they
were unable to appreciate their danger, and instantly turned
and opened fire upon the group of passengers.
The letter at once replied, and for a few moments a sharp
exchange of revolver-shots took place between the two parties.
Jem Mandv. Ned Dawson, and several others of the gang were
seriously wounded; one of the passengers was killed outright.


Then, as revolvers were emptied and there was no time to
reload them, the passengers made a combined rush upon the
gang, and fairly drove them from the field. A sharp tussle
ensued for the possession of the bag, in the course of which the
gold, the silver, the watches, and the other trinkets were
scattered over the roadway.
In all probability the gang would have rallied again, and
perhaps recovered their booty; but at the oritical moment the
sound of horses trotting quickly, and the jingle of accoutre-
ments, warned them that a posse of police troopers were rapidly
approaching, attracted by the sounds of firing which had reached
them.
To the horses! Get to the horses !” was now the general cry.
there was a wild rush over the fence to the place where the
horses were hobbled; then a regular stampede, every member
of the gang riding at top speed in the direction of the hut where
fresh horses had beep left—a matter of twenty miles, at least.'
Hie gang had a good start.
The police troopers presently arrived upon the scene, and
had great difficulty in obtaining accurate information of what
hao occurred. For the passengers were not only highly excited
by me adventure that had overtaken them, but were infinitely
more interested in seeking, squabbling, and disputing over the
various items of their individual property than in helning the
police with advice or information.
At length the latter gathered some information upon which
they could act, and at once went off in pursuit of the gang,
although the darkness naturally prevented them from following
otherwise than at haphazard.
“Going strong, Ned?” asked Jem Mandy, as he and Dawson,
aiter a five miles hard gallop, eased up to let their horses
breathe a bit,
“Infernal lrck!” growled the latter. “I am hit in two
places, and all the swag lost!”
... Can you stick it out, Ned? To be copped now means a
liter at least, if not a rope and a six-foot drop.”
‘I may. lam not done yet.”
“ They hit me, too.”
“Where?”
“In the left arm.”
“I guess you’ll do well enough.”
“ Where have the rest got to ?”
‘‘hollowing a line of their own, I suppose,”
We shall find them at the hut, I dare say.”
‘‘Most likely.”
“ We must be getting on.”
“ J’J 1 . 0 !® cursed troopers are on the track, you bet.”
v.ith an oath, and a “Get up, old hoss!” Dawson dug his
s P’ l ! rs 1I “°. lls horse s flanks, and again rode on at a furious rate,
although it was easy to see that his seat was unsteady, and that
he maintained himself in the saddle rather from force of habit
than any present power to do so.
The early morning sun rose just as they reached the hut, and
them t
“They have left only one horse,” said Jem Mandy. “and
mine is dead-beat,
“ 1 suppose they thought we were lying stark dead down
there at Peter s Pitch.
‘‘But what’s to be done?”
“ You take the fresh animal; it is no good to me. If I get
down from this brute I shall never get up again.”
" em 1 now took a long look at Dawson’s face, and
noticed the ghastly pallor that covered it.
“ Where are you hit?” he asked.
“ In the neck, and somewhere in the side.”
“ Bleeding much ?”
“Think nob; may be internal.”
“ You want a drop of brandy.”
Ned Dawson laughed. “ Guess I have had too much of that,”
he said. Come, get up, and let’s be moving on.”
Jem Mandy, without further pressing, mounted the fresh
horse, and they pushed forward again.
For many miles they rode in silence at a moderate pace,
until Jem began to be anxious. It was broad daylight. "The
of the coach would be generally known and tele-
graphed to all the stations. At every bit of rising ground they
came to he expected to see a trooper or two on the other side
( an't you shake up a bit ?” he asked.
“ Not a foot raster if Jephson himself were within pistol-
shot. answered Dawson.
“ Think PH go ahead, and send you back a fresh horse and
a mouthful of liquor.
“3lTi°ht” neW What that meant ‘ He rianed > as he said,
He knew that Jem Mandy was not very keen about im-
perilling his neck to save a wounded comrade.
<( “Guess I should do the same,” he said, as Jem rode off
Every man for himself, has been my motto, and I am not
surprised when 1 see others acting upon it as well. ”
Jem rode away at top speed, and was soon out of sight. Ned
CHAPTER VI.
The Prison Barber—A Whitish Powder—The
Mortuary—The Warder and the Coffin.
You can get a lot of fun out of the contest starting in this week’s “CHIPS,” and you may
win one of the fifty prizes.
Dawson continued ou at the same moderate pace; he was just
able to sit in his saddle, and no more. The horse jogged steadily
on r ■ instinct in the right direction.
His progress was slow, but it was sure; and, aa mile after mile
was covered, a feeling of hope that he would yet pull through
came over him, and he revived somewhat from the faintness
that had appeared likely to overpower him.
At last he was within a mile of the Chasm. He had sur-
mounted the last ridge; the track in front of him was rough
and stony, but comparatively level. He gave his horse a
moment’s breathing space, and looked behind him.
He saw a police trooper descending the slope on the opposite
sice of the dip; he knew his tracks had been discovered, and he
IjS P ursuer must be up with him in ten minutes.
Get up, old hoss ! one last effort.”
But the poor beast, ridden out nearly to the last gasp, could
oo no more than he was doing, but shambled feebly forward at
the same slow gait at which he had previously travelled. In
the meantime the trooper was closing upon him hand over
hand.
Dawson was within one hundred yards of the secret pathway
when he heard the sound of clattering hoofs behind him,
ominously near. He felt the secret of the Chasm would be
discovered if he went straight to the pathway; but he knew of
nothing else to do.
A stentorian voice called out, “ Surrender!”
lie was at the very edge of the path now.
Then a revolver-bullet whizzed so close to his face that he
put up his hand to his cheek to see if there were blood on it.
That settled it. He turned his horse in among the trees,
and began the dangerous descent. No man had ever yet ridden
down this part of the path. He knew his danger, but he was
too weak to dismount. He trusted to the instinct and sure-
footedness of his horse.
Ned Dawson had scarcely commenced his perilous path when
the trooper rode up, and found his progress barred by a sheer
precipioe.
He dismounted; searched about; came upon what might be
the vestige of a footway; followed it up warily ; and saw
A nan and horse reel from the narrow path into the abyss,
roll over and over, and then strike the bottom with a horrible
thud that placed their fate beyond question!
The police trooper was brave and hardy; but the sight of
that horrible fall unnerved him and rendered him dizzy. He
almost fell. But the passing weakness presently left him, and
he realised that he had made a discovery of vital importance.
This was the lair where the gang of bushrangers who had so
long terrorised the country had their home. He made haste
to turn his discovery to account. Quickly regaining the summit
of the Chasm, he mounted his horse and rode swiftly away.
The track was narrow for some distance, with steep banks on
either side. It would be a nasty place to meet any of the gang
in who might be returning from their recent exploit.
Suddenly he was aware of two horsemen riding rapidly
towards him. One was a big man with close-cropped hair; the
other was a native.
The trooper knew them in a moment.
The big man was the late leader of the gang—the convict
Bowen; although the trooper could scarcely believe his eyes
when he saw him. The other was Mores, the black, whose
daring and impudent crimes were the talk and terror of the
whole country.
The trooper’s only chance was to drop one of them with a
successful shot, and then charge. But the chance was a very
small one, and he knew it.
The three revolvers rang out at the same moment.
The troooer’s horse fell, pinning him to the ground beneath
it. There he lay, helplessly at the mercy of the two miscreants,
and in another moment a pistol-shot stretched him lifeless on
the ground.
“ The fools! they have given the secret of this place away!”
was Mores’ only comment.
But he and Bowen did their best to remedy the danger. The
dead trooner and his horse were, with infinite difficulty, pushed
over the precipice, at the bottom of which they were afterwards
found, close beside the remains of Dawson and his horse.
Then, having done what was possible to obliterate the tracks
leading to the secret path, they descended into the Chasm, and
joined their astonished comrades.
Mores had returned, and had actually accomplished the
difficult, task he had set himself of getting Bowen out of Portman
Gaol.
The gang—all of whom, except Dawson, had safely returned,
although every man had been wounded—were not only
astonished, but delighted to see him. Their late unsuccessful


expedition had taught them the lesson that an incompetent
•leader was likely to bring destruction upon themselves; and
they remembered now that all their successes under Bowen
were due to the fact that Mores was always at hand to adviso
him.
Dawson, moreover, who had been the chief opponent to
Mores’ leadership, was dead. Bowen himself frankly admitted
Mores’ superior claims, and so the latter was elected
unanimously to the post he coveted.
Why had Mores run such risks to obtain command over
comrades that, we know, he despised and hated T
The question is difficult to answer.
In part the reason, no doubt, was that, as leader, he would
have a larger share of all booty than the rest. And money was
Mores’ god; money, not to spend, but to keep; to hoard it in.
heape, and to see these heaps growing bigger and bigger, that
was Mores’ ruling passion.
And then, in days gone by, he had been treated to kicks
and cuffs from every man in the gang. His share of the spoil
had been less than anybody else’s, and so he had intended again
and again to sell the gang to the police; but had found it
difficult, owing to hia own implication in every crime.
Now his chance had come. He would have the largest share
of every prize. Those little heaps of hoarded gold would grow
much faster than before.
And then, when his followers had ceased to be useful to him,
he oould still have his revenge, and betray them to the dock
and the gallows.
“And how did Wliit-efoot behave?” asked Mandy, when
Meres had been duly elected as leader and chief.
“He is a clinker, and no mistake,” was the reply. “He
never tired, never faltered, keeping up that long, easy stride of
his from morning to night.”
“ And tell us how the job was done. Have you pulled the
blessed old gaol down? or blown it sky high? For that seems
about tlie only way of getting a prisoner out of Portman.”
“ No, the gaol is still there,” laughed Mores, in his dry way;
“ and I guess there has been a good deal of commotion inside
the walls these last few days.”
“This was the way of it, boys,” said Bowen, taking up the
tale. “ That is to say, I will tell you all x know; for I don’t
know all, and there are some pxfints Mores refuses to explain.”
“ Never mind them. You tell your own story,” interrupted
the newly-elected chief.
“This was the way of it, then,” continued Bowen. “For
seven weeks I had been in that beastly hole, working pretty
hard during, the day and eating my heart out with rage and
disgust all night. Seven weeks I had had of it; and when I
remembered I had ten long years to serve, I began to feel Kke
a madman, and was ready to bash my brains out against the
granite walls.”
“Just as well you didn’t-,” said Mores.
“ I’m pretty certain I should have done, if a ray of hope
hadn't penetrated those prison bars.”
“What was it?” asked Jem Mandy.
“A black fellow used to come every day and shave us, and
onoe every week to cut our hair. No one knew who he was, or
what his real name might be; he was, in fact, one of these native
©haps that seem to spring from nowhere in particular. ‘ Gam-
mon,’ the prisoners called him; because he was as sly as a rat,
and had often passed useful little articles like files, spikes,
and pioklocks into the hands of his patients under the very noses
of the warders, who always superintended the daily shave, no
doubt being well paid for doing so by friends of the inmates
outside.
“ Well, one day this old image whispered something in my
-par which fairly made me jump, and cost me a nasty cut with
jfche razor on tlie chin.
“ ‘ Can’t you sit still, you fool?’ he said to me, as uppish as
could bo. And the warder asked me ‘ what i meant by behaving
like a darned jack-in-the-box.’ You will understand why I
was a bit agitated when I Bell you that the words I heard were:
1 Are you going to try a bolt out of this next Friday?’
“Nothing else passed that day, for the warder was too sharp
on the watch for me to make any reply. Next day, however,
when he was pending over me, I managed to whisper ‘ Yes,’
tod he nodded" as a sign that he understood. Well, the day
following was the day when we all had our hair cut, and I
was on tiptoe of expectation to get some further message from
old Gammon. But he didn’t move a muscle, or so much as
wink, and I was beginning to think there was nothing more to
come for a bit, when suddenly I felt a small ptaper packet
eliding down my back, inside my shirt and next to the skin.
“ I managed to sit tight that time, although it sent a regular
shiver down my spine.
“ You can imagine how keen I was to get my clothes off that
night and see what the packet might contain; but it was many
long hours before I got the chance. At last we were shut up
for the night in our cells. _ Even then I had no luck; for the
warder was so darned suspicious he didn’t leave me a moment
until I was in bed; and then he turned out the light, and I
I AVE RED "A DEAD MAN’S GIFT,” AND IT IS AWFULLY GUD AND EXCITING,
AND FROZE MY YUNG BLUD.—PIMPLE, OFFIS-BOY.
was in the dark, and still ignorant of the contents of the paper
packet.
“ But before veiy long the moon got up, and, by screwing
my eyes and the papier close up against the little hole of a
window, I was able to read the precious writing. This is whaS
it said:
“ ‘ Swallow the enclosed at ten o’clock on Wednesday night,
and leave the rest to me.’
“The note was signed * Mores.’ The enclosure was a whitish
powder, and there was a good deal of it.
“ I can’t say but what I was disappointed when I read this
extraordinary epistle. For I could not figure out, for the life
of me, how a few teaspoonfuls of messy powder were going to
help me. At last I came to the conclusion that it must be
poison, and that Mores meant to offer me an escape from prison
by a short cut to the next world.
_ ‘ ‘ However, in the end I decided that I would follow instruc-
tions closely, and if it did turn out to be poison—well, anything
was better than the grim torture of ten long years’ imprisonment.
“ At ten o’clock, as near as could be, I swallowed the dosa
on Wednesday, and then I can remember no mere until I a wok a
to find Mores bending over me, and saying that the horses
were waiting outside and that we must be off at onoe. What
happened in the meantime Mores must tell you himself, for I
know no more than the man in the moon.”
Here Bowen broke off, and the listeners gave vent to various
exclamations of wonder.
“ Great Scott! but it is a rum start-.”
“ Jingo! Mores is a miraole !”
“ It is a pretty surprising tale !’
“ Get on with it, Mores! Let us hear what happened !”
Mores sucked at his pipe for a few minutes in silence, before
taking up the story, which he did as follows:
“ The effect of the powder was- to send Bowen into a trailoe—•
a deep as deep and still as death itself; and go he was found in
the morning-— ‘ dead,’ the doctor said, and the body was carried
away to the mortuary, a small building close to the big prison;,
but separate from it and eutside the walls.
“ This was what I had been scheming for, and, when I heard
from Gammon that the powder had taken effect the rest was
fairly easy.
“ Now, I must tell you that Gammon had one other office
''in connection with the prison besides being barber. It was his
business when a prisoner died to lay out the body and prepare
it for burial. In due course, therefore, he received a summons
from the governor to proceed to the prison on this occasion, and
do what was necessary. Need I tell you that the old chap did
not go, and that your humble servant, accurately disguised to
represent him, went in his place? Whitefoot and the other
horse had been previously placed in a shed in the charge of a
email urchin, at a convenient distance from the mortuary. Well,
off I went- to the prison.
“ ‘ You’ve come to lay out that bushranger chap who died
Wednesday night?’ said the porter.
“ ‘Just bo,’ said I. ‘ Here’s the governor’s order.’ ,
“‘Walk this way,’ said he. And handed me over to a
warder, who unhitched a bunch of keys from a hook, and led
me right through the prison, opening and looking the doors
behind him, out to the small building which stood apart and
served as the mortuary.
“ ‘ Here you are,’ he said, unlocking the door. ‘Go in and
do what is necessary. Gome out when you have done, and I’ll
smoke a pipe the while.’
“ This suited me exactly. I took the lantern—for it was quite
dark inside—and went in.
. “ Then, without much difficulty, I roused Bowen, as I knew
I should ba able to do, and told him that the horses were waiting
and we must be off sharp. He was a bit dazed at first ; but
after a word or two of explanation he tumbled to the situation,
and recollected everything.
“When everything was ready I went to the door and sang
out to the warder:
“ ‘ I have all but done ; lend me a hand here.”
“He came in gruffly enough, not liking the job, only to be
embraced and thrown to the ground by Bowen, whose appear-
ance of itself was enough to frighten the wits out of him. Well,
We soon had him neatly tied up with ropes, and as helpless as
a baby.
“ ‘ Let us put him in the coffin,’ said Bowen to me.
“We were in-essed for time, but the temptation was too
strong to be resisted. So we whipped him in, locked the door,
dropped the keys into the well close by, and then made for the
shed where the horses were.
“ That’s about all. We rode hard all night, and rested at
a safe shop that I knew of during the day. We were three days
and nights on the road, and never met a trooper until we got
within a hundred yards ®f the Chasm. We settled him, how-
ever, and pretty well obliterated the tracks. It is a good thing
we turned up when we did, else by this time the secret would
have been known, and we should have had a visit from. Mr.
Commissioner Jephson and all his merry men.”


A long pause followed the conclusion of Mores’ strange story.
“Tell us what the whitish powder was, and how you roused
Bowen from the trance,” said Jem Mandy.
Mores grinned in his cunning way. “ You white men don’t
know everything,” he said.
Then, curling himself up in his blanket, he appeared to drop
off to sleep at once.
A MAN AND HOUSE FEEL FROM THE NARROW PATH INTO THE DEEP
ABYSS BENEATH.
from the apparent death of Bowen down to the finding of the
warder in the coffin at the prison mortuary.
Nothing else was talked of or thought about. And everyone
expected, now that the old gang were reunited, that some
unusually daring enterprise would be attempted and carried
out which would surpass all previous efforts in the same line.
Commissioner Jephson was more determined than ever to
break up the gang; for not only was his
professional reputation at stake, but he had
a private grievance of his own to avenge,
\ in the loss of his valuable and favourite
\ horse Whitefoot. He had long ago made
. up his mind that little or nothing could he
( done until he had discovered the retreat to
which these marauders retired with irn-
punity after their various deeds of villainy.
But how on earth was he to find it ? He
thought the matter over long and deeply,
and at length hit upon the idea that seemed
most promising of success.
One of his troopers who had pursued the
gang on the night that the coach was
“ stuck-up ” had never returned. But his
body had never been found.
_ And so, he argued, the trooper must
either be alive in the hands of the bush-
gangers, or else his body must have been
disposed of with extraordinary rapidity.
They—the gang—would never have had
time to bury it if he were dead. What,
then, had become of it ?
This was the puzzle he set himself to
; solve; and finally he arrived at the eonelu-
I sion that it must have been dumped into a
7 ravine.
Now, the general direction in which the
lost trooper had followed the bushrangers
on that eventful night had been noted by
his comrades ; and so Jephson had some
fair, but general, notion of the line of
country which he ought to search.
Having thus fixed, as it were, his course
of action, he lost no time in having the
particular tract of country carefully ex-
amined, and he superintended the conduct
of the operations in person.
Now, the art of tracking was ©ne which
Jephson had studied very early in his
career, and in which, after long and care-
ful instruction from a native, he had
attained great proficiency.
He eould read all the signs of fallen
leaves, of sticks awry, of upturned stones,
with all the skill and certainty of the best
black trackers in the country; and this
knowledge he now applied to discovering
the abode of the bushrangers.
Six police troopers accompanied him.
They started from the very spot where the
coach had been “stuck up,” and they fol-
lowed the tracks without much difficulty
to the deserted hut where the fresh horses
W&MmmS V / had been left.
fgggir ' From this spot the signs were more com-
«HU\ rJfl plicated, but still possible to read; and
Jephson and bis men, now losing the tracks
and now gaining them again, eventually
■'s Mi §1 arrived at the place where Mores and
m* Bowen had done their best to obliterate all
lllifljfflt W marks of their passage.
mMH f Here Jephson was baffled, and remained
'i'O W || for a long time in deep perplexity and
HHH A thought.
iplllp V “i'll tell you what, men, he said.
“Look here! and here! and hero! It is
as plain as possible ! There has been a full
he deep trampling of horsehoofs and men s feet
here. And they are not natural prints,
either; they have been, as it were, made
on purpose, while the true tracks have been carefully effaced.
At least, that’s hoW I read the sign.”
“ Then what’s to be done, sir?” said the sergeant who was
with him. ... , .
“ Trust to luck, and examine closely the most likely places.
We want to find poor Ingham’s body —lngham was the name
of the missing trooper —“ and if we find that we are not far off,
I expect, from the rascals’ den.”
“ Then we had better separate.”
“ Yes; but note this spot, and all meet here m an hour.
CHAPTER VII.
The Search for the Body—Jephson Discovers the
Den of the Gang sooner than he Expected.
If there was excitement in the colony when Mores stole
Whitefoot from under the very eyes of the police, there was
ten times more excitement when the news spread that Bowen
had broken out of Portman Gfaol, and that Mores was the
accomplice who had arranged the escape.
The newspapers were full of it, and described every detail,
IF YOU LIKE THIS STORY YOU WILL BE SURE TO LIKE THE STORY IN NEXT WEEK’S
“MARVEL,” CALLED “A DEAD MAN’S GIFT.” TRY IT, AND SEE FOR YOURSELF.


. Obedient to orders, the six troopers rode off in different direc-
tions, and J ephson remained for a moment where he stood. The
problem was a difficult one and interested him immensely, apart
from any consideration of the bushrangers.
He wandered on, catching the trace of the trail here and
there; and at last stumbled upon the narrow pass that led to
ine Chasm, and eventually stood upon the edge of the Chasm
itself.
He peered over the precipice, and remarked its breakneck
depth.
“A likely place enough,” he said to himself, “to stow an
away in. But this gang are not birds, or
even cats and monkeys, that they could pass up and down such
a place themselves. There is not a sign or mark here, for the
ground is nothing but solid granite. In all probability the
track I have got an occasional glimpse of is a mere decoy, pur-
posely leading nowhere.”
Having finished his observations, Jephson got off his horse
and sat down on -a slab of rook to smoke and think.
“ This seems a wide gorge, and has never been surveyed,
’g hen I have a little time I’ll ride right round it, and see if
there is no way of getting down into it.”
But J ephson, alas! was to find his way down sooner than he
expected, and in a manner he did not anticipate. For he
suddenly found himself seized by both arms from behind, while
the cold muzzle of a revolver was pressed against his temple.
His first instinct was to struggle madly for his freedom; but
rough fingers gripped his throat, and choked him into perfect-
stillness.
“Glad to see you, Mr. Commissioner!” said Mores, in that
tone of exulting mockery he knew so well how to assume. “ You
mere anxious, .1 think, to find the whereabouts of our dwelling?
I shall be very glad to show it you. It is but a humble one;
but I assure you you are very welcome to it. In fact, there is
no visitor we have so ardently longed to entertain as yourself.”
Jephson withered under this taunting address, and gazed at
Mores to try and find out what treatment he was likely to
receive. But he found little to comfort him in the black’s eyes.
There was nothing written there but gloating cruelty, devilment,
and revenge.
“ You don’t seem pleased,” Mores went on. “ Now, we heard
your men were out, and likely to come our way, and so we came
up iiere to meet them in case they gave us a call. That is how
we have been able to oifer you our hospitality so suddenly.
Don't trouble about your horse; I’ll bring him along. And,
now I think of it. I’ll relieve you of those pistols; they are
heavy to carry, and you have had a long ride to-day. You are
tired too, I expect! My men shall carry you down the path.
You had better not struggle, for your own sake! It is a nasty
crop to the bottom. ”
Bound hand and foot, Jephson was carried in amongst the
trees and down the secret pathway. He knew his life was in
the utmost danger; but he felt the .humiliation of his position
more than its peril.
Mores and three or four of the gang accompanied him to the
cave; Bowen and the rest stayed amongst the trees on the
brink of the Chasm to deal with any troopers that might stumble
on the path by chance,
“ Now, Air. Commissioner, sit down,” said Mores. “ Well
untie your legs presently, and then you must try and make
yourself quite at home as long as you are here. How long that
will be,” he continued darkly, “ I can’t tell you for the moment.
But we’ll hold a council presently, and decide upon your fate
when the rest come in.”
Jephson now made up his mind that he had only one fate to
expect, and that was death. He would be slain in cold blood.
He felt it a hard end to face; but his courage was firm, and his
resolution high to face boldly -whatever was in store for him.
The consciousness that he died in the execution of his duty kept
him up ; and he was determined that the rascals in whose
power he was should not have the extra satisfaction of seeing
him quail before the utmost they could do.
Mores continued his tone of impudent raillery:
‘ * You are fond of horses, Mr. Commissioner! There i 3 one
I've got here that I should like to have your opinion upon.
'Whitefoot we call him, and a fine, up-standing animal he is.
I venture to think you'll admire him.”
Jephson, with his hands still tied, but his feet free, was
taken to the place where Whitefoot was stabled. He was very
glad to see his favourite horse again, and would have likea to
fondle and caress him; but that was impossible.
But he spoke to him, and the faithful animal knew his master’s
voice in a moment. He turned his head and neighed with
delight, and struggled with the halter that bound him.
But master and horse were prisoners, and neither could help
the other.
“ Now well go back and hold our council,” remarked Mores,
when he had enjoyed sufficiently lie fun of showing Jephson
his own horse. “ The rest of our men, I see, have come back ; and
that means, Mr. Commissioner, that your troopers have cleared
CHAPTER VIII.
SEE THE STORY, “IN THE I IOHDTV IN “PLUCK,” PUBLISHED
CAUSE OF LiOLlil I, ON SATURDAY.
out of this part of the country. I’m afraid you’ll be terribly
missed!” he added, with a sneer.
In the meantime the six troopers had returned to the
rendezvous Jephson had appointed for them. The hour waa
up, and they were surprised to find he was not there.
They became alarmed. They scoured the country in search
of him; they shouted; they fired their revolvers. But no
answering signal came back to them; and lastly they were
foreed to return to their quarters with the unpleasant intel-
ligence that the Commissioner was missing, and in all pro-
bability a prisoner in the hands of the bushrangers.
If there was a panic before in the colony it was as nothing
to that which prevailed now, when the news of this latest
catastrophe got abroad. If the Commissioner himself, with six
troopers in close attendance upon him, could be spirited away,
leaving no traces of his whereabouts behind him, what might
humbler folks expect ?
So people argued; and it seemed as if there could be no
answer to such an argument.
The papers were loud in their condemnation of the inefficiency
of their police protection. They clamoured for more men; for
a permanent increase in the number of the force. In the mean-
time everybody went to bed in fear of their lives, expecting to
be roused from their slumbers by the ominous cry, “ Bail up 1”
Trial and Sentence—Whitefoot— A Successful Job
Planned by Mores—The Orgie-
The gang were, as Mores put it, sitting in council. Jephson,
a helpless prisoner, was standing in their midst. Mores had
made a speech, in which he cited against the prisoner every
zealous act of his that had brought about at various times the
punishment of some past or present member of the gang.
What must bo this man’s fate?” asked Mores, in a closing
sentence. WTiat do onr interests demand? H© knows the
secret path into the Chasm, ilemember that, and each giy©
your answer in turn.”
There was a pause.
“ Death !” said Bowen, the first to speak.
“ Death !” said Jem Mandy.
“ Death !” said every man.
“Death!” repeated Mores, when it came to his turn.
Then, in mockery of the forms of justice, Mores asked the
prisoner if he had anything to say why the unanimous verdict
of the jury should not be executed upon him, a opestion to
which Jephson condescended to make no reply.
Xt is quite clear, continued Mores, now thoroughly enjoy-
ing himselr, “that the prisoner has nothing to say In his own
defenee. Indeed, there is nothing he could say. His evil deeds,
a-s far as we are concerned, are only too well known to us and
to himself. There is no hope or possibility of pardon. He is
condemned to death!”
Mores kept up the sorry farce to the end; and his mock
solemnity as he pronounced sentence sent most of the gang
into a roar of laughter. °
“ Come out and get it over,” said Bowen presently.
“Yes; we’ve had enough of fooling.”
“Bring him along, then.”
“ Softly, men, softly!” It was Mores speaking. “Death waa
the sentence, and death it shall be. But not just awhile. One
month ‘ hard ’ lie got for me, and one month ‘ hard ’ he
shall have himself before he dies ! That is my will; and my
will is law here now. For I am head of the gang; ’so let no
one make any mistake!”
There was no little surprise at Mores’ determination; but
no one felt it worth his while to dispute it. The council broke
up, and Jephson was -removed to the back of the cave until
Mores should decide upon the kind of work he would have to
perform.
It was not easy, however, to make this as cruel and hard as
Mores would have wished, because they dared not give Jeplison
his freedom, unless someone were always at hand to watch him.
It often happened, therefore, that he was shut up alone in the
cave, with nothing to do but think about the misery of bis
present position, and the certainty of a violent death later on
There was one pursuit, however, which he followed with
infinite pleasure, and that was the tending and grooming of
Whitefoot. In the companionship of his faithful horse he just
found that sympathy and consolation tha-t enabled him to
endure liis captivity without losing his reason.
And so the days dragged on for Jephson slowly and woarilr.
Underfed and overworked as he was, he often wondered whether
he should live for the month that Mores had allowed him.
As to hope of rescue, he knew it to be practical! y an
impossibility.
“ We've teen loafing here long enough,” said Jem Mandy.
“ Ay, it is about time we had a bit of a run again,” answered
Bowen.


“And what does the chief of the gang eay?” asked Jem
Mandy, looking at Mores.
“He ’says,” replied Mores, “that you shall not be dis-
appointed I’ll tell you what it is, boys,” lie went on. “I’ve
not been idle these last few days. While you have been wasting
your time here I've been pursuing inquiries and making plans;
and I’ve got everything prepared for a bigger touch than this
gang has ever dreamed of before.”
“ What is it? What is it?” asked a ohorus of voices.
“ It is better than ‘ stioking-up ’ a coach, or thieving a horse,
or kidnapping a Commissioner. It is robbing the Gold Fields
Bank ; and this time, mind you, we are not- going to fail.”
“What have you done, then?”
“ Made things snug and ready. It is like this. The bank
doses at four o’clook in the afternoon. I have made an appoint-
ment with the manager to call upon him shortly before closing
time. I’ve written to say that lam living in a far-off claim,
and can’t get into town till very near the time for shutting up
shop. I've mentioned that hour because there is not likely to
be any customers about, aud no one in the bank but the tsosa
and his two clerks. He'll keep the bank open, never doubt;
for I’ve mentioned a stiffish sum in gold that I am anxious to
deposit. Well, when I get the old sinner into his private room,
and he is counting out my money, I’ll put a pistol to his head
and ask him to be good enough to hand me the keys of the safe.
This he will be sure to do without much fuss. And in the mean-
time two of you boys will come in and hand a couple of cheques
over the counter, aud, when the clerks are counting the money,
you 11 cover them with your revolvers. ( It will be as easy as
winking, if you will only time it nicely.”
“ But suppose some other customers come in?” objected Jem
Mandy. , , , . ,
“They won't. Didn’t I tell you that the business ends at
four o’clook ? W e’ll lock the door and put up the shutters
punctually to time, and no one will suspect anything.”
“ And what are the rest of us to do?"
“ The rest of you are to be hanging round, promiscuous like,
in ease of accidents; and, when wove done the job, you are to
help escort the gold to this place. For it will be the biggest
sum you’ve ever thought of, much lees seen. ’
“ Sounds well,” was Bowen’s comment. “ But how tun I
going to venture into a crowded town, with any number of police
about, without being nabbed, when every man in the force has
been studying my face and description for months?” >
u You are going to do it- t<ho same ae I am, was Mores
ready reply, “with the help of a disguise. I've false beards
and hair, and foreign clothes. I could rig you out so tnat your
own mother would not know you.”
“And where did you get all that truck from?” „
“ I take it that is no concern of yours or anybody else s,
promptly rejoined Mores. “ I’ve got ways of hearing news
and getting stuff sent to me that you know nothing about.
You’ve got to make the best use of them. That’s all you liave
to worry about.”
“ You are a darned clever chap, Mores; and if you can ng
me out as you say I’ll face any amount of troopers.”
“I dare say you won’t meet one,” said Mores indifferently.
“Why? How? What do you mean?”
4 4 Simply because I’ve prepared a sham racket- forty miles
away, and have sent information to the police. They’ll draw
©very trooper away to catch the old Bowen gang, and I don t
suppose we shall meet a solitary one.”
“Mores, you are a wonder!” ■
“ Not at all; but I’ve got a fairly good head, and lam going
to run this show on scientific principles. 1 look upon this job
as one of the easiest we have ever been in. Jephson is the only
man likely to have seen through the trick, and we have got him
here safe enough. For the rest of the police I dont car© a
button-top.”
“ When do we start?”
The announcement was received with wild delight by th©
men, who were ready for any and every kind of devilment. And
how they laughed and enjoyed the fun when Mores proceeded
gravely to explain the whole plan to Jeplison, and to ask his
opinion upon it.
“I guess this is the first time a job of this kind has been
discussed and arranged with the concurrence of a Commissioner
of polioe.” , , , . ~,
At night the whole party started, one man only being left
an the Chasm to look after Jephson. On this occasion Mores
did not. take Whitefoot, for he reckoned that they were not
likely to be pressed hard in pursuit; and, moreover, if he rode
into a populous town on such a remarkable animal someone was
prettv sure to recognise him. . , x
He’ expected to be back m the Chasm on the night of the
second day. The day following would lie the end of Jephson’s
moicli of hard labour, and so he would be shot on the
morning after the return of the gang.
It was wonderful how everything turned out as Mores had
planned it ■ and Jephson, as he lay in his cell at the back of the
CHAPTER IX.
“STRONG ARM’S SECRET.” Ar * you followingt l H, e going s ,^!df ) l oryln “ PLUCK " 7
cave, trying in vain to sleep, heard the noise made by the return-
ing gang, wild with delight at the enormous booty they had
secured.
“Bring out the Commissioner!” was the cry. “It will do
his eyes good to see all this gold !”
Jephson accordingly was brought into the oentre of th© cavern,
and tbs spectacle he met amazed him.
“ We'll have an illumination to-night,” said Mores.
And so all the available stock of candles was used to illuminate
the cave. Most of the gang still wore their disguises, and a
motley group they looked as they sat round in a ring with the
booty piled up in the centre. Jephson hardly recognised a
man; but he noted that bottles were passing swiftly from, one
hand to the other, and in this circumstance he just detected a
spark of hope for himself.
“ Now, Mr. Commissioner, here’s a good night’s work !” cried
Mores, pointing to the heap of gold, notes, coins, and packets
of gold-dust that were piled in a heap on the ground.
“ A profitable night, indeed, ’ said Jephson cheerfully.
“ There is a fortune there for every one of you.”
“Now, do you know what vve want you for?”
'“No.”
“ Well, you’ve got to divide all that up into eight equal shares.
We can trust you, we know; for to-morrow your time is up,
you know, and I expect you'd like to die honest.”
‘ ‘ That is my own wish, certainly, replied Jephson. “ Lend mo
fihe scales, and I will divide this gold and dust to the very
grain.”
He set about his work with supreme unconcern, as if he had
no more interest in the matter than that of a casual spectator.
He talked brightly and smartly as he handed the different
portions of the booty to one and another. Aet all the time he
was noting the mood and temper of every member of the gang,
and, with ever-rising hope, he remarked that the drink was
slowly but surely doing its fatal work.
Mores himself for a long time resisted his companions’ invita-
tion to share their orgie; but eventually the excitement of
the occasion mastered even his reluctance to partake of strong
liquor, and long before Jephson had finished the division of the
spoil Mores had lost every vestige of sobriety, and was nothing
more than the mere savage he used to be before he learnt from
the white men some of the ordinary usages and deoeneies of
civilisation.
How Mores and Bowen Played for a Great Stake—
And how Jephson escaped from the Chasm.
The bottles passed to and fro, and the fun and ribaldry waxed
fast and furious. J epihson was pressed to drink like the rest;
but with cunning hand he spilt glass after glass on the ground.
Then, as if the liquor he had taken had quite overcome him,
he fell helplessly backwards, and lay, to all appearance, sound
asleep in a besotted and drunken slumber.
“ Look at the Commissioner !” cried Mores, with a wild burst
of merriment. “He's done! Bring the cords, and we’ll make
him snug and comfortable. At all events, he can t complain
he hasn't had one good night on earth before leaving for the
next world!”
A chorus of profane laughter greeted the chief’s remark; and
several pairs of hands were stretched out to receive the cords,
and to make Jephson “snug and comfortable,” as Mores put
it—in other words, to bind him hand and foot.
“ Now he’s ready,” said Jem.Ma.ndy, when the cords had been
twisted this way and that, and fastened in a series of complicated
knots round Jephson’s limbs.
“ Where shall we put him?”
“ Take him to the stable. He can pass his last night with the
old horse he will never ride again.”
So to the stable Jephson, to his inexpressible satisfaction,
was taken, and dumped roughly on the floor. The men who
had borne him returned with staggering steps to their com-
panions, and the Commissioner was left alone with his faithful
steed VtTiitefoot.
The hands that had tied the knots that bound him were
unsteady. With a vigorous effort he exerted his strength, and
the cords lay loosely in festoons about him. A few mmute3
later he was* free and untrammelled; ready, active, alert, and
watchful to make the most of his opportunity to escape.
Leaving him where he is for the time being, we must return
to tihe cave, where the orgie then in progress had entered upon a
new phase.
The pleasures of the bottle had by now been predy welt
exhausted, and the revellers required some new stimulant to
their excitement. The bottles were removed, or, rather, thrown
carelessly aside; cards and dice took their places, and every
member of the gang was prepared to hazard the whole of his
newlv-aoquired treasure in the horriole fascination of a
gambling bout.
“ Til stake ten!”


“ Fifty I”
“A hundred!”
“ Double sixes ! Hand over the cash, there !”
With varying luck the game proceeded. Vast sums changed
hands. Wins and losses shifted from one side of the table to the
other. One moment a man’s pile had dwindled down to two or
three solitary coins, the next a lucky card or a fortunate throw
of the dice had multiplied these few coins into a store of wealth
twice as great as that with which he had started.
From the gambling, as he had done from the liquor, Mores
held aloof at first. But his eyes watched greedily the large
sums of money that passed to and fra. He saw only the grow-
ing heaps; he was blind to the dwindling ones. The fascina-
THB FAITHFUL ANIMAL KNEW HIS MASTEK’S VOICE IN A MOMENT.
tion of the spectacle was too strong for him. He brought forth
a great pile of gold and began to play.
“ Whoop!” he shouted, with a yell of triumph, laying down a
winning hand upon the table. “ You are hit, every man of
y°u! Push it along, Bowen ! Here, you! you staked fifty !”
“ I didn’t!” replied the latter fiercely.
“ You did!”
“It is a lie!”
Hie next moment there would have been an exchange of
bullets at three-foot range had not the other members of the
gang instantly thrown themselves upon the disputants, and so
prevented the encounter.
“You were wrong, Mores.”
“ He only staked forty.”
“ I saw it, too.”
‘ ‘ Bowen is right. ”
The point having been settled by the other players in favour
of Bowen, the game proceeded. But Mores’ temper was not
improved by the incident; and, what was worse for him, his
slowly. The players began to chaff him for his miserly use of
his money. But he remained unmoved, intent only on recover-
ing what was to him of more value than his soul.
“ Eh, man, but you are too reckless I” said Bowen, with a
sneering gi.be.
“ You are staking two this time, Mores. It is too much for
a prudent man to lose.”
“ Let me take care of the notes for you,” said another with a
playful attempt to snatch at the money that lay at’ Mores’
elbow.
But there was a glitter in his eye and an angry growl as he
threw the outstretched arm aside which warned the would-be
joker that he was playing a game that might change to grim
earnest in a moment, with fatal consequences to himself.
And so the play went on, Mores steadily winning Pma p
sums, until one by one the players grew tired of it, and'one bv
one fell out. J
At last Bowen and Mores alone were left. The former had won
Take this, it will make you rich mem. It is a secret worth millions. It is drawn on my oim skin, and was stolen from mr
by a man who left me for dead, and who flayed the map from my living body. I killed him to regain possession of it BeivZeof
WUh “ ***** !ishhis
luck suddenly changed. After having had one good hand the dice
and the cards went dead against him. He saw that precious
pile of his, which had cost him so much labour and toil and
scheming to acquire, diminish by large slices, and presently
disappear altogether.
With anguish as deep as if his heart bad been torn from
him, he went to his secret hoard and drew forth another pile,
which he would use, he said to himself, in recovering the ons
he had lost.
But his play was very different from what it had been. He
grudged every piece he staked. He watched with his beady
eyes the fall of every card and every shake of the dice-box.
x iece by piec© his fortuno cam© book to him j but slowly—very


a vast sum, and the small stakes of his opponent ceased to
interest him.
The latter had nearly recouped himself for his losses—that is
to say, within a few pieces—and was bent upon continuing
the game until his pile should be once more intact—until it
should have recovered its original proportions.
“ I’m side of this child’s play,” said Bowen suddenly, throw-
ing down his cards.
“ go on !” answered Mores hoarsely.
“I won’t!” replied Bowen doggedly.
“You shall!” was the quick rejoinder.
_ The high tone of this angry exchange of words startled the
tired spectators into a renewed interest in the game. They
interfered, and tried to arrange the matter in a way that would
satisfy both parties. Presently Bowen, who was obviously
anxious to cease the play, said:
“ I’ll go on on one condition. We’ll stake five hundred apiece,
and one throw of the dioe shall settle it. ”
“ A challenge! a fair challenge!” shouted the rest. “ Mores,
you must oonsent, or the game is over!”
Five hundred sovereigns ! Ah !if he could win them, thought
Mores, he would indeed be a happy man. But supposing he lost I
For fully a minute he remained silent, tom with conflicting
emotions. It would kill him if he lost. But then, he might
win. The greed for money that possessed his whole being at
length overmastered his discretion. He consented to the stake,
and, with trembling fingers, pushed a sum of five hundred
pounds into the centre of the table. Bowen, with ostentatious
indifference, did the same. They were to toss for first throw
of the dice. Mores won.
Then there was a pause.
With every nerve and fibre in his body strained to its utmost
tension, Mores clutched the dice-box and rattled it. Six pairs
of eager eyes followed his every movement. After a period of
suspense that seemed a very eternity, the dioe fell upon the
table, and a, great shout of exultation escaped the lips of Mores
as he saw he had thrown a six and a five—the highest ptossiblo
throw but one.
Unless Bowen threw double sixes, his precious five hundred
pounds would be safe to him; and, what is-more, he would gain
five hundred others.
Now it was Bowen’s turn. He took the box with the same air
of unconcern that had characterised his previous conduct. He
was not anxious—at least, he betrayed no anxiety. Without a
moment’s hesitation he turned it upside down upon the table.
Lo and behold! the ivory cubes each showed the six dots
uppermost.
Mores had lost!
What happened afterwards was a . ?ene of terrible confusion.
Mores, with a scream, grabbed his precious money. Every
member of the gang sprang to his feet. Bowen stood with his
revolver, prepared to exact payment of what he had won.
Mores, it was easy to see, would fight to the death in defence
of his precious gold. Everybody was conscious for the first time
that it was broad daylight.
Suddenly the sound of horsehoofs was heard outside. First
of all, a few slow steps of a horse starting; then the clattering
rattle of a horse urged to a furious gallop.
The gang saw the flying forms of a man and horse quickly pass
the entrance of the cave.
“ Jephson!”
“ On Whitefoot!”
‘ ‘ He’s escaped !”
“ We shall never catch him 1”
“We must!”
There was a rush to the entrance. A dozen bullets went
whistling after the horse and its rider. But it was all in vain;
the distance was too great.
“ Follow him ! Get out the horses ! We may catch him as
he goes up the path !”
But they little knew Whitefoot or Jephson who thought so.
Both were half way up the dangerous path when the pursuers
were still a hundred yards away from the base of the cliff.
Jephson dismounted when he came to the most perilous and
difficult portion. He was as cool as a man taking a pleasure
ride; he was not going to throw a chance away. Both he and
Whitefoot safely gained the summit. He waved his hand in
farewell to his pursuers—who once more fired an impotent volley
at him—and then rode away.
CHAPTER X.
Conclusion.
Next day the commissioner, at th 9 head of a company of
twelve picked troopers, returned to the Chasm. He advanced
to the secret pathway with great caution, for he did not intend
to bv token by surprise, as he was on the former occasion.
“ Coast quite clear, sergeant,” he said. “ I expect they have
given us the slip.”
“Well, it doesn’t much matter, sir,” replied the sergeant.
“ When we have stopped this hole of theirs we are bound to rufl
them to earth somewhere.”
“ Quite so. Now, mind how you come down this breakneck
place! One at a time, and slowly.”
The whole party managed the descent in safety, and then
approached the mouth of the oave, taking every possible pre-
caution to guard against a sudden attaok.
Arrived at the entrance, Jephson drew up his men with their
carbines presented, and then summoned Mores to surrender.
No answer came.
He repeated the summons with the same result, and then
marched boldly into the oave. For a time the gloom of the
interior prevented him from seeing anything; but at length his
eyes grew accustomed to the subdued light, and he saw clearly.
An exclamation of horror escaped his lip®.
The interior of the cave resembled a shambles. The floor
was strewn with dead bodies, and here and there amongst them
remained the appiaxatus of last night’s orgie, littered about in
wild confusion.
“Water! water!”
The trooper started forward at the cry, raised the dying man,
and dressed his wounds. It was Bowen. He retained strength
enough to give a brief outline of what had happened before he
died.
Shortly, it was this:
After Jephson’s escape the gang turned to mutual recrimina-
tions, each man blaming the other for what had happened.
In the mood they were in it did not take long for pistol-shotfl
and knife-thrusts to follow the war of words.
They were divided into two psarties, under Mores and Bowen
respectively.
Then followed a fight which was fought out to extermination.
Such in brief was Bowen’s story, and there seems to be no
reason to doubt its accuracy.
He did not survive the completion of his narrative more than
a few minutes.
Thus, by their own hands, was the notorious gang of bush-
rangers—first of all known as Bowen’s gang, and afterwards as
Mores’ gang—annihilated. They merely anticipated by a short
space the action of the law. For t-heir lives were forfeited to
justice. The careers of violent and reckless men like these
invariably close with sanguinary endings.
THE END.
HERE’S YOUR CHANGE.
A PLEASANT AND PROFITABLE WAY OF
SPENDING YOUR SPARE TIME.
Have you ever thought how many changes a man can effect
with only two suits —one white and one black? By simply
mixing up the articles he can appear differently every day for a
very long time. To begin with, of course he can appear in
white from head to foot, or he can go into complete mourning.
Then he can put on a black waistcoat, and, behold ! you have
a complete change. Next day he can come out in a white coat,
with the rest of the suit black. A moment’s thought will show
you that he can make numerous other changes without ever
appearing twice alike. Prizes are offered to those who succeed
in thinking out the largest number of other possible combina-
tions. We give you a few examples here in order to make our
meaning clear.
The rules are quite simple. Write out on sheets of paper all
the different changes you
r.S&T) can think of. Your list
rfc - { Bhould appear after this f|||a
style: ygjgy
/'•''p (1) Black hat and tie;
if l t rest white. V
(2) All black except coat.
(3) All white except waist-
coat.
And so on, numbering each
Be careful not to duplicate
any of the suits. The boots
must always go in pairs,
not one white and one black.
We are aware that a very
great number _ of changes
can be made with those two
suits; but thfen we do not
expect anyone to discover
them all. Write out as many as you can think of. You can get
your friends to help you.
There will be some fifty prizes. For fuller particulars, see the
number of Chips now on sale.
SAVE YOUb s, as Mr. PIMPLE hintends to rite wun weke on ART, with praktickle iliustrashuns. So
kepe yer peepers opin, and luk out for mi wurk.—Yorse as ushual, PIMPLE.


O'ETZES SSKIA2. a ,
By S. CLARKE HOOK, Author of “By Nelson's Side," “The Wreckers,” &c., &c., &c.
This is the story of Alec Turner, the powder-monkey who
fought so gallantly under Nelson, and whom we now find a
midshipman. The story opened with Nelson and his brave
men —among whom were Alec, Richardson, another mid-
shipman, and Mike, a fine old salt —on board the “Vanguard.”
The ship is attacked by Spanish ships of war, bur manages
to beat them off. Nelson sends for Richardson, and
appoints him to the command of one of the prize vessels.
Collecting his crew, which includes Alec, Richardson
goes on board the Spanish vessel “Vigilante,” and starts
on the journey. The Spanish officers are placed on
parole, but fire the vessel and escape in boats. An Eng-
lish vessel comes to the rescue, and all the crew, with
the exception of Richardson and Alec, are taken off.
The magazine blows up, and the young sailors are thrown into
the sea, but gain the shore. Here they fall into the hands of
the Spaniards, and are thrust into a ceil with other prisoners.
Richardson exhorts the men to make a sudden rush for liberty
directly the cell-door is opened, and to this they all agree.
The attempt is successful, and they make their escape. After
experiencing many dangers, Richardson and Alec reach the
sea, and embark in a boat. A French vessel sights them, gives
chase, and they are captured, and brought aboard by a brutal
officer, La Combe. In turn the Frenchman is chased by an
English ship, and a battle ensues. The British tars capture
the vessel, and take La Combe prisoner. The fleet now sails
for Egypt, and anchors off Alexandria, and after a time
proceeds to the Bay of Aboukir in pursuit of some French
vessels, when commences the celebrated Battle of the Nile.
Everyone knows what a glorious victory this was for Nelson.
After the fight Edwards takes command of a prize, the
“Estrella.” Under him are Richardson, Alec, and Mike.
They sight a strange vessel, but Edwards runs away from her.
The' men become discontented at his cowardice. They are
caught in a storm when they have sprung a leak. The crew
break into the spirit-room, and the pumps are almost deserted.
They lose sight of the strange vessel, and the crew, under
Richardson’s command, do all they can to save the ship. The
vessel strikes the rocks, but all land safely. The mob attacks
the shipwrecked crew, and they seek shelter at an inn. After
some more adventures, they take ship again, and reach England.
The crew have a run ashore, while Richardson and Alec go to
see Lady Richardson. They are afterwards promoted at
Nelson’s instigation—Richardson to be a first lieutenant and
Alec Turner to be a second lieutenant.
After having received their promotion. Harry Richardson and
Alec Turner remained in London for a few days; then, when
their lieutenant’s uniforms were ready, they proceeded by coach
to Lady Richardson’s.
“ I was rather fearful that something would be said about me
striking Edwards,” said Alec as they were approaching their
destination.
“It is my belief that you will hear nothing further about that
matter,” replied Richardson. “He has got that score against
you, but we have got a more serious charge against him.”
“Won’t there be an inquiry as to the loss of the vessel ?”
“I do not expect so. You see, she was only a prize; so the
loss is principally in prize-money. Well, here we are. Don’t
THE EDITOR OF THE “UNION JACK of New Stories and Sketches.
r\ JUST IN
>V} TIME
j WL TO BEGIN.
I it m in
ySAfll 5j Lo-\\< G~» o
Wd ,S °f Old England.
say anything about our promotion. See if my mother notices
our different uniforms.”
Lily did, directly she ran to the door on hearing her brother’s
voice, and she congratulated Alec with words that set his heart
throbbing as wildly as it ever throbbed when the thunder of
cannon and the ring of steel were in his ears.
A few days passed, when the young lieutenants received orders
to join Captain Cranburn’s vessel, which was about to proceed
to Naples, where Nelson was. It was their last evening at
home, and Alec and Lily were strolling through the part, her
brother having gone to bid farewell to some relatives. Lily’s
beautiful face was rather sorrowful now, nor did Alec’s words
dispel the mournful expression.
“Of course, Miss Richardson,” he was saying, “I shall
always remember that to whatever rank I rise I am not your
brother’s equal by birth. If I have ever ever forgotten it, it has
been against my will.”
“We all remember that we owe our lives to your heroic con-
duct ; it is not necessary for us to question your pedigree.
Besides ”
Alec was watching Lily’s face, and, as she suddenly ceased
speaking, he saw it turn deathly white, while there was an
expression of terror in her eyes. Quickly turning, ho followed
the direction of her gaze, and from behind some laurel bushes
two masked ruffians stepped with muskets levelled at Lily’s
brea°t. This, then, was Cade’s threatened vengeance. Alee
guessed who one of those villains was, and a feeling of terror
seized him when he saw the deadly weapons levelled at the
beautiful girl. In that instant he knew how dear she had
become to him.
Before either of those weapons was discharged he sprang in
front of her; then, with steady aim, the ruffians fired in quick
succession. Both balls struck Alec, one in the left arm, the
other in the shoulder. As he felt the sharp pain he turned to
Lily, and when he saw that she was untouched a smile came
over his face.
She saw the cruel wounds Alec had received, and he never
forgot the expression in her eyes.
“ I will avenge that deed ! ” he cried, drawing his sword from
the scabbard.
Lily saw the flash of the gleaming weapon. She saw her hero
spring at the two ruffians, and in that moment she knew that
brave young sailor had gained her love as surely as she had
gained his.
Alec forgot the pain of his wounds now. A pistol-shot was
fired at him, but it missed its mark, and the next instant his
sword rang upon that of one of his adversaries. Both attacked
him at once, but he was a far more skilful swordsman than they.
Turning one of the blades aside, he made an upward cut at the
man’s arm ; and, with a cry of pain as the keen weapon gashed
the flesh, he dropped his sword and fled, while the other ruffian,
whom Alec had also wounded, quickly followed. But he was
determined to capture them; and, notwithstanding the serious-
ness of his wounds, he followed them into the wood towards
which they ran.
Once he got near enough to give the hinder fugitive a- cut
with his sword, but he was unable to capture him before he
gained the bushes. Alec now became so faint from loss of blood
that he found it very difficult to follow ; but he was determined
to go on so long as he could keep his feet. Owing to the density


of the undergrowth he soon lost sight of the fugitives, but he
was able to follow by the sound, and for a considerable time he
kept up the chase. At last a deadly faintness came over him ;
the trees swam round before his fading eyesight, and with a
moan of pain he fell forward on his face.
The ruffians heard that fall, and they stopped their flight at
once, to cautiously return to the spot where their victim lay.
“We have him now,” exclaimed one of them, taking off his
mask and revealing the features of Cade. “ I will stab him to
the heart.”
“He is about done already,” replied the other. “ Turn him
over.”
Judging by Alec’s white face it seemed that this was the case;
but as Cade bent over him he heard his faint breathing. With
a murderous expression on his face he drew a dagger, and raised
it above the young lieutenant’s breast.
******
For a moment Lily’s terror at the peril towards .which Alec
had rushed to avenge her wrong numbed her brain, so that she
lost all power of thought'; then, knowing how much depended
on her effort, she ran swiftly towards the mansion, calling
loudly for help.
Jack and Mike, who had been strolling in the park, hurried
towards her, and when they came up she gasped :
“Mr. Turner has been shot by two men. He chased them
into the wood. He entered close by that tree. Save him—oh!
save him !”
“Never fear, miss,” cried Mike, dashing off, followed by
Jack. Then Lily felt some hope return when she saw them draw
their cutlasses.
They could see where the bushes had been torn asunder, and,
following swiftly in the track, they came upon the scene as Cade
was just about to deal the fatal blow. Directly the ruffian saw
these new foes he sprang to his feet and disappeared amongst
the bushes, followed by his evil confederate, while Mike and
Jack bound up Alec’s wounds with their scarves.
“If we can only stop the bleeding tr- will be all right,” said
Jack. “Let us carry him home.”
Then they bore him towards the mansion, and when Lily saw
them coming, she ran home to send off for the doctor.
Just as they reached the house Alee regained consciousness,
and here they were met by Richardson, who was riding up the
carriage-drive.
“Let me down, Mike,” said Alec. “ I can walk.”
“That is the first order you have given me, sir; but by the
powers I’ll not obey it! ”
“ You are right, Mike,” said Richardson. “ Carry him up
to his room.”
“ I am sure I am not much hurt,” said Alec, who absolutely
refused to lie down.
“ How did it happen ?” inquired Harry.
‘‘ I was walking in the grounds with your sister, when two
men sprang from behind a bush and fired. lam certain one of
the men was Cade.”
“ It is very likely. You remember Ms threat, though I should
have thought he would have been more inclined to shoot me
than you. However, you keep quiet until that doctor comes. ”
‘‘lt is ridiculous to make an invalid of me like this. It is
very slight.”
“ Is that so, Mike ?” inquired Richardson.
“It has bored a hole clean through his shoulder, and, bedad,
sir, if you call that slight, I would rather not be wounded
severely.”
“ I can see what you are afraid of, Alec,” said Richardson.
“ You think you will be unable to sail with us, but I trust it
will not be so bad as that. There will be some good work at
Naples. Have a drink of water,” he added, noticing how white
Alec’s face was. “ Y/hy doesn’t that idiot of a doctor Oh ! I
beg pardon, Dr. Smart, ” he said, as that gentleman noiselessly
entered the room.
The wounds were- examined and dressed, and the doctor
looked very grave.
“Now, rny dear sir,” he said, turning to Richardson, who was
wondering whether the doctor had heard himself called an idiot,
“ the patient must have absolute quiet. The nature of the
wounds is very serious, and he will be confined to bed for several
weeks; but we shall pull him through. Never fear that.”
“ But, doctor,” said Alec sitting up in bed, “ I must start
from here to-morrow.”
“To-morrow? Impossible! Preposterous, my dear young
gentleman.”
“ I must, indeed I must! We are going to the seat of war,
and ”
“There, there! Keep calm, my youug friend. A little
feverish,” whispered the doctor to Richardson.
“By Jove ! I believe he knows what he is talking about,”
replied Harry. “ I can feel for him, too. We could go by easy
stages to the vessel; then he would have the surgeon aboard.”
“A ship’s surgeon !” exclaimed the doctor contemptuously.
“ My dear sir, he needs weeks of skilful treatment.”
“Harry, I will go,” said Alee. “Iwould not miss if my
life depended on it.”
But the doctor had no intention of losing three or four weeks’
fees lightly. He went downstairs to seek Lady Richwdson’s
assistance in the matter, and, not finding that lady at home, he
gave Lily a description of Alec’s condition that left very
little hope of his recovery.
When Harry entered the room some few minutes later, &a was
a little taken aback to find her in tears.
“ My poor Lil,” he said kindly, “you have had a fright.”
“It is terrible, Harry,” she sobbed. “Was it not noble of
him ? Oh, how brave he is! ”
“ Alec is certainly brave, Lil; but I fail to see how he was
noble in getting shot.”
“ Did he not tell you ? ”
“ Yes. He told me he was walking with you,, and two ruffians
shot him.
“ Harry, they aimed at me. Mr. Turner saw the guns pointed
at me, and he sprang before me and received the balls in his
breast.”
“He never told me that. It is like him. Yes, Lil, it was
noble to save your life. Now, tell me why you are so troubled.”
“ How can you ask me, when my brave rescuer is perhaps
dying? ”
“ Nonsense! ”
“Why, Dr. Smart ”
“ Dr. Smart is an old idiot. Alec is no more dying than I am.
We have decided to start for the vessel to-morrow.”
When Lady Richardson returned she and Lily did their best
to get Alec not to go that voyage. But it was in vain. He felt
that both duty and honour required him to go at once.
“ My dear mother, you don’t understand the case,” said Harry.
“It would be an awful blow to him if he did not take part m
the glorious victory that we shall gain. lam just going out to
endeavour to capture those ruffians. I have an idea that they
are in some way connected with a gang of smugglers who used
to frequent a little public-house not far from here. You will
remember we captured most of them. lam going with Mike to
that place to-night, and Jack will remain here to keep watch.”
That night Richardson and Mike hurried towards the inn
where it was believed Cade and his confederate would seek
shelter ; but when they reached it they found the place locked
up, although a light was burning in one of the lower windows.
No notice was taken of Mike’s knocking at the door until it
became so violent as to threaten to smash the panel in; then the
landlord unbolted the door.
“You are making a nice row, ain’t you ? ” he said.
“ Faith, I thought you would like it,” replied Mike.
“ Look at my paint.”
“ There isn’t any to look at where I have been knocking.”
“ Who have you got in your house ? ” demanded Richardson.
“Whathas that got to do with you ? ”
“ I intend to search it.”
“You won’t come in. I’ll ”
The landlord tried to stop Richardson, but Mike dealt him a
blow in the chest that completely doubled him up ; then they
entered the room where they had seen a light.
A tall man with a drawn sword stood at the farther side. His
forbidding face was rendered fiercer by a deep scar down the
cheek. That scar was dealt by Richardson for an act of villainy
which many of my readers will remember. The man’s name was
Sir Charles Meredy.
A murderous light came into his eyes when he recognised the
man he hated most on earth.
“What do you want?” he demanded, in a voice tremulous
with suppressed passion.
“My object in coming to this house,” replied Richardson,
“ was to see if two ruffians who fired at my comrade, Lieutenant
Turner, are in it.”
“ This room is private. Go out.”
“I know your character, Charles Meredy, and that you seek
revenge for the punishment I gave you ”
“ I will have your life for it! Hound ! You shall ”
“ Pshaw ! You ought to know that I do not fear you like
others do, in spite of your being a notorious duellist; that scar
on your face should remind you of that. I demand to know
what brings you to this low public-house ? ”
“ I refuse to answer you.”
“ Shall I get a bit of rope’s-end, sir ? ” inquired Mike. “ I’ll
soon make him talk, like I did with the leg of that stool.”
“No, Mike. Since he refuses to give any information about
himself, I shall search the house, and ”
Richardson ceased speaking, for at that moment the door was
flung open, and the two masked ruffians, together with the land-,
lord, entered the room. They were all armed with cutlasses,'
and Meredy drew his sword directly he saw that help was at
hand.
Mike sprang to the lieutenant’s side, and, placing their baoks
against a wall, they waited for the rush.
(To be continued in our next number.)
ARE COMPETITIONS PLAYED OUT? Well, no^ h g j^ s this*week’s ‘*CHIPS.” S g


It is a verj good sign that we now show no trepidation or
nervousness in looking over our correspondence. When the
admirable Mr. Pimple hands us our basket of letters we receive
it with a smile of expectancy, instead of appearing somewhat
doubtful as to the strain in which the letters will be written.
We chuckle now a 3 we grab the basket, and say: “ Five out of
every six of these mean friends.” We are not neglected by
our supporters of either sex ; in fact, our lady readers send us
dear little scented notes quite frequently, and these we lay out
on our desk, so that when our rival editors give us a look in (as
they are in the habit of doing, to borrow a bit when hard up)
they may see what a number of the fair sex are staunch
Marvolites,
Let me see, now. “N. L. D.” has taken the Marvel for nearly
twelve months. Sensible fellow. We always said our readers
were as smart as they make ’em. “F. M. E.” thinks we have
improved our book a lot lately, and hopes we shall continue to
go on making it better. Of course we shall. Though we cannot
think of any book published that comes up to the Marvel, still
we don’t intend to sit down satisfied. We keep on pegging
away to make it better, and better, and better. We worry up
artists and authors; and if we happen to hear a particular
author has a splendid idea, we make tracks for that author, and
wherever he is we don’t stop until we have got him writing up
his idea for us. We stick at nothing, as the bandit said when
he tried to stab the ghost. The way we hunt after artists (who
are a lazy and incorrigible lot) is really quite bloodthirsty. We
bribe them with our best office sherry, regale them with our
editorial pipes and tobacco, feast them royally at home, so that
they cannot do anything but give us their best work.
“ P. G. S. E.” (what can all these letters stand for?) writes
us a nice four-page letter, making us blush horribly. We are
very modest, you know, and four pages of overwhelming praise
make a great impression on so susceptible a person as your
editor. Then, to crown all, this correspondent of many names
ends up with, “I hope you won’t feel annoyed at my letter.”
Annoyed ? Good gracious! do you take us for a growling old
savage ? Annoyed ! Why we caper with joy when we receive
such letters. We box Pimple, our office-boy, a hundred times a
day in the excess of our transports. We make the office resound
with our merriment. We take down our African assegais and
execute a war-dance. We are young again ? Annoyed ? My
good sir, what sort of a grumpy old brute do you picture us ?
There is a facetious gentleman in Newcastle who is chuck-
ling to himself, and no doubt thinking himself exceptionally
smart. What a merry joker he is ! He writes us a long letter
filled with the most fulsome flattery, and ends up with the
modest request of a loan of £2O out of our coffers. He is really
having a huge joke at our expense—or rather, he wants it to be
at our expense. No; we don’t take him to be serious—only j esting.
and new ropes, &c. These kind, it is almost needless to
explain, need no tips from us, for they will never become any-
thing better than sickly or boisterous youths, who, as soon as
good, honest work is required, slink off.
Though we have now had our office cat for some weeks, it
has not Deen christened yet, though Pimple did dip its nose in
the inkpot and paste its back. Poor creature. What a life
the little wretch has led it! Twice, to our knowledge, has it
been shaved with our Turkish daggers, and its whiskers been
nipped with some betel-nut crackers which a correspondent
sent us from Afghanistan. Pieces of its fur fly on the air, and
stray whiskers protrude from the inkpots; so that we are almost
inclined to get rid of it, and the boy too. Only there would
be moments when we should repent, and want to have them
both back again.
Last Thursday we had a photographer up in our room, and
Pimple and the cat were taken as you see them here. What do
you think of them ? A bright couple, are they not ?
Like many another Marvelite, “ Old Joe ” wants to know how
to get strong, so we give a few hints, without going into a long
essay on exercises that may be done without any expense.
For an exercise that will strengthen the wrists and hands we
recommend the following : Grasp the top bar of a chair with both
hands, raise the chair until opposite the chin, then push straight
out and lower until the chair rests on the floor. It will be dis-
covered that the grip of the hand will become stronger each suc-
ceeding day while this exercise is followed.
The swimming movement —that is, lying across a stool or a
chair and kicking out as if swimming with the hand movements,
cannot be surpassed as a gentle and beneficial exercise. _ Every
muscle of the body is called into action during this exercise.
A flatiron, taken in the hand, can be used as one would a
dumb-bell, and wdth the same result.
A word of advice. Don’t continue the exercise until you
become tired, don’t exercise rapidly, and always breathe
slowly while exercising.
There is one thing more to be remarked, and that is that
too many only become gymnasts to play about on good appliances
and enjoy the novelty of exercising themselves upon new bars
LATEST PHOTO OP PIMPLE AND THE OFFICE CAT.
We had great difficulty in persuading the cat to stand on the
pedestal. Pimple suggested tying the animal down, and past-
ing her whiskers on to the books. We notice we have said
above that we had a photographer up ; it should be, we allowed
him to come at Pimple’s request. For some days the youth has
been posing up against the office stools in ridiculous attitudes,
and we wondered what on earth was in the wind; and when he
came in from lunch, dragging a dilapidated photographer after
him, we knew that he had been rehearsing the elegant pose
which you see he was taken in.
The signs + (plus) and - (minus), “R. W.,” are said to
have first been used by one Christopher Rudolph somewhere about
the year 1354. The sign —, which means “equal to” or
“ equalling,” was first employed by Robert Recorde in Queen
Mary’s reign, because, said he, “ noe 2 thynges can be moare
equalled’ The Editor.
Mr. PIMPLE appeals to is reders to raise the cirkulation ov the “MARVEL,” as the Boss will then raise
is skrew. Yew kan giv you’re book away wen you ave read it. This makes the paper better known.




GOOD
STORIES.
Id.
by Mr. Chips, and heaps of screamin '
Pictures.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
