

I 'r- '
THE
A Fa i \<& *1 ’Oazwirt^z
- l "‘— miT'-im, —— ■ mn- . ■»'■"■'«mgi-"MT--mumtwh- wr —..-■■ r
A Newspaper Published on September 15th, on Board the
P. &0. S. S.. “ Australia,” during a passage prom *
Melbourne to Colombo.
20 British Indian Street.
PRINTED AT THE CALCUTTA ADVERTISER PRESS,
1883.




QUIS SEPARABIT.
»HE one and only issue of the Australian Gazette is here
presented nearly exactly as it appeared on the Steamer
Australia.
The original “ Editorial Preface ” has been omitted, and so
have the Puzzles which wound up our newspaper: the record
of the voyage has been completed to Bombay. Little else has
been omitted, nothing has been added, and no alteration of the
arrangement of the articles has been attempted.
THE VOYAGE.
“ Happy is the kingdom whose annals are dull.” To some
extent this proverb holds good of a sea voyage, the absence
of conspicuous marks in the records of our present trip, even if
it shows that no whirl of gaiety has engulfed us, yet testifies that
our state of placid happiness has not been broken in upon by
any great catastrophe.
A correspondent has kindly supplied us with a diary of the
voyage, which we are unable to give in full, as it is written on
small paper, and would take too long a time to copy; we extract
from it, however, the following bare itinerary of facts.
August 22nd.—Left Sydney at midday, in unpleasant
weather; the trip to Melbourne, where we arrived on the 24th,
was very enjoyable. Many passengers left us here, but their
places were filled by others.


August 28th.—Left Melbourne at 7 A.M., and by noon were
clear of Port Phillip. The wreck of the George Royer, just outside
the Heads, has now very nearly disappeared from view, and salvage
operations have been discontinued. A mile or two from the
Heads, we passed close to the S. S. Orient, crowded with several
hundred emigrants and other passengers who greeted us with
loud cheers, to which only a feeble return was made by our
small company.
August 30th.—Glenelg was reached in the morning, and left
in the evening; heavy rain fell during the greater part of the
day, spoiling the pleasure of the passengers who ventured ashore.
Here many more of our messmates left us, and the rest shook
down into their places to face the long voyage.. Whist parties
were formed and the piano was brought into use, the saloon being
resorted to by numbers who found the upper air too cold for
them. As far as King George’s Sound the weather was very
unfavorable, and few passengers appeared at meals. The vessel,
which had been heavily laden at Glenelg, rolled and shipped
seas to an extent which made walking almost impossible to the
majority of us, and drove us under cover. We arrived at King
George’s Sound on the evening of the 2nd September, and left
at day-break, so that little or no opportunity was afforded us of
seeing either the town or harbour.
The piano was brought on deck on the 7th, and singing and
dancing have given occupation and amusement to some of the
passengers every evening since then. On Sunday morning, Service
was held on the quarter deck, Captain Alderton officiating, and
some ladies and gentlemen, who formed themselves into a choir,
rendered good service in the Hymns and Canticles, though their
nervousness and the extreme unsteadiness of the ship prevented
the singing from being as good as we had expected.
As we swept northwards through the “ Trades,” each day
became hotter than its predecessor; on the 11th, punkahs were
first used, and the currents of air they gave birth to were much
appreciated.
The afternoons of the 12th and 13th were devoted to Athletic
Sports; as they are fully reported elsewhere, we need only say


that they were very successful, and appeared to give great plea-
sure to both onlookers and performers. Thus day by day passed
happily away : nothing occurred to mar our enjoyment, and we
think most of us felt a sensation of regret when, on Sunday
September 16 th, we found ourselves in Colombo harbour.
About half our company proceeded at short notice to the S. S.
Brindisi to continue their journey home, and of the remainder
some went on shore for a trip through Ceylon, and half a dozen
stayed by the Australia till she reached Bombay on Friday the
21st, after an uneventful passage up the Indian Coast.
To Captain Alderton and his officers, for the pains they took
to render us comfortable, and the hearty manner in which they
entered into all plans for our entertainment, we take this oppor-
tunity of expressing the thanks of the passengers. The voyage
will soon linger as a faint memory only, but we feel assured it
will be a pleasant one, and in conclusion we wish Good-bye and
God-speed to all.
RIDDLE.
A noun there is of plural number,
A foe to human peace and slumber.
Now any noun you chance to take,
By adding “ S ” you plural make ;
But, by adding “ S ” to this.
How strange the metamorphosis !
Plural is plural then no more,
And sweet, what bitter was before.— {Geo. Canning.)
ANSWER,
Ah, sharper than all sudden snares,
We Ael the sting of daily cares ;
To change their number “ S ” we take,
And singular of plural make :
But that, of changes is the less,
Onr cares melt sweetly in caress.


Tune. —“ In the Gloaming.”
THE EAT OF THE SEA-SICK.
ON the Ocean, oh my darling,
When /the ship rocks to and fro,
Dorit you think ’twere better, darling,
You and I should go below.
When the ship is tossing wildly,
Comes a sudden, unknown woe ;
Don't you think ’twere better, darling,
We should both go down below.
On the Ocean, oh my darling,
Cling not lovingly to me,
For I often, at short warning,
Rush to view the deep blue sea.
For I feel o’ercome with something,
Something struggling to be free ;
It were best to leave me, darling,
Best for you and best for me. —( With pathos .)
THE EGYPTIAN WAR.
THE heroic storming of Tel-el-Kebir shattered Arabi’s power so
effectually that his generals from Kafred-war to Cairo resign-
ed themselves to the inevitable without another struggle.
For the first time since armhs have been supplied with
breechloaders, an inferior force of Britishers march coolly up to
works which might and would have been (under a general like
Sir Garnet) simply impregnable, and in defiance of artillery and
bullets carry the whole position at the point of the bayonet.
The elite of the German troops would doubtless have essayed the
feat, but up to the present the honor is due to our warriors alone.


The news has been a theme of wonder in every eastern bazar,
and its effects will not be confined to the eastern races only. The
Frank, the Teuton, and our cousins on the other side of the Atlan-
tic have secretly, and indeed openly, paid a tribute to the endur-
ance, courage and generalship which crushed the greatest (or
rather what soon would have been the greatest) revolt since the
Indian mutiny. What makes the exploit the more remarkable is the
fact that the season was the worst during the year for unseasoned
or even seasoned white troops, and while our men were stricken,
down with sunstroke, dysc ntery, and fever, the thick-headed Egyp-
tian and Negro from the Soudan scarcely felt the evils that slew
more of our brave boys than all their bullets.
Whatever the political opinion of Britishers in general may
be of the causes which led up to the war, they are at least unani-
mous in expressing a determination not to lose its fruits by the
dictum of Europe, and much as ’twould be to be regretted, ’tis
quite possible our representatives may have to enter congress with
shotted guns. Nations (and France at the head of them) whose
statesmen looked on with indifference, and as far as they dared
go, encouraged Arahi, can scarcely expect to be listened to, as they
would have been had they shared in the work and its hardships,
instead of increasing them for us to endure. The foremost of
these cut-throat powers stands the country which owes its very
existence to England, or rather to Great Britain, not one country
more than another (England, Ireland, or Scotland).
T will be an evil day for Italy if ever a hostile fleet of
Britishers appear in the Bay of Naples. The watch of the
commander will again be laid upon the table, and ’tis short notice
will be given for submission !
Little benefit do Britishers ever derive from their Allies,
although in this instance, at the commencement of operations,
events appeared to shape rather favorably. To the end, the advice
of Cromwell to his soldiers suits our policy and interests best.
Our sailors and soldiers have done their part but too well.
The drama must be concluded by diplomacy.
Will the actors in that do their duty to their country as
well as their fighting countrymen ? C. R.


NOYEEETTE,
VOL. I
66 1\/TY dear/' said the Baron, waking about 5 A.M., “I’m tired
-B-L of doing nothing, and being scolded for not doing it
right; I think I’ll take a cruise to the Crusades.”
“ All right,” murmured his very-much better-half dreamily;
“book jour armour through to Jericho to avoid bother, and
mind you go second class, and telegraph to me on your arrival ;
and be careful to take your new woollen comforter; and if you
have a cold, rub your nose with tallow, and take a hot footbath
w ith a pint of must” here she dropped off again into slumber.
When the news spread of the Baron’s intended departure,
an astonishing number of people manifested an interest in his
movements. The Variety Troupe in the neighbouring town
promptly advertised its farewell performances, and a number of
men in seedy-looking costumes began prowling about the house
with pieces of paper, suspiciously like writs, issued in the name
of Richard the First, Rex. Several sheriff’s officers fell victims
to misdirected zeal, and all the efforts of the Royal Humane
Society proved ineffectual to resuscitate one who spoiled the
Sunday dinner by sticking head downwards in the chimney, or
another who was discovered, stiff and cold, on the post where, for
the twelve preceding hours he had kept a vigilant eye on the
scarecrow : a third had nearly succeeded in entering the castle,


when the eye of love, in an underhousemaid, detected him in
the baker-boy’s guise. Day by day the blockade grew closer, and
at length a grand rush of the assailants carried the castle, but
its owner had escaped. Wading a stream in the rear of the
premises, he may be considered to have ewaded his pursuers,
and the way he did it was masterly.
YOL. 11.
The Baron took a single ticket. His wife pointed out, justly,
that the climate of Palestine was remarkably unhealthy, and
she disapproved of his wasting money on a return ticket, which
was not transferable, and would probably never be used. She
also made him insure his life, warned him against being taken
in by the Confidence Trick, or Greek Slaves, and bade him an
affectionate adieu.
His journey was uneventful; the worst peril he had to
undergo was a Railway Refreshment Room dinner, and thanks
to early piety, he got over that.
In the fighting that followed his arrival, wherever Richard
Coeur de Lion went, there was the Baron to be found, per-
forming prodigies of valor. Musalmen were nowhere when he
produced his muscle, and gave them a hoister with it, and no
less terrible was be, when his sword sawed its way through the
sordid herd.


After losing count of the slaughtered, the Baron began to
feel the work monotonous, and his heart yearned for home and
its comforts.
“ Who ran to shake me when I fell,
And smacked me, till I had to yell 1"
The Baron’s nights were dreary without his wife’s lectures.
He had to make his own mustard poultices and gruel, a state
of affairs to which he naturally objected, so a few months saw
him wending his way home again in the guise of a pilgrim.
VOL. 111.
With his armour disposed of to the most liberal dealer in
second-hand stores, and clad in a long and sombre gown, the
Baron slowly meandered through
the countries of Europe that lay
between Palestine and his happy
home. To many a penitent did he
give consolation, and many a fair
demoiselle did he comfort in a way
I shudder to think of. lam never
allowed to go on so.
At length, worn and emaciated, he stood on a hill whence
he could see, on the sea-cliff, the familiar objects of his youth.
He leant upon his sword and wiped away a tear.
Suddenly, as he turned his regards on his castle, sounds of
revelry issued from it “Gad’s life, odzooks, ifeckins, by my


halidame, and marry, come up/’ muttered he, relapsing into
strong language he had picked up from some loafers at the camp,
“ methinks the ladye Eleanor entertaineth company, though
indeed I wot not how she could raise the necessary plate and
crockery. Perchance her thrift hath turned an honest penny by
letting out my ancestral home as a seaside hotel or head-quarters
of a Salvation Army detachment.”
At this moment, a peasant passed, and in reply to an
eagerly-put question, gave the required explanation; “ Our
ladye Eleanor hath hired out the main hall for a six days’
walking tournament, and even now they quarrel over the result,
with foul assertion and recrimination.”
It was too much. With a wild shriek, the Baron sank a
lifeless mass. In this supreme moment of agony, all the
slaughtered Saracens were amply avenged.
WE probably all know the old fashioned custom of spread-
ing salt on a wine stain in a tablecloth to prevent the
moisture from extending its area of mischief. Some glimmer-
ing idea of this was present to Mr. Brown, when on an
overturned saltcellar he emptied a claret decanter, with the hazy
remark, “Nuzzin like clar’t t’ take out salt stains.”
THE END,
HE would’nt marry her, because she had false teeth, but
when his wife kept him awake at night with toothache
and neuralgia, he began to think he had made a mistake.


THE HOST BALE.
"HATTING one day at the Oval,
-L' I was scoring, and quite at ease
And I placed the bowling neatly,
Piling up twos and threes.
I know not whom we were playing,
Or what was my total then,
But I struck one ball of Morley’s,
With the sound of a great Big Ben.
It speeded away in the distance,
Like the Devil away from a psalm,
And sweetly, though Long-leg fielded,
It slipt like an eel through his palm
It quieted chaff and chatter
Among love’s overcoming dears,
It awoke the harmonious echoes
Of loud discordant cheers.
It left the perplexed fieldsmen
Silent as perfect geese,
At length they were forced to leave it,
Although they were loath to cease.
They have sought, but they seek it vainly,
That one lost ball to find,
That came from the shoulder of Morley,
And speeded away from mine.
It may be some man at the gas-works
May have it in his domain,
It may be that only next season
I may hit that ball again.


KEMINXSCENeES OF THE SFOETS.
(Discontinued owing to our going to press too early.)
What is that which men love more than life,
Dread more than death or mortal strife,
That which contented men desire,
The poor possess, the rich require,
The miser spends, the spendthrift saves,
And all men carry to their graves.
Nothing.
AMONG the replies to an advertisement of a music committee
for a candidate as Organist, Music Teacher, &c., was the fol-
lowing, “ Gentlemen, I noticed your advertisement for a music
teacher and organist, either lady or gentleman. Having been
both for several years, I offer you my services.”


66 TITHAT would you do now,” said a Barrister in his cross
* ' examination of a witness, “if a man called you a
linguist." “Well,” replied the witness promptly, “I should either
bring an action or knock him down.” As soon as the witness
got outside the court, he asked a friend what the meaning of a
ninqivers was.
EH?
T\OES the Grand Old Man
Deem it right or proper,
When some darling plan
Threats to come a cropper,
Just to try to gain
Freedom from frustration,
By a pretty plain
Hint of resignation.
Does he hold it wise
To exhibit passion,
Treating his allies
In despotic fashion,
Does he think it is
Fraught with their perdition,
“ To consider his
Personal position ” 1
Though new Irish friends
Seemed to him a treasure,
Do their private ends
Now afford him pleasure 1
Can he disallow
That their tricks are hateful 1
Can’t he call them now
Horribly ungrateful ?
Is he not within
Measurable distance,
Of the power to win
Stoppage of resistance


Knows he not a way
To inform us nicely,
Why he ought to stay
Where he is precisely 1
Will he then resign
All the sweets of office ?
Add his fall, in fine,
To the Tory trophies 1
Such a thing might be,
Some by no means scout it,
But for our part we
Feel disposed to doubt it.
SPOHTING.
SEPTEMBER the 11th and 12th were great days on board the
good ship Australia, days which will be remembered by
many for a considerable time to come, for various reasons; by some
on account of the intense pleasure they experienced in witness-
ing the Athletic Sports, which took place on the above dates j
by others on account of the exquisite pain they endured after
competing for the various events. Many are still suffering
excruciating agonies, and not a few received wounds, which as
yet have completely baffled the skill of our worthy medico
Powell; and he’s a strong man too (a really powellful man), altho’
not quite strong enough in his profession to reduce the propor-
tions of White’s damaged beetle-crusher, or convert to its origi-
nal color the olfactory organ pertaining unto Turner. There
were no less than eighteen events on the tapis, or programme
as some people call it; the entries for all of them were large,
and each event was keenly contested, the best man winning in
every instance.
Space, or rather the want of it, will not allow us to give a
detailed account of each event; we must, however, dwell for a
few moments on the most important contests ; these, bien enten-
du, were the races competed for by the fair sex, who entered most
vigorously into the two days’ business. If only we had not run
short of paper (N.B. —We are daily expecting a large shipment)


we would willingly enter minutely into the names, weights and
colors of the riders, or rather give you a description of the pretty
faces, and the quite too lovely costumes which met our gaze:
A propos of costumes, our reporter states that divided skirts were
resorted to by most of the fair competitors. The first race the
damsels went for, was the Egg Race, 30 yards,—that was the
distance to be run, and not the length of the egg as many sup-
posed, This was a great race, Miss Lily Jones eventually win-
ning by a short chignon. The betting was pretty heavy: the favorite
was Mrs. Jones who started at even money, but unfortunately the
unevenness of the course prevented her from putting in an
appearance at the finish, for the ground riz up and hit her on
the forehead.
Race 17 was a very exciting one : nine came to the post, and
the starter had much trouble in getting them away, the younger
competitors being very restless. This race was run in three
heats and a final, and the prize was eventually carried off by
Miss Saunders.
Thompson opened a book on the event, but the winner was
such a hot favorite, that there was no business to be done, so he
sought the seclusion of his cabin and buried his sorrows in a
cup of cold poison, commonly called B. and S. It was rather
amusing to overhear the ladies discussing the events after they
were over. All would have won, had it not been for something
or another. One said, “If my egg had been the same shape as
yours, I’m sure I should have won that Egg Race.” Another
would have come in first, only the heels of her boots were too
high. A third confidently stated she could beat the field, only
something went wrong with her <s pull-backs,”—whatever they
may be, and so on. The only other event worthy of particular
notice was the Obstacle Race, which was closely contested by
Messrs. Meredith and Askin, the latter proving the victor. Both
the men in question are true Athletes, Meredith especially show-
ing hmself to be a thoroughly good all-round man. The Tug-
of-War wound up the second day’s sport, and simultaneously
wound up the competitors. The officers deserve much praise
for winning this event. Everybody was much surprised at their


1,
Hopping Race ...
... Mr. Meredith.
2.
Egg Race
... Miss Lily Jones.
3.
1U0 Yards Race
... Mr. Meredith.
r „ Egbrton.
4.
Three-Legged Race
"■ ( „ Meredith.
5.
Quadruped Race
... „ Askin.
6,
Quoit Match
... Miss Fuller.
7.
Walking Match
„ Saunders.
8.
Hop, Skip, and Jump ...
... Mr. Askin.
9.
Putting the Shot
... Dr. Powell.
10.
Obstacle Race
... Mr. Askin.
11.
Chalking the line
... ,, Montefiore.
12.
Hurdle Race
... Mr. Turner.
13.
Bull Match
... Miss Jones.
14.
Cock Fight
... Mr. Montefiore.
15.
Trial of Strength
... Dr. Powell.
16.
Stewards’ Race
... Did not fill.
17.
Open Race
... Miss Saunders.
18.
Tug of War
... Officers of the Australia.
Consolation Stakes
.. Miss E. Jones.
»» »
... Miss Barber,
defeating the passengers, as the winners looked a very poor lot.
The Chief Officer, Chief Engineer, Doctor, and Fourth Officer,
have evidently been neglected in their youth, as they presented a
particularly emaciated appearance, and the public was mad with
joy at the result. Thompson, the bookmaker, paid for drinks
all round, and threw his hat overboard.
A word of praise is due to Mr. English, the promoter of
all the fun. Thanks to his indefatigable energy, the passengers
of the Australia passed two most pleasant afternoons. Captain
Alderton was kind enough to act as judge, and in conjunction
with his officers, assisted the Stewards in every possible way in
carrying out the programme satisfactorily. Appended is a list
of winners.


ADVERTISEMENT,
THIS is a real advertisement. Ran away from home, Laura, aged 18,
dressed in a straw hat.” What an airy costume she’ll be in,
if the wind blows that hat off!
TOO HTTERET DECIDED,
THEY were standing on the seaside, he was by her side, and she
was by his side and they were both beside themselves, besides
being by the ship’s side. He whispered aside and he sighed ; and she
sighed aside.
NEWS FROM THE SANDWICH ISEES,
Court Gazette. —His Majesty has bestowed the order of the
Cock-a-100 on General Spritz Kopf. This distinguished warrior
will therefore be entitled to add 3 stripes of paint, gules, with
a bend dexter or. to the many decorations already tattooed on
his manly breast.
The Court will go from full into half mourning to-morrow,
and in place of the frown hitherto worn, courtiers will appear
clad in a gentle smile ; not a broad smile, but a subdued one,
‘f as if,” as the Court jester aptly remarks, “ you were seasick,
and were trying to make people believe you liked it.”
Latest Fashions.
Madame Jones, the Court milliner, has invented an entirely
new pattern of nose ring ; this, with a pair of spectacles and a
false tooth, is calculated to form a tout ensemble seldom equalled
and never excelled, and to drive even more young men than ever
to matrimony or suicide, we don’t know which. We must, how-
ever, enter a protest against this growing extravagance of dress ;
the Romans fell when they lost their simplicity, and we fear
much, that our beloved countrymen are following but too
rapidly in their wake.
Full dress for boys consists, as heretofore, of a piece of
string. A whaler captain, lately killed down south, had his
pockets filled with the article, the whole stock of which was
promptly secured by Mr. Smith, our enterprising tailor and
draper. His price is extremely reasonable, and parents have
now no excuse for letting their sons run about in danger of
catching cold.


Domestic Intelligence.
The School of Cookery has been shut up. It is many years
since missionaries and sailors were so scarce, and the few secured
were of such poor quality that the attendance at the school
showed a daily falling-off. This is a matter for much regret,
as, under the influence of the school, our taste was rapidly
improving, and even the poorest had begun to prefer missionary
to pig.
EPITAPHS,
HERE lies my wife Sue,
If 1 said I was sorry, I should lie too.
Here lies the body of Mary Ann Lowder,
Who died whilst drinking a seidlitz powder ;
Called from this world to her heavenly rest,
She should have waited till it effervesced.
Sacred to the memory of John Smith,
Who was accidentally shot by his brother,
As a token of affection and esteem.
On a Miss Partridge who died in May.
What! kill a Partridge in May,
Was that sportsmanlike, eh. Death, eh 1
Here lie I and my three daughters,
This comes from drinking Cheltenham waters.
If we had stuck to the Epsom salts,
We shouldn’t have been lying in these ’ere vaults.
Here lie I, and my death was a rum one,
I died of a pudding, and that was a plum one.
Private John Jones lies buried here,
All thro’ drinking cold small beer.
Good Christian, drink no beer at all,
Or if you do, don’t drink it small.
With face turned towards the heavenly Zion,
Here lies the Landlord of the Lion ;
Resigned unto the heavenly will,
His wife keeps on the business still.


NONSENSE HHYMES.
THERE was a young fellow of Magdalen Hall,
Who really knew little or nothing at all,
He was seventy-three,
When he took his degree,
And that was youngish for Magdalen Hall.
There was a young lady of Rio
Who tried to pray Handel’s grand trio,
But her powers being scanty,
She played it Andante ,
Instead of Allegro con Brio ,
There was a young lady of Chichester,
Who went to see her solicitor,
When he asked for his fee,
She said “ Fiddle-de-dee,
I merely looked in as a visitor.”
There was a young lady of Sestry,
Who was oft to be found in a vestry,
She Said it was poor rates,
But it really was curates,
That made her resort to that vestry.
There was a young lady of Lees,
Who bought a small pipe and some peas,
When the parson passed by
She shot peas in his eye,
And said, “ Pick them up if you please.”
There was a young lady of Harrow,
Who went to the Church in a barrow,
When she stuck in the aisle,
She exclaimed with a smile,
“ They make these ere churches too narrow.
There’s a fair Mongol maid of Thibet,
Who has a young bear for a pet,
In spite of bronchitis,
Her greatest delight is
To cuddle him when he is wet.


There is an old ship called Australia,
Whose runs are rather a failure,
Were it not for her copper
There’d be nothing to stop her,
From being by now at Ismailia.
KISSES.
“ Tell me prithee, what are kisses,”
Asked a maid of me one day,
Smiles and mirth were on her red lips
Mischief in her brown eyes lay.
So I answered, likewise laughing,
Kisses, maiden, you must know,
May be bought at any sweet shop,
Four a penny, is’t not so T
Then the brown eyes flashed upon me,
“ What want I what all can buy,
Tell me truly what are kisses ;
Such as we want, you and 1?”
“ Maiden, if you knowledge seek for,
Which exceeds the pastry cook’s,
Ask not for it of the cold world,
Seek it not in musty books.
Come and stand awhile beside me,
Watch the sea’s fair loving grace,
Let me see the tender moonlight
Fall upon your upturned face.”
Then the fire and anger vanished,
Hushed was the impatient cry,
Whilst my head stooped low towards her,
And we kissed then, she and I.


THE MESMERIC MAJESTY,
I KNOW a young man, whose conceit is immense,
At yarn-spinning he’s simjfly perfection,
He talks of himself, till we all take offence;
He boasts his dominions, and rarely has sense
To withdraw for a moment’s reflection.
He poses as king, or as ‘‘ Lord of the Isle,”
Though he doesn’t gain credit a minute,
And when a girl’s heart he attempts to beguile,
He says to himself, “Now I’m in it.”
It happened this fellow a passenger came
On a far renowned P. and O. Steamer,
And bragged of the love he could fan to a flame,
In the breast of each fair lady-dreamer.
“ With a red-flushing cheek they advance for the prize,
When I hold up my finger, no more.
For fatal to all is the glance of my eyes,
And they worship, they cling, they adore.”
On an ill omened day, he encountered a girl,
Who determined, by way of a treat,
To take, as she phrased it, “ his hair out of curl,”
And to try to bring down his conceit.


With her smiles and her sighs, as a girl comprehends,
She snared the unconscious enslaver,
Till at length to his knees, he in suppliance, bends;
Then around them, crowd swiftly her loud-smiling friends,
And as he, like a fool, hot and speechless, upstands,
She lectures him on his behaviour.
“ I’ve read you a lesson which, when it you scan,
I hope will effectual prove,
When a girl has a chat with a pleasant young man,
She is not always thinking of love.
And if she, as she walks, stops and lingers near you,
By your charms never think she is caught,
She will list, it is true, to your talk, faute de mieux,
But of flirting she hasn’t a thought.
Again, Sir, you talk of your station, your place,
Your position, your prowess, your power,
Learn, Sir, that a person of truly high race,
Wouldn’t talk of himself, in a whole year of gr«ce,
As much as you do, in an hour.
You're a very big man in your own little sphere,
So you say, though I cherish a doubt of it,
But know. Sir, whatever you may be when there,
You’re only a pigmy when out of it.”
LATEST TELEGRAPHIC INTELLIGENCE.
Ireland. —Twenty Laud-leaguers were to-day murdered by 30
Approvers. Most of the approvers have been arrested, and will shortly
be tried for the crime.
Later. —Only one and a half Landleaguers were murdered; up to
date no arrests have been made.
The Queen. —Her Majesty’s health is so much improved that she
was able to-day to visit the grave of the late Sir John Brown, Esq., and
place a wreath of forget-me-nots thereon. Her Majesty has so far-
recovered from her late accident, that her knee only troubles her when


she plays lawn tennis or aunt Sally. Princess Beatrice celebrated
her 26th birthday, by taking a drive with Her Majesty in the country
round Balmoral.
Suez Canal. —All arrangements have been completed for the mak-
ing of the second Suez Canal, which is to be completed in 1983,
London, 11th September. —The usual half-yearly meeting of the
P. and O, Co, took place yesterday. A dividend of 25% was declared,
and the salaries of all the Company’s employes were doubled.
Madagascar.—The Hovas continue to hold their own. The war is
not all (h)over yet.
Bombay. —Cholera continues to increase ; 5246 deaths were
reported yesterday, and more are expected to-day. General
health of the inhabitants is good. The Byculla Club is closed
in consequence of the death of the whole staff and all the mem-
bers from cholera.
London. —Theatre Royal, Coven t Garden, was burnt down
this morning. Fire caused by a spark from the big drum during
one of Wagner’s operas.
Mrs. Langtry slipped on board ship when crossing the
Atlantic, and fell on her face. Her nose had to be amputated.
Mr. Gebhardt says that now she looks prettier than ever. Baro-
ness Burdett Coutts is advertised to appear in the Alhambra
Pantomime at Christmas, in the character of the “ Sleeping
Beauty.”
.


THE EAST RESOURCE.
give to me a novelty,
Amusing and sensational.
And yet inclined to raise the mind,
And somewhat educational.
I like the play, both grave and gay,
And concerts and society,
But it is strange, I want a change,
And long for some variety.
The spelling bees were not the cheese,
For me or my credentials,
Good spelling never ranked among
A gentleman’s essentials.
I’ve picnicked all the country round,
At Chowder and at Botany,
And tried the rink, and donned the pink,
To drive away monotony.
And still I strive to keep alive
A feeling of festivity,
But stern ennui oppresses me,
And robs me of activity.
If pleasure fails and naught avails,
To use a term colonial,
I’ll “ plant” my life, and seek a wife,
And solace matrimonial.
—A Bachddore,


h ■ y,
■
■
v;
% ■ :}&
