

THE
POSTAGE STAMP
IN WSR
Copyright: Bassano, Ltd.
BY FRED. J. MELVILLE.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
J. W. JONES
444 STRAND (Opposite Charing Cross).
Makes a speciality of Government War
Issues of all kinds—Entires, Provisionals,
&c., ®c. Also Special Red Cross
Issues, postal and otherwise.
Naval and Military Entires purchased and sold.
SPECIAL ITEMS ON SALE.
sc. Atalanta (Georgia) Confederate War, - - £5O
10c. Alsace, German occupation, 1870, yellow network,
mint, £5
6as. and 8 pie India, Abyssinia Field Force, 1867, - £5
China Expeditionary Force —all values at special rates.
~ ~ ~ 1 anna, red, used, - - 2d. each
Indian Expeditionary Force (France, 1914), anna, - 2d. each
Indian Expeditionary Force (France, 1914), J anna to 1
rupee, ------- 7/6
Red Cross of all kinds from Id. each.
In addition to the above, I hold a very complete stock of Postage Stamps of
all countries, and can fill want lists from any Catalogue at special rates.
List of 1000 Cheap Sets, Packets, &c., post free, anywhere on application.
Stamps purchased or exchanged to any amount.
Sole Address :-(Dept. W) 444 Strand. London
Telephone—Gerrard 2811. Office Hours—lo to 6.


The Postage Stamp
in War.


By the same Author.
A new work on the postage stamps
of the new British Protectorate of
EGYPT
in the Melville Stamp Book series
(No. 20) is now on the press and
will be published in January, 1915,
by Stanley Gibbons, Ltd., 391
Strand, W.C. Price 6d. Post free,
7'A d.


The
Postage Stamp
in War
BY
FRED. J. MELVILLE,
Editor of “The Postage Stamp.”
MDCCCCXV - PUBLISHED - BV - FRED.
J. - MELVILLE, - 14 - SUDBOURNE - RD..
BRIXTON, - LONDON, - ENGLAND.
COPYRIGHT. All rights of translation and reproduction reserved.


ACKNOWLEDGED WITH THANKS.
To many collectors and dealers We are
indebted jor the loan of stamps, envelopes,
etc., jor illustration in this work, including
Messrs. E. Bentley Wood, H. H. Norland,
W. J. Holmes, Nathan Heywood, J. Ireland,
R. Wedmore, Stanley Gibbons, Ltd., Hugo
Griebert & Co., Aljred Smith & Son, W.
T. Wilson, Whitfield King & Co.,
Charles Nissen & Co., Lewis May & Co.,
W. S. Lincoln & Son, Bright & Son,
Roberts, Bridget & Kay, A. C. Roessler,
.C. Davies, and others. : : : : : :
Captain Lionel Crouch has kindly assisted
in revising the proojs. : : : : : :


CONTENTS.
Chapter I.
The Postage Stamp with the Flag. —British Posts in the Crimea—The
Abolition of the Capitulations—The British Fleet in the Baltic—
—Abyssinian Expedition—The First Army Postal Corps—Egypt—
Dongola Expedition—South Africa—The British Army Post in France,
1914—How to Address Soldier’s Letters—The Postmarks from France
—The Navy’s Postmarks. ------ Page 7.
Chapter 11.
INDIAN Army Postal Service —China Expeditionary Force-*—British Rail-
way Administration in China—Somaliland—The Forbidden City of
Lhassa—lndian Expeditionary Force in France. - Page 28.
Chapter 111.
SOUTH African Wars —Transvaal—Orange River Colony—Krugersdorp—
Kuruman—Lydenburg—Mafeking—Pietersburg—Rustenburg—Schweizer
Renecke —V olksrust —V ryburg —W olmaranstad—The Union—South
African War of 1914. - - - - - - - Page 37.
Chapter IV.
FRANCE —Napoleon’s Minister of Posts—The Second Republic—The Pre-
sidency—Empire—French Expeditions to China and Mexico—Sedan—
Metz—Strasburg—The Siege of Paris—Balloon Post—Pigeon Post—
Peace—Military Frank Stamps—The German Invasion, 1914—Red
Cross Stamps—War Postcards and Postmarks. - Page 47.
Chapter V.
RUSSIA —War Charity Stamps—Portraits of the Tsars—War Stamps of
1914—Japan—War with China—The Empress Jingo—Triumphal
Military and Naval Reviews—Kiao-chow—Belgium—-King Albert—
Bombardment of Malines—Private Postal Service—Germanised Posts
—Red Cross Stamps—Bogus Stamps—Postmarks—Serbia—” Death
Mask ’’ Stamps—King Peter—Montenegro—King Nicholas. Page 59.
Chapter VI.
The Enemy’s Stamps —Germany—Austria—Bosnia—Hungary—Turkey.
Page 7/.
Chapter VII.
AMERICAN Wars. —United States—Civil War—Confederate Stamps—
Hispano-American War—Vera Cruz—Canada—Mexican Revolution—
South and Central America. ------ Page 91.
Chapter VIII.
Miscellaneous Wars and Commemorations— Patriotic Empire Stamps
—Victoria—New Zealand—Barbados’ Nelson Stamp—A Dutch Naval
Commemoration—Balkan Wars—Greece—Albania—Epirus—Bulgaria—
Roumanla—ltaly—Portugal—Spain—Mysterious Melillas—China.
Page 100
Chapter IX.
The Great War of 1914-1915. Check List of New War Stamps.
Page 113.


Russia’s New War Stamps.
(Figs. 189-192. See Chapter V.)


THE POSTAGE STAMP
IN WAR.
CHAPTER I.
THE POSTAGE STAMP WITH THE FLAG.—British Posts in the
Crimea—The Abolition of the Capitulations—The British
Fleet in the Baltic—Abyssinian Expedition—The First
Army Postal Corps—Egypt—Dongola Expedition—South
Africa—The British Army Post in France, 1914 —How
to Address Soldier’s Letters—The Postmarks from France
—The Navy’s Postmarks.
THE Postage Stamp follows the Flag. The same small
talisman which passes our letters across the seven
seas to friends the world over maintains the lines
of personal communication with our soldiers and sailors in time
of war. Wherever the British Tommy goes he must have his
letters from home; like the lines of communication, which are
the life-line of the army, postal communication is the chief
support of the courage and spirit of the individual soldier. His
folk at home send him new vigour with every letter that tells
of the persons, places and things that are nearest and most
cherished in his memory.
In these days letter-sending and letter-getting are so common-
place that few give any thought to the great organisation by
which thousands of millions of postal packets are posted and
delivered in this country every year. And now that most
of us have friends at the Front, in France, in Belgium, or on
the high seas, we are perhaps Inclined to take it all just as a
matter of course that letters pass and repass much in the
ordinary humdrum way. This is plain to the conductors of our
postal services when during war time they get numerous com-
plaints from individuals of delay or even non-delivery, or any
one of a number of other minor inconveniences which must
often be unavoidable in the stirring times of war.
To-day many thousands of letters and postal packets are
being sent to and received from the troops of the British
Expeditionary Force in France, yet it is a simple fact that


but a small percentage of the civilian population in this country
knows anything of the existence, far less of the workings,
of the Army Postal Service as an organisation separate and
distinct from the postal department of the home Government.
The Army Postal Service is administered under a Director
of Postal Services, who is responsible to the Commander in
Chief of the Army, and whose system is established with the
co-operation of the Inspector-General of Communications.
The formation of a British Army Post Office Corps is of
comparatively recent date. It was first suggested by Colonel
du Plat Taylor in the seventies, as a means of using the
services of the Post Office Rifle Volunteers in war time, but
it was not until the Egyptian campaign in 1882 that the corps
was formed.
Prior to this, however, bodies of servants of the Post Office
had done duty with the army in organising and maintaining
postal communication with the armies in the field and with
the links connecting up with the home service. During the
Crimean War extensive arrangements were made by the Post
Office to maintain postal communication with the forces in
Turkey, the Black Sea, and the Baltic. Prior to the war,
the British Government did not maintain any postal packets
between Mediterranean ports save some steam vessels for
the transport of the Indian mails, and some of these were
taken up by the military and naval authorities. Letters for
Constantinople and the Levant ordinarily went through the
French and Austrian administrations and were chargeable at
the then high foreign rates of postage. With the assistance
of the French Government, letters were sent via Marseilles to
Constantinople (or vice-versa) at first at intervals of three times
a month, but afterwards six times a month, and during the
latter period of the war, twice a week.
But the French mail packets went no further than Con-
stantinople, so the British Postmaster-General sent out an
experienced officer, Mr. E. J. Smith, of the London General
Post Office, to Turkey as Postmaster of His Majesty’s Forces;
and three Assistant Postmasters, together with seven Letter
Sorters. As the facilities for land transport accorded the
Postmaster proved insufficient he was furnished with eighteen
horses and mules for the exclusive use of his office. The
Postmaster was supplied with the postage stamps of the home
country, then (so far as the penny and twopence denominations


were concerned) in the early and beautifully engraved design
of William 'Wyon s Queen s Head. This was the first
use of British postage stamps on foreign territory, or indeed
anywhere beyond the limits of the British Isles, and stamp
collectors take a considerable interest in the English stamps
which survive with the various Crimean postmarks specially
supplied to the Postmaster of His Majesty s Forces in the East.
Stamps used on letters from the forces may be recognised by
either the Crown and Stars or Cypher and Stars or the circular
Figs. 1 — 4. Crimean Postmarks.
dated postmarks {Figs. I—4). A range of the early penny
red stamps, from the imperforate red-brown stamp of 1841 to
the Die 11. large Crown perforated 14 stamp may be found,
as well as the twopence blues of the same period, and the
4d. rose (1857), 6d. violet (1834), and Is. green (1847) (see
Figs. 5—10). There are possibly others not yet known to
collectors.
7
5
6


Figs. 5-10. British stamps found with Crimean postmarks.
The correspondence dealt with by this small staff was con-
siderable, averaging 45,250 letters despatched to and 43,125
received from the seat of war in each month. In one year
543,000 letters were despatched to and 517,500 received from
the forces in the Crimea.
The chief officer in charge at the British post offices in
Turkey and the Crimea during the war, Mr. E. J, Smith, is
specially mentioned in the Postmaster-General’s report for 1857
as having discharged his duties in a very creditable manner.
In that year his services were offered to and accepted by the
Turkish Government with a view to establishing an improved
postal service in the Sultan’s dominions. Since this date British
post offices have been maintained (in common with post offices of
other Powers) in various parts of the Turkish dominions, using
British stamps with or without a special overprint. These offices
were closed jn October, 1914, as a result of Turkey’s declara-
tion of the “ abolition of the Capitulations,” just prior to Tur-
key’s open acts of war against the allied forces of Great Britain,
France, and Russia in the present war.
Ordinary British stamps used at the British post-offices in
the Ottoman Empire may be distinguished by postmarks
[Figs. 11 17).
(Constantinople)


Postmarks of British Post Offices in Turkish Empire.
The first three are from Constantinople, the fourth and fifth
from Smyrna, and the last two Beyrout. There are also S
Stamboul, BO 1 ” Alexandria, “ 802 ” Suez, as well as
ordinary date stamps of all these places.
The following are illustrations of samples of the stamps which
were in use at the British post-offices in Turkey at the time of
the abolition of the Capitulations. {Figs. 18, 19).
18
Special arrangements were also made
for maintaining postal communications
with the British Fleet in the Baltic, the
stamps used being distinguishable by
postmarks of diamond-shaped internal
configuration (Fig. 20). It is possible
19
20
that date marks of Dantzig may also be found on
British stamps of this period ; they appear on the covers of
letters bearing British stamps with the diamond cancellations.
In the early part of the naval campaign letters were transmitted


exclusively by war vessels or transports, but in the beginning of
May, 1854, when the greater part of the Fleet had reached its
destination the Admiral commanding in chief was directed to
establish regular weekly communication by steamer between the
ships under his command and the port of Danlzig. Mails for
the Fleet were despatched from London every Tuesday to
Dantzig, under cover of a bag addressed ,o Her Britannic
Majesty’s Consul at that port, who handed the bag over to the
commander of the steamer which was timed to arrive at Dantzig
each Friday. This arrangement, while satisfactory in respect
of speed and regularity, involved the charging of the high
foreign rates of postage, as the route was through Belgium and
Prussia, but, as often as facilities offered, mails were made up
for transmission by Government transports passing to and from
England and the Baltic, by which soldiers and sailors were able
to send and receive letters at their privilege rate of one penny
each.
Abyssinian Expedition. The
following is the type of date stamp used
by the British post-office corps accom-
panying Sir Robert Napier’s successful
expedition to Abyssinia in 1867—1868
{Fig. 21).
Ihe Indian Government sent an army
postal corps to Abyssinia, the mails to and
from the United Kingdom connecting up
21
with the vessels carrying the Indian mails off Jubbel Teer in the
Red Sea. The late Mr. J. G. Hendy of the G.P.O. Muni-
ment Room records* that, in April 1868, a direct weekly mail
service was established between Suez and Zoulla. The rates
for letters under half an ounce were the same as to India, viz. :
Via Southampton. Via
Officers of Army or Navy, ... ... 6d. ... Iod.
Soldiers and Seamen, ... ... Id. ... sd.
For persons serving on board transports or
other persons not belonging to the naval
or military forces, ... ... ... 9d. ... Is. Id.
He also states that naval and military officers, when serving
on colonial or foreign stations, were permitted, under Treasury
* “ The Postmarks of the British Isles from 1840.” By J. G. Hendv
London, 1909; p. 13. 7 7


Warrant of May 16, 1837, to send or receive letters at the
reduced British postage of 6d. per ounce, in all cases where the
postage of ordinary letters to or from the same place was higher
than 6d. The privilege was withdrawn on January I, 1870,
and then letters became liable to the general rates of postage.
Egypt. The organisation of an Army Postal Corps was
authorised on July 18, 1882, for service in Egypt, and it was
promptly completed. Colonel du Plat Taylor was instructed
to form the corps of two officers and one hundred men from the
Post-Office Volunteers (24th Middlesex) for enrolment in the
first-class Army Reserve. The men combined the advantages
of experience in postal work, as sorters and postmen, with army
training. The officers selected were Major Sturgeon (of the
Money Order Office) and Captain Viall (Receiver and Accoun-
tant General’s Department), the former taking command with
the army rank of Captain, and the latter seconding him, with
the army rank of Lieutenant. The men received their post-
office pay, and, while on active service, in addition to free kit
and rations, the privates drew army pay of Is., corporals Is. Bd.,
and sergeants 2s. 4d. per day.
The famous blind Postmaster-General, Henry Fawcett, in-
spected the corps at the General Post Office on July 26, and
the officers with 50 men sailed on August 8, disembarking
at Alexandria on August 21. Their first postal duties were
undertaken at Alexandria and Ramleh, but two days after
disembarkation they re-embarked, joining up with Lord
Wolseley’s main forces at Ismailia on August 26. The base
was at Ismailia, whence the post
office corps sent out Its branches,
planting advanced base and field
post offices connecting the base
with the changing front, between
which and the base a daily service
was maintained. In September,
shortly after the battle of Tel-el-
Kebir, the Army and the Army
Post Office reached Cairo, and re-
embarked for home on October 7.
The despatches gave high praise
22
to the efficiency and useful service of the corps.


Three years later, Major Sturgeon (promoted in recognition
of his services in Egypt, 1882) again commanded a corps of
twenty N.C.O.’s and men, in Sir Gerald Graham’s Suakim
expedition of 1883. The corps left England on March 3,
and returned on July 28, after a more difficult experience with
the Suakim garrison than they had met with in the first Egyptian
campaign.
Dongola Expedition. Of the Dongola Expeditionary
Force under General Kitchener in 1896 we have no record of
the use of English stamps, but Mr. H. H. Harland has shown
us an interesting envelope with the postmark of Wadi-Halfa
camp, the letter not being prepaid as no stamps were available
{Fig. 23).
Fig. 23. Dongola Expeditionary Force.
SOUTH Africa, 1899-1902. Major Sturgeon was succeeded
in the command of the Army Postal Corps by his second in
command, Captain Viall. On the death of the latter (1890),
Captain G. W. Treble of the London Postal Service took the
command, which he held at the outbreak of the South African
War in 1899, aided by Captain W. Price (now Colonel W.
Price, C.M.G., in command of the Army Post Office with
the British Expeditionary Force in France) and Lieutenant H.
M’Clintock, these latter officers belonging to the Secretary’s
Office of the G.P.0., London. A first portion of the company,
with Captain Treble, left England with General Buller and
his staff, and the rest followed on October 21, and several


further detachments went out with later contingents. In South
Africa they had a very wide area to cover. At the outset
Captain Treble established himself with the headquarters of
the Inspector General of Communications in Cape Colony, and
moved about keeping close touch with the movements of the
forces, an important part of his duties being to forward to
the various offices the information necessary to ensure the correct
circulation of the mails. Captain Price was at Cape Town,
and Lieutenant M'Clintock at Pietermaritzburg,
The British military mails were made up in the London
G.P.O. in special bags addressed to the Army Post Office,
and sent to the G.P.O. at Cape Town, in which building the
detachment of the Army Postal Corps under Captain Price
had established its base office. The bags containing military
mails were handed over to the Army Base Post Office at Cape
Town whence they were distributed to the various military
post offices established at the centres of the troops, and to
field post offices with each Brigade or Division in the field.
In the return direction the soldiers’ letters were handed in at
field post offices and forwarded through various channels, some-
times ordinary and ofttimes military to the base at Cape Town,
whence they were despatched to England in the ordinary way.
Early in 1900 the average weekly mail from London to the
Field Forces was 150 bags of letters, postcards, etc., and
60 boxes of parcels; the incoming mail from the Field Forces
was 11 bags of letters per week. In a letter dated from Cape
Town, February 27, from Lieutenant Preece, who went out
with reinforcements for the Army Post Office Corps in February,
are some interesting glimpses of the difficulties of the work
of this service" :
“ Price, of the Post Office Corps, met us and told us (Captain)
Palmer was to leave at once for Kimberley with 17 men (Captain)
Labouchere and (Lieut.) Curtis to proceed on to Natal with 50 men,
and I was to take the remainder ashore here (Cape Town) and stop
to help at the base. At 9.30 on Monday morning I marched off
with my 57 men to the main barracks and bid good-bye to the
good ship ‘ Canada ’ and her merry cargo. After lodging the men
in barracks I went off to the G.P.0., where I found Price and his
40 men ensconced in one huge wing, overwhelmed with work, and
at breaking-down point. The mails every week increase now, and
we have 250,000 pieces of mail matter to sort and distribute every
week, over a country larger than France, among a shifting population
of soldiers, each of whom expects to get his letters as easily as he
gets his rations. It is a vast job, and we have done wonderfully
*St. Martins le Grand, vol. x., page 201.


so far with a totally inadequate staff. We have come in the nick
of time. The recent movements (the advance of Lord Roberts from
Modder River, relief of Ladysmith, etc.) have caused chaos among
our mails. We receive and send telegrams every hour either to a
field post office or to headquarter staffs. The latter order immediate
reinforcement at Modder River, and Price has decided to send me
up with more men to proceed to Paardeberg, or wherever the troops
are, to get things straight.”
The preliminary arrangements necessitated by the vast area
of the operations provided for two base offices, the one in Cape
Colony and the other*in Natal, and 43 field post offices, and
by June, 1900, the Army Postal Corps was composed of ten
officers and 400 N.C.O.’s and men, exclusive of post office
telegraphists, etc., serving with the Royal Engineers. Many
interesting statistics of the mails at different periods of the war
have been given in various records, but it will suffice to quote
some general ones on the authority of the Postmaster-General.
His forty-sixth report, 1900, states:
During eight months of the Crimean War, 362,000 letters were
sent out, and 345,000 were sent home. During a similar period of
the war in South Africa 5,629,938 letters were sent out, and
2,731,559 were sent home.
The work of the corps was not undisturbed by the depre-
dations of the enemy, and not Infrequently the member? of the
corps had to defend the mails in their charge along with the
guards provided by the military. On June 7, 1900, General
De Wet, who has lately extinguished the admiration in which
Britons held him for his brilliant and elusive tactics, by his
treachery in the present war, swooped down with 1200 men
and 5 guns on Roodewal Station where Lieutenant Preece had
2000 bags, a several weeks’ accumulation of mails for Lord
Roberts’ main army. There were 1 7 men of the Army Postal
Corps, and these, with about 160 men in charge of supplies,
etc., had to defend the station. Two of the seventeen were
killed, and Lieutenant Preece and the remainder of his gallant
little corps were taken prisoners. The 2000 mail bags were
used as a barricade. It is recorded that when the gallant little
band surrendered, and De Wet, riding an English cavalry horse,
came up, the Boer general was most polite and even kind in
many ways, and expressed himself as “ very sorry to do it,
when asked not to destroy the letters and registered parcels.
He said if he did not do so, his young Boers would open and
read them and turn the letters of the soldiers into ridicule. The
bags were opened, the contents strewed about, and the Boers


possessed themselves of the valuables, while tobacco, cigarettes,
cakes, chocolates were so plentifully strewed about that the
young Boers even invited their prisoners to help themselves, as
the General was going to burn everything. And he did burn
the entire station.
In his forty-seventh report (1901) the Postmaster-General
states :
The Army Post Office is still in operation in South Africa. The
staff now consists of 7 officers and about 540 men. The weekly mail
for the Army Post Office contains on an average 204,000 letters
and 115,300 packets of printed matter; and it is estimated that
during the year ended 31st March, 1901, 11,551,300 letters were
sent to the troops and 9,250,000 were received from them. During
the same period the parcels sent out to the forces in South Africa
by post amounted to 534,245, the largest number despatched on any
one occasion, namely, on the Ist of December, 1900, being 19,672.
About 8745 such parcels are now sent each week.
As to the magnitude and difficulties of the work of the Army Post
Office, I cannot do better than quote the following paragraph from
Earl Roberts’ despatch of the 16th August last
“The magnitude of the task set the Military Postal Service may be
appreciated when it is realised that the Army Mails from England
have exceeded in bulk the whole of the mails arriving for the
inhabitants of Cape Colony and Natal, and contained each week
little short of 750,000 letters, newspapers, and parcels for the troops.
No little credit is therefore due to the department under Major
Treble in the first few months, and for the greater part of the time
under Lieut.-Colonel J. Greer, Director of Military Postal Services,
for the way in which it has endeavoured to cope with the vast
quantity of correspondence, bearing in mind the incessant manner in
which the troops have been moved about the country, the transport
difficulties which had to be encountered, the want of postal experi-
ence in the bulk of the personnel of the corps, and the inadequacy
of the establishments laid down for the several organisations.”
His Majesty has been pleased to confer the honour of G.M.G. on
Messrs. Greer and Treble in acknowledgment of their services.
The forty-eighth report (1902) mentions no change of any
Importance in the Army Postal Service in South Africa, and
gives the weekly average mall from England as 184,000 letters
and 143,600 packets of printed matter: the total number of
letters for the year ended March 31, 1902, was 10,774,000
outward, and 8,372,000 homeward, showing a decrease com-
pared with previous returns. During the same period 528,000
parcels were sent out.
The last official reference to the Army Postal Service in
South Africa is contained in the forty-ninth (1903) report,
announcing its withdrawal, postal communications with the
troops still on service in the old colonies and the new ones
being carried on through the Colonial Post Offices under the
ordinary regulations. The Peace was declared May 31, 1902.
B


The war in South Africa left its impress on many pages of
the stamp collector s album, but at this juncture we are chiefly
concerned with the immediate work of the British military
postal service. Collectors have followed the use of the stamps
of the home country into the distant fields of operations by means
of the various postmarks which are summarised as follows from
the collection of Captain Guy R. Crouch, of the Oxlord and
Bucks Light Infantry* ;
24.
25
26
27
Type I (Fig. 24). Office Numbers from I to 56, and 100.
Used also at Cape Town base with initials BO (Base Office)
and an asterisk (sometimes omitted) in lieu of the office number.
Also at sub-base offices with larger office numerals I to 9.
Type 2 (Figs. 25, 26). Commonly without the year being
noted, as in the first illustration but also found with the year
* The Postage Stamp, vol. XIV., pp. 234-237.


28
29
31
30
32


as in the second illustration of this mark. It has been largely
supposed, but without much, if any, foundation that these year-
less marks originated in Ladysmith during the siege, but little
correspondence can have been passed out of the town during
that period, and the origin of many of these marks is known
not to have been Ladysmith.
Type 3 {Fig. 27). Used in sub-offices supplementary to
type 1, found stamped in blue-green as well as in black. Office
numbers 41-60.
Type 4 {Fig. 28). Used in Base Office at Cape Town.
Type 5 {Fig. 29). A locally made rubber-stamp cancellation
found in several sub-varieties.
Type 6 {Fig. 30). Used in the field post offices attached
to the Natal Field Force with name of place or number.
Type 7 is similar to type 2 but lettered NATAL FIELD FORCE,
found in black and in violet.
Type 8, a newspaper cancellation, with NFF (Natal Field
Force) in white letters on a black ground, circular shape.
30A
32A.
Type 9 {Fig. 30a). A thick lined circle, 20 mm. in dia-
meter, lettered F.P.O. (Field Post Office) and a number, also
used lor newspapers.
Type 10. An almost circular obliteration lettered P.O.A.
(Post Office, Africa) with the number 43, a bracket at each
side and two thick bars at top and at bottom.
Type 1 1 {Fig. 31). Used in travelling post offices (T.P.0.),
struck in black or violet. The travelling post offices are EAST
NO. 1,” “MIDLAND/’ “WESTERN,” and “NORTHERN.”
Type 12 {Fig. 32). For fixed army post offices in Orange
River Colony and Transvaal, used from about the end of 1901
and for a short time after the declaration of peace.
A fancy type of town postmark is shown in Fig. 32a.


Another interesting postmark relic of the war in South Africa
is one struck in red “RECOVERED FROM WRECK OF MEXICAN ”
a ship which was returning from South Africa with mails from
the troops, and which foundered after collision with the ss.
Winkfield. The bulk of the mail was recovered.
The Great War, 1914. The Army Postal Service with
the British Expeditionary Force on the Continent in the present
war is under the command of Colonel W. Price, C.M.G.,
who as Captain Price had the long experience of service with
the Army Post Office in South Africa. It is scarcely-necessary
to say that the volume of correspondence now being dealt with
by the service is unprecedented in the history of the British
Army. In the early months of the war the outgoing mail to
the Army Base Post Office in France averaged 12,000 parcels
and 250,000 to 300,000 letters a day. It is impossible to give
statistics of the number of branch offices of all grades established,
but already there are many interesting postmarks originating with
the British Army in France.
The various types of marks so far recorded are :
Army Base Post Office {Fig. 33).
Advance Base Post Office {Fig. 34).
33
34
Army Post Offices with the Troops {Figs. 35-37).
37
35
36


There are also a number of types of Censor marks, not all
necessarily military, and printed labels used in re-sealing opened
letters {Figs. 38-40) :
38
38A
39
40.
40A.
40C.
40D.
40B.
In this connection may also be mentioned the various marks
used on letters sent by prisoners of war in charge of the British
military authorities at home and abroad. An old type of
prisoner-of-war mark dated 1800 is
illustrated in Fig. 41, from "Pre-
Victorian Postage Stamps and Franks
by Mr. G. A. Foster.*
The following are examples of the
marks now being used {Figs. 42, 43) :
*London, 1910: Charles Nissen & Co.


42
43
42A.
43A
It may be well to give a brief outline of the methods of the
Army Postal Service, that its work may be better known and
understood. In addressing letters to the troops it is important
to give the full military particulars of the addressee. Viz :
Regimental number, rank, name, squadron, battery or company,
battalion, regiment (or other unit), staff appointment or depart-
ment, and title of the Expeditionary Force. With these details
set out clearly on the envelope, the work of the Army Postal
Service is facilitated and the letter stands every chance of going
through without delay.
In France, as the postmarks already illustrated denote, the
British Army Postal Service has several grades of post offices.
The chief is the Base Post Office, the principal sorting estab-
lishment for all mail matter passing between our British Post
Office and the Army Postal Service. The Base Office is quite
a large concern and has a vast amount of clerical work to
perform. In it letters are sorted, letters taking precedence over
all other mail matter, after which the newspapers, and lastly
the parcels are dealt with. Accounts of all the branch post
offices are filed and the general routines and formulae of the
Post Office at home are adhered to in detail. Letters, etc.,
for services, departments and units at the base are put into


callers boxes for delivery to the post orderlies. Those for
more distant services and units are forwarded to the various
grades of branch offices.
At the Base Office one of the most complicated and difficult
tasks is the re-direction of letters. Here are kept hospital lists,
giving names of men away from their units in hospital, and these
hospital rolls are revised weekly. Here also records have to
be kept of the movements of the units, and these records are
constantly in process of revision, and frequent communication
is maintained with every branch office in the field.
From the Base Office mails for field units are forwarded to
the Advanced Base Post Office, which in its turn distributes
them to the Field Post Offices serving the units to which the
letters are addressed. There are several kinds of field post
offices; those “ with train ” are attached to the headquarters
of each train, and handle the letters of the units served by the
train. Branch field post offices are attached to the general
headquarters, and to the headquarters of armies, divisions, and
brigades. Then there are stationary field post offices at various
points on the line of communication, and in some cases travelling
post offices on railway lines.
It devolves upon the Director of Army Postal Services, who
is represented at general headquarters, and at the headquarters
of each Army by an Assistant Director, to organise the service,
and to supply to the various offices the information necessary to
ensure the proper circulation of the malls. This, especially
in a campaign like the present, is a delicate task, often com-
plicated by the restrictions necessary in military policy to pre-
serve secrecy as to the movements of the troops.
Naval Postmarks. Of the naval postal arrangements,
reference has already been made to the cancellations used on
letters originating with the British Fleet in the Baltic during the
Crimean War {Fig. 20). Special navy post offices were in
the early days established by
local postmasters at various
ports as a link between the land
service and the Fleet in home
waters. The letters were marked
44
with Fig. 44, and the local postmaster collected an extra penny
charge upon such letters for delivery to ships lying in the
harbour or roadstead.


The late Mr. W. G. Hendy, of the Muniment Room,
records that with the introduction of Uniform Penny Postage
(1840) it was decided so far as Portsmouth was concerned, that
such letters should be delivered free in the harbour as far as
Spithead; but it was not until May, 1852, diat the practice of
charging the extra penny for delivery was abolished at Devon-
port and Plymouth, and free delivery extended to all vessels
lying in the harbour (Hamoaze), although not to vessels lying
in Plymouth Sound. The following are types of postmarks used
after free delivery was granted. {Figs. 45, 46.)
46
45
The same authority states that a privilege was accorded to
non-commissioned officers, seamen, and soldiers of sending and
receiving within any part of the British dominions, under certain
regulations, letters on their own concerns only, not exceeding
half an ounce, at the rate of one penny each. Such letters had
to be superscribed with the name of the seaman or soldier, his
class and description, the name of the ship or regiment to which
he belonged ; and if they were the
writers of the letters, they had to be
countersigned by the officer com-
manding. When this regulation was
not complied with letters were
charged as ordinary, and postmarked
with Fig. 47.
47
No doubt there are many more postmarks with a naval
interest, including those valued by collectors as indicating
stamps on letters originating in the various naval stations abroad
from 1858 to 1870, recognised by the following letters and
numbers :
A 79 to AB9. Pacific Naval Stations.
A9O to A 99. Atlantic Naval Stations.


803, 812, 856. African Naval Stations.
853 (Mauritius), 862 and C 79 (Hong Kong), 864
(Seychelles).
Also B , H . and the date stamp in the case of
Ascension ”.
In the present war the naval postmarks promise to be of
exceptional interest. The postmarks for both Army and Navy
give no clue to the locality in which the correspondence
originates; this, of course, applies to
mails coming from the field or area o!
operations ; there is no occasion to
disguise place of origin of letters going out
to sailors or soldiers. Most of the naval
marks at present in use bear no inscriptions
of any kind, though there is a type in-
scribed Fleet Post Office (Fig. 48).
48
Even the machine cancellation, doubtless used in some large
centre of naval concentration, has had bars (or type turned base
upwards) in lieu of the lettering and date {Fig. 49).
Machine Cancellation (Navy).
Other naval marks introduced in the present campaign, in
accordance no doubt with a secret code, are in various devices,
such as a propeller, a target, and various arrangements of rines
etc. {Figs. 50—57).
50
51
52


53
34
55
57
56
37A
54A.


CHAPTER II.
INDIAN ARMY POSTAL SERVICE- China Expeditionary Force—
British Railway Administration in China—Somaliland—
The Forbidden City of Lhassa—Indian Expeditionary
Force in France.
THE Army Postal Service forms a highly organised
branch of the Indian Army organisation. It dates
from 1878-1880, when, during the Afghan War, a
mail cart route was set up between Peshawar and Jellalabad,
and a horse post was conducted thence to Kabul, in all about
176 miles. Jhelum and Peshawar were also connected by
rail, a military transport train being run by the Post Office
between these points. Even earlier than this date there were
postal arrangements for Indian Expeditionary Forces, including
that operating in Abyssinia (1867-68), the type of postmark
being lettered F.F. (Field Force), as in Fig. 58.
58
The postmarks used on letters despatched from troops accom-
panying the numerous Indian military expeditions form a very
considerable range for philatelic exploration. They include
Egypt. .Miranzi, Kurrum, Hazara, Waziristan, Suakim, Tochi.


Chitral, Malakand, Tirah, China, Tibet, Somaliland, and South
Africa. The system of the Indian Army Postal Service is
similar to that already described for the British Expeditionary
Force on the Continent. A base office is established at each
military base, and works as a head office, communicating with
India and with the field. Field post offices of Ist and 2nd
class are attached to brigades, divisional troops, and divisional
headquarters, and these fly a distinguishing flag by day and
display a distinguishing lamp by night. The establishment of
base and field offices varies according to the size of, the force
which they are to serve, but ordinarily the establishment of a
base office is: 1 postmaster, 2 deputy postmasters, 13 clerks, 2
khalassis, 6 packers, 1 sweeper. First class field post offices
are accompanied by 1 postmaster, 2 clerks, 1 packer, 2 tent
khalassis, and 1 sweeper, while for second class field post offices
the establishment consists only of a postmaster, a packer, and
a sweeper. In addition there are supervising officers for each
division, and in the event of the post office making its own
arrangements for transport between the base and the field offices,
a number of overseers are required. The officers and men all
have the word “ POST ” in brass letters on the shoulders of their
uniforms.
Postage stamps of India (including postcards and embossed
envelopes, both ordinary and official ) are stocked by all
field post offices, and ordinarily a six-months supply is sent
out with the force, and is distributed from the base office to
the field post offices. It is part of the duty of the base office
to see that each field office maintains a sufficient stock of stamps,
in accordance with a minimum determined by the chief super-
intendent in respect of each field post office.
In 1900, in connection with the Boxer Troubles in China,
Indian troops were despatched to assist with contingents from
all the Powers in the relief of the Legations, and with them
went their Army Post Office, Since the settlement of the
troubles a permanent Legation Guard has been maintained by
the Indian Army in China. On reaching China, the Indian Army
Post Office established its base at Hong Kong, but this was
temporarily shifted to Wei-hai-wei on account of objections
raised by the Postmaster-General of the British colony of Hong
Kong. The new base did not prove satisfactory, however, and
ultimately Hong Kong became the permanent base, and the


Army Post Office worked in harmonious co-operation with the
British Post Office and the Chinese Imperial Post. Field post
offices were set up at Pekin, Tientsin, Shanghai, Stonecutters’
Island, Wei-ha i-wei, 1 ongshau, Matao, Ching-Wang-Tao,
Yangstun, Tongku, Sinho, Hanku, Shan-hai-Kwan, and many
other points, sometimes consisting of a couple of tents, but often
during this campaign in more substantial structures, and even
(according to Mr. Ashley C. Vernieux) in the Temple of
Heaven at Pekin.
With the troops sent to China in 1900 the Indian Post Office
started the supply of specially overprinted Indian stamps, so
that stamps bought in China could not be subject to speculation
and sale in India by reason of varying rates of exchange. The
Queen Victoria stamps then current, values from 3 pies to
1 rupee were overprinted with the initials C.E.F. (China Ex-
peditionary f orce), and the successive issues of Indian stamps
have been similarly overprinted for the use of the troops still
maintained in China {Figs. 39-61.).
39
60
61
The postmarks used on the expedition were Fig. 62 for the
62
63


64
65
66
base office, and Fig. 63 for the advanced base, similar marks
inscribed at top “ FIELD P.O. No. . .” or “ F.P.O. No. .
or single line circular marks inscribed F.P.O. {Figs. 64, 65).
There are also a single-line circular date mark of the base
office, and registered marks {Fig. 66).
67
Fig . 67 illustrates the postmark of the present base post office
of the Indian troops in China, located at Tientsin.
On the suppression of the Boxer rising the troops of the
Allies were in occupation of Chihli, and the Pekin Shanhaikwan
railway was divided up between the English, Japanese, Germans
and Russians. By February, 1901, the administration of the
whole of the line was in the hands of the British, but it was
under the control of a Board consisting of a British director and
two deputies, one German and the other Japanese.
At this period the Allies had about 100,000 men in Chihli,
but the British troops were stationed at various stations on the
line. 7 o facilitate the prompt delivery of the letters of these
British troops, the postal superintendent of the British force
applied for a sorting van to be attached to the train so that
letters could be dealt with en route.. To this application the
reply was that no concession could be given to the British which


was not given to all the other forces, and that as the service
was then restricted to one train a day, such a concession might
result in the train consisting largely of mail vans. But to meet
the general convenience, subject to the British postal authorities
undertaking to receive and deliver the letters of all nationalities
posted at the stations or in a box attached to the van, thus
68


making the service international, a van was placed at their
disposal from April 20, 1901. The new facilities were an-
nounced in the circular, of which a facsimile is given {Fig. 68),
and the extra fee was collected by surcharging and selling a
number of /i cent Chinese stamps “ B.R.A. 5 Five Cents ”
in black or green {Fig. 69). The B.R.A. stands for British
Railway Administration.
69
About the same period India had mili-
tary post offices with the troops engaged
on the Swat Frontier and against the
Waziris. Field Post Office No. 25 was
the office at Camp Khar on the Swat
Frontier, Nos, 3A and 22 were respec-
tively at Zam and Jani Khel in con-
nection with the blockading of the Mahsud
Waziris (Type of Fig. 70).
70
Indian stamps were also used by the forces engaged in the
Somaliland campaign of 1903-4, at first without overprint, of
which the following are types of the postmarks {Figs, 71, 72):
c


72
71
74
73
and during 1903 stamps of India appeared overprinted for use
in British Somaliland {Fig. 73).
Colonel Younghusband’s mission to the Tibetan Government
was accompanied by army postal service which set up its base
in the Chumbi valley, and during the occupation of the forbidden
city a field post office was set up at Lhassa. Indian stamps used,
on this mission are recognisable by the postmarks of Lhassa,
including two mis-spellings of the name LAHASSA {Fig. 74),.
and LAHSSA {Fig. 75).
75


76
78
77
81
79
80
82
83
84
85
85 A
35


The Indian forces in South Africa also had their own postal
establishment, with a special series of postmarks.
In the present campaign the Indian forces are accompanied
by fully-equipped field postal arrangements, and following up
the precedent of the China Expeditionary Force, the Indian
Expeditionary Force in Europe is furnished with a set of current
Indian postage stamps, cards, etc., overprinted I.E.F.
{Figs. 76—83). The Indian troops enjoy free postage on un-
registered letters and postcards posted to the United Kingdom,
France, and India, but correspondence to all other countries,
such as Switzerland, Holland, Scandinavia, and the rest of the
world has to be prepaid with I.E.F. stamps, as also the parcels
and registered letters for all countries.
The next figure (85a) illustrates the type of base post office
mark used in France, and no doubt similar marks are being
used on these stamps supplied to the Indian forces engaged in
Egypt and elsewhere during the present war. Fig. 85b although
not definitely identified is probably an Indian army postmark in
use in France.
The first instalment of the “ 1.E.F.” Indian stamps issued
to troops Included :
3 pies, grey (Fig. 76), .... 230,400 stamps.
/j anna, green (Fig. 77, - - - 768,000 ~
1 anna, rose-carmine (Fig. 78), ... - 472,400 ~
2 annas, mauve (Fig. 79), - - - - , 204.800 ~
21/ 2 annas, ultramarine (rig. 80), ... 51,200 ~
3 ~ orange-brown (Fig. 81), - - - 51,200 ~
4 ~ olive (Fig. 82), .... 51,200 ~
8 ~ purple (Fig. 83), --- - 25,600 ~
12 ~ dull claret (Fig. 84), ... 25,600 ~
1 rupee, green and brown (Fig. 85), - - 9600 ~
and the following supplies of postcards and envelopes .
|4 anna inland postcard, single, ----- 1800 reams
(4 anna inland postcard, reply, - - - - - 700 ~
I anna international single postcard, - - - - 100 ~
Yl anna envelopes, small size, - - - - 1100 ~
85B.


CHAPTER III.
SOUTH AFRICAN WARS. —Transvaal—Orange River Colony—
Krugersdorp—Kuruman-Lydenburg—Mafeking—Peters-
burg—Rustenburg—Scbweizer Renecke—Volksrust—Vry-
burg—Wolmaranstad—The Union—South African War of
1914.
86
87
TRANSVAAL. The stamps of the Transvaal illustrate the im-
portant changes through which the country has passed during
the past forty years. Fig. 86 represents an early stamp of the
Republic, while the next figure {Fig. 87) is just one example
of several denoting the annexation of the country by the British
in 1877. There are several types of the “ V.R. Transvaal
overprint, as in Figs. 88—90.
88
89
90
These were followed by stamps bearing the portrait of the
British Sovereign {Fig. 91).
91
92
93


A great blow to British prestige was struck in 1881, and the
result of the disaster of IVlajuba Hill was the establishment of
a Second Republic which in its turn overprinted the Queen
Victoria stamps with a Dutch inscription ” Een Penny” {Fig.
92), subsequently returning to the original Arms design of South
African Republic stamps {Fig. 86).
Just before the outbreak of the last South African War in
1899 the ascendancy of President Kruger had led to the ambition
to see his features depicted upon the postage stamps of his
country, and a new stamp design {Fig. 93) was prepared for
94
this purpose, and a special paper was manufactured watermarked
Z.A.R. (Zuid Afrikaansche Republiek) as illustrated in Fig.
94. But the stamp was never issued, and the quantity of the
Z.A.R.” paper was sold and used for purposes very different
from that for which it was prepared. In 1900, after the late
Lord Roberts’ march to Pretoria, the contemporary South African
Transvaal stamps came under British control again, and were
issued at first with the overprinted initials of Queen Victoria,
V.R.I. {Fig. 95), and later of King Edward, E.R.I, {Fig. 96).
95
96
97
These were superseded in due course by the London printed
issue of Transvaal stamps bearing the portrait of King Edward
{Fig. 97).


Orange River Colony. On March 17, 1900, Field
Marshal Lord Roberts issued the following
PROCLAMATION.
“Whereas it is deemed expedient and necessary for the welfare
of the Orange Free State that the Postal Service shall be resumed
in the aforesaid Republic as far as circumstances permit.
“ Now therefore,
“I, Frederick Sleigh, Baron Roberts of Khandahar, K.G., G.C.8.,
G.C.5.1., G.C.1.E., V.C., Field Marshal and Commander-in-Chief of
the British Forces in South Africa, do hereby nominate and appoint
David George Amosi Falck Administrator of the Civil Posts in such
portions of the Orange Free State as have been or may hereafter
be occupied by British troops. *
“ And I do hereby order that the Postal and Telegraph Services
shall be resumed in the portions of the aforesaid Republic already
referred to, from the nineteenth day of March, 1900, under the exist-
ing Laws and Conventions of the Orange Free State, subject to such
alterations as may from time to time be notified.
Given under my hand at Bloemfontein this seventeenth day of
March. 1900.
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN.
(Signed) ROBERTS,
Field Marshal,
Commander-in-Chiej British
Forces in South Ajrica.
The Administrator shortly afterwards Issued the following
NOTICE.
It is hereby notified for general information that Orange Free State
postage stamps, in use up to the 14th inst., arc no longer valid;
surcharged stamps of the same denomination having been substituted.
(Signed) A. FALCK,
General Post Office, Administrator.
Bloemfontein, March 22nd, 1900.
98


The stamps of the Orange Free State were successively over-
printed “V.R.1.” and “ E.R.1.” (Fig. 98), and later on new
stamps were issued with the portrait of King Edward (Fig. 99).
99
100
Cape of Good Hope stamps were also used in the new Colony
with a special overprint reading ‘ ‘ Orange River Colony ’ ’ (Fig.
100).
A sixpence blue stamp of the Orange Free State (type of
Fig. 98) was in readiness for issue at Bloemfontein when
the British forces took over the control, and a few of these
escaped the “ V.R.1.” overprint. The stamp is familiar to
collectors with the overprint, and strictly speakirg, without the
overprint it has no record of postal use.
A tj'pe-set label was issued by the Orange Free State early
in the war to indicate the franking of official correspondence
probably on military service. The stamp has a border of fancy
type ornament and simple type inscriptions in three lines “IN
DIENST —R.D.M.— O.V.S.”
The so-called ” Commando Brief ” stamp alleged to have
franked the correspondence of burghers on commando is a bogus
production.
KrugeRSDORP. The South African Republic stamps alleged
to have been used in this Transvaal town with V.R.I type-
written across them are believed to be purely fictitious creations.
KuRUMAN. During the siege of this town in British Bechuana-
land Cape of Good Hope stamps were overprinted “KURUMAN
BESIEGED ” and the date, but they are not fully credited by
philatelists as bona fide issues.
LvDENBURG. During the temporary occupation of this South
African Republic Town in September, 1900, the stamp com-
memorative of penny postage (Fig. 101) was surcharged
“ V.R.I. Id.” and the ordinary Transvaal stamps were locally
overprinted “ V.R.1.” (Fig. 102). The values are /id- green*


102
101
Id. carmine and green, 2d. brown, 2 blue, 3d. on Id.
carmine and green, 4d. sage green and deep green, 6d. lilac
and green, Is. ochre and green.
MaFEKING. During the memorable siege of Mafeking, a
Bechuanaland town but under the Cape postal administration,
arrangements were made for a local post, and for occasional
transmission of letters to Cape Colony, Natal, Rhodesia, and
the United Kingdom. The postal arrangements of the town
had only been transferred to the Cape Colony shortly before
the siege, a fact which explains the variety of Bechuanaland
and Cape stamps available in the town during the siege. Pay-
ment of postage at the special rates chargeable for the service
in the town and beyond was payable in the stamps of either
British Bechuanaland,' Bechuanaland Protectorate, or of
the Cape overprinted Mafeking—Besieged, and the new
value {Figs. 103-114). As will be noticed from the illustra-
tions, the Bechuanaland stamps were chiefly created by over-
printing the name “BRITISH BECHUANALAND’” or “BECHUANA-
LAND PROTECTORATE” on English stamps.
105
103
104


106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114


The foregoing stamps were chiefly used for letters sent by
native runners who had to dodge through the enemy s lines
and get either to Buluwayo in the north or Kimberley in
the south. A special penny and a threepence stamp were
prepared by a photographic process in the town, and these
form the most interesting philatelic souvenirs of the South
African War. The penny stamp, designed by Dr. W. A.
Hayes, shows a portrait of Sergeant-Major Goodyear, of the
115
116
117
Cadet Corps {Fig. 115), and there are two sizes of threepence
stamp, designed by Captain Greener, the Chief Paymaster,
showing a portrait of the gallant defender of Mafeking, General
Baden Powell.
PETERSBURG. This town in the north of the Transvaal pro-
vided an interesting set of type-set provisional stamps during
the Boer occupation, from March until April 9, 1901, when


the British troops occupied the town and district. The stamps,
which were but roughly printed in the office of De Zoutpans-
berg Wachter in the town, are inscribed “ POSTZEGEL ” at top
118
119
120
“ Z. AFR, REP.” at each side, and
1901 at foot. The value is
expressed in figures and word In the
rectangular opening of the frame of
printer’s rule (Fig. 118). The
values issued were /zd. green, Id.
rose, 2d. orange, 4d. blue, 6d.
green, and Is. yellow, and owing
to the crudity of the printing,
specialists find a very extensive range
of minor technical varieties amongst
this issue of six denominations.
RUSTENBURG. After the relief of the
British garrison by Baden Powell’s force
in June, 1900, the British hand-
stamped South African Republic stamps
with the sans serij initials V.R. in
violet, the values known being Yzd.
green, Id. carmine and green, 2d.
brown and green, blue and
green, 3d. purple and green, 6d. lilac
and green, Is. ochre and green, 2s. 6d.
dull violet and green (Fig. 119).
SCHWEIZER RENECKE. This
Transvaal hamlet, in which a British
force under Colonel Chamier was
besieged from August 19, 1900, to
January 9, 1901, overprinted some
Cape of Good Hope /zd. and Id.
and Transvaal J4d., Id., 2d., and
6d. stamps with a handstamp, read-
ing “BESIEGED” in violet, but this
scarcely alters the postal status of
the stamps {Fig. 120).


VoLKSRUST. Here also In June, 1900, a number of Boer
stamps were overprinted “v.R.1.” in serif letters. The stamps
used for the overprinting were fiscal stamps of the type of
Fig. 121, converted for postal use by the overprint * ‘ POST-
ZEGEL ’ (postage stamp) {Fig. 122). The values overprinted
V.R.I, were Id. pale blue, 6d. carmine, Is. olive-bistre.
Is. 6d. brown, 2s. 6d. purple.
121
122
Vryburg. In November, 1899, the Boars occupied this town
in Grlqualand West, and they surcharged some of our Cape
Colony stamps in stock there with the initials of the South
African Republic (Z.A.R.) and a new value {Figs. 124, 123,
129).
124
125
The town was retaken by the British in May, 1900, and certain
stamps of the South African Republic left behind by the
Boers were overprinted with an English inscription {Figs. 126-
129).


126
127
128
129


WoLMARANSTAD. Occupied by the British in June, 1900,
the available South African Republic stamps having the Dutch
name overprinted Cancelled ” and the addition of the sans
serif letters, separated by hyphens “ V-R-I.” in blue and red.
The values are the ld., 2d., 2J4d., 3d., 4d., 6d., and
Is. of the regular South African stamps, and the Id. red
commemorative stamp, in which, however, the word cancelled
is in a square, script type {Figs. 130, 131).
130
131
UNION of South Africa. It was fondly regarded as the
settlement of British and Boer troubles in South Africa when
the former belligerents in the Transvaal, Free State, Natal, and
Cape Colony combined to form the Union of South Africa.
The opening of the Union Parliament was commemorated in
a special stamp {Fig. 132), the first to bear the portrait of
H.M. King George V. after the decease of King Edward.
132
133
Th is has since been followed with a complete issue of Georgian
stamps for the whole of the Union {Fig. 133).


SOUTH Africa IN 1914. Already we have a first instal-
ment of special marks used on letters of General Botha’s loyal
forces against the rebels, and against German raiders. The
first {Fig. 134) is the handstamp struck in violet of an official
regimental frank. The army base and field post offices have
134
135
their postmarks of the pattern Indicated in Fig. 135, and the
censor label illustrated {Fig. 136) is printed in violet, appar-
ently in sheets which before use are endorsed with a black
mark of concentric circles bearing an inscription of which only
a portion shows on each label, and of which we have only
seen an undecipherable part.
136
AH three of these were used on a letter from a member of the
South African Scottish regiment at Luderitzbucht in German
South-West Africa.


CHAPTER IV.
FRANCE —Napoleon’s Minister of Posts—The Second Republic
—The Presidency—Empire—French Expeditions to China
and Mexico—Sedan—Metz —Strasburg—The Siege of
Paris—Balloon Post—Pigeon Post—Peace —Military Frank
Stamps—The German Invasion, 1914 —Red Cross Stamps
—War Postcards and Postmarks.
THE postal arrangements of France have been deranged
oft-times within the past century by war and revolution.
It is just a century since the famous episode of the
Lavalettes occurred. The Count de Lavalette was Director
■of Posts under Napoleon, and in 1814 he did his best to upset
the organisation and fled on the approach of the Allies. The
following year he returned to his post, and after he
was arrested on a treason charge and sentenced to the guillotine.
The Countess made desperate efforts to gain the clemency of
Louis XVIII., but without avail. In the end she gained
permission to go to her husband in his prison. She went in a
sedan chair with her daughter, and an old servant of the family.
The gaoler left the couple to their last farewell, and on his
return saw the broken-hearted wife assisted out by her two
companions. A little later he approached the Count, who lay
collapsed upon his bed covered in a large cloak, and his face
buried in his hands. It was some time after ere the gaoler
discovered that his prisoner was the lady, and that the Count
had got clear away.
French stamps provide a very interesting record of the political
changes in the country, and provide one of the best illusLations
of how stamps demarcate the periods of a nation s history. We
have dealt at some length with this aspect of French stamps
elsewhere,* and limit our account here to a short pictorial
one. The first French stamps {Fig. 137) are inscribed RLPUB.
FRANC., and followed in the wake of the revolution of 1848
when M. Etienne Arago was in charge of the post office. They
were first Issued January 1, 1849, after the election of Prince
Louis Napoleon to the Presidency. The head on the stamp
* " All About Postage Stamps.” By Fred J. Melville. London, 1913.
T. Werner Laurie, Ltd.


engraved by the elder Barre is not the head of Liberty, as is
commonly supposed, but that of Ceres, the Italian goddess of
Agriculture, who was the same as the Greek Demeter or
“ Mother Earth,’’ appropriate for the design of the stamps of
a country which is ” one of Ceres’ chiefest barns for corn.
Napoleon’s coup d’etat of December, 1851, was followed by
the issue in 1852 of stamps in which his portrait takes the place
of Ceres {Fig. 138). Late in the same year the Empire was
137
138
139
proclaimed, so in 1853 the abbreviated inscription REPUB.
FRANC, was altered to EMPIRE FRANC. {Fig. 139). Napoleon’s
successes in Italy and elsewhere were acclaimed by adding the
victor’s crown of laurel to the portrait on the stamps in 1863
{Fig. 140). His various expeditions are marked for the cob
140
141
lectors in a most interesting range of Army postmarks, used in
the Crimea, China, Mexico, etc., and of French stamps used
in the French post offices in the Levant, similar to the British
ones described in chapter 1., and now rendered obsolete by


the closing of the post offices in October, 1914, as a result of
the “abolition of the capitulations.” The Mexican expedition,
largely owing to the Civil War troubles in the States, led to
the placing of Emperor Maximilian on the throne of Mexico,
and to the issue of stamps of the Mexican Empire bearing that
ill-fated ruler’s portrait {Fig. 141).
The Franco-German War has left the stamp collector an inter-
esting series of stamps catalogued as Alsace and Lorraine {Fig.
233), but more properly called the stamps of the German Army
of Occupation, as they were used in
the parts of France occupied by the
German Army during the war and
afterwards in the two annexed pro-
vinces until superseded by the
German Imperial issues. Septem-
ber 2, 1870, witnessed the surrender
of Napoleon to the Prussians at
Sedan, and in November we find
the head of Ceres recur on the
stamps lithographed at Bordeaux
during the siege of Paris {Fig. 142).
142
This period is undoubtedly the most interesting one in modern
postal history. There is a vast array of Army postmarks of
the war, special postcards issued by the auxiliary committee
of the Red Cross at Strasburg, letters sent from Metz during
the siege by free balloons, and letters sent by a variety of in-
genious methods from Paris. M. Steenackers was the Director
of Posts under the republic proclaimed September 4, 1 870,
and his endeavours to maintain postal communications between
Paris and the outer world are among the most fascinating of
postal records. A cable was laid under the Seine to Rouen,
but the Germans dragged the river and destroyed it. Telegraph
wire had to be smuggled into the country, as the Swiss Govern-
ment declared it to be contraband. Letters were enclosed in
different forms of hollow spheres and thrown into the river;
the spheres were flanged so that they would rotate with the
current. Hundreds of gallant messengers, ladies as well as
men, strove to reach the city with concealed messages, mostly
without success. One lady is said to have succeeded in getting
through with a letter which had been secreted in a ncllow
tooth and the tooth stopped with gold. Even dogs were sent


with messages to Paris, but most of them were shot by the
enemy. The chief means of sending letters out of Paris was the
balloon post, and almost the only messages received within the
city came by carrier pigeons. There were free balloons and
passenger balloons, a higher rate of postage being charged for
the latter. Letter sheets, etc., were issued for both services
inscribed “ PAR BALLON NON-MONTE,” or PAR BALLON MONTE.
A register was kept of the services of aeronauts during the siege.
The messages sent by pigeons were at first written in very
small handwriting, but afterwards they were photographed in
microscopical minuteness, so that a very large number could
be carried by one pigeon. These photomicrographs were pro-
jected on to a screen by means of an optical lantern to read
and transcribe the messages when received in Paris. The films
were placed in tubes attached to the pigeon s tail. One pigeon
arriving in Paris January 28, 1871, delivered 40,400 messages
by this means.
The later and more peaceful history of France has been
typified on its stamps by M. Jules Sage’s allegory (Fig 143)
representing Peace clasping hands with Commerce across the
world by means of the post, and by the late M. Roty’s
pleasing Semeuse or Sower design {Fig. 144).
144
143
By a law promulgated February 9, 1900, a long discussed
project to allow soldiers and sailors serving with the colours
a limited free postage was brought into operation. Each man
coming under the description was allowed to send two letters
a month free, and by another law of December 29, 1900, the
Franchise Militate stamp system was Introduced. These were


at first the then current 15 centimes stamps with the overprint
F.M, {Fig. 145); their distribution is in the hands of the
145
146
147
148
149
military authorities, who allow two stamps a month to each
private or non-commissioned officer in the Army and Navy,
enabling them to send two letters not exceeding 20gr. free of
postage. The two types of the 13 centimes “ Rights of Man ”
issue exist with the F.M. overprint, issued in 1901 and 1903
respectively {Figs. 145, 146), and the succeeding Sower type
{Fig. 147) appeared in 1904. When the French inland postage
rate was reduced from 15 centimes to 10 centimes, Aprl 16,
1906, the 10 centimes stamps were overprinted F.M. instead
of the 15 centimes, two of the Sower types of 10 centimes value
receiving the overprint F.M. respectively in 1906 and 1907
{Figs. 148, 149). Since January 30, 1912, these stamps have
been used on the official correspondence of the French civil
service as well as by the military.
After forty years the fair fields of France are once again
ravaged by the German invaders, and already our allies across


the channel have issued special stamps which serve the double
purpose of denoting postage and of collecting small contribu-
tions to the French Red Cross. The following is the official
decree :
Le President de la Republique Frangaise,
Sut le rapport du Ministre du Commerce, de I’lndustrie, des Posies
et des Telegraphes,
Decrete :
Article premier.—II est cree un timbre-poste special, denomme
“ Timbre de la Croix-Rouge Franfaise.” Le public aura la faculte,
dans le regime interieur seulement, d’utiliser ce timbre qui vaudra
affranchissement jusqu’a concurrence de 10 centimes seulement.
Art. 2.—Ce timbre-poste est vendu 15 centimes. La difference
entre le prix de vente et le valeur d’affranchissement, deduction
faite de la remise reglementaire de Ip. 100, sera versee a la
Commission institutee par le decret du 8 aout, 1914, au ministere
de la Guerre, sous I’autorile du service de sante militaire et avec le
concours des Societes formant la Croix-Rouge franchise.
Art. 3.—Par mesure transitoire et en attendant I’impression du
nouveau timbre, le public aura a sa disposition des timbres-poste
ordinaires a 10 centimes, portant en surcharge le signe de la Croix-
Rouge et le chiffre 5.
Art. 4.—Le ministre du Commerce et le ministre des Finances
sont charges, chacun en ce qui le concerne, de I’execution du present
decret.
Fait a Paris, le II aout, 1914.
R. Poincare.
Par le President de la Republique :
Le Ministre du Commerce, de I Industrie, des Pastes et des Tele-
graphes,
Gaston Thomson,
Le Ministre des Finances,
J. Noulens.
150
151
152


As indicated in the decree, the first
stamp {Fig. 150) was only of provi-
sional character, the ordinary French
10 centimes stamp being surcharged
+sc ”, and selling for 15 centimes,
two-thirds representing the postage, and
one-third the Red Cross contribution.
This was issued on August 18, 1914,
and in all 600,000 were printed before
the definite Red Cross stamp {Fig.
153
151) was issued on September 10. The Principality of Monaco
has also issued a similarly overprinted stamp for the French
Red Cross {Fig. 152), and yet another of this class of
stamp has been issued for the French Protectorate in Morocco
{Fig. 153).
154
Special postcards have been furnished to the French troops
and there is a special postcard for the use of the public in
writing to soldiers. They are decorated with the flags of the
Allies in colours, and the first kind, “ Modele A,” bear in-
structions to the effect that ‘ ‘ This card must be handed to
the Quartermaster. It must bear no indication of the place


of sending nor any information relating to military operations,
past or future. Otherwise it will not be forwarded.”
On “ Modele B” {Fig. 154), for the use of the public, it
is stated that “if it is to be forwarded immediately the card
shall contain personal news only.” Messrs. Alfred Smith &
Sons report the existence of an unofficial Imitation of “ Modele
B” sold in the streets of Paris. It differs from the genuine
variety in the following details :
(i) The flags are misplaced so that the French flag leans over
to the right, instead of being vertical ;
(il) The red and blue colours are shaded with black lines
only, instead of white and black lines ;
(iii) The ruled line at the back is plain, instead of being
composed of square dots.
There is also a variety of plain letterpress cards, headed
“ CORRESPONDANCE MILITAIRE—REPUBLIQUE FRANCAISE —CARTE
POSTALE ”, and other textual inscriptions, or in some cases with
only the first two words, with an arrangement of space for the
address.
156
Many military postmarks have already been noted by col-
lectors in connection with the present campaign, but it is too
early yet to arrange them with proper regard to their use and
significance. One interesting episode is marked by the post-
mark of the Central Military Postal ad-
ministration of Paris {Figs. 155, 156).
This establishment accompanied the
French Government when the latter
moved to Bordeaux on September 3,
and continued to use the postmark in-
scribed Paris there, so that impressions
of Fig. 155 bearing dates between
September 3 and October 13 (the date
of the return to Paris) originated not
in Paris, but in Bordeaux. *
155


A somewhat pathetic interest attaches to the mark Fig. 157
indicating “LIEU DE DESTINATION ENVAHI ” (place of destina-
tion invaded), and it appears that Tours has been a temporary
centre for civil correspondence undeliverable to parts of the
country which have been invaded {Figs. 158—160).
159
157
158
162
160
161
Figs. 161 —l6B represent various types of army postmarks*
regimental franks, etc., being used during the present campaign.
167


168
163
184
165
166
167
168
169


CHAPTER V.
RUSSIA —War Charity Stamps—Portraits of the Tsars—War
Stamps of 1914—Japan—War with China —The Empress
Jingo—Triumphal Military and Naval Reviews —Kiao-
chow—Belgium—King Albert—Bombardment of Malines
—Private Postal Service —Germanised Posts—Red Cross
Stamps-Bogus Stamps-Postmarks-Serbia—"Death
Mask" Stamps King Peter-Montenegro-King
Nicholas.
RUSSIA. The Empire of the Tsars has provided col-
lectors with a few stamps of philanthropic interest in
connection with its wars. A set of four denominations
was issued in 1905 and sold at 3 kopecs per stamp in excess
of the face-value, this extra sum going to the fund organised
by the Imperial Women’s Patriotic Union for the benefit of
orphans of soldiers and sailors who fell in the war with japan.
The following are the descriptions of the stamps which were
printed by the Imperial Printing Office at St. Petersburg in
the delicate colour work for which that establishment is just y
celebrated ; the figure in brackets denotes the price, in kopecs,
charged for each, including the 3 kopecs charity contribution
{Figs. 167—170):
3 (6) kopecs, red-brown, cerise,
and yellow-green.
5 (8) ~ violet, red-lilac,
and buff.
7 (10) ~ dark blue, pale
blue, and rose.
10 (13) ~ dark blue, pale
blue, and orange.
Normally the stamps are perforated
12 x \2y 2 , but the 3 (6) kopecs exists
perforated 13, ll /z ; and a
compound of these two measures.
The 7 (10) and 10 (13) kopecs also
exist perforated 13, 13]/2. The
stamps appear to have been designed
170


by Richard Sarring, an artist attached to the great printing works
of the Russian Government. The subjects represented are—
-3 kopecs. Monument of Admiral Nachimoff at Sebasto-
pol, a hero who was wounded in the
Crimean War,
5 ~ Monument to two national heroes of the Tartar
dominion, Minin and Pascharski.
7 ~ Statue of Peter the Great.
10 ~ The Kremlin, with statue of Alexander 11. in
the foreground.
The small doles of 3 kopecs per stamp collected in this
manner for the orphans’ fund yielded about 50,000 roubles,
roughly £5600.
The portraits of the Tsars never appeared on the stamps of
Russia until 1913, when a very fine portrait and view series of
stamps were issued {Figs. 171 —187), and although not issued
as war stamps they are full of reminiscence of the three centuries
of the stirring history of the Romanofs.
The set begins with a picture of Peter the Great, after a
portrait by the Dutch painter De Moor, on the 1 kopec stamp.
There is another portrait of Peter on the 4 kopecs stamp, this
one being copied from an engraving of the picture painted by
Kneller to the order of King William 111., and now at Hamp-
ton Court. Czar Alexander 11. figures on the green 2 kopecs
stamp, and Alexander 111. is portrayed on the 3 kopecs. The
present Czar, Nicholas 11., appears on the 7 kopecs brown, the
10 kopecs blue, and the highest value in the set, viz., the 5
roubles (1 rouble = 2s. I A portrait of Catherine 11.,
after the painter Skorodonmow, and another of Elizabeth 11.
after Tchemesow, add two more to the list of illustrious females
in the stamp collectors’ portrait gallery. These are on the 14
kopecs green and 50 kopecs brown, respectively. The other
Czars depicted are Nicholas I. (15 kopecs), Alexander I. (20
kopecs), Alexei Michaelovltch (25 kooecs), Paul I. (35 kopecs),
and last, but actually the first and founder of the dynasty*
Michael Feodorowitch (70 kopecs).
On three of the rouble values are views which include The
Kremlin at Moscow (I rouble), the Winter Palace at St.
Petersburg (2 roubles), and the Romanof House (3 roubles).


171
172
173
176
174
175
177
178
179


180
181
182
183
184
185
185
187


Early in the course of the present war the Russians invaded
East Prussia, and it is re-
ported that they were using
Russian stamps in that coun-
try, but up to the time of
writing, examples have not
come to hand. The only
special marks yet noted in this
country from Russia are
various censor njarks and
labels, {Fig. 188).
188
In this war philatelic history is repeating itself, for Russia
has issued a new set of war charity postage stamps {Figs. 189
-—192) for a fund organised by the Imperial Womens’ Patriotic
Union, of the face values I kopec, 3, 7 and 10 kopecs, each
of which sells for one kopec more than the franking value
denoted. The extra kopec goes to the fund, which is to relieve
distress among widows and orphans of soldiers and sailors killed
in the war (see Frontispiece).
JAPAN. The rapid modern rise of our Far Eastern Ally to
power is marked upon a few interesting stamps of a commemora-
tive character. Japan’s successful war against China (1894-93)
was commemorated by an issue of four stamps in 1896. These
are of two denominations, each of which is in two varieties,
an outcome of an Eastern etiquette which at a later dale was
evinced in the stamps of the Republic of China. The Japanese
stamps in question portray two heroes of the war ; the denom-
inations were 2 sen and 5 sen, but that there should be no
suggestion of any inequality in their admiration for the twc>
heroes, the Japanese postal authorities had two stamps ot each
193
194


195
196
denomination prepared so that each warrior figured on a 2 sen
and also a 5 sen stamp. Thus neither could be regarded as
being valued higher than the other, and neither could be said
to be given greater prominence. One of the portraits {Figs.
193, 194) is that of the late Marshall, Prince Arisugawa
Taruhito, chief of the staff of the Army of the Japanese Empire,
and the other {Figs. 195, 196) is the late Lieutenant General
Prince Kitashirakawa, Commander of the Imperial Guards en-
gaged in the subjugation of Formosa.
At a later date, 1901, there was a proposal to commemorate
the services of the late Lieutenant General, and a 3 sen stamp
was announced ; its design was to comprise the imperial crest
(the chrysanthemum) and a Formosan Shinto Shrine. The stamps
were heralded as about to be Issued in time for the festival
of the Shrine celebrated at Taipeh on October 27 and 28, 1901.
In 1905 , as the outcome of Japanese military successes in the
East against China and Russia, full administrative control was
taken over Corea, and a special stamp of the value 3 sen was
issued to mark the amalgamation of the Japanese and Corcan
postal services.
Yet another pair of stamps commemorates somewhat ancient
history; they were issued in 1908
and bear the portrait of the Empress
Jingo-Kogo {Fig. 197), who is stated
to have been Regent from 201 to
269 in lieu of her son Ojin. She
waged a victorious war against
Corea. The legend goes that the god
Sumiyoshi acting as pilot for her on
the sea, caused gigantic fishes to sur-
round the boat and keep it afloat
197
■when a great storm threatened to send the ship to the bottom.


198
199
The next two stamps {Figs. 198, 199) were issued on April
30, 1906, to mark, according to the inscriptions the “ Cam-
paign of the 37th and 38th years of Meiji. Memorial Postage
Stamp of the Triumphal Military Review—One Sen five Rin
(or, for the higher value—l hree Sen). In the centre is a
trophy of arms, including a field gun, rifles, and ammunition,
and the Imperial flag, the Crest or Chrysanthemum, within a
wreath of rice plant and pine. In the spandrels are the five-
pointed stars, badges worn by the Japanese soldiers.
Two years later a great naval review was held at Kobe,
and although no special adhesive
stamp was issued, a quaint post-
mark representing the bow of a
battleship was used {Fig. 200).
The stamps already mentioned
under Japan have only a com-
memorative association with war.
In 1910 the 3 sen carmine stamp
then current was specially over-
printed with Japanese characters
{Fig. 201), signifying war or field
■service. These were prepared for
201
200
202


and issued to the Japanese military and naval forces in China
and Corea, and it is very probable that the Japanese forces
recently co-operating with the British at Kiaochow used stamps
of this kind, but with the overprint on the new 3 sen stamp
illustrated {Fig. 202).
Belgium, Brave little Belgium, whose King is the out-
standing hero of the present war has not hitherto had any
occasion to provide collectors with war stamps since the first
Belgian issue of adhesive postage stamps in 1849-50 with the
portrait of Leopold I. {Figs. 203, 204). But the German
203
204
invasion, and the gallant efforts to frustrate it, have left their
mark imperishably in the stamp album. The last current
ordinary stamps of Belgium were in four designs by M. Ed.
Pellens, a professor at the Antwerp Academic des Beaux Arts,
and these included a good portrait of King Albert {Figs. 205
208).
205
206
These stamps were manufactured at the Belgian State Stamp-
printing factory at Mahnes, and as the factory was destroyed in
the bombardment of the town late in August, it is unlikely that
more of these stamps will be printed. The Belgian authorities


207
208
had been preparing a new issue of stamps before the war, and
had ordered machinery in England, which at the time of writing
is not delivered, but which will probably be delivered to the
Government at Havre, where temporary arrangements will be
made to supply Belgian stamps to the inhabitants of the small
part of the country not in the hands of the enemy, and inci-
dentally to be ready to reorganise the Belgian postal system
as the Germans get driven further and further back to their
own country.
Early in September, 1914, it was reported that a private postal
service was working between Ostend and Blankenberghe, and
Brussels, Namur and Nivelles at a charge of 1 franc per letter,
but no information is yet to hand of any specjal stamps or post-
marks being used in connection with the service.
The Germans have conducted the posts in Belgium with a
view to the requirements of their own countrymen in the tem-
porarily conquered land, and incidentally to make profit out
of the Belgians and out of philatelists. There will no doubt
be many interesting curiosities in the
postmark line arising from the Ger-
manisation of the names on the can-
celling cachets, such as Lowen
(Louvain), Liittich (Liege), Kales
(Ostend), etc. But the chief phila-
telic interest attaches to the issue of
special stamps, or rather the ordinary
German stamps, overprinted in Gothic
type “Belgien”, and with the cur-
rency surcharged in centimes {Fig.
209). Of these there are four
209


denominations, 3 centimes on 3 pfennig brown, 5 centimes on
5 pfennig green, 10 centimes on 10 pfennig red, and 25
centimes on 20 pfennig blue.
The Belgian Government authorised the preparation of stamps
for collecting binds for the Red Cross, and these made their
appearance on October 3, 1914. There are two sets of three
values—3, 10 and 20 centimes. The set in the smaller size
portrays King Albert {Figs. 210, 211), and the larger size
210
211
213
212
stamps bear a picture of a monument commemorating the Belgian
War of Independence, 1830 {Figs. 212, 213).
The Belgian Red Cross stamps were for some time rather
difficult to obtain, as it appears that the stock was left behind
at post offices to which the Belgian authorities have not had
access since their removal to Havre. Undoubtedly vast num-
bers of these stamps could have been sold in England and else-
where had they been procurable from Belgian sources,


The interest aroused in the Belgian Red Cross stamps, and
the difficulty in obtaining them, has probably been responsible
for the attempt to exploit collectors with a set of three labels
purporting to be ” new Belgian stamps, sold in Flanders only
during two days. The emission was very small, only 15,000
214
215
series, which were paid the double of the nominal value, r.e.,
70 centimes.” The “ stamps ” are figured 5 (green), 10
(red) and 25 (blue), but no “c” or centimes. They bear
within a fancy frame lettered BELGIQUE at top and BELGIE below
portraits of King Albert and his Consort {Figs. 214, 213).
Messrs. Alfred Smith & Son submitted these ” stamps ’ to
the Belgian postal administration, and were told that not only
are they not official stamps, but that “they have apparently
been obliterated with a stolen or forged date-stamp.” The
“postmark” reads ROULERS —5 OCTO —18-19 — 1914.
The Belgian Government moved to Havre in France on
October 13, 1914, and there they have a special post office
using the postmark Fig. 216. The headquarters of the habita-
tions of the Belgian Government are reckoned part of Belgium,
and while the Belgians may send letters to their different addresses
in Havre or to Belgium, for the unit rate of 10 centimes (Id.),
letters for France, even for another part of Havre, are treated
as foreign letters, and require to be prepaid at the 25 centimes
(214 d.) rate.


There are also Belgian military postcards at present in use
by the soldiers, and a variety of military postmarks, of which
Fig. 217 is an example.
216
217
An interesting trio of covers has been received from a young
marine who was with the Naval Brigade at Antwerp. The
first, dated October 6, 1914, has the postmark (Fig. 218).
218
220
On the 1 Ith he was evidently interned in Leeuwarden {Fig.
220) Holland, his letter being censored {Fig. 39). On the
27th he wrote from Groningen, where most of the naval brigade
men were interned. The letter has the Groningen machine
cancellation, and Fig. 221 struck in violet :
221


SERBIA. Revolutionary disturbances have assisted the changes
of the stamps of Serbia. Michael Obrenovich 111., who figures
on the issue of 1866, was assassinated on June 10th, 1868, by
the friends of the abdicated prince, Alexander Karageorgevich.
Milan IV., his successor, had a troublous reign; during his
period the country was recognised as a kingdom with Milan as
king, but he abdicated in 1889 in favour of Alexander, hjs son.
The portraits of Milan and Alexander figure on the stamps of
their respective reigns, and in the case of Alexander we get one
of those philatelic issues which must imprint on our minds the
memory of notable or notorious events. It is within the memory
of most of our readers that Alexander and his consort. Queen
Draga, were assassinated by a number
of military officers in 1903, and the
house of Karageorgevich once again
ruled in Serbia in King Peter, the
present monarch. At the time of the
assassination a new series of stamps
bearing the portrait of Alexander was
in readiness for issue, but before they
were sent out under the new regime
the effigy of the murdered king was
almost completely obliterated by the
overprinting of a design of the Serbian
Arms {Fig. 222).
223
222
224
The year following the grimmest of all the royal tragedies
of Serbia the surviving dynasty commemorated its centenary,
and issued perhaps the most sensational stamp series known to
collectors. These will go down to posterity as the “ Death
Mask” stamps, although the curiosity of artistry which led to
this designation probably owes more to the excited imagination


of the Serbian and foreign public than to any gruesome intent ort
the part of revolutionary artists.
The Coronation stamps of King Peter, issued September 21,
1904, are of large size, and in two designs, by G. Janovic.
M. Mouchon was the engraver, and the stamps were printed at
the French Government Stamp Printing Factory in Paris. The
names of the designer and engraver appear in microscopic letters
below the design of each stamp. The first design {Fig. 223)
shows a medal on which the profile of the new King Peter is
superimposed upon the profile of the founder of the dynasty
' Kara,” or Black George. The names inscribed upon the
medal are KARA GJORGJE at left, and PETAR 1. at right. To the
left and right of the medal respectively are the centennial dates
1804—1904, and below are the Serbian Arms, with the motto
SPES MIHI PRIM A DEUS. Along the top of the stamp in Scla-
vonic characters is KRALJEVINA SRBIJA (Kingdom of Servia), the
value in PARA is in the lower left corner, and the word POSHTA
in the lower right corner. This design was used for all the
para values.
For the higher values in dinar {Fig. 224), the same frame
design is used, but for the medallion what may have been the
reverse of a Coronation medal is shown. This is reputed to
be an allegory representing the successes of the guerilla leader
Kara-George, founder of the dynasty against the Turks in 1804.
There is a minute inscription on the medallion below the picture
signifying THE DAWN OF LIBERTY, 1804.
These stamps were at first received by collectors with disdain
and some disgust ; the memory of the tragedy of June 10th,
1903, was still too fresh to allow the world to join readily
in any jubilation over the centenary of a dynasty which had
been dragged from obscurity after many years, to occupy a
throne lately emptied by the foul hands of assassins. It is
even said that the early sales of the stamps were entirely dis-
appointing. But this was all changed from the moment rumours
of a cunning intrigue attached themselves to the issue.
It is probably—almost certainly—an accidental effect pro-
duced by the drawing or engraving of the two heads, one over
the other, that they produce in more ways than one, other
composite “ faces.” By masking the lower part of the profile
of Kara George it is possible to distinguish a new face with
an ugly gashed brow ; but the alleged ” Death Mask ”of


Alexander is seen by turning the stamp upside down, and re-
garding that portion of the inverted
profiles which may be marked off
in triangle fashion with the chins as
the base of the triangle. There is
certainly a curious and hideous effect,
but similar, if less ghastly, artistic
curiosities occur in numbers of
other stamps, and in many other
forms of pictorial representation,
and in the case of the Serbian
Coronation issue it is probably
pure accident. Fig. 225 represents
225
the current type of Serbian stamp, with a military portrait of
King Peter.
226
227
228
229


230
231
MONTENEGRO. Tsar Nicholas of Montenegro has not given
us any special war stamps, but the warrior King’s portraits, at
various stages in his career appear on the stamps issued in 1910
for his jubilee. The 1 para shows him as he was during his
student days in Paris (Fig. 226), the 2 and 20 paras show him
with his bride at the date of their marriage, 1860 (Fig. 227).
The other values show various portraits of the King, including
one of him on a charger leading his troops to battle (Fig. 228).


CHAPTER VI.
The Enemy' s Stamps— Germany —Austria —Bosnia Hungary
Turkey.
GERMANY. In postal arrangements for armies in the
field Germany has shown earlier organised war posts
than any of our Allies. As with the regular postal
systems on the Continent, their early history is bound up with
the records of the princely house of Thurn and Taxis, of which
house Count Roger set up in 1460 the first horse post between
the Tyrol and Italy. About 1335 Johann Baptista von Taxis
created the first field post offices operating with the armies of
the Emperor Charles V. against the Turks and in Italy. The
hereditary monopoly which the Thurn and Taxis family enjoyed
from the fifteenth century continued well into the nineteenth,
the last remnant of it being purchased from the family by
Prussia in 1867 for three million thalers.
The growth of Prussian dominion and the fusion of the
German States into one vast empire is well demonstrated in the
stamp album by the joint Austro-Prussian Issues for the con-
quered Danish duchies, by the disappearance of the States
from the list of separate stamp issuing countries, replaced at
first by stamps of the North German Confederation, and later
by stamps of the German Empire.
The stamp collection plainly shows the modern progress of
military Prussia to the lead in the Germanic countries. Col-
lectors have many interesting postal relics of the Austro-
Prussian War of 1866 in the form of Feldpost Brief, and the
Franco-Prussian War brought about the first special war stamps
issued by Germany for the use of their armies of occupation in
Alsace and Lorraine, and in the invaded parts of France (Fig.
233). Of this Campaign there are also the Feldpost Brief,
and the then novel form of communication by postcard was
also adopted for military purposes in the “ Feldpost correspond-
enz karte.” From the foundation of the Empire the stamps
show little change. Being a collection of sovereign states it
has never been regarded as appropriate for the Kaiser s portrait
to figure on the stamps as King George s does on most of the
stamps of the British Emoire. The German stamps to-day bear
a female head {Fig. 23*4) drawn by Paul Waldroff after a re-


233
234
presentation of “Germania by an actress Fraulein Anna
Fiihring, which so impressed the Kaiser that he adopted this
as the symbol of Germany on its stamps. On modern high
value German stamps there are pictures of more war-like interest.
The 2 marks stamp shows an allegory of the Union of North
and South Germany from a painting by Anton von Werner,
with the motto “ SEID EINIG, SEID EINIG ” (be united, be
united !) ; the 3 marks {Fig. 235) shows a group of German
235
236
princes with the Kaiser on horseback at their head, a scene
drawn by W. Pape of the unveiling of the memorial to Kaiser
Wilhelm I. The highest German stamp denomination, the 5
marks {Fig. 236) shows another group, with the present Kaiser
prominent in it. This is also by Pape, and represents one of
those spectacular appearances which the Kaiser has revelled in,
the delivery of an address on the anniversary of the reconstitution
of the German Empire. The motto “ EIN REICH, EIN VOLK,
EIN GOTT ” (one kingdom, one people, one God) is one which,
as we now know, may be carried too far !
Since the outbreak of the present war the German armies
have no doubt provided a great deal of new material for phila-
telic study, and a recent number of a stamp journal published
in the Fatherland tells us that collectors there are zealously


following the development of the German Field Post Offices,
adding the following information ;
There is a lot of interesting material already, not only with regard
to the printed forms used in the Field Mail Service, but also with
regard to the Field Post cancellations, Troop Letter cancellations,
and Censor postmarks. The correspondence coming from the garri-
sons very rarely bear a Field Post cancellation, and it is generally
cancelled with ordinary town postmarks like the mails of troops still
at home. Besides this, there is, occasionally, a censor Troop can-
cellation; to the latter also belong the Lazarett cancellation (hospital
service), of which we have seen several that were interesting. Lately,
a large number of pieces of mail have been corning from troops in
the enemies’ country, without postal cancellations—owing to strategic
reasons—which is much to be regretted from the view-point of the
collector. In the near future, the working out of German Field
Post cancellations of the war of 1914 will be an exceptionally thank-
ful philatelic report. We will only mention the news that France
had issued several occupation stamps which were said to have been
used during the occupation of Muelhausen. A collector in Muel-
hausen wrote to us about this mythological issue of stamps, that the
French, during both occupations, have neither used their own stamps,
nor have they organised any kind of postal service. A
Belgium, as already noted in Chapter V., has been provided
with stamps of the Germania type overprinted “ Belglen and
the value in centimes {Fig. 209). These have, no doubt, been
issued in enormous quantities with the hope of raking in shekels
not only from the Belgians and from German stamp collectors,
but also from collectors and curiosity hunters in neutral countries.
Although there are plenty to be had in Switzerland, Holland,
and other neutral countries at about sixpence the set of four, it
is extraordinary to relate that in one or two isolated cases
British dealers have obtained and sold supplies at very fancy
prices. As in the case of the similar issue so called Alsace
and Lorraine ” of 1870-1871, there will be plenty to go round,
and it will be time enough when the Huns have ceased from
troubling us to gather these relics into our albums as memorials
of Germany’s trail through the beautiful towns of Belgium.
In any case it is inadvisable to buy any unused stamps originat-
ing in an enemy country since the outbreak of the war, as they
represent a clear contribution to the enemy s Treasury.
* Incidentally the German journal, Berliner Briejmarken-Zeitung, in a
very moderate article on the war’s effect on the stamp trade, states that
German collectors are buying up Belgian, Serbian, and Montenegrin
stamps, evidently in the “opinion that these countries will become non-
existent.”


237
238
239
Very few postmarks of the present war have so far reached
us from Germany, but Fig. 237 is a type of the Field Post
Office date mark. Figs. 238, 239 are Censor marks, and the
next (Fig. 240) is the cover of a letter from a prisoner of war
interned at Kissingen.
240


242
243
241
AUSTRIA, The stamps of Francis Joseph the Unlucky, who
has been on the throne of Austria since the first Austrian issue
appeared in 1850, do not call for more than pictorial repre-
sentation here. The general postage stamps current in Austria
were originally issued as a special series to mark the sixtieth
year of the Emperor’s reign (1908). Slightly modi-
fied, they were re-issued for the celebration of his
eightieth birthday (1910). The illustrations {Figs. 241
257) show the original issue of 1908 as still current. The
portraits are copied from paintings in the Royal palaces, and
the subjects are : 1 heller (Charles VI.), 2 heller (Maria
Theresa), 3 heller (Joseph II.), 6 heller (Leopold II.), 12 heller
(Francis I.), 20 heller (Ferdinand).
Of the present Sovereign, unluckier than ever in the present
war, the series comprises several good portraits. The 30 heller
shows him at the time of his accession in 1848, the 35 heller
a portrait painted thirty years later, 1878 ; the 50 heller show's
him in the uniform of a Field Marshal, and on the 1 krone he
figures w'ith the insignia of the Order of the Golden Fleece.
245
246
244


247
248
249
250
251
252
Contemporary portraits appear on the 5, 10, and 25 heller
(Figs. 244, 246, 249), and a particularly fine portrait stamp of
large size is the 10 kronen (Fig. 257) printed in deep brown,
blue and ochre.
The 2 and 5 kronen stamps (Figs. 255, 256) respectively
present views of the Imperial palaces Schonbrunn and Hofburg.
235
256


253
257
254
On October 4, 1914, two stamps were Issued in Austria of
a war charity postal character, sell-
ing for 2 heller more than the
face value, the extra 2 heller
going to the fund for the
widows and orphans of Austrian
soldiers killed in the war. The
designs are adapted from the ordin-
ary 5 and 10 heller stamps {Figs.
244, 246) by a lengthening of the
stamps for the addition of the date
1914 {Fig. 258). These although
paying postage to the value of 5
and 10 heller, sell at 7 and 12
heller respectively.
258
BoSNIA-HerzeGOVINA. The military occupation of Bosnia-
Herzegovina by Austria under the treaty of Berlin, 1878, was
followed thirty years later by the
coup of October 5, 1908, by which
the Emperor-King proclaimed his
sovereignty over the two provinces.
His portrait first appeared on a
Bosnian stamp of the pictorial series
of 1906-7 in which, incidentally,
there are included views of Sarajevo
where occurred the murder of the
Archduke Francis Ferdinand on June
28, 1914, a tragedy which provided
a pretext for hastening the German
plans for a world war. In 1912 the
r
259


Emperor-King’s portrait re-appeared on the stamps of the mili-
tary postal administration of these provinces {Fig. 259).
The 5 and 10 heller stamps of 1906 giving views of the Pass
of Narenta with a view of the river Prenj, and the valley of
Vrba, are reported to have been overprinted 1914 and
surcharged 7 and 12 hellers for use in collecting 2 heller con-
tributions to the Austrian war fund.
HUNGARY.
260
261
The stamps of Hungary, in the lower values
{Fig. 260) depict the Turul, the mythical bird
of the Magyars, which was said to have been
the messenger between them and -Heaven, and
their guide along the road that took them
into Hungary. When the Magyars pro-
claimed Arpad their first King, the Turul
perched upon his forehead. Two of these
low value stamps have been, with modifica-
tions and overprint, adapted for selling as
war charity postage stamps {Fig. 261) at
5+ 2 filler, and 10 + 2 filler. The war
inscriptions read ” HADI SEGELY ” (War
Relief) and on label at the foot, obliterat-
ing the original inscription, OZVEGYEK-
NEK ES ARVAKNAK KET (2) FILLER” (for
the widows and orphans two filler). The
next illustration {Fig. 262) is a charity
postcard from Hungary bearing one of
the war relief stamps.
TURKEY. The coming of the Young Turk has completely
changed the aspect of Turkish stamps. They have robbed the
collector of a rare illusion, and we owe them a grudge for it.
The picturesque fancies which we treasure in our memories as
the children store up the fables of the nursery, are dear to us
children of a larger growth. But our love of fantastic lore
suffers many a shock. Ever since the first stamps of the Sublime
Empire appeared in the reign of Abdul Aziz, on whom be
Peace, we collectors of stamps (on whom there can be no
Peace, for in stamps there is constancy but in change) have


262
nourished a fond fancy that pictures and portraits are forbidden
to the Muslim, and that Allah, who is great, and his prophet,
Muhammed, have set the Curse upon such works of Satan.
Much has been written by philatelists, a£ well as by
Muhammedan scholars, upon the subject, and the continued
philatelic fidelity to the Thoughra (the Sultan’s sign manual)
on the Turkish stamps has ingrained into collectors the belief
that the 1 urks would never depart from their reading of the
law as set forth by Muhammed in this particular. The verse
which, in the Koran, sets forth the alleged prohibition is tran-
scribed :
O believers ! surely wine and games of chance, and statues, and
the divining arrows are an abomination of Satan's work ! Avoid
them that ye may prosper.
The wise men of the East, who have drunk deep of the
streams of wisdom that flow from the Book of Warnings, have
read many different meanings into the verse, and in Turkey it
has been taken to imply the forbidding of all figures, and even
the ruminative game of chess is barred by the strict Muslim.
We, of Christian faith, would appear to have a more emphatic


prohibition of the making of pictures In the translation of the
Mosaic law :
And God spake all these words, saying, Thou shalt not make
unto thee any graven image, or the likeness of anything that is in
heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water
under the earth.
264
263
265
266
267
268


269
270
272
271
273
274


275
276
277
278
279


Our theologians have not regarded the second Commandment
as a condemnation of the making of pictures, though many an
earnest believer, during the phases of pictorial frenzy through
which we have passed and are still passing, may have regarded
the picture paper and the picture palace as abominations of
Satan’s work.
The new pictorial stamps of Turkey have dispelled one of
the mellow myths of our cult, a myth which, perhaps, was
simply an exaggeration of a prohibition which is more in common
with Western ideas than with Western practices. For instance,
there have been recorded seizures of pictorial postcards in Turkey,
attributed to the Muhammedan law ; but these probably con-
cerned cards which gave offence to Muslim susceptibilities by
their blatant portrayal of the unveiled faces (inter alia) of women.
If the prohibition of pictures in the past has been no myth, and
the late departure from precedent is the result of the advent of
the New Turk, then, indeed, the New Turk hath courage,
for each true believer of the Prophet must needs regard every
new-born child, whether a creature of the flesh or of the mind,
as a thing that is touched by Satan.
Yet one other illusion concerning Turkish stamps has been
shattered of recent years. We are told now that the Crescent,
so long an emblem of the Sublime Empire, owes nothing to the
moon. The barking of dogs on the appearance of the moon
at the siege of Byzantium may have saved the city, and the
partial eclipse of the orb of night may have aided the Turks at
the capture of Constantinople, but the Turkish Crescent is no
memorial thereof, merely a horse-shoe or an amulet. Professor
Ridgeway says it is the result of the base-to-base conjunction of
two claw or tusk amulets. Says another writer, There is no
historical evidence that the Turks thought at all of the moon
when they adopted a crescent as their national symbol.
Turkey’s first departure from the Thoughra device for its
stamps was in 1913, when a set of crude picture stamps dis-
played an alleged view of the new General Post Office at
Constantinople {Fig. 280). Later in the same year a finely-
engraved set of three denominations, 10, 20, and 40 paras, was
issued to commemorate the recapture on July 22, 1913, of the
fortress of Adrianople after the Balkan War. The design,


280
281
which was engraved in London, shows a view of the Mosque
of Selim {Fig. 281).
On January 15, 1914, a fine new set of London-printed
stamps was issued depicting a number of scenes in the Turkish
Empire and a portrait of H.M. Sultan Muhammed V. In-
cidentally some of the designs are of warlike interest, notably
the cruiser Hamidieh on the 2 piastres {Fig. 272), Turkish
War Office on the 5 piastres {Fig. 274), and the forts of the
Bosphorus on the 50 piastres {Fig. 277).
The vignettes of the full set of the 1914 issue are :
2 paras, mauve. Hippodrome Obelisk.
4 ~ sepia. Column of Constantine.
5 ~ purple-brown. The Seven Towers.
6 ~ deep blue. Leander’s Tower.
10 „ green. Fanaraki.
20 ~ scarlet. Castle of Europe.
I piastre, bright blue, Sultan Ahmed Mosque.
IVI .. carmine and black. Martyr’s Monument.
1 3 4 .. grey and red-brown. Bathing Fountains of
Salem.
2 piastres, green and black. Cruiser Hamidieh.
2/ 2 ~ orange and green. Candilli.
5 ~ deep lilac. Ministry of War.
10 ~ red-brown. Sweet Waters of Europe.
25 ~ dull yellow-green. Suleimanieh Mosque.
50 „ rose. The Bosphorus.
100 .. indigo. Sultan Ahmed’s Fountain.
200 ~ green and black. Sultan Muhammed V.


283
282
In addition there were issued four postage due stamps, one
bearing the warlike “Arms” of Turkey, and the other the
Thoughra, or sign-manual, of Sultan Muhammed V. {tigs.
282, 283). , , j .
Already the present war, even before Turkey had on its part
opened hostilities, has produced an important effect upon the
postal arrangements of Turkey by the abolition of the
Capitulations” which took effect on October 1, 1914. the
various Powers interested in Turkey have for many years main-
tained agencies of their own postal administrations in Con-
stantinople and other parts of the Turkish Empire, and these,
owing to the untrustworthiness of the Turkish service, secured
the bulk of the foreign correspondence both of Europeans and
Turks. Latterly, Turkey has been endeavouring to compete
more keenly with these rival post offices within its own
dominions, and they have sold specially earmarked stamps to
business firms for use on foreign correspondence at a substantial
discount off face value.
285
284
The star overprinted in blue or red {Figs. 284, 285) on the
current stamps indicates those sold in this way.


Each of the foreign post offices in Turkey, including our own
British post office, used special stamps. Years ago, when the
British office was first set up, ordinary English stamps were sold,
but there were abuses of the currency values so that it was found
desirable to overprint our English stamps for use in Turkey with
either the value in Turkish currency, or with the word LEVANT,
which effectually prevented any large purchases in Turkish
money being exchanged at the English face value.
he iurkish Government has long been trying to get these
foieign post offices closed, but without success until the out-
break of the present war ; they are all now closed, and their
stamps consequently obsolete. The nations having had special
stamps for their post offices in Turkey are :
Great Britain (closed October, 1914).
France ( tf j
Russia ( ’ \
Italy ( ’’ ’’ )’
Roumania (discontinued 1896).
Austria (closed October. 1914).
Germany ( ~ t> )
A curious set of stamps, never
really required for postal duty,
was issued by the Turks during
the Graeco-Turkish War of 1898,
under the pretext of being required
for the use of the Turkish Army
of Occupation. The Turkish
inscription on these odd-shaped
stamps {Fig. 286) reads “Special
for Thessaly, that part of the
country conquered.” Even at the
286
time these stamps first saw the
light in Thessaly, the Turks were boarding their transports to
evacuate the country. Large remainder stocks have been sold
since the evacuation, and extensive forging of these stamps has
been detected.


CHAPTER VII.
AMERICAN WARS —United States—Civil War—Confederate
Stamps—Hispano-American War—Vera Cruz-Canada
Mexican Revolution —South and Central America.
UNITED STATES. In December, 1860, South Carolina in
convention repealed the act adopting the Constitution
of the United States, ..a move which was promptly
followed by other Southern States, and led to the American
■Civil War. On February 18, 1861, a provisional Confederate
Government under Jefferson Davis was set up at Montgomery,
Alabama, with all the appendages of military and civil adminis-
tration, including a post office department. The Confederate
Government later moved to Richmond, Virgima, and through-
out the long and bloody war from 1861-1865 the Confederate
States maintained a separate postal service, with separate postage
stamps. Judge John H. Reagan was Postmaster-General.
The United States postage stamps current at the beginning
of the war were the beautiful series of 1851-60, and as large
quantities remained in stock at Southern post offices, these issues
were demonetized and replaced hurriedly by the now rare
premiere gravures of August, 1861, which were promptly super-
seded by the more finished designs of September, 1861.
The Confederate States stamps lack the excellence of en-
graving and printing of the United States stamps, a deficiency
due to the difficult conditions under which they'were produced
in the country or imported from England. But what they
lack in this respect is more than amply compensated by their
historic significance and associations. The home produced
stamps were prepared under the stress of invasion ; the foreign
manufactured ones and much of the material for the local pro-
ductions had to be brought through the blockade. In the annals
of philately there are no more exciting records than those which
tell of the capture of a ship bearing three De La Rue plates
and 400,000 dollars worth of Confederate States stamps, which
the agent of Davis’s Government managed to throw overboard,
or of the despatch (preparatory to the evacuation of Richmond)
of printing press, dies, plates, and stamps to Columbia, in South
Carolina, where they arrived only to be destroyed in the holo-
caust following upon General Sherman s capture of the city.
"The different designs of the successive issues of Confederate


stamps are shewn in Figs. 287—295 ; their history we have
dealt with at length in “Confederate States of America-
Government Postage Stamps.”*
Some bogus stamps purporting to have been used in various
temporary services are illustrated {Figs. 296—299), including
one showing a fort at Charlestown, and another which purports
to prepay blockade postage ”to Europe.
The postmasters of a number of towns in the Confederate
States found it desirable pending the receipt of stamps from the
Confederate Government to prepare and issue provisional stamps
of their own to denote prepayment of postage. Among these
are some of the rarest postage stamps known to collectors ;
the best authenticated issues emanated from ;
Athens and Macon In Georgia; Baton Rouge and New Orleans
in Lou'Siana; Beaumont Gohad Gonzales, Helena, Independence'
ouT m . T^ a - 1 Brid B evilie - Greenville, Grove Hill Living-
ston. Mobile and Uniontown in Alabama; Charleston and Spartan-
burg in South Carolina; Lenoir in North Carolina; Danville. Emory
rredericksburg, Greenwood, Jetersville, Lynchburg, Marion Peters
burg, Pittsylvania, Pleasant Shade and Salem in Virginia; Kingston
Knoxville, Memphis, Nashville. Rheatown, and Tellico Plains in
1 ennessee; and New Smyrna in Florida.
The war with Spain produced a considerable effect upon
stamp issues ; but the war tax stamps which were very popular
with young collectors by reason of their bearing a picture of
the battleship Maine {Figs. 300, 301) were in no sense postage
300
301
I9* 3 Melvil,e Stam P Books - No. 19. Stanley Gibbons, Ltd., London.


287
288
289
290
292
293
294
295
296
298
299
297


305
302
306
303
307
304


stamps, though often affixed to letters as small contributions to
the war funds. Throughout the campaign there were many
United States military postal cancellations used in Cuba (Fig
302), Porto Rico {Fig. 303), and the Philippines {Fig. 304),
and United States postage stamps were later overprinted for
these and other former Spanish colonies, e.g., Cuba, Guam,
Philippine Islands and Porto Rico {Figs. 305—307). These
have since been replaced by definite issues for the Republic of
Cuba, and for the Philippines.
The United States stamps offer a very wide field for associa-
tion with war interest, many of them bear portraits of warrior
heroes, and their cancellations in connection with expeditionary
forces cover a wide range of territory from the neighbouring
and troublesome republic of Mexico (where the United States
recently used its own stamps at the post office of Vera Cruz)
to China.
308
309
310
311
CANADA. Our great North American dominion gave us a
patriotic Empire stamp a few years ago to mark the introduction
at Christmas 1898, of Imperial Penny Postage {Fig. 308). It
shows a map of the world on Mercator’s projection with the
British possessions coloured in red, and with a line quoted from


Sir Lewis Morris’s jubilee ode, “We hold a vaster Empire
than has been.’’ The “ bumptiousness ”of the quotation led
Punch to suggest a few alternatives :
We are richer than anybody.
We are Tremendous Swells.
The Policeman outside Mansion House is the finest in the world.
Our fleet can smash all the rest.
Mind your eye !
By Jingo, if we do ! ! !
Go to Jericho !
The difficulties of printing a map of the world in colours within
the space of a postage stamp led to “minor” geographical
inexactitudes, such as the annexation by the red colour, of the
United States, the invasion of France by England, and the
removal of the Cape of Good Hope out into the sea. But
unlike the Dominican Republic’s map stamp of 1900 it did not
lead to complications with other countries.
Canada’s Quebec Tercentenary issue includes some stamps of
martial interest {Figs. 309—31 1), the 5 cents shows the French
Governor Champlain’s house in Quebec, round which a wide
ditch was dug and breastworks were thrown up and cannon
mounted to protect the colonists from the savages. Generals
Wolfe and Montcalm are portrayed on the 7 cents, the 10 cents
shows the old city and fort of Quebec in I 700, and the other
denominations show incidents in the exploration of Canada and
portraits of King Edward and Queen Alexandra, and of King
George and Queen Mary.
312
313
MEXICO. Mexican stamps from 1856 to the rise of Porforio
Diaz demonstrate some of the political changes through which
the country has passed, from Republic to Empire, and back to


Republic. Revolution has brought about provisional stamps
of a rare order, such as the Guadalajara, Chiapas, and Cam-
peche stamps of 1867-1868, and the more recent issues of the
“Constitutionalist” party for Sonora {Figs. 312—314) and
Tamaullpas {Fig. 315).
314
315
Figs. 316, 317 represent ordinary Mexican stamps commandeered
and overprinted by the rebels.
317
316
Martial portraits figure on the stamps of many of the South
and Central States ; to mention them all would require a goodly
sized dictionary of American biography. In addition, specialists
find much interest in tracing, by extra-territorial postmarks, the
movements of troops in the various wars between Brazil and
Paraguay, Chili and Peru, etc.; and many of the countries give
us scenes recording outstanding incidents in their histories, especi-
ally on their issues commemorative of the centenary of their
freedom from the Spanish yoke. Chili, for example, depicts
the battles of Chacabuco, Roble, Malpo, the sea fight of April


27, 1818, between the Lautaro and the Esmeralda, and another
ending in the capture of the Maria Isabella on October 28.
In this series also is a portrait of the renowned Admiral Coch-
rane, the 10th Earl of Dundonald, who organised the Chilian
Navy and played a great part in Chili’s struggles for freedom
from Spain.
Ecuador’s issue of 1896 marks the end of a period of civil
strife and the triumph of the Liberal Party, a portion of the
proceeds of the sale of the stamps being devoted to the destitute
families of soldiers killed while serving in defence of the
Liberal cause.
Colombia gives us a number of stamp designs of war- like
interest, including warrior heroes, and a crude picture (Fig.
318) of the cruiser Cartagena. A particularly bitter commem-
oration of the centenary of the independence of Colombia in
1910 was the picturing on a registration fee stamp of the whole-
sale executions ordered by the Spanish victors at Carthagena
on February 24, 1816. (Fig. 319). To this stamp objections
318
319
were raised by the Spanish Minister at Bogota, and in deference
to his protests it was withdrawn from circulation.
Guatemala displays its Artillery Barracks (Fig. 320). The
much disturbed Dominican Republic warns off possible invaders
by displaying the fortress of Santo Domingo. Its map issue
of 1900 (Fig. 320 a), owing to a dispute over the boundary indi-
cated nearly led to war with the Haytian Republic. Hayti
shows the fortress of Sans Souci (Fig. 321). Peru having had
its stamps much overprinted by the Chilians in 1881-1883, vaunts
more peaceful subjects on its recent picture stamps, e.g., its
General Post Office, Municipal Institute of Hygiene, and the
Lima Medical School. Uruguay, after its civil war of 1904,
added a “peace” overprint to its contemporary stamps, read-
ing PAZ-1904. It also illustrates the fortress and port of Monte-


320
320A
321
video, and its cruiser of the same name on its issues of 1908
and 1909 {Fig. 322), and Venezuela has given us crude
sketches of the revolutionary steamer Bankigh {Fig. 323), and
a map stamp illustrative of the great boundary dispute with
Great Britain.
322
323
Brazil also furnishes examples of stamps specially furnished
to soldiers and sailors for use on their letters home in war-time.
These were printed by a stationer in Rio de Janeiro and were
used during the war with Paraguay 1865-1870. The army
franks are inscribed EXERCITO (Army), and those for the sister
service ARMADA (Navy).


CHAPTER VIII.
Miscellaneous Wars and Commemorations.—Patriotic Empire
Stamps- Victoria- New Zealand- Barbados’ Nelson
Stamp—A Dutch Naval Commemoration—Balkan Wars—
Greece—Albania—Epirus—Bulgaria—Roumania—ltaly
Portugal—Spain—Mysterious Melillas—China.
AUSTRALASIA has not had much occasion for war stamps,
but it is worthy of note that at the time of the South
African War Victoria issued two postage stamps of
patriotic designs, obtained in public competition. The Victoria
Cross design {Fig. 324) gained the prize for the penny stamps
and the prize for the twopence stamps was awarded for the
other design {Fig. 325) showing a picket on foot and armed
324
325
scouts scanning the horizon of the open veldt in the Transvaal,
whilst in the distance are the faint outlines of the mills which
the British have had to scale. The central figures in the latter
design are in the uniform of the Victorian contingent. These
stamps sold at Is. and 2s. each although they only prepaid Id.
and 2d. postage respectively, the balance going to the Patriotic
Fund.


In connection with the same
campaign New Zealand issued in
1901 a stamp printed in a khaki
colour to commemorate the sending
of a New Zealand contingent to
the war. The stamp {Fig. 326),
designed by Mr. J. Nairn of
Wellington and engraved in New
York, pictures the part of the con-
tingent sent as New Zealand’s re-
sponse to “ the Empire’s call.”
326
Barbados marked the centenary of the battle of Trafalgar by
an issue of stamps depicting the ‘ ‘ first monument erected to
Nelson’s memory, 1813 ” {Fig. 327). The monument is in the
capital of the Colony, Bridgetown, but its claim to be the first
erected to Nelson’s memory is contested.
Another naval hero, Michael A. de Ruyter, Admiral-in-
Chief of the Dutch Fleet, is commemorated on a set of stamps
of Holland issued in 1907 for the ter-centenary of his birth.
This design, in addition to a portrait of the Admiral, depicts
a battle at sea {Fig. 328).
327
The recent Balkan Wars (1912-13)
would require a volume to describe in
detail the philatelic results. Two Greek
stamp designs commemorate the vic-
tories of the troops allied against Turkey.
One shows the cross of Constantine
over the Acropolis and city of
Athens and the Bay of Salamis; the
other depicts the eagle of Zeus fly-
328
329


ing oyer Mount Olympus with a snake in its talons. Fig. 329 shows
the design of two war charity stamps sold for the benefit of Greek
soldiers incapacitated in the campaign, and for the widows and
orphans of the killed. Greece overprinted stamps very lavishly for
territories occupied during the war. When the fleet occupied
Mytilene the Greek authorities overprinted the Turkish stamps they
found there with a Greek inscription rendered “Greek occupation
—Mytilene.” Lemnos was furnished with Greek stamps over-
printed LEMNOS in Greek characters, and many other places
were provided with Greek stamps overprinted with an inscrip-
tion signifying ” Greek Administration.” In Samos tour issues
of new stamps appeared in 1912-1913, and Icaria’s Independent
Government stamps prepared just prior to the Greek occupation
were overprinted “Greek Administration.”
330
331
Albania s separate stamp issues were an outcome of the
Balkan Wars. The first were created in 1913 by overprinting
Turkish stamps with a device of a double-headed eagle and the
word SHQIPENIE {Fig. 330). Since then four or five new issues
have appeared, crude labels of circular handstamp pattern {Fig.
331) with the value typewritten. More recently a series has
appeared depicting Skanderbeg, the warrior hero of the
Albanians, and these were overprinted in March, 1914, with
an inscription “7 Mars. 1467. rrofte mbreti. 1914” to corn


memorate the arrival of Prince William of Wied as Mpret.
The year 1467 was the date of the death of Skanderbeg.
333
334
332
The * autonomous state of Epirus, another outcome of the
Balkan troubles, has given us some quaint stamps. The first
was the skull and cross-bones issue {Fig. 332), the incriptions
on which read “ Liberty or death—Defence of the fatherland
—Lepta 10.” This was succeeded by a more ambitiously
designed stamp {Fig. 333) showing an evzone or light infantry-
man in the act of firing. The simple name “ Epirus was
extended to ” Autonomous Epirus {Fig. 334). Other crude
issues have appeared in Epirote districts, as yet not very satis-
factorily authenticated. These include Kontza (Fig. 335) and
Moschopolis {Fig. 336), both places in lower Albania.
Another curious provisional is one for Gumuldjina {l'ig. 337)
in the vilayet of Adrianople.


335
336
337
Crete s troubles may be ended with the final settlement of
the Turks; in its stamps since 1898 we see the influence of the
British, Russian and Greeks, and a remarkable range of re-
volutionary stamps. On one modern stamp of 1907 {Fig. 338)
is depicted the landing of Prince George of Greece at Suda
on his appointment as High Commissioner. He is being received
by Admirals of various Powers, Noel of Great Britain, Skryd-
loff of Russia, Pettier of France, and Bettolo of Italy. A
still more recent stamp of Crete shows the fort at Suda, and
was issued to celebrate the raising of the Greek flag on May I,
1913.


338
On two stamps of 1901 commemorative of the War of Inde-
pendence Bulgaria pictured a cherry wood cannon, a home-
made affair used by the Bulgarian patriots against the Turks,
and drawn from one which is preserved in the national museum
at Sofia {Fig. 339). The following year, 1902, the 25th
anniversary of the battle of Shipka Pass (August 21, 1877) was
the occasion for a set of stamps showing a view of the ravine
with the Bulgars tumbling rocks down upon their enemies {Fig.
340
339
340). Later stamps of this country show some interesting
portraits of King Ferdinand {Figs. 341—343) in naval and
military uniforms, and one showing the King with the sceptre
in his right hand and the orb in his left, and wearing the garb
of the ancient Tsars of Bulgaria. These form part of a fine
pictorial issue of 1911, and it is noteworthy that these stamps
may be found with Turkish cancellations, used by the victorious
Bui gars in the recent campaign before they could substitute


341
342
343
Bulgarian postmarks for those left behind by the Turks. In
1913 the pictorial set up to the 25 stotinki, was issued with
an overprint in Sclavonic characters signifying “War of
Liberty to mark the successes against the Turks.
The enlightened Prince Cuza was responsible for the intro-
duction of many reforms in Roumania, among them being
postal reform, with the use of adhesive stamps, those of 1865
bearing his portrait. He was obliged to abdicate the year
following the issue of the stamps as a result of a conspiracy.
The late King Charles was his successor, there being no
further developments to recall. Rather in this case we read
from our stamps the more peaceful story of the growth of the
King’s beard. In commemorating the 40th year of King
Charles’ reign a long pictorial series of stamps showed among
other pictures Prince Charles saluting the first shot fired at the
Battle of Calafat, the meeting of Prince Charles and Osman
Pasha in 1878, the Roumanian Army crossing the Danube in
1877, the triumphant entry of the victorious army into Bucha-
rest, and Prince Charles riding at the head of his Army in 1877.
344
345


Italy has given us commemoration portraits of Garibaldi {Figs.
344, 345), and its war with Turkey in 1911 extended the use
of the overprinted Italian stamps of Tripoli {Figs. 346—348).
347
348
346
From the Italian pages of our albums much of the story of
the makings of United Italy may be
learnt chiefly by the absorption into
one of all the separate stamp issuing
stales, Sardinia, Naples, Sicily,
Parma. Modena, Romagna, Tus-
cany, and, although much later, the
States of the Church. The jubilee
of the Union was commemorated by
a set of four fine designs in 1911,
one by Signor A. Sezanne show-
ing {Fig. 349) a sword grasped by
a hand, symbolical of the Italian
Union, and at the sides are branches
of palm in memory of the warriors
who died in the Wars of Independ-
ence.
350
349
351


352
353
Portugal does not offer much war-interest, though plenty of
historical associations, in its postage stamps. The Republic
followed so soon after the assassination of King Carlos that
the stamps with the portrait of the young King Manuel had no
long service without a distinguishing mark to show that the
stamps were issued by the Republican Government {Fig. 350).
These have since given place to a distinctive Republican de-
sign {Fig. 351). It is interesting to note that the Red Cross
Society and the Civilian Rifle Corps in Portugal have a limited
privilege of free postage, for which they use their own special
stamps {Figs. 352, 353).
The postage stamps of Spain introduce us to the revolutionary
element in 1868 in which year Isabella 11. fled to France as
a result of the revolution under Prim and Serrano. That was
in September, and the current stamps were overprinted before
the end of the year with the words HABILITADO POR LA NACION
(authorised by the nation), signifying that they were now being
used under the Provisional Revolutionary Assembly. One of
the forms of overprint reads HALILITADO POR LA JUNTA REVOLU-
CIONARIA. Some of the known overprints did not emanate from
the headquarters of the Provisional Government but were added
at the order of local juntas or revolutionary councils. The
familiar emblematic figure of Spain followed on the stamps
issued on January 1, 1870.
The republican form of government did not last long, and in
1870 the Duke of Aosta, second son of King Victor Emmanuel
of Italy, was chosen King of Spain, now a limited monarchy,
as Amadeus 1., and his portrait was Introduced an the stamps


of 1872-73. The tiny %c. de peseta stamps of the former
year bear a small design of a royal crown.
Changes at this period followed in rapid succession, and
Amadeus failing to make headway as a constitutional Sovereign
resigned his troublesome crown in February, 1873, in favour
of peaceful retirement in Italy. The little stamps aforemen-
tioned were changed under the new government—-this time
another form of republic—to shew a mural crown in lieu of
the royal one, and the portrait of Amadeus gave way to an
emblematic figure Peace in July, 1873. Peace! What most
desire, but few can obtain and keep. Nor was the next stamp
design of Justice (July, 1874) much less wide of the mark.
There were actually in Spain between the revolution of 1868
and the restoration of the house of Bourbon three different types
of republic, the limited monarchy under Amadeus, and a mili-
tary dictatorship. In 1872, too, the
pretender Carlos proclaimed himself
King of Spain, and issued the cele-
brated Carlist stamps from 1873 to
1875. So far as the general issues
of Spanish stamps are concerned,
their changes subsequent to the re-
storation of Alphonso XII., son of
Isabella 11., are free from further
revolutionary changes, but there are
postal war tax stamps of 1874-1879,
and 1898 {Fig. 354).
354
A remarkable instance of planting a bogus set of stamps on
collectors occurred in connection with the Melilla campaign in
1893-1894. In the set there are 53 or possibly 54 varieties,
each for a different detachment of the Spanish forces. The
Inventor of the scheme apparently launched his venture by going
about amongst the troops, sailors, officers, etc., distributing
specimens of the stamps he had conceived in their behoof, and
consequently the appearance of some of the labels on letters
emanating from soldiers and others at the war gave colour to
the supposition that these gaudy labels had been provided by
a generous and otherwise unoccupied government at Madrid.
Of the fifty-three stamps, all except Nos. 1 and 2 are per-
forated. Nos. 1 to 5 are in design of Figs. 355, 356, and
were supposed to have been for the use of the five Army Corps.


355 (1-2)
356 (3-5)
The colours are (1) black frame, arms red and yellow; (2)
blue frame, arms red and yellow; (3) as No. 1 perforated;
(4) as No. 2 perforated; (5) black, red, and orange;
357 (7-35)
358 (36-42)
359 (43)
7-13. One for each Regiment of “ Cazadores ” or Chas-
seurs, the name of the Regiment on each stamp.
14-35. One for each Regiment of Foot, with the name of
a Regiment on each stamp.
36-42. One for each warship, the name of a ship on each
stamp.
43. Commissariat Department.
44. Civil Guard ; a disciplinary Corps, half military, half
police, a la Royal Irish Constabulary.
45. Staff.


361 (45)
362 (46)
360 (44)
365 (49-53)
363 (47)
364 (48)
46. Engineers.
47. Artillery.
48. Medical Staff Corps.
49-53. One for each Fort ; name of the Fort on each stamp.
366
367


368
369
China’s troubles during the Boxer rebellion were reflected
in the stamp album by the “ C.E.F.” stamps of India (see
Chapter II.) and by the use of the stamps of several of the
Powers co-operating in the defence of the Legations. The
revolution of 1912 made its mark in the overprinting of the
Imperial stamps with various republican overprints {Figs. 366,
367) and the revolution when completed was commemorated
by two sets of stamps issued in November 1912; one set
bears the portrait of Dr. Sun Yat Sen in a frame in which are
unripe ears of wheat, and inscribed “ in commemoration of the
revolution ” {Fig. 368) ; the second set bears the portrait of
President Yuan Shi Kai, and in this set the ears of wheat are
ripe, and the inscription reads “in commemoration of the re-
public ” {Fig. 369).
Although not issued in connection with warfare, it may be
noted that the only separate postage stamps of Heligoland
appeared while the island was in British possession (Fig. 369 a).
Since its cession to Germany in 1890 the islanders have used
German stamps.
369a.


CHAPTER IX
THE GREAT WAR OF 1914-1915. CHECK-LIST OF NEW
STAMPS.
AT New Year, 1915 it is too early to show more than
a few of the first philatelic signs of the great world
war which is being waged between
Great Britain, Germany,
France Austria-Hungary,
Russia, Turkey.
Japan,
Belgium,
Serbia,
Montenegro,
But the developments are already full of significance, and
the stamps of each of the countries at war acquire a new interest
in the occasions for their extra-territorial use as the armies invade
the territories of their opponents. At the beginning of August
the Germans invaded France and Belgium, accompanied, or
followed shortly, by field postal organisations, of which few
particulars are yet available. By the middle of August the
French had entered Alsace and German Lorraine, and the
Russians having invaded East Prussia set up posts there in
which they used the current Russian stamps. The British
Expeditionary Force, with its well-equipped Army Postal Ser-
vice, was in France by the 16th. About this period the
Germans Invaded Cape Colony. The Tsar s promise of autonomy
to Poland may ultimately demonstrate its fulfilment in the issue
of new stamps for Poland. France issued its first Red Cross
stamp, and similar war charity stamps have since appeared in
Monaco, French Morocco, Russia, Austria, Hungary, and
Bosnia. Japan s declaration of war, and successful attack on
Kiaochow, probably led to the use of Japanese soldiers’ stamps
(Figs. 201, 202) by the forces engaged, possibly along with
Indian stamps overprinted C.E.F. (China Expeditionary Force,
Fig. 61), for the use of the co-operating British land forces. On
the 26th the British along with the French took Togoland, and
have already issued stamps of the Anglo-French occupation of
that former German colony (Figs. 384-386). Prior to their issue
the British Gold Coast stamps were used in Togo for a time (Fig.
370). Towards the end of the month the bombardment of


370
370B.
370A.
371


Malines destroyed the Belgian State Stamp-printing works, ren-
dering it necessary to create an entirely new series of Belgian
stamps when the Government finds itself In a position to do so.
On the 29th Samoa was taken by the New Zealand forces, and
English stamps have been used there {Fig. 371), and already
a provisional and a definitive set of British Samoa stamps have
appeared {Figs. 382, 383).
German attacks in September on various British and Fr-ench
colonial possessions may in some cases leave philatelic records,
chiefly in the way of war postmarks which may be looked for
from the affairs in Nyasaland, British East Africa, Zanzibar,
German South-West Africa, etc. Postmarks, too, record the
withdrawal of the French Government to Bordeaux {Figs. 153,
156), and the sending of great loyal contingents from Canada
372
373
{Fig. 372) Australia, and New Zealand {Fig. 373). The effect
on stamp issues caused by Turkey s abolition of the capitulations
has already been referred to as rendering a considerable number
of stamp issues obsolete, and this event has been commemorated
on the Turkish issue, which, by the way, was printed in London.
Australia’s capture of German New Guinea and the Bismarck
Archipelago, is already reported to have been followed by the
re-issue of the German colonial stamps of New Guinea (Figs.
370 a, 370 b) with a British “G.R.1.” overprint.
Some postal aspects of the retirement of the Belgian Govern-
ment to Havre in October {Fig. 216) and the issue of German
stamps for Belgium {Fig. 209) have already been referred to.


Turkey’s entry into the war in November may have the effect
of removing Turkey from the list of European stamp-issuing
States, and has already led to the long anticipated proclamation
of a British protectorate over Egypt, and the annexation of
Cyprus. The fall of Tsingtau renders obsolete the German
colonial type of stamp for Kiaochow, although there may have
been some interesting provisional issue here, and also possibly in
the Marshall and Marianne Islands.
All these and many more happenings of the past few months
will leave their traces in new stamps, or in new uses for stamps,
and when at last the enemy shall be vanquished and Peace
reigns once more, one of the most fascinating histones of the
great War will be that recorded in the pages of the stamp
album.
The following is a synopsis, or check list, of distinctive
postage stamps already issued in connection with the war. Issues
reported but not yet seen by or satisfactorily vouched for to the
present writer are not included.
AUSTRIA.
October 4, 1914. War Relief stamps. Current design
adapted {Fig. 258) sold at 2 heller over face-value.
5 heller green.
10 ~ carmine.
BELGIUM.
October 2, 1914. Red Cross Stamps. Lithographed on
white wove unwatermarked paper. Perf. 131/2. White gum.
(a) Head of King Albert {Figs. 210, 211).
sc. green.
10c. red.
20c. purple (cross in red).
{b) Monument design {Figs. 212, 213).
sc. green (cross in red).
10c. red.
20c. purple (cross in red).
BELGIUM (GERMAN ADMINISTRATION).
October, 1914. Current German Empire stamps, over-
printed in black “ Belgien,” and new value in Gothic type
{Fig. 209). Perforated 14, Issued in Brussels.
3 centimes on 3 pfennig, brown.
5 ~ 5 ~ green.
10 ~ 10 ~ carmine.
25 ~ 20 ~ ultramarine.


BOSNIA.
October (?), 1914. War Relief stamps. 5 and 10 heller
stamps of the 1906 issue overprinted 7 and 12 heller, respectively.
7 heller on 5 heller, green.
12 ~ 10 ~ carmine.
FRANCE.
August 18, 1914. Contemporary 10 centimes stamp, sur-
charged “ + 5c.” in red (Fig. 150).
10c. + sc. vermilion.
September 10, 1914. Definitive stamp. Sower design adapted,
inscription reading ” CROIX-ROUGE POSTES (Fig. 151).
10c. + sc. vermilion.
FRENCH MOROCCO.
September 1, 1914. Red Cross stamp. The 10 centimes
“ Rights of Man ” type, already overprinted “ 10,” and native
inscription, further surcharged + 5c.” (Fig. 153).
10c. + sc. red.
HUNGARY!
October, 1914. War Relief stamps. The 5 and 10 filler
“ inundation ” stamps of 1913 overprinted in black in the centre
of the stamp “ Hadi Segely ” (War Relief) and on label at
the foot, obliterating the original inscription, ” Ozvegyeknek es
arvaknak ket filler” (for the widows and orphans two filler)
(Fig. 261).
Seventeen values 1,2, 3,5, 6, 10, 12, 16, 20, 25, 30, 35, 50
and 60 filler, and 1,2, and 5 korona.
INDIA EXPEDITIONARY FORCE.
October, 1914. Stamps of India overprinted I.E.F. in seriffed
type, for use with British troops on the Continent (Figs. 76—85).
Perf. 14.
3p. grey.
J /2a. green.
la. carmine.
2a. mauve.
21/ 2 a. (Die 2) blue.
3a. brown orange.
4a. olive.
Ba. purple.
1 2a. claret.
Ir. green and brown.


MONACO.
October, 1914. Red Cross stamp. Current 10 centimes
stamp of this Principality, surcharged ” + sc” in red (Fig. 132)
10c, + 3c. red.
NEW GUINEA.
October, 1914. Provisional Issue. German Colonial (Ship)
type for DEUTSCH-NEU-GUINEA, overprinted “ G.R.1.” and new
value in English. (Similar to Figs. 374—381.) Perforated 14.
Id. on 3pf., brown.
Id. on spf., green.
2d. on 1 Opf., carmine.
2d. on 20pf., ultramarine.
3d. on 25pf., black and red on yellow.
3d. on 30pf., black and orange on buff.
4d. on 40pf., black and carmine.
3d. on 50pf., black and purple on buff.
Bd. on 80pf., black and carmine on rose.
RUSSIA.
November 26, 1914. War Charity stamps. Surface-printed
at the Russian Imperial State Printing Works on enamelled
surface coloured papers (Figs. 189—192, see frontispiece)
Sold for 1 kopec extra per stamp.
1 (2) kopec.
3 (4) kopecs.
7 (8) kopecs.
10 (11) kopecs.
SAMOA (BRITISH).
September 3, 1914. Provisional Issue. German Colonial
(Ship) type for Samoa overprinted ” G.R.1.” and new value in
English (Figs. 374—381). Wove paper, unwatermarked.
Perforated 14.
375
376
374


378
379
377
381
380
1/2 d. on 3pf. brown.
No fraction bar to “ /%.
Comma after “ G.R.I,
]/ 2 d. on spf. green.
Two small fraction to "/i-
Comma after “ G.R.I,
Id. on lOpf. carmine.
on 20pf. ultramarine.
No fraction bar to /i-
Inverted surcharge.
Comma after “G.R.I,
3d. on 25pf. black and red on yellow.
Double surcharge.
4d. on 30pf. black and orange on buff.
sd. on 40pf. black and carmine.
6d. on 50pf. black and purple on buff.
Double surcharge.
Inverted “9' for 6.
*9d. on 80pf. black and carmine on rose.
Is. on 1 mark carmine.
Error “ 1 shillings.
2s. on 2 marks blue.
3s. on 3 marks violet.
ss. on 5 marks carmine and black.


September 29, 1914. Permanent Issue. New Zealand
stamps overprinted "Samoa” in sans-serij type 2mm, high and
14mm. long. The type of stamp is indicated in brackets {Figs.
382, 383). Orange-red overprints for /id-, 2d., 2Yid.\ and
blue for Id., 6d., and Is. White wove paper. Watermarked
“ N.Z ” single-lined and Star. Perfs. various.
382
383
green (King Edward).
Id. carmine (Dominion).
2d. mauve (King Edward).
2/id. blue (Pictorial).
6d. carmine (King Edward).
Is. vermilion (King Edward).
TOGOLAND (BRITISH ISSUE).
October, 1914. German Colonial stamps for Togo over-
printed "Togo—Anglo-French—Occupation” in three lines
in black {Figs. 384—386). Wove paper, perforated 14.
384
385
386
(a) Surcharged with new value in pence {Figs. 384, 383).
on 3pf. brown (no wmk.).
Id. on spf. green (wmk. lozenges).
( b) Without new value {Fig. 386).


3pf. brown.
spf. green.
lOpf. carmine.
20pf. blue.
23pf. black and red on yellow.
30pf. black and orange on buff.
40pf. black and carmine.
50pf. black and purple on huff.
80pf. black and carmine on rose.
1 mark carmine.
2 marks blue.
TOGOLAND (FRENCH ISSUE).
October, 1914. Similar stamps, but with overprint reading
“ TOGO —OCCUPATION —FRANCO-ANGLAISE, and new value in
French currency.
.03 on 3pf. brown.
10 on spf. green.
lOpf. carmine.
20pf. blue.
25pf. black and red on yellow.
30pf. red and black on buff.
40pf. red and black.
80pf. red and black on rose.
1 mark carmine.
2 marks blue.
TURKEY.
October, 1914. Current stamps (see Figs. 263 et seq.) over-
printed (?) in commemoration of the closing of all foreign post
offices in Turkey, as a consequence of the abolition ot the
Capitulations. The overprint is in two lines of Turkish characters.
5 paras, purple-brown.
10 paras, green.
20 paras, scarlet.
1 piastre, blue.
2 piastres, green and black.
5 piastres, deep lilac.
10 piastres, red-brown.
NOTICE.
[This check list of stamps of the war will be revised. continued and
presented as a supplement which will be given away from time to time
with The Postage Stamp (Id. weekly) of all newsagents or by port 4»- 4d-
per annum from the publishers. S. R. Le Mare. 21 Paternoster Square.
London, E.C.]


APPENDIX.
Egypt—Sudan—Morocco—Military Postcards—Additional Postmarks.
EGYPT.— -An event of the greatest interest to philatelists is the
termination of the suzerainty of Turkey over Egypt, and the
placing of the latter country under British protection. As a
British protectorate, Egypt will be transferred to the British
Empire division of the stamp catalogues, and a greatly increased nterest
will be taken in the postage stamps of the land of the Pharoahs, with
the result that the earlier issues will rise appreciably in value. As
recently as January 8, 1914, a handsome new series of stamps was issued
m hgypt on the anniversary day of the accession of the now deposed
Khedive, Abbas 11. These were not of a commemorative character but
were issued on the anniversary as a compliment to the then reigning
Khedive. 1 hey probably call for no change in the designs under the
new conditions, and as they are denominated in English the present
stamps may be continued in use. But they will
probably be changed in regard to the water-
marked paper on which they are printed, as
the watermarked device is that popularly
known as the ‘‘star and crescent” (Fig. 387).
although modern authorities appear to agree
that the Turkish symbol is not a crescent (vide
p. 87). The new Egyptian flag, under Sultan
Hussein 1., is red with three silver crescents
each enclosing a star, instead of the Turkish
flag with the single “crescent” and star.
Thus although a new form of watermark may
not be deemed necessary, a change to the
387
multiple ’(or as printers term it, the "all-over”)’ watermark" of similar
device would appropriately denote the new regime.
The designs on the fine series of stamps (Figs. 388—397) now current
in hgypt are - 1 millieme, sepia : gyassas or sailing-boats on the Nile;
green: Cleopatra in the garb and head-dress of the goddess Isis’
3m., orange-yellow : the Ras-el-Tin Palace in the Muhammedan quarter
ot modern Alexandria; 4m., vermilion : the Pyramids of Giza; 5m.. lake ;
the bphmx of Giza; 10m., cobalt: the two Colossi of Amenophis 111.
on the banks of the Nile at Thebes; 20m.. olive: the Pylon or Gate-
way to the Karnak Temple; 50m., lilac: the Citadel at Cairo; 100 m
388
389
390


391
392
393
396
395
394
397
slate: the Rock Temple at Abfl Simbel. Ipsambul; 200 m.. marone : the
Aswan Dam, at the first cataract of the Nile. . ... ~ ■
In view of the great future now opening up for British philatelists in
the study and collection of Egyptian stamps, the present writer has com-
pleted a full illustrated history of these stamps for publication in the
-Melville Stamp Books series,” published by Messrs. Stanley Gibbons
Ltd.. 391 Strand (see page 2). This will be issued almost simultaneously
-with the present volume.


An Egyptian stamp which might have been included in the body of
the present work is Fig. 398, a postage-due
stamp issued in 1898. At that time the Egyptian
postal regulations charged 3 milliemes for pre-
paid letters but double that sum (6 milliemes)
for unpaid letters, from or to non-commissioned
officers and men of the Egyptian Army in garri-
son on the frontier, as well as at Suakim and
Tokar; the same tariff was applicable to
soldiers taking part in the Expedition to the
Sudan. In consideration of the fact that such
soldiers would be most frequently in places
where they would be unable to get postage
stamps, the authorities decided that unpaid
letters sent by them should only be liable
398
to the single rate of 3 milliemes instead of the double rate of 6 milliemes.
But as there was no postage-due stamp of 3 milliemes to use in collecting
this sum, it was temporarily permitted to use a 2 millieme stamp, with
half of another 2 milleme stamp divided diagonally, until the surcharged
stamp {Fig. 398) 3 milliemes on 2 milliemes could be prepared and issued.
399
400
40l


APPENDIX.
SUDAN. —The first stamps of the Sudan were created by overprinting
Egyptian stamps in 1897 for use at the Camp Post Office at Wadi Haifa,
and at points south thereof, the overprint reading “SOUDAN and re-
peated in Arabic characters. The first stamps of special design, the
attractive “ camel ” issue, also have military associations, being designed
by Colonel Stanton of the Oxford Light Infantry, depicting a camel
rider, alleged to be a portrait of Slatin Pasha. The rider is carrying
mail, and is armed with a rifle and two spears (Fig. 399). These stamps
were overprinted for use of army officials either with the words OFFiCIAL-
ARMY ”as in Fig. 400, or “Army Service as in Fig. 401. Another
interesting Sudanese military stamp design was used for the military tele-
graph service (Fig. 402).
402
MOROCCO. —Following upon the proclamation of Egypt as a British
Protectorate, it was announced that Great Britain
has recognised the French Protectorate in
Morocco and has adhered to the Franco-
Moroccan Treaty of March 30, 1912. Ihe
French stamps for Morocco (Fig. 403) have now
been overprinted “ PROTECTORAT-FRANCAIS ,
as may be seen by comparing this 10 centimes
value with the same denomination utilised for
Red Cross stamp purposes (Fig. 153). The
change in the status of Morocco may render
the British postal agencies there unnecessary, in
which case the series of British stamps over-
printed “MOROCCO agencies” (Figs. 404 , 4Ui>)
may be rendered obsolete.
404
403
403
125


POSTCARDS and Postmarks, The remaining illustrations, added as
this work is being sent to press, supplement the philatelic records of the
present war, as already outlined in the earlier chapters. Fig. 406 is the
original issue of the French military postcard, on thin green card. Fig.
407 is also French, printed on a thicker Silurian card. Fig. 408 is a
German field postcard (medium white) despatched by a British prisoner
of war in the English Lager at Sennelager. A few additional naval
postmarks are also shown (Figs. 409—413). Fig. 409 appears to be in
the design of an “Iron Cross ”( !) Fig. 414 is a mark used by the
censor in handling registered mail, and 415 is on correspondence originating
at a depot for convalescent horses. Figs. 416—420 are various types of
censor marks. No. 419 being a Dutch one on a letter posted at Maas-
tricht. At the time of going to press we have noted British military
censor marks up to No. 1739. We are also able to state definitely that
Fig. 85b (Chapter II .) is a field postmark of the Indian Expeditionary
Force in France.
407


408
409
410
411
414
412


413
415
416
417
418
419
420


ON ACTIVE BUSINESS.
Announcements of the chief philatelic firms, dealers, societies,
etc., carrying on “business as usual” during the war will be
found in the following pages, as indexed below :
Page
Bridget & Kay, ------- xxiii.
Bright & Son, ------- xiii.
Charles Davies, ------- xxviu.
David Field, ------- iv.
M. Giwelb, ------- xxvi.
Frank Godden, ------- ii.
Hugo Griebert & Co., - - - - - xi.
Grover & Co., Ltd., ------ vu.
W. Hadlow & Son, ------ xxiv.
Harmer, Rooke & Co., ------ xxxi.
Edwin Healy & Co., ------ xxx.
W. Houtzamer, ------- xxxii.
J. W. Jones, ------ cover ii.
Eugene Klein, - - - - ■ * " xxvii.
J. Louis, ------- - xib
H. M'Craight, ------- xxx.
Victor Marsh, ------- xxi.
Lewis May & Co., ------- xxviii.
Fred. J. Melville, ------- xxiv.
New England Stamp Co., - - - - • - ’ lx ‘
Charles Nissen & Co., xv.
D. Ostara, ------- - xx -
Otterdale Stamp Exchange. ----- xxix.
P. L. Pemberton & Co.. cover iii.
B. W. H. Poole, XVI -
Postage Stamp, The, - - - - ' " X-
Printex Co., Ltd., ------- v-
Record Press, The, ------ viii.
R. Roberts, ------- hi.
A. C. Roessler, - - - - - - ' xxvL
H. Ross-Shiells & Co., ------ xxv.
F. B. Smith. coCet ! v -
Stamp Lover, The, - - - - ' ' ' X * V-
B. B. Waitt, - - - - ' ' xviii -
Waterlow Bros, and Layton, Ltd., -
Whitfield King & Co., - - - - ' ' xv ["-
W. T. Wilson, x,x '
Winch Bros., xu -
Wood & Son, XXIU
J


o u u o
OOOCOOOoooooooooooooooooOOOOOO
For Anything
APPERTAINING TO
Phi lately
WRITE
CALL
or
PHONE
Frank Godden
359 STRAND.
COLLECTIONS AND SINGLE RARITIES
PURCHASED FOR PROMPT CASH.
EXPERTS
in Transferring and Arranging Collections.
Telephone : Regent 3522.
0000000000000000000000000000000


R. ROBERTS,
Dealer in Rare Stamps,
148 Wellmeadow Road, Catford, S.E.
(Over 17 years with W. H. Peckitl, late of The Strand.)
RARITIES AND NEW ISSUES
Write for free list of the Rare King George
Provisional issues of Colonial stamps with
WHITE BACKS.
RED CROSS STAMPS
France, 10c. + 5c., surcharged Provisional, 4d. each.
10c. + 5c., inscribed, - - 3d. ~
Monaco, 10c. + 5c., surcharged, - 3d. ~
Belgium, sc. and 10c. small type, g 2
~ sc. and 10c. large type, J
And other War Provisionals in stock.
WANTED TO PURCHASE
Old Collections and Single Rare Stamps.
LISTS OF WANTS SOLICITED.
Telephone : Lee Green, 699.


Wanted to Purchase.
Collections : Rarities and 20th Century Colonials.
& $
For Sale.
Stamps from Id. to £5OO each.
Stock Books.
300 Large Stock Books to choose from (Great Britain, 18 vols.).
Approval.
My series of Approval Booklets contain an endless variety of charming
specimens.
<s><s> <£>
to the Medium Collector.
n
Ask for rny “ Pink ” Books : 5° P er cent, discount off catalogue
prices, condition perfect.
<s> <S> <&
Sets of Stamps,
At half to one quarter catalogue rates.
20th Century Stamps.
One of the finest stocks of 20th Century Colonials existing.
Published as Usual.
“The West End Philatelist” 1/6 per annum {l2 numbers), post free.
$> <2> &
D. FIELD,
4 and 5 The Royal Arcade, Old Bond Street,
Telephone 918 Regent. LONDON, W.


THE IDEAL STAMP
CC?
Ya
*
&
$
0
H
<
x
3
&
to
SK
s
$
O
35
•-*:
a
WAS PRINTED FROM PLATES PRODUCED BY
THE PRINTEX PROCESS
capable of reproducing in ABSOLUTE IDENTITY any number of
original copies of any subject at a minimum of cost in time, labour,
and material. Suitable for postage stamps, poster stamps, and all
classes of printing. For particulars address :
PRINTEX COMPANY, Ltd.,
CENTRAL HOUSE.
KINGSWAY.
Telephone—
LONDON, W.C. REGENT ]SI3-


THE IDEAL STAMP
31
'■O'
Va
£
o
<
x
£
a
£
Co
Sr
V
s
$
O
/
i
d
WAS PRINTED BY THE HISTORIC FIRM OF
WATERLOW BROS.
AND LAYTON, LTD.
MANUFACTURERS OF ADHESIVE POSTAGE AND
REVENUE STAMPS TO THE BRITISH GOVERNMENT
SPECIALISTS IN THE PRINTING OF STAMPS AND
BANK NOTES BY THE TYPOGRAPHICAL, INTAGLIO,
AND LITHOGRAPHIC PROCESSES,
BIRCHIN LANE, LONDON, E.C.
Telephone ; AVENUE 5820.
Chief Manufacturing Premises :
BROKEN WHARF, UPPER THAMES ST., E.C.
Telephone : CITY 717 {3 lines);
ALSO AT
40, KING STREET, COVENT GARDEN, W.C.
Telephone : GERRARD 2955.


THE IDEAL STAMP
«
*o*
$
M
Ta
£
%
0
h
rt
<
X
%
a
*
N
s
*
o
14
Enlarged Reproduction of the “ Ideal” Stamp.
Was Perforated on Machines constructed by
GROVER g? CO., Limited.
Britannia Engineering Works,
Carpenter’s Rd., Stratford, LONDON, E.
(Late of Wharf Road, City Road, London, N.)
Makers of all kinds of Special Machinery for the
production of Stamps in sheets or reels, and
Perforating Machinery of every description for all
materials. Makers to the British Government.
Telephone—
Stratford, 984 and 985.
Telegrams—
‘Adopted, Strat, London.'


Stamp Illustrations.
The Best, and at the Most Moderate Cost.
IF you require process or reproduction work in connection with
the illustrating of stamp catalogues, journals, or other publica-
tions, we can supply you with the very best line or tone work
at very reasonable rates.
Of our ability to offer you the best service in this respect we need
only state, ijvith the kind permission of Mr. Fred. J. Melville, that
we supply most of the fine process work which appears in
“THE STAMP LOVER,”
admittedly the best illustrated stamp magazine,
“ THE POSTAGE STAMP,”
“The Melville Stamp Books,”
and we have made the majority of the
numerous illustrations in the present volume,
“The Postage Stamp in War.”
We are under bond, as required by the regulations of the
Commissioners of Inland Revenue, and are fully acquainted with
the requirements of the regulations of the Board in regard to
illustrating stamps.
We also undertake all kinds of photographic and process work.
THE RECORD PRESS,
29 Fetter Lane, Fleet Street, London, E.C.
Telephone ;
Central 2781.
Telegrams :
“Typolite, London.’


Do You Want to Sell?
Having the finest clientele among purchasers of rare
stamps, we offer our services to European collectors
:: :; :: who wish to :: :: ::
Sell at Auction in America.
Boston is one of the leading auction markets in America, and
Catalogues go to collectors all over the United States and Canada,
it should be remembered that auctions in America are conducted
somewhat differently from those in England in that very many of
the buyers are collectors, so that in many cases much higher prices
are obtained.
We shall be pleased to undertake the sale of several fine collections
this season and can promise the best service in America with
prompt settlement.
Our commission charge is 10%. Any owner desiring to group his
own lots may do so, in which case the commission is 10%, with
a minimum charge of 50c. (2/-) for each lot.
We have handled some of the largest collections ever sold in
America. Established 1894. References : Mr. Melville or anv
of the large London dealers, with most of whom our management
is personally acquainted.
New England Stamp Company
12 Bromfield Street, BOSTON, MASS., U.S.A.


The Postage Stamp
ONE PENNY WEEKLY.
EDITED BY FRED. J. MELVILLE.
All the philatelic news of the War is promptly
recorded in “The Postage Stamp,” which is the
RECOGNISED NEWSPAPER
OF THE STAMP WORLD.
If you are interested in War Stamps write to “The Postage
Stamp” for a specimen copy.
If you are interested in War Postmarks, Censor Marks,
Prisoners of War Letters, etc., get “The Postage Stamp ”
every week.
If you are serving with His Majesty’s Forces at Home
or Abroad, write your name, rank, and regiment, battery,
or ship to “The Postage Stamp” to be enrolled on the roll of
PHILATELISTS IN KHAKI AND BLUE.
"The Postage Stamp” can be had through any newsagent for
1 d. a week, or will be sent post free to any address for 4/4 a year.
THE POSTAGE STAMP,
21 PATERNOSTER SQUARE, LONDON, E.C.


ALL COLLECTORS who subscribe to
“ Griebert’s Philatelic
Notes and Offers,
Subscription : 1/- for six numbers, post free,
may obtain all newly issued
British Colonial Stamps at 10% above face value.
NO CASH DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
Details of our ]\f ew I ssu e Service
sent GRATIS to all Collectors.
The following NEW STOCK BOOKS
are ready for inspection, or can be sent for inspection :
Great Britain (7 vok),
All British Colonies in Africa,
All British Colonies in America,*
Egypt, Abyssinia, Belgian Congo, Argentine Republic (2 vols.), Mexico (2 vols.)’
Chile, Uruguay (2 vols.), Peru (2 vols.), Bolivia, Brazil (3 vols.), U.S.A.
(3 vols.), Colombian Republic (3 vols Sonora, etc. Others in preparation.
Valuable Collections (either General or Specialized) purchased
for Ready Cash up to any amount.
HUGO GRIEBERT ® CO.,
170 STRAND, LONDON. W.C.
Awarded Twelve Gold, etc., Medals at various International Philatelic Exhibitions.
Telegrams—“GßlEßEßT, LONDON.” Established over 28 years.


THE WAR
Having temporarily dislocated
our large Continental business
WE CAN GIVE
Special Attention to any Enquiries
from HOME and COLONIAL Buyers,
And our Huge Stock is at their disposal.
SPECIAL BARGAIN LIST OF DESIRABLE STAMPS.
GREAT BRITAIN, COLONIAL, FOREIGN, ADHESIVES,
ENTIRES, FISCALS,
All at REDUCED PRICES. Selections against references or deposit.
WINCH BROS.,
COLCHESTER. (Estab. 1870.)
Env. and Wrappers, Mulready, Stage Coach Letters, etc.
WAR ON HIGH PRICES
AS USUAL.
J. LOUIS,
20 MOORGATE STREET,
LONDON, .. EC.
A fine selection of Stamps always on view, or sent on approval
to responsible applicants.


Free! Free! Free!
FRANCE 10 + sc. RED CROSS STAMP
MONACO 10 + sc. RED CROSS STAMP
These two interesting War stamps are given free to all purchasers
of the “Red Cross” Packet, No. E 210, containing 110 different
stamps (catalogued by Gibbons at about 1 6/-), which includes the
following U.S.A. “Postal Savings” (s.g. 9d.), Union of S.
Africa (s.g. Bd.), Unused 2d. New Hebrides, Canada Bc.
Queen’s Head (s.g. Bd.), Rare Hyderabad (s.g. 2/-), Gwalior
Service (cal. 4d.), Philippine Is. Revolutionary Stamp (cat. 6d.),
a set of 3 Jhind Service (cat. s.g, 2/-), and other stamps.
Price only 1/-, postage free. (Only one to each applicant).
10th EDITION A B C. CATALOGUE—
“Part /.—(The World’s Stamps). 930 pp. 7000 Illustrations.
Price, 2/6. Post Free, 2/10.
Part //.—(The Entire Envelopes, Postcards, etc., of the
World). 400 pp. Price, 2/-. Post Free, 2/3.
BOTH PARTS BOUND TOGETHER, 1300 PP
Price, 4/-. Post free, 4/4. Abroad, 4/7.
SPECIAL BARGAIN PACKETS.
50 different French Colonials,
100
100
200
300
300
1000
British ~
Foreign and Colonial Stamps,
- I s 6d
- , 3s Od
1 s 6d
5s Od
-10 s 6d
3s Od
9s Od
New Issue Service at 10% over face value.
WRITE FOR PARTICULARS.
40 PAGE LIST OF NOVELTIES, Sets, Packets, and all
Philatelic .Accessories, post free on application.
SELECTIONS of any country sent ON APPROVAL.
WHOLESALE LIST, for DEALERS only, just
published, post free on application.
BRIGHT & SON, SS"


The Stamp Lover
ORGAN OF THE JUNIOR PHILATELIC SOCIETY.
Edited by Fred. J. Melville.
®
This beautifully illustrated monthly magazine gives the fullest
illustrations and most complete record of all
WAR STAMP ISSUES
WAR POSTCARDS
WAR POSTMARKS
WAR ENVELOPES
CENSOR MARKS , etc., etc.
This is the British stamp magazine that is going on as usual,
without reduction in size, and without reduction of its finely
illustrated NEW issue CHRONICLE. It is not necessary to subscribe
to “The Stamp Lover” —you can get it post free by joining
THE JUNIOR PHILATELIC SOCIETY
the largest philatelic society in the world (annual subscription, 2/6).
The Society’s Blue Book, together with specimen copy of
“The Stamp Lover,” application form for membership, etc.,
can be had free from the Hon. Secretary—
RALPH WEDMORE.
54 Park Road, West Dulwich, London, S.E.


Postage Stamps of War.
Finest Stock in the World of
BRITISH WAR
POSTMARKS
CRIMEA. EGYPT.
ABYSSINIA. SOUTH AFRICA. ‘Sc.
Naval and Military Cancellations of the present
European War.
Approval against deposit or references.
Great Britain
A SPECIALITY. price list free.
Specimen copy of the “ BRITISH PHILATELIST
(1/6 per annum), post free, on application to
CHAS. NISSEN ® CO.,
65, High Holborn, LONDON, W.C.
‘Uelephone : Holborn 5181.


=MEXICO=
The Land of the War Stamp ! !
THE stamps issued in the Sovereign State of Sonora by the Con-
stitutionalist Government during the last two years are of absorb-
ing interest. Their status has been fully established and they
form a series without parallel among 20th century emissions.
They consist of crude type-set labels, various overprints on the Federal
stamps, and stamps of distinctive designs. All are of the greatest
interest and the time to buy is NOW while they may still be obtained
at reasonable prices. I have a very fine stock of most issues, including
unused, used, and covers. Selections priced at lowest possible quotations
will be gladly sent to collectors known to me in any part of the world,
or to any reader of this handbook furnishing satisfactory references.
SPECIAL OFFERS.
First issue. Type-set. Black and red. Entire sheet of ten
2c. unused (cat. 52/- in Scott), ... ... ... price 307-
First issue 10c. used. A scarce variety, ... ... 12/-
Second issue. Type-set. Black, red, and green. Ic., 3c.,
and 10c. Set of three, used, ... ... ... ‘ 67-
Second issue, with black roulette. Ic., 2c., 3c., and 5c.,
set of four, all used and fine, ... ... ... 4/-
The rare Torreon sc. unused (only 300 issued), ... ... 10/-
Federal 4c. overprinted "G.C.M” in green; very rare, ... 3/-
Bertram W. H. Poole,
Philatelic Expert and Stamp Dealer,
616 W. P. Story Bldg., LOS ANGELES, Calif., U.S.A,


Business as usual. No publications suspended or delayed.
NOW READ "V.
THE FIFTEENTH (1915) EDITION OF THE
STANDARD CATALOGUE
OF POSTAGE STAMPS
592 pages. 4244 illustrations.
Complete and up-to-date.
Price. 2/- post free.
Superior edition, interleaved with white paper for M.S. notes, 3/G
The Monthly Philatelic Novelty List
contains quotations for all new issues received during the month,
notices of corrections and alterations of catalogue prices, and sundry
interesting “ Notes and News.” Sent free to all subscribers to our
New Issue Service, or to non-subscribers on payment of the postage
only—6d. per annum.
Our New Issue Service
is the oldest established and the most complete ; it embraces the
stamps of all Foreign Countries as well as British Colonials. Write
for explanatory circular and order form.
The “Paragon” and “Acme” Albums
are the pioneers of the spring-back system, and are still the best.
The “Standard” Albums,
fully illustrated, spaces numbered to correspond with catalogue.
All our Albums are guaranteed to be of British Manufacture.
Write for our 100-page price list, in two parts, sent free on request.
WHITFIELD KING® CO., Ipswich
K
ESTABLISHED 1869.


SELECTIONS of Rare Stamps (many unused and
mint). Any country sent on approval at Bd.
in the 1/- discount off catalogue prices (save
those unused which would thereby come to less than
face value). — B. B. WAITT, 83 Mildred Avenue,
Watford, England


War Stamps and Envelopes.
_
I HAVE A LARGE AND VARIED STOCK OF THESE,
including:—
France.
Red Cross Stamps on and off the covers, Balloon Post Letters of
the 1870 War, rare Military Postmarks of the 1914 War.
Germany.
War Censored Envelopes-
Great Britain.
Naval and Military Postmarks in great variety —“ Prisoners of War,”
“ Interned in Holland,” etc., etc.
Gold Coast.
Stamps used provisionally in Togoland after the Anglo-French
occupation, also the Togoland “Occupation” Stamps (on German
Togo) unused and used on covers.
India.
The China Expeditionary Force Stamps, unused and used on cover,
with Field Post Office obliterations. The 1914 Indian Ex=
peditionary Force Stamps, unused and used.
Boer War.
Envelopes in great variety.
I specialise in the KING GEORGE Stamps
overprinted for the Indian Convention States,
of which complete collections can always he
furnished.
The 1915 SCOTT CATALOGUE, 4/- post free.
Choice Approval Books of Great Britain and Colonies, Europe,
and Mexico are always available.
Price Lists Free on request. Speciality—Stamps on Original Covers.
W. T. WILSON,
18 Livingstone Road, Handsworth, Birmingham,
ENGLAND
Telegraphic Address—“ PHILATELY—BIRMINGHAM.


D. OSTARA,
24 Corporation Street, Manchester.
Telephone 5776 City. Telegrams—“ Ostara, Manchester.”
Established 1884. Over 20 years at same address.
Large and select stock of the Old Classical Issues.
Hundreds of Stockbooks ready to send out on
approval to responsible applicants at usual 50%
below catalogue. Periodical Auction Sales frequently
held. Write for terms and catalogue. ——
A Few Special Bargains. (Postage extra.)
Send list of wants. Satisfaction guaranteed.
References required.


Philatelic Libraries
THE possession of a library is a necessity to the “live” philatelist,
whether he be amateur or professional. He must possess all' the
really useful books and periodicals published on philately. Know-
ledge is power, and useful publications are cheap. Money thus
spent should not be regarded as an expense—it is capital sunk which reaps a
rich harvest. Are you a “live’’ philatelist ? Do you know of the multitude
of useful publications that exist ? Write for my lists—they give useful
information, and are supplied free. During the past few years 1 have made
many large purchases, some of them tons in weight, and my prices are most
moderate. Possibly you don’t care to pay £lO, £2O, or £5O down—well.
I’ll accommodate you if your credit is good. You can pay quarterly out of
income and spread your payments over three years without any extra
charge whatever. This offer only applies to pre-arranged purchases of £lO
upwards, and for “ useful ” periodicals and separate works only, I am
somewhat short of publications issued before 1880, and for these, if in good
condition, I pay a good premium on the prices at which they are published.
1 need these for a library entrusted to my formation.
Perhaps you have the taste of the book lover —if so, your craving has a
rich field for exploration, richer, indeed, than that of any other existing hobby.
Quite apart from acquiring useful knowledge, you can enjoy philatelic
sentiment, you can dip into the past and reconstruct the world of philately in
its earliest days, with its interesting characters and happenings. You can
pause or linger over choice examples of the earliest catalogues, manuals, and
periodicals from which the world of philately was fashioned. Sometimes you
will find the autographed signature of some well-known philatelist whose name
lies enshrined in the annals of the past as one of the small band that studied and
fought out philatelic battles while the light shone dimly. I claim to have the
largest business in the world of library formation. My stock is large, and 1
can supply therefrom libraries up to £lOOO each, really worth the money.
Why not give the matter a thought—and act ?
Write to
VICTOR MARSH,
Lists Free. I The Dealer in Philatelic Literature, | Lists Free.
389 BRIXTON ROAD, LONDON, S.W., Eng .


WOOD & SON, Perth
For years we have made
Philatelic Printing a : ; : :
speciality, and this pub-
lication is an earnest of
our work. : ; :r 1 : :
WOOD ® SON,
PH;I LATE Lie - PRINTERS,
62 High Street, PERTH.
Works, - - 5 MILL STREET.
We print The Stamp
Lover and the Melville
Stamp Books. May we
have your next enquiry ?
WOOD & SON. Perth


Wanted to Purchase
We are still desirous of purchasing rare stamps and
collections for immediate cash. Collectors wishing to
realise should submit their collections. We pay good
prices for fine collections, but at present the more
ordinary stamps are only required if cheap. Kings
Head Colonial collections purchased.
For Sale
We have several small specialised collections for sale
at reasonable prices, and are constantly purchasing
fresh ones. Collectors starting to specialise should write
to us stating the country in which they are interested.
Recent Purchases
We have recently spent very large amounts, and have
an exceptionally fine stock of all countries for disposal,
including most rarities. Latest purchases include;—Fine
collection of African (all countries), Ceylon, British
Guiana, Cape, etc., etc. Want lists filled, or any country
priced up and sent on application to responsible collectors.
Most of our stock books have lately been rearranged,
and at present contain very complete selections.
Priced Catalogue of British Colonial Stamps Free
I- _
B. & K. ITEMS. —Gratis. Gives particulars of
recent purchases and special offers. Also prices for
most 20th Century Colonial issues.
BRIDGER & KAY,
71 FLEET STREET, LONDON, E.C.


Wm. Hadlow Son
Philatelic Dealers and Commission Agents,
GROVE PARK. LEE. KENT.
Bankers—London County and Westminster.
Telephone: Lee Green 91. Established over 30 years.
Books of stamps arranged in catalogue order of any country sent on
approval. Especially nice books of Australians, India and
States (including the very interesting series of the native issues),
Siam, Turkey, Greece, Belgium, France, Brazil, Peru,
Mexico, etc., etc. A nice series of books of mixed stamps (no
rubbish).
DISCOUNT —5O per cent, off marked prices.
Agents to the North British and Mercantile Fire and Life
Insurance Co.
Agents to the Railway Passengers Assurance Co.
Collections & Duplicates bought for cash or good exchange
WAR STAMPS
JND POSTMARKS
Mr. Fred. j. Melville, the author of this
book, will be glad to hear from collectors and
others of any new issues of war stamps, or any new
postmarks in use with any of the forces engaged
in the present conflict. When possible examples
or tracings should be submitted, and will be care-
fully returned to their owners; or new stamps,
post-cards, envelopes, and wrappers bearing
war marks will be purchased if offered for
sale at reasonable prices.
All news of stamp interest will be welcomed
by Mr. Melville in his capacity as Editor of
The Stamp Lover, The Postage Stamp, etc.
Please Address—
FRED. J. MELVILLE,
14 Sudbourne Road, Brixlon, London, S.W.
Telephone : Brixton 2022.


Selections on Approval.
Series A. —Attractive stamps in fine condition usually sold
at Id. each.
Books contain 120 stamps from which you may select
any 15 for 6d.
any 40 for 1/-
or entire book of 120 stamps for 2/6.
Series B. —Similar to A, but better, at double above rates.
(7 for 6d.).
Series C.— A still better class of attractive stamps, at double
rates of B.
Series D. —The most saleable class of stamps, such as higher
value King Edward and King George Colonials and
Old Colonial and Foreign, in very fine condition, marked
separately, at lowest net prices.
Series E. —Good stamps, priced according to Gibbons’ latest
catalogues, with a discount of Bd. in the 1/- (suitable
for re-selling at half catalogue).
Series F. —Stamps in not quite fine enough condition for our
other books. Priced very low, with further discount
of Bd. in the 1/-.
In each class we have books of Colonial only, Foreign only,
and Colonial and Foreign together.
Send for any book you would like to see. You will
be more than satisfied. Wholesale quotations free.
H. ROSS - SHIELLS & CO.,
4 ELDON STREET, LONDON, E.C.
Telephone—London Wall, 4822.


‘PLEASE 5\[OTE
7 hat my stock consists of picked copies
of the stamps of the I 9th Century only.
I don’t publish Price Lists, but send out selections of
stamps of any country or colony desired and so submit
the stamps themselves, which is, I think, much more
satisfactory, as the purchaser can see there and then
what he is buying. I have done Business in this way
now over 30 years and it has always worked very
satisfactorily. Want Lists are my speciality and
will receive prompt attention. New applicants will
kindly furnish me with reliable references.
M.
Established IsB2. 54 STRAND , LONDON , England.
Vhe War- =
ON HIGH AND UNREASONABLE PRICES
FOR STAMPS STILL CONTINUES IN
“ Roessler’s Stamp News ”
Learn how to get unused British Colonials at 10
per cent, over face ; Foreign at face ; Albums at
If over wholesale cost; latest war issues at
lowest prices; wholesale bargains unobtainable
elsewhere; all this and more for yyur name on
•a postal: (Postal =1 d. to America f.
« L I I AV ; L.!v L‘ zi r-
A. C. RoESSLER, Newark, N.J., U.S.A.


EUGENE KLEIN,
(-_ k >
Member of the Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce.
Member of the Juries of the Chicago 1911 and
New York 1913 International Philatelic Exhibitions. .
Honorary Member of the New York Stamp Society.
Life Member of the Junior Philatelic Society, London,
and the Societe Francaise de Timbrologie, Pans.
If you want to realize quickly on your collection or
single rarities, let me sell them for you at auction in the
ONLY UNAFFECI D STAMP MARKET
OF THE WORLD _======
I hold regular monthly high-grade auction sales, and
can boast of the best results. My charges of 15% of
amount realized include expert and careful handling
and listing of your stamps printing and mailing of
over 2300 well gotten up catalogues to knowi> auction
buyers, and publicly exhibiting the stamps prior to sale in
both New York and Philadelphia, in other words giving
W FIRST-CLASS SERVICE.
1 account and pay in full within thirty days of day of sale.
Send stamps by registered mail; they are duty free.
> ■ • . J v.. *
*•-*' * - ' *”
EUGENE KLEIN.
142 S. 15th St, PHILADELPHIA. PA„ U.S.A.


GREAT BRITAIN.
King George Issues.
APPROVAL BOOKS.
Controls.
Rolls.
Booklets.
Plate Nos.
Watermarks.
Postage Dues.
Levant.
Shades and Varieties.
Joins and Printed Ends.
Shades, Watermarks, etc.
Somerset House Printings.
3d. and Id. values,
Somerset House & Harrison, including Controls,
Controls, Shades, etc.
WAR CARDS AND COVERS.
CHARLES DAVIES, Frodsham, Cheshire,
w, a» r
To purchase all kinds of Loose Stamps
and Collections for cash. Send on
approval, or call and get our offer.
LEWIS may ® CO..
15 King William St., Charing Cross, W.C.
Telepone: 6083 Gerrard.


16 YEARS AGO,
Otterdale Stamp Exchange
was founded by the present Secretary—during the
whole of that period Packets have been sent out every
month without a break, and no sheet has ever been lost.
WHY NOT JOIN A SAFE CLUB?
WAR RISKS —all Otterdale packets are fully insured at Lloyds.
Membership includes the free use of a splendid Philatelic Reference Library
containing practically every standard work, and a Forgery Collection of
about 1600 specimens.
Secretary and Founder :
G. HERBERT DANNATT. F.R.P.SrL.,
■ “LYNDALE,” BLACKHEATH, S.E.
Bankers:
London County and Westminster (Greenwich Branch).
NOTE
GERMAN STAMPS overprinted for use during
the temporary occupation of BELGIIjM will not
• be circulated in the Otterdale,


RARE BRITISH COLONIALS.
' A very fine stock at reasonable prices can be inspected af
428 STRAND, W.C. (First Floor), near Charing Cross.
Collections Bought to any extent or Sold on Commission,
During 1914-15 we negotiated the sale of the famous
Crawford Collection of British Stamps for £16,000,
and the Peltzer Collection of African for £ll,OOO.
Cash in each case. We have buyers for anytding
of the same kind. Promptness guaranteed.
Publishers of the Royal Album for British & British Colonials,
The Best Album at the Lowest Price. - -5/- and upwards.
Up-to-date. Full particulars free.
Catalogue of British and British Colonials, 6d., post free.
Price List of Sets, Packets, and Albums, post free and gratis
EDWIN HEALEY @ CO.,
14 Wormwood St., Old Broad St., E.C., and 428 Strand, W.C.,
LONDON. -A_
Established at same address over 30 Years.
1000 Different British Colonials
ON APPROVAL.
This magnificent range of stamps, all in fine condition and without
minor varieties, neatly mounted in bound book, will be sent on
approval to any responsible collector. A selection of any stamps
required may be made from same on the following economical terms :
any 50 may be selected for 8/-; 100, 14/6; 150, 20/-; 200, 25/3;
250, 30/-, and so forth up to 70/- for the whole collection. The average
price of the stamps being well under ONE PENNY EACH, it will be
seen that an important and serviceable addition to any collection may be
made at the most moderate possible cost. Please write for the collection
at once; if it contains no specimens you need, just return it and the
transaction is concluded. Best buyer of stamps and collections—consign-
ments solicited.
H. McCRAIGHT, 60 Honiton Road, Southend-on-Sea.


STAMP AUCTION SALES,
Messrs. Harmer, Rooke & Co.
Stamp Auction Specialists,
69 FLEET STREET, LONDON,
Hold Auction Sales of Postage Stamps Twice Weekly
(Alternate Wednesdays and Thursdays and each Saturday).
Lots can be viewed at offices daily, and distant buyers unable to
personally attend can have lots purchased for them and
valuations furnished free of charge.
advice gratis.
Messrs. Harmer, Rooke & Co. have held 700 sales during the past
14 years, and sold quarter of a million lots. Collections broken up and
arranged for auction free of charge. Terms on application.
Photograph of our Auction Room, taken at the 600th Sale.


I hold one of the Finest Stocks of
Rare and Medium Stamps in Europe.
MY SPECIALITIES ARE :
High-class Selections of Stamps of all Countries, and
Filling of Want Lists according to any Catalogue.
Owing to my systematic and continual fresh purchases,
serious collectors have a good opportunity of acquir-
ing “hard to get” stamps at moderate prices.
FOR SPECIALISTS : Interesting Items in Great Variety.
In order to show my Low Prices, I offer the following, all in fine condition;
* =unused and mint.
British East Africa.
Belgian Congo.
Holland and Colonies.
A choice lot, with nearly all the rarities of
perforation and types.
Europeans.
The finest stock in Great Britain,
in magnificent condition.
France and Colonies.
A choice lot, with many rarities.
Portuguese Colonies.
A choice lot. practically complete,
used and unused.
WANT LISTS SOLICITED.
W. HOUTZAMER,
368 Strand, London, England.
(Formerly of THE HAGUE, HOLLAND.)
Member of the Junior Philatelic Society, Stamp Trade Protection Association, &c., &c.


WAR STAMPS.
Indian Expeditionary Force.
USED BY THE INDIAN ARMY IN FRANCE.
INDIAN STAMPS OVERPRINTED I.E.F. All mint.
3 pies grey, '
i anna green.
1 rupee green and brown, - 2/3
Full set of ten, 6/6
We have also many other War Stamps, War Postmarks, and
Curious Envelopes in stock. Let us have your want lists.
WANTED FOR CASH.
WAR STAMPS of all kinds, especially Togoland, Samoa,
Belgian Red Cross. :: :: Also War Postmarks.
For complete chronicle of all philatelic war novelties
see the Philatelic Journal of Great Britain.
SPECIMEN COPY FREE.
P. L. PEMBERTON & CO.,
151 STRAND. LONDON, W.C.
Telephone ; Central 6647.
ADVERTISEMENTS.


EiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiHiiiHiiiHiiiiiiiniitiiHiiiitiiiiiiiNiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiimimHiig
•piBJUSQ Site g
= *3 AV ‘MOGNOI
= ‘QMVHIS ZSV
hiiws a j
•S3JPUBA AjßUipjO 3l|J JO AIXBIU JOJ J3AO pUB 3nSO|B}BD Jjßq
Asd 9M t SSBJD J34PCJ pUB i9d891J9 91{4 ipOCJ JO JflO
SUIUUIU Aj}UB4SUO9 9JB 9M ‘JSIJ ip9|lU9MJ JHO JO
UOqBjn9JT9 9§JB| Aj9A 9ip 04 SuiMO SB “DJO ‘spß9J_J
J|B JO SJ9JJO 9ABlj 04 p9Bß9|d 9q J|Bt|S *SUOl4D9j[OO
p9Slp3l99ds JOJ pißd S99Ud qSIJ_J ’S3J9O4S SJ9|B9p pUB
| Anq 04 qsiM |
"9UIJ A||Bl99dS 9JB S9ipUJ pUB ÜB9Ujy
3 HJ- C 94UHOABJ jnoA JO UOI4D9[9S B noA pU9S
9M •A|94Bjßd9s p99ud puß dn p94unoui U99q
sbi| siqjL •uoqoojjOD 9ug A49A b p9Sßipjnd Aj94B[
4snf 9ABq -uompuoD posn 9uy ui pire 40101 ipoq
JO S9nssi J9pp 91J4 JO 5U01499J9S 99S 04,
SuiqSlM SJO4D9JJO9 UIOJJ JB9q 04 p9Sß9|d 9q JJBIJS 9^
I sanssj bi |
•SS9jppß AUB 04 99JJ p94SOd 9q JjIAA 4SJj -SSJDO4S
4S9uy 9ip jo 9uo pjoq puß sduiß4S jo Apms b 9pßiu
9ABq '4SIJ 99Ijd 45948 J JHO SUI99S 9JOJ9q OS op 40U
pjnoqs noA ‘s9nssi 9§jooq jio pjßMpg j9ipio
‘uoi4D9j[o9 jnoA ui 9q4 dn jjy 04 qsiM noA jj
| sduiß4§ Ajn4U93 |
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiimniiiiiimiimiiiiS
ADVERTISEMENTS.


SOLDIERS & CITIZENS’
POLITICAL FEDERATION
7th FLOOR. CHALLIS HOUSE
MARTIN PLACE, SYDNEY
I
Phone 7361
Lieut. E. CORTIS (late mining corps) Organising Secretary


OBJECTS
1. To return members to Parliament in sympathy with
Returned Sailors, Soldiers, and their dependents.
2. To serve .the Commonwealth in general by combining
the soldier sentiment of self-sacrifice with that of his citizen
relatives and friends in one united eifort to free Australia
from the paralysis of CAUCUS MACHINE GOVERNMENT.
3 To create a national sentiment worthy of sacrifices
made by those who have fallen and suffered:—so that Aus-
tralia may live with HONOR, SOLVENCY, and PROGRESS.
4. To make Australia safe for Democracy.
NOTE. —The Annual Fee is Is. for Soldier of this or
previous war, Is. for his female relative, and 2s. 6d. for other
members.
Those desirous of paying Is. or more per month towards
the financial operations of the organisation kindly state so on
this form. «


Mr. George Elhington Roddis.
Late Paget's Horse , S. Africa.
17th Battalion, A ./.F.
