

wpr f..
3BT *9P1
y . , j{ jr; •.
yy rrrrrr f HD^
TntJm
sasA
FR.fi
ill] pi:
•jfi
if#
maMi


upon a time there lived a King who thought so much of
himself that he built an enormous castle on top of a high
mountain. When the palace was built he took his daughter and his staff


of servants and, leaving his home in the valley, made his way to
the mountain top where he intended to spend the rest of his life, far
away from the noise and worry of the world.
The mountain that the King had chosen had a very flat top which
was a mile square; the mountain sides were covered with thick pine
trees. The palace was made of gleaming white marble and, if you stood
on the plain below, you could just see its turrets peeping out from
above the trees.
Around the castle grounds the King ordered a twelve-foot wall to
be built, and no one was allowed to leave the palace except specially
selected servants, who went once a week down to the village below to
bring food to the mountain top.
Now the King had no wife but he had one beautiful daughter
whose name was Moonbeam. It seems that when she was born the
Queen of the Moon Country had come to her christening and given
her the gift of great beauty and, as the Princess grew older she became
lovelier and lovelier. She had pale golden hair like moonbeams and big
dark eyes like the sky on a clear warm night. Moonbeam was one of the
reasons why the King had decided to go and live away from his
fellows he was so jealous of her beauty that he was determined that
no other eyes except his should gaze upon it.
All day long the Princess lived in a special room that had been
made for her in the castle tower, and here she sat spinning cloth as
fine and beautiful as rainbow spider's web, and dreaming dreams. Some-
times she would sit and gaze across the top of the trees on to the plain,
and watch the white gleaming road that ran in and out beside a river.
Sometimes she saw little black objects that were like ants, and she
knew that these were the people who lived in the world far removed
from the lonely mountain.
When the Princess was seventeen the King thought that it was time
that she was bethrothed and he said to himself, "She must marry some-
one who will agree to come and live up here, then when I am dead
he can rule my land from this castle," and he began to think of all the
princes he knew.
He said to his daughter, "They are such common people on the
plains, my dear, you wouldn't like them at all." You see the King had


1 L —*-r
! " [ -
t
begun to like his solitary life so much
that he couldn't bear the thought
of leaving it!
And the Princess murmured duti-
fully, "No father, of course you are
right," but there was a wistful look
in her eyes. The dark pines hao
grown very tall against the castle
walls and the windows were so
covered that inside was always a
gloomy kind of darkness. The Prin-
cess's pale hair was the only bright
gleaming thing to be seen.
Then the King told her about his
plans for her marriage, and her eyei
suddenly shone until he said that her
husband would, too, live on the
mountain top. She had suddenly
had a glimpse of another life down
where the sun shone brightly and
where one could hear the merry pea!
of bells and the laughter of the
common people.
The very next day when the
Princess was walking in her own small
walled garden a curious thing hap-
pened the privacy of the castle
was invaded! Hearing a noise and
looking up startled, she saw a merry
face peering at her over the top of
the wall. It was a man's face. But
it was the smile of his face that sur-
prised the Princess most of all.
Nobody ever smiled on the mountain
top. Suddenly she smiled back at
him.


"You are the Princess Moonbeam," he said springing on to the
ground beside her. "i come from the plains below, and am Prince of
the River country."
"But however did you get here?" she asked him, for she knew how
tortuous was the path to the mountain top through the thick pine
forest and he had jumped the twelve-foot wall as though it were a
mere nothing!
"I came to find you, princess," he said, bowing low. "The fame of
your beauty has spread far and wide, and it is rumoured in the valley that
your father would have you bethrothed. I come many miles to ask for
your hand in marriage." ■
But the Princess shook her head. "|t is impossible," she said, for,
looking at the fine handsome young man, she suddenly knew that he
would never consent to live in lonely retirement far away from his subjects.
"Nothing is impossible if you want it enough," he replied, and
kissed her hand.
But the Princess was very sad, for she knew her father better than
the Prince, with whom she had already fallen in love.
When the King heard the Prince's offer he was very angry, and he
ordered him to be locked in one of the palace rooms and banished from
the mountain top at dawn next morning.
But that night a curious thing happened. As the King was getting
into bed the floor shook so much that he was flung to the floor. Then a
red light tilled the room and a hideous roar rumbled through the whole
castle. A voice said, lam the King of the mountain King Volcano.
What right had you to build your palace on top of my land? I shall
give you until to-morrow evening, and if you are not gone by then I
shall blow your palace to the skies, and with another roar the light
disappeared.
The King was very frightened and he could not sleep, so he went
wandering through the castle coming to the room where they had
imprisoned the Prince. He unlocked the door and went inside. The Prince
was sitting at the window looking into the night. In a trembling voice
the King told the young man what had happened.


"I have heard about King Volcano," said the Prince. "He is very
strong and powerful he could lift your castle and blow it to a thousand
pieces. His subjects are fire and liquid gas. I should advise you to
leave in the morning."
So the next day at sunlight the King and his daughter and ail his
subjects, accompanied by the Prince of the River, left the mountain top
and began the descent to the plain. And the King, once back in his old
castle, permitted the Prince to marry Moonbeam. And they lived happily
ever after. But the Prince has not told anyone not even his wife that
his greatest friend was King Volcano, who came to his aid when he wanted
to marry the Princess.
But whenever you are looking up at a high hill or mountain and see
a white gleaming cloud resting on top it probably isn't a cloud at
all: it may be the empty palace of the King who wanted to live alone!


h yf
if
| iJBBBt |
M | a ii ■ V | J J | J Vf J J 5 [ fcWrjt«3g6<^y
I j + i t ' I Tf * ■ ■ j f I j * | 1
MIPR« f RANCIS S*"^
IF YOU HAVE A PET OF YOUR OWN YOU WILL LOVE THIS STORY
\A7 HEN Eunis first had her cat It was a tiny kitten. It was just a
’ * round ball of grey fluff, with a small red tongue, golden eyes and
an entrancing white shirt front marked under its chin. She had called
it "Aussie" because her uncle, who
was in the A.1.F., had given it to her
before he went overseas
At first Mr. Patterson
, Eunis's
her to have
■ »
\


the cat. "Cats and birds just don't
mix," he had told his daughter. The
Pattersons lived on a farm, and Mr.
Patterson, besides rearing chickens,
had an av ' ar Y of P 0 f birds, and a
IM large number of pigeons.
"But I shall train him not to go near the birds," Eunis had said, hug- *
ging the kitten who looked adorable with a yellow ribbon tied round his
ruff of a neck. "I couldn't give it up," she had gone on tearfully, and
Aussie, who seemed to sense that his fate hung in the balance, jumped


from her arms and ran to Mr. Patterson's legs, where he began to purr
loudly. He seemed to be saying, "Now, do be a sport. I won't eat
your silly old birds."
Eunis's father picked him up, "He's a cunning little fellow," he
announced, his heart beginning to soften; "he may stay Eunis, but"
now his voice grew stern—"the first time I catch him frightening my
birds he'll have to go. Understand?"
The little girl skipped with delight, "Oh, thank you, dad," she said
happily. "I'll look after him," and she did. It took a long time for the
kitten to understand that the cages were out of bounds the cokatoo
especially fascinated him, but every time Eunis caught him near the
chicken house or aviary she gave him a hard slap. He really was a very
intelligent cat, and soon knew where and where not to go.
Every night Aussie went to sleep on the foot of the girl's bed,
although her mother was always saying he mustn't. Mrs. Patterson,
though, was as fond of the cat as her daughter, and she often pre-
tended not to see the sleek grey form curled up on the counterpane.
Aussie was growing from a fluffy kitten into a handsome grey cat
with large golden eyes and a tine arched tail. He was so intelligent
that he came like a dog when his mistress called him, and he was so
affectionate that he began to purr and arch his back before she picked
him up or stroked him. Of course, sometimes he was naughty, but it was
only mischief, and when there was rain about, he would tear like a whirl-
wind round the house clawing at the curtains and sharpening his claws on
the tapestry of the sitting-room furniture. Mrs. Patterson was really
angry then, and demanded that he be put outside and kept there until
he was in a more gentle mood.
Then one day Eunis came home from school full of excitement for
she had heard that there was to be a pet show and she would be able to
enter her pet. She brushed Aussie s coat every night and morning until
it shone like satin, and he looked so sleek and lovely that she was sure
he would win first prize.
Two nights before the Show, she hugged him hard and planted a
kiss between his small pointed ears. Then shs went happily off to sleep,
sure of his success.


' '' ' ''' '' ’ ’’
The next morning when she awoke the first thing she heard was a
loud angry voice coming from the kitchen. It was her father's. Eunis
opened the door and heard him saying, "It must have been Aussie. Two


(* T\
of the young chickens are dead and several of the others look pretty
sick."
Eunis, with a heavy heart, looked quickly towards the bed, and
and there was her pet curled up peacefully sleeping!
She picked up the cat and ran with him in her arms to the kitchen.
As she reached the door her father called out, "That cat of yours,
Eunis he's killed two chickens," and sure enough he held in his hand
two poor little limp yellow bodies. Aussie, frightened at the angry
voice, sprang from her arms, and dashed through the kitchen door into
fhe yard.
"Oh, dad," she was almost crying, "it couldn't have been Aussie.
He's been asleep on my bed all night," she said.
He can get in and out of the window. It's always left open for
him," he replied, angrily.
Yes, Eunis s voice was small and hopeless, for she knew that what
her father said was true, the window was left open for her pet and often
she would awake in the middle of the night and feel him springing on
to the counterpane.
"He'll have to be destroyed," said Mr. Patterson finally. "I'm
sorry, Eunis, but there it is."
"Oh, dad, no," she sobbed out.
Very well, I II give you until to-night to find another home for him."
His voice was stern, and she knew it was useless arguing further. "But,
if I ever see him on the place again I shall shoot him at sight."
Eunis went off to school miserably after saying a tearful fareweN to
Aussie, who had been locked in the tool-shed for the day. She could
hardly bear to ask any of her school fellows if they would like to have her
pet. She wouldn tbe able to enter him in the Show on Saturday, and,
even if she were lucky enough to find a home for him, he would be
sure to come back to the farm to look for her.
It was a heavy-hearted little girl who trudged home from school that
night. Aussie would have to be shot that was all there was to it, she
had decided. She was going home to say good-bye to him now. But
as she reached the front gate she saw Aussie running to meet her,


purring profusely, his tail held aloft. She picked him up in her arms and
hugged him. He must have escaped from the toolshed!
Then she heard her father's voice, "Eunis, come here."
Oh, poor Aussie, this was the end. but she went bravely with her
pet into the house.
Her father, much to her surprise, was smiling. He took the cat out
of her arms. "It's all right, my dear —we found a stray cat in the
barn to-day. I actually caught him stalking the chickens. Ausie was not
to blame, poor old chap."
"Oh, dad." She hugged her pet close, and Aussie purred
contentedly as though he knew ail that had happened and what a
lucky' escape he had had.
The next day, with a big yellow bow tied round his neck, he won first
prize at the Pet Show, but, when he was free to get off his mistress's lap
he walked proudly past the cages of the birds, his eyes averted scorn-
fully, as if to say, "Nothing doing. I wouldn't risk my safety for a lot of
silly old birds," and the parrot screamed, "Pretty puss! Pretty puss!" in
vain.
(Copyright)
p r d FRANK JOHNSON SE s°v^ STREET
Printed by The Pinnacle Press, 431 B Kent Street, Sydney,
