

THE
FUTURE
o IP
VICTORIA.
BY xICORN,
Melbourne :
Published by A. J. Smith, Swanston Street.




THE
FUTURE
OIF 1
VICTORIA.
BY ACORN.
Melbourne :
Published by James Smith, SwanSton Street.


Ballabat:
WIGNET & SUMMERSCALES,
Printers.


There is no doubt that Victoria has great things awaiting her.
She is evidently singled out by Providence to occupy a very prominent
part in the world’s history. What part that will be, for how long
it will be sustained, and how it or the contrary will be brought about,
will be learnt by those who will take the trouble to read the pages
referring to “The Future of Victoria.”




CAN VICTORIA PROSPER ?
FOR commerce her situation is exceedingly good. Well situated with
respect to the neighbouring colonies, not far distant from the southern
shores of Asia, on the north-east the innumerable Isles of the Pacific,
and still further the western coast of America, all testify her good position
for trade. Her harbours tolerably good, are capable of improvement.
Her country’s surface presents no great engineering difficulties in the
making of canals. Her railways are already extending their ramifications
throughout the country. She is blest with a soil in many parts exceed-
ingly fertile. Her mineral treasures are not yet known. Her forests
abound with useful timber trees. Good roads are on the increase.
Manufactures are multiplying, and bid fair to compete well with those of
other countries, even England herself. Fresh industries are started
from time to time. Money is in general plentiful for carrying out any
promising scheme. The people are brave, hardy, laborious, and
intelligent. The means of education for the young are within the reach
of all. Churches and preaching places are numerous, and the gospel in
its purity is generally proclaimed. Our Government is tolerably good.
The constitution is right enough, only sometimes the controlling men
mar its efficiency. Our merchants are in general men of probity. Among
our people are men of honesty. Religion is to some extent attended to.
We have books in abundance. The Bible is within the reach of everyone.
Tracts, and cheap religious publications abound amongst us. A deal of
energetic labor is being put forward by true philanthropists for the benefit
of their fellows. Our public institutions bear the marks of Christianity,
and good is being done to mind and spirit, body and soul. Thus, even
from this slight enumeration, it appears plain enough that Victoria has
all the elements of prosperity already in existence. But who will deny
that there are many opposing influences at work to mar this progress ?
Many might be enunciated, but we will confine ourselves to that which
will have most effect upon the future destinies of our country when the
present generation is dead and gone,—we mean the bad training the
present rising generation is receiving. There are none but will admit
that the present one is being trained, as a whole, very badly. There is
scarcely a family where proper obedience is enforced. How seldom you
meet with a child who shows proper respect for its superiors. How many
are encouraged in lying, or at any rate they are not corrected when they
do lie, and they get to think it very proper. How little they respect
either the feelings or property of others, excepting as harsh force compels
them. And how little real knowledge of God many of them possess,
notwithstanding all the agencies at work to instruct them in it. Some
actually have been come across who really did not know of a God ; and
others so ignorant as to mistake the Lord Bishop for the Lord Jesus,
and that in all sincerity. And, of course, if their parents are not
reverenced and obeyed, we cannot expect that God should be so. And,


by-and-by, after these early bad exhibitions, what can we expect but a
grown-up generation far worse ? And then, instead of what is good
being on the increase, it will diminish. This will militate against all our
other advantages. And we, who might become truly great, if we don’t
rectify this error by the wholesome disciplining and tuition of the young,
will dwindle away till we become miserable, degraded, and undone.
VICTORIA’S PROSPERITY.
COMMERCIAL.
WE will now just picture to ourselves Victoria in a state of full
prosperity, and will begin by referring to that of commerce.
Years have fled away ; a new generation has arisen. They retain all the
spirit of their forefathers, and energetically apply themselves as they did,
to what they take in hand. They have learned fully to do what they do
with their might. Their progenitors attended to the same, and made
application of it to commerce. Their endeavours have been crowned
with success ; their successors have acted like them, and the commerce
of Victoria eclipses that of any other country. Behold the fleet of ships
betaking themselves to her ports. They swarm from every country upon
the face of the earth, that has an approachable seaboard. Ships from
the Indies loaded with the richness of tropical produce ; their raw stuffs
coming to Victoria for manufacture or exchange for some of her well-
made fabrics ; the produce of the more temperate zones from different
points, together with the timber exports of colder regions, all making its
way across the mighty deep to Victoria’s favored harbors. Pearls from
the north, spices from the Moluccas, sugar and cotton from Queensland,
and from different parts of the world their respective products find their
way far more than ever they have done to these ports. Why ? Her
markets are so good ; her demands are great; and her prosperity war-
rants it. The folks about Melbourne have been obliged to make the
much talked of canal. Those Yarra flats have been opened out into
docks to make room for the multiplied shipping. Standing on the shore
of the bay at Sandridge and looking towards Melbourne, you are amazed
at the forests of masts occupying so much of the space between Emerald
Hill on the one side, and Footscray on the other, with Melbourne at the
northern end. Whence can all these have come, and whither can they
go ? What a change from when Melbourne was but thirty or forty years
old ! But numbers of vessels are leaving daily, loaded with their rich
freight, for as many parts of the world as others have come from. Gold
still goes forth, either raw or manufactured; silks to supply the need of
civilised society ; timber for the use of mechanics ; coal dug from beneath
Victorian soil; tin and copper, also her produce. Wool still leaves her
shores, but principally in a manufactured form ; splendid dye stuffs ;


colonially made sugar; salt from our own mines ; rich vegetable produce ;
fruits of delicious sorts; much coveted birds and beasts. Lake and
river, plain and mountain, forest and open country, desert and fertile
land, town and country, workshop and warehouse, all send forth in
countless varieties their stores of industrial and artistic treasures to
supply the yet growing demand in foreign lands. Her merchants’ coffers
are full, her artisans have enough to do, and plenty to spare, her trades-
men know no lack of business, her labourers are happy and contented.
When goods arrive at her shores they are speedily transmitted to their
respective destinations, raw stuffs to be manufactured, edibles to be
consumed, and clothing to be worn. Then follows the busy return of
manufactured goods or native produce to the metropolis or towns on the
sea-board. The sea-ports are large. The warehouses are made very
capacious on account of the immense trade. Of course the current
coin of the realm is plentiful; silver is scarcely thought of; gold is
become like the stones of the streets. Wealth comes rolling in like a
golden sea depositing its riches at the foot of each. This leaves room
for very few insolvencies, or for those who cannot pay their debts. If
there are any such they will soon be able to extricate themselves from
their difficulties. A tradesman is not stinted in his means; he can
extend his business, enlarge his borders, meet his bills, without feeling
any uncomfortable pressure. Each employer can afford to give good
wages, so each in employ has an incentive to do their work well. The
mineral treasures developed to such an amazing extent are an immense
impetus to the prosecution of trade. These stores hidden so long beneath
the ground, now brought forth for the benefit of man, are so unusually
rich, that they pass all comprehension. The quartz reefs still found
productive at great depths, and worked by complicated machinery, with
so much better apparatus for securing the gold, uphold Victoria’s dignity
as a gold bearing country. In different districts is heard the rattle of
machinery engaged in bringing up to the light of heaven the mineral or
metal from below. Smelting furnaces here and there testify to the
character of the metals, while various foundries turn out machinery of
an exquisitely improved sort. The coal-fields are dispkiying their sup-
plies of blackened wealth to the salvation of our forests, which may then
be used for other purposes. So that by these aids the wealth and commerce
of the country are so much increased that each individual is greatly
benefited. There is not a portion of the country but has its measure of
trade ; not an out of the way town but has its full commercial benefits.
The commercial life and vigor of the country seems to be sent forth
through the arteries of the whole commonwealth so thoroughly, that not
a portion escapes its vivifying supplies. Hence, the vigor and life being
so thoroughly diffused, each commercial pulsation is healthful; and the
whole system thus strong and hearty, making its natural advances towards
mercantile manhood, being purged of those ailments which now so often
strike it with paralysis, bids fair to attain to that iron constitution by
which its perpetual manhood will never decay, or its vigor be impaired.


ON ITS TOWNS AND VILLAGES.
AS one would walk through the streets of the great metropolis—the
Queen of the South—you would be astonished at the marvellous
sight you. would behold. You might make a start from the well-dressed
stone floor in the vicinity of the docks, and you would be surprised at the
size of the city. Miles upon miles are gone over, but still no suburbs
appear to be reached. But you are still more surprised at the wonderful
scenes that greet your eye as you pass along. The streets in many
places widened out and richly adorned with buildings on either side, of
exquisite style of architecture. Our superb town-hall of the present
day, and the post-office—our great pride—sink into insignificance when
compared with the splendour of the buildings of these future days. The
people appear to have got hold of a sort of architecture just adapted to
our climate, which looks so tasteful, so in keeping with the country and
with the state of things in it, that everyone’s opinion is that it is just
the thing; and if pride dwelt much in the people’s hearts, they would
indeed look back upon their ancestors as semi-barbarians if they could
but have some of their much delighted in, much applauded edifices to
place in among some of theirs—something like the introduction of a bark
hut into the midst of Collins Street at the present day. But the mag-
nificence of the shops, and the marvellous stores of various materials
there exhibited, fills with much surprise. And then there are the public
buildings. The wonderful palaces of ancient Greece now are eclipsed.
It seems as if, having got such a position that gold and silver are plen-
tiful, and so much work has not to be put forth in order to carry on every-
day business as formerly, more time being on hand, and making use of
the ability God has given them, they have bestowed more attention to
the improvement of their city; and a large amount of additional
intellect being enjoyed, a corresponding degree of success has attended
their efforts. The large public educational establishments, the universities
and colleges, the governmental buildings, the libraries and repositories of
art, are really stupendous and grand. But then the places of worship,
not confined by any means to one style of erection, but varied as the
flowers of the landscape, but all of a beauty and taste, all of a sort
suitable for temples dedicated to God, and yet so rich, so charming, that
the eye cannot take itself from them. And then the multiplicity of them.
“Truly, you would say, “this is a people given over to worship.” And
then the inside so grand, yet so chaste, quite in character with what the
inside of the house of God should be; nothing to take off the attention,
but all that seems to impress you solemnly that you are in God’s house.
And if perchance in the course of your journeyings through the city you
take a rest on a comfortable seat under one of the shady trees which line
the way beside one of the sparkling fountains so numerous and so
healthful, and look back along the street you have just traversed, you will
fancy it is some scene of enchantment opening out before your eyes.
The lovely trees, either planted in rows or placed in groups, to mean


some puzzling device, the beautiful fountains playing in the sunbeams,
the magnificent causeway for foot passengers, with delightful pieces of
information here and there marked out upon it, elegant little news
establishments for you to turn in, on the walls of which a wonderful
electrical machine exhibits the latest intelligence. And at the sort there
represented a news seeker of the present day would be much astonished.
Not much news of war, but rather news of peace ; no account of violent
bloodshed, but capital news of nations surrendering unto the Prince of
Peace. The triumphs of the Cross form the chief news, but the variety,
as now, is immense. Then the trains of horses and carriages urging
their comfortable way along the noiseless pavement. The gorgeous
buildings rearing themselves on high on either side, the fronts glaring
with handsome decorations, and the previously mentioned edifices, such
as churches, &c., in all their superb splendour, here and there, with an
occasional perfection of architecture in the form of some grandly con-
structed public building, and you think you are in some land of
enchantment, especially as such pleasure beams from the countenance of
each, and such perfect decorum is observed on every side-. You may at
last reach the suburbs, but you will not recognise them as of to day.
There seems an exquisiteness in the laying out, a superbness in the dress,
a beauty in all the arrangements with every little bit of particular, that
sets everything oft to the greatest advantage. Artificial mounds there
are that you may behold the beauties around. You ascend : spell-bound,
you gaze around. “Is this Melbourne? Are these its suburbs? A
paradise rather. I’m unable to tear myself away. I should never have
conceived nature and art could have possibly worked together so success-
fully as to produce such a surprising scene.” You find that the
metropolitan character is sustained throughout the entire colony. Wealth
has flowed in. It has been turned to good account. Nature’s defects
have been remedied ; her beauties have been enhanced. Arts’ most
glorious conceptions have been embodied in astonishing realities. Every
town you visit bears the mark of the most complete civilisation, and of
the highest human intelligence. You behold every adornment that can
be made use of, and every excellence that can add to comfort and conve-
nience. Our country sea-ports are made especially good. Breakwaters
run across the mouths of the harbors to keep back the swell of the
Southern Ocean. Splendid docks afford a commodious refuge for ships
of all sorts. From these places lines of communication run through the
country in all directions to facilitate the conveyance of goods. Every-
thing that art or wealth can furnish is done to render each sea-port all
that can be desired. And what is peculiarly noticeable, the most remote
village, or most retired hamlet, has every adornment, every improvement
that the age can afford ; so all the building arrangements exhibit an
appearance throughout the entire country which we at present can
scarcely conceive.


ON ITS AGRICULTURAL PROSPERITY.
TAKE a ramble through the country districts, and the scenes breaking
in upon your view will indeed fill you with wonder. They are the
most gorgeous imaginable. Again have nature and art formed a compact
to produce the most glorious events. The improvement of the land is
amazing. Also the way in which the barrenness of nature is made to
produce richly, and the follies of past generations to work about for
good. Here, where was a dry wilderness, are copious streams of water
brought from sufficiently elevated water-courses, spreading fertility during
their onward flow. And around their locality are splendid crops of varied
sorts. At another place where the land is too rocky for cultivation, a
stream, w'ell directed, pours down the sides of the steep, forming
beautiful cascades, while useful and ornamental trees clothe the hills all
around. And a beautiful scene is thus formed embowered in trees.
Houses are built peering into view at the end of lovely vistas. And round
about are orchards of most luxuriant fruit trees. The vines, more and
more splendid, are used for making a drink by happy art formed to
refresh, not to inebriate. The horticultural productions of the earth are
made of real benefit, and not abused. The quality of each is that which
only the richest soil and most careful attention can pi'oduce. The grains
are exceedingly good, the laudable spirit of competition still stimulating
to the production of a superior article. But the way in which the land-
scape is laid out is what is most surprising. If an eminence is not
capable of producing anything better it is crowned with timber trees.
These being of beauty and size, greatly adorn the landscape, while they
act most advantageously in securing falls of rain. The country between
is so laid out as to add to its beauty by variety and the exhibition of
taste. Paths lead you through scenes of the richest cultivation, when all
at once, after wandering awhile amid mazes of luxuriance, you are startled
by finding yourself in a beautiful grotto, out of one side of which pours
a stream of the clearest water which gurgles over the stones, and then
finds its way to fructify the land. In here the laborers find a beautiful
retreat to refresh during the heat of the day. Or visitors can rest after
beholding w r ith admiring gaze the works of nature and art around. Again,
you are in a wood; the soil at your feet tells you at one time it was a
waste. Now you are again amid the beauties of an orchard. The trees
are placed so strangely, that horticulturists, while they please the eye and
taste, also give good exercise to the intellect. Here are trees planted to
tell of remarkable events. And again you are confronted with a trellis,
teaching you in a word the science of a good life. And then after having
exhausted your ingenuity in solving these riddles, out bursts on your
view a gently sloping lawn, at the foot of which is a strange looking
mansion, appearing like a dilapidated castle. But when you glance within
you find it only an artistic arrangement to add beauty to the scene. Not
tar away is seen an edifice devoted to worship, beautiful in its surroundings,
handsome in its style, and quite in keeping with the grandeur of the


country. Perhaps in the locality is a noble river, rendered secure
against overflow by canals connected with it, and by channels which
take the surplus water and deposit it in some far off reservoir, which, in
turn, during drier seasons, sends forth supplies for lower lands. The
trees of different climates suitable to Victorian soil are planted in great
variety. Plants of many sorts which add to the beauty of forest or
garden, are pressed likewise into service. How much better the pools
look for a sprinkling of lilies upon their surface, as for instance the
Victoria Regia. How much better the plain looks for its clumps of
Wellingtonia Gigantea, or as is sometimes the case, piles of stones like
miniature mountains, with a fountain bursting out at the top, falling
down the side like a robe of transparent snow. Whatever it may be, we
find it adds loveliness to the scenery. This loveliness is only to be sur-
passed by the happiness and contentedness of the people, and the moral
beauty of their renovated natures. Rich grasses are made to grow on
the wide-spread plains, which being irrigated at certain periods, are dressed
in a robe of almost perpetual green, while upon them, and upon other
places suited for such, feed numbers of useful animals. The lakes and
streams are made to be the resort of numberless wild fowl, whose num-
bers are decreased as man requires in such a way as not to frighten the
rest away. Birds of the most exquisite sorts, both for beauty and song,
find refuge in the numerous groves, so that animal life, as well as vege-
table, presents a most admirable variety.
ON EDUCATION.
IF anything is important in the management of a community, it is
education. According as this has been done, so will you have your
people, so will you have your country. By education we understand all
that is included in the training, instruction, and bringing up of a child.
Wherever this is neglected there is not a solitary instance of success
attending in any way such a nation, while we have abundant evidences of
the ill effects of this neglect in the demoralisation and indolence,
stupidity and superstition, cowardice and general degradation of countries
where this is the case. While where the reverse is carried out, how
nobly such countries are rising towards the glorious perfection of every
attribute of civilisation ! As this is attended to, so, correspondingly, a
nation must rise, and where it is attended to the best, we necessarily
claim a position for that country in the first ranks. Now this has been
fully understood and acted upon by the future Victorians, and accordingly
they have paid the strictest attention to the matter of education. But
as they well know that no structure stands secure unless it is built on a
good foundation, so they wisely conclude that no education can be fully
and substantially performed unless they lay first a proper foundation.
They have rightly come to the conclusion that unless education compre-


hend a good substructure of Holy Writ, it is often worse than useless.
They have found it out from the history of the past. Where are the
proud empires of former civilisation which in their respective days shed
a lustre that illumined the dark ignorance of the entire world ? Is not
the Jewish nation the only one which retains its pristine intelligence ?
And why ? Because it was the only one whose intelligence was connected
with the Bible. And the only reason to be assigned for their present
scattered and helpless condition is, that they did not obey its precepts.
If they had, who can tell what an eminence they might have risen to by
this time ? And those others whose star has long sunk into obscurity,
had their civilisation been connected intimately with the Bible, and they
had regarded its commands, to what a height of glory and intelligence
they might have ascended by this period ! And these future Victorians
argue from these lessons that if they imbue their education deeply with
the spirit and life of the Scriptures it will be so permanently beneficial
that the glory of the country will become more and more lustrous, and
shine with a more fixed and unimpairable light. They have found it out
from the Bible teachings ; they there find that those that honor God,
God honors, and that when a people are diligent to obey him, then all
their enemies are at peace with them, and they become the head of
nations, and others who forget him become the tail. There was an
immensity of truth in the expression of Queen Victoria to the African
prince when he wanted to know the secret of England’s greatness, as she
took up a Bible, and pointing particularly to it, said, “This is the secret
of Britain’s greatness.” And they find there is authority in the Bible for
most truthfully prognosticating a country’s greatness if the ways marked
out in it are carefully followed. so they rightly conclude that if
Victoria take but these teachings for her foundation, the structure erected
thereon will survive the durability of the world itself. They find out the
same truth by what they view around them in the world as it is in their
day. Those who adhere most closely to God’s word are the chief in the
earth. They find it out from the Spirit’s teaching in their own hearts
according to the promise given long ago —“He will lead you into all
truth.” And hence their education is based on the word of God. This
is the first book taught; this is the principal item of their educational
curriculum. Its strength imparting sinews run through the whole of the
course of future studies, so it binds them well together, imparts coherence
to them, and nerves the whole for being used for the good of man and
glory of God. By this means all studies are directed towards their
legitimate end, and all advancements made bring them nearer to that
glorious termination.
I know that many in the present day will think this language is
enthusiasm. If they can show it to be so, lam sure I shall have great
pleasure in modifying it. If they can show any other way to ensure our
colony’s arrival at the acme of continual prosperity, I am sure I shall
heartily subscribe to it. But there is none. The world has tried others,
and signally failed; and the only instances of success we meet with are
those which adopt these methods. And still more, their success corres-
ponds to the measure of their close agreement with the teachings of


unchangeable truth. And let not anyone suppose that these studies
hinder other studies. So far from that, they become the greatest
inducement to the ardent prosecution of all useful studies. The only
things they are an obstacle to are sinful ones. The Bible enjoins on
people that they improve their time, store their souls with knowledge, be
slothful in business, and what they find to do they are to do with
their might. Each man has an honest livelihood to get, or has some-
thing to do among intelligent people, for which he wants preparation. If
a man is intended for a certain line of business he must be taught those
things which will fit him for it, and if he be not, the Bible is not obeyed.
Such a one is not doing what his hand findeth to do with his might. And
the same with anything else which has to be prepared for; you must
teach all that will ensure success, if the thing be right, and if not, the
greater lack of preparation the better. Thus there is even a religion in
arithmetic, grammar, and geography; for when God’s providence gives
us opportunity, our ability to serve him, and our service of him is
greatly measured by the way in which we fulfil the duties of our position ;
it becomes part of our religion to embrace the opportunities to learn what
most certainly fits for the better performing these duties. And if
Providence seems to direct that a youth should in future be a book-
keeper, it is far better, and most certainly necessary that he learns
book-keeping. But then, as it often happens that people have not the
future occupation marked out for them, so if an individual in future time
thought proper to resort to this to earn a livelihood, how much better it
would be if he had previously made the acquisition, and thus avoided
the need of studying it when it would have been so desirable to know it.
All these useful acquirements tend to God’s glory, and are more eagerly
pursued by one who has the strength imparting inculcations of Scriptural
truth. Education is then commenced, carried on, and consummated with
the inspiring truths of God’s word. There is by this means a beauty
and symmetry of form, a perfection belonging to all the attainments of
learning which it is beautiful to behold, It gives a transparency to every
student’s motive. It increases his zeal in acquiring knowledge ; the
refining grace clears his mind and enables him to discern clearly between
the right and wrong, to see his way through difficulties, to solve difficult
problems, to find the clue along some hidden track into the unknown
realities of knowledge beyond, to understand deep subjects, to answer
hard questions, to retain more vividly what is learnt, to make more rapid
advancement, to comprehend more fully the fitness of things to their
intended end, and raised above all things, he stands surveying all things
and all transactions beneath him, which appear to those unpossessed of
this, dark and intricate, to him appear clear and intelligible, fulfilling the
designs of their great superintendent, and agreeing for their consum-
mation in the strictest harmony. Thus there is an elevation of soul, a
keenness of perception, as well as a holiness of purpose, which cannot
fail in making such education abundantly successful. But when we add
all the other qualifications with which this so wonderfully endows, how
can the future occupiers of our country, when turned out into their
several spheres, prepared in such institutions as these, how can they fail


in ennobling our land, and bringing it to the most exalted pitch of per-
fection ? But it may be said “What will become of people’s
conscientious scruples ?” Are they to be ignored ? which will be the
case if the Bible is taught thus. It is a question easier asked than
answered, but well worthy of consideration. Can there be any really
conscientious scruples against the teaching of the Bible ? We know the
Church of Rome would not object, only requiring that a peculiar version
be used. We know all denominations of Protestants would only be too
glad. So there would only be left a mixed lot of heathens, Mahommedans,
and unbelievers. And if those of them who do see what wonderful
things it has wrought in the earth, and that this is the only stepping
stone to true greatness, and yet profess to be conscientiously affected
against it, would it not be better to wound their exquisitely great tender-
ness ? But how do we act in a physical case ? If small-pox be in our
vicinity, how strenuously the government impose the regulations with the
sanction of a fine in case of non-compliance. And even w’hen not
immediately troubling us, how it is enjoined on parents to have their
children vaccinated. No doubt a mother likes not her tender infant to
feel the doctor’s lancet, and feels distressed at the pain it experiences till
the wound is healed again. But would any listen to her expostulations if
she dared to refuse ? Would it not be said the safety of the community
depends upon the operation, so the pain inflicted, common to us all, must
be borne for the general good ? Now in this case there need be no pain
inflicted. There is a dreadful disease ; it is contagious and destructive ;
it has swallowed whole nations in its unsatisfied jaws. It has taken down
into its capacious maws whole worlds full of people, and yet, like the
horse-leech’s daughter, cries “give, give.” And there is to this a most
potent remedy, the only remedy efficacious. It has proved itself millions
of times. And this remedy we want making use of. It will counteract
the disease in its infancy, it will impart strength to resist any remains of
it; it will be the means of implanting the contrary healthful principles,
and will turn the young out strong and ready for all that is beautiful and
benefiting. The application of this is what they are called upon to suffer.
How great the pain ? how fearful the oppression ? how tyrannical the
government that insists on this ? Why not rather should they not give
liberty for the disease to have its full development, to strengthen its force,
to take a deadly hold upon each victim, to poison all the knowledge as
soon as received into the mind, to make each acquisition a deadly arrow
to wound others, to thoroughly poison the fountain of the soul that
everything that emanates from it in future shall come forth diseased,
polluted, noxious, venomous, so that from many sources the poison shall
go through every artery of our national community ? And instead of
seeing her rise in life and power, we hear her deathly groans, and behold
her wallowing in degradation, swollen, bruised, and death-stricken. And
as we watch her in these convulsions, and see her dying countenance,
and hear her last expressions, and behold her last struggle as Victoria
passes out of national existence, picture to ourselves what she might have
been. Why not ? Is it not better then that these exquisitely sensitive
consciences should be put a little on the rack, if it need be, so that their


children may become more obedient, more loving and obliging, and be
tbeir parents’ joy instead of their sorrow, their blessing instead of their
curse, tbeir consolation in tbeir old age instead of sharp thorns and
daggers to them, or a sword quickly to hasten them to the grave ? But
there is really no need to injure anyone’s conscientious feelings ; at any
rate feelings that are worthy of respect; for those feelings which only
desire to get the Bible driven out of our schools—no matter what evils
by this driving out will be brought upon our country—simply because of
its obnoxiousness, should not be, and are not worthy to be treated with
respect. But any who would desire it to be taught, but yet fear lest
some favorite doctrine be trampled upon, have no need to fear the children
being led into the doctrinal part of religion, as the great aim, and that
to which the teachers would be confined, would be to make them prac-
tically good, so that while the doctrine of immersion is not taught, it is
not repudiated; while the doctrine of transubstantiation is not contra-
dicted, it is not upheld ; election and reprobation, the freedom of the
will, nor the final decrees, are gone into ; but the word of God just as it
stands, able to make a man good for both worlds, is inculcated with all
wisdom. A teacher who can inculcate the contents of the Fourth Book
is able to inculcate these things. He has but to take the passage before
them, and after reading question on it to impress upon their minds what
has been read. Supposing the lesson had been the 23rd Psalm, how
much good the children would receive, and how little favorite notions
would be encroached upon by the following questioning—“ How is it that
God is called a shepherd ?” The children will discover the analogy, and
any incorrect answers might be rectified. “If we are God’s sheep, how
may we expect him to treat us ?” they will, doubtless, answer correctly.
If not, the same can be done as in the other case. “What is meant by
God’s restoring the soul ?” Get from them how we have wandered from
him, and how his grace brings us to him. “ What do you practise, and
what do you avoid in the path of righteousness ?” This they will easily
tell you, or you can readily get from them. “To where does it lead ?”
Get them to tell the verse which shows it. “What have we to pass
through prior to arriving there ?” They will answer, “ The valley,” &c.
“ What state of mind will one who has God for his shepherd be in when
arriving there ?” “They will fear no evil,” &c. “God’s rod is what ?”
“ The afflictions he allows to come upon us for our good.” “His staff?”
“ The word on which he has caused us to hope.” Of course no sensible
teacher would take the children to those parts above their understanding,
or which would not be suitable. But by wisely using this sacred foun-
tain he might lead every child to drink of its life giving streams. Would
to God this were only put in practice now! If Divine light would only
so shed its gloom dispersing rays that our government might not only
perceive the suitability, and the imperative necessity of having the
teaching of the Bible, but strictly enforce it, and see that it was properly
performed. If that all teachers would then second the efforts of the
government, and instill diligently these sacred truths into the minds of
youth, then, 0 then, how quickly would we ascend in the scale of
nations !


Let it not be supposed that we imagine the mere teaching of
Scripture is going to bring about of itself moral perfection. By no
means. It must be accompanied by the Divine agent to be efficacious.
But when we teach it we are doing our duty, and it is when we do our
duty that we are promised, and may expect the required blessing.
ON MANUFACTURES, ARTS, &c.
WITHOUT doubt, Victoria has by this period, with the march of
time, made corresponding advancement in manufacturing industries.
No longer has she need to import at great cost from other countries the
articles she requires, but her own well-intelligenced community have
devised means by which she can, instead, have a surplus to send else-
where. With ready wit, and active plodding ingenuity, they have
fashioned and framed machinery to work wonders in the production of
manufactured articles. We now can have every finely constructed fabric
fashioned within our own limits, of such a superior make, that successful
competition becomes impossible. There is not a part of our country
but has some branch where the most enlightened industry turns out the
best things of human make that ever the fair members of the human
family fixed eyes upon. Instead of unhealthiness in the process of
bringing into existence these products, arrangements are so good, one has
more advantageous healthful employment, that of working in the open
air. The workpeople work long enough, and not too long, so that while
they can and do perform justice to their employer, they do the same to
themselves. There is time for improvement at home, or at the many
places where such facilities are given, that even the most indolent can
hardly withstand the temptation to vigorously improve. Then endeavors
to work the mines are tried, the most enlightened possible. The best
machinery hauls the stuff to the surface after the most safe, speedy, and
complete methods have been used below for procuring the ores. The
most admirable smelting apparatus separates the metals from their refuse,
or gathers up the gold while it parts with its undesirable admixtures.
Means are employed to ensure the health of those employed here, and
better, more vigorous, and contented workmen are not to be found
anywhere. They, too, have the time and disposition to improve, and
each is richer in intellectual lore than the mine he works in its metallic
produce. The timber of the country forms a noble part of its produce,
and is largely used in the various manufactures in which it can be
employed. The cabinet work produced from some is surprisingly
splendid. Ladies rejoice over the performances of wood carvers who
have tried their skill in fashioning Victorian timber. Ships are made
from her forest monarchs. Sometimes houses are built ornamentally of
her finer wood, and look like fairy palaces. The medicinal and dye-
woods produced in her forests are found of great utility, and of course


many find a comfortable livelihood in collecting them. Now, too, are
our deposits of marble brought into requisition for the sculptor’s art.
The colony having become more settled, and having made advancement
in wealth, has bestowed more attention to this art, and her attentions
have been rewarded with most astonishing success. It has been found
that the talent of Yictoria is far before any which has previously been
exhibited on the arena of our globe. The chisel of the sculptor has
brought out pieces of workmanship in the Southern hemisphere that leave
far in the shade anything of the kind overproduced. Nature and beauty,
ease and elegance, are most delightfully combined in the works of these
artists. The boldness of conception, and the majesty imparted, is per-
fectly astonishing. Painting also has flung the palm to Victorian artists,
who know how to wield it, and how to retain it. If ever beauty were
pourtrayed upon canvas it is now. Some of the good old scenes in
Australian history are there recorded in imperishable monuments. The
wonders of other lands are here wrought, and in all their native beauty
appear before the gaze of the entranced spectators. There is not a
beautiful scene upon God’s earth but what some of these enthusiastic
geniuses will have its likeness, and delineate with the exactness of nature
sights which causes admiration of their divine originator, and wonder at
the skill of his inspired creature. Fancy, too, brings from her glorious
realms many a wondrous sight, and history furnishes these Victorian
artists ample scope for the exhibition of their imaginative faculties.
We may be sure that literature is not laggard in these days. She
has taken gigantic strides, and with such rapidity as to outstrip all the
rest. She has cast aside the pedantic hindrance of seeking for hard
words, or the laboured endeavours to make reading as dull as possible.
She recognises man as man, and what is suited to him as such, she more
wisely and abundantly produces. Has he imagination ? then she brings
before him such things as exalts the faculty, and fills him with refined
delight. Hoes he want science ? then she has the heavens, earth, and
seas ransacked, and the description of their contents written to the
setting off to advantage the wonderful works of God. Is natural
history his forte ? then the results of more correct knowledge are pictured
before him so as to call forth his highest admiration. History, travels,
and geography, with all the marvellous variety of subjects that it is
possible for literature to embrace, are all treated in an enlightened,
refined, comprehensive, attractive fashion, that rivets the attention,
delights the soul, the mind, and fits and fashions the individual for doing
more good, and being a happier, wiser, and a better man. Think not
that the books are mostly full of religion. Not at any rate in so many
words. This is not needed; the works speak for themselves. The
subjects they treat.of so grandly speak for themselves. These things
exhibited in such a brilliant light speak volumes of the being who created
them. And when anyone has these things pictured forth before his view
in such a way as that the picturing forth alone tells amazingly of God’s
power, how can he possibly, if he have any soul at all, but be bound
closer and closer to him who made them ? The man dare not to make
his appearance in Victoria who would write such vile stuff as is sometimes


written now, stuff to degrade the mind, to stultify the faculties of the soul,
and make ignoble the noble creature man. The works of such authors
dare not to show themselves within the pale of Victoria’s limits. If their
horrid pestilential appearance were put in, the flames would be their
speedy tomb. Men exercise their talents according to the laws of
uprightness, honor, and truth, for ennobling and not for degradation, for
advancement and not retrogression, for exaltation and not for abasement,
for the comfort of the people at home, for their usefulness abroad, and
for their general good.
The question may be asked, and most likely to be, “What has
Victoria got in the way of defences ? What amount of warlike protection
has she in possession ?” The millenium times have not arrived yet, so
the lion does not lie down with the lamb, and nations have not yet beaten
their swords into ploughshares or spears into pruning hooks, and so peace
does not reign throughout the earth. She is liable to be attacked still,
though the people have learned pretty generally to live at peace with
each other. But yet the old principles still remain, the devil still walks
abroad, and down deep in the abyss of the future may be slumbering like
the precursors of the volcano, that strife and bloodshed which may burst
forth with relentless vigor and deluge the earth in blood. Against such
a catastrophe as this it is her duty to prepare, only though for her self
defence. Not that she thinks she will ever require to use her prepara-
tions ! No, she has got stronger battlements than those of her frowning
fortresses. She has more numerous defensive hosts than her companies
of militia, and far better watchers on her coasts than many three-headed
Cerberus protectors. Her virtues, her true nobility, her generous
endeavours for the advancement of her fellows, her renouncement of
trust in self, the overspreading of the wings of the majesty of on High,
are far more trustworthy defences than all those. And though she does
mot despise them or ignore their use, yet she wisely makes her chief
defence in him who has promised that no weapon formed against her
shall prosper. And is not this true wisdom for her to act thus ? Where
have the victories that have yet been gained come from ? From the
multitude of hosts 9 from well prepared armaments ? or from the sup-
plies provided by well-replenished national coffers ? We know well that
the most extensive preparations, the most magnificent military trains
imaginable, and the most overwhelming armies, attended with all the
skill and appurtenances and warlike apparatus that could ensure success,
have been all in vain. These mighty equipments, these noble armies,
have melted like snow before the approach of an insignificant enemy.
While meagre preparations, a mere handful of men, and a miserable
outfit scarce fitted for the pomp of a beggar, but accompanied with
courage and determination, inspired by heaven in answer to the urgent
entreaties of heaven’s besiegers ; and then the most gigantic endeavours,
the whole strength of mighty empires, the vigor and energy of a powerful
people, all brought to bear upon these feeble opponents, have all faded
away like plants fade before the scorching sirocco, and their country
brought to submit to the most humiliating terms; for God who alone
can, hath given the victory to them that please him. And often, and how


often may not the terrible scourge of war have been warded off by the
simple trust of those who looked for help to Israel’s God ? And Victoria
then is very wise when she says, “Some trust in horses, and some in
chariots, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God.
When God allows the hell-dogs of war to be let loose upon a
country, it is because there is a just reason for it, and is through no
desire to willingly allow her peace to be disturbed, but to correct some
errors of the body politic. When a nation follows the course marked
out for them in the Book of Truth, and pursue righteousness, justice,
and virtue, and humbly acknowledge their dependence on their Supreme
Head, and diligently apply themselves to the work allotted them, —even
to spread the knowledge of God and the blessings of civilisation through-
out the earth, such a country will be as safe as the throne of God from
the invading force of an avaricious enemy, and from internal disorders
arising from unprincipled factions at home. But let this same people
become lifted up with pride, and forsake righteousness and the pursuit of
virtue, and forgetting God, give the reins loosely to infidelity and self
adoration, then shall the shield of protection be withdrawn, and the
armed host being witheld by no divine restraint, rush on to execute
their full pleasure on the devoted country. But when the people recollect
themselves, and recall to mind their sins, and remember their dependence
upon their Heavenly Father, and with deep humility ask forgiveness for
their misdoings and non-performance of good, and return again to God,
and put their trust in him, then immediately the shield of protection is
thrown around them again, and their foes, panic-stricken and overcome,
haste to get themselves away before they become completely annihilated.
Instance, in proof of this, what happened to the ancient Jews. When a
powerful enemy appeared upon their borders, there was always a prior
reason for it. God had been forsaken for idols ; Sabbath breaking had
been indulged in, or some other command had been violated. But when
their conduct Avas in only a moderate degree agreeable to God’s laws,
how secure abode Israel, even Avhen nations round about were torn from
their homes and carried into degrading slavery by a ruthless conqueror,
and their lands left deluged in blood. And if such a foe dared to show
himself, hovering like a flock of rapacious birds ready to pounce on what
they supposed was their devoted prey, then, 0 then, how quickly was an
unseen hand stretched forth on their behalf, which dealt death so
mightily, furiously, but yet so silently and effectually, that only a very
small affrighted remnant could return to tell the tale. So that if Vic-
toria but be faithful to her God, and faithful to herself, and do nobly the
work assigned her, the Defence Commission could not have better
defences to investigate, to assert to them the impregnability of Victoria,
and the folly of an invader trying to molest her peaceful shores. And
apart from the idea of God’s protecting influence, the reason of the thing
fully demonstrates it. The nations of the earth feeling the influence of
her bounty in her generous efforts to do them good, could not fail to love
her. Seeing the nobility of her national virtues, and her devotion to
God, they could not help but respect her, and when they beheld her


unparalleled beauty, and all the brilliant lustre of her character, they will
be so enthusiastic in their endeavours to imitate, that all idea of waging
war upon her peaceful territories is lost sight of.
ON THE PEOPLE.
THE practice of virtue and the performance of good, together with
vigorous endeavours after high mental qualifications, cannot fail,
when it is associated with wisdom and prudence, in exhibiting itself in the
physical organisation of the people by adding greatly to their nobility of
appearance, healthful, vigorous frame, and in many ways conducing to
their physical advantage. So in accordance with this the people of this
day exhibit generally the most noble specimens of man and womanhood it
is possible to conceive. Through the temperance to which they are
addicted, with regular intervals for exercise and wholesome recreation,
the people most commonly experience healthy constitutions. They are
by reason of their mental composition and this generally happy state of
health, so remarkably contented and peaceful throughout their mental
capacity, that their effect is effectively shown forth in their happy,
beaming countenances. No people are so cheerful as they. None
dispense abroad so plentifully the joys arising from joyous dispositions.
Not that they are empty-headed, loud laughing hare-brains ; when they
laugh, they laugh at something worth while ; but within them is such
abundant joy that it will well over in different ways at different times.
Whatever they take into hand this joy diffuses itself throughout the work
and sweetens it and makes it pleasant. This also causes the thing to be
done with a vigor not otherwise imparted, and this joy will naturally
burst forth in different manifestations according to the nature of what is
engaged in. Their bravery is as great as their joy. Oftentimes are
there occasions for the forthshewing of this, as there always will be
among human races, and for aught we know among races of angels, and
they come up to a very high standard. So great is this, that if a foe were
to be engaged with, he would indeed find that he had to grapple with
very lions in courage and boldness. They are strong to labor, and
mighty to endure, and are active and quick in the performance of work.
They have possession of great mental qualifications, and show forth
qualities of mind that astonish the world. You are delighted at the way
in which they abide among each other ; no strifes, no jarring, discord,
envyings, tumults, broils, and a whole host of disquietments common at
present. Their houses are well furnished, not for the purposes of luxury,
for this is not what they look for or desire, but merely for the purposes of
comfort and convenience, and the proper refreshment of exhausted nature.
And in their dress there is nothing to be perceived that savors of
gaudiness and ill-taste, but what adds to the natural elegance bestowed
already by the Creator, and fully performs all that in the best possible


manner for which human habiliments are used. So either extreme is well
guarded against, and a wholesome legitimate use made of these provisions
of nature. The same wise use they make of the bounties of Providence
supplied for the strengthening of the human frame, so that while people
do not live for the purpose of eating, they do not disdain what God has
so liberally supplied, and thus avoid a Spartan and austere frugality.
Their qualifications of mind are peculiarly attractive. Mental develop-
ment has taken place in a remarkable degree. The powers of the mind
seem to have so wondrously made headway that their ability appears fit
for most surprising achievements. They have vigor enough to grapple
with any subject, and to pry into hidden secrets, and unfold in wrapped
mysteries, and penetrate into the nature of things, and make such deduc-
tions from obtainable premises, as in these days we cannot attain to.
Hence each science enjoys a palmy day. Each branch of knowledge
extends its now widely-reaching arms far into previously unknown regions.
The beautiful, the grand, the elegant, the sublime, in learning, are all
brought into such familiar association, that each may avail of their rich
treasures. Ignorance vanishes away like grim dark visaged night at the
approach of light. Knowledge now stalks over our streets arrayed in
her glorious attire of universal acquaintance. Books are more than ever
attractive. Those evil-geniused ones which now haunt our bookstalls and
booksellers’ shelves, which you wonder a honest man would patronise at
all, are allowed no longer, either by desire or permission, to engage the
attention, and to send their destructive poisons into the already enfeebled
human heart. These wild, harum-scarum books, which lead the mind
into scenes of dissipating untruthfulness, and unfit the mental capacity
to engage in anything really useful, no longer intrude within the precincts
of our literature, but books of an enlivening, agreeable sort, are common
enough. Every book must have a useful tendency, and lest anyone
should be horrified by the supposition that it must be a terribly dry age,
it may be stated that their mental status has enabled them generally to
discover that it is not necessary to make a good subject dry and uninter-
esting in order to be useful, but that each may be made so attractive that
its charms will be more and more set off to advantage, and more good
obtained from its perusal. A literary enthusiasm has taken hold of the
people’s mind, that the strongest desires are experienced, and the most
determined endeavours put forward to replenish still more their mental
stores and strengthen their mental capabilities. The result of all this is
seen by a glance at their towns and a survey of their country around.
By the wonderful monuments of mental ability, their mode of transit,
their wonder-inspiring structures, their marvellous obedience to nature,
whereby she is made to serve them to perfection, the arrangements of
their land cultivation, the general features of their landscape and of their
towns there beheld, are amply attested the results of their mental
development. How free they are from the mistakes of past ages 1 How
diligent they are in making use of their time ! What perseverance they
manifest in every good thing they take into hand ! How enjoyable it is
to get into their company ! And everything you behold in connection
with that which has for its aim mental culture—their public libraries, the


arrangements of their schools, their seats of literary instruction, their
places of general scientific cultivation, their libraries at their own homes,
which no man is destitute of, the way in which they labour in fresh
research, the way in which they make use of opportunities for literary
acquirements, all testify that they are people of great mind, of unrivalled
industry, and successors of whom we may be justly proud. The moral
qualifications of these people are exceedingly good. Drunkenness is no
more rife ; gluttony has fallen into disuse. Temperance in these matters
of eating and drinking is strictly adhered to. Truth occupies its proper
place of pervading every act, word, and heart. A lie would be accounted
a most horrible thing. A man who told a lie would think he deserved to
be execrated by all his fellow citizens. A man in our days if he adhere
rigidly and inflexibly to the truth, and by this means, perhaps, put him-
self to some temporary inconvenience, is accounted a madman. In these
good times now coming, shopkeepers do not tell lies to pass off their
goods; merchants do not swamp their customers with a lot of unfounded
palaver to gain their custom; neither do politicians think nothing can be
done without deceit; nor do lying advertisements appear in our papers
from any of our own people ; no untruthful recommendations are made
to draw a crowd to a certain locality, nor do you ever hear people speak
what they don’t mean. Truth is revered, adhered to, and made to appear
in all its glory. And this people is equally honest as truthful. It is
marvellous how society has become revolutionized with regard to this.
No more is heard the complaint-—“An honest man can’t live.” A dis-
honest man would stand a bad chance. No one would allow him their
society ; he would be scouted by everyone ; he would have to slink away
and live in isolation. “Honesty is the best policy,” is carried out in its
most refined degree, not just as the common interpretation would render
it, because it would make people think better of you, and pay better in
the end than its reverse, but because it meets with God’s approbation,
and is strictly right. Your door may be left unlocked, but no thieves will
intrude. Your purse may be forgotten, and lie about, but no one will
interfere with its contents. Locks and keys are useless encumbrances if
you want to make property more secure than it is when free to all. Men
never fall into the errors of our days in so often taking to themselves the
self invested rights of appropriating unasked other people’s goods. The
distinction between mine and thine is most universally allowed, and most
universally respected. Their good, decent behaviour, at all their meet-
ings is also particularly noticeable. The greatest regard for each other
evidently is experienced ; no commotion, no rudeness, not any giving way
to quarrellings or vituperations, no angry passions, no over-boiling
tempers exhibited, no wounding of each other’s feelings, no arrogating
over another. Each seems to feel for the other, and what kind of
behaviour he would like shown to himself he shoAvs to his fellow. And
in the public streets it is just the same ; there is no need of policemen
to take their walks abroad to be on the look-out for evil-doers ; no such
people as these are to be found. You pass along the streets at any time
and see no disturbance, nor are molested yourself, however defenceless
you may be. In even these street transactions there seems a mutual


regard and deference one for another, and every street spectacle exhibits
in the strongest light that the people who parade them are in the highest
degree refined. The evils in connection with gambling which are now
experienced through loss of precious time, and wild undue excitement,
and oftentimes the wanton waste of much useful money, as well as the
horrible moral effects both on the person immediately engaged in it, and
often on others who have intercourse with him, such as leading the
person to all sorts of excesses, rendering him unprincipled and unfeeling,
changing a man into a fiend, are no more ; for gambling, the origination
of them, is no more. Nor are vicious performances which present before
the mind such pictures as will quickly destroy a sense of right, and such
as debase the imagination and deprave the moral tone, any more coun-
tenanced in the least. Nor are any books which may be classed among
those things that cause a like effect, allowed any more. Whatsoever it
might be that would have a tendency to deteriorate the mental status,
arouse their keenest and most violent opposition. And no wonder, for
they are become so delighted with the beauties of true morality, and are
as anxious for each one to enjoy them as they are for themselves, that
whatever would militate against this naturally stirs up their ire, and
causes them to put down such a thing with the greatest vigor. Their
behaviour in any transaction with foreign lands is worthy of conspicuous
remark. We all know the effect the behaviour of our sailors and mer-
chants has, who deal with foreigners, in making the people form a good or
bad opinion of them and their fellow countrymen. Oftentimes honest
people have been put to the blush by the nefarious practices engaged in
by some who have represented our own colony, and thus, among poor
illiterate savages it is no wonder if we were ranked with some of the
worst upon earth ; and as they soon learn, so they have become tricky,
overreaching, dishonest, and murderous, and whatever their civilised
teachers have set them an example in. And if these teachers have not
originated these traits of character, they have, at any rate, greatly
strengthened them. All such as this is at an end with respect to
Victorian traders. By their rigid adherence to everything that adorns
humanity, they appear before these poor people, now rising in the scale
of civilisation, as a representation of a community so excellent, that they
are thoroughly attracted, and in whatever good thing they see them do,
they energetically imitate them. There is another thing which in these
times causes a vast amount of discomfort, brings about an immense deal
of evil, and does an incomprehensible measure of mischief to those who
engage in it ; many do not seem to be alive to its atrocity, yet it almost
everywhere invades the happiness of happy homes, and takes much of it
away. It has come between those who were thought inseparable friends,
and has torn them as ruthlessly asunder as the bushman with his wedges
tears the fallen tree. It comes often under the garb of virtue, and under
this plea has had, and has many adherents, and yet it has undermined
the virtue of many. It has made previously careful women to neglect
their families ; it has caused those who were at one time diligent men to
obtain a character for laziness; men by it have been injured in a course
of usefulness. Doubtless it brings many a child prematurely to its


grave by reason of the neglect it induces. It has set fire to many a
house ; many a good business it has ruined ; hearts it has broken without
compunction ; confidence it has destroyed never to be regained. In fact,
the evils of it are innumerable. How any strictly moral person can
engage in it is a wonder. It leads them to do all this, and effectually
hinders them from doing their own duty, so that a person who professes
strict morality, and yet does this, makes profession only. Whatever may
be done in our time with respect to this, these people thoroughly ignore
it. They slay the monster at once with the blow of eternal repudiation ;
and thus is got rid of the cruel, unpitying, ruthless dragon called idle
gossip and evil speaking. Perhaps one of the most surprising things
noticeable at the present day is the generally bad behaviour of children.
They treat their parents as if they were much beneath them ; if they
obey, it is with the air of conferring a favor. They are rude, insolent,
unmanageable, ignorant, growing up without proper culture, morals
uncorrected, lives unfitted for usefulness, but trained—not purposely—
for evil; and in fact, in almost every way, bid fair to be, in multitudes of
cases, a curse to our land. In these future days, their good behaviour is
as remarkable. They have been taught better, so they grow better.
They now are remarkable for more of good than the past generation was
for evil. Amongst themselves the course of conduct is most exemplary.
Each seems to try and outvie the other in excellent conduct. They are
ready to give place to another instead of so selfishly self-seeking.
The language they use delights rather than shocks, and disperses good
abroad from its wholesome seasoning. Behind the scenes they act as
well, as before their parents’ gaze ; not that they come untainted with
corruption into the world. They are still the children of Adam ; but
their parents have seen the need of giving them such training as will
drive out the evil, and will effectually cause the good to predominate, and
will make the child to be the incipient form of a glorious man. Knowing
that all the best instruction communicated to the child, unless it be
properly directed to the child’s welfare, would be as useless as it would be
to attempt to fashion a golden image by pouring the molten metal on the
ground without a mould, so they fashion and frame all this instruction by
wise and wholesome discipline to the beautifying of the child’s character,
and for the making of it in future years to shine forth an image of perfect
moral beauty. Thus, then, by means of hard wrought but judicious
labor, they have succeeded, with the blessing from on High, in bringing
out a generation who reflect credit on their parents, are beneficial to the
country, and are a joy whenever we behold. No rudeness is now
indulged in, no disobedience to orders is manifested, no neglect of duty,
nor any unwillingness to please. They know how to behave to their
superiors ; well inclined are they to enter into all the labors set them.
The schoolmaster finds them diligent, attentive scholars. The stranger
proves them to be kind, civil, and obliging. At home they are known by
their orderly behaviour, their industrious actions about the house, and by
their freeness and self-denial in trying to please. Their parents find they
are jewels whose value no man can reckon. They are precious substance
which they well know how to estimate ; they are glorious treasures they


cannot contemplate too often ; and now more than ever is fulfilled that
passage, blessed is the man who hath his quiver full of them." The
reason of their genuine morality is their religion. The reason of their
religion being so true is, that they have been well taught, and God has
blessed the teaching. Does this give universal satisfaction ? No. There
are some who would suppose the community must be a very melancholy
set. Why ? because of their religion. If they are, they have not got
God’s religion ; it is a gross sham. God’s religion is the very best thing
in the world for making a person truly lively. A mournful Christian !
What an anomaly ! unless he have sinned, and then he has reason to be
mournful. But if he has the smile of God and the light of heaven
shining down upon him, and true religion in his heart, he has need te
rejoice. Everything makes for his welfare. If he require anything he
has it given him. If he asks he receives. He has such strength that he
can do the greatest feats of labor, such wisdom, that his course is always
right, such energy, that he makes his way through oppressive difficulties,
such firmness, that earth and hell cannot shake him, such help that he
cannot but succeed. He has light that he may discern clearly, he has
superior knowledge that he may know all things, he has diligence that he
may make good use of all his time ; so that he may have joy in all he
performs, a sweetness pervades everything he does ; so that he be not
despisingly lifted up in himself, he has humility; so he may obtain the
love of all, he has sweet condescension. That he may strive after know-
ledge, his soul is athirst for it; that he may acquire it, his mind is
divinely assisted; that he accomplish everything he undertakes, he has
a spirit of indomitable perseverance. His soul is filled with peaCe, so he
is full of comfort; his soul is full of love to God, so his affections cling
to him. In all things he has a constant Friend. There is nothing good
the earth can afford but what it is made subservient for his good; All
the glories of heaven are his likewise; so if there be any good, if there
be any joy, if there be any satisfaction, if there be any help, if there be
any advantage, if there be any pleasure, if there be any wisdom, if there
be any friendship, if there be anything worth attaining in heaven and
earth, he attains to it. Is it any wonder that they are religious ? Would
it not be a wonder if they were not ? for they may truly say “all things
are ours.” If there are many to object against religion in our own days,
there are not in these. They have noticed well the testings religion has
been subjected to, and the way in which she has come out of each test,
exhibiting conspicuously her sterling worth. Therefore they wisely make
that use of her she deserves. They allot her that position her merit
demands. They give her the honor which is her due. They give her
the controlling reins of all things, and instead of driving post haste into
fanaticism, they advance on with glorious rapidity to unbounded success.
Now who can find fault with them ? Can anything be pointed out to
them better ? If they find this makes them wise and good, happy and
virtuous, holy and useful, generous and free, diligent and successful, great
and powerful, rich and influential, don’t let anyone be grieved on their
account that they give it the chief place. And if they prove by their
constant experience that this makes their country happy and free, forcible


in strength, safe in security, satisfied with plenty, joyous with abundance
of peace,, rich through the supply of wealth, great through their wisdom,
successful through the smile of heaven, exalted through the abundance
of virtue, and loved by reason of the overflow of her goodness, and to
tower above all the nations of the earth because of the prospering hand
of her God upon her, do not on this account, and because she loves to
have it so, let anyone taunt her, or sorrow because of it, or because she
prefers to cling to the religion which brings about so glorious a result.
Each one has seen his natural state. Each has felt that he has lain an
unhewn stone in the rough quarry of nature. Each has felt his feet fast
in the mud of actual sin and original transgression, So each has been
directed, as we are now, towards Him who can chisel out of the rough
block an image likened unto the pattern of heavenly beauty. Each has
had to look towards Him who can extricate from the woful plight in which
he finds himself, and obtaining his requirement, he becomes truly
blessed. A new nature is the chiselling which fashions him after the
image of them in heaven, and being set upon a rock he treads on firm
ground. What can be more blessed than his position when he feels thus
safe under the immediate protection of God? What can be more
blessed than his state, when within his heart the old evil has departed
away ? He finds pride, wilfulness, selfishness, ignorance, inclination to
vice, aversion to good, hardheartedness, malice, viciousness, with every
hateful thing, gone from his heart, and in their place love, peace, joy,
gladness, sweetness of disposition, delight in what is good, amiability,
gentleness, goodness, with every good thing. What can he do but fix
his affections strongly, irrevocably, unchangeably, eternally, upon Him
who has done all this for him ? And having thus got within his heart
the root of the matter, depend upon it all other things, all outward acts,
all words, and all indulged in thoughts, will be in thorough conformity
with what God has put in his heart. Having heart religion themselves,
they put away those outward tests which are falling gradually into disuse
in our own day. That a man have a heart full of love to Jesus is more
delightful to them, as it is to all true disciples of Christ, than if they
belonged to their own party, or held the same opinions, or saw everything
in the same light. That people hold their own opinions they feel is right
and good. That when love to God and man is the ruling principle per-
vading everything that is done, they feel that diversity in thought and
variety of opinion in such a case adds greatly to the beauty of the whole
body. Like as the landscape, a dull uniformity would be most disagree-
able, so exact resemblance and uniformity of opinion would be alike dull
and disagreeable. And as a oneness of avocation in our artificial world
would produce an universal glutting and stagnation, so would sameness
of thought. And as variety of thought and variety of avocation in the
artificial world produces activity, vitality, and stimulates each branch
onward to perfection, so dissimilarity of opinion in the spiritual world
they find induces activity, vigor, life, arouses the mental energies,
Stimulates searching into truth, affords a pleasing apparent contrast in
things mutually and really agreeing, evolutions of beauty where else it
would be buried in dull sameness., an expression of religion’s ability to


suit every shade of opinion, and gloriously to help to bring forth from
where beauty is, all those gems of divine revelation that shine so
resplendently that they may be set in the circle of the earth before the
eyes of men, diversified in color, but harmonious in association, and one
blending with another all conspire to set forth the most perfect model of
spiritual beauty imaginable. All their duties are well done, and performed
with pleasure. Whether it be naturally pleasant or otherwise, love gives
sweetness to it. The Sabbath they particularly like to set apart for a
great court day, where all, old and young, more particularly gather to pay
their respects around the throne of the Great King. The homage is due
to him, —not that he does not deserve and receive homage every day;
but a day of particular attendance at court is necessary. Necessary that
they may behold his glory and be properly impressed with his excellent
majesty ; that they may see the beauty of the Lord and be attracted
towards a permanent residence at court themselves ; that they may see
more of his kind manner of ruling his subjects, to set them more in love
with his government; that they may learn more about his laws, and be
able to perform them the better. And, also, it is necessary, that they
may do homage for all the bounties that have flowed to them through his
good government, for protection, peace, inward and outward; plenty at
home and abroad, within and without; for success in trade, advancement
in knowledge, growth in mental and spiritual good, for preservation in
physical health, and for all the multifarious benefits, which a man cannot
sum up, but which descend largely into the midst of every people, and
especially amongst those whose God is the Lord. These times are such
that they are eagerly sought for. The splendour of earthly courts fades
before that of this ; the brilliancy of this pageantry eclipses altogether
the greatest show that adorns the festivities of Kings. Never did any of
their occasions pass off with the eclat each of these does. Never was
such a congregation of greatnesss, such an association of splendour. The
glory of heaven beams in sight. The innumerable company of heavenly
courtiers gather round dressed in robes of imperishable texture. The
Great King sweetly condescends to accept the meanest, and smile benig-
nantly on the most unknown. And each is sent away back again with
the exultant thought that they are accepted at court, that their names are
engraven among its sacred archives, and that their King is unchangeable
love. No wonder then that the expectant presenters often cannot contain
for fair joy, that they sometimes audibly express their admiration, or that
their sense of the glory almost weighs them down from the intensity of
its grandeur. No wonder the return of such days is eagerly hailed ; no
wonder upon its return the world of business is temporarily vacated for
the greater attractions of the King’s court. Nor is their respect for their
Great Lord confined to these services, but through all the ramifications of
the affairs of life, reverence to him, and zeal for the honor of his majesty,
characterises each action, whether it be secret or whether it be public.
In conformity with this they have the profoundest feeling for the well-
being of each one of his subjects, and a consistent attention to their duty
in this respect. What will make for the delight and comfort of each one,
and for his greater ability to rightly employ the present life, gives them


great satisfaction because the welfare of their loving Lord’s territories is
then enhanced, and in the well-being of his creatures with their full flow
of prosperity and happy content, the revenues of his glory are greatly
increased. All things then that they can do which will tend to this they
do with their might. Those things, which committed, would militate
against this, they habitually abstain from. So if they have received a
provocation or what they thought was a provocation, (for such things will
sometimes rise up even among this community, for all are not perfect;)
they will not retaliate ; for that they know would only widen the breach,
and tend to admit the devil to such an extent as would greatly interfere
with the orderly carrying on of the affairs of the community. So the
Bible method is adopted, the thing is spoken of between the parties alone,
and mutual explanations generally suffice. As no one thinks of taking
advantage of a person’s mildness in this respect, it can be done with
safety. Litigation which causes so much harm is thus avoided, and the
bonds that unite society made stronger and sweeter than ever. Such are
the people of the good time coming with respect to their neighbourly
behaviour. But their goodness ends not at Victoria’s boundaries. It
leaps beyond this narrow limitation and hastens to gladden and exalt the
whole of the human race. Their generosity pours itself out in overflow-
ings of money and strong armies of men of God to scatter blessings
among the less-favored sons of Adam. Her hard working printing
presses scatter such rays of heavenly light amidst the darkness of the
heathen world that it bids fair speedily to vanish entirely away. So no
missionary society is short of funds, no missionaries cry out for books,
no agency is short of men. By Victoria’s means the whole earth is being
lit up with Divine Light.
ON THE GOVERNMENT.
THE government of this future day it is naturally concluded will be a
very superior one. They have learned many lessons, and determine
to profit by them. They have the history of the past. They have looked
there to see where were the failings of others, and wherein lay others’
success. They have well studied the good old Bible and have carefully
noticed the principles of good government as taught there. And as they
viewed them of old time and their failings and successes, and received
those living in the earth during their own days, their national prosperity
or insignificant nothingness, and also took into consideration the language
of the good old Bible, they then could see in an unmistakeable light that
the nearer any country’s constitution assimilated to what is laid down in
the Bible, the more happy she seemed, the more vigorous her people, and
by far the more she prospered. When they observed this, and saw the
emphatic declaration of the rule of man’s conduct shining forth with
sunlight brilliancy as the ladder whereby to attain to the, most glorious
28
ON THE OOVEENMENTi


eminences a country can, then how could they do otherwise than to
fashion the governmental departments in accordance with them ? They
find an admirable guide in the Word of God. They find an unsurpassable
teacher in the Holy Spirit of Grod. By this blessed agency their minds
have been enlightened, they have seen the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ, and know of a truth that all other knowledge is poor and worth-
less compared to this. It is the gold. Rather the philosopher’s stone
which turns everything it touches to gold. That this may be spread about
is of course one most particular end to be obtained, if happiness and
success are to make their land to smile. They are not going to be bigots.
By no means. But knowing that the legislative power is trusted in their
hands by the All Ruling Providence for the good of man, it is their
bounden duty to perform this work in order to gain that blessed purpose.
That this may be done everything that would militate against man’s
attainment to it must be removed or effectively annulled; and everything
that would encourage and help, or that would render the way plainer
and more easy of access, must be thoroughly performed. They interfere
not with man’s creed. They set not before man one authorised code of
religious opinions and demand that everyone conforms himself to that.
This would be foreign to their purpose. This would be against the plan
and design of the Heavenly Architect who in devising the glorious
spiritual structure of his Church meant not that each part of the building
should be exactly alike, but would have one part to assume one appear-
ance, another that which would most become it, and in every part a
variety suited to its position in the building, so that so far from detracting
from its beauty it adds to it; and so far from being separate establish-
ments, are necessary portions of the main structure ; and when all
combined and united together will make the whole look glorious and
attractive in the sunshine of the smile of God. This is what they want.
They want everyone to be good. Then, when each one strives after this,
everyone’s opinion will only be a help to arrive at this blessed goal. In
order that the goal may be arrived at, by all, if possible, they feel
convinced every effort must be put forward that it is possible for a
government to do without interfering with the liberty of the subject.
And this they set themselves to do with all wisdom and prudence. They
feel it is the bounden duty of every man to serve God with all his mind,
soul, and strength. That every man should be left to do this in that way
his own conscience dictates, —the manner of service being more than ever
a man’s private affair between himself and God. That each is in duty
bound to abstain from everything that would be injurious to another.
And that everyone ought to try and make the other’s position and state,
as happy, excellent, and prosperous as he can. To gain these ends all
their laws tend. Rightly judging, that, as the farmer cannot manage his
farm to advantage unless he have learned his business, nor the navigator
direct his ship across the pathless ocean except he have studied naviga-
tion, so if people have not been instructed in these things it is so
desirable to practise, how will they practise them ? Therefore, they set
themselves to have the young instructed well and thoroughly in Scriptural
truths. This is seen after ; for upon the -right performance of it depends


the future man and the future country. So the most important element
of instruction becomes Biblical knowledge. And by this means is
secured a good groundwork of moral virtue, of duty to man and duty to
God. The mind becomes thoroughly alive to the importance of acquiring
other knowledge, its appetite becomes strong and hearty for such
acquisitions, and its principles urge it to make them with all conceivable
diligence. The men who teach are examined as to their ability to teach
religious subjects as others; and they have to shew ability to do it in
such a way that a good thing is not made obnoxious ; but that a truly
delightful theme be set off in all its native beauty and attractiveness.
Having seen that the young have put within them those principles which
will fit them for a glorious career as the future upholders of the honor of
our country, and given them such an impetus in the right direction as
will, if circumstances are at all favorable, make them rapidly advance in
a career of glory, they have next to remove far away those pestilential
hindrances which so often mar the best work that has been bestowed on
rising youth. One that often falls in the way of the youthful devotees at
the shrine of literature is the abominable assemblage of works of a most
baneful character. Their name, however, is legion. They contain every
shade of evil from the slightest sneer at religion, to the bold, unblushing
depiction of scenes of the greatest vice. Some appear so humble in
their tone, and so devoted to the good of man, so attractive in their
style, and their open expression so apparently sound, that it is hard, very
hard, to get at the under current of evil that pervades them. But it is
in them. And by reason of its secrecy it produces an introduction for
the books into places where else they would never be allowed, and thus,
the way is made plain for those of a more glaring sort; and thus on, till
the mind is completely vitiated, and the worst of books may be then
read, and the mind prepared for performing, by regular degrees, those
things so injuriously inculcated by this sort of literature. Or the way in
which some of the better sort treat the subject of religion make them
exceedingly pernicious. The religious characters are always put down as
hypocrites, or unpleasant, fault-finding individuals, or as those who hold
themselves up as much better than their associates, and thus are made to
appear mean and worthless, as arrogance will make anyone to appear.
This is quite contrary to fact. A truly religious person is the best com-
panion you can have in the w r orld, and it is exceedingly wnong to prejudice
the mind more against religion than it naturally is. All books that have
such a tendency to injure our rising or risen generation, will be effectually
disallowed; and a class of literature of a contrary sort, like to what we
have referred to in another part, which will refine and elevate and bring
about an amount of good we cannot now estimate will be as effectualy
encouraged. There is another net for the entanglement of youth, and
one that effectually retains in its meshes those of older years. It per-
forms its work by presenting before the imagination scenes of evil, it tries
to attract with the professed charms of debasement, or it would lead away
from rectitude by pouring into the ear profanity or obscenity. Its
endeavours are to attract by dressing itself in the garb of gaiety and
merriment. It strives to persuade the young that it is their true friend,


and that if they will but submit to its guidance, it will take them by the
hand and attend them through scenes of the greatest pleasure and
enjoyment. If they do yield to its seductive voice they will soon become
better acquainted with their guide. They will find that the habiliments
and words are the only attractions. Down in the heart there is an
intense desire to bring down from the high exaltation of manhood or
youthful integrity to the low estate of meanness and degradation. Or if
its intentions be found out not to be quite so hateful, they are, at any
rate, to transform the diligent worker and ardent student into a lazy drone
and an idle pleasure seeker. And if its hateful influence can be escaped
from, happy, indeed, are they who do so. But how many are they who
being once led in within the whirl of the pool, are drawn slowly, perhaps,
but surely, towards the destruction of their elevation in life, their useful-
ness to their fellows, and their real overflowing and perpetual enjoyment.
But there are other scenes far different to these, which promise pleasure
equally with the other, but so much better than the other, give not death
instead, but really perform what they promise. They are attractive but
they are beneficial ; they are enjoyable but instructive ; they promise
amusement and give proper relaxation. No harm is to be got from them.
No serpent’s tooth is lurking among their flowers. They charm not to
deceive. Used in moderation their effect is exceedingly healthful. Now
the government know how to decide with respect to these. The last are
worthy of being encouraged. The first are seen in all their deceptive-
ness. The parliament take their management into hand. They deal with
them as we do with natural pestilential nuisances whose odour invades
the sanctity of our dwellings. The moral odour of these affects our
people with malignant disease, and therefore the extermination of moral
beauty. Then the course of procedure is plain. They themselves must
he swept away. And driven away by the power of legislative enactment
are all those pernicious amusements that have the injurious effect we have
described, never again to pollute our happy land. But the terrible demon
who stalks abroad so boldly at the present day against whom such
ferocious attacks are made, but who is like the wonderful-headed dragon
of olden times, as one head is cut off another grows in its place; for
truly after all the attempts made against the sale of strong drink (the
name of this terrible individual), and his power was thought to have been
much decreased, it rises up in fresh strength in another quarter. But it
is a matter of great consolation that efforts are still being made against
it, some valiant Theseus still lays hold of his sword and aims deadly
blows at the many-headed monster. The blow being aimed at him now
is only too weak. But God grant prosperity to it and make it a precursor
of what it will be to many others, which will result in its death. By the
time lam writing of his death has taken place. His ravages have been
so immense, seven lads and lasses would not satisfy this ravenous
minotaur year by year, but hundreds and thousands yearly were swept
into his capacious maws, and still it cried “more, yet more.” So a more
decisive step was determined on. So one time of Parliamentary gathering
the house of governmental wisdom was startled by the introduction of a
bill for the annihilation of the traffic. The country was surprised but


gladdened, and a glorious shout of joy rose up simultaneously from the
whole community as it was announced that the drink traffic was a thing
of the past, And then, 0 then, what prosperity attended our country !
It seemed as if a curse had been removed, —a blackening influence, a
pall which screened from her view the smile of heaven. But now, the
curse being removed, blessings come down, and the land, from shore to
river, re-echoes with shouts of joy. The government of our day are too
lax with respect to a thing called Sabbath-breaking which has invariably
brought evil upon a country practising it. Thus the ancient Jews were
chid and punished by God because of their propensities in this direction.
And the right observance of this holy day has always brought upon the
observers his smile. Not the mere keeping of it in a perfunctory manner,
but the thoroughly keeping from all labour that tended to worldly profit,
and zealously engaging in his service. Not keeping it as a day of inflex-
ible rigidity; but as a day of cheerful consecration to the honor of
God. Not a day of mournfulness and discomfort, but one of sweet-
ness and hallowed delight. Not a day of vexation and depression
of spirits, but a day of joy, of lifting up, of glorious exaltation.
Not a day whose dreary hours slowly drag themselves away, whose
weariness they would fain escape from by early indulging in sleep ; but
a day so thoroughly enjoyable that they fain would have each moment
to be an hour. A day when each is made happier, holier, wiser, richer,
and better, when each body becomes stronger, each mind more vigorous,
and each faculty more able for the work of another week. Now this is
the sort of day it is meant to be. When this is brought about God is
honored as well as people blessed. But the allowing public desecration
of this hallowed day,—trains to be run, pleasure excursions to take place,
unnecessary works to be performed, shops to be opened, drink to be sold,
and a multiplicity of business to be transacted, is enough to wear out the
best energies of a nation, is a public dishonor of God, is destructive of
our best national virtues, hinders effectually the right training of youth,
entangles them in the snare of the devil, and is sure to be followed by
destruction and woe. This the government have perceived. And seeing
that true happiness and benefit to the people, as well as true honor to
God, are contained in the proper observance of the holy day, they take
those steps as far as they have a right to interfere to bring it about. These
are some of the good things that the government of this time performs.
But to enumerate all would take a volume themselves. To tell of how
they legislate in the affairs -of agriculture, with respect to the protection
of property, for the developement of the country’s resources, for the
increase of trade, for the advancement of the arts, for the increase of
knowledge, for the encouragement of inventions, for the promotion of
discoveries in every department, for the protection of each one’s liberties,
and for the advancement and good of the country at large, (and the world
as far as their influence extends) would indeed be a long story. But let
it suffice to know that their praise has gone from mouth to mouth.
Little children are taught to look up to them as their great benefactors.
Their young hearts glow with gratitude toward them to whom they are
so much indebted. The grown up generation call them blessed, “Many


legislators,” say they, “have done well, hut ye excel them all. Under
your care the whole world speaks aloud of our virtues. We are loved by
all the earth. Within, our country enjoys the most unalloyed happiness.
We see one advantage after another appearing into view. We behold
each branch of industry vigorously advancing along a prosperous career*
Evil is most rigorously suppressed. Good is most advantageously
encouraged. Misery departs away more and more, day by day. Peace,
happiness, and plenty of all good, comes flowing in with yet greater
abundance. Liberty is enjoyed on every side. Our country has become
a blessing to the whole earth, and well, now, may we say, a fulfilment has
come of those words seemingly prophetically uttered by Sir T. Mitchell
as he from some mountain eminence beheld the fertile plains, and smiling
valleys of the land rejoicing at his feet, and towards which through many
a hardship and many a struggle, she has been making her way upwards,
and having at last with God’s help shaken off the terrible oppression of
her burden of national and social ills, now rises in all the honesty and
life, all the glory and joy, all the richness and wealth, all the prosperity
and influence, and all the other things that make for man’s welfare and
God’s glory, so that she does indeed merit, she has indeed earned, the
glorious, thrilling, soul-filling, heart cheering title of Australia Felix,- —
Australia the Happy.
Part 11.
IN WHAT DOES THE TRUE SOURCE OF A COUNTRY’S
PROSPERITY CONSIST?
HAYING noticed what constitutes the true prosperity of a country,
and having exhibited Victoria in a highly advanced state of pros-
perity, it naturally follows that we try to find out the true source from
whence such prosperity flows, and having traced it up, to enlarge upon
it, so as to ascertain the best means of keeping it pure and ensure a
continual supply of that glorious prosperity we so much desire. We all
know well that every good thing cometh down from the Father of lights,
And because of this it might be said “All then we can do is to wait upon
him, and there would be a solution of the problem,” or “Let us endeavor
to serve him, and then we shall have his favorable help.” But the thing
is, how shall we wait upon him ? What sort of service will be most
likely to bring this about ? We know very well if God does a part, we
have likewise a part to perform; and unless we comply with the
stipulated conditions we cannot expect reasonably that God should
perform his. In what department of labor shall we find this secret
store ? Where shall we look for that desideratum which is to render our
service acceptable, and which will cause Victoria not only to be great,
but to continue increasing in her greatness ? We know there must


always be some suitability between the means we make use of to the end
we intend to arrive at. If a man try to build up a fire by throwing
water on it he will put it out. If a man said he wanted to learn morality
and yet frequented drinking dens and gambling saloons, we know he would
just arrive at the contrary. Or if a legislator professes to stay drinking
customs by increasing the temptation to them, we will universally agree
that he will effectually increase them. So if were to decide wrongly as to
what was the true human source of prosperity, and put forth our
strength for the increasing of this, we most likely would cause to flow
out upon us, misery instead of joy ; wretchedness instead of blessedness ;
and universal deterioration in place of prosperity. So necessary does it
become to find out, and work at the true, and only the true source.
The ideas with respect to this are very various. Some would place
it in an unbounded wealth diffused abroad so generally that each had a
portion. Not that they suppose it to be in the wealth itself, but this
being largely distributed gives to each ample means for obtaining good.
It gives means for procuring what administers to knowledge, and what
will continually set before the mind lessons of virtue and of duty to God.
Likewise it enables you to distribute more largely among those who need,
which is declared by God to be exceedingly gratifying to him. But where
is there a case of this having been a source of bringing about such a
noble consecration to what is good ? Did anyone ever by mere money
become noble ? Does it bring about with it an extensive train of virtues ?
Does it ensure a right use of itself by the owner thereof ? If so, then
our rich men would be patterns of generosity, and of the wise use of
their means as God directs. But is it so ? Is it not generally the case
that poor (or comparatively so) give more, and far more in proportion
than rich people ? And except the wealthy have something more besides
wealth, is it not generally the case that people of moderate means use
their incomes more in accordance with the way in which God would have
them ? Where does Pride flourish most ? Indolence ? Self gratification ?
Love of flattery ? Forgetfulness of God ? Is it not chiefly where wealth
is ? And is not its natural tendency thus, when it comes into the pos-
session of a depraved nature ? Because of what it procures him, it
seems naturally to lead him into many wrong things, unless he have a
nature that is repugnant to such things. It exalts his position, this
engenders pride. Because he can easily procure luxuries, it induces self-
indulgence. And because all he wants appears within his reach, he
becomes forgetful of God. It is noticeable, too, that many countries,
while poor, were honest, brave, and generous, but when riches came
pouring in like a flood, evils of different sorts came pouring in with them
which speedily made sure the nation’s downfall. So it is not in wealth
that the source of a country’s greatness lies.
But in commerce surely we shall find something to lead us to hope
that we are near, if not at the source we want. Does it not promote
activity, industry, and brings out into lively exercise the faculties of mind
and body ? Does it not direct the attention to a good, wholesome
channel ? Does it not stimulate the man to honest endeavour ? Does it
not force a man on in the path of improvement ? Is not a man who engages


in it a benefactor of his country ? Does it not tend to diffuse the
blessings of civilisation ? Has not it likewise helped to propagate the
gospel ? Doubtless it is beneficial. Its benefits we would not for a
moment deny. But yet did it ever stimulate a people to seek God ? Did
it ever make a people sober, respectable, or virtuous ? In what part of
commerce does that regenerative influence lie ? What philosopher has
yet discovered it ? Where is the man that ever traced his good citizen-
ship to commerce ? What laws of commerce are they that teach your
duty to God ? When does it direct you to look for your neighbour’s
good as for your own ? We know of much good that has accompanied
it, but the good was not the produce of commerce. We know of many
of its devotees who are great benefactors of their race, but do they trace
their benevolent dispositions to commerce ? Has not commerce prin-
cipally engendered selfishness ? Has it not produced and inflamed a
spirit of self-aggrandisement ? In order to prosper itself has it not been
the means of originating many base schemes ? And in order to vindicate
its rights have not many barbarities been committed ? While it stimulates
a man to exercise, is it not that he may enrich himself ? While it pro-
motes improvement and tends to diffuse civilisation, is it not merely to
aggrandise itself ? If it has cleared the way for the Gospel it has not
been for the Gospel’s sake. And there is not a solitary instance of it
having been the means of doing any moral good through any virtue
innate to itself. ’Tis true God commands “Be not slothful in business,”
and this diligence commerce incites to. So by practising diligence you
please him. But we must remember that duty to God is a symmetrical
affair, and not composed only of a toe or a finger nail, which this dili-
gence might be likened to. And from whence is commerce to find the
rest of the body ? Commerce is bad or good according to the spirit
diffused into her. So it is necessary to have a good stream flowing through
it to make it good. Then the source must be looked for elsewhere.
A good government must surely be this source, for we cannot
properly reckon up the blessedness it confers upon a country. This is an
idea which comes up very much nearer the mark. But yet through it
may be said David brought a deal of good upon Israel by his wholesome
laws and just administration, and we have abundance of evidence of the
blessing a virtuous and wise senate bestows upon a country, we may
still say, “This good did not drop into them as from the passing air. All
this excellence was not originally within the body. Their goodness is
only an evidence of some source ulterior to themselves from whence they
derive it.” A good government may frame wholesome laws, and
administer affairs so wisely, that, as far as it is the province of a govern-
ment, they may make things pleasing to God and beneficial to man ; but
yet it is only composed of men, and unless you have some means of
keeping up the standard of the men, you can have no dependence on
your good government lasting, for of the changeability of man we have
so many and painful proofs. And besides, if you keep not up this, the
fact of being armed with power is a terrible inducement to the naturally
depraved human nature to abase it. But our liberal form of government
is a great means, we are thankful to say, of preventing much abuse. But


even the very best of governments, by means of the weakness of human
nature, when a continual flow of prosperity has attended their efforts,
have become inflated with a notion of self-importance which has put a
decided stop to their being benefactors to their country. So it appears
evident enough that you must, from some source or other, derive men of
such firm principles that they will be unalterably good, and ensure
continuance of good government.
Well, then, we have only to take another step and then we arrive at
what must be the true source ; for when we give people a good education,
which is the step we mean, you will then send forth those who will be
capacitated for occupying with honor and credit those positions assigned
them. And they, with all private individuals, being well educated, will be
well fitted for ensuring continuously the advancement of our country.
But what kind of an education are you going to give them ? If you mean
by a good education only teaching them things we usually call secular,
and leave out a good solid foundation of religion and virtue, all your labor
will be in vain. You will not gain the end you contemplate. You never
find that education, apart from duty to God and man, can make people
truly the perpetuators of good in their country. “Educate without the
Bible,” says one, “and you have educated devils.” And but too often
do we see instances of the truth of it. Education alone preserveth not
from evil, Grammar and geography diffuse not of themselves morality
through a land, and raise its religious tone, and enable it to consecrate
itself to the service of the Creator. They are indeed excellent. We
would not be without them for anything. But we want a spirit flowing
from a pure source transfusing into these to make them certain helps to
our country’s advancement. We must go deeper. We must penetrate
down to the very roots. And when we have got them good w r e may
depend on the tree being good likewise. We must go right to the foun-
tain head, and when we have made or ascertained that that is pure we
may be sure the streams are so too. What are the roots ? Where are
the fountains ? A good, firm, kind, vigorous, moral and religious disci-
plining and training. In the secular, moral and religious instruction,
training, and management of all who have the work of training the young,
or who may be held responsible by God for their bringing up. This is
the source, and the true source of a nation’s bane or prosperity. Have
work done properly in this department, and under the blessing of heaven
such people will be sent out as the world will be proud of. Have this
work neglected, or let the children grow up without discipline or proper
training in the things of God, and you can go no surer way to ensure a
country’s downfall. What is necessary to be done here may be compre-
hended in one word, if it be used in its most extensive sense. Compliance
with what is contained in this word will demand that God be obeyed, and
this includes that the child shall be taught of him and his duty to him,
and be taught all that will constitute him an efficient citizen. Also that
he do God’s will, and try faithfully to serve his generation with respect
to moral, religious, physical, and every other benefit. That he obey his
father and mother, and learn to reverence them, and obey all good laws/
human and divine, and obey all teaching that would cause him to leave


the world better than he found it. It is not very hard to perceive that
the word is “obedience.”
THE SOURCE ENTERED INTO.
WHEN we take obedience to task, and penetrate into its inner
recesses, and find out its real meaning, it seems comprehensive
enough to include all that would benefit our children, and prepare them
by its powerfully fashioning ability (of course, under grace) to be glorious
examples of what is good. The sound of harshness contained in the
word has flown. There is no folly uttered forth from any part of its
recesses. Kindness is its principal inmate, but she takes firmness by the
hand. Persuasion occupies a chief chamber, but she has a fellow-occupier
named wisdom. And thus, though varied in her constituent parts, there
is such a symmetry and just proportion existing among them, that all is
sympathy of feeling and harmony of action. Now, who is there who
would not be persuaded that this is just the very thing to meet our
wants ? But that the difficulty, they will very likely assert, is, to obtain
Madam Obedience’s introduction, and the exercise of her control, upon
the free admission of her claims among the families of the people of
Victoria. Whether it can or not is a question we are not going to deter-
mine in this place ; the thing we have to observe is, that this, along with
all that embraces the right culture of youth, but this chiefly, is the only
thing which will make a country what it should be ; and so necessary is
it, that it is just resolvable to this, that if prosperity of the most glorious
character is to mark the progress of our land, we must have this carried
out ; but if we are careless of this, and will be satisfied that it should
sink down in beastly degradation, we can go no surer way to bring it
about than by neglecting proper education.
Let us gain an introduction to good Education’s establishment, and
see how she conducts the matter in hand. Examine how she imparts
instruction, and what she imparts, and then let us suppose, as we then
can do fairly, what sort of material will issue forth from her establish-
ment, and whether it will be of the sort which will make the country to
be what we assert it will. Observe how she instructs her attentive chiL
dren first in a knowledge of their Creator, impresses upon their minds
the goodness of his character, his wondrous love in the gift of what was
most precious to himself—his dear Son, —of his claims upon every
infant or youthful learner through that gift, and through his creating
them, and preserving them from day to day, and of his justice, his wis-
dom, his power, especially as exhibited in the stupendous work of the
universe; his omnipresence; his amazing omniscience, as discovered in
his being acquainted with every thought of the heart:—what he will have
them to do ; —to love him and all his creatures, with the different ways in
which that will be forthshown; —to honor and respect superiors, and


especially parents ; to diligently labor to provide things honest in the
sight of all men ; to do all those things which are needful to he done in
the comprehensive duty to God and our neighbour, and that with all their
might. But she stays not here, as some would superciliously say, and
then charge us with desiring only to make people religious, and not
prepare them for the work of life in this world. As if what has been
already said did not really embrace everything, which only their short-
sightedness prevents them from seeing. But, as we just said, she, in
the course of her instructions, stays not here. She knows they have all
a moral nature, and though so nearly allied to the spiritual as to be almost
the same, yet her wisdom teaches her to educate this distinctly from the
other. She shows each one the horrible form of vice. She paints him
to the eye of each young learner in the true colours of its own hideous-
ness, and imparts a lively fear of the dreadful touch of such a horribly
loathsome appearance. And the moral thus becomes the handmaid of her
companion the spiritual nature, by making more repugnant still that
which has been discommanded. While thus looking at our good
instructress, we will perceive she likewise portrays to them in the most
beautiful form that her witching hand can fashion itself to do, decked
with all the beauteous perfections which so become her, and so truly
belong to her, adding every touch that her master hand can so well give,
that she may exhibit herself in all her glowing loveliness, —she thus
portrays virtue to their gaze, and renders more delightful, and more
attractive, those things in which it is desirable for us to excel. While we
thus delight ourselves in this admirable school, we find that she insists
strongly on industry, perseverance in what is right and good, and tem-
perance, &c., well knowing that the reverse of these are great outlets at
which good pours ; and inlets through which the evil streams. Then we
we will perceive her change her lessons ; and remembering the intellectual
part of her listening group, she opens to their view, as suited to their
capacity, the glorious stores of general knowledge, and leads them
forward to a closer acquaintanceship. What will principally give a zest
to their appetite to incite to future attainments, as well as what will most
suitably prepare them for their future intended mode of life, she wisely
imparts first, and adds to the stock as opportunity affords. But how
well this wise instructress knows that if she place all these desirable
things in the mysterious nature within, thereby strengthening it, and
making it vigorous, but neglects the more apparent, more perishable
outward structure ; that the vigor within would be too much for the weak-
ness without, and would speedily cause its down-crumbling. Therefore,
like a good builder, who keeps all parts of the building in proportionate
strength, she has the outward frames of her pupils educated to the
development of their native strength ; to the rendering of them more
subserviently useful to the wants of their minds; to the keeping away of
many diseases which make a ready prey of bodies impaired with weak-
ness ; and to the rendering their vigor firm and active, even to the time
of very old age. Delighted with such a mode of teaching, we scarcely
know how to express ourselves, and can hardly tear ourselves away,
through the attractiveness of her system. But we are forced to take our


leave, fervently hoping that the influence of her system may spread far
and wide. Who can deny but we find here the true source of a country’s
grandeur ? If it be anything like a country at all, what can hinder its
climbing to the very summit of perfection’s height ? Are not these the
men, educated in this manner, who are just capable of bringing out a
country’s treasures ? Are not these the men, the indefatigable workers,
whose watchword is “Onwards” in every good thing ? The men who
never let the grass grow under their feet ? Who are always at some-
thing, and something improving ? These are men who put the
all-absorbing care of their own interests aside, and espouse those of
others, and their country in general; men who adore God, and act either
in public or in private, alone for his glory. Men of determined honesty,
of inviolable integrity ; of unquenchable zeal in the prosecution of any-
thing they undertake. Men of courage, men of honor, men of simplicity,
men of wisdom, men of knowledge, men of humility, men of kindness,
men who hate evil, men who adore what is good, men who would scorn a
mean act, but who would almost kill themselves in their earnest struggles
to abound in good. These are the men. The men of our country. And
who will say but this is the true source of all that is good and great.
And Victoria composed of such cannot fail, while God thus blesses her,
of attaining to the very pinnacle of fame and honor.
Part 111.
THINGS TO BE AVOIDED THAT WOULD HINDER A
COUNTRY’S PROSPERITY.
PRIDE.
THOUGH fair be the prospect yet the sailing is not all smooth into the
glorious harbour of our commonwealth’s exaltation. Many a sand-
bank beneath the ocean’s surface on which we may run aground and
stick for aye, many a rock upon which already many a bark well manned
by able politicians and others interested in a nation’s weal has been
dashed to pieces. These we want laying down upon our chart that their
latitude and longitude being ascertained they may be successfully avoided.
Pride seems about one of the most dangerous rocks that lie in the way of
either individual or national success. There is not an individual but
sometime or other finds this out. He aims at success. As his success
appears attained so pride grows. As pride enters, so folly enters ; and
how noticeable it is that as a man submits to the incoming of such a vile
intruder, he does, and says things of a sort he never else would think of,
they are so abominably foolish. If, by a common process of reasoning
we may estimate what he will be in a short time, by what he has become
in a like very little space, we can only come to the conclusion that it is a


very kind Providence which removes from him that which caused him to
act such folly before he becomes an entire fool. Now many men have
been like this; so it is no merely assumed case. People have been
noticed prospering in business, till their heads got so full of their
importance, that God was obliged to lessen their success lest they ruin
themselves. Others, when rising into public notice, have become so
intoxicated with the glorious elevation of their position that a fall was
most imminent. To save from such a catastrophe God has kindly
lowered such a one’s position, and brought him into a state of more
humble security. People often complain that fortune does not favor
them, when truly God in mercy keeps it back, lest it be a sword to slay
them; and so it is but witholding their destruction from them. There-
fore, the blame is with themselves, and the mercy with God. There can
be nothing more suicidal than a yielding to pride. It is the most silly thing
imaginable. A person gets proud, boasts of his acquirements, and this
very boasting causes their loss. Nebuchadnezzar was prospered in his
kingdom till he began to point with haughty pride to the famous things
he had gathered in Babylon; to famous Babylon itself; and pointing
east, west, north, and south, extolled the size and glory of his dominion.
’Twas then, and not till then, that he heard a voice saying, “ Thy glory
is departed from thee.” As he was boasting of his possessions they
were departing away from him. Thus it is with every proud person.
Thus it is with every proud country. While a nation is humble and low
in its own sight, it is much wiser in its doings than when it becomes
uplifted. Nothing eats the wisdom out of all classes like pride. How
incomparably foolish are some of the actions of proud states as narrated
by historians. The Carthaginians, for instance, when about to engage
in a naval battle with the Romans, who till then had never been engaged
in such a fight, were quite sure of the victory, and sang the song of
triumph in their foolish pride. Bnt on nearing Mylae and entering into
engagement with the Romans, they lost eighty out of one hundred and
thirty vessels, and their admiral had to flee in a small boat. In their
foolish intoxication, how the French, before the battle of Agincourt, being
so proudly confident in themselves, and feeling so certain of putting to
flight so many fewer, half-starved Englishmen, that during the night
preceding the battle they actually played at dice for the prisoners they
were to take on the morrow. On the morrow the English took more of
French prisoners than they themselves amounted to, besides slaying
many thousands, and gaining a complete victory. Pride lays open both
government and governed to be a prey of designers on every side, to
whose hands they are generally given over by God. Their language,
how great it sounds ; their actions, how poor they are. There is not a
state upon earth perhaps that has declined, but what can trace their
declination to pride in the first instance. ’Tis certain none declined till
they became proud. While humble, at any rate, they kept their estate.
If a nation be of the past, we can trace in history the cause of their
downfall. Pride wails forth with all its melancholy sound the key-
note of their destruction. They reached a certain height. They
waxed too fat; they swelled with a sense of their imperial dignity. The


next beholder gazed upon them fallen down from their high estate,
shorn of their honors, spoiled of their powers, rolling in the dust of
dissolution. Let England allow the foot of pride to stamp out of exis-
tence the sweet flower of humility which now flourishes within her
boundaries, and how speedily will her splendour be on the wane. Let
Victoria become haughty instead of teachable and lowly, and it requires
no prophet to say that her greatness will never increase, her exaltation is
at an end. Pride wears away the strength of countries. For instead of
making efforts by patiently and carefully endeavoring to put life and
vigor into every part of the community, and thereby perfect the strength
of the whole, she falsely assumes she is strong, and places her reliance
in that assumption, and makes that assumption her strength, instead of
making her strength the uniting together of every well strengthened part.
So when a false assumption is a country’s strength, how strong is that
country ? When there is anything to be done, pride makes a nation to
trust that, as they are so great, it cannot but be well performed. And
so all the little niceties of arrangement are neglected. And swallowed up
by this voracious, devouring notion, is all that is prudent or cautious.
So that no precautions are taken, no preparations are made. Instead of
which, in that lie, “that it is sure to succeed,” it plants its confidence,
and the people only find out their folly when they are ruthlessly torn away
from their houses ; or that their country’s prosperity falls destructively
about their ears. Pride blinds the eyes. She cannot see into the
fawning of flatterers who crowd around, praising her greatness, admiring
her institutions ; when they, like parasitical plants, flourishing round a
tree, but cling to her that they may draw nourishment from her, and thus
add strength to themselves while they detract from hers. And as pride is
ever addicted to bestow upon that which feeds her appetite with her much
desired morsels, she, in her blindness, cannot discern the flattering deceit
of her adulators, nor the truly advantageous mode of disbursing her
revenues : and instead of using them beneficially, encourages these all-
absorbing flies to cling yet closer and closer, by putting within their
powers of appropriation that golden honey so suited to their taste. So
is a country’s strength dissipated, her energies wasted, and a herd of
lazy drones fed to corpulency while her true supporters are thinned and
weakened by these continual abstractions of her strength. And it also
has the abominable effect of so exalting a people who are under its des-
potic sway in an estimation of the importance of their own opinion, that
its excellency is an uncontradieted fact with them, no matter whether man
or even God exclaim against it. And what can be the result of this self-
will but a going forth obstinately in a way which often leads to destruction ?
A plan is originated ; it meets the views of those in power. Man appeals
against it. Our homes are at stake. Our children’s future is endangered.
God speaks from his word. He denounces it. He shows its evil. No
matter. Self-will has the lead. This is the path ! And though its
termination be in destruction how eagerly it is followed. It would bear
away the state in the same way in which a fiery and impetuous horse,
having thrown off the control of bit and bridle, carries his rider at
tremendous speed along some dangerous path, so hazardous a race, that


if he escape with his life it is a wonder. Pride is the fiery subtle poison
of the fangs of the deadly serpent,—the arch enemy of man. Once let
these poison fangs send some of their terrible contents, burning, urging
their fiery course through the veins of a state, they will irritate, inflame,
and consume what is lovely and pure ; vex and annoy ; inflate with
high notions _ every member; enfeeble every right pulsation; embitter
every joy with repining discontent; scatter throughout the whole, its
fever-stricken particles; and change the temperate, wholesome, nature of
the whole into a diseased and loathsome mass of approaching dissolution.
Pride is the abominable vampire, which, while it fans its victim to deadly
slumber, at the same time sucks out the precious moisture which is its
life, and leaves it, almost bloodless, a corpse. It is the foul disease,
which, like some attacking our mortal frame, makes the man to appear
healthier and fatter and more vigorous, while the deceptive, insidious
worker within, is eating out the life, like the young of the ichneumon
within the caterpillar, and preparing the way for a more speedy death.
It is the hectic flush of a person in consumption, which, while it seems
to convey tidings of vigorous health, gathered from its rosy bloom,
enkindled eye, and apparently healthful appearance, to the experienced
eye, these are but signs of a speedily approaching dissolution. It is the
circling currents of the sea into which is gently drawn the noble ship;
at first, with great, seductive quietness ; then, as it becomes more
thoroughly drawn into its impetuosity, it hurries it on with greater speed ;
till at last, bearing it round and round with terrific violence, precipitates
it into the depths below. The black frowning rock looms ahead ; let the
men on board of our State ship keep a good look out, that by good
steering, and able commandership, she may pass in safety and get into
happier seas.
SLOTH.
BUT there is a low sandbank lying very near our course, over which
the waters generally very gently break, which has wrecked many
vessels. It only now and then comes in sight. There looks nothing
formidable about it. Like the small worm holes in a piece of timber
about to be used in the construction of a ship, look nothing just then,
but after that ship has been a little time at sea, when howling winds lash
ocean to a foam, and the straining timbers creak and groan, as the
tempest-tossed ship is wildly plunging amid the roaring waters, then it
is, when the worm has done its work, and the timber is eaten through,
that the faulty piece gives way, the waters rush in, and all on board find
a watery grave. There is an evil small in itself, as generally viewed, but
yet grows tremendously, and attains such a gigantic stature, that it
becomes truly formidable. An idea of its might, when it has got full
sway, may be gleaned from beholding the state of some of even the more


civilised countries of the earth. Turkey in Asia might become one of
the most productive countries of the whole earth. Her agricultural
resources are unbounded. The products of every climate might be sent
away from her shores, but through the prevalence of sloth it is a fertile
wilderness. The same evil genius presides in Spain, Portugal, and Italy,
and likewise in many fertile but uncultivated spots upon the earth’s
surface, keeping as deserts what might bloom as Paradises. It is subtle
in its influence. Its progress is marked by insinuating stealthiness. At
first it seems not particularly an enemy, but still its presence is disrepu-
table enough to cause its company to be looked upon rather suspiciously.
But owing to its accommodating manners,- —its agreement with the ease-
loving propensities of our nature, by-and-by a more friendly reception is
allowed it. Till soon, what was regarded with suspicion, and in some
measure treated as an enemy, is now welcomed as a friend. Having once
gained an acknowledged position, no longer does it wear the garb of a
friend, but appears in its own real state, that of an abominable tyrant,
exercising the most unjust and usurped sway over its unfortunate subjects,
and from which tyranny to escape is almost impossible. Then it is that
labor almost ceases. Efforts become feeble. Then it is that inventions
are few: that manufactures are slight ; that many are the idlers, and few
are the workers ; multitudinous the impoverishers, scarce the enrichers.
The enfeebled country, hardly able by abominable sloth to even put forth
her hand to feed herself with an industrious use of God’s bounties, soon
lies down in filth and wretchedness, poverty and ignorance, barbarity and
sensuality; and must, with respect to all civilisation, unless a revolution
come, speedily expire. Note how this insidious reptile intrudes and
exercises himself in robbing of strength the vigorous working members
engaged in their various active operations in order to the dissemination of
life and health through all the arteries and channels by which these are
conveyed to the sustentation of every part of our body politic. Here we
come across a group of merchants. It would indeed appear a better part
if they were to attend to the keeping a strict account of their affairs.
Minding their servants do their duty. Seeing their books are properly
kept. Inquiring into the state of the markets, exercising themselves to
obtain buyers, endeavoring to buy and sell to great profit, and striving
that affairs may go on prosperously. But sloth has usurped dominion.
Business is disagreeable. Idle chat is the thing. What are others
doing ? How about the doings of that man of fortune, instead of trying
to work themselves up to it ? How is this man so poor all at once ?
(Why by just the thing they are indulging in, though the same thing
blinds their eyes to it). Different amusements will then undergo the
assault and battery of their opinions, or they will unfold the interior life
of these things to each other’s gaze by the rehearsal of varied expe-
riences in connection with them. They will then wander off into other
fields whence to gather equally unprofitable fruits, and leave their own
orchards unpruned and uncared for. Their ability for application oozes
out in sluggish drops, and thus the strength wears away till, if it were to
spread, the mercantile business of the country, weakened with the loss
of her blood of activity, sinks down exhausted, and slowly expires. But


can sloth so affect the halls of our legislative that the sagacious guardians
of our public weal, will lose their active concern for her varied interests,
and lay them down to slumber while dangers are hovering around her
coasts, and far greater calamities are shaking and bestirring themselves
and making a preparation like giants to attack the indifferent populace
and if possible overwhelm them ? Can it ? Ay ; sloth steals its marches
into the marble halls of wide-awake legislators, and makes the time to be
spent in nonsense, and trying to outdo each other in mouthing words,
and trying to undo some little tie, which they aggravate into a gordian
knot of invasion of the rights of legislators. Or by way of variation the
refreshment room becomes a well frequented rendezvous, where between
the imbibing of reputed wit-inspiring, potent fluids, and the exhaling of
sociable, soothing, air-darkening clouds of unwholesome vapor, their
active energies may be thoroughly nursed and cradled, not to their
reviving, but to the yielding to the charms of the overwhelming influence
of slothful repose in the lap of idle indulgence. Good, serviceable
debate; real, hard, country-serving work, is at a decided discount. At
home, no private cogitations on the state of national affairs, therefore
no plan revolved over in the mind for the amelioration of any grievance ;
or the opening up of some new channel whence can flow in prosperity.
To attend to this work is too difficult, too laborious. Ease, deliverance
from close, consecutive, thinking ; freedom to kill the arduous hours
devoted to the management of the country’s wild-growing, to waste-
running political concerns, in the way most suited to their luxurious
tastes, is much preferred. Are our artisans affected in like manner ?
Has sloth paralysed their limbs, as it has the minds and actions of these
others ? Have they determined to live no longer on the products of
their own labours, but on what the;y can induce others to bestow ? Ho
they abhor the factory, loathe the mine, forsake the forge, abandon the
plough, leave unbuilt the ship, undug the mine, unprinted the morning
papers, unlighted the city, unfed the population ? Yes, if sloth hath
crept in among them and gained its end; and others with them are alike
affected. Schoolmasters neglect to teach the children; pastors leave
untended their flocks ; housewives are unconcerned about their homes.
Philosophers forsake their studies ; medical students repudiate proper
training; shipmasters no longer study navigation. Authors will not
compose ; men of mind will not think ; men of business will not act;
laborers will not work ; and on every side we would see sloth making
grand inroads upon us, throwing out its long sinewy tentaculae, embracing
in its suffocating folds our active industries, crushing out our very life
and power, that we, as-a dead and powerless mass, may be just ready for
the capacious maw of past existence.


SELF INDULGENCE.
BUT there is another evil we will do well to try and avoid, as it, when
compared with the others does not yield in point of badness. Like
many others similarly injurious, we are but too apt to fall into it. Our
natures have a leaning towards these things, and a little yielding prepares
us for submitting entirely to their authority. Self indulgence is one of
these. So easy is it to become a poor bond slave to this, that the
strongest, whilst boasting of their unconquerable temperance, have all
the time been coming under the yoke. They have, when feeling the
chains, struggled through their harsh restraint. But, alas ! they found
they were too securely bound to get free. Their fetters were unbreakable.
People get under this tyranny very simply. It is principally through the
mistaken kindness of those entrusted with youth, for the lessons which
lead to the habit are learned chiefly then. Dainties are supplied when
plain food should be. The child learns to love to choose that which
pleases most the palate, instead of what does most good. If not gratified,
it raises a storm, which soon wafts to its reach the required dainty. This
strengthens as he grows older, till he no longer eats in order to receive
strength, but derive pleasure. Nay, more than this, he cannot possibly
do without a daily investigation of the province of Epicurism to find out
those luxuries which will gratify his most exquisitely delicate appetite.
Now how easily this might be avoided, by showing them in early youth
that there was a place for luxuries, and also a place for temperate food.
That God had given the plain substantial for our principal nourishment,
but the others for very seldom use, because they are unadapted to pro-
mote vigor if used too frequently ; but when used occasionally may do as
a relish, or in some way repair a fault in our bodily health.' A distinction
would have been taught between the two. The using of the best would
follow as a natural consequence, to, perhaps, which would of course be
much the better, the thorough repudiation of anything but the plainest
fare. In this case we might reasonably suppose that we should have a
manly, vigorous, lot of people who would ably support the interests of
our country. But instead of this, if self-indulgence were allowed to
obtain an ingress, we should have a set of people who were fed and
liquefied with the most incongruous mixtures imaginable, that the stomach,
astonished at such a strange heterogeneous introduction, exhausts her
discriminating powers in vain in striving to find out what will serve the
interests of the arterial blood in its enrichment that the wasted strength
and tissue may be repaired, and becomes confused and perplexed
in disorder, and sends its strange perplexities through the system instead
of good wholesome blood, and renders it weak and ill-flavored, a fit prey
for any passing ravenous disease to fix its greedy grip upon. What kind
of minds can enfeebled bodies like these contain ? Originally they may
have been vigorous enough, but a weakened frame, especially weakened
in this manner, must necessarily affect the mind, as a weakly built house
will necessarily expose the valuables contained within it to the attacks of


robbers, effects of weather ; and thus we have an enervation of body,
and through it of the mind ; and what can such people do ? The country
demands men of power. But here are men of weakness. She clamours
for bones and sinews, but alas, all she has is the loose, flabby flesh of a
diseased population. She wants leading. She wants a head. Whither
can she look ? Among the enfeebled throng ? She has nowhere else to
go. She may get one there who can boast of his dinners, how much he
can eat, the quantity of wine he can drink without being drunk, but as
for one who can guide her out of difficulties, he is evidently so inextri-
cably involved in his eating difficulties, that he is utterly unable to lead
others out of theirs. She wants wisdom, but, alas ! ’tis all exhibited
among the cooks. She needs labor performed, ’tis well done in the
kitchen. She requires her children instructed and trained; that they
well are,—but it is in eating and drinking to excess. Can prosperity raise
up its banners among a people like this ? The only banner people like
this could have power to wave would be “Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die.” And truly as she does this will another be raised up
by an unseen hand with “Want, disease, and death,” written upon it in
prophetically true characters ; for soon their verification would come to
pass, and Victoria would be rembered among them of the past.
FORGETFULNESS OF GOD.
THERE is another thing that it will be wise in us to more carefully
avoid even than the others referred to. If they are deadly, this
more. Even if they poisoned, yet if this was not invested with all its
authority, there would be some hope of a remedy. Respecting the others,
if their ugly sway was felt, and this has not inflicted its full force, we
might be likened to people immured in a close dungeon, the walls are
strong, death lurks within, and if no escape is effected, it will seize
speedily on its victims. But still there remains a little weapon, a small
chisel, which if well used will unloose the stones and make a passage of
exit. But if all these four evils exist in full power our prison becomes
stronger, its walls inside and out become immensely consolidated, we are
denied our chisel; no inward help can save us. The evil is forgetfulness
of God. While other evils be strong, yet while we do somewhat remember
God, we can have help. If we cry we shall be heard, if we continue
crying we shall be delivered. Here is the little chisel with which we can
loosen the stones of our fortress. But if we never recollect God,
wherewith are we to be delivered ? If God come not of his good bounty
and pull us by main force out of our iron-cased prison of evil, die we
must. ’Tis vain to speak of human help. ’Tis vain to speak of natural
energy, of firm determination and a whole host of auxiliaries that some
would bring into the field. They are but so many traitors that would
betray us and make our case worse and worse. If there be any good


done, God performs it; if evil, then he allows it. If a man be virtuous
it is God that helps, and if the contrary, a man has either wofully abused
past help, and God judicially withdraws it now ; or has been foolishly
bragging of his own powers, and God lets him know his own weakness ;
or through some other reason which Divine wisdom sees fit, the power is
witheld, and man’s weakness makes him an easy victim. How plain from
this, that forgetfulness of God may be called the acme of a nation’s evils,
the sum of all its woes. No prayers going up for help, no importunate
pleadings like mighty earthquakes shaking the seat of the great King.
No exercise of faith which causes his Imperial Majesty to bend down and
help. The overflowing evils come rolling in, but no cry, even feeble, up
to heaven imploring the angry waters may be turned back, and that God
may show forth his saving power again in commanding the sea to be dry
land. The poisoned arrow flies, but no entreaty that the shields of the
earth shall by the God of them be made protecting. Behold we a low
sandy island in the watery main. No loud commanding voice says to
those rolling waves, which wash, roller after roller, over its shifting
surface, “Thus far and no further.” See the towering palm which
occupies its wonted place waving its feathery top as it has done for years.
The low deep groan of the approaching hurricane is heard in the distance,
and soon the blast in all its fury bursts upon the tree, catching hold of it
in its headlong course, roots it up and dashes it to splinters on the
ground. No protection for the tree. Behold the approaching swan.
Security seems its full assurance. Behold also the fierce eagle sitting up
on some lofty tree. How he darts forward his neck, fixes his gaze,
erects his feathers, spreads his wings, and like the bolt out of a thunder
cloud falls upon his victim. No help for the poor swan. Look at that
house upon a fair mountain’s brow. How smiling it looks in the setting
of the sky as seen from below. Its fields around it are green, its orchards
flourish, its whole aspect pleasing. Hark to that rumble down deep in
the ground like distant thunder. The ground rocks to and fro, it heaves
like the billows of the ocean. Hills skip like lambs, and mountains flee
apace ; and now, as hill bursts from hill, the house, with all its beauty
and surrounding fertility, sinks into the yawning chasm between. Thus
would it be with our country if we forgot God. Helpless and undone, a
prey to a variety of evils, a spectacle exciting the cupidity of evil spirits.
The storm would gather, and bursting with all its fury upon us, carry us
unresistingly to destruction. This is no far-fetched picture. It is the
language of the Bible, “Consider ye that forget God, lest he tear you in
pieces when there is none to deliver.” When this has thoroughly set in,
a nation’s end has come. These other mentioned evils have, in their
several positions, been the precursors of a country’s downfall; but when
this has come, it has been the consummation. Take any nation for an
example. If pride, sloth, self-indulgence, had severally exhibited their
supreme power, they would each have been able to swallow it up. But
while there was a remembrance of God, these evils were not allowed to
attain their full vigor. But when God was forgotten, neglected in the
way of being thanked when a blessing was bestowed,—no prayers offered
for deliverance from threatened calamity, —no invocations for daily preser-


vation and sustenance, —no cries for help when involved in a difficulty,
—no burst of thanksgiving when a deliverance was wrought, or a victory
won. And instead of these remembrances, men kept themselves in
memory,—recounted their own valiant deeds, —their noble preservation
of their country, —their devotion being its elevation, according to them-
selves, independently of any other power,—their own natural talents,—
their superiority to others; and scorned religion—-treated their God with
contempt—ridiculed his worshippers—professed infidelity—attributed all
things to chance- —worshipped the creature, knowing it was such—then
you might be able to detect from that time the descent of that country
from its lofty eminence with swiftness down through the different regions
of degradation till it lay bleeding, dying, and dishonored, under the feet
of some tyrannical conqueror. But how much more might not this be
expected to happen to a country which has known much about the true
God. Having seen instances of his goodness. Having seen his power
often made manifest. Having especially, as we have, beholden his won-
drous love in the gift of his Son, and known of a surety how able and
willing he is to deliver from any sort of calamity whatever—to bestow
the exceeding riches of his goodness without constraint, or upbraiding
the petitioner, and who has positively declared that “Blessed are the
people whose God is the Lord,” and who always verified it in the abun-
dant supply of all good that a land was capable of enjoying, and the
honors to which he raised it. And being a nation he delighted to honor,
nothing was too great or high that he would not have bestowed ; and
even in commencement was bestowing ; —but yet after all these, expres-
sions, to forget him, to turn thoroughly to self, to let cease all the agencies
used for his glory,—to leave the Bible, our great upraiser, neglected as a
book forgot,—to turn houses of prayer into places of buffoonery—our
ministers turned to jesters—Religion a farce—men of prayer none—
every man’s heart stripped of the remembrance of God, and what could
we expect ? what would come to pass ? Surely nought else but destruction.
Part IY.
WHAT HAS TO BE DONE TO SECURE PERMANENT
PROSPERITY TO VICTORIA?
FROM what was said respecting the source of a country’s prosperity,
it will be obvious enough that it consists, as was indeed expressed,
in the “Right training of the young.” It is then, and only then, that
we can expect the colony or any other country truly to prosper. As this
is adhered or not adhered to, so will a country sink or ascend. As this
is well performed or otherwise, so will be the degree of prosperity. But
how various are the opinions respecting what the training is, and in what
it consists, You would imagine from the way of some that their


expression as to what it consists of would be “Leave a child to follow
his own inclinations and all will be well.” No effort is ever made to
control. No endeavor to direct aright. No teaching of duty, or setting
before them a good example. And yet they would fain expect their
children would become something. This is contrary to the nature of
things in this world altogether. Where is there to be found anything
worth obtainable without trouble ? Is not the ground dug to produce a
crop ? Are not blocks of marble carefully chiselled in order to produce
the statue ? And can the painter produce his truthful picture without
hard labor and indomitable perseverance ? And can we expect our
offspring to exhibit the likeness of moral and mental beauty unless the
careful hand of training hath been sedulously at work ? But it is surprising
to what a contrary extreme others go. The great carefulness they
exhibit. The peculiarly keen oversight they keep. The scrupulous
exactness in all their requirements. The wide area of separation they
keep between their own children and others. They seem to keep them
all but immured in a glass case for public or rather private exhibition,
and not to make them active and useful men and women. The slightest
breath of atmosphere must not come upon them. They are debarred
from all companionship. They are taught their duty, but never to
practise it. They have a great amount of precept and learning given
them, but it is mostly in theory. Their minds are well filled, but so filled
in, that they cannot drag anything up to make use of, and thus they
become like ships well freighted but without a sail to catch the breeze.
They know nothing of the world in which they have to live. They know
nothing of its requirements or practices. And thus they often fall an
easy prey to its delusions. This is however better than the other. The
others had no training; these have, though of a misguided sort. Where
are the happy individuals who keep the middle course ? These are the
ones who will do the work that future generations will praise them for.
How is it then they will do their work ? To this we will now direct our
attention. The soil in which this young plant of a future generation
finds root is the rich ground of parental care and solicitude. The tender
anxiety manifested by those who truly love. And all the helps which
would tend to make the more abundant good to the children. All those
goods things which God in his providence bestows that parents may make
their children more truly blessed. All these things watered by the fer-
tilizing blessing of God constitute a ground of sufficient fertility to rear
trees that will produce such fruit of which the country may be justly
proud. Now, plants have roots. These are necessary that nourishment
may be drawn in to the plant from the ground around that its strength
may be matured. We referred to one word previously in which an
immense portion of education was comprised. This is a principal means
of communication between the soil and the future plant. If this be but
well let into the ground and well loosened about with kindness and loving
attention, and free scope for the shining down upon it of the warming beams
of the sun of family affection, we may expect fully that the plant will
imbibe much nourishment. Of course, this supposes again that the
ground is good. If it be bad it is our fault. God will take good care to


do his part and do it well. If we are unfaithful or unfeeling towards our
children and care not whether they shine or dim, how can we give proper
nourishment to the young plant ? In the sterile bleak ground of parental
neglect from whence are the children to obtain training ? By what
means are they to grow ? Then the matter of the soil rests with our-
selves, and when we are determined in a wise way to do for our children
that which we can do under God in making them all we could possibly
desire, then it is we may expect from the richness of the ground, power,
life, and fruitfulness will be imparted to the tree. But, of course, this
will not take place unless we affix roots to the plant; for how else is the
moisture of instruction to be drawn up, and the wholesome life of religion
and of true morality ? There is one root, as we were saying, and a
principal one that we must first see affixed, and that is “Obedience.”
OBEDIENCE.
UNLESS a child first learn how to obey, he won’t learn much. By
obedience we mean “entire subjection to the will and guidance of
wholesome authority.” If a child have not this it is a most incontro-
vertible fact that he will learn next to nothing. This is plain from the
following considerations. The youthful man has the same failing as those
of older growth, an intense dislike to trouble. Now learning requires
trouble and effort. Being doers of their own will they will reject this,
and dwell in idle ignorance. The disposition engendered by disobedience
leads rather to natural gratification than to the acquisition of knowledge.
The palate, whereby the sweet taste of instruction is discerned, by this
evil, is destroyed. So how impossible it is that instruction should be
communicated! And then you have to overcome the natural indispo-
sition before you can do anything with them, and how hard a task is
that! Then the minds of children are generally dull enough for the
acquisition of knowledge. But when this abominable intruder thrusts
himself in the way the stultifying effect is all the more increased. And,
who, with such an immense array of almost insuperable obstacles, could
succeed in brushing past them, and leaving in the child’s mind that which
it would he desirable to implant ? But when you have obedient children
the whole scene is changed. Such attention, such willingness, such
yielding to orders, such ready reception of what you want to instil, that
the terrible, unfruitful labor becomes the pleasant, delightful, encourag-
ing, successful employment that makes you glad you are at it, pleased
with the proficiency you are making, and full of more abundant love
towards them whom you instruct. You find everything that savors of
opposition removed. All the antagonism of self-will being gone you
have only the natural dulness to combat with. The mind being in a
docile, humble state, it is ready, like softened clay, to receive any form
you like to put upon it. If you want to teach of religion, you find


divine grace making a more abundant readiness to receive its truths. If
you want to impart secularities of a difficult nature, you find perfect
attention to the rules you may lay down, which will ensure their_ success
in solving these problems. In fact, whatever you want to do with them
they are just the ones you can act with, and if you have got any idea of
instilling good into a child, you can do it with the greatest advantage.
The course of some people with their children is very remarkable. We
have some wonderful examples of the peculiar method in which people
act with their children in this country. I have seen people tormented
with the noise the youngsters have been making, and who told them to
leave off. For all this the disturbance has still gone on. Till at length
the good individual has, in despair, gone to them and said, “get out into
the street and play there.” And then by way of excuse said, “my
children are so unusually troublesome, I don’t think anyone is troubled
with such unruly ones. They have made my head fit to split.” Now
this parent has been guilty of several errors. (1.) The children have
been taught cruelty, for well they knew the pain they were inflicting.
(2.) They have been encouraged in disobedience and been taught
in rebellion. (3.) They have been sent out into the street where possibly
they may meet with those who will do them still more harm. Now in
contrast to this I have seen people placed in the same predicament
through boisterous players. The voice of authority has been raised to
command silence, and immediately the noise has been hushed. Or if it
has not, perhaps the children have been told to come inside and sit down,
which has been done without any trouble. Again, I have come across
those who have forbidden their children to go to such a place, and
immediately there has been a reponse, “I will go.” And instead of the
parent carrying the point, the child has. And afterwards the excuse has
been made, “0 my child has taken advantage of the presence of a
stranger.” Whereas, if the child had never been allowed to exercise
such disobedience, it never would have thought of it. What an immen-
sity of evil is done here. The child led to disregard its parent. Allowed
to go where the better judgment of the parent decided it ought not. And
thus the poor little thing is perhaps brought within the reach of those
who will injure it. Its mind, not being under restraint, is not properly
guarded against the incoming of evil. And, so, when the malevolent
enemy sin makes his endeavors upon his intended prey, he finds a more
easy victim than he would otherwise. It is almost impossible to say what
amount of evil may be inflicted by this means of letting children have
their own way. We dispose their minds towards throwing off wholesome
restraints. Having thrown off the authority of parental restraint, their
next procedure will be to cast off other ones which Christianised commu-
nities deem essential. For this gets the whole being to dislike anything
that crosses its inclinations. Being thus disposed, the natural propen-
sities have freedom to work and grow. Virtue and holiness being
contrary to these (when they have assumed wrong proportions), are
looked upon as impositions. So, as the inclinations become more astray,
so are these conservers ot human happiness regarded still more at
variance ; more and more are they thrown ofi, that present gratification


may be afforded, till as the reins are loosed, at last the unbridled steed
rushes on unrestrained towards destruction. Here is the commencement.
Where the end will be God alone knows. The most deplorable bequest
parents can leave their children is a disposition inured to habitual
disobedience. And if this were left to every child, and all were accus-
tomed to decide for themselves, and alone do according to their own will,
nothing could be regarded so certainly to prognosticate a most grievous
general calamity. It is on this point that good people generally fail with
their children. They do teach them well. Are full of kindness towards
them. Are really anxious for their welfare. But yet, alas ! they lack
the wisdom which makes them continually insist upon them doing what
they are told. Thus it is we find the children of ministers and others
of whom we should expect better, running to waste with obstinate wilful-
ness. May God help them, and all others who are thus inclined to
throw off this accursed folly, and learn to act more wisely, on this matter,
at any rate. Be sure then to obtain complete control over your children.
Commence it at first and you will find you have done a good work. The
trouble you will have will be very small. Some begin wrong, thinking
their children are too young to be obedient, and so leave it to older
years, when a deal of trouble is necessary. When a child can compre-
hend anything, it can understand to obey. And I’m of opinion this is
one of the earliest lessons it can receive. But if you have not taught
your children to do what they are told, and you have allowed them to
grow up in the spirit of disobedience, you will of course expect to meet
with a deal of trouble. If you regard the child’s welfare you are bound
to make the effort. And the sooner the better commencement is made.
If you can perform it by quiet means do it. But if you meet with such
opposition that this will not be efficacious, then, as a kind parent,
will have to use efforts till compliance with your demand is given. Sup-
posing that you give an order, and instead of performing, the child takes
no notice, you will be bound to take it tq task. Try what reasoning will
do.. But if you see the lips pouted out, and a look of expressed defiance
upon the countenance, you must use more vigorous means. Some
children would be most affected by being shut up by themselves, others
by deprivation of a meal; and perhaps corporeal castigation will have
most salutary effect upon others. If you fail without employing any of
these, which seems likely in the present case, it will be necessary to
employ one or all of them till you gain your point, which you must gain
at all hazards. Because the child becomes irritated and apparently
worse through such inflictions, exhibiting it by violent bursts of passion,
do not for this reason, leave off and set it down that you are producing
evil instead of good. When a physician is administering physic to a
patient, we sometimes see that the symptoms become more violent, and
from the outward convulsive efforts, and the violent exhibitions of the
power of the disease, we would be apt to imagine that what were given
as remedies were really making the individual worse. But the doctor
would tell you that this was but the conflict between the medicine and
the disease, and just shewed the virulence of the distemper. But by-
and-by the fury of the enemy would be overcome by the potency of the


remedy, and health and soundness would again be enjoyed. So here,
the violence of the disease causes the stirring up of the passions through
contact with the remedy, but after each administration, the opposition
will become less and less, till it is effectually overcome, and you enjoy
the blessedness of a child who delights to do its parents’ will. Having
gained the conquest, by all means, let every day find you maintaining it.
Soon it will become less trouble to do so. And when it forms thus a
habit we shall adhere to it like second nature. But let us beware of
imagining that the enforcing of this habit is through a continued process
of punishment. Our quiet firmness will be sufficient generally for all we
want, except in extraordinary cases, so there will be no need of ourselves
being stirred up by passion, or the child being made the sufferer of much
corporeal infliction. Nor will we have to let out peal after peal of threats,
or string out thunderings of fault-finding. The less we do of these the
better for ourselves and our trainees. If we have to take the severer
castigation in hand, let us be very careful to always do it in a right
spirit. Let us beware of being ill-tempered, or showing any signs of it.
Let them know that you feel much against the offence, hut towards them
you have the greatest feelings of love ; and that you feel so deeply grieved
at the thought of punishing that it is only the sternest sense of duty that
makes you do it. The effect punishment inflicted like this has upon
children is surprising. It takes a hold and produces an impression no
other form of it will. They see the offence in a new light. They per-
ceive it is not a thing which simply stirs up anger, but deeply grieves,
and from the ingratitude manifested in it, becomes a sin of the deepest
hue. Ward Beecher mentions that he was frequently punished for
taking apples from a certain tree, without much effect being produced,
till a servant working at their place, told him one day, with tears, that
she could not bear to see him beaten, “so do” said she “not go near the
tree, dear Henry.” This made him feel, and produced an effect nothing
else could, because he found he hurt her more than he was hurt himself.
Let us take good care that our commands are obeyed. Just as we think
it necessary, either at once or after longer time. But let them be
obeyed. And also let us take care that what is commanded is done well.
Half done savours greatly of disobedience. And by the active use of
our wisdom, and the exercise of common sense, we shall have our
household like a piece of well-ordered machinery, every part doing its
appointed work at the appropriate time. I think it may be helpful to us
to have a few general rules which would embody those principles upon
which the good government of our households would be built, without
the trouble of unending particularisation. For instance —(1.) Let us
always, if the case demand it, insist upon commands being performed at
once. (2.) If it seem not necessary to be done at once, let us try by
some means to see that it is done. (3.) To let us get a supply of heavenly
wisdom, to be within us a fountain, ensuring wisdom in our commands. (4.)
Let us not confine our exactions to the obeying of direct commands, but
also of whatever teachings or rules we impart to them, as our common
sense may direct. We shall find it necessary, if we have children
entrusted to us by God, to, in some measure, study their peculiar mental


constitution. It will make us so much better to comprehend the par-
ticular treatment adapted to each child, which will cause us to act in a
way much more suitable for each child’s advancement. It does not
require much discernment to distinguish between the delicate, retiring,
gentle disposition of some, and the rough, vehement, boisterous temper-
ament of others ; neither wisdom to know how to adapt treatment to their
peculiar constitutions. When we are obliged to visit with punishment,
is the time that the advantage of this investigation will peculiarly appear ;
for if we visited the boy of hardihood severely, and administered the same
to the timid nervous disposition, the poor little frightened fellow would
receive a great injustice. Or the reverse would be equally injurious.
The bold, defiant spirit, which wanted much humbling, would laugh at
what would almost overwhelm the other. It may be remarked by some
that there are children with whom you can do nothing. You may try
and try again to reduce them to habits of obedience, but their rebellious
dispositions will not be brought under the power of authority. Well,
even if it be so, and we at the same time are doing our very best to
overcome it, and with God’s help persevere in the work, we are doing
our duty, and as such, we may expect heavenly help ; and by and by we
will find the seed has taken root, and the harvest bids fair to be better
than we could have expected. But if we never tried, what could we
expect ? Surely the man who never plants will never gather. Thus,
then, should we do in order to the production of this all-important root.
When we have got this well fixed in the ground of parental care, we may
well expect that the virtue with which we want to inspire the plant will
be readily transmitted through such a root. The spongioles of such a
root are open to imbibe whatever will administer to the nourishment of
its head. And the various lessons we may now desire to impart will
quickly enter, and transfuse throughout the whole system strength and
vitality. No matter what may be the character of what we want to
impart; there is a readiness to receive it. Whether religious or moral,
secular or heavenly; there is always a humble endeavour to receive it as
readily as can be. The opposition of waywardness is fallen to the ground.
The dislike to wholesome restraint is no more. The wild bedouin
character of the mind is mostly overcome. The quarrel between the
animal and mental for the disputed supremacy no longer takes place.
The intellectual being invested with its appropriate authority throws
open its portals to receive Madame Instruction with welcome voice.
She finds, if she see fit to tell of the knowledge of Jesus, or the demands
of his love, the requirements of our God, or our obligations to him; or
if she distribute the narrations of history, or give them of the spoils of
natural science, or let them know of the configuration of their globe,
’tis all one : they sit in humble docility at her feet profiting all they can.
And not only do they learn in humble submission, but what has been
told them, according to their ability, they love to act upon. So, what
may not be done with children when they are thus rendered plastic to
take the most beautiful forms which it is possible to bestow upon them.
We can impart a moral strength and intellectual vigor which else we
never could hope to do. We will teach them so fully to yield to proper


authority, that they will quite naturally place themselves under moral
restrictions, and especially (grace helping them) be ready to yield
obedience to the voice of God. And when they thus yield themselves to
what is good and devote themselves to its service, what vigorous prose-
cutors of good we will find them ! Firm in resolve, tenacious of
purpose, vigorous in the cause of good, they will be people of such a
sort as our country may well be proud of. It is a well-known fact that
it is only people of this sort that can make a country really great. If
this is not the case everything runs to waste. There is no controlling
influence, there is no authoritative voice, but everywhere, either pro-
minently or otherwise, elements of discord are at work, each one,
according to its quality, striving for the mastery. This has been apparent
in all ages of the world, so much so, that some legislators have thought
obedience has been sufficient of itself to bring about all that could be
desired, and have legislated accordingly. And we find that in those
countries where this law was most in exercise, we notice there was most
vigor and life. And the glory of the country appeared to die out com-
mensurately with the decrease of obedience (and, of course, of other
things in connection with it). The apparency of this is clear enough
from the consideration that when people have learned to obey they
receive the fashion those laws impart to which they yield. So if the
laws be good the people will correspond. If the law refer much to
boldness and bravery, of such a character will be the people. Is
patriotism enjoined ? Then they are patriots. Are they called upon to
devote themselves to the service of their Maker ? Then with heart,
soul, and strength, they do so. And whatever else it may be, they take
a form accordingly; and thus how plain if you neglect this you destroy
your country. Now viewing our country in connection with what has
been said, and knowing as we do, the too general neglect among all
classes, of this most necessary principle, our hopes with respect to its
future welfare would not be very bright if we did not believe this was
rather a temporary than a permanent failing. But that its passing away
may take place quickly, we have brought before our fellow-colonists’
notice the need of enforcing obedience. So apparent is it that no good
< can be done without this is strictly adhered to, that our country’s des-
tinies may be faithfully predicted from our behaviour in this matter. If
we neglect it, it requires no very penetrating-eyed prophet to foretell
that darkness hovers over the future of our land. That storms and
troubles await her, from which she will never escape. That plagues and
afflictions, like vindictive demons, will ever haunt her footsteps. That
bloodshed and rapine shall do their horrible work amongst them. And
every evil that prowls about under the sun shall find in Victoria a favorite
haunt, whither they may gather to hold their hellish carnival on the best
principles that have ever dwelt in the human soul, and feast and fatten
on all that is good and great till the whole land is a weeping, moral,
spiritual, and natural wilderness. But if we listen to the voice of God as
he speaks to us in his Sacred Word “A child left to himself bringeth his
mother to shame,” —“Correct thy son and he shall give thee rest, yea,
he shall give delight to thy soul,” —“Train up a child in the way he


should go.” And we make our “children obey their parents, for this is
right.” We shall find that God shall bless us in our deed. And it will
require no prophet to testify what the future of our country will be. Its
prospects will be most happy. Its future looms forth in the distance as
the fairest picture the earth can look upon. Its glories can never be told.
Its greatness reaches to the heavens. The greatness of its treasures,
the extent of its learning, the power of its moral forces, are such as all
the earth will feel it. While this remains her sun of glory will never go
down, her day of splendour will never grow dim. But she shall shine
forth when many another nation has hid its light in darkness.
LOVE AND RESPECT OF PARENTS.
THOUGH obedience be one of the principal roots of this growing
plant, yet there is another which must be found in close proximity
to it, and which, if it did not exist, would leave obedience a very barren
affair. Obedience, even though it be a tap-root, cannot suffice of itself,
for the instruction we want to instil into the child’s mind requires an
accompanying conduit through which the onflow may be greatly assisted.
The beneficent presence of another is needed to stimulate the flow of
that which finds its way through obedience’ root. But yet more, another
is wanted whose pores are still more open to draw within themselves all
those supplies of enrichment which may be opened up by parental
goodness. The nourishment of the plant will then be much more com-
plete, and its growth correspondingly vigorous. This root is the love of
parents, without which not much good can be done. ’Tis true that
obedience may be observed, but yet if this be not along with it, it
becomes very dry. A command may be given, the outward act per-
formed, when there is inward repugnance. There is no delight in what
is done. There seems to be a separation between parent and child. The
parent gives an order, the child obeys from the force of habit, and not
from any springs of delight, and the performance is without any more
life than a piece of well-regulated machinery. Now to all this love is an
antidote. Else where were the union in a family ? Where were the
feeling of confidence which should inspire each member, and knit the
whole together with a bond no earthly or hellish power could tear
asunder ? Else where were the strength which comes through unity ?
Where are the accomplishments, combination produced by love, can
achieve ? Alas !in that family they would never be known. Nor the
sweet delight which sweetens every labor of life, nor any of the pleasures
and comforts of home. But love introduces all of these and makes every
command performed with delight. Each loves to perform. And many
a time no commands are waited for, but the thing done in anticipation.
If there is learning or a direction with respect to behaviour inculcated, it
comes to the young with a sweetness, else it never could. They consider


“It is the one I love, and who loves me, who gives me this command,
and who taught me this lesson, from the fulness of whose heart it has
come for my benefit. What a delight I experience in earning that much
coveted smile, the reward of obedience ; and, as for that direction, what
delight I experience, and shall experience in obeying it, so that I may
but have the ones I love to say ‘how attentive I have been.’ ” Now all
this can be done by love. There is far more done by this than by
anything else. Love makes everyone in the household active. It is the
great enlivening power that causes each one to be swift to perform
behests. It is the powerful operative force which makes children labor
and strive to please their parents. It renders easy the most difficult
tasks. It causes the most intense labors to be entered into joyfully. It
makes everyone cheerful in the midst of pain, affliction and woe. It
causes each to be far happier making others happy than being happy
themselves. More powerful is this than great force of physical strength.
A man may be powerful and exercise great authority, but yet not get
half so much done as the weakened invalid, just through this happy
power. Happy are they too, who know how to wisely make use of this.
They can by this means exercise such an influence for good as is impos-
sible to estimate. It is the grand power by which we gain the hearts of
the children, and are able to mould them as we like. We said this of
obedience just now. And so we say of this, for if you have either of
them absent, you will utterly fail in doing what you want. It is a sweet
controlling power which seems to affect the children in a secret, silent
but forcible way, that gives us, when united to proper firmness, an
immense amount of influence. But this love, if it is to be permanent,
must be cultivated. The cultivation of love seems often most active
when it is least thought of. We are thinking of anything rather than
the increasing of love and are just steadily plodding in the performance
of our duty; and all the while love is growing strong and powerful. And
then if something were to happen which would greatly try whether love
were there, it would be found to be there to the very death. Much
talking helps not love. I believe it generally diminishes it even when
you have the moral force to make all your actions consistent with your
expressions, for perhaps it makes others to expect too much. But to
pray much for an individual is a sure way to make him love you, if your
conduct at all be consistent, even if he have been your enemy; so how
powerful it is when used to strengthen love already existing. But, of
course, prayer should not be used only for this, but that God may in
every way bless the children’s souls, minds, and bodies. When the
children find out by your constant actions that you truly love them, not
merely because they are your children, or are fair to look upon, or indi-
cate that they have talent in possession, but because they are your
children, because of their immortal souls, and because of themselves,
then, as this continues, you will find love is permanently established. And
not only will this behaviour effect its permanency, but also its degree.
oto what a degree should children love their parents ! The warm
gushing flow of parental affection demands that it have something
adequate in return, —some warm, earnest flow of affection somewhat in


the same degree as its own. Love in the children’s hearts towards their
parents should he like the gushing spring bursting forth from the summit
of some lofty hill sending forth in magnitude a river, to gladden the
country below. It should fill the life like sweet perfumes fill the atmos-
phere in the,verdant valley on some glorious day at the commencement
of summer. It should fill the soul with a wholesome warmth like the
heat that gently spreads itself through the air on some soul-enkindling
day in spring. It should be in volume like the capacity of the mighty
ocean whose size seems almost immeasurable. It should not he like the
turf which just garbs the surface with a coating of green, but like the
primitive rocks, which, though they often crop out on the surface, reach
down into the heart of the earth. Love like this will be worth some-
thing. And we believe every parent may secure this if they but be
faithful to their duty. Think now what impressionable children you will
have. Their hearts will be like wax to take impressions, but like cast
iron to retain them. If you give them instruction suited to their
capacity, their little minds will drink it in like a thirsty land does water.
You will find you can guide them like an Oriental shepherd does his
sheep. You can train them like a gardener does the young shoot along
the trellis. And then, what kind of obedience you will have ! How
willing, how ready, how well done everything ! But some will say, there
there are some natures which won’t be affected by love. That is a mis-
take. There is not a nature you cannot affect with love. A more firm
discipline will perhaps have to be used with some than with others. But
you will do nothing in any case to advantage without love. But I have
known some with whom no reproof, or correction had effect, even when
tried by those whose influence you would be inclined to think must be
be great, and yet when their loving mother uttered a few words, they
were quite overcome. Again, I have known something of those upon
whom the firmest discipline had not much effect; hut yet when some
individual whom they knew loved them got hold of them, he could
manage them as he liked. All this leads to show us that this thing,
when in wise hands, gives a power that will be efficacious for good, and that
to a vast extent. But if, which is almost an impossibility, it gets into
bad hands, the effect would be that of a withering blight effectually
destroying all that was good or glorious, and making the future life to
have the bitterness of wormwood. But this love must have a guard to
it. If not, its goodness will soon be dispelled. Its influence will soon
be destroyed. To every good thing in this world we must have a pro-
tection, else some ruthless invader comes in and destroys that we most
delighted in. So' the comforts of our home are not unassailable by
misfortune, against which assaults we ought wisely to defend ourselves.
Nor can a man too certainly say a fortune is his own, “Therebeing many
a slip between the cup and the lip,” even when he is just on the point of
receiving it. Our country’s liberties may be infringed. Against a
calamity like this the Argus-eyed public have to keep an active look-out.
So may love be invaded by a foe which often does an immense deal of
damage. It is but too common an invader of it in our country, Dispos-
sessing love of its high position it would bring it down into the dust of


drudging serfdom. It would make it a degraded waitress upon its all-
important necessities. It would bring parental love down to a position
we don’t like to speak of, but it is exemplified in the case of those who
treat their parents as mere tools who should use their strength in working
for their good. This is the thing—the thing which causes a deal of that
behaviour which makes so many of the colonial homes so pitiably
unpleasant; which causes so much of the larrikinism which abounds in
our land; this thing to guard against which is necessary if we want to
conserve love, —this called irreverence. Who is there but sees, as
children fail to revere or respect their parents, so love must dwindle down
to mere foolery, and so correspondingly obedience must suffer! Who is
there that cannot see that as they fail to respect their parents those
parents will lose their influence over them ? And as they disrespect
their parents, so will they learn to do so to other people, and when this
disrespect becomes a habit, larrikinism flows in quite naturally. I don’t
think many larrikins would infest our streets if when young they were
only taught to respect their superiors and the rest of their fellow-creatures.
Now what attention will a child pay to what its parent might say if there
were no respect in its mind for that parent ? Will it not naturally exalt
itself and lift up itself as it experiences low feelings about its parents ?
Will it not consider itself as greatly the superior ? Will it not put a
very small value on what father or mother may say ? So this, if it be
allowed to encroach upon love, will naturally rob it of its influence and
make it a mere toy. If there is anything noticeable in this country it is
this want of respect to parents. If anything will bring upon us as a
community great evil, this from its wide-spread influence will. For the
Bible says so. “The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to
obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young
eagles shall eat it.” And this evil is so much predominant, as, it is to
be feared, to be almost general. And when so many are growing up with
these principles, what can we expect for the future of the country in the
way of good ? How parents can stand it is really hard to say. They
cry it down as they see it in others, but in their own families they allow
it, or at any rate take no adequate means to suppress it. They will say
they don’t allow it. But how do they stop it ? Perhaps by uttering a
loud burst of denunciations as to what they will do with the child when
they get hold of him, at the same time the children are running away,
and answering back so rudely, that you are quite astonished. But the
children know that if they can keep away till the anger subside, they will
meet with no performance of the threat. And so they keep away for a
while, and they can then return in safety, but as soon as opportunity
offers they will repeat the same again. Can we expect from this that
obedience or love will either exist ? Will it not be destructive of every-
thing that should keep a household together ? But there are families
where such things as these never take place, but yet there is a great lack
of reverence. The only reason must be that the parents don’t act so as
to ensure it, or don’t require it amongst their family’s duties. WBerever
temper is lost, or absurd orders are given, there will be a tendency to
disrespect. Or whenever it is not insisted on that the children shall


“honor their father and mother.” But as it is such a great evil, care
should be taken to suppress it as quickly as possible. Let us have the
children in their place. Allow them not to give themselves airs of
superiority, neither allow them to intrude themselves in speech or person
where they are not wanted. I think one help to disrespect is, allowing
to speak and give their advice and act as if they were grown-up people;
and, of course, they gain a high opinion of themselves, for they have not
the sense to keep themselves within bounds, and so become puffed up
with a vain conceit. Whereas they ought to be made to know how
ignorant and foolish they really were, and taught that their position for
many years yet, was that of learners. Train them as you think fit.
Whatever you feel satisfied is the best for them, do. In some things
perhaps we ought to consult with them or we will not treat them as
rational beings, but wisdom will teach us how much. Do not let us make
more of them than is wise. I know it is hard to restrain from making
great pets of them when they are particularly engaging, but if we do we
shall do them great harm. I have seen some of the best, most clever,
and promising children spoiled by this. Let us not be too ready to run
down people before them. Depend upon it if we be so ready to detect
others’ faults and speak of them, we shall teach the children to detect
our faults, and consequently to think of us as we express ourselves we
think of them of whom we speak. If they come out with any disre-
spectful questions, let us be sure they feel the wrong of it, and are made
to have a just appreciation of the respect due to their parents. Also let
us get them to yield great respect to what we say, whether it be advice,
or precept, or teaching of any sort. So that till they come to years of
maturity, “my parents said it,” shall be a sufficient sanction to them.
But let us try and have enough wisdom in them that they will have no
need to change their opinions as to anything we have said. Let us take
good care to make much use of our common sense in our orders and
teachings, else we cannot expect that their respect be what it should be.
Let our example always be good. Let us have complete command over
our own selves, then we shall be able to command them. By this means
we shall greatly succeed in engaging their respect. Loss of temper
argues weakness, and the children are sharp to find it out. By thus
securing their respect and preserving willing obedience and love, we shall
make our houses exceedingly pleasant. They shall be so comfortable
that they will be a delight to ourselves and a joy to all our visitors. We
will confer a mine of wealth upon our children, and fit them for lasting
happiness. Our children will often bless God and our memory that they
had such parents, who were wise enough to conserve loving obedience by
the secure safeguard of respect. And, by this means, have made them
not only to have springs of joy opened up within themselves, but have
constituted them springs of joy bursting forth amid the trying deserts of
this world’s troubles, making all around oases of gladness, wherein are
brought forth abundantly the fruits of timely assistance and wholesome
comfort. But if we think that the habits our children have got are so
confirmed that it is altogether useless our attempting reformation, let us
think again before we thus leave off. Think how much harm has been


done and will be done. Think what a boon we will confer upon them if
we do teach them these lessons. And when we have thought this, think
what a woe we will oppress them with if we teach them not. And then
let us be generous enough to try and enrich them thus. Suppose we
succeed not at first, try again with kind firmness to gain our end. If we
let our behaviour be what it should, and our orders wise, we shall not be
long before success crowns our efforts. Sometimes people find it difficult
to hold their own position when their children are better educated than
themselves. But from whom have they received this superior education ?
Have not their parents been the means of doing it ? Then should not
respect and gratitude be shown to them because of this ? And should
not the children make use humbly and respectfully of this superior
knowledge, keeping in mind to whom they are indebted ? And at the
same time let the parents show the superiority of their wisdom and
experience. And let these lend them a calm dignity, which will, without
assuming anything unpleasant, or anything at all, cause them naturally
to keep their superior positions and their children in proper respect.
Then if this protection only be made thus use of, and love kept by its
means from tarnish and alloy, we will also have obedience kept in its
healthy vigor, and thus far we may expect our plant to make good pro-
gress. But in order that its thorough advancement may be ensured we
will have yet to use another root, and thus cause abundant moisture to
enter into the plant, and nourishment that it may grow with imperishable
verdure.
LOVE TO GOD.
THOUGH those two other roots are just what we said they were, yet
it requires this to be added for their effectual completion. By this
such an influence will be shed throughout the plant that its growth will
be much accelerated and rendered permanent. Love and obedience will
be permeated by a heavenly, sanctifying force, which will render them
much more precious and far more effective. Thus we see, though we
spoke of each one as being essential, that they are so closely united that
each cannot possibly do without the other, so that all united form all that
is needful to enable us to perform everything that is included in training
them up in the way they should go. Take but one away, and the
efficiency of each of the remaining is impaired ; keep them together and
each secures the success of the others. With love to a parent, a child
may try hard, very hard, to please and continually obey. But when the
love of God takes possession of the soul the work is rendered delightful,
and the child enabled to effectually obey through the highest of motives
—the love of God. This causes, even more than the love to their
parents, a child to follow out all the little details of obedience, even when
hidden from the discerning eye of parental supervision. For this reason.


However much a child may love the parent and strive to please, yet there
is within, the natural heart, which will often cause the child to go contrary
to its parents’ commands. But when the love of God abide there, the
natural disposition is made good; so a constant course of obedience is
ensured. If we have anything to impart, we now find they are more
effectually attentive. If we give a command there is much greater
thoroughness in the performance. If we are training them to the
acquisition of a certain virtue (for we won’t find God does work which we
can do), their soul has a keen appetite for it, and receives it in as readily
as a hungry man does meat. And this is the reason of it, they have got
a love for God, and as all virtues emanate from God, and are resemblances
of his character, so they are loved, and their possession is eagerly sought
after. But still further, we will find that this love of God transfuses
throughout the whole mental system a great deal of increased intelligence,
a keener appetite for learning, and larger ability in its acquisition. Thus
it is of immense advantage in the common-place preparations for every-
day life. If anyone doubt this, just let them consider those who remain
unconverted a large portion of their lives during which I;hey have been
content to live in entire ignorance, but when they have been turned to
God, immediately they have set to work to obtain knowledge, and some
have learned to read and write at very advanced ages, and made
acquisitions far in advance of some who previously were as far ahead of
them. And consider also those who have experienced the help induced
by this in the acquisition of languages, &c., and also the experience of all
men of learning who have felt this love ; what clearness, what compre-
hension, what application, what progress they have made, and all through
this aiding their natural intellect! We will find also that this sends to
every part of the household such a feeling as unites it so closely that
nothing can be found more uniting. Natural affection will do much, but
it is more easily destroyed than this. It will unite a household very
closely, and while it lasts is very effectual. But it may be undermined
by many things, as we are more ready to quarrel than to show charity,
and then the family union is at an end. But this love of God is a uniting
bond which is preserved by the Deity, therefore it dwelleth in perfect
safety. The great aim of each one is to glorify God ; this gives unity of
purpose. All have the presence of God ; this gives unity of nature. All
hate every form of evil; this bestows unity of aversion. Each one loves
God ; this gives unity of affection. Each one is kept by the power of
God, who then can molest them ? Now can your family ties be preserved
by the most tenacious of bonds. Our children shall be actuated by the
most glorious of principles. We shall find them ready to our hand to
shape them as we see fit. What we want them to learn they are ready
for. If we want to teach them the sublimest things they are prepared to
receive them. Would we make them men and women of learning ? Then
if they have the natural ability, we have them in the best order possible.
Would we aim at their being accomplished artisans ? Then we will be
able to carry out our intentions in the most effectual way. Are they to
become statesmen ? Then having first right principles, their minds next
expanded with heavenly wisdom, they are just in the position to acquire


what will enable them to lead a country on to glorious success. Is the
ministry their intended field of labor ? Then how blessed it is to con-
sider that heaven has got so thoroughly of these future laborers, to train
them, with heaven’s assistance, for heaven’s work. Thus then, according
to their natural capabilities, there is not a state in which we can have
them better fitted for becoming great, according to what God has bestowed
upon them, than when they are furnished with these three roots—
obedience, love to parents, and love to God. But let us remember that
this is not to be brought about by any simply human effort. It is in our
power to make them obedient,—their own nature is in favor of loving us,
and our conduct will inflame and preserve it; but as for putting within
them the love of God that is not our work. God alone by his Spirit
bestows the love of God. But let us not sit idle because of this. Let
us teach the children all the more earnestly because of its preciousness.
And then let our hearts be heavenward, direct our prayers to the throne,
and as sure as we have asked in the name of Jesus, the heavenly love
will come down, If it come not down just at once, let us not relinquish
effort. Pour in what good we can through the channels already existing.
Let us more depend on God’s help than our own efforts, not for the
purpose of relaxing our own, but for not depending for success upon them.
If we do we shall not have to charge God with neglect. Our efforts shall
succeed. We have planted, we have watered, and God will give the
increase. And is not the expectation of such a thing enough to inflame
one to the utmost, and make one exceedingly zealous in trying to bring
about these glorious results ?
KNOWLEDGE, &c.
HAYING thus supplied the young plants with roots, according to our
ability, we have now to the best of our ability to supply the plant
with that nourishment which will add to its future growth. Of what will
this nourishment consist ? Of course knowledge of different sorts will
make up what will add to the mental and moral stature of the child. Let
us exercise wisdom in the choice of this knowledge to be imparted. There
are some sorts extremely pernicious, Avhich will be most beneficial as our
children are kept in ignorance. But what a glorious round of instruction
there is for them to follow which will truly exalt them. How requisite it
is they should know of the Being who made and supports them, of his
wonderful dealings with the human race; of the framework of the universe,
and the different forms of life living upon this lower world. They
should also know of the human race—its past history, its present state.
They should know of their own natural constitution, their mental, moral,
and religious capabilities, and the use to which each of these should be
put. They should above all be made to understand for what purpose
they are placed upon this world and the high responsibility of their


position, together with the endless felicity which awaits them, if they
but prove faithful to their trust. Part of this is the province of the
parent to impart, part of it belongs to the schools. Or rather we
may more truly say the whole work belongs to both which each has to
perform in their several degrees. But it will greatly help or deter the
children according as we have a pleasant way of imparting these things.
Who likes dulness ? Children especially do not. Who can give attention
to what they don’t understand ? I believe that in nine cases out of ten
when we complain of the attention of children they don’t understand us,
or we are so insufferably dull that they can’t get their attention up any
more than what we are interested in what we are teaching. When we
are dull, depend upon it we are not interested, and when we are not
interested bow can we expect the children to be ? So, to have the
children pleasantly to receive these things, we must be able to give them
clearly and interestingly those things we desire to impart. In order
that those things (which are the hardest to teach pleasantly) that belong
most to a child’s present and permanent advancement, we will give a few
examples of the way in which we imagine these things might be taught.
Supposing, first of all, we wanted to give them a knowledge of God,
which we might impart to some extent when they were very young
indeed, such as telling them who made them, and taking them outside
and shewing them his great works, or telling them of the love of Jesus,
how he came to die, how he rose from the dead, how he still lives in
heaven, or of the glorious house God has above, and the kind of
servants he has got there, and the kind of people who live there. These
of course would be very preparatory, and from the ages of the learners
would have to be very simple and very brief. But as they grew older
and we wanted to give them a more comprehensive knowledge of these
things, here our ingenuity would be tasked to make the lessons as vivid,
simple, forcible as possible, that the children might be much improved.
Supposing we desired to instruct them in the attributes of God, perhaps
his natural attributes, and we wanted to impress upon them a lively sense
of their exceeding greatness. If we were just simply to tell them that God
was wise they would doubtless believe us, and regard God as being so.
But as for any lively, impressive apprehension of it, that would never
take place. Their minds would only acknowledge it as a thing told them,
but they would not be convinced that it was a fact from what they them-
selves observed, in addition to what was told them. What we want is
that they may have such an apprehension of it as shall lead to a more
intelligent and more willing service, combined with more profound
adoration of his character. Suppose we were to have a company of
children round us and were proceeding to instruct them in this. Let us
make a little fellow stand before us, and catch hold of his arms and draw
all their attention to it. Make the little chap move it about in all the
ways he could, and show him how suited it is for all that it has to do.
Is anything far way ?he can stretch out to reach it. Is it near ?he can
bend and double his arms. Is it above his head ? then he can reach up.
Is it near the ground ?he can direct his arm down towards it. He can
turn his hand about by means of the wrist in every possible direction,


just suitable for the position of the things he wants to grasp. And then
the fingers fixed at the end of the hands, what ingenious instruments
they are for grasping. Could anything be thought of better suited ?
Being long and jointed, how they will bend to encircle the object. Being
thus pliant we can extend them to hold a large, or shut them closer to
lay hold of a small thing. We can grasp the immense cable, or direct
the course of the finest threads. They can hold tight or loosely, can
retain or let go at pleasure. They can direct the motion of the facile
pen, or bring down the ponderous sledge with heavy blows. Perceive
how fine their capabilities of feeling. With our eyes shut we can tell
whether a thing be hard or soft, rough or smooth, fine or coarse, round
or square, and an immense number of other things. Then let them see
how adapted they are for both procuring our food along with the other
members, and putting it to our mouths when it is procured. What would
that child be without arms ? What a loss it would be. How deficient it
would constantly find itself. What a number of things he could not do.
What a number of things he would require doing for him. How helpless
he would feel himself ! And what a drag upon the wheels of society !
What can we give him instead ? Can human ingenuity devise anything
to compensate ? Here we see then manifested the great wisdom of God,
just in one part of our structure. Let us take a bird and just exhibit to
them its wings. Draw particularly their attention to their adaptability
for the purpose of flying. Observe the peculiar construction of the
feathers, their remarkable arrangement in the wings. Let them par-
ticularly notice how well they are formed for propelling the creature
through the air, and in such a way as they make as little resistance as
possible to its onward progress. Man has tried in vain, we might say,
to make, with all his cleverness, wings for himself that he might fly like
a bird. In another lesson we might refer to another marvellous proof of
the wisdom of the Deity. Man required something in the shape of a
fluid to inhale into his lungs, that life and vitality might be continued, and
his blood sent coursing on its way more freely. It is also necessary that
we have a fluid flowing around us that will bring to our ears the sound
of people speaking, cries of distress, or notes of alarm. Or to please us
with the voice of song. Besides, it would be very awkward if the sun
were just to send down its rays in one spot, like as it would seem down
a shaft, or at once leave the earth in darkness the moment it disappeared
from view. And still further, it was requisite this fluid should be able to
sustain bodies of expanded water in the shape of clouds, so that at
proper periods, from these storehouses, carried hither and thither by
currents of the same fluid, in all parts might descend fructifying showers.
Now what would man make of a deficiency like this ? He might try one
thing after another, and after all would have to give up in despair without
having made the slightest approaches to what was required. But when
the wise God works, he just compounds three simple elements, oxygen,
nitrogen, and carbonic acid gas in certain proportions, and makes the
very thing we need. Thus we have oxygen to receive into our lungs to
mix with our blood, to disperse itself through our system, that its warmth
may be kept up, and our energy sustained, When we have exhausted


the supply in our chambers, we can open our windows and admit fresh
supplies of oxygen. The air around, from its undulating motion, brings
to our ears sounds from all quarters. It gratifies us with hearing the
voices of them we love, or the sound of the bell on Sabbath day calling
us to the House of Prayer. It enables us also to inhale the sweet scent
of the rose, or enjoy the fragrance wafted from the smiling fields. It
pictures out to us the gorgeous colouring painted on the morning or
evening sky, and we enjoy a scene from the setting sun as if it were some
compensation for the withdrawal of its light. Its buoyant nature is such
that bears upon its bosom floating bodies of aqueous vapor, carries them
about those parts most in need of supplies of moisture that their con-
tents may be discharged for the nourishment of the land below. And if
we were to refer to the wise adaptation of animal life to the use of man,
as the horse to carry him, the cow to give him milk and flesh, the sheep
also to supply him with food, besides comfortable clothing; timber for
his various wants ; metals buried deep down in the earth, wisely neces-
sitating his labor, and adapted for multitudinous purposes of civilisation.
These and many others, with very little elaboration, might be expanded
in the form of subjects of lessons which would equally, with what we
have mentioned, impress them with a hearty feeling of the wisdom of
God. Do we want now to teach them of God’s power ? It will be far
better for us to explain it to them in a way whereby they will have a
clear comprehension of it. It may be said, and said truthfully, that our
finite minds when of the greatest power cannot grasp the idea of God’s
power, so what can we expect children to do ? But when we have taught
children our best they will have but a slight idea of its vastness, so what
would it be if we did not ? But then their ideas of it will be clear as far
as they go, and our explanation must be of that sort which will make
them feel impressed with a vivid sense of his omnipotence. Suppose, for
instance, we began by referring to their own strength, and spake to them
of the greatest force it could exert. What sized stone, we might say,
can you lift ? You soon can find one too heavy for you. Then how
impotent you would be in trying to lift a mountain. Suppose you had all
the people of your acquaintance gathered to try, how poor would be
their endeavours. But even supposing all the people in the country were
gathered to shift it, how feeble they would find themselves. They would
be one crowding upon another in each other’s way, and at last have to
leave in despair. And all the world gathered to try the same would
only have the same success. But suppose then God were just to let one
slight wish escape him, the mountain would fly at once wheresoever he
wanted it. Now one angel, we may suppose, is stronger than many, very
many men. If some of them were to gather together to stop a world as
it was rolling on its course, supposing they partly succeeded, and to
ensure its stoppage all the legions of angels gathered to the scene from
every part of creation, and brought with them every intelligent creature
God has made, we cannot but imagine they would stop it. But then if
God wanted it to go on, a very feeble effort on his part, like the lifting up
of a straw, and the immense globe, obedient to the power of its Creator,
would again move on, bearing with it, like helpless flies, the mighty


armies of opposers. And think, when each world is so big as people find
it out to be, and when there are such numbers of them that we don’t
know the size of them, and which appear bigger than the ones we already
know of, and when the number is so great, as astronomers say about
500,000,000,000 that can be discerned with the telescope, what an
astonishing amount of power must be required to keep the whole in their
position, and keep them moving with such regularity in their courses !
But the power he puts forth is smaller to him than to us to blow a soap
bubble through the air, and that suffices to do all this. Let them notice
the power exerted in the daily production of those fresh members of the
vegetable and animal kingdoms. Try to produce one insignificant vege-
table, and all the wisest and mightiest in creation might bring forth their
greatest wisdom, task their best energies, and exhibit their most subtle
skill, and yet they would not produce anything approaching it. But God
makes many such in the course of an hour; what numbers in a day;
what multitudes in the course of a year to repeople and replenish the
earth. And if we consider that all these worlds are inhabited, as we
suppose, and are supplied with all the luxuriance of vegetable production
(whether they may die or not we don’t know), what an immense addition
of power is requisite. But this is a small, very small thing for God.
But when we think of the support each individual wants from day to day.
Body and soul, mind, with all its powers, must be supported. Think of
all the waste in each human being that has to be restored ; the strength
that has to be imparted to each, that every member may have its portion
and every faculty upheld. Think of all the animal operations going on
within, and the incessant dangers that have to be warded off without.
Think of each mental faculty, memory, reason, imagination, &c. All
have to be supplied with vigor day by day that each operation may go on
vigorously. And then the spiritual nature with all its different functions,
defending itself against the powers of darkness, against the gigantic
power of sin, laboring to establish itself spotless before God (which itself
induces the exercise of more vigorous power from God). Think of this,
and then think of the multiplied cases of this sort in the whole world,
and what must be the immensity of labor connected with the whole of
intelligent creation ? But yet God without putting himself out of the
way, without more than the smallest effort, keeps up everything, keeps
everything at work at every time and every place in his vast dominions.
Perhaps next we want to give them an idea of God’s omniscience. But
how is this to be done ? Not surely by lust telling them that God is so.
Doubtless as we told them so and explained the term, they would believe
and understand; but they would have no clear forcible idea of it that
would keep them in sacred awe of that wonderful Being. We must then
adopt another plan. Let us question them as to that power within them
that is always actively engaged. Then let®us get them to tell us from
whom its life comes, and by what means it is supported. Then make
them to know it is by no secret fund of power within that we support
our mind’s activity, but by God’s alone power it is upheld. Let them
remember how continually the mind thinks. There is not a moment of
the day but it will remind us of its presence, either for joy or woe,


pleasure or pain, things good or bad. Even at night on it goes at times
more vigorously than in the day. If then it be ever going, of which you
are constantly reminded, and is only upheld by the presence of God, then
you have a most vivid evidence of the ever-presence of God. And as
you know what a person says and does when they are close to you in the
broad daylight, so God being thus near to us discerns quite clearly what
we think. Only there is this difference between God’s glance and ours.
Ours looks but on the surface of things, but God’s looks down into the
very centre of our soul and sees through and through. So there is not
a thought escapes his notice, and all within us is known by him far better
than we can see the things around us in the bright daylight. If then our
thoughts are bad, how bad must they appear to God ! He putting power
into our hearts, and that power being used just before his eyes for an
abominable purpose. What feelings he must have ! How pained he
must be ! For remember, we might say, though God supplies power we
are responsible for its use, the same as a man for his bodily actions, for
which God supplies the strength. When God sees close before him,
rebellion, wickedness, and hatred stirring up their awful strife, how
hateful it must appear to him ! What a wonder he does not cut us off!
What a wonder he does not drive us away and send us to where we
deserve ! Nothing preserves but his mercy. Then as they cannot get
away from the idea of their minds ever working, so they will not be able
to escape from the deep conviction of God’s equal nearness, and feel
deeply within them that “Thou God seest me.” Suppose we want to
teach the children of God’s omnipresence. We have already told them
of his omniscience, and with which it seems almost identical, but which
perhaps in logical order ought to come last, as it seems from being
everywhere he must behold everything. But to make the thing plain to
them it will be necessary to give them a separate lesson, as they are so
apt to imagine God has got eyes like us, penetrating and searching into
places beyond that to which our bodily presence extends. Just let them
think then of their range of thought. Let them try the experiment of
throwing their thoughts out towards any place far distant, and trying
then at the same time to think of places equally distant, but in a contrary
direction, with all the places between, and in every other direction too.
They will find that they can go an immense distance in a moment of
time, and almost think of all at once, but yet not quite. There is a
slight succession in time and order in their thoughts which their best
skill and endeavors will not enable them to do without. So they find
that even in this .way they can’t be at every place they know or have
some idea of, at once, and how many places and how much space beyond
what they know of or see, they cannot tell. So they may have fancied
themselves at a very few places in a very small part of God’s dominions
after all. But then it is only fancy with them, just the thoughts of the
mind going out in that direction, while the mind itself was in one place.
But how different it is with God. In every place, however far it may be,
in whatever direction it may be, however small it may be, in every point
of time, with everything, through everything, upholding everything, so
that there is not a point of all we can throw our thoughts to, or beyond


where we can throw our thoughts to, but we find he is there, and from
whom we cannot possibly escape. Now if we wanted to teach the moral
attributes of God, we should without doubt find it harder work to render
them plain and forcible to the children. For instance, if we want to
teach of holiness, how hard it is to make the subject clear and distinct,
as well as forcible and efficient. Perhaps our best way will be to per*
sonify holiness, and then personify sin, and compare the two, and show
the vast abyss which separates, and the excellence of the one, while we
exhibit the abominable foulness of the other. Dress out holiness then in
all her beautiful attire. Show her beautiful garb, white as the driven
snow, her shoes of peace, her crown of everlasting life. Her feet are
sounding gently as she comes near. What a sweet and heavenly smile
plays upon her lips, how her brilliant eyes sparkle with lustrous beauty;
her fair brow is pure and lofty, the seat of chaste ideas. But what
a well-set countenance, every part adding to the beauty of the other,
every lineament well formed, every feature perfection. When we gaze
upon her we are entranced. Is it possible that there should be such
beauty ? We cannot withold from beholding. We sit at her feet
wrapt in a delighted contemplation. What fresh loveliness beams out
from her features ! What affectionate concern she exhibits for all the
sons of men ! Will not they be charmed with her ? Will they not yield
to her kind entreaties and fall in love with her ? How can they resist ?
How can they keep themselves away from her ? See, she spreads out
her hands ! Look at what they contain ! In her right, durable riches
and righteousness with the bliss of everlasting life. In her left, to
attract the sons of men, she holds honor, long life, days of happiness,
and true pleasure. She is kind and tender, faithful and true, good and
pleasant. No sorrow ever fills her heart—none at any rate that comes
from herself. No mournfulness is heard tracing its heavy steps through
the chambers of her soul. No heaviness clouds her brow, nor tear,
naturally, steals down her cheek. All within her is blessedness ; every
step betokens joy. Come then ye sons of men, come ye my children,
and be acquainted with her. Where she comes there glory comes, where
she goes there happiness goes. Sorrow flies away at her approach.
Distress, anguish of soul, cannot abide her coming. What makes men
miserable is dispersed by her glance. What makes them joyous and
their light to break forth as the morning, she brings in plentiful supply.
This then is holiness. A fable picture truly, but in some way exhibits
some of her characteristics. But when this is heightened ten thousand
thousand times it will only be a very, very faint idea we shall get of the
blessed holiness which forms so conspicuous a part of God’s character.
It will show them there is nothing offensive in holiness, which we are too
apt to imagine, but everything that is attractive and lovely, and which
we would do well to attain to. In order to make it more forcible, and to
show forth more completely its excellent character, and how worthy it is
of our best endeavors to secure it, as well as God’s excellence in pos-
sessing such an attribute, and the reasonableness of him wanting us to
fall in love with it, let us just put it in contrast with its opposite—sin.
Here now comes forward a foul, black-visaged, demon-like form, such


a s makes you shrink with dread instinctively as you see it. 0 the
misery, wretchedness, woe and despair, all mixed up in its appearance !
Fain you would get out of its way, but it is better just to pass the
wretched object beneath our scrutinising glance. Look at her habiliments,
when did water come in contact with any of her garments, or purified
her skin ? Truly never. Her clothes are all in rags, so foul and loath-
some, you shrink from them as from a plague. Her feet are torn and
bleeding from the roughness of the way she has to tread. Her head is
crowned with shame, her hair hangs down in clotted masses, foul and
disordered. Her limbs are full of fever and disease and death. Her
frame is attenuated and decrepit, and her whole appearance of one who
experiences all the Avoes and distempers, the plagues and thraldoms, that
afflict in this world. But when you look into her countenance ’tis there
you perceive to its complete extent what vileness there is about her.
Behold her forced endeavour to smile ! How she would fain try to pass
it off that she was bewitching, as if such a being could ever be so. The
very effort only makes her look all the worse. But her bloodshot eyes
sunk deep into her head like painted furies looking out of their dismal
hiding places. Her painted cheeks with all their cancers but ill covered
up, and then that ugly mouth looking like the mouth of hell, and speaking
things to charm, but which are full of death. And at the reeking love of
evil that gleams forth there in that face ! Those eyes that tell of
devouring greed. That expression that tells of obnoxiousness to good,
and a hatred of God, and the ruination of man ! 0 arch enemy ! 0
arch fiend ! 0 destroyer of the world ! 0 combination of all woes !
Her right hand is full of death, gloom, God’s wrath and eternal misery.
Her left offers to the sons of men fictitious pleasures, dishonor, and a
lost life. 0 vile one ! How can you dare to walk our globe ? Why are
you not off to your own regions ? Why range our fair earth and waste
our choice possessions ? Away, away, foul one, withdraw your tainted
presence, take back the remembrance of yourself save as it shall make
all the children of Victoria hate you, trample you under foot, wreak their
vengeance on you till you be ground to powder, scattered to the winds,
and driven to the uttermost parts of hell. This is as it should be. God
grant that it may be. Help each parent to do their duty that it may be.
Help each child to make the right choice that it may be, and when this
choice is made there will be no difficulty in prophesying a glorious career
for Victoria. But if the contrary, if such a thing can take place, down
she will go to that degradation Avhich overtakes all who follow sin. But
when we get to love, lioav shall Ave explain that ? How shall we get them
to understand it ? The Bible itself seems to be under a deep sense of
this impossibility, when, instead of going into any elaborate description
of it, says “God so loved the world,” giving us the word so to let us
into the magnitude ot it, but at the same time to let us know the impos-
sibility of explaining it that it may be understood thoroughly. But then
Ave must try to explain it. But Avhat language shall A?e use ? Many of
the wisest and best have tried, and yet how signally failed. Their best
illustrations have seemed to be nothing. We feel at a loss. We can but
try, and if we fail it will only be Avhat others have done. Children never


feel a thing so acutely (or adults either) as when their own experience is
used for illustration. Nothing comes so hard to us generally as perhaps
self-denial. Let them, then, through the means of appealing to this, be
led step by step to come to some comprehension of this wondrous love.
Appeal to their sense of the hardship of self-denial. When they desire
a meal very much, do they feel inclined, or would they willingly yield it
to another ? If they are very sleepy and have a comfortable bed to go
to, will they voluntarily yield it up to some poor homeless- wretch who at
one time perhaps tried to take their father’s life, though he had often
bestowed much good upon him ? Do they live in a comfortable house ?
Are they surrounded with conveniences ? Some cold, pitiable night,
will they freely give up this to some shivering helpless one who cannot
find a home elsewhere ? Will they brave the storm themselves and court
death amid its relentless fury to save these, when these have injured them
in ten thousand ways, and continually rewarded their good with evil ? Is
your life full of joy and hope ? Can you look forward to pleasurable
years? Do many kind friends help to fill up your cup of joy ? Are you
expectant of great honor ? Have you the best of prospects ? Are
accumulations of every good gathering around your path ? C)n these
accounts is not life exceedingly desirable ? You would not relinquish it
for a little ? Supposing in the midst of this you saw a poor culprit
dragged away to the gallows, the one who last week only tried to take
your life and bring to a premature end all your joys. Would you rush
forward and offer yourself to offended justice, and cry “Hang me, but
let him go free ?” Are you out at sea ? Are your father and mother
and brothers and sisters on board with you ? Do some almost as dear
live in that country to which you are hound ? Are you full of delight in
the expectation of meeting with them ? for they nursed you when you
were little, and your hearts got knit to them. Do the winds now
begin to howl ? Is the sea lashed to a foam ? Does the ship tremble as
though she would break ? Do all expect a watery grave ? If a poor
shivering wretch were now to come forward and throw himself prostrate
and say “I’m the cause of this. I committed murder. Though I
escaped man, God overtakes me. Cast me into the sea and its boiling
waves will calm.” What wouldst thou do? Wouldst thou rush forward and
say “spare him,” give him time to repent, but let me go in his stead !
Would you, could you, then plunge into the angry deep, a martyr to the
cause of justice, to save a wretch like that ? Could you thus leave
behind you all that were so dear? If you can, children, we might say
to them, strengthen, intensify in your imagination, each of these cases
ten thousand fold, ay, ten thousand thousand fold, then if you could
grasp the idea of the love evinced you might have some faint sort of a
notion of the wonderful, over-whelming love of Jesus. How well we
know the reason we should have to intensify ! What would our happy
state be to that of Jesus’ ? Y/hat would be the temporal misery of these
individuals to the spiritual misery in which we are all plunged by sin ?
What would be the love of our friends to the love of the Father ? What
the greatest glories of earth to those of heaven ? How much more love
the Father had for the Son than our friends could have for us ? And


who can tell the bitterness of that plunge into the boiling sea of the just
wrath of an offended God ? Who can tell the intensity of the pangs
endured ? Who can tell the terrific weight of the curse ? So when we
have intensified many times, it will be but a very, very faint idea of the
wondrous love stored up in the heart of God. These are examples, as
we think, of the way in which might be possibly shown the character of
God. Of course they are only a few, but enough for illustration. But
we think other lessons might very suitably follow after that of the love
of God. For instance, to show the children for what that great mani-
festation of his love was. We might then in connection with this tell
them of their own wicked nature with which they are born into the
world. It will not be hard to convince them of this, their own con-
sciences will bear them witness. Their inability to do good unless God
help them. The need of a renewal of their hearts before they can get
into heaven, or even be good upon the present world. But between
them and God, shew them, are numbers of unpardoned sins, how are
these to be forgiven ? There is the Holy Spirit needed to renew the
heart, how is he to be obtained ? Our sins cry for vengeance, how then
can we expect mercy ? Our wicked hearts and doings rather call out for
God to drive us from his presence than make us fit for it, and then bring
us into it, how then can we expect the Holy Spirit and heaven ? Can
no help be brought ? Is there no remedy ? Whence can we look ? To
ourselves ? We are helpless. To heaven ? There is an offended though
loving God. To good future performances ? Alas ! we can do no more.
Or if we could, where is the pardon for the past ? There is only one
spot we can direct our attention to, if we get not help there we are
undone. But before we need the help, here comes forward the only one
who can assist—Jesus the Son of God. He obtains help to rescue us.
He sends the Good Spirit. He obtains for us pardon. He becomes our
sanctifier. He receives us into heaven. This will show them the con-
nection between the greatest manifestation of love and themselves. We
might also teach them of the Divinity of our Lord, as well as his glorious
attributes and perfections. Also we should set before them of the
personality and divinity of the Holy Spirit, likewise his attributes and
perfections, giving Scriptural proofs for each. I know a good many
pass these things by as of little importance, but I am more convinced
than ever if we want men of stability we must teach them thoroughly of
these things. Besides this, we should teach them of God’s providence,
and show them that things are not left to chance, but are under the
wisest and best of jurisdiction. That what seem evils are often for our
greatest good, and often what we fancy best is allowed in anger. That
multitudinous are the evils warded off by this, and multitudinous are the
good things brought within our reach. Let them know there is no
ordering things otherwise than as Providence appoints, but this does
not preclude our most vigorous efforts ; for we know the appointment of
Providence to a lazy man would be want. While they are working their
best they are to trust in Providence, because it is wiser than they. Let
them know of God’s unchangeability. We shall never find that God
alters, Come to him when we will, he is always the same. To his care


we can commit our souls in sure hope that they will he well taken care
of. That we can rely on him that he puts the same construction on his
Word as he did formerly, and that its meaning by him is subject to no
capricious changes. His methods of government are still the same, and
will be. He is still the rewarder of good and the punisher of evil. We
should explain fully that by grace we are saved. We should also tell
them how truthful God is. How we can always get from him a fulfilment
of what he has promised. No need to fear of him changing his mind
with respect to these if we only comply with his conditions. How, when
he has spoken he will perform even if a long time intervene. How cer-
tainly will he fulfil the promise on which he has caused us to hope, or
how r surely, though he likes it not, will he bestow punishment on an
obstinate evil-doer. Then his justice, we should not be behindhand in
telling them of this. Show them the impartiality of it. Show them the
cause of its being required to be put into action. If we sin against
God and our neighbour justice requires that we should be punished for
it. We have infringed God’s rights, we have attempted to destroy his
peculiar privileges, we have robbed him of his honor, we have offended
his justice, so what more reasonable than that we should feel its wrath.
Because of the exceeding heinousness of our sins they render us justly
liable to the infliction of eternal punishment. And so hell, though so
unfashionable a doctrine, might be spoken of to them. Show them how
grace comes in and delivers them. And also how it only can he through
grace that we are delivered. Show how we are, as it were, weighed in
the balances and found wanting. Justice has whet her sword. Unless
she have some equivalent for the offence her broken law demands his
death. Justice’ honor is involved, she could not let him go if she wanted
it. But now mercy and love come to the rescue in the form of Jesus
Christ. He sees the threatening stroke, and comes forward and receives
it himself instead. Justice now is satisfied, and allows every sinner that
trusts in Jesus to go free of the penalty. Teach them well on the point
that we are saved by grace and not by our good works. We have to do
good works, but can’t do them properly till we have grace. Grace is
ever at our hand to help us, so if we employ it not it is our own fault.
But the grace to do the good works is of God’s supply, so God must
have the praise. Of course there are a good many other things to which
we might draw their attention with very great profit, as, God’s exceeding
patience, as exemplified in his dealings with ourselves. His long-suffering,
his marvellous condescension, his munificent bounty, his generous regard
for even the most insignificant creatures his hands have made. And
lastly, we should teach them of heaven. We should lead them to regard
that as their future home, and as he that hath this hope in him purifieth
himself as Christ is pure, that shows them of what character they must
be wdio are travelling there. When we have done this work to our best
ability and secured God’s blessing upon it, and gone into every other
subject about God we desire them to know, according to our opportunity,
and their capacity, we shall have them tolerably well instructed in God’s
character and attributes. Let us, however, during this time not fail to
cause them to study the Holy Scriptures, that they may more or less find


out that the things we advance are so. Then what we generally call
secular subjects have to be attended to with all possible diligence. But
these things do not require so much remark because the need of these
(a pity that religion is not so well perceived) is so well perceived, that to
secure for their children ability to get a livelihood, will stir up most
people. But for all that, too many are very careless about it, and thereby
do their children serious harm. If all were to be particular, and com-
mence with their children at a proper age, and steadily instruct, or have
them instructed till their minds became well disciplined, we should have
a far more able race than we have at present. Here is where the lack
becomes apparent. Not but that they are at school, or are taught some
time in their lives, but there is no regularity in their attendance. What
they learn one time they forget by the time they commence to learn
more, and thus they become dull and stupid, and have no inclination for
learning as they find they make no progress. By this means you don’t
get out of a child what God has placed there, but wrap up the poor little
thing like an Egyptian mummy, in an endless roll of stupid laziness, out
of which it is almost impossible to untwine itself. In order more
thoroughly to secure against this, we should be careful to see, as much
as we have opportunity, that they do what work they do completely,
whereby we shall much aid their progress. For as a child does its work
thoroughly, so it is stimulated to make greater progress, but a child that
is allowed to do its work carelessly, sees no beauty in it, sees no improve-
ment, and consequently becomes disheartened. It greatly matters with
respect to this what kind of a school the child attends. If they are not
well looked after, and they acquire slovenly habits, they very likely will
stick to them through life. What they then do is generally only partly
done, and they never perhaps learn to do a thing well. But besides,
they don’t learn much, and gradually sink into lazy habits which much
mar their progress through life. But we ought to be careful with respect
chiefly in a moral sense, to the sort of school to which we send our
children. There are some teachers who make them careless about
religion, and some who do worse, teach them by their example, and
perhaps by more, to scoff and deride. There are others who will not
look after their morals or correct them in their behaviour if it does not
interfere with school work, whose only aim seems to be to do something
for their salary, and then no matter about the children. I have some-
times come upon parents who have objected to their children learning
above a certain number of subjects, as though there would be no use for
them. But this is really not the thing, Learning, even if nothing else,
gives an excellent balance to a person. An ignorant man thinks he knows
something and often shows himself a fool. A man who has learning
knows there is a vast deal that he has not learned, and hence is humble
and careful. But if there be no use for it now, there will be sometime,
and a person never finds it unhandy even when he can’t specially turn it
to account, but he always can turn it to some account. Be not afraid to
let them learn. Mind they have a good foundation of plain English, and
then a superstructure of other things can be added as opportunity serves.
The more you can teach them the better. Learning will refine them.


If they become good Christians, which it is to be hoped they will, learning
will give their Christianity a polish which will considerably beautify it.
They will be saved from many of those extravagancies into which many
good, zealous, but untutored men fall, and thereby their usefulness will
be increased. Try and get them to make a practical use of their learning
as they acquire it. Not by pedantically exhibiting it before those who
are ignorant, but rather to do good and improve upon it, and learn how
to put it to best service. It would be well if the knowledge of self could
only be taught with the same ease some of these subjects are. For often
through our ignorance of this we commit great errors, and rush into
silly extremes through our foolish pride, all engendered by our not
knowing ourselves. When we know ourselves we find out our weak-
nesses, and what men are without them ! This tends to keep down our
pride, for we find we have not much to be proud of. The principal help
by which it is learned is the Spirit of God, and he commonly makes use
of experience to instruct us thoroughly in this. And thus it is generally
by very slow lessons that we come to that knowledge which more than
ever constitutes us wise men and women.
ON DUTY TO GOD.
BESIDES teaching them the knowledge of God, and of what else we
think will be advantageous to them, it will also be necessary to show
them how to turn these to the best practical use they can be. And also,
how all these things can be made to subserve to the very highest employ-
ment any created being can engage in, which is performing their duty to
God. How truly noble a being who performs this aright! How glorious
to look back at the end of each day and know that you have honoured
the best of Beings ! Happy man who can lay his head down on his
pillow and say “this day has been spent in arduous endeavors to please
the Being who keeps me ! It raises a man to the exaltation of an angel!
It links a man to the life of heaven ! All else below, howsoever high
their rank may be, are low, mean, and worthless ! A heavenly inspiration
fires his soul! A glorious intent gives eminence to every action ! Earth’s
actions terminate in mean self. All these end in the glorious tribute of
all creation that is poured out at the feet of God. This man lives to be
a boon. The man of earth lives to sacrifice at the shrine of self. This
man will, if he can, make others happy. The man of earth will, if he
can, fill up his own bosom, no matter what sorrow fills the breast of
others. This man is like a fruitful shower fertilising the parched ground.
The other is a cloud without rain. This man is like precious gold which
enriches all that receive of it. The other is like base coin, the more ’tis
tested the worse it seems. As he honors God, so God honors him. If
an enemy be driven away it is for his sake. Does plenty gladden the
land ? then it is for him. Do disease, distress, expected famine,


anticipated riotings disappear ? It is through honor to him. At his
feet God likes to pour out the blessings of the earth. Into his life God
delights to pour all goodness. And when he has crowned him with glory
and honor upon the earth, he will give him a better glory in the land to
which he journeys. These are the ones beyond all others the earth
need to keep. They are the salt, meat, drink, of the whole earth. If
they have not these, sin will corrupt them. If they have not these their
souls will die of spiritual hunger, and many a time more than they are,
would they be visited by a natural famine. No living streams would be
made to flow hither and thither diffusing life to all, if these laborious
individuals did not toil at it. 0 earth keep them ! Encourage them !
0 parents of Victoria, make, if God will help you, your children like
these, and what can hinder the glory from Victoria ! The first lessons in
a child’s, or anyone’s else’s duty to God will, of course, be Obedience.
We touched on obedience to parents before ; this may exist without
obedience directly, to God. I say, directly, because a child does really
obey God when they obey their parents, at least in most things. But
then they don’t directly obey God when they don’t do it through
obedience to him. I also classed roots Love to God. This
can’t exist without Obedience. Though obedience to God must exist, for
a child to take in to the greatest advantage all manner of mental and
spiritual nourishment, yet its existence, as in fact the others, by no means
is confined to a root. As the root forms a part of the plant, so does
this of the life of the man. As the influence of the root is felt for evil
or good throughout the plant, so is obedience formed throughout all the
moral being. As the influence of the root extends to the quality of the
fruit, so does it here. When I spoke of the roots I mentioned Love to
God, which, of course, includes Obedience. But great obedience argues
much love. And as obedience is so much contained in the life of the
future man, that it belongs more properly to this part which might be
supposed to refer to the stem, the branches, and fruit, therefore I have
forborne speaking particularly of it, though it is implied as being con-
tained in the root, and in fact that root love could not exist without it.
This obedience is a most glorious virtue. The heart naturally revolts at
such a thing. But it is its nature to do so, for the thing is contrary to
it. And if it did not, we might begin to suspect whether it were real in
its submission, unless we had good reason to suppose that God’s grace
was at work. Through this natural reluctance of our heart we see the
need of a change of heart. For it is only as the evil heart exists this
obedience is unpleasant. As this is removed so the yielding this becomes
proportionally pleasant. One of the first steps we take in the path of
obedience is to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Without this faith
there is no true obedience. I know there are a considerable number of
very good people who have doubts as to the wisdom of directing children
to believe in Jesus. And a great many more who have doubts, and great
doubts, of the wisdom or correctness of urging them to believe.
Certainly the experience of many children who have professed to believe
has given some cause for these doubts. They seem right in their trust,
for they become obedient and devout, and anxious apparently to please


the Lord. But yet this soon all slackens. They gradually become
unconcerned, and finally do many things contrary to the mind of Jesus.
Have they really trusted in Christ ? Can we doubt it ? Have they not
been sincere ? Did they not go to Christ according to the Scriptural
method ? Were not they careful, yea very careful to please him ? Were
not they devout ? Did they not love the souls of others ? What better
indications could we have that they truly trusted ? But then it lasted so
short a time. Can grace perform such a work ? We think not, if all be
extinguished. But who knows what is slumbering under all that outside
appearance of careless indifference ? A fire may exist there which only
wants a little fanning of cheerful exhortation and good example. It is
more likely that they had what was real. Some, of course, may be
fictitious, or, more likely, may be mistaken. If they have had it really
and lost it to this extent, then they are greatly to blame. But if we
consider the ease with which children are led, we may find the cause
more abundant in others than in themselves. Do not people often look
very suspiciously on children who profess faith in Christ ? Are not their
actions closely watched ? Do not eyes so scrutinise as though they would
penetrate into the very recesses of their souls ? Every word seems
weighed. And then, how surely what a little encouragement they have.
When is a kind word spoken ? When is a good example put before them
to enkindle their souls ? Alas! the rather, the slightest supposed
deviation, and the countenance scowls, the brow knits, the eyes look
scornful, and instead of urging the poor little one to fly to Jesus, and get
help there, out comes the expression, “Is that your religion ? I thought
it would end there!” How likely such expressions as these are to
dishearten. But very likely we set them a bad example ourselves. Do
we call ourselves professors of religion ? Then they watch us with
expectation of finding an example. Are we cold in our love ? Is it not
likely they will be so too ? Do we seldom pray in secret ? Is it not
likely they will neglect private prayer ? Are we neglectful of Bible
study ? What more likely that they are too ? Do we speak very little
of what should so fill and inflame our hearts, that it finds a vent like
fi re —the love of Jesus ? Do not we neglect Christian communion, and
such help as the Church of God generally affords, besides the public
services ? What else can we expect but they will follow us implicitly ?
And if we, as their examples, frequent places, keep company, read books,
enter into converse such as we should not, how can we look for them to
do otherwise ? Now in this case who seems most to blame ? To whom
will God come for the most responsibility ? On whom will he charge it ?
Do we not hear his sacred word uttering in warning tones, “Whosoever
shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me.” Is not this offending
them when we are the cause of leading them to offend Christ ? How
different is the case of children who have thus professed and have been
carefully attended to and nourished in the things of the kingdom of
grace ! They have grown like trees planted by the rivers of water, and
have indeed kept their leaf evergreen, and plentifully brought forth their
fruit in its season. And have not those who so professed when their
parents were wicked done oftentimes well ? Knowing what their parents


were, they have not looked to them as an example, but have looked to
the Lord Jesus, who has kept them and brought them on, and they have
been made a lesson of good to the whole family. From these consider-
ations are we not persuaded that the fault greatly lies with others ; and
there are from these, no just grounds for supposing we should not urge on
children to come to Christ. But are not the grounds exceedingly strong
for insisting on exhorting, encouraging, helping, urging, and trying every
way conceivable to get them to exercise faith in Christ ? Yerily when
the Word of God says “Train up a child in the way he should go,” it
means that we should take a child the very best step in the whole way to
the arms of Christ. “They that seek me early shall find me,” surely
means that they be directed and helped to seek him rather than hindered.
“Suffer the little ones to come unto me,” was said to people who were
hindering those who were bringing them. And when we are to “feed
his lambs,” how can we do it better than by feeding them with Christ
himself ? And what does this mean but that we lead them to him that
they may receive of the Spirit of Christ ? So we find that the unhappy
experiences even testify nothing against this, but indirectly in favor.
While the gladsome experiences where the little ones have grown strong
in the Lord speak favorably in a way we can’t controvert. But when we
come to the Book of God we find language there that makes the duty
doubly binding, past the shirking ten times enforced, and ten thousand
times requisite that we use our best endeavors to bring the children at
the very earliest age to trust in the Lord Jesus Christ. While we do
this let us beware of mystifying a very simple thing. Faith is a very
simple thing. God speaks of it as if it were. But somehow or other it
has got twisted and tortured till it assumes such an intricate form that no
one knows what it is, no one less than the man who professes to explain
it. The only difficulty is to have as much faith in Christ as many people
have in things natural. Faith in the natural world is simple and spon-
taneous. In the spiritual it is simple, but it is a product of the Divine
Spirit. We suppose that the children have been taught that they are
sinners. That their nature is totally depraved. That they must be
forgiven. That they must be renewed. That in order to their coming
to God and having a new heart they must have the Holy Spirit. That
Christ has loved and died for them that all this may take place. That
he is willing, very willing to save them. That now, even now, is the
accepted time. What more is needed then that their young hearts be
broken on account of sin ? Does the Holy Spirit thus affect them, and
bestow upon them yearnings after Christ ? Then what more is
needful than that they believe that Christ, according to his word, saves
them ? There is no need to doubt. There is no room to doubt. Has not he
said so ? Is not that enough ? It would be sinful, very sinful, to doubt
his word. This faith wants to be kept. While we have faith we have
power. He that believeth hath the might of God on his side. He that
begins to doubt, allows the devil to come in. They should be taught that
we don’t hold Christ with a precarious grasp, like a person who might be
holding a rope, his body hanging over some terrible abyss, of holding
which, by and by, he gets tired, and falls down headlong to perdition.


But rather this gets to be a confirmed habit of the mind, so that the
exercise of it becomes part and parcel of ourselves ; only like every other
good thing in this world we have to look out we don’t get robbed of it.
One blessed thing about it is that we are in no danger of losing it unless
we are first willing. It is no merely cold sanction on God’s part when he
bestows upon our faith being exercised. Let the children know this. Nor
has he grudgingly placed things for our good within the limits of certain
restricting conditions, so that when a compliance is yielded, he will as
grudgingly bestow what will make us happy and good, merely to uphold
his honor, because he has promised. No; God loves us, and loves us
dearly. If it were not our sinfulness and his own sense of justice, he
would literally deluge us with blessings. But his justice causes sin
rather to be punished, and if he bestowed good upon us indiscriminately
we should rather be encouraged in our sin, and fancy in our foolish pride
that God had seen some good thing in us which made him thus bestow.
But now we find that all things for our good are stored up in Christ, and
on our trusting in him they are bestowed. So whenever we require
anything of God our attention is directed to Christ, through whom alone
we receive. And thus all praise goes to Christ, and we have no room to
give any to ourselves. And Christ, too, has made such ample atonement
for our sins that not only are they covered, but innumerable blessings are
provided also. Whenever then we have complied with the condition,
immediately God shews his bounty by pouring down upon us more good
than we can contain. And as we continue to comply, throughout our
life, he continues to bestow, as we have strength of soul and mind to
bear, blessing upon blessing, his hand never being wearied. But lest
any should think, “ At any rate if he bestows willingly when we do believe
he is not anxious for us to believe,” just consider the immense variety
of expressions he makes use of in his Word, exhortations, entreaties,
promises, threats, examples, and plain commands, to induce us to believe.
Of the number of agencies he has set on foot for the very purpose of this
very thing, as preaching, publications, &c., and also the various provi-
dential circumstances met with in our life which call us to this same;
and, lastly, the voice of his Holy Spirit within our hearts inviting us
to come, and declaring that we shall not be cast out. Can they
then think God does not want them to come ? When faith has
been exercised, love will come in; and when love has taken possession
of the soul, how easy then becomes obedience ! Consider when we
have love for an individual, it is no trouble to do what they want
us to. We look about to anticipate their wishes ; and are only too glad
to exert ourselves for their pleasure. So it is when love to God is enjoyed.
Fear may affect to bring about obedience, but it is what the Scriptures
designate feigned obedience ; for -while the actions are being done, and
obedience outwardly exhibited, the inward man revolts against it as a
wretched species of tyranny. So every thing is done by constraint,
accompanied by a constant look out for an opportunity of throwing off
the cumbersome, galling yoke. But love fills the soul with delight in
doing the commands of God. These commands are the free-will choice.
The contrary, if even God would not punish for it, would be rejected with


scorn. The whole soul desires it. The inward man leaps joyously
towards the accomplishment of its heavenly Father’s will, and carries the
outward actions in ready and joyous conformity with it. Obedience in this
case is complete. But let us not neglect the enforcement of obedience,
because the children have not love. Though the subject be not well
relished, let us still be wisely firm to enjoin upon them their duty, and
as far as we wisely can, enforce a compliance. Depend upon it, while
we are looking to a higher power to succeed our work, he will not be
backward to perform his part, and love to him will soon make obedience
easy. And let them perceive the reasonableness of love. Fancy not
loving the beings who gave us existence, those who have tended us most
carefully, and loved us most of any ! If it be possible that such love
should be shewn towards others, and awaken no feelings of reciprocal
love, would not such an event be strange and unnatural ? Would it not
provoke everyone’s astonishment and reprobation ? But supposing, if in
addition to this, violent enmity was engendered, shewing itself in the
most bitter attacks upon them, defiance of their authority, neglect of
their requirements ; and instead, the performance of every thing a hostile
spirit could suggest to exhibit its enmity, would not this stir up the
execrations of the whole human race ? Would not all look upon the
doers with horror ? But when God has ten thousand times ten thousand
been more kind and good to us, to think of ill-feeling towards him, to
think of hatred and rebellion towards him, of performing malevolent acts
against him who is so good, what can we think of it ? Is it not enough
to make all nature stand aghast, to look on terror stricken, and filled with
horror at the scene, hasten her dissolution ? But cause them to remem-
ber that obedience and love are not to be shewn forth without the
exercise of self-denial. By this they will be prepared. And as a captain
who is apprised of the coming of his foe, together with his strength and
warlike preparation, is far better able to make ready to meet him than if
the contrary; so the child being informed of self-denial beforehand will
by proper treatment be more ready to successfully and continually perform
it. Self-denial arises from our natural will coming in contact with the
exercise of God’s will with respect to our conduct. Our natural inclina-
tion often leading us to want to do things contrary to what God wants us
to do, causes a struggle, if we want to do God’s will; and the voluntarily
entering into this struggle, and overcoming our nature therein, is called
self-denial. Of course, it will appear from what has been said that the
more of Divine power rests upon us the easier will be the work of self-
denial, because the natural man becomes weaker and the spiritual stronger.
So they should be specially enjoined to seek for that heavenly strength
which will make the work more successfully performed. There is a self-
denial practised by men who have no fear of God before their eyes. As
when they want to succeed in a certain thing, they must use a considerable
amount of self-denial. And that is the reason why those who have a
meagre fare, and plenty of work, more often succeed than those who have
been delicately brought up. Both, perhaps, had the same amount of
natural talent; but one could practise the self-denial necessary to success,
while the other, tenderly trained, could not. This sort of self-denial, of


course, is not to be compared with the other, this being merely partial,
while the other is universal. This is a purely natural thing (though it is
impossible to say how much help God directly gives to a man who is
determined to get on), while the other is never practised till the heart is
renewed. The children will want instructing in this virtue that they may
be able to take up their cross daily and follow Christ. Let them know it
does not consist in seeking for crosses to take up, but in the performance
of what God wants us to do at the expense of the mortification of self.
But beware of making it appear too harsh to them, “Christ’s yoke is
easy and his burden light.” It mostly consists in denying ourselves of
things that are wrong or would be injurious, or the performance of those
things which we should do, but to do which we feel exceeding loath. Let
them know it by no means shuts us out from pleasures and every season-
able enjoyment. A time for everything, and everything in its time. But
it does shut out from wasting our time, from spending our all, of mind,
time, money, or other talent, wholly on ourselves. It does require us to
do good, and to do all the good we can. It does require us not to pamper
the bodily appetites, to revel in luxuries while others are starving; and
spending our money on handsome decorations while others have not
clothes to cover them. But while you instruct them wisely on what they
should do, don’t forget to tell them what they should not do in the
performance of this same virtue. There are not many people who go to
extremes in this, but there is a danger of an earnest, affectionate soul
going into them to such an extent that they have done themselves serious
injury. Our body must have proper attention; and self, as a whole,
must have a wise amount of care, else we don’t glorify God. Keep
between the two extremes, and then with God’s blessing we shall be safe.
Let them beware of thinking that there is any merit in practising self-
denial. God will doubtless reward most largely for its exercise, but it
will be all of his goodness and free bounty. For he has supplied the
grace to practise it, and he, though beyond the power of compulsion,
agrees to give reward for doing what his grace enables us to do. The
merit is in Christ, and if we were stripped of him we should be stripped
indeed. Supposing us to build upon the foundation of these things
instead of on Christ, then at the time when we wanted most security we
should find that our foundation would crumble away, and our good works
would fly away like the wind, and we should appear miserable, destitute,
and undone before God. And don’t let us forget to inculcate reverence
toward God. It is possible that people who love God get into a habit,
from their being so accustomed to appear before him, of forgetting the
reverence which should be showed him. Quite unintentionally though.
For the honest desire of their heart is to please God. But notwith-
standing this they forget to a great extent the disparity which exists
between themselves and God, and treat him too much as if he were an
equal. But it is when the heart is averse to God that the greatest need
exists of inculcating this. The awe-striking presence of God which at
times makes itself gloriously experienced in the case of almost every
believer, in the case of them that love God, helps effectually to promote
reverence in them. But in the case of those who don’t, none of these


experiences taking place, it is necessary to enforce such behaviour as is
requisite towards God in the best way it can be ; for there not even being
love towards God, reverence must be taught, and its practice enforced.
We want the children to regard him as his majesty deserves. Being so
high and mighty, so exalted above themselves, so glorious in the company
of his adoring retinue, so mighty in his working that he only speaks and
it is done, so rich in the distribution of his treasures that all creation is
enriched by him, so excellent in his wisdom that he never makes the
slightest mistake, and so effective in his performance that no endeavor
fails, and so exceedingly good that every creature finds a place in his
kind affections, should they not regard him with feelings commensurate
with his glorious dignity, so that all their thoughts may be influenced
with an idea of his superiority, and their own nothingness as compared
with it. Their words should likewise be brought under the same awe-
inspiring influence, and their actions will scarcely fail of being in
conformity with both. What was advanced respecting the attributes of
God is well calculated to bring this about, only in addition to this it is
better to impart some particular injunctions and teachings, and then when
love takes up its abode in the heart, the child will be more fully prepared
for glorifying its maker. Amongst other things it will be very beneficial
to teach them that they have to work for God, The thing is of vast
importance, because as we do this so shall we glorify God, which is truly
said to be the chief end of man. Now our wisdom will be shown in
trying to find out what work God has for the child to perform on the
earth. Of course an individual is doing God’s work when he is honorably
filling some honest employment. He is doing his part in carrying out
the great schemes of Divine Providence which are in exercise for the
benefit of the whole human race, and which, besides having their influence
in doing good to the animal and mental, also contribute somewhat more
indirectly to the welfare of the spiritual. Now as a man pursues his
calling, whatever it is (provided it is right), with honesty and integrity
performing the duties of it for God’s glory, then has his influence a direct
spiritual benefit. He lives the gospel. And as people see him so they
say, “That man, though he speaks it not with his lips, I know by his
conduct, serves Christ.” God has a work for our children to do. And we
shall find out by watching the child’s developing abilities and tendencies
what is most likely it will be fit for. If we cannot discern it let us still
proceed with our process of culture, trusting in God that he will direct.
But what we find the children inclining towards let us draw them out.
Direct them to all the improvement we can in that direction, so that they
may become eminent in that department. By this means we shall impart
strength and ability to their faculties, and impart great degrees of power
to the process of development. But while they are thus preparing in one
way for working for God, let them know they must prepare to work for
the souls of men. While pushing their way on in the world, they are,
besides living honorably as people of business, to strive to do all they
can for the benefit of their fellows in more direct ways. Have they got
money ? They are bound to bestow on those who have none. Are any
sick, or afflicted, or destitute ? If they can, which we can’t but think


they will be able, they must visit them. Do they meet with any in the
course of business whose souls they have good reason to suppose are
unsaved ? If they can speak a word to them, if it be wisely said, how
good it is. Or if time presses, how easy it would be to give them a
tract, or something to remind them of their duty to God. If they be
called as ministers or missionaries, fit them well to always have God's
glory in view, and with his blessing they will be eminently useful. If he
calls them to a life of business perhaps then they may be more useful
than these others in winning souls for Christ (the day will declare it).
They may preach to as large multitudes, and if not called to that, to
smaller, and if not that, as is mentioned above, let them do. And even
if they could do none of these, if they have money, think how much
money is needed to carry on God’s work in the earth. The man who
labors to gather money that he may give one part of the sinews of exten-
sion to this work, is working for God. And what is more glorious than
to see a man voluntarily yield up all that his business or the requirements
of his family will allow, for the support of gospel agencies. It is
grieving to hear some people say when speaking of this subject, “0 you
can’t do without money !” But the cause of God can do without money.
But God has so condescendingly allowed us the privilege and great honor
of contributing something towards a cause which he could very well
carry on without our help, that we may have a part in the glorious work
of rescuing mankind from the powers of evil. He could do by many
ways what he desires without our aid, but having put things on their
present basis, man comes in to be the agent to effect man’s recovery, and
therefore man works as a man, and needs the same assistance as he does
in anything else where expenses are contracted. But to come back to
our subject again, there are so many ways in which we can work for God
that however we are placed we can serve him by benefiting our fellows.
Where there is a will there is a way. And we may all have the glory of
leading souls into everlasting bliss. But let them remember that they
have to depend upon the help of the Spirit of God ; for however well
a person may do his part, if the Holy Spirit use not his all-efficient
power and make it effective, all will be vain. Another duty must be
prominently brought before the children’s minds which is exceedingly
needful in the cases of individuals like us. We are dependent from day
to day for the least as well as the greatest things, all upon God. What
more natural than that we should pray to him ? Consider that every-
thing needed by us in the present life, health, wealth, food, raiment,
friends, relations, help in time of need, deliverances from all sorts of
danger, strength for the body, strength for the mind and soul, wisdom to
direct, power to overcome, patience to endure, grace to resist, or grace
to perform, goodness at all times, things suitable for every emergency,
are all stored up in God. Do we want any of these ? What can be
more natural, what can be more suitable than that we humbly bow the
knee and ask that help might be given ? We know and feel this to be
so. Then let us get the same into the children, but not only to know
and feel, but to do. Unless God see fit to give out any of these things
we cannot possibly attain them. A man may think he is sure of a thing,


God sees fit to withold ; vain for him to try to obtain it. But the soul
that really needs, when petition is made to heaven, always obtains a
gracious hearing and bestowment of what they need. We want to get
them into a habit of praying. Let them learn that they are dependent
upon God. But let them know at the same time they have to depend
upon their own efforts to the very full measure of their strength, for God
is no encourager of idleness. Those people who fold their arms and say
“the Lord will provide,” will have provided for them a scanty larder,
rags and tatters. But everything beyond our ability is the sphere for
the exercise of prayer. If we are going about business, not knowing
whether it will prosper or fail, we should seek guidance. If we seem
likely to contract an intimate friendship how needful to ask will this
person be a curse or a blessing, a helper or destroyer of my peace ? By
this means we may be saved from many an evil. And fancy the thank-
fulness we should experience supposing we had been saved from taking
for our bosom friend one who really was an infamous character. But let
their prayers always he simple, and to the point. God hates a prayer
compounded of a whole string of mysterious expressions which have no
understood meaning. Not but he can read the heart however the
language is mystified, and understand the language. But in this case
this is the fact, that he can read it only too well, and sees nothing but
abomination in it. Let them be saved from offering such a foolish,
wicked sacrifice to God either in public or private. Let them learn to
ask for what they need, and not just for the sake of asking. Then when
they do bow down, their prayer will be direct, and reach the ears of the
King of Heaven. Let them chiefly ask that they may be made those in
whom God delights. Teach them that their prayers be earnest. This is
one condition, the compliance with which seems so reasonable. Being
dependent upon God for all, what a state of confusion and dismay we
should be in if we were not to receive ; so what more needful than that
our prayers he with all the soul. Besides, earnestness moves. Cold,
dead language never yet affected anyone. But whole-souled earnestness,
when a man has apparently had no chance of success, has been put
forward, and obstacles have been overcome, difficulties have been
vanquished, men’s hearts full of opposition have been melted down, and
yet, when multitudes would have despaired of success, a glorious victory
has been won. How much more will this have effect with him who is so
good, so movable, so willing, as the King of Kings, who giveth to all
men liberally and upbraideth not. As for the length of time we should
spend in prayer, it very much depends upon our own state with respect
to God. When we love a friend very much we eagerly embrace oppor-
tunities of being in their presence, of conversing with them, and do not
think the time ill-spent, or find it hang heavily upon our hands. We all
know it is the reverse when such love is not experienced. So with
respect to God. When we love him much his presence is so delightful
that we can stay before him hours, and then find, instead of the time
hanging heavily, it passes only too quickly. But when our love has
cooled, a long prayer is a melancholy thing for ourselves, and a most
offensive thing to God, Generally we may say, unless love flame much
84
ON DUTY TO GOD,


in the heart, let the prayers be short, to the point, and as full of faith
as can be. One prayer would, of course, be specially applicable in a
case like this, —that for more love. But when the greater love comes,
let us not pray long for the sake of doing so, or to the neglect of any of
our other duties, but rather, as God’s good Spirit guides us. As for the
number of times we should pray in a day, we ought to be guided by the
number of our wants. Some days special things will demand special
appeals to the throne of grace. Other days perhaps the more usual
routine of things will take place. But surely we are not to neglect those
stated periods of, at any rate, three times a day which seems to be the
rule laid down in God’s word! By no means. No one who has wants,
and who has not ? but must be able to find a need these many times a
day. Only warn the children fervently against the danger of becoming
formal. Let their prayers, as we have said, be to the point. If people
feel there is much need of Divine help, even when they have no time to
place themselves in a formal position, a lifting up of the heart in
ejaculatory prayer is within their reach, and will be effectual to bring
down the blessing.. But they must be sure to have deeply impressed
upon them the imperative necessity of mixing faith with their prayers.
A prayer without faith is like a bird without wings, it cannot rise from
the earth. It is like a telescope without lenses having the appearance of
one, but without those glasses which bring the objects apparently near.
The prayer may be finely proportioned, well worded, wisely arranged,
exceedingly eloquent, as men would say, and yet be as useless for
accomplishing what was needed as a nicely fashioned piece of machinery
which could not be made to be of service in any way. While a short,
may be rough, ungrammatical utterance of some illiterate man, has taken
heaven as it were by storm, and brought down, almost before finishing,
the desired gift. But there is no need of being rough, or of being
ungrammatical, or anything else unpleasant, but there is the most urgent
need to have that indispensable article faith, to enter into the compo-
sition of our prayers. Faith makes a short prayer effective, but a long
prayer without is as a lifeless body. We can’t have too much faith for
anything we are warranted in asking for according to God’s word. We
are never blamed for too much faith. The New Testament examples are
all to the effect that great faith got great honor, as “Thy faith hath
saved thee,” repeated many times. Prayers should always then be
accompanied with the simple confidence that what we ask for shall be
granted, and then we should make our minds quite easy as to the result.
Some blessings that we expect require us to be working, expecting to
receive them. Others are of that nature that we shall have to wait
patiently and “ stand still and see the salvation of God.” When we have
to wait working, let us use all the strength we have as if all depended
upon our own efforts, and while thus doing the help we expect is coming.
Some things our foolish nature would incline us to ask for which are
really for our hurt. We ask, but receive not, because they would be as
poison to us. So when we ask for things of a doubtful nature we should
put an if. But other things we can ask and receive, and our joy will be
full, without the shadow of a doubt, Sometimes when people obstinately


ask for a thing that will do them hurt, and will take no denial, but will
have it, persuading themselves it must be for their good because they
want it, God lets them have it, to show them how much wiser he is than
they. And then they become sorry for their gift,»and loathe it for its
pain, and heartily wish to get rid of it. Another thing we must not
forget to instruct them in is, a proper reverence for the Sabbath day. It
is shameful the way in which it is desecrated in this colony. People seek
their own pleasure, speak their own words, perform their own works in
flat contradiction to God’s word. Nay, some will even go the length of
asserting that we have no Sabbaths at all, as such by Divine authority.
As if the need of rest for body, and special attention to the affairs of the
soul, did not in themselves constitute a reason why God would enjoin
such a thing even if his word w T ere obscure on the subject. But it is not
obscure. If it be right and binding that we are to do no murder, it is
right and binding that we “keep holy the Sabbath day.” And some
wicked people would go so far, if they could, as to throw off what they
call a barbaric yoke, and do away with every Sabbath restriction, and let
all, as they say, be free. We have tasted already in’Victoria too much
of the sweets which lurk in that cup of freedom. Wherever the Sabbath
is desecrated there rests God’s curse. It has done so in olden times in
the world’s history, it does now. It does on nations, it does on
individuals. They disdain to give the generous hearted Euler of the
Universe who has been loadingthem with blessing so lavishly, one day in
seven, and according to the measure they mete it is measured to them
again. They are stingy ; they are dealt with as such. They won’t give,
so it is not given to them. They take all they can and give no return ;
so it is taken from them and none given back. They are miserable in
their conduct towards their best benefactor, and so he lets them have the
misery of their own hearts to the full. They won’t give praise for what
they do receive, so they are portioned out that they could not give thanks
for. As the country could not but take themselves as a guide in the
manner of employing the Sabbath, and therefore took a little innocent
diversion on that day after the toils of the week, so God gives them such
times as they fain would work hard seven days to keep the life in them.
In fact, we publicly dishonor God, and God publicly dishonors us. A
few years ago Ballarat was well to do. People flocked to it from all
parts. Her prospects were good. Then they could not do without
working on Sunday, such was their greed. They must boat on the
Swamp, such was their love of pleasure. So God has hidden from us
where the gold is ;he has visited us with pain for our pleasure. These
are some of the glorious effects of this freedom these boasters so vainly
speak of. Poor fellows, they must be ignorant, or else they would not
speak as they do. This is the only thing which makes them worthy of
pity, for they are as great enemies to our country’s real prosperity as can
be found in the whole world. And our Government have contributed to
it. They have allowed, and do allow sales to be effected, trains to run,
and ships to be inspected, and temptations to be put in the way of youth,
all on that holy day. So if our country becomes bound, and her sturdy
sons can obtain no bread for their families, we know where to put the


blame. Our legislators’ duty is plain. Let them do it like men, and our
country freed from this load of galling oppression, shall have a much
better chance to rise in all the splendour of unsullied prosperity. Let
the children then be taught to reverence God’s Holy Day. Get them
into the habit of refraining from play on that day. Get them into that
of attending God’s house, and really worshipping God when there. Of
reading such books as are profitable for the Sabbath. Of behaving with
such a decorum as is meet, and God worthy of. We shall find though
the things mentioned sound stiff and unpleasant, it will be exceedingly
beneficial to the children thus to be disciplined. It will do them so much
good that they won’t know how to find words sufficient to thank us for
it. But there must be nothing stiff or unpleasant about it, but such a
cheerfulness pervading the events of the Sabbath as will naturally make
it the most pleasant of the seven. It is a sweet calm after all the
storms of the six days. It is a day when the delicious fragrance of
heavenly flowers is wafted down to our earth after the scorching sirocco,
the parching hot wind laden with depressing atmosphere of the six days.
It is a day of freedom when you can throw off the shackles of earthly
business, and rise, free, as the air, and enjoy the sacred presence of your
God. It is a day when the delights of the whole of the six days if
brought together would look small, so great are its delights ; and were all
its evils gathered and compared with those of .one of the other days they
would be lost so small are they. Experience, as well as God’s Word,
teaches us to reverence the Sabbath. How many cases come under our
notice of workers on the Sabbath being still poverty-stricken and miserable,
though they thought to enrich themselves ! How often do we find
pleasure-seekers who desecrate that holy day, finding death in the midst
of their pleasures ! But how often is it that we come across people who
reverentially observe its sacred hours, and with honest firmness cleave to
perform God’s will on that day at the risk of want through loss of work,
&c., and God has shown them how he honored them, and for their loss
many fold compensated them. When properly kept I know of no
instance where the Sabbath is found to be a dull monotonous day.
Generally its approach is hailed with delight, and its hours pass away but
too quickly. But it is when its hours are ill-spent, when pleasure is
sought rather than profit, when the work of the week is longed after, and
the precious boon of the Sabbath is disregarded,-—then it is that the day
moves dull and slowly away like the time that intervenes between the
expected arrival of a much desired friend. They owe to God the
duty of searching into the word which he has given them. The
blessed Scriptures are therefore a book which they want to read
much of. Do they not want direction as to their path ? Do
they not want light poured into their souls ? Do they not want
instruction as to where they must ultimately go ? Are not they
standing in need of wisdom ? Are they not requiring teaching of God’s
will ? Have they not to be fitted for this life as well as the life to come ?
Are there not difficulties in which they may get involved ? Is not there
wanted light from heaven to stream upon the darkness of their paths in
this world ? Do they not want help, and that mighty help ? Are they


not in need of promises to that effect, that they may be assured it will
be granted ? Where is the storehouse of all this ? Where is teaching
so good, so wholesome, and so simple, so useful ? The fund of wisdom,
the fountain of knowledge, the magazine of learning, the volume of
instruction, is the Bible. There will they find all they need. There is
no situation in life but what they will find just the thing to suit here.
They are sinners ; here is the way shown by which they can become
saints. They want a Saviour; here is one pictured out to them who is
able to deliver. They want strength; the promises of the Bible assure
its supply'. They want heaven ; here is told the way thither, and how to
get there, So this above all others is the book for them to read. They
should be taught to read it frequently. Then, my dear friends, you must
explain it to them, and apply it to their different cases. By this means
they will get to understand it, and if we do our work cheerfully and as
well as we can, depending on the help of the Holy Spirit, they will get to
like it. Some are afraid that much reading of the Scriptures will get
them to dislike it. But experience teaches the contrary. Those who
dislike it are chiefly those wdio have not had much teaching in it, and
have not been shown into its sweets. Those who have had frequent
teachings out of the blessed book, and have had the things explained to
them, have perceived its beauties and have become engaged with it, and
thus have had no reluctance, but great delight in searching into its
contents. And in such a case wdiat can hinder, if God’s Holy Spirit only
apply, these lovers of the Bible becoming the very best stamp of people ?
They will have instilled into them all those truly moral principles which
will make them fit for every duty of life, and enable them to so do that
God and man will behold their conduct with supreme delight.
ON THE WAY IN WHICH THEY BEHAVE TO OTHERS.
WHEN we have taught the children the things previously referred to,
we shall not find it hard work to get them to do this work right.
If they have received of the grace of God, and have the inner man right,
the natural outflow of their behavior will be to do what is right to others.
All that they will require will be some measure of direction to their
behavior that it may be always wisely exerted. But even if they have not
received of the grace to save, yet if we have done our part well, and have
been laboring to have them in obedience both to ourselves and God, we
will find that there will be a great willingness to receive what we teach
them about their duty to others, and also a considerable readiness in
acting. So we have no need to be alarmed that we will have a large
amount of trouble here, for what we have done previously has well
prepared the way for this. All this is perfectly reasonable. If a child
does its duty to its God, its duty to its neighbor is so intimately involved
in it, that it cannot do- one without doing the other. And if we have


been instructing them in their duty to God, though they may not yet
from motives of love set about it, still God will so bless right
endeavors in this direction that they will in a great measure do what we
have taught them to do, and therefore we shall find them correspondingly
disposed to perform what is required of them towards others. There is
one habit that we would do well to get the children into, because, besides
being so exceedingly useful to them, is what they owe through respect to
their instructors. I mean the habit of respectful attention to what their
superiors say to them. It is surprising what a baneful influence the want
of this has upon the people. It hinders them from getting a right
understanding of almost everything. They hear one thing, fancy they
understand it, jump at a wrong conclusion about the other, and dash off
to perform a whole lot of blunders. When they get to school they attend
to anything rather than the thing in hand, and, of course, if the teacher
wants conscientiously to perform his duty he will have an immensity of
labor, and the youth be subjected to very strict discipline that he may be
got to give the attention which is necessitated to bring about improve-
ment. So if parents would just accustom their children to the habit of
carefully attending to what was said to them they would confer an
inestimable boon upon them. It is not likely we shall have much trouble
in getting them into the habit of respecting others. Right behavior in
this respect is so necessary. Man being made in the image of God, it is
expected by God that we will give it the due regard. This will come
very easily when children have been even in some measure trained well,
but, of course, when the better nature has been implanted within them
they do it naturally. This will lead them to act and speak civilly to
everyone ; to show as much respect to the beggar as to the man of large
fortune. And is not this the right way ? Is not the man, and not the
money to be respected ? If their virtues be equal, should not each have
equal respect ? But even to bad people we are to yield a sort of respect,
as they still are our fellow-creatures, and bear the same image. Though
we want to abhor their bad deeds, and keep from their company all that
we can, yet if we despise them, and treat them with contempt we should
drive them to despair and make them plunge further in wickedness.
There is a sort of respect peculiar to office such as we all should yield to
those whom God has set over us. This is due to their office, and, of
course, does not refer to the individual, except as he fulfils that office,
Very nigh to this is a pleasant, obliging behavior such as we should
endeavor that our children should constantly exhibit. There are many
ways of exhibiting respect which turn up again and again in the course
of every-day life ; so if our children have the training for it they will be
on the alert to perceive those opportunities as they occur, and perform
what is demanded. But what shall we say respecting honesty ? We
might the same that we have said just now, that these principles of virtue
being within, the outward act of rectitude will be performed. And so it
will as far as not taking what does not belong to them of material
property, or it will in giving up to the owners any property they may be
holding, or in the ready payment of debts, if they are able. But a
strictly honest person goes further than this. If he has promised to


meet a person at a certain time he cannot (if he can possibly help it), be
behind his time, for how does he know how precious that time is to this
person. At any rate it is that person’s, and not his who agrees to the
appointment. Or if he meet with a person bearing a good character
generally, and he hears another speaking disparagingly about him, does
he take it up and repeat it ? Not he. He knows that that person’s
character is like untold gold to him, and to rob him of that on a mere
accusation without a proof, would be tantamount to robbing him of his
life. This is how he regards evil speaking. Nor does he falsely raise
the hopes of people, and then finding his inability to fulfil, without
giving all proper warning, destroy them all. How many in this way have
been injured. Led to build upon promises of those they considered
faithful, just when they thought themselves recovering, they have found
themselves more deeply involved than ever, and their hopes fallen to the
ground. The truly honest man defines dishonesty something in this way
—“The taking, or using, or witholding anythin,g from another that
dons in any way belong to them, without their knowledge or agreement.”
And of course the reverse of this he considers honesty. This he puts
into practice. This he regards as the right of all. Is he a servant ?
His master must have a full amount of work done. Is he an employer ?
Then the laborer must have his hire. Is he a preacher ? He feels
bound to live for his people and for all men. Is he in Parliament ?
Then he must fulfil all he can for his country’s good. Is he a trades-
man ? He never extols goods too highly, or asks for a thing above its
worth, or puffs off his own shop as being cheapest when he knows it is
not; but every action of his will bear strictest scrutiny. Whatever he
is, whatever he does, is always characterised by rendering to every
man his due. This is the sort of stuff we want our children to be made
of. These are the ones whose upright integrity will bring down the smile
of heaven, and make every good project, and every piece of success, and
every good thing in our country to be permanent. Truthfulness, candor,
strict impartiality, and many other things that concern our behavior to
our fellows, are closely allied to this, so that it would be superfluous to
mention them, as they could not fail of being performed if honesty was
but adhered to. But we are not only to show forth this negative good-
ness, but to do whatever we can of a positive sort for the amelioration of
the condition of our fellow-creatures. However prosperous a country’s
state may be, we will, while sin exists, always find something to excite
our sympathy and call forth our benevolent exertion. Even those in good
position sometimes drink deeply of the cup of sorrow ; how then they
require comfort-! What numbers are in temporal destitution; how we
should fly to their relief! We meet with those who feel the pain of the
overflowing waves of affliction. What healing we can give them ! But
what multitudes know not their heavenly shepherd ! What a noble work
to lead them to him who purchased them at such a price. All this is in
store for us more or less ; and besides this, instruction has to be given
to the ignorant, direction has to be given to the perplexed, the people
have to be served in the church, work has to be done in the department
of government; labor on the land and on the sea ; among the poor and


among the rich ; in the prison and in the place of freedom ; down under
the ground, or in the country walk, in the workshop, in the pulpit; for the
learned and for the ignorant; wherever there is a man, if he need it, and
we can do it, part of the allotted task devolving upon us is to afford that
help, whether it be bodily, spiritual or mental.
On the liberty we allow our children. There are many things we have
to keep the children from as well as those into which we have to lead them.
For instance, though we want to make them drink in all the useful know-
ledge we can, yet we want to save them from imbibing that which is pernicious,
and there is much contained in some books that is the drinking in so much
word poison. Against these we want to put a prohibition. There are some
of them that to all appearance assume a very beneficial aspect, but yet you
find lurking beneath a secret spring of evil, which is all the more
dangerous because it is hidden. Were it not for its secresy, or in other
words because people cannot well detect it, they never would be allowed
to enter into many families. Thus how needful to know«what our
children read ! But other books have such a glaringly bad aspect, and
their baneful tendency is only too plain, that it requires no hesitation
to place them where they ought to go if they chance to get into our
houses —at the back of the fire. Most surely as we do allow them such
things they eat at the life of the moral principles, weaken and debilitate
them so that they have no strength to resist if temptation assault, and
thus they become easy victims to those things most hateful. But there
are some books even if they have not this effect, yet fill the mind with
such wild fancies and unlikely freaks, that instead of being fit for the
common-place duties of life as we all find them, they are indulging in
wild flights, in unmeaning fancies, and often quite neglect the things of
every-day life. The habit, when got into in youth, is hard to break off,
because so many of the same class of books are always within reach.
By this means, I think, a great many family quarrels arise. Those who
have the duty of managing the house instead of doing their work, spend
it in this frivolous employment, and the consequence is that when the
business part return home, the house is still untidy and the food only
partially cooked, and then arises a quarrel; one professes that the other
expects too much, and the other charges home neglect and laziness, and
lays the accusation on the reading of these trashy books ; and if no
remedy is obtained, most likely they sally forth in quest of comfort
elsewhere, and leave the house managers to the unenviable occupancy of
a house all to themselves. But there is another evil in these books ; they
indispose people from thinking. Now it is necessary that we should
think, and learn to think. We can’t get on without it in this world.
There are so many calls to it, and anything which will militate against its
practice ought to be repudiated. Though at the same time do not let us
discard all works of fiction, for there are many of them written with a
very good tendency, and when used in discretion, and given to the
children for the purpose of relaxation after a period of hard work, or at
other times, when such is needed, they will be very beneficial. If that
our country took the training of the children in hand how soon would the
number of ill-behaved children diminish ! But, as it is, so many people
91
■ON BEHAVIOR TO OTHERS.


and children are far from what they ought to be, so that we must be
constantly on the look-out that our children do not intermix with them.
A good companion is perhaps one of the greatest blessings God bestows
upon his rational creature man, but the contrary is perhaps as great a
curse. Truly did St. Paul speak when he said “Evil communications
corrupt good manners.” A child may be innocent, and disposed to do
what is right, but there comes across its path one of those whose dispo-
sition is very bad. Phej 7 have got the same strong desire as exists among
most, a desire to make others like themselves. Thus a good man likes
to make others good that they may glorify God. A bad man likes to
fashion others to resemble himself, so that he will not have the constant
leflection of his bad behavior cast upon him, and even a chimney sweep
loves to give another boy a slap with his dirty bag that he may have the
pleasure of seeing him as dirty as himself. So these getting into com-
pany of a good child, love nothing so much as to make them glory in
evil. However strongly the child may intend to resist, if they get among
such associates their good intentions will soon be overthrown, and evil
by-and-by readily embraced. There is a weakness exhibited first in
getting into such company. Another sign is staying amongst it; and
still further, by listening to and engaging in conversation with them. By
means of this the good of much home training is nullified. The result
of much moral culture is effectually overcome. The influence of many
prayers is wasted. Many a budding virtue has been rudely blasted.
Many a good expectation has been blighted. Many a scalding tear has
been dropped on account of this. Many a parent’s joy has gone down
precipitately to an ignominious grave only through bad companions. 0
paients, get your children to shun evil companions ! Keep on the watch,
foibid them their society, save them from the taint, deliver them from the
serpent s tooth as you value their welfare or your own happiness, and
you will thus show yourself true patriots, men and women of whom the
earth may well be proud. If you can, let your children have good com-
I am persuaded good company has a most beneficial effect
upon children. They must play, they must be vivacious, and the
healthful vivacity of the others, added to the stimulus such are in all that
is good, causes them greatly to aid in making the children agreeable men
and women. Only see that they are good. Children naturally like to
cover the faults of their companions, and certainly they should never
blaze them unasked abroad. But as it is' sometimes attended with some
difficulty in getting to know what we require, let us be pretty certain they
are good before we trust our children much with them. And another
thing intimately connected with this is the letting of children be much
out without the superintendence of some protector. This is a most
common fault in this colony. Children run out and play at all hours of
the evening. The streets at times are lull of them. You can’t go down
a stieet, or visit an open space but what you find them. Groups of them
stand at nearly every corner, and oftentimes what language they indulge
in, and what behavior they show forth ! Our daily papers but too truly
tell of it. These are the seasons when the effects of bad company are
secretly, silently, but powerfully insinuating themselves into the youthful
92
ON BEHAVIOR TO OTHERS.


mind, to be afterwards exhibited in the life. These are the training
schools for future indolence, excess, degradation and vice. These are
the places where the different forms of evil, the future hinderers of the
success of our country are gathering strength. Do, dear friends, rescue
your children from these places ! Exercise your authority and keep them
where they ought to be at this time. If they be comfortable at home ; if
when they have learnt their school lessons they have some pleasant books
to read, or some enlivening games to engage in, they would pass through
the evening so quickly and so beneficially that home would soon appear
to better advantage than the streets. But even when a good place is
attended it is exceedingly hazardous to let children out by themselves at
night. They may attend the house of God and hear something very
good, but coming home, and where is their good ? Say, rather, where is
their evil ? At night the rule should be, let children be at home. And
the fewer exceptions to this rule the far more advantageous to our
children. Even the pic-nic’s connected with our Sabbath Schools are
reprehensible from this. There is a good intention in their institution.
The benefit and enjoyment of the children is looked to. And truly, when
well managed they are really enjoyable times when you can have a hearty
romp with the youngsters, and by your entering into their enjoyments,
obtain a greater influence over them for their good, But when they are
allowed to continue after nightfall, and all promiscuously playing together
till late hours, I do believe, from particular observation, that the good of
the year’s teaching is completely, for the present at any rate, and likely
for the future, set aside.
If people but consider their own cases, and remember when it was
that they received bad impressions most particularly; if their parents
unfortunately allowed them to wander about at night, were not those the
times they received them ? I know what their answers will be. And we
know that temptations are particularly strong in this country at night.
If then this be the case, how firm we should be in our determination to
keep them as far as possible from these pernicious influences. We next
will perhaps think about what places we allow the children to frequent.
There are many which bear the name of amusements. Whether they
are truly so is a thing much to be doubted. If people can get amuse-
ment from them it shows that they have got an acquired appetite for
what is very injurious. The loathsome things produced for the osten-
tatious purpose 01 amusement are more like what should drive away full
of abhorrence those who beheld them. Against what is legitimate who
can say a word ? But against those whose aim seems ruin rather than
real fun, who has got a tongue fiery enough to say what should be said ?
These dangers stand thick, like open sepulchres, about our own and
children s paths. And if we want to do them real good we will remember
that money spent on their education is far more profitable than that spent
in the best of amusements, and also if we make the fireside cheerful,
and home enticing and pleasant, there are few, very few other enjoyments
our children will want, besides, perhaps, that of the school playground.
If we do think our children need a change, let us use our common sense
as to whether the place will be beneficial or not, and if we deem it will,


and evening being the period for attending it, then let them be under the
protection of some one who truly cares for them. And if we early instil
into our children an abhorrence for the publichouse, they will learn to be
seen anywhere rather than there, and will hate the place so much that
they will shun it like a lazar-house. But if we never taught them this,
and sent them to this place, and got them accustomed to its precincts,
they would become inclined to frequent it, and thus be in the way of its
temptations, and very likely fall victims to its seductive influences.
ON PHYSICAL TRAINING.
BUT our children are human, and though we take care to educate their
minds, and bring their souls under right influences, and do all that
we can for their mental and spiritual welfare, we must not forget that this
mind and soul are contained in but a perishable casket. The activity of
the mind within acting upon the frame without, will be more than the
weak outward structure can bear without we attend to its requirements,
Imagine how dull a mind would become if the body were weak ! How
dreary, how heavy, how arduous each mental exertion ! But get the
bodily functions into active operation, the vigor of the limbs, the energy
of the muscles all restored again, and with what fresh vigor everything
goes on. This is the reason of the dulness of some children. It is a
fulfilment of the old adage “All work and no play makes Jack a dull
boy.” Though not a dunce, yet he can’t learn. Though not slothful,
he moves like a tortoise. Though not careless, he does nothing well.
You can’t impart anything. You can’t deal with him in any way to
advantage. Perhaps, poor fellow, he. gets beaten and scolded, but only
becomes worse. 0 stupid fellow, you might as well give him up ! By no
means ; let the little chap have a few day’s active exercise, and you won’t
think him the same —such application, such diligence, such attention, such
progress, such a change as you could not have expected !
God has wisely ordered for the education of body, as well as the
other parts, so it becomes necessary we should see that it is done. If a
house be leaky the interior possessions must necessarily suffer if they be
of value. If its w r alls are fragile and easily displaced, the substance
within must run some risk, if it be valuable. So from a weak body the
mind within has often its stores invaded and injured, which else would
never take place. Our wisdom is to guard against such a catastrophe.
We can find out plenty of games for boys which bring the muscles into
vigorous action, stir up the bodily activity, and cause such a healthful,
general motion of all the limbs, as imparts strength through all the


frame. Cricket seems well adapted for this, and obtains great favor
amongst very many. There should generally be that sort of game chosen
which brings out the muscular vigor, and thus by conferring upon the
rest of the body a more healthful tone, will likewise assist the mind in
its acquisitions and investigations by giving it ability to steadily pursue
its alloted course. By a wise alternation of a proper relaxation, a great
many diseases, a vast amount of indisposition, and a considerable weight
of heaviness of spirits will be effectually put on one side. By this
means we shall be likely to have the children grow up vigorous in body,
and through it the way is made more open for vigorous mind and soul ;
though it has happened at times that men have had largely of both the
latter, while of bodily strength they had scarcely any. But let anyone
ask the question, in which case would they have been able to benefit man
the more, and there would not be much difficulty in answering.
As for girls, it appears as if they were shut out of a great deal
which tends to the advantage of the human race in general. For
healthy exercise makes so much for our welfare that those descended
from us who are not able to partake of it yet much for themselves,
already feel the benefit of it. And the advantage is very apparent in
strong, active, healthy children, who promise to make the same men and
women. Why females should be shut out of what would so benefit the
race, is hard to say, unless it is a mistaken notion of good breeding.
What is there in a romp to unfit a girl to become a lady ? I know some
whose lady-like behavior would do honor to any, hut yet in their younger
days they used to ramble through the fields with their younger brothers,
indulge in games on the green sward, stroll through the woods (of course
with proper company), handle garden tools, and perform a whole host of
things that many affect to despise. They are ladies most truly in all
their behavior, and if it supposed some harm has come to them through
their early exercises, they certainly are afflicted with a most healthy
constitution, they are suffering from the absence of many of these
nervous, irritating disorders which make so many miserable, and to add
to all, their doctor’s bills are exceedingly small. How much happier
must he the state of those who have not thus early been obliged to
submit to such unseemly pastimes ; when now, happy beings, their head
seems the resort of every evil-disposed ache that affects the human
cranium, and whose temper, not by their own fault, but by reason of
weakness of nerve, appears always in a state of irritation ; the slightest
thing oversets their nervous system ; they start at their very shadow,
and their offspring, of course, partake considerably of their infirmities.
I say nothing against them. I include not those who when not thus
affected, yield willingly to a bad temper. It has been a mistake in the
beginning, a mistake they follow up with regard to themselves,
but it is to be hoped they will rectify in the case of their young
ones. It has come about through mistaken fears, i.e., of their
becoming rough and unseemly in behavior, of injuring their com-
plexion, of the undignified action of racing about, of wildness getting
the ascendency through exploring the realms of nature, as if God had
not made these beauties to be enjoyed, And thus, poor things, they are


kept prisoners. Now how much more reprehensible is the mode which
is generally pursued. During the day within doors, often perusing a
novel which describes some impossible adventures in the most orthodox
style, and carries the reader through whole realms of nonsense, fills the
mind with all sorts of wild fancies, and brings it in a nervous, anxious
state to the desired climax, lost in the clouds of no meaning, or perhaps
worse, vice, and who can tell what other climax may then be reached.
Or the art of dancing is taught, that the ball room or private dance may
be frequented, and that unwholesome and injurious commingling of the
sexes take place, and a night spent which requires many days of
restoration. They are often given a .smattering of surface education.
They are taught to preserve an affected exterior without looking to greater
solidities, or what is indispensable, a .good healthy frame of body. This
is not the case, it can be gladly said, with all, but with too numerous a
portion. It is to be hoped for their children’s and for their country’s
sakes they will give every advantage of vigorous exercise ; let their bodies
be kept in tone ; let them have the country air if possible ; if not, by no
means restrict them from exercise. Let, of course, ail of these things
be in strict accordance with the rules of modesty. See that all is done
with proper associations and superintendence. There is no room to
doubt that the benefit will be great and lasting. But let us mind that we
give to relaxation its just award. If we yield it too high a place, and
regard it as a large part of education, we shall make a great mistake. It
is essential, that is certain. But if it be much indulged in, it no longer
answers the end for which it was intended. Instead of provoking a keen
appetite for work it would do so for play. Instead of increasing the
ability to rightly employ time, it would do so to waste it. It would make
a youth lazy instead of diligent, indifferent instead of attentive,—a poor
worthless pleasure-seeking idler, incapable of the business it was so
necessary for him to follow.
Have these young plants been bestowed upon us ? Have we taken
all that care of them it was possible for us ? Have we instructed them,
trained guided them, and brought them on as God gave us wisdom'
toward maturity ? Have we invoked the help of heaven ? Have we
petitioned that the heavens should send down their rain ? Have we
desired that the fertilising influence of the skies should render productive
our work ? Have the showers come down? Has God’s benediction
alighted upon our labors ? Is the fruit already appearing ? Does it not
then bear promise of a good supply ? Rather, was there ever generally
such a promising harvest ? Will not the whole country be enriched ?
Rather, will not the whole world feel the benefit ? They will be trees
loaded with every good. They will bring forth to enrich body, soul and
mind of each one who comes within their influence. This will extend
through the earth, and not only so, but by reason of its fructifying
disseminations it will affect them in heaven, and cause their joys to
abound yet more and more. If we teach our children as we can, these
several things which we have been referring to, they will have the soundest
principles, the greatest learning, the most active intellects, the most
conscientious behavior, the most abounding charity, the utmost liberality,
96
ON PHYSICAL TRAINING-.


combined with the greatest wisdom and caution, foresight and discretion,
that it is possible for them to be possessed of. They will be diligent
employers of their time, earnest workers for their country’s weal,
vigorous in designing fresh plans for her welfare, constant in all their
endeavors on her behalf. No spendthrifts, no wasters, not bent on folly,
nor bent on pleasure, but careful, frugal, always having some wise end in
view. They would love good for its own sake, they would love man for
his own sake, and for God’s sake. Whatever was designed that was
really good they would love it. If it were very likely to be beneficial to-
man, they would, besides loving it for its own sake, love it all the more,
because it would do good to man, and loving it, they would pursue it
with all the ardor imaginable. Therefore, if there was anything worth:
putting forth effort in, they would put forth most determined effort. And
whatever was worthy of being followed, we might certainly depend upon
its being done with their might. Nay, yet more, what is for the exaltation
of the most High, and for the welfare of man, not only enlists their
sympathy and most cordial approbation, and brings out their vigorous,
performance, but it kindles within them a sacred flame of enthusiasm,
it entires their soul, and imparts to them a kind of seraphic zeal in the
performance of every one of them. With such people as these, if any
thing is stated which will be for our country’s prosperity, whether it be
for temporal or spiritual, mental or otherwise, having such energy dis-
played in it, such concentration of effort, such perseverance in
performance, and with such an active life-giving influence scattered
through the doing, how can prosperity but attend their efforts, especially
when performed under the blessing of God ! But there is such a unity
of purpose among them that abundantly secures success. Having the
love of God and man possessing their soul, the glory of God and the
desire of man’s welfare, of course, predominate. The grand design of
each one is to accomplish this. There may be different opinions, there
may be endless variety in particular notion, but all these endless varieties
tending to the one goal, all lend their various helps in their various
degrees, and as each one in itself is best capable, so bring on the endeavor
with glorious rejoicings towards its successful completion. When things
are all resting on such a foundation as these therefore repose, on the
foundation laid for the secure resting of every perpetuated achievement,
for every enduring performance, for every lasting good—the glorious
Hock of Ages—all being laid there in sincerity, in holiness, and in truth,
what a glorious endurance everything will be endowed with ! And what
an eternal prosperity ensured for our country ! Those commonwealths
built up through freaks of human ambition, and existing only on the
fortunes of a passing moment, as they rise, so they fall. All those whose
stability rests on the caprice of trade, the fortunes of war, or the help
of man, are already tottering on the eve of their downfall. But this
land, thus firmly fixed, shall smile in all the glory of unalterable
endurance amidst all the overthrows taking place around her, and
hewing out for herself stones from God’s Book of Truth, shall build
herself stronger and yet stronger as time rolls by.


With such people laboriously working away at the building up of
the glorious fabric of our nationality, what can hinder its being a most
superb one ? With such a foundation there shall be no fear of anything
giving way beneath. This glorious army of laborers toiling away, day
after day, year after year, cannot fail, as the blessing of heaven rests
upon their labors, but make the structure truly great and noble. See
how these your instructed and trained ones exhibit repayment of all
your toil! Gather round, citizens of Victoria, and behold the future
of your land, reared up by them on whom you spent such well-bestowed
plains !
Everyone is in his place, each knows his own sphere. Behold the
Busy workmen, some in obscurity, some in prominence, each nobly
performing their allotted task. See how the structure has risen since
you performed your part. How the glory of the present eclipses that
of the past. Everything put into the edifice is of the best and most
tried material. All base and ignoble stuff is indignantly rejected. It
is well cemented together with neighbourly love. See the stones of
genuine honesty and real patriotism gleaming in their places. Behold
the glorious girders of truth that give security to the building. Notice
the gorgeous covering of heavenly love keeping the whole secure above.
See those pillars of true holiness, how they adorn and impart mighty
strength. See those glorious ornamentations of human tastefulness
and human wisdom finely set off with combinations of grace ! Perceive
well the general set of the house, its exquisite proportions, its beautiful
symmetry, its ponderous size, its amazing capacity, its towering height,
and did you ever think, could you ever conceive that your labors should
by-and-by achieve such wonders ? Look, parental laborers, look and
draw encouragement from the scene, and consider as it progresses,
year by year, period after period, how it increases in dimension, its
riches becoming more immense, its accommodations becoming more
extensive, and the bounty it sends out more in accordance with the
wants of man. 0 consider this ! And as poverty, dishonesty,
deception, selfishness, and other evils flee away from within, and every-
thing being added to her that would strengthen and adorn, that will
increase her usefulness and ability to do good, that no part of the
earth is hidden from the blessedness thereof; thereby more, much more
glory is brought to our Lord. The news travels—as well it might—
to all quarters of the globe. People are astonished at the sound
thereof. Delighted with the intelligence, and full of eager anticipation,
and filled with a laudable curiosity, they leave their homes, take ship
to visit our shores. But when they have landed and beheld for
themselves all the arrangements that are made, when they see our
excellent order and behavior, and see the marks of the wisdom and
prudence of our race, the wise adaptation of each thing for its end,
the glorious use made of all the country’s resources, the utilising of
all material, whether it be spiritual or mental, corporeal or immaterial,
animate or inanimate, temporal or religious, and behold all the wonderful
provisions made for distributing good to the rest of man, the excellence
of her laws, the sacred attachment to keeping of them, and still farther


of the law of God; and also all the various things which are presented
to their astonished gaze, they are overwhelmed, and break out in the
words of the Queen of Sheba when she came from the uttermost parts
of the earth to see the glory and hear the wisdom of Solomon, “verily
it was a true report we heard in our own land of your wisdom and
greatness, but now our eyes have beheld, behold the one half was not
told us of your wisdom and prosperity.”


•"TAfp
S t -Sill a
INDEX.
Can Victoria Prosper ? p. 5.
Victoria's Prosperity. p. 6.
On its Towns and Villages, p. 8.
On its Agricultural Prosperity, p. 10.
On Education, p. 11.
On Manufactures, Arts, &c. p. 16.
On the People, p. 20.
On the Government, p. 28.
Part II. —In what does the True Source op a Country’s Prosperity
Consist, p. 33,
The Source entered into. p. 37.
Part. lll.—Things to be Avoided that would hinder a Country’s Pros-
perity—Pride, p. 39- —Sloth, p. 42—Self Indulgence, p. 45 —
Forgetfulness of God, p. 46.
Part IV. —What has to be done to secure Permanent Prosperity to Vic-
toria. p. 48.
Obedience, p. 50.
Love and Eespect of Parents, p. 56,
Love to God. p. 61.
Knowledge, &c. p. 68.
On Duty to God. p. 75.
On the way in which they Behave to Others, p. 88.
On Physical Training, p. 94.
Wigney and Summerscales, Printers, 6 Sturt Street, Ballarat.




