

v «




THE AUSTRALIAN
Portrait Gallery
and
MEMOIRS OF REPRESENTATIVE COLONIAL MEN
lUnu iTtcuttlr IlihtU'o
To be completed in 24 Parts, issued Monthly, first week in each month.
PART ITT.
JANUARY, 1885, CONTAINS:
THOMAS SUTCLIFFE MORT.
THE REV. JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D. D
[Copyright.]
Printed by W. M. Maclardy, 319 George Street, Sydney
PUBLISHED BY THE SOUTHERN CROSS PUBLISHING COMPANY,
90 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


W .MfiCLEOD , DEL.
Ff[om Photo by Freeman


THOMAS SUTCLIFFE MORT.
HILE the constitution of the country is building itself up, and the men who
took an active part in its inception are, as we have seen, writing their names
legibly enough, each one in his own peculiar characters, across the pages of
our history, it is not fair to lose sight of that great interest, the magnitude and
importance of which formed our strongest claim for self-government and free
institutions. We have seen how, from time to time, the commercial progress
of the colony was quoted in its successive stages of almost magical increase and
development, by those who wished to see Australia colonised by a free people in a free
country. Commerce has been the backbone of the colony from the first, and the
mainstay of its existence and prosperity. Its record in New South Wales has been
one of almost monotonous brilliancy, —and the few dark spots only seem to burnish
the lustre of the complete whole. With free ports and free trade our merchants have
established Sydney as the emporium of the south, and the seat of successful enterprise.
Houses whose business extends all over the civilised world—whose argosies are on
every sea, and whose names are registered on the revenue books of every port —have
grown up and flourished side by side with the growth and progress of the colony itself.
Not a few of those names are known in the political world of the colonies as well as in
commercial circles, while some have worked for the general good of the colony quietly
and unobtrusively enough, while laying in their own way the foundations of their own
commercial fortunes. Prominent among these latter is the name of Thomas Sutcliffe
Mort, —a sterling type of Australia’s representative commercial man. His life, like
all that stand out in marked relief from the background of our social or
political life, was one of unceasing work and activity. His career is one record of
labour. But his labour bears the distinctive character of being directed in such a way
as to benefit and enrich, or at least develop and open up, the resources and capabilities
of the colony in which he elected to cast his lot. His commercial record is a pure and
clean one, and his character for honour and high-minded probity is above and beyond
reproach. In all these respects his character is so strongly marked as to make him a
model and exemplar of commercial life in Australia, and a representative figure
amongst colonial mercantile men.
The life of Thomas Sutcliffe Mort presents a graphic picture of the career of an
Australian colonist, and of the great influence for good wielded by a modest and
unassuming, but public-spirited and energetic private citizen. His large views and
courageous enterprise are factors to which, though the views and enterprise of one man
who was not a politician or a public leader of the people, the colony that he served, and
which delighted to honour his memory, is greatly indebted in many remarkable ways.


If only as a model commercial man, a commercial community like our own would be
impelled to honour his unsullied record ; but as that of one who ever subordinated his
private aims to subserve his country’s interest, his name should never be forgotten by
those who cherish the memory of the master-builders of the fabric of the colony’s
greatness.
Thomas Sutcliffe Mort was born December 23, 1816, in Bolton, Lancashire,
England. After the usual term spent in the acquirement of an ordinary commercial
education, sufficient to fit him out for the part his talents destined him to play in after
life, he entered the counting-house of a firm of warhousemen in Manchester. When
about twenty-three years of age, on application being made by the house of Messrs-
Aspinwall, Brown, and Co,, of Sydney, for a clerk, his name was suggested for the
vacancy, and having accepted the engagement young Mort arrived in Sydney in 1838,
and at once entered on his duties. He remained in the firm’s employ, and in that of
their successors, Messrs. Gosling, Brown, and Co., for about five years, until 1843,
when they were involved in the financial disaster and distress which seriously threatened
the future prospects of the colony in that year. This dark spot in our commercial
history was productive of very serious consequences at the time, and only the elasticity
of a colony that possessed all the essentials of success within itself could have recovered
so rapidly from such a crushing blow. This disaster was owing to an indiscriminate
rage for speculation which prevailed about this period, and the stoppage of the sale of
land, consequent on the price being raised from twelve to twenty shillings per acre.
Great facilities had been given by the new banking and loan institutions for obtaining
the use of money; a mania for purchasing cattle and sheep had swept the colony of most
of its available capital a few months before, and English exporters were willing to give
enormous credit to secure the sale of their commodities. A feeling of false prosperity had
carried the hitherto successful ones into excesses of wild extravagance and expense, and
when the crisis came the bubble broke without a note of warning. The Bank of
Australia was the first to fail, and as it was then the leading institution of
its kind it involved most of the leading houses of the day in its downfall. The
new Insolvent Act was devised by Mr. Justice Burton —hence called “ Burton’s
Purge ” —to relieve the general pressure in 1842, and an idea may be gained
of the extent of the prevailing distress from the fact that some seven hundred
names appeared in the bankruptcy list, as having availed themselves of its provision
within twelve months of its passage through the Legislative Council. A great meeting
was held in 1843, to take into consideration the alarming and depressed state of the
monetary affairs of the colony, and to devise measures of immediate relief. Mr.
Wentworth took a leading part in these measures, and it was deemed advisable to allow
the Bank of Australia to realise on its securities by submitting them to public lottery.
On the failure of the firm with which he had been connected since his arrival in the
colony, Mr. Mort decided on making an effort to carve out a future career for himself,
with the result that we find him soon afterwards engaged in business as an auctioneer.
His association with the late firm had made him many friends, who were attracted as
much by the winning manner as by the business capacity of the young man, so that
he did not want for a connection on embarking in business, into which he threw


himself with all that ardour and energy which, up to the closing scene, marked his
active and useful life. One of the broad results of his business-like tact, and one
which had no small influence in developing and opening up a ready market for our
staple commodity, was the establishment by him for the first time of an organised system
of public wool sales in Sydney. The wool-grower on the far-away squatting station in
the interior, whose market had hitherto been a precarious one at the best, was now
enabled to count on a safe outlet for his raw material. From this beginning sprung
the great wool-broking firm, now known as that of Messrs. Mort and Co., and which
at the present time is deservedly second to none in the whole of Australia. Henceforth
every step in the commercial enterprise of the colony is illustrated by his name. To
enumerate the public undertakings with which he was connected would be to catalogue
the acts of years. When the first railway within the colony was spoken of in 1849,
Mr. Mort was one of the promoters of the first experimental line between Sydney and
Parramatta. As far back as 1841 he had taken up shares in the Australian Steam
Navigation Company, then the Hunter River Company, and in this way he
connected himself with the two great carrying enterprises of the colony. The gold
discovery at Ophir in 1851, which seemed at first to revolutionise the colony and
galvanize it into new life, brought out anew the ready tact and adaptability of Mr.
Mort, who threw himself at once into the new condition of things with a determination
to turn it to the best advantage. He formed the first company for working auriferous
lands under the name of the “Great Nugget Vein Mining Company,” and it is in
connection with this enterprise that an event happened which at once marked his place
in the confidence of the public. At that time people were not so inured to the costly
delays in mining enterprises as they now are. Very primitive notions prevailed as to
the facility with which the precious metal could be picked up, and rapid fortunes made
by all interested. Those who cherished these fancies were not a little disappointed at
their non-fulfilment, and openly expressed their dissatisfaction. Mr. Mort immediately
met the shareholders, and gave his explanation, offering to at once take up the
liabilities of such as wished to withdraw from the enterprise and its risk. His generous
proposal at once disarmed distrust, and removed the last trace of dissatisfaction ; it is
needless to say that the fulfilment of his offer was not claimed. Five years after the
discovery of gold, his ever wakeful attention was directed to a new object, and, in
conjunction with Mr. Hawdon, Mr. Mort bought some 14,000 acres of land in the
Moruya district on the South coast, about two hundred miles from Sydney. This he
called Bodalla. He spent £IOO,OOO on the property, buying his partner’s share in
1860. He devoted it to a series of experiments in the direction of such operations as
were conducive to settlement. His extensive dairy business—the largest in the
colonies—goes on there, the quality of its products being said to be equal to the Home
exports. The whole estate now consists of some 38,000 acres, the returns are very
large, and the whole constitutes a model settlement which is the wonder of the colony.
A rural population forms the tenantry of the estate, which has been of incalculable
advantage in promoting farming enterprise. In 1857, Mr. Mort visited England,
where he indulged in a complete rest and holiday for two years, returning in 1859. On
his return, refreshed and re-invigorated by his well-earned recess, he took up the


subjects of silk, cotton, and sugar cultivation. The last named in particular interested
him deeply ; he sank nearly £20,000 in the development of this industry. A legal
dispute arising out of the sale of station property —the famous Wentworth v. Lloyd
case —occupied his attention for some four years after his return, Mr. Wentworth
moving that the sale be declared void on the ground that the auctioneer, Mr. Mort, had
an interest in the transaction. On appeal to the Master of the Rolls in England, it
was held that Mr. Wentworth was aware of Mr. Mort’s interest in the purchase when
the sale was effected, and a verdict delivered in April, 1863, completely cleared away
the aspersion on Mr. Mort’s business character. To continue the long catalogue of
public spirited enterprises with which his name connects itself, it may be briefly
mentioned that in this and the preceding years commenced his interest in the
Queensland Peak Downs Copper and Waratah Coal Mining Companies, in the floating
of both which large undertakings Mr. Mort took a leading part. The Newcastle coal
industry received a great impetus from this enterprise, while the value of the ore taken out
of the former mine has amounted to upwards £1,000,000 sterling. During the latter
years, too, he gave his assistance to the encouragement of steam vessels for the harbour
and coasting trade. The Dry Dock at the head of Port Jackson was also initiated by him
about this time, and is one of the greatest works of its kind on this side of the line. The
dock itself is four hundred feet long, being cut entirely out of solid rock. The workshops
cover over five acres, and nearly one thousand men are employed when in full operation.
The branches comprise every branch of the engineers’ and metal workers’ trade —iron and
brass founding, boiler making, locomotive, engine and shipbuilding trades all being
largely represented amongst the army of workmen and artificers who labour there.
Several large steamers well known in the colonial coasting trade were turned out there.
As was usual in Mr. Mort’s undertakings, the place was the theatre of a vast
expenditure, another £IOO,OOO being spent in its perfection. In 1873, these great
works were floated into the “ Mort’s Dock and Engineering Company, Limited,” and
on the founder’s invitation most of the responsible employes became shareholders, thus
establishing the common tie of a common interest between the capitalist and the labour
he employed.
Not the least among the great undertakings of Mr. Mort’s life was the last in the
long list, —that of the exportation of Australian beef and mutton to the English market.
The enormous increase of stock within the colony had been so great, that at certain
periods of our history the value of sheep and cattle was merely nominal. In 1843,
when the financial crisis at which we have glanced occurred, sheep had so far fallen in
price as to be worth but sixpence to eighteen-pence per head, and cattle bought at six
guineas were selling at 7s. 6d. It was at this time that the process of “boiling down”
was resorted to, as a means of turning the overstock to some account. Mr. Henry
O’Brien, of Yass, an old colonist and an extensive proprietor of flocks and cattle,
finding that stock had depreciated in value so far as to be almost valueless, resorted to
the experiment of killing and boiling down the carcasses to extract the tallow. The
expedient succeeded, and had the so far satisfactory result of raising the value of sheep
to ss. per head, for their tallow alone. Since that period numerous boiling down
establishments w 7 ere formed all over the colony for the extraction of tallow for the


London market, from the carcasses of sheep and cattle which the population of the
colony had been hitherto too small to consume. This plan, however, was only a
temporary success, and though it had its advantages for the time being, and for years
after, it was not to be supposed that stockowners would be willing to sacrifice their
assets in such a wholesale manner when a market for their beef and mutton existed in
England, where the large population labours under a chronic scarcity of animal food.
The difficulty of course lay in transporting the meat to the home market under such
circumstances as would ensure its preservation and acceptance. In 1843 Mr, Mort
had made an attempt to export cured animal food in the ordinary way, but
without that measure of success essential to form a vigorous industry. He now threw
himself again into the project with renewed energy, with the difference that he hoped
to land the meat in England in the same fresh condition as it was placed upon the
Sydney market. In this venture Mr. Mort was assisted by the scientific ability of Mr.
E. D. Nicolle, who had joined him in establishing the Sydney Ice Works some years
before. The undertaking in the hands of these two gentlemen is thus described in a
specially prepared Press report: —“ The project now was to land the meat as sound,
and fresh, and natural in appearance as if it had been killed at the place of delivery.
Mr. Mort’s knowledge of the prospects of pastoral industry enabled him to forecast a
magnificent future for a trade of this sort. Mr. Nicolle’s experiments were constant,
and he received from Mr. Mort a generous confidence which placed all this gentleman’s
resources at his disposal. The first point was to invent a cheap means of producing
artificial cold, and this-difficulty was, after many trials, overcome by the experimental-
ists in discovering the possibility of the repeated use of the same ammonia. In this
respect Messrs. Mort and Nicolle went ahead of European science. According to the
first authorities in the old world ‘meat frozen was meat spoiled.’ But partial freezing, it
was found, would never do, the meat becoming so rapidly bad when exposed. Mr. Nicolle
at last demonstrated that in Australia at any rate meat could be thoroughly frozen—that its
quality was not thus injured —and that it kept longer after thawing than did other meat
after being killed. Feeling convinced that the results of Mr. Nicolle’s experiments in this
particular had made the project practicable, Mr. Mort entered upon it with enthusiasm. A
large establishment rose upon the margin of Darling Harbour, and it was connected with
the railway. Costly machinery, in duplicate, was erected, and the ‘ freezing chamber ’
was covered with five miles of iron piping, through which the liquid ammonia was kept in
circulation. A series of most interesting experiments shewed that the freezing power
could be successfully applied to game, fish, and various sorts of fruit, as well as to live
stock ; and it was a novel sensation to find oneself suddenly transferred from the sultry
atmosphere of an Australian summer’s day to a region of ice and snow, abounding in
oxen and sheep, poultry, wild game, and fish, butter and milk, all as hard as rock, their
natural qualities kept in complete suspension until the time should come to thaw, cook,
and consume them. The belief that the process injured their quality was shewn over
and over again to be unfounded, Mr. Mort then erected slaughter-houses in the
Lithgow Valley, amongst the Blue Mountains, on the Great Western Line of Railway,
96 miles from Sydney. This site was chosen to save cattle their journey over the
mountains, which much injured their quality. The buildings and yards were on the most
complete plan conceivable. When both establishments were finished Mr. Mort invited,


on September 2, 1875, a large number of colonists to make an excursion to Lithgow
Valley, beginning with an inspection of the freezing works at Darling Harbour. The
party proceeded by special train from the freezing works to the Valley, and there sat
down to a luncheon composed of varieties of fish, game, and meat, all of which had
been frozen for considerable periods before being cooked. The whole repast was a
thorough success, and congratulations were showered upon the chairman and Mr.
Nicolle from all sides. The Premier, Mr. John Robertson, made a speech full of
laudation of the undertaking. Mr, John Hay proposed ‘ Success to the Enterprise ’
in terms similarly enthusiastic. In reply to these congratulatory speeches Mr. Mort
said, —‘ There shall be no more waste ! Yes, gentlemen, I now feel that the time has
arrived, or at all events is not far distant, when the various portions of the earth will
give forth their products for the use of each and all ; that the over-abundance of one
country shall make up for the deficiency of another ; the superabundance of the year of
plenty serving for the scant harvests of its successor ; for cold arrests all change 1
Science has drawn aside the veil, and the plan stands revealed. Faraday’s magic wand
gave the key-note, and invention has done the rest. Climate, seasons, plenty, scarcity,
distance will all shake hands, and out of the commingling will come enough for all,
‘for the earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof,’ and it is certainly within
the compass of man to ensure that all His people shall be partakers of that
fulness.’ ” The speech was frequently interrupted by bursts of applause, and with it
the new industry fairly launched itself. The next stage was the filling up of a vessel
—the Northam —to take home a shipment of Australian beef and mutton for the
London market. Together with the sum of £BO,OOO which Mr. Mort had expended in
this costly enterprise, the squatters of the colonies, who were so closely interested* in
the result of his experiment, subscribed a further sum of £20,000 to carry the project
out. This last part of the undertaking, however, unfortunately fell through. The
metal of the machinery proved to be unable to withstand the action of the chemical
agent employed, and the result was that the Northam!s machinery broke down, leaving
the ultimate realisation of the project to other hands. A great and permanent good was,
however, done to the colony by the results already attained, Sydney being supplied
with ice from the works at Darling Harbour, and country dairy produce was brought
to the doors of city consumers at the lowest rates and in the purest condition. The
failure of his experiment severely affected Mr. Mort, who had given himself up to his
task in the most hearty manner from the first. He did not survive long to repeat his
operations. A few months after the Northam failure he caught a cold at a funeral at
Bodalla, where he was then staying, and died on May 9, 1878. His funeral took place
quietly at Bodalla, in accordance with the principles of the Funeral Reform
Association of New South Wales, of which he was a member. His death was
mourned as the loss to Australia of one of its most useful and public-spirited sons.
About five years after the death of Mr. Mort a fitting tribute was paid to his
memory by the erection of a statue in recognition of his services, in Macquarie Place,
Sydney. That statue is a faithful and life-size copy in bronze, by Conolly, of Florence,
of what the original was in life. It stands in the midst of the city, and forms one of the
first striking objects that meet the eye of the stranger in the land which his great and
unexampled services have done so much to open up and develop.




W .MaCULOD , DEL .


THE REV. JOHN DHNMORE LANG, D.D.
JraILERGYMEK in New South Wales have acted no small part in shaping the
early history of the colony. Names of public-spirited ministers of religion
have been among the foremost in the roll of progress and in the lists of
jjj public life. Their very profession, in the first days of the colony, gave them
4 a standing and leadership which have since been assumed, in due process of
development, by members of other learned professions, and notably that of the Bar.
But for many years the learned professions were practically unrepresented in point of
influence save by the Church, and the extent to which this element in colonial society
tempered the rude growth of the colony, harshly forced as it was by the civil and
military officialdom of the period, is now almost incalculable. The name of many a
popular Divine will be tenderly and gratefully recollected as often as we are called
upon to turn back to the records of our political growth and formation. Among the
rest, Marsden, Therry, and many others claim a place on the colony’s bead-roll of great
names. And not the least of these is that of the late Reverend John Dunmore Lang,
Minister of the Scots’ Church in Sydney, and for many years an elected representative
of the people. Perhaps no clergyman in our history has distinguished himself for his
active and energetic participation in the struggles of the colonists for free institutions,
and his unremitting and zealous interest in all public questions, more than the late
Dr. Lang. From the date of his arrival in the colony up to his retirement into private
life —a term covering the whole of that stirring time known as the transition period of
our history —he is found intimately and closely identified with every public movement.
His sympathies were ever with the people, —so much so that they not infrequently
brought him into violent contact with the more influential classes. But his active
mind brooked no rest, and as he himself has written, he was desirous from the first to
promote the welfare and advancement of his adopted country in every possible way.
He claimed, more than thirty years ago, to have been most closely and personally
connected with the general history of the colony, and with the progressive development
of its intellectual, moral, and political system. No observer of the growth of that
system can close his eyes to the influence such a character as that of our present
subject must have exerted in its moulding and formation. No student of colonial
history can afford to ignore the part therein taken by John Dunmore Lang. And it is
not too much to say, as he himself asserted, that, “ although his course may have been
somewhat unusual and erratic, the candid reader will come to the conclusion that it has
been uniformly the result of a sincere desire to promote the best interests of the
Australian Colonies,” Whatever faults of hastiness or undue impulse his career may
present are faults rather of head than of heart, and the good-will and earnestness of


purpose which characterised almost every important step in his public career are
sufficient guarantee, if any were needed, for the good faith of his intentions.
John Dunmore Lang was born at Greenock, in Scotland, August 25, 1799. Both
his parents were Scottish, and their family, true sons of the Kirk, had suffered in past
times for the cause of the Solemn League and Covenant. When young Lang was
about seven years of age, his parents removed to Largs, in Ayrshire, where he attended
the parish school for some years, until he was old enough to go to the Glasgow
University. He elected to devote his talents to the Church, like so many others of
his young educated countrymen, and, after spending four years in the ordinary
academical course, he proceeded to his humanities and divinity. About this time, in
1821, his younger brother Mr. George Lang came out to Australia in connection with
the Commissariat Department, and his accounts seem to have directed the attention of
the young divinity student to Australia as a fitting field for pioneer missionary labour.
About twelve months later, having obtained the degree of Master of Arts, and, having
been ordained to the ministry by the Presbytery of Irvine, the young cleric left
Scotland for Australia, arriving in Sydney in May, 1823. At that time the colony
was governed by Sir Thomas Brisbane, a scion of an old Scottish family in the
neighbourhood of the parents of our subject in the west of Scotland. Thirty years
afterwards, in summing up the character of that Governor’s rule in New South Wales,
he re-called with some feeling the time when, returning from the parish school in the
north of Ayrshire, he was proud to be noticed by Sir Thomas Brisbane and asked the
meaning of some line in Ovid or Virgil. It is to be presumed that the Governor was
not allowed to remain unmindful of this early patronage, for we find that, on the
arrival of young Lang’s father, Mr. W. Lang, in January 1824, he received a grant of
two thousand acres of land and the assistance of twenty assigned convict servants from
the Government of the colony. In 1824 the Scots’ Church in Jamieson Street,
Sydney, at which Dr. Lang officiated up to the time of his death, was built and opened
for service. From that centre Dr. Lang radiated his influence among his co-religionists
throughout the colony, from Brisbane to Port Phillip, establishing congregations and
missions wherever his countrymen congregated. He identified himself almost
exclusively at first with his fellow-countrymen in Australia, and acted as their friend
and adviser in every emergency. He interested himself largely in procuring the
emigration to the colony of large numbers of Scotch mechanics ; though it would
appear that, in the first instance, this was done with an ulterior view. Some five or
six years after his arrival in the country, Dr. Lang conceived the project of establishing
a college in Sydney for the preparation of young men for the Presbyterian ministry,
and for general educational purposes. Governor Darling having refused the use of
convict labour and other facilities for this purpose, Dr. Lang undertook a voyage to
England in 1830 —his second —for the purpose, where he obtained from Lord Goderich,
the then Secretary of State for the Colonies, an order on the Colonial Government for
£3500, on condition of a like amount being previously spent on the undertaking by its
promoters. This concession was afterwards amended by Lord Goderich permitting
£ISOO to be paid for the passage of a party of Scotch mechanics, to be selected by
Dr. Lang to the number of fifty or sixt}', who were to erect the proposed buildings and


repay their fare out of their wages. In accordance with this arrangement some sixty
Scotch families—stonemasons, carpenters, blacksmiths, plasterers, and others— arrived
in the colony by the Stirling Castle , in October, 1831. The reverend Doctor claimed
to have another object also in view in projecting this scheme of immigration.
“ Previous to this period/’ he says, “there were only two classes in the colony—the
free emigrant gentlemen settlers, with their large grants of land of from one to two
thousand acres of land or upwards, their flocks and herds, and their numerous convict
servants. These were, in their own estimation at least, the aristocracy of the colony.
The other class consisted exclusively of the emancipated convict labourers and
mechanics, who were congregated chiefly in the colonial towns. In such circumstances
it appeared to me that the formation of a middle class in the colony was indispensably
necessary to its moral welfare and social advancement.” This scheme met with
considerable opposition within the colony, however, and the projector was compelled to
make another voyage to England in 1833. In 1835, having returned to Sydney, he
initiated the Colonist newspaper, “ for the furtherance of the moral and intellectual
development of the colony.” This journal he carried on with characteristic vigour,—
so much so, indeed, that successive actions for libel were the result. One of these
actions was taken by the emancipists, to whom Dr. Lang consistently opposed all his
talents and influence, as we shall presently see. In this case the writer defended
himself in an address to the court of remarkable point and vigour, and, though the
judges granted the rule, the prosecution was withdrawn. In a subsequent case the
Colonist attacked some of the more glaring social vices of the day, coupling them with
well-known names ; for this the editor was fined £IOO, which was immediately
subscribed and paid by the public. This was by no means the last of the libel actions
in which Dr. Lang and the Colonist figured, for in 1851 we find Dr. Lang undergoing
an imprisonment of four months, with a fine of £IOO, for a criminal libel on a political
opponent named Mr. Thomas Icely, who, he alleged, had acquired a considerable
competency by dishonesty and fraud. He continued to conduct his journal throughout,
however, in a vigorous and outspoken manner, carrying a large section of the public
opinion with him in all his actions at law. In the last-named case, both his fine and the
law expenses were paid by a shilling popular subscription. In 1836, for the fourth
time, Dr. Lang made another visit to England, bringing back with him, under
engagement to his brother, Mr. Andrew Lang, about two hundred and fifty German
vine-dressers for New South Wales ; these emigrants, however, were induced to settle
on their way out at Rio de Janeiro, so that the colony lost their valuable services. A
large number of missionaries from Berlin accompanied Dr. Lang on this voyage to
Sydney, and established an Aboriginal Mission at Zion’s Hill, near Brisbane, in 1838.
While at home on this occasion Dr. Lang also procured the deportation of upwards of
four thousand Highland herdsmen for the colony.
On the passing of what is known as the Constitutional Act of 1842 as already
described by the Home Legislature at the instance of Lord Stanley, then Secretary of
State for the Colonies, Dr. Lang was elected in 1843 as one of the members of the first
Legislative Council for Port Phillip, He thought it advisable at a later period of his
life to give some explanation of the “ extraordinary circumstance of his occupying so


unusual a position for a minister of religion in the British Empire,” and in doing so he
gave two reasons which furnish the key to a great deal of the reverend representative’s
public career. Firstly, he says, his object was to “put a stop, if possible, to the
enormous preponderance of Irish Roman Catholic immigration, which was ruining the
country in its best and dearest interests and, in the second place, “to secure for the
colony a general system of education, suited to its circumstances, and adequate to its
wants.” As a precedent he pointed to the fact of Bishop Broughton occupying the
position of nominee member of both the Legislative and Executive Councils up to the
year of his own election, and in this way he answered the objections of the politicians
of the time. The district of Port Phillip, under the Act, was allowed one representative
for the town of Melbourne, and the rest of the district five, or not less than three
members. The contest was a spirited one, and ended in Dr. Lang’s election for the
district by a large majority. The first Legislative Council elected by the people
numbered some of the best men of our history in its ranks, and writing of its constituent
parts some years later Dr. Lang has the following striking expression of opinion, which,
in the judgment of many, has been largely borne out: —“For general ability, for extent
and variety of information available for the business of legislation, for manly eloquence,
for genuine patriotism, and for energetic and dignified action, I question whether the
first Legislative Council of New South Wales, under the Constitution of 1842, has ever
been surpassed by any Legislative Council out of England in the British Empire. The
great superiority of the first Legislative Council of New South Wales to those that have
hitherto succeeded it, is a remarkable fact in the history of the colony,” When it is
recollected that such names as those of Wentworth, R. Windeyer, Robert Lowe,
Cowper, and others were included in the list the encomium will scarcely be considered
unmerited. As a member of this Council Dr. Lang took an active part in the discus-
sions that resulted in the passing of the Lien on Wool Act, elsewhere referred to This
measure tended to relieve to some extent the prevailing financial pressure, by
empowering the embarrassed stockholder to give an available mortgage to his creditor
on his forthcoming clip of wool, thus rendering him independent of the necessity of
selling altogether. The bill was disallowed at home, because the principle it
of mortgaging growing crops, was not in accordance with English law. As however
the Colonial Act was in force until formally disallowed at home, the effect was secured
by again passing the same measure and allowing it to remain in full force until the
second veto arrived. One of the first of our subject’s individual acts in the Council was
to table a motion to the effect that proceedings in Council should commence by public
prayer. This was rejected by nineteen votes to eleven. As the result of another
motion of his in reference to the Elective Franchise, a Select Committee was appointed
in 1844 to consider the general subject of Franchise and Representation, Dr. Lang being
Chairman, The Committee recommended the extension of the franchise to tenant-
farmers and squatters, whom the existing Act excluded. Several other suggestions
were made as to the number of members for the electorates of Sydney, Cumberland, and
Camden, Durham, and Northumberland. These suggestions, however, were not carried
into effect, and the Electoral Bill of 1851, which ignored them, was bitterly condemned
by their author in consequence. That measure was strongly supported by Mr.


Wentworth, who had been on the Committee of 1844, and who, up to that time, had
always favoured a popular franchise. His modification of his views on this occasion
gave rise to an aversion on Dr. Lang’s part, which the latter never lost an opportunity
of expressing in the strongest and most trenchant manner. He was also the first to
move for the establishment of the Twopenny Postage Rate for the colony, which,
though vetoed by the Governor, Sir George Gipps, became law under his successor.
Rut by far the most important of Dr. Lang’s acts as a popular representative, and the
most enduring in its effect on the future of Australia, was his proposal for the separation
of Poit Phillip from New South Wales, audits erection into a distinct and independent
colony. His motion to this effect, which was heartily concurred in by all the Port
Phillip members —six in all —received only one vote from amongst the other members
for New South Wales proper —that of Mr. Robert Lowe, now Lord Sherbrook in the
English Peerage. As the Port Phillip members were, however, unanimously in favour
of the project, Dr. Lang suggested that they should send a joint petition on the subject,
through the Governor, to Pier Majesty the Queen. The suggestion was concurred in.
Dr. Lang drew up the petition, which was signed, presented, and forwarded accordingly;
and nine or ten months afterwards a favourable reply was received from Lord Stanley
(afterwards Earl Derby), then Secretary of State for the colonies, in 1845. It was not
till July 1, 1851, owing to the opposition of Earl Grey, that the separation was
effected, and Port Phillip proclaimed a distinct colony under the name of Victoria.
Dr. Lang also moved for a geological survey of the colony in 1845, which was
negatived on division by fifteen votes to ten.
In 1846 the subject of this memoir made another voyage to England,
avowedly with the object of checking the progress of “Downing Street misgovernment”
as evidenced in the arrival in the colony of Irish immigrants in considerable numbers.
This species of “ Papal Aggression,” as the reverend gentleman styled it, was only to
be checked in his opinion by the encouragement of Protestant immigration in larger
numbers. In this matter Dr. Lang discovered a tincture of religious or national
prejudice in his own character which, in one so strongly marked as his, could not fail
to impress to a proportionate extent that portion of the population that came under his
personal influence. Fortunately for Australia, these differences are now rapidly dying-
out ; in fact, they only remain to give evidence of their decay when momentarily
fanned by designing persons for their own ignoble ends. Dr. Lang’s part in this
sowing of the seeds of difference was purely a conscientious one, however, and as such
it occupied no small share of his attention. Before proceeding home on the present
occasion he made two extensive tours in the northern and southern divisions of the
colony respectively, with a view to qualify himself to point out to intending home
emigrants, from actual personal observation, the extraordinary capabilities of Australia
as a field for settlement. The results of these observations he embodied in two volumes,
entitled respectively, Port Phillip , or the Colony of Victoria , and Cooksland, in North
Eastern Australia. On his visit to the Moreton Bay district for this purpose, in
November, 1845, he was struck by the healthy appearance of some cotton plants which
he found growing, merely as an article of curiosity, in the garden of a colonist in
Brisbane. As Dr, Lang had seen the plant under cultivation in the Brazils, and had


also visited the cotton-growing States of North America, he pursued his enquiries in
the matter, arriving ultimately at the conviction that cotton cultivation was well
adapted to the soil and climate of that portion of Australian territory. This idea took
such masterful possession of his mind that on his arrival in England he submitted
several specimens of colonial cotton to experienced judges in Manchester and Glasgow,
and had the satisfaction of learning that the quality was much superior to that of
American cotton. His intention was to establish a workable cotton-growing interest
in the northern part of the colony, which would give endless employment to the
thousands of the mother-country who might seek the means of livelihood in Australia.
With this view he made application to select one hundred Scotch families from the
neighbourhood of Glasgow, to be assisted from the Immigration Fund ; but this request
was refused. However, he succeeded in obtaining from the Under-Secretary of State
for the colonies an admission that an equivalent in land for the expense of the passage
out would be allowed for all emigrants he might take out with him, and he accordingly
selected two hundred and fifty, who sailed from London in 1848. Two other ships
followed on the same errand in 1849. It is, however, necessary to add that the
principle of land grants to the immigrants was not recognised, so that the cotton-
growing scheme, in a great measure, fell through, though the then unformed colony of
Queensland received a considerable impetus by the accession of Dr. Lang’s six hundred
Scotch immigrants. The projector of the scheme met with considerable opposition
from the authorities in carrying it out, Earl Grey going to the extent of advising the
immigrants to proceed at law against their leader, for breach of agreement in connection
with the land grants. The advice was not accepted, and the immigrants in a memorial
expressed their great obligation to Dr, Lang, and their entire confidence in his
arrangements. Shortly after his return to the colony in 1850, a vacancy having
occurred in the representation of the city of Sydney, Dr. Lang was elected to the
position, and one of his first acts was to move for an enquiry into Earl Grey’s charges.
The Committee of Enquiry was disallowed, however, by the vote of the majority. The
charge of making money out of his immigrants was again preferred against him in the
Press and in the Council, and a resolution to that effect passed in the latter, whereupon
Dr. Lang issued an address to the electors, offering to resign his seat if they approved
of the Council’s proceeding. A public meeting was held, at which large numbers of
persons expressed their continued confidence in their representative, who was thereupon
induced to resume his seat, and at once entered on his part in the struggle which
culminated in the passing of the Electoral Act of 1851. As we have seen, that
measure did not harmonise in any way with Dr. Lang’s suggestions in 1844, and his
idea that representation should be based on population met with but scant favour at
the time. It was about this time that he found himself cast in damages and imprison-
ment for four months in the Icely libel case. During this term the election came on
under the new Act, and Dr. Lang was nominated a candidate for the representation of
Sydney, while still a confinee in Parramatta gaol. At the election, September, 1851,
he was elected a representative for the city at the bead of the poll, Messrs. Lamb and
Wentworth being his colleagues, and Messrs. Longmore and Cowper the defeated
candidates. On that occasion Dr. Lang polled the largest number of votes —1191—


recorded up to that time in the colony. At the declaration he made a speech to the
assembled electors, which was thus reported at the time : —“ He congratulated his
fellow-citizens on the position which the city had taken up as the heart of the whole
Australian Group. The heart of the colony was in right action, and the blood it would
send into the limbs and branches of the other colonies would infuse life into the whole
political system. Personally, he thanked them for the certificate of character which
they had given him, and which, he doubted not, would serve a future purpose, not only
in the colony but in England, if it should be his fate to go once more home. They
were all aw r are of his efforts to arouse public feeling at home, in order to obtain justice
for the colonists of the Empire generally; but in making those efforts he had aroused
the wrath of the Colonial Office against himself. Some comments had appeared in the
London Daily News , stating that his election last year had been accidental, and that
the constituency took no part in the extreme views he held, particularly as to the right
of a colony to entire freedom and independence. He had risked his present election,
however, on a strong expression of that opinion. It was from no feeling of disloyalty
that he professed these opinions. God forbid that he should feel disrespect for the
authorities of the old fatherland! But while he yielded to no man in respect, in vener-
ation, for the constituted authorities of the mother country, he would never hesitate to
express his conviction of the right of any colony of the Crown as soon as it could stand
on its own legs, to entire freedom and independence. He held that a common language,
a common literature, a common law, and a common religion, constituted an infinitely
stronger and more binding tie than those which kept them now under the domination
of Downing Street ; and whenever the day came that they should have a flag of their
own floating over the splendid series of colonies founded in Australia, he felt confident
that Great Britain would rejoice with them, and would say, ‘ Many daughters have
done virtuously; but thou, Australia, hast excelled them all.’” In February following,
having resigned his seat in the Council, he left the colony again on another visit to
England.
Dr. Lang’s chief work was the separation of Victoria, mainly due to his
exertions in 1843. At a later date, in 1848-49, he advocated the same course
in respect of the Moreton Bay settlement, giving as reasons its adaptability as a
centre of trade and commerce, and its differently-marked natural features to New
South Wales. By his part in this matter Dr. Lang has written his name in large and
bold characters over the broad page of his adopted country’s history. We have seen
that his efforts to establish a cotton-growing industry in the northern colony were not
attended with marked success, but his exertions went far to prove the suitability of the
soil and climate for the foundation of such an interest. In fact, his repeated travels
about the country, and his intelligent observation of all that came under his
keen-sighted notice, were of great value in numberless ways. He never tired, by pen
and speech, of inciting the people to a due estimation of their proper privileges, and
long before that event happened he had paved the way, to a considerable extent, for
Responsible Government and the free institutions of the present day. He recognised,
too, from the first, the remarkable influence over the history of the colony the
discovery of gold was destined to exert, and the resolution to be effected by an event


which, in Mr. Wentworth’s words, “ precipitated the colony into a nation.” That
discovery neutralized the squatting element, which till then had barred progress, and
gave a more active party wealth and influence. Dr. Lang’s part in the efforts made
from time to time to provide better facilities for popular education was also no
inconsiderable one, and he supported the report of the Committee of the Council,
under Mr. Robert Lowe, in favour of the National System, in 1844. In 1832, just
after returning from his first voyage to England, he founded his Australian College,
which has turned out some well-known public men of the present date. The Sydney
University attracted a share of his attention, but his effort to have that institution
affiliated to the London University was unsuccessful.
It is scarcely to be supposed that such a stirring life as that of Dr. Lang could
have been lived without some false steps. That sectarian blemish to which reference has
been made, unworthy of notice in a less worthy man, did much to leaven the masses of
the community. Within his own Church, too, he was engaged in various disputes, and
his action in 1842, in publicly renouncing all connection with the State and State
Churches of the colony as a minister of religion, gave considerable offence in
certain quarters. His brethren looked upon this step as an act of contumacy,
and deposed him from the ministry nine months afterwards. In 1865, however,
having still continued in his calling in the meantime, he and his followers
amalgamated with the other body in the general union, and fraternised with
their separated brethren. His action, in respect of the emancipists is, perhaps, the chief
charge against him as a public man. He consistently opposed himself to all efforts for
their endowment with civil and political privileges, and the humane policy of Sir
Richard Bourke and the agitation of Mr. Wentworth and his compatriots for the
effacing of the lines that separated the emancipist from the free colonist, met in out
subject an uncompromising opponent. Dr. Lang last appeared in public on the
hustings in support of the candidature of a member of the Robertson Ministry,
in 1877. He died in Sydney, at his residence adjoining the Scots’ Church
where he officiated throughout his colonial career, on August 8, 1878. The public
funeral which was accorded his remains was largely attended by most of the public
men of the colony, and a great concourse of people.
As a writer, Dr. Lang displayed an unceasing activity. His “ History of
New South Wales ” —which is, however, rather a biography than a history-—is marked
by outspoken opinions on persons and events of the day, and is full of keen and critical
observations on his contemporaries. It is, withal, ludicrously virulent at the expense
of his opponents, and he never fails to visit with his sarcasm those who incurred his
ire. Besides the Colonist newspaper, started by him in 1835, he initiated the Colonial
Observer in 1851 and the Press in 1851. Among his other publications are the
following:—“Aurora Australis,” a collection of sacred verse; “Emigration;”
“Origin and Migrations of the Polynesian Nations;” “Transportation and
Colonisation;” “New Zealand;” “Religion and Education in America;”
“ Phillipsland ; ” “ Cooksland ; ” “ Eine Deutsche Colonie in Stillen Ocean;”
“Freedom and Independence for Australia ;” and “Queensland.”
64
THE REV. JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D.


1508
02285697


