

THE CHURCH OE SCOTLAND
and the
CHURCH OR ENGLAND,
IN THEIR MUTUAL RELATIONS.
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED TO THE SYNOD OF THE DIOCESE
OF SYDNEY ON MARCH 2, 1577,
BY THE REV. ROBERT STEEL, D.D.,
ST. STEPHEN’S CHURCH, SYDNEY,
ONE OF THE DEPUTIES TO THE SYNOD APPOINTED
BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE PRESBY-
TERIAN CHURCH OF NEW SOUTH WALES.




THE CHURCHES OF SCOTLAND
AND ENGLAND.
An Address to the Synod of the Diocese of
Sydney, March 2, 1877,
BY THE REV. ROBERT STEEL, D. D.,
One of the Deputation from the General Assem-
bly of the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales.
I stand before this Synod with my fellow depu-
ties, commissioned by the representatives in this
colony of one of the historical and national Re-
formed Churches of Christendom to the repre-
sentatives here, of another historical and national
Reformed Church,
The two national Churches of England ana
Scotland have long had characteristic differ-
ences, but they have been oftener in friendly re-
lation and in bitter strife than any other two
national Churches of Christendom, not one in
polity and ritual. They both carry us back in
history to a very early age. _
1. They had a common origin. Christianity
was planted among the ancient Britons while
yet Pagan Rome was dominant in the island ;
and Tertullian, the eloquent African father, in
the close of the second century, says in one of
his strokes of rhetoric that “ those parts of
Britain which were inaccessible to the Romans
had become subject to Christ.” Augustine found


a British Church in Wales when he came to
evangelise the Saxons in 597 ; with customs dif-
ferent from his, and with an independence of
foreign control. When Palladius was sent from
-home in 431 to the Scots, they were said to be
“ Scots believing in Christ.” Northumbria re*
ceived its Christianity from missionaries of lona.
-The peculiarities of that evangelistic establish-
ment gave a marked character, some think even
a taint, to the Church in the north of England.
As early as the seventh century, while there
was so much to be thankful for in the conver-
sion of the Northumbrian people by Scottish
zeal and piety, grave doubts arose, as they have
oiten arisen since, about the validity of Scottish
orders, and disputes about the time of keeping
the Christian passover, and of the way the razor
had gone round the missionaries’ heads. It is
well known that the Primate of the Church of
Scotland for the first three hundred years,
as for the last three hundred of its his-
tory, was not a bishop, but a presbyter, and
the. succession of its orders in the early
period was made valid, not by imposition
of a bishop’s hands, but of a dead presby-
ter s bones. Though there were bishops
in Scotland, they had neither dioceses nor juris-
diction, and their orders w r ere repudiated by
some of the great dignitaries of England and of
France. . Presbyters in Scotland, then, conse-
crated bishops and crowned kings. The Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, Honorius, however, hon-
oured these Scottish evangelists for their Chris-
tian virtues and good works, and the Venerable


Bede affirms that the differences were patiently
tolerated for a time without breach of charity or
fellowship, so highly esteemed were Aid an and
his fellow-labourers in Northumbria. (Eccles.
History, Book 111, Chap. 25.)
11. Both Churches came under Borne, and par-
ticipated in the corruption which demoralised the
Mediaeal Church. The Church of Scotland
was last in yielding, but suffered most from the
usurpation. Perhaps no country in Christendom
was more oppressed. English barons were de-
fenders of liberty against Papal claims and
royal humiliation; but in Scotland, prince,
baron, and peasant alike succumbed to priestly
rule. From the time that an Anglo-Norman
princess became a queen of Scotland, the great
aim was to assimilate the Church of Scotland to
English ways, then conformed to Rome. St.
David, who gave away so much to the Church
in his day, and was a “sair sanct for the crown,
as his subjects said, was in all his thoughts and
aims an Englishman. Monasteries and cathe-
drals were fashioned by him after English
models, and the Popish Church of Scotland
had not a primate of its own till 1472. But the
spirit of independence had arisen ere that period
under Wallace and Bruce, and bore great fruit
afterwards. 7
111. In the sixteenth century both national,
Churches were reformed. If in Scotland it went
much farther than in England, it was because
the people and their teachers took the matter in
hand, and carried it in the face of peers and
princes. But this did not interrupt the fellow-


I slap with the Church of England. The Refor-
niers on the Continent and in Scotland who
adopted Presbyterianism in reconstructing their
Churches, were recognised advisers of bishops
Kuo! fSv §llSh Church. And John
Knox, Calvin, and Swiss divines have left their
mark on the Liturgy, the Articles, and even the
Communion office of the Church of England
and it is now proved beyond a doubt that John
Knox was instrumental in getting the Declaim.
ion appended to the Communion service. Dean
+ • ‘77 F f gUsh articles were so
pressed as to include the recognition of Pres-
bytemn masters. The first English Act of
Uniformity was passed with the express view
Ohureli sw ™ es «■' E»gS
the KW nf i lll . Kl !? X “ ot , ° llly became one of
Jvui S of England s chaplains for a time, but
ions SOU A ht 7 kee P U P tlie friendly rela-
aons of the Church of Scotland with that of
7 g and - ‘ Johl ] Enox had as little belief in
■he paramount and divine character of Presbv-
.eriamsm as Cranmer had in the paramount ami
[ vine character of Episcopacy.’’ The Church
Lt fo d iad a Permissive Liturgy in its
ook of Common Order, which retained its in-
luence more or less till 1649.
The English Convocation'of 1603-4 enjoined
lolv cSb y r rS A" 6 7 be ? ffered «P for Christ’s
loly Catholic Church, that is, for the whole
;% e o f atlo “ Sof Christians dispersed throughout
d W| eS f ialy r f 7 he Churches of Eng-
ind, Scotland and Ireland. ” I have heard a
istmguished prelate of the Chnrch of EngtaS


say on a platform, that this was meant to ac-
knowledge the Presbyterian Church, and the
candid historian of the Scotch Episcopal
Church admits that “there can be no doubt
that the framers of this meant to acknowledge
the northern ecclesiastical establishment, at
that time Presbyterian, as a Christian Church.’
The fact is, that with the exception of Roman
Catholics, there was then no other Christian
communion in Scotland.
When the Presbyterian Synod of Dort was
held in 1618, deputies were invited from all
other Reformed Churches except the Lutheran,
and four delegates were commissioned by the
King of England and the Archbishop of Canter-
bury to attend it. These were Dr. Carleton,
Bishop of Llandaff; Dr. Hall, Dean of Wor-
cester, afterwards Bishop successively of Exeter,
and Norwich; Dr. Ward, Master of Sidney
Sussex College, Cambridge ; and Dr. Davenant,
Margaret Professor of Divinity, and Master of
Queen’s College Cambridge, afterwards Bishop
of Salisbury. Dr, Goade took Dr. Hall s place,
when his health required him to leave. These
distinguished divines, on their departure from
Dort, received each a gold medal, on which was
represented the Synod sitting ; and on the por-
trait of Bishop Hall, a man “ whose praise is in
all the Churches,” in Emmanuel College, Cam-
bridge, this medal is pourtrayed on his breast as
a badge of honour ! ~
The judicious Hooker, while defending the
Church of England, writes very respectfully of
the Scotch and other Reformed Churches,


though Presbyterian ; and he says that Calvin
was “ incomparably the wisest man that ever
the French Church did enjoy, since the hour it
enjoyed him. .... His books were almost the
very canon to judge doctrine and discipline by.”
The President of this Synod will sympathise
with this opinion, as he took part in a public
meeting in London, fifteen years ago to promote
the erection of a suitable monument to the great
Presbyterian theologian in Geneva.
When the attempt was made to impose Epis-
copacy upon the Church of Scotland in 1610, one
of the three Presbyterian ministers then conse-
crated bishops, Spottswood, informs us that the
question arose “ whether they should not first be
ordered Presbyters, as having received no ordin-
ation from a bishop.” Archbishop Bancroft
did not think it necessary, and liis view was sus-
tained. Even Bishop Andrews joined in the
consecration. Archbishop Bramhall also dis-
tinctly affirmed the same. Ussher was of the
same opinion, and in the Irish Episcopal Church
Presbyterian divines were allowed for a time to
minister. When so many French Presbyterians
were refugees in England, the generosity of the
English assigned them several of their conse-
crated Churches j and for three hundred years
to this day, the crypt of Canterbury Cathedral
has been used by a French congregation, whose
minister and form of service are Presbyterian.
The Churches of Scotland and of England had
a fierce contest when the attempt was made to
establish Episcopacy in Scotland, and again
when Presbyterianism became rampant in West


minster Abbey. But if English Articles and
Liturgy have marks of Presbyterian handiwork
in their present form, the Standards of the Pres-
byterian Church were framed chiefly by divines
of the Church of England, who held cures in its
parishes, and chairs in its universities, and one
of whom became afterwards a bishop of a See.
The Scottish Commissioners, though they had
seats, had no votes in the Assembly.
Episcopal clergymen were freely embraced in
the Church of Scotland, on its re-establishment,
on more occasions than one; and notably so in
±(594. The Church of Scotland admitted the
ministers of the Church of England to her
pulpits. And though conscious of having
suffered much at her hands, yet did not deny
her title to respect. The man who did more
than any of his age to shake off the Episcopacy
that had been imposed on his own national
•Church, Alexander Henderson, was one of the
Commissioners to the Westminster Assembly.
He had no idea of making that Assembly so
Presbyterian as it became. Writing in 1643 he
said, “We are. not to conceive that they will
embrace our form. A new form must be set
down for us all; and although we should never
come to this unity in religion and uni-
formity of worship, yet my desire is that we
should see what form England shall pitch upon
before we publish ours. ” The Lords and Com-
mons in appointing the Assembly of Divines
sought reform in government and liturgy, and
expressly stated that they were to “take away
nothing in the one or the other, but what shall


be evil and justly offensive, or at least unneces-
sary and burdensome. ” The Scotch Church was
quite prepared to surrender her venerated Con-
fession of Faith received from the Reformers,
and the Book of Common Order, for the sake of
something better, and more acceptable to all,
The Commissioners from Scotland said, “We
do, upon very good reasons, judge the Church
of England in the midst of her ceremonies, to
have been a true Church, and the ministry
thereof, notwithstanding the many blemishes
and corruptions cleaving unto it, to have been a
time ministry, and shall never deny to them the
praise which they most justly deserve. Upon
the other part, we are neither so ignorant nor
so arrogant to ascribe to the Church of Scotland
such absolute purity and perfection as hath not
need or cannot admit of further reformation.”
That was the spirit in which the Commission-
ers of the Church of Scotland entered the West-
minster Assembly. The result we know.
Presbytery was sanctioned by Parliament, and
reigned for a time. But a reaction came, which,
sad as it was in England, proved an overthrow
of the Church of Scotland. But even in the
Episcopacy then forced upon the country, thei-e
was only one case of re-ordination of a Presby-
terian clergyman ; the prayer book was rarely
used; the communion was received sitting ; the
sign of the cross was not used in baptism ; the
clergy wore no surplices; and they prayed ex-
tempore. Such practices were not deemed in-
consistent with the order of the Episcopal
Church, and though they did not conciliate the


Scottish people, they rendered the passage of
many curates into the Presbyterian Church
when it was re-established in 1689, compara-
tively easy. It is also worthy of remark that
after the Prince of Orange landed at Torbay, it
was the Presbyterian divine Carstares, who con-
ducted the first religious service on the shore,
and implored the blessing of God upon the en-
terprise.
When the Act for the Union of England and
Scotland was passing through Parliament in
1706, the same securities were distinctly
provided for the Church of Scotland as for the
Church of England. Several lords and four
bishops objected very strongly to this com-
plete recognition of a Presbyterian Church ;
but the cautious, yet firm, Archbishop of
Canterbury of the day, Dr. Tenison, ‘the
old rock, ’ as he was called, at once replied in
words which may well be remembered,—“ The
narrow notions of all Churches have been their
ruin. I believe that the Church of Scotland,
though not quite so perfect as ours, is as true a
Protestant Church as the Church of England.”
These words were quoted with evident approba-
tion by the President of this Synod—the Bishop
of Sydney—in a public manner last year, and in
a manly and dignified speech, for which he has
been treated with an amount of undignified
abuse.
IV. Since the era to which I have referred,
though old sores smarted very long and pain-
fully, the pulpits of the Church of Scotland
were open to the clergymen of the Church of


England for a period of a century. The excel-
lent Simeon of Cambridge— clarum et venerabile
nomen —preached in these pulpits, and even as-
sisted at the communion. Dark shadows fell
for a time on all Churches, but since the period
of religious revival in this century, kinder feel-
ings have arisen, and but for certain legal re-
strictions, of which we are all aware, might
have led to more reciprocal actions. More re-
cently an Archbishop, a Bishop, a Dean, and
other clergymen have preached in Presby-
terian Churches in Scotland, according to the
simple form of our ancestral Church. Our be-
loved Queen, the temporal head of the Church
of England, regularly receives the sacrament
according to the Presbyterian form of the
Church of Scotland, when she resides in her
Highland home ; and the spiritual head of the
Church of England sent a public letter of con-
dolence to the Moderator of the Church of
Scotland on the occasion of the death of the
late Dr. Norman Macleod. Tempora mutantur
et nos mutamur in illis.
More free action. can be taken where there
are fewer legal restrictions. When the Union
Conferences of Presbyterian Churches took
place in America, three Bishops and other dele-
fates attended to cr ngratulate them. Then Dr.
lodge, facile princeps of all Presbyterian
divines of the present day, addressing the late
Bishop MTlvaine, said, “Fifty years ago you
and I sat in the same Academic Hall, and re-
ceived spiritual impulses at the same time.
Since then you have gone your way and I have


gone mine, but I am sure you have not preached
a sermon that I could not have endorsed, and I
am equally sure that I have not preached a ser-
mon which you could not have endorsed.” In
Canada on a similar occasion, when the Presby-
terian Churches from British Columbia to New
Foundland were united into one, two Diocesan
Synods sent communications of congratulation,
one of them being from the hand of the Metro-
politan of Canada, Dr. Ashton Oxenden,
Coming to these Southern seas, I cannot pass
over pome instances of fraternity as particularly
pleasing as they were kind. When the apostolic
Bishop Selwyn was sailing amidst so many
heathen isles in his little yacht, he conveyed a
Presbyterian minister and his wife to the New
Hebrides, the scene of their mission labours, and
took stores to them from year to year. On one
occasion when this missionary’s watch required
repair, he left it at the harbour of thejisland for
Bishop Selwyn to take to Auckland, but great
was his surprise when he found that the bishop
had left his own instead till he returned the suc-
ceeding year. Nor was this all. Pteferring at
Dunedin to what he had seen at this island of
the New Hebrides, he said that if any Presby-
terians were disposed to help the work he would
be glad to take their contributions. Next morn-
ing £3O were handed to him as he was going on
board. He made similar appeals at Wellington
and at Auckland, and on his arrival at the New
Hebrides handed £lO5 to the Presbyterian mis-
sionary. That surely reconciled the Bishop and
the Covenanter. Bishop Patteson acted in a


similar spirit, often visited our missionary at
Eromanga, where he had to climb a precipitous,
rocky path to reach him, and when, after the
melancholy tragedy by which Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon perished as martyrs, Bishop Patteson
was the first to arrive* awi he went ashore and
read the burial service of his incomparable
Liturgy over their graves. The Bishop was
ever careful to abstain from setting up missions
on any islands occupied by Presbyterian mission-
aries. lam glad also to notice in a recent
speech of Bishop Selwyn the second, a worthy
son of a noble sire, he made a graceful reference
to “the excellent Presbyterian missionaries ” in
the New Hebrides, “on whose labours,” he
added, “we are careful not to trench”—a
worthy example for us all to follow.
In Victoria a Society has been organised to
aid the Church of England and the Presbyterian
Church in supplying divine ordinances in
sparsely peopled districts, and the Bishop of
Ballarat has been preaching for collections on
its behalf.
It is a becoming thing, therefore, that our
Church should, in a formal way, convey its
greetings to yours. Perhaps we should have
done so a few years ago when you set up a re-
presentative Synod—a step which takes away,
in my humble opinion the great controversy
about the Government of the Church. We are
all representative now. We rejoice in this con-
dition of things, and anticipate much good from
it to the Church. Permit me to add my own
sense of satisfaction to that of many in and out


of this Synod, that the Bishop of Sydney has
determined to spend the remainder of his days
m this diocese, which he has long adorned with
his virtues and works of usefulness; and at
length to lay bis bones where he has already
buried his own sainted dead. J
Our Churches have never been dissenters
from each other, except when, alike in Edin-
burgh and Westminister, it became necessary
for each to say, “God forbid that I should take
the inheritance of my fathers and give it unto
thee.” We, therefore, take this opportunity of
expressing our respect for your Church, by con-
veying in this formal way, the cordial greetings
of our General Assembly. While each Church
is doing its own proper work, it is good to evi-
dence the spirit of charity occasionally by a
mutual recognition. As we now meet on so
many occasions for common objects, the spirit
of charity grows ; and brotherly love is one of
the best means of promoting ecclesiastical
fellowship. Unity may take long to reach, but
brotherly love and mutual recognition will do
much to hasten the fulfilment of our Divine Re-
deemer’s prayer, “that they all may be one
as thou Father art in me, and I in Thee*
that they also may be one in us, that the
world may believe that thou hast sent me.”
Though in different companies of the Church
militant upon earth, we claim common kindred
to patriarshs of the ancient time, “to the goodly
fellowship of prophets, the glorious company of
apost es, the noble a”my of martyrs, aud the
bol y Church throughout all the world that ac


knowledge God the Father of infinite Majesty,
His honourable, true, and only Son, and the
Holy Ghost, the Comforter. ” We await alike
the General Assembly and the Church of the
First Born, which are written in heaven.
N OTE _Some of the foregoing statements
were omitted inadvertently in the delivery ot
the address ; but are here given as they were
written.
John Luttox, Printer, 316, Castlereagh-street.
