

PfOO
THE VICTOR CROWNED.
THOUGHTS ON
pie, Cftmrter anN gatfe
EEV. JOHN LEIECHILD, D.D.
THE SUBSTANCE OF TWO DISCOURSES,
REY. JOHN GRAHAM,
its in % at Ctsfatn Cfrsptl.
LONDON:
JACKSON, WALFOED AND HODDER,
18, ST, PAUL’S CHURCHYARD ;
WARREN HALL & CO., CAMDEN TOWN;
J. H. KELLY, YIGO STREET, REGENT STREET.


I '■}
, 4 j|4
i iii
1 Kl f* Ty
J « 'H 4'«
j | .'| 'v I H'|
<1 >sJ 4 11


8 • °t ~i y
THE VICTOR CROWED.
:£ I HA YE POTJGHT A HOOD EIGHT, I HA YE FINISHED MY
COHBSE, I HA YE KEPT THE FAITH.” 2 Tim. iv. 7.
There is no recorded saying of king Ahah
which has so much seeming wisdom in it as
his message to the boasting king of Syria—
“ Let not him that girdeth on his harness
boast himself as he that putteth it off.”
I Kings xx. 11. Yet this was only worldly
wisdom; for through it we see cropping out
the ungodliness of an apostate heart, the
permission of the successful warrior to “ boast
himself ’.” All power is of God; and while
the raw recruit may boast himself in the
Lord, the most veteran victor has no other
ground wherein to glory. Timothy beginning
“ to fight the fight of faith” is to be strong
in the Lord ; and Paul, who has finished it
and is waiting his triumphal entry into the
presence of the King of Glory, feels he has
no room for boasting, “1 laboured more
abundantly than they all,” he says, “yet not


I but the grace of God which was with me.”
He awaited that crown which shall be the
crown of glory, of life and of righteousness ;
but he awaited it as the gracious reward of
grace-inspired service; and he longed for it
chiefly that he might wear it in his Master’s
service, or lay it adoringly at his feet.
I have chosen these memorable words of
the great apostle of the Gentiles as the basis
of a discourse for the improvement, to our
edification, of the death of Dr. Leifchild.
The first pastor of this church has, in his
82nd year, gone home to God. After more
than fifty years warfare he is crowned. Few
men since Paul’s day could more truthfully
use the words of the text. Like him he had
done victorious battle for the Lord in a re-
volted province of his empire, and awaited his
triumph amid the glories and acclamations
of the capitol. Often, as I looked on that
radiant face and snowy head, and thought of
the service he had rendered to Christ, and
the life of honour he had lived, and the scenes
that fixed his hope, I could not but compare
him to the aged John, the last lingering
oracle of inspiration, the disciple whom Jesus
loved and who, in old age, spake so sweetly
of Love. Such men are like mariners, who
have survived all storms and anchored at


length in tranquil seas, where the mountains
of spice and myrrh gleam through the mist,
while the scent-laden breezes announce the
character of the regions that await their
landing, when once the sun shines fully
forth and the shadows flee away. There was
no servant of Christ I ever knew whose life
and death I could more covet than those of
my lamented predecessor. Not for the length
of his life, with its honours and comforts and
the easy competence in which a generous
people placed his old age, would I covet it;
hut for his stern adherence to faithful toil in
the gospel ministry; for his peace of con-
science and assurance of faith, and for the
wonderful success vouchsafed him in bringing
souls from sin to God.
I know something of the toils and cares
and joys of twenty years’ public ministry;
and they help me to conceive of his course
which spanned nearly three times that period.
I gleaned his history when I became his suc-
cessor, and it awoke both my fear and hope.
Often before entering this pulpit, often while
in it, have I thought of the fearless, tender,
ambassador of God, in whose place of power
I stood. Gallant old soldier of Jesus Christ,
great were thy toils, great thy triumphs,
great thy closing hours ! Let me die the


death of the righteous and let my life he
like his !
Both duty and inclination prompt me to
speak freely to you of the grace of God in
one, who was to many of you a spiritual father,
and who was to us all an honour and a joy.
But I am jealous of myself lest I should
make the servant overshadow the Master,
instead of manifest Him. As I meditated
this sermon in my study I thought the spirit
of my predecessor might he near, I felt sure
the eye of God was upon me; and I desired
to pen nothing that the glorified servant or
his infinitely glorious Lord would disapprove.
Our sainted patriarch when dying gloried in
nothing but the wondrous love and atoning
blood of his Lord. He said to a dear friend—
“ If you record anything of me, let it be this—
that not one wavering feeling have I known
as to that firm foundation, the cross and
the sacrifice of Christ. What would it avail
me now to have been a successful preacher,
a teacher, a comforter of others, if I could
not simply believe and trust my all to the
Lord Christ ! There is no peace, no rest
hut in that simple plan which I see written
in the skies as with a sunbeam. I have
thought so often of W. Bunting’s line—
‘A death-bed witnessing for God/


I have wished to hear my dying testimony
to his truth and grace; hut I have been
afraid of self-glorification and have prayed
earnestly to he kept from that. Thank God
I can now say, I am willing to be for-
gotten.”
Happy self-conquest of a mind naturally
so self-asserting, happy triumph of the grace
of God in one whom this church long valued
and cannot soon forget.
We desire to let this noble sentiment in-
form and mould our remarks, and we shall
therefore use some facts of Dr. Leifchild’s
life, and some features of his character, to
illustrate three phases of the Christian life
presented in the words—“ I have fought a
good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith.”
Here we have successful antagonism to
evil, successful completion of duties pre-
scribed, and successful keeping of a holy trust.
First: the Christian life implies life-long
war against sin.
Sin is in the world and in our souls, and
wisdom’s way is not to spend time in specu-
lation on the origin of evil, but earnestly use
God’s means for its expulsion. The wild
hoar of the woods is laying waste our vines,
we know the gate by which to drive him out,


however he may have got in. Every Chris-
tian is a soldier enlisted, attested and pledged
at the cross of Christ to a war of extermina-
tion against—not sinners—but sin. On this
mission the Captain of Salvation descended
to earth. “ And ye know that he was mani-
fested to take away our sins; and in him is
no sin. He that committeth sin is of the
devil; for the devil sinneth from the begin-
ning. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested that he might destroy the works
oe the devil.” 1 John iii. 5, 8. To warfare
against this enemy Paul would engage his
converts—“ Ye have not yet resisted unto
blood striving against sin.” IIel), xii. 4. In
this holy war he and his fellow-soldiers em-
ployed the heavenly weapons of truth and
love, overcoming evil by good. “ Eor though
we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the
flesh : for the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God to the pull-
ing down of strongholds ; casting down ima-
ginations and every high thing that exalteth
itself against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.” 2 Cor. x. 3—5. They
warred to expel evil and plant good, to over-
come enemies and make them obedient sub-
jects of Christ, to use all the resources of the


conquered to extend the conquests of salva-
tion from sin.
As sin exists in the believer’s own nature
the battle must be waged within. No man
can know the evil of sin who has not tasted
its bitterness in the deep-felt estrangement
of his own heart from the Fountain of good-
ness, and in the anarchy of his passions
broken loose from allegiance to conscience
and God. No man can be sincere in warring
with evil externally who does not war with
it first internally. He must first cleanse the
temple of his own soul ere he can show
genuine zeal for God in cleansing other tem-
ples for his reception. If evil can be over-
come only by good, then, in proportion to
the growth of goodness in the Christian’s
own heart, will he the strength of his armour
and the success of his efforts. Victory over
his own besetments will expel traitors and
combine his own forces for effective attack.
There is a blessed contagion in moral good-
ness. The very sight of a man in whom
truth and love reign inspires feebler souls
with power. “He that ruleth his own spirit
is better than he that taketh a city.” All
true conquerors must he self-conquerors ; but
it very often happens that the traitors within
are not fully discovered till stirred up by


presence of foes without. So that often the
Christian soldier must return to defend his
own marches and do battle with strongholds
on territories of his own. The preacher’s
sorest struggles will be with the vain-glory,
self-seeking, anger and pride of his own heart.
Deep in the strongholds of his own spirit the
sternest battles of Christian life must be
silently fought. If they be not fought and
won his forces will be ever held in check, and
he may break down in defeat in moments of
seeming victory. How terrible to promise
others liberty and yet the promiser be the
slave of corruption !
In a nature so replete with energies and
passions as was that of Saul of Tarsus this
self-conflict must have been no sham-fight.
The seventh chapter of Romans lifts the cur-
tain from the arena of this hidden struggle
and renders audible the groans of the agony
for life. The eighth announces victory.
It was a life-long work to keep down the
resurgent forces of sin. “So fight I, not as
one that beateth the air: but I keep under
my body and bring it into subjection; lest
when I have preached to others, I myself
should prove a castaway.” 2 Cor. ix. 26, 27.
Inspiration did not supersede self-denial, in-
trospection, and all the means of personal


sanctification. Nothing is moral character,
nothing real virtue or holiness, but that
which is wrought out by the forth-putting
of will. Holy will is the image of God, and
that which renders the exercise of gifts truly
virtuous. The most flaming eloquence, if
wielded by a self-seeking or godless will, is
but the phosphorescence of a putrefaction,
whose loathesomeness is concealed by dark-
ness, but will appear in the day of God.
Holy will is the centre of all the powers from
which they take complexion and guidance.
A heart right with God is the one thing
needful and must be kept with all diligence.
Hr. Leifchild fought this good fight of
faith, and thereby gained purity of heart and
victory over self. He needed to do so. His
nature was full and vigorous and thrown in
a mould of striking individuality. The out-
ward man revealed the inner. The large
head, leonine features, and massive frame,
reflected the powerful soul that informed
them. Seldom, indeed never, have we seen
features of such strength so capable of rapid
play and varied expression, whether of joy,
tenderness, reverence, scorn, or indignation.
And his voice was equally suited to the whole
scale of human passions. Nor were these
capabilities fallacious. The fulness and fire


of human passions dwelt in him. The in-
stincts and appetites that draw life from
earth, and enjoy the draught, were vivid and
strong in him. His will was imperious and
unconquerable by any power but that of God.
The growths of a mighty ambition were
indigenous to such a soul. The defensive
affections were in equal force—scathing in-
dignation, anger and scorn hut waited a word
to call them forth. But intellect, conscience
and the religious affections were equally
strong. It was a noble conquest to bring
such a massive, fiery nature into subjection to
the obedience of Jesus Christ. For this he
searched and denied himself, and read and
prayed, and left no means unemployed that
Jeremy Taylor or Richard Baxter would pre-
scribe. The success was gradual but appa-
rently complete, and, perhaps, as far as this
mortal state permits, really complete. That
great heart never lost its fires; hut they were
sanctified on the altar of God and burned in
zeal, devotion and love. That dominant will,
might sometimes he too self-assertive and
unduly imperious over weaker ones, this,
however, was only seldom the case, and
its force was put forth for God in mighty
pleadings with men, and in authoritative
rebukes of sin. His nature was still lion-


like; but while terrible to evil, yet it was
such as the hand of a little child might lead
in the highway of holiness. If his nature
was originally stormy, its force was tamed
by the hand of the Highest and directed in
a uniform course, in which it helped many
heavenward. The volcanic soil, when cooled
down and conquered by the kindly action of
the elements, throws up crops impossible to
soils over which the glowing lava has never
spread. Let no soul, however stormy or
volcanic, despair of self-conquest. Nay, bro-
ther, that terrible temper, so hard to tame,
will pull powerfully in Christ’s yoke when
thoroughly broken-in. These fiery passions
may be purified into a flame of holy love that
will thaw many a frosty soul, that might
shiver and die among ordinary samples of
cold, passive goodness. Gunpowder need not
hurl destruction against man; it may rend
rocks to build his roads and breakwaters and
palaces; and if in such work its explosions
and fragments disturb weak nerves, they
will learn to bear that disturbance and reap
its permanent benefits.
Dr. Leifchild had a deep insight into the
passions and motives of men, and could de-
pict with awful vividness the struggles needed
to self-conquest, the blessedness of such vie-


tory, and the woe of defeat; that insight
and that art were; we believe; the result of
passions possessed but conquered within him-
self.
Among many instances of his self-com-
mand I notice two. There was only one
serious division of judgment and feeling in
this church since its origin. In all the dis-
cussions that led to the secession of about a
hundred influential members; the pastor con-
ducted all things with calmness and order ;
and when the secession did take place at a
church meeting, he; with perfect composure;
gave out a hymn; and requested that while
it was being sung the dissidents would de-
part. Yet that was a trial that entered
deeply into his deepest feelings. When, after
his retirement from the pastorate of this
church; the faithful partner of his joys and
sorrows was taken from him by death; many
feared it would shatter his remaining strength.
He did. bow beneath the stroke in deepest
grief; but; on the morning of Mrs. Leif-
child’s burial; while all the friends were
seated in the drawing-room awaiting with
hushed breath the presence of the stricken
husband; and fearing an outburst of grief, he
walked in, his tall figure draped in mourning
cloak and with his hat in his hand. He


stood a moment, and bowing his snowy head
said, with firm voice, “ I take you all to wit-
ness that I do not murmur against the will of
God in this trial, but submit to the stroke
that has left me bereaved/ 5 One, who
witnessed the melting effect of that look
and those words, assured me none present,
she believed, could ever forget them; so
touching were the blended dignity of age
and sorrow and calm submission to the
Supreme will.
Indeed Dr. Leifchild 5 s self-command was
one great secret of his command over others.
He was so thoroughly master of himself and
his position, so ballasted by sound judgment,
so able to rule, that it appeared natural he
should have his way ; and so it was given.
Besides, his tenderness was as remarkable as
his strength; and the son of consolation
often had power where the son of thunder
would have failed. He successfully fought
the good fight of faith on the battle-field
within, and seldom, we think, has it been
given to a man to work for God with higher
motives or a more unblemished character
than he maintained. The growing fulness
and joy which culminated in his last hours
proved that his eye was single, for his whole
body was full of light.


All ! this victory over self, so that he could
say. “ I am now willing to be forgotten,”
was the noblest conquest of the veteran vic-
tor and the one which most avails him now.
The Christian warfare is not only internal
and defensive : it should be also external and
aggressive. We should not only be loyal
subjects of Christ, keeping our own hearts
for him, but loyal soldiers winning other
hearts to his kingdom. Such was Paul, who
could rejoice in God, who made him triumph
in every place by making known the savour
of his name. Such were those early Chris-
tians who went everywhere preaching the
word, and many through it were added to
the Lord, Dr. Leifchild believed himself
called of God and set apart, not only for
the defence but for the spread of the faith ;
not only for the edification of saints but for
the conversion of sinners. He believed such
to be what the Bible states them, enemies of
God in their mind and life, and he sought to
make them submit to the authority of God,
and be saved by the sacrifice of his Son. He
looked on every society of believers as a
section of the militant church. Hence he
was so earnest to get converts to unite with
the church and confess Christ before men,
that they might commence war to the death


with sin in all its forms. He did succeed in
edifying the church most effectually ; hut he
did so not only by expounding the word, but
by finding work for each member, and by
bringing each into sympathy and co-operation
with Him who came to seek and to save that
which was lost. He abhorred and denounced
the abuse of church-membership which would
turn the church into a windy, debating club,
where itching tongues would minister to
itching ears, where puffing up in so-called
knowledge, and not building up in love,
would be the effect of church-meetings. So
successful was his ministry in winning souls
that, generally the whole time of the church-
meeting was employed in admitting converts,
and in giving addresses to such, or to the
church on experimental or practical themes.
He gave the right hand of fellowship to
about two thousand whom he welcomed to
this church during his pastorate in it; and
more than three-fourths of these gave satis-
factory evidence of being converted through
his means. The spirit of work and prayer
he breathed into this church made it the salt
of the earth in its district, and kept it united
through long years, save in the one painful
instance referred to. And although it de-
clined in numbers in the declining years of


his ministry, and declined after his resigna-
tion to less than one-third of what it once
had been; yet, at its lowest, it retained a solid
residuum of working piety, which proved the
leaven to a mass afterwards gathered around
it. And the solid worth of this church’s
first pastor is proved by the estimation in
which he was held by his flock, till many of
them went home to God before him. With
almost his dying breath, Mr. E. Swaine, who
was a deacon of this church from its forma-
tion, desired me to give his love to Dr.
Leif child. For full forty years Mr. Swaine
had known him, and loved and honoured him
till his dying hour. He had known his ex-
tensive usefulness, and revered him as “a
man of God.”
My predecessor had wonderful tact in the
organization of useful societies within the
church, which he guided with a master hand.
On becoming acquainted with their objects
and workings, I deemed all so indispensable
that I resolved to follow in his tracks, and as
far as I could to minister to their efficiency.
I am grateful to God for the wisdom and zeal
given to his servant in forming and sup-
porting these benevolent organizations. He
sought to antagonize sin and ignorance
wherever he was, and to be instant in sea-


son and out of season, building up God’s
people in their most holy faith. For this
purpose he stored his mind with weighty,
pointed truths in prose and verse, which
he often dropped into the hearts of indi-
viduals and companies as germs of imperish-
able thought. To win a way to the heart
for truth, he embodied it in terse maxims
and illustrated it by anecdotes fresh from life
or gathered up in his reading. The variety
of these, and his graphic narration of them,
were the wonder and the delight of his bre-
thren and friends. He appeared to have taken
into the depths of his soul Wesley’s saying to
his ministers, that—“ Their business was not
to pay so many visits or preach so many
sermons, but to win all the souls they could.”
He believed, in their integrity, the state-
ments of God’s word concerning the de-
jnaved and perishing state of unconverted
men; he believed in the endless life of every
human soul, and that its weal or woe for ever
were to be settled here ; he believed in God’s
universal love to man, in the efficacy of
Christ’s death as an atonement for all, in
the adaptation of the provisions of salvation
to every human spirit. His early faith and
zeal had been kindled and fed amid the fer-
vours of Methodism ; and as the result of


temperament, faith, education and sustained
communion with Giod, he laboured for the
eternal good of all whom he met. His was
no spasmodic awaking to spiritual verities,
no official zeal that burns only when fanned
by the public breath. In the parlour as in
the pulpit he was the servant of Jesus Christ,
who had his speech always with grace sea-
soned with salt, that he might answer all
aright and edify his fellow-travellers to eter-
nal rest. For this he had the tact and re-
sources that only can come from studying,
to watch for souls and win them to God.
“ And moreover, because the preacher was
wise, he still taught the people knowledge;
yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and
set in order many proverbs. The preacher
sought to find out acceptable words ; and
that which was written was upright, even
words of truth.” Ecc. xii. 9, 10. He preached
in nearly all the large towns of England and
often in Ireland, and, I believe, in Scotland
also. Wherever I have followed him I found
some who had sweet and touching remem-
brances of his public or private ministrations.
In a family where I stopped in Sheffield, I
met a venerable and pious lady, who said
with emotion, she never could forget a verse
of a hymn he introduced into a sermon, and


told the people they never lived in a right
state of heart towards Christ except they
could say with love and joy—
“ O let me kiss thy bleeding feet.
And bathe and wash them with my tears.
The story of thy love repeat
In every drooping sinner’s ears.
Till all shall hear the quick’ning sound.
Since I even I have mercy found.”
The pathos he threw into these lines, as if
in very deed he saw his dying Lord and were
falling in gratitude at his feet, melted many
hearts and engraved the lines indelibly at
least on one.
Once I went to a city in the south of
England to open a chapel; on entering the
drawing-room of my host for the night, I
found an aged lady, who saluted me with
more than usual cordiality. When we were
left alone, she said she had good reason to
know my predecessor; for that many years
ago he had visited her house. She then had
two daughters who were young and thought-
less about death. Dr. Leifchild became in-
terested in them; took each apart, and with
fatherly tenderness and apostolic faithfulness
spoke to each to decide on loving and profess-
ing Christ. The words were not in vain.
Both gave their hearts to the Lord. Both


died early and happy. “And surely,” said
the aged mother, “ I ought to remember Dr.
Leifchild.” I trust that simple touching nar-
rative was not lost on his successor. Blessed
and honoured of God was the man, who kept
burning so constantly the pure flame of zeal
in his Master’s work. Oh, how many, many
did he win to God out of the pulpit as well as
in it! Many such he has now rejoined, and
many still follow to the land of light.
The pulpit, however, was his place of
power, in which he sought to do the great
work of his life. He highly valued the press
as a power for God; and he published several
works which had a wide circulation and
effected much good; but the inculcation of
truth by the living voice and personal pre-
sence was his mission and his power. We
cannot but hope for a full development of the
method and success of his preaching in the
biography of him to be published ere long
by his son, Rev. J. Leifchild; and also for a
volume of those sermons, which, from his fer-
vent lips, thrilled so many thousand hearts.
As a public teacher he fought the good
fi«ht. The destruction of the works of the
O
devil, the salvation of souls from sin, was
ever his aim. He had felt the plague of sin
in his own heart. He saw it to be the blight


which has withered God’s noblest work—the
human soul. He saw it to be the curse
which, striking creation’s lord, has gone down
through all his domain, creating dislocation
and chaos where health and order should
reign. He saw it striking down from the
arch of the soul and society their key-stone
of allegiance to God, and saw all the mate-
rials thereby rushing to ruin. He saw sin
separating man from God and men from each
other. His soul burned in jealousy for God
and grief for men. He buckled on his armour
to do battle with sin and to use heaven’s own
remedy—the gospel—to save man from sin’s
present and eternal effects. He saw wrong
opinions prevailing, but it was not with
opinions but with sin he waged war. He
studied his work comprehensively and mi-
nutely. His whole ministerial life was a
grand campaign; and every sermon a battle,
in which he struck strong strokes to destroy
the works of the devil, and shiver the fetters
and rouse the energies of captive souls. He
believed in the love of God and felt he was
on his side; he as really believed in the
malignant power of the Devil; and as he
struck at the foundations of his kingdom,
every stroke rung it out —“ So fight I, not
as one that heateth the air ! ” Many of you


well remember the manner and matter and
effects of his sermons. You remember with
what a solemn, steady step he ascended these
stairs, as one coming from the presence, and
bending forward under the burden, of the
Lord. The hymns and prayers and scripture
readings were made to bear on the subject
for the occasion. Sometimes, it is said, they
appeared disproportionately short to the ser-
mon. But devotion is to be measured rather
by the intensity of its spirit than by its
stateliness and length. His devotion was
intense, concentrated and direct, like that of
a man who believed God really present and
better pleased with faith and fervour than
compliments and circumlocution. He was
highly discriminating and experimental in
prayer; but did not forget supplications for
objects common to all men. Undoubtedly the
sermon specially absorbed his strength; for
he believed that “ faith cometh by hearing
and hearing by the word of God.” His nature
was climacteric, and so were his sermons.
Was it that his faculties were massive and
could not kindle to white heat but with
earnest effort and gradual progress ? or was
it that he had a settled purpose to restrain
his power for certain points, and more espe-
cially for the close ? or were both the cause


of his calmness at the beginning, and for
three-fourths of his discourse, till his powers
were unmasked and thundered forth so terri-
bly in concluding appeals? We do believe
his cumulative style was the result of both
nature and art. A stranger hearing him the
first time would be struck with the appro-
priateness and calmness of his introduction,
the distinctness and exhaustiveness of his
divisions, the calm concatenated style of his
arguments and expositions. Sometimes he
might think him almost dull, were it not for
the sudden pause, followed by a flash of the
kindling eye, and a brief appeal, short, sharp
and effective as the simultaneous fire of a file
of rifles. The hearer began to feel that he
had only witnessed the preparatory work of
a siege, where the planting of cannon and
running of parallels had been effected with
masterly precision and with but little noise;
indeed he has not long to await the unmask-
ing of batteries weighty and terrible ; and if
his own heart is a stronghold unsurrendered
to Christ, he may expect shocks that will
vibrate through his whole moral nature,
till he furls the flag of rebellion and sue
for mercy at the cross. Often when the
preacher had treated his subject with logi-
cal force that won the admiration of the


thoughtful, he would turn back and sum up
the points with lawyer-like exactness, com-
mencing with such words as —“ Thus we
have seen, first, &c. Men and brethren, if
this be so what shall we say to these things/’
Then, perhaps, the deep pectoral ejaculation,
the peculiar nod, the vehement stamp, the
step backwards, till the pulpit door flew open
(but all unnoticed by the preacher), would be
the signal for the close application and vehe-
ment appeal. Then the lion-like head would
be thrown back and every massive feature
dilate with expression ; the voice would be-
come more flexible and full, and run through
every note of the scale from softest pathos to
deepest indignation; and thought would suc-
ceed thought in condensed and cumulative
meaning and force, till some peculiarly start-
ling fact or pregnant sentence was uttered
by the preacher exalted to the prophet ; and
while himself and people were on the crested
surge of emotion —they perhaps standing as
well as he —he would abruptly sit down in
the storm. Men of strong nerves have told
me that at such times they have for moments,
if not for minutes, been perfectly unconscious
of everything but the utterances of the
preacher. Their whole being appeared to
live in the eye and ear; and lessons never to


be forgotten were enstamped on a soul, which
could not for the moment tell whether it was
in or out of the body.
One friend, then a young man, has told
me that he went to hear the Doctor on a
Christmas morning, determined afterwards to
spend a joyous holiday in the country; but
the Doctor’s appeal to souls who were blind
to the glory of Christ so awoke and alarmed
his conscience, that he gave all his money to
the collection for the poor and remained at
home in his closet to pray. Such results
were not occasional, but repeated from Sunday
to Sunday, as he delivered to crowded assem-
blies those electric truths, with which his own
great heart and soul were charged. Some occa-
sions, however, were peculiarly rich in results.
Such was that in 1835, when he delivered
the sermon afterwards published and entitled
—“ The Christian Course, with its impedi-
ments and incitements. A Sermon to the
Young.” The effect at the time, and the subse-
quent effects of this sermon, were marvellous.
At these, however, no one need wonder who
reads the sermon and remembers the heart
and brain and tongue that delivered it, and
with how much prayer for the spirit of God
it was preceded and followed. One who was
himself savingly impressed by that sermon


writes to me, “ That sermon to the young
was the means of the conversion of many.
That sermon won my heart for Jesus. Oh,
the power of those words as he said c You
must decide this night for eternity/ 'Was it/
he said, f from Scripture we learned that God
was more disposed at one time than another
to hear prayer. We are forbidden, by the
history of the church as well as by the warn-
ings of Scripture, to entertain much hope of
those whose whole season of youthful impres-
sions, convictions, and the stirrings of God’s
spirit have passed away without coming to
any good issue. As the result of long ob-
servation (he said) I make this remark. Of
all whom I knew some years ago, in early
life, who were the subjects of frequent pious
emotions, and often on the point of yielding
themselves to God, as those that were alive
from the dead,but as often drew back and frus-
trated my expectations, I recollect scarcely
an individual but what has remained station-
ary to this hour, or retrograded, or been
hurried with no sign of a favourable nature
into eternity. Let this statement be pon-
dered by those before me who answer to such
a description ; and let it awaken in the hearts
of those still young a spirit of promptitude
and exertion. Upon your decision now the


whole direction of your future life may de-
pend ; upon this night may hang eternity.
You must be brought to decision this evening.
This matter must not be left in uncertainty.
Nothing is more offensive to the Saviour—
not even rejection—than indecision—neu-
trality. f I would thou wert cold or hot? Be
one or the other. Choose or reject. You
ought not to go out of this place without
deciding. Yes or no this very moment.
Accept salvation now —or never / &c. These
solemn words (adds my friend) penetrated
my very soul. Oh, with what agony did I
entreat my God to remove me from the pos-
sibility of turning hack to the world, and to
keep me by his power and grace from its
snares!”
Some twenty-four young persons, I under-
stand, decided for Christ and united with the
church as the visible result of that sermon.
Others if not so rich, yet were eminently
rich, in spiritual fruits to the young. The
same friend writes, concerning another of his
annual sermons to young people —“ Though
it occurred many years ago, I have never
forgot one occasion when our pastor was
addressing young men, how he brought in
a touching incident. A young man had
fatally succeeded in drawing a young woman


from the paths of virtue to disgrace, and
finally to prostitution. She was early laid
on the bed of death and sent for that young
man. As she held up her withered arm, and
raised her withered form before him, she said,
with a look of awful meaning,— ‘ This form
shall haunt you by day and night; it shall
go with you to death \ it shall meet you at
the judgment!’ That young man became
converted, but, said he, was it not for the
blood of Jesus to appease his guilty con-
science he would have been driven to despair.
Oh, who can tell of what use that awful fact
was made to many ; I can truly say it proved
a warning to me that I never forgot! ”
Other men might soar higher in poetic
flights or dive deeper in metaphysical depths,
hut John Leifchild was, in his day, the prince
of British preachers, in appeal to the con-
science and heart of an audience. His fearless
exposures of the guilt of covetousness made
mammon tremble amid his coffers, and be-
fore the ark he bore, the dagon of worldly
love often fell and was broken. He was a
pulpit warrior, and led a gallant band in the
wake of him whose name is the Word of G od,
and who goes forth conquering and to con-
quer. He was an able minister of the New
Testament, not of the letter but of the spirit.


Many of you here present, as well as many
more scattered over Christ’s wide vineyard,
are the monuments of his work. To you
he might say, could he speak from heaven, —
“Ye are our epistle, written in our heart,
known and read of all men : forasmuch as
ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle
of Christ ministered hy us, written not with
ink, hut with the spirit of the living God;
not in tables of stone, hut in fleshy tables
of the heart. 5 ’ 2 Cor. hi, 2, 3.
The inspired character of Barnabas, whom
I think he resembled in more respects than
his Jupetrine aspect, might serve as the
epitaph on his tomb ;—“ He was a good
man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of
faith : and much people was added unto
the Lord.” Acts xi. 24.
His ministry was one of great spiritual
power. His glorying was not vain when on
his death-bed he exultingly said —“ Blessed
be my God that my heart and lips have
caused the name of Jesus to be reverberated
by many hundreds, who are now, perhaps,
repeating it in sweeter cadence.” We cannot
but repeat it that, few men, since the days of
Paul, could on a death-bed more truthfully
use the language of our text, “ I have fought a
good fight.” Grand old warrior thy work is


done, and thy battered helm and shield and
sword are exchanged for the crown and harp
and palm. Thou art now more than con-
queror : may thy cloak of zeal enwrap me in
its flaming folds •, may thy hold believing
spirit kindle thy brethren to noble emula-
tion of thy deeds !
Here let us pause to enquire what were
the elements of this spiritual hero’s power ?
Much of character and power in every
man depends on natural constitution. By
constitution I mean the amount, combination
and temperament of all the faculties. The
receptivity of spiritual power must be con-
ditioned by natural capacity. The electric
current that would fuse down a small wire
will pass harmless through a large one.
Much as to our usefulness will depend on
faithful culture of talents ; but much must
also depend on the number God has given
us. The God of nature fitted John Leifchild,
by a powerful physical and mental constitu-
tion, to do a great work for many years in
his vineyard.
The great vigour of his frame fitted him
to bear great toil, and his natural energy of
mind, when sanctified, fitted him for the
powerful exposition and impression of truth.
He was endowed with a completeness of fa-


culties and a fulness of emotional and moral
nature that impressed all who intimately
knew him. He was not deficient in the play
of fancy, and his imagination often revelled
in the combination of images of beauty or
terror. His intellect was robust rather than
acute, just the intellect to scorn unpractical
subtleties in doctrine, and by its vitality to
throw off all fungous growths of doubt;
the intellect to grasp a subject strongly, to
reason convincingly, to handle historical facts
and scripture statements with a mastery that
won the confidence of his hearers, and power-
fully ministered to their faith. It was not
very original, was sometimes rather heavy
in developing a subject; but was always
sound and massive, and when lighted up by
fancy and kindled by emotion it rose, in the
estimation of many, to genius. His con-
science was naturally strong, and by exercise
and enlightenment brought his whole inner
and outer life under its searching and im-
perial jurisdiction. All his sympathies and
affections were large, and especially his de-
votional affections. These he cultivated by
all the aids God puts within the reach of
his saints on earth; and rose on the wings of
devotion with holy fervour in the closet, the
study and the pulpit. The fulness and depth


of his nature fitted him. for a great spiritual
work in his day. To the God of nature and
of grace be all the praise of what he was and
did! We lay great stress on this natural
adaptation; for, contrary to the views that
would represent God’s sovereignty as assert-
ing itself by arbitrary measures and violation
of fitness, we believe it always acts by suit-
able agencies, and that the God of nature
and grace is one. Feeble men, however holy,
can never do the work of the strong, nor
should they hold themselves accountable for it.
Were we asked what was the mainspring
of Dr. Leifchild’s spiritual power, we should
say it was faith. That faith which is the
conviction of the unseen and the realization
of things hoped for. This is the organ of
the spiritual life. By faith Moses endured
as seeing him who is invisible; and hence his
power. By faith Elijah stood in the realized
presence of Infinite Majesty and Power, and
therefore he could fulminate on Ahah’s path
—“ Thus saith the Lord God of Israel before
whom I stand.” That realization of God
made him calm on Carmel; and it was its
momentary failure that made him fly from
the threat of the wicked Jezebel. Dr. Leif-
child cultivated an abiding faith in the pre-
sence and perfections of the ever-blessed God.


Often in the pulpit, when in a state of high
exaltation, his faculties appeared to grasp the
invisible world, and the unseen and eternal
were made real to his hearers. He spoke of
heaven and hell, of the God of love and jus-
tice, as one to whom they were awful glorious
verities. It was refreshing to hear the calm
assurance with which he spoke of the spiritual
world. Heaven was felt by him to be an
exceeding great and eternal weight of glory,
while earth was a changing scene and a vain
show. Temporal things were the rolling
mist, eternal things the changeless rock. As
he grew in years faith almost appeared to
change to sight. This was the result and
the reward of long fighting the good fight of
faith. While the outer man decayed the
inner man was renewed day by day, till those
adaptations to a higher state, which in most
are but embryotic, in him acquired a vigour
that struggled to claim their appropriate
sphere, and turned all things into aliment for
themselves.
This was a calm, deep, equable power in
the man of God, for which nothing else could
have been a substitute. He came into the
pulpit consciously under the eye of God, and
to do a work for that eternity, towards which
he travelled with its glories full in view. This


fired him with zeal, gave conviction to his
words, and made men feel he was the ambas-
sador of a heavenly King. This was power.
Another element of power, supplied by strong
faith, was his complete assurance of personal
acceptance with God through the merits of
Christ. This he had early been taught,
among the Methodists, to believe in and seek
as his privilege. Some shrink from all ex-
pression of religious experience. Perhaps
sincerity demands this at their hands. He
had experience of the love of God and the
witness of his Spirit, and to encourage others
he often, in the pulpit, expressed this assur-
ance of faith. He did not think it a virtue to
hesitate and doubt, but believed himself a
servant and saint of Jesus Christ. Had he
not believed this, how could he have con-
sistently urged others to become saints ?
This assurance gave him power both in
preaching and in prayer.
He not only felt assured of personal “ ac-
ceptance in the beloved,” but also that he
was called of God to preach the gospel and
save sonls, as the work of his life. The
guidings of providence, the call of the church,
his own convictions of duty, together with
his adaptation to, and success in, the work,
left him no room to doubt that in preaching


the gospel he was doing the very thing for
which “ God had separated him from his
mother’s womb and called him by his grace.”
He felt that he stood at the post assigned
him by the Captain of Salvation. He there-
fore stood on solid ground and struck no
feeble strokes. He knew nothing of the en-
feebling doubts of the man who knows not
whether his calling is secular or sacred. Such
doubters should take the lower seat, till the
Great Master is unequivocally heard to call
them up higher. Another element of power
connected with faith was his entire conse-
cration to God in his work. When ordained
to the work of the ministry, he felt his whole
being through all its powers was to be sanc-
tified to do the will of God in saving souls.
He felt himself set apart wholly to this one
thing; and he gave himself wholly to it. To
withdraw his powers in any degree from his
sacred calling he should have felt most guilty
sacrilege—direct robbery of God, He looked
on the Christian ministry as dealing with
the highest truths of God and the most pre-
cious interests of deathless souls. With a
call to preach, and powers to preach, and the
glorious gospel of the blessed God to preach,
he felt that he needed no other work to do,
that here his highest zeal had scope to burn,


that here was work worthy of angelic powers.
This exalted idea of his function would have
made him scorn for himself the highest offices
of state. Ministers, who betake themselves
to secular or political lecturing, either to
make money or popularity, he looked on as
recreants to their ordination vows and as
mistaken souls. “ What!” I have heard him
say in conversation, “ come down from the
high ground of a minister of Jesus Christ to
amuse a crowd and court their ignorant ap-
plause ! The working classes ! Must we
turn our chapels into lecture halls to interest
them. Did not the common people hear our
Master gladly, though he did not lecture on
Had all ministers as high an idea of their
proper work as he had, and as clear a call,
and as full consecration, they would not need
to resort to unapostolio and equivocal me-
thods of bettering their fellow-men. The
entire surrender of his powers to God gave
him confidence in appealing to his Great
Master for all needed succour and success,
and kept him so constantly engaged that his
powers were free from the rust of indolence.
He lived long and wrought earnestly ; but
his work was his delight, and he did not
seek his happiness in other sources than


those open to him daily. He had the power
of the consecrated man. Another source of
power lay in his diligent preparation for the
pulpit. He did not alienate the week from
study, and then on Sunday try by vehe-
mence of gesture, or by spasms of earnest-
ness to make up for want of well-digested,
methodical thought. He believed in the
earnestness of the study as well as in that
of the pulpit; and, rather than appear be-
fore his people with cnide matter on the
Sunday, he often spent the hour of midnight
—when nothing else would do—in studious
preparation. He loved and studied theology
as the food of his own mind and heart, and
as furnishing bread to feed his people. The
best books on apologetic, systematic and
pastoral theology were familiar to him, and
their contents stored up in memory ready
for use. He had little time and less taste for
merely imaginative and general literature ;
his science was theology, and his high art
that of winning souls to God. In the gene-
ral study of theology, but especially in stu-
dies for the pulpit, he was perseveringly
diligent, and hence the great variety and
freshness of his matter. His sermons, I
believe, were written at pretty full length,
and entrusted to a memory of remarkable


power, and always delivered extempore in
the pulpit. This enabled him to combine
the solidity and accuracy of writing with
the impassioned earnestness of free speech.
One high reward of such diligence is that
labour becomes a necessity of life. He en-
joyed earnest, methodical thinking, and after
his retirement from the ministry he still
pursued it as his duty and delight. How
blessedly different such a state from that of
the indolent soul, that only finds happiness
in release from all serious thought! How
blessed the necessity of work when it ends
in its own reward ! Work engaged his ac-
tive nature and kept it from outward evils
and inward corrosions. Wbrk made life a
dignity and a joy. It crowned him with
honour on earth, and we doubt not he now
enjoys its high reward in heaven. It fur-
nished him with the materials of his vocation,
and nerved him with power for their effec-
tive use.
His power as a preacher was greatly
augmented by the singleness and directness
of his aim. He profoundly believed in the
scriptural doctrine of conversion from sin
to God. He believed conversion to be the
crisis of being—the turning point from
endless woe to eternal life. He believed that


God was willing to afford all influences
needed to effect it at once—just now —in
the heart of every sinner, and he sought
with an earnestness, often rising to agony,
to turn sinners from the error of their wavs.
For this he plied the deepest powers of
men’s nature with the most vital and pri-
mary truths of the gospel, and sought to
enlist God’s people in the same work. And
he did succeed extensively in this great work
of his life. God gave him grace to keep
this end in view, and steadily to pursue it by
all scriptural means, and the Author of his
zeal crowned it with abundant fruits. His
ministry was a proof that it is not a few truths
only that God uses to awaken and convert
souls. Some have faith in but a few truths
as conductors of saving power ; but surely
the saving results of ministries’so doctrinally
different as those of Edwards and Whitfield,
on the one side, and those of the Wesleys
and their followers on the other, should teach
us that quite as much depends on the spirit
as on the letter of the ministry. Some sub-
stances are better conductors than others ;
but most will conduct where the battery is
highly charged. All experience shows that
the moral nature may be approached from
various sides, and awakened by various truths


—the most potent undoubtedly being those
most vitally connected with the cross of
Christ. Every truth Dr. Leifchild wielded,
whether touching man’s responsibility or pri-
vilege, or the goodness and severity of God,
proved a rod of power to smite rocky hearts
and cause streams to flow. He studied the
art of preaching as few men did ; he aimed
directly at present and saving effects, and
became wise in winning souls. His earnest
powerful nature, with all its force and ac-
quisitions, was thrown into the effort in. every
sermon, that by any means he might save
some. Eor this he studied, prayed and lived.
In this he co-operated with that blessed
Spirit whom Jesus promised to send to take
of the things of himself—the efficacy of his
blood, the divinity of his person, the reality
of his love—to show them to his people and
to convince the world of sin, righteousness,
and judgment. He sought to be the Spirit’s
instrument in effecting the regeneration of
depraved souls; and that Spirit, who is
equally love with the Father and the Son,
filled him with his influence, winged his
words, and gave him the desire of his heart.
He acknowledged that divine agent’s indis-
pensable aid in conversion, and sought in
every available way to secure it; and he


was often so filled with the Spirit that it
looked in his case as if the of prophetic
inspiration had returned.
He was a man of power ; —power to carry
truth deep into the souls of men ; —power
to rebuke levity, pierce impenitence, quicken
torpor, strengthen weakness; —power to
shake sin’s strongholds with giant strokes,
and to lead trembling souls to approach and
yield themselves to God at the blood-sprinkled
mercy-seat. He esteemed polish, but he
panted for power. He did not despise lite-
rature ; but he sought with all his seeking
to be “mighty in the scriptures.” He could
admire the art that evokes forms of beauty
from dead stone; but his enthusiasm burned
for the power to turn stone to flesh—to
awake the sleepless energies of holy thought
and love in deathless minds. He drank into
the spirit of Christ—the spirit of power and
of love and of a sound mind. Oh, for such
men of God in all the pulpits of our land
to preach with the Holy Ghost and with
power! Amen.


THE COURSE FINISHED.
“ I HAVE EOHGHT A GOOD EIGHT, I HAVE EIHISHED MY
COHESB, I HAVE KEPT THE EAITH.” 2 Tim. iv. 7.
Secondly : —“ I have finished my course.”
In the foot-race, so celebrated in the Greek
games, the course was marked out with great
exactness for the runners. The competitors
did not choose the course for themselves, nor
did they prescribe the conditions or prize of
victory; though it lay at their own choice
whether to run or not. They submitted to
arrangements ; and perfect compliance was
their aim. So it must be in the Christian
course. By faith we must start from the
cross; by obedience we must observe the
fixed rules of gospel holiness, if we would
win the crown of eternal life. Paul, there-
fore, exhorted the Hebrew Christians to run
with patience the race set before them, laying
aside every weight, and easily besetting and
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher
of faith. He himself acted constantly on
the principle that, he that contendeth for
masteries is not crowned, except he contend


lawfully, and therefore he was temperate in
all things.
This Christian course, with its essential
conditions and glorious prize, is ever the
same. The laws of God’s kingdom of grace
are as stedfast as the laws of his kingdom of
nature. We might as wisely expect to un-
hinge the earth from its axis by a wish, as
expect to inherit a holy heaven without
true holiness of heart and life. God’s own
Son trod this course ; and all wdio will in-
herit his glory must’ follow in his steps.
But not only is the course in general, as to
the principles and conduct of the Christian
life, “ set before us; ” God has also set before
each of us a specific course of circumstances,
in which these principles are to be exercised
and holy character formed. In other words
God has a special work for every child of
his to do, and a special providence over him
in the doing of it. The divine perfections,
the nature of the case, as well as the plainest
language of holy scripture, demand our be-
lief in this truth. God from eternity fore-
knew all beings and events to come on the
stage of time. The mighty multitudes of
men and their actions lie easily open to his
alhseeing eye. Bor our limited minds this
is a difficult conception; but surely if an


earthly father knows all his children, the
Omniscient Father is not ignorant of any
of his. If the human mechanist knows all
the parts that contribute to the motion of a
complex machine ; if the sailor can, in the
dark, make his way to any rope in the ship ;
surely, surely God must know all parts of
this, to us complex, system. All good that
is done he inspires and approves; he, as the
All-knowing One, must have graciously pur-
posed it, though equally purposing to leave
men free in its performance. His sovereign
wisdom and power, therefore, as the Iduler
and Judge of all the earth, demand that
there be a given course for each servant of
his. And does not his love equally demand
it ? Shall the Great Father alone have no
pre-arrangements for his obedient children ?
Ah ! his infinite paternal love has numbered
the very hairs of their head, and in his hand
are all their ways. Hot merely by general
arrangements, but with minute affection, he
has fixed the bounds of their habitation and
mingled their cup. Our slowness to believe
in a minute and loving providence arises
from our slowness to realize the perfections
of our Father in heaven. Yet surely the
nature of the case demands that we believe
in a special providence ; for as the whole is


made up of parts, as has been often argued,
a general providence is made up of special
ones. Do away with the latter and the for-
mer dissolves into the thin air of abstraction
and nonentity. If omniscience does not
literally number every hair, it ceases to be
omniscient ; and so you may minify it
down to the compass of human igno-
rance. If God is the creator of every man,
then he has measured out and tempered
the faculties of each; and if he be the
God of providence, be has mapped out the
course through which each is to pass in his
discipline for eternity. Ido not make God
the author or ordainer of evil, or of his
people’s mistakes and blunders; but God is
the author of all good, and has a path of
light and love for every Christian to walk
in, if his feet obediently keep the path which
God has prescribed. The precepts, promises,
and narratives of God’s word so repeatedly
teach this, and with such emphasis, that I
forbear to quote passages so well known to
you all. Indeed the doctrine of a special
providence over his people w r as one of the
most prominent characteristics of the teach-
ing of Him, who came from the bosom of
the Father to reveal him to the world.
Paul strongly felt the fact that God had


prescribed a course of action for him—
“ When it pleased God, who separated me
from my mother’s womb, and called me by
his grace, to reveal his Son in me that I
might preach him among the Gentiles.”
The whole history of the Lord’s dealings
with him confirms this belief, that God ar-
ranged the circumstances of his natural and
spiritual birth and the course of his Christian
life. It is true his will was free, and he
often purposed lines of action in carrying
out the will of the Lord ; yet he always
purposed on the pre-supposition that that act
was in the divine fore-sketch of his life.
Hence when, in the third chapter of his
epistle to the Philippians, he opens up the
deepest aspiration of his spirit, it is— <f That,
I may lay hold on that, for which I also have
been laid hold of by Christ Jesus.” He knew
the great Captain of Salvation had in his
mind the grand idea of the whole campaign,
that shall eud in the subjugation of the
world, and that he had in his mind the idea
of the life, and every act of service in the
life, of every soldier of the cross. Christ’s
purpose concerning him he knew must be
wise and good ; and he therefore aimed to
see its disclosure and realize it from day to
day. Faith in this truth makes each life an


intelligent part of a predestined whole. It
gives grandeur to little things. It inspires
dignity and contentment. It is the very
back-bone of service to God. We are all
ready to concede, indeed, that such a life as
Paul’s was worthy of God’s predestination ;
but hesitate in thinking the same of our
own. But what are great and little to the
Infinite P Did not he make the one as well
as the other ? And as to utility: is not the
brook of the meadow as needful, in its de-
gree, as is the “ father of waters ?” Is not
the lamp that lights the alley needful as the
lighthouse ? Are not peasants’ gardens as
needful in their way as princely model-
farms ? Oh, I rejoice to think how God has
a work for the crossing-sweeper as well as
for the prince, for Lydia as well as Peter,
for you as well as for Dr. Leifchild. I love to
hear His voice in the rippling brook, that
writes its annals in serpentine verdure ; and
in the grasshopper that sings in the grass,
and in the lark that mounts and sings to
heaven’s gate. The Great Father has a
work of holy love for every child to do ;
and His eye and heart are on him in the
doing it.
My pious predecessor had strong faith
in a special providence, as his beautiful little


treatise on the subject shows. Indeed few
men ever marked the hand of God more
carefully or thankfully in fixing his lot.
His course was long, laborious, and honour-
able ; and was signally marked and crowned
with mercies.
Let us glance at its several stages ; and,
while we can only glance at them, let us
note one or two events in each.
He was born at Barnet in the year 1780.
His parents were both devotedly pious mem-
bers of the Wesleyan body. His father
was an earnest local preacher ; and, having
reared a family of three daughters and two
sons, died in the full triumph of faith, under
the roof of his eldest son, John, in Kensing-
ton. The Doctor gives a touching account
of his father’s character and last days in
his “ Selection of Hemarkable Facts.” He
says —“Thus fell, in the seventy-first year
of his age, one whom to know was to love;
and who has left a testimony to his worth in
the bosoms of all those who were intimately
acquainted with him, that no time or change
can ever obliterate.” His mother also was
evidently a strong-minded Christian of large
and loving heart.* In the work last alluded
* Several interesting facts of Dr. Leifchild’s early days are given
in—“ John Leifchild, D.D. A Sketch. By James Baldwin Brown.”
It is a loving sketch of his eminent relative, and executed with


to there is a narrative which gives an in-
teresting insight into the youthful John
Leifchild’s early days, and in which his
mother is introduced :
“When about seventeen years of age, I left home
for the metropolis, where from too close application
to my pursuits, and the want of country air, I lost
my health, and soon fell into a state of extreme
debility, with all the threatening symptoms of
consumption or decline. Medical aid seemed un-
availing, and but slender hopes were entertained for
my life. In this condition, I was brought back
to breathe my native air, and to experience the
unparalleled tenderness of a mother’s love. I well
rememember how shocked they all were at my
altered appearance, and how the hushed exclama-
tions of my beloved parents increased my own
apprehensions of danger.
“Strictly speaking, I had at that time no religious
character, although I was no stranger to prayer and
the scriptures, and had been, when in health, a
regular attendant on the outward means and ordi-
nances of Christianity. Now, however, my thoughts
were chiefly occupied with my bodily condition, and
the best means of restoring my lost strength. One
morning as I was sitting as usual in my sick
chamber, ruminating on the bare possibility of my
recoverv, my dear mother entered the room, and I
heard the sighs that escaped her, as she looked
anxiously into my face. The Bible was lying before
Mr. Brown’s sagacious insight and masterly touch, I trust both
Mr. Brown’s sketch and my sermon may help but to whet the
desire of their readers for the forthcoming Autobiography of
Dr. Leifchild, by his son, Rev. John R. Leifchild,


me, and as I glanced on its open page, my eye was
arrested by a passage that came to my heart at that
instant with a power not to be described. With a
strength of voice that startled my dear parent, I
cried out, ‘Oh ! mother, I shall recover ! See here
it is written;’ and I pointed to the memorable words
which were then sealed upon my heart in the 17th
verse of the 118th Psalm—‘ I shall not die hut live,
and declare the works of the Lord ! ’
“For a moment she caught the feeling that in-
spired me, but soon shook her head in doubt and
sadness. To her surprise, however, and my own, for
the first time since several months, I felt my appe-
tite returning; and that every day gained strength
enough to bear being carried out into the garden,
where I distinctly remember the reviving scent of
the fresh turned mould which I was encouraged
to inhale. I slept the following night as I had
not done for weeks, and step by step grew again
into vigour and manhood to pursue my appointed
course.
“I need not say that at that time I had not the
remotest idea of ever becoming a teacher of Divine
truth. It was enough for me, then, that the power
of God’s Word rested on my spirit and increasingly
influenced my life. Several years had to pass away
with their various experiences of sorrow and of joy,
before the premonition of my youth was completely
fulfilled by my dedication to the work of the Chris-
tian ministry. From that time forth it was the
honour and privilege, as well as the delight, of my
prolonged life, publicly to ‘ declare the works of
the Lord .’ To this day that passage always looks
to me as if an angel pointed to it with his radiant
finger, and surrounded it with a halo of glory ! ”


He married early; and, as he sometimes
said, was a husband, a father, a widower,
and childless, in one short year. The claims
of the Christian ministry revived in his dark
night of sorrow ; but as his views of doc-
trine and church order had become changed
from those of strict Wesleyanism, even his
favourite preacher, Bev. Jabez Bunting,
thought he would be happier in another
connexion. At the invitation, and under
the auspices, of Thomas Wilson, Esq., he
entered Hoxton Academy, to study for the
ministry among the Congregationalists. This
ministry was undoubtedly most conducive to
the fulfilment of his course ; yet we cannot
but be grateful that he commenced his
Christian life among the Methodists. Among
them he learnt the free, fervent utterance,
so characteristic of Methodism ; among them
he cultivated that Christian experience, that
assurance of faith, that working piety, that
direct appeal to heart and conscience, that
direct effort for conversions, which after-
wards were such elements of his ministerial
power. We do not say he would not have
had them in some degree in whatever sec-
tion of the Christian church he had been
converted; but, undoubtedly, the Method-
ism of seventy years ago was an admirable


school for their nurture. For his Wesleyan
brethren he often afterwards preached, and
with several of their ministers, especially
Doctor Bunting, was on terms of fraternal
intimacy. His nature was broad enough for
the excellencies of half-a-dozen denomina-
tions. His being led to study in Hoxton
Academy was one of the greatest blessings
of his life. It gave him help and leisure for
exact, consecutive thought, and for storing
his mind with materials for his future work.
His strong active intellect thirsted for truth,
as much as his heart craved emotion; and
his aim was to minister to mind as well as
heart, or, as his ripened judgment subse-
quently uttered itself; —“Wo to us, if a
complaint, recently made by some of our
American brethren, of a growing indisposi-
tion, on the part of many of their auditors, to
didactic and thoroughly instructive preach-
ing, and a preference for appeals at once to
the passions and sensibilities of their nature,
should ever become justly prevalent among
us. On what foundation, but the under-
standing, can truth be firmly placed in the
soul ? Through what other medium can it
enter into the mind, so as to live there,
and exert its salutary influence over all
the powers and operations of the heart?


Awake, then, your reason into vigorous exer-
cise.”
While in the academy, his reason was
trained to think, his heart was not less ex-
ercised to feel, on the great themes of the
gospel. He had not to bear the moral shock
of sudden transition from a church of high
temperature to a college below zero. Dry
roots or thin abstractions did not await the
soul that had for years fed on the flowery
pastures of Bible truth and fervent piety.
The president of the Hoxton Academy —its
theological tutor then—was Rev. Dr. Simp-
son, whose theology was as Calvinistic as his
piety was ardent. A most touching and
graphic tribute to his memory closes his
honoured pupil’s “ Remarkable Facts.” His
family devotions, his exalted character, his
paternal love for the students, his great suf-
ferings before death and his rapturous joy
in it, made indelible impressions on young
Leifchild.
While in the academy John Leifchild
was often invited to supply vacant pul-
pits ; and had more temptations to cut short
his collegiate studies than many young
prodigies, who have foolishly done so since.
He says —“ I myself was once in danger of
yielding to a temptation of this nature, and


when his (Dr. Simpson’s) consent was earn-
estly requested by the parties who had in-
vited me, his reply was in his own nervous,
homely style —‘ If he go, it shall be over
ray old body, for I will lay it down in his
path.’ ” That sentence for the student was
worth a hundred lectures ; it laid him under
life-long obligations.
His college terms completed, Mr. Leifchild
settled in Kensington, in his twenty-eighth
year, as minister of Hornton Street Chapel.
There he married Miss Stormonth, and there
he laboured for sixteen years, till, in 1824,
he removed to Bristol. While in Kensing-
ton his ministry was attended with remark-
able success ; and, among many young men
who used to attend from a distance, was
Edward Swaine, of Piccadilly; who, having
often heard him at Kensington, was subse-
quently one of his deacons for twenty-three
years at Craven Chapel. Over his ministry
for those sixteen years we must pass to make
way for his own account of the conversion,
during that period, of an obscure individual,
which led to happy results. He gives it
under the heading—■“ Marvels of Grace,” in
“ Kemarkable Facts,” pp. 149—53.
“He was by trade a shoemaker, and resided in
one of the narrow courts or alleys of the town.


Naturally lie was inoffensive and cheerful, and so
healthful and good-tempered that his neighbours
deeply lamented his association with dissolute and
profane companions. At the time I became first ac-
quainted with him he had already degenerated into
a notoriously had man. Two of his children were
brought into the Sunday-school that was established
in connexion with my chapel, the gratuitous teachers
in which were indefatigable, scripturally intelligent,
and zealously corncerned for the intellectual, moral,
and spiritual welfare of those committed to their
care. One Sabbath afternoon these were publicly
examined to test their proficiency, and their parents
and friends were invited to be present. By the per-
suasions of his favourite daughter, the father of
these two children was induced to attend. It was
the first time he had ever entered that place of wor-
ship, which was his abhorrence, on account of the
reformation there wrought in some of his dissolute
companions. He was astonished at the knowledge
which his own child had obtained, and gratified at
the commendations she received. As the company
were invited to attend again at the evening service,
he resolved to make one among the number. The
subject of the discourse happened to be singularly
appropriate. It was founded on that passage in the
Epistle of Jude, where the Apostle speaks of be-
lievers as ‘preserved in Christ Jesus, and called.’
The aim of the preacher was to expatiate on the
many recorded instances of the wonderful preserva-
tion of persons while in an unconverted state, who
afterwards became eminent for piety, and zeal in
promoting the conversion of others. The case of the
Rev. Mr. Cecil, which at that moment came sud-
denly to recollection, was introduced in illustration.


That excellent clergyman was thrown from his horse
on. the road just across the rut of a waggon, which
in passing crushed his hat and moved it away from
his head, without inflicting any injury on himself.
The attention of the new-comer was riveted. He
had in his youth been in a similar situation, un-
favoured however by so marvellous an escape,
having been much hurt by a cart-wheel which
passed over him, and rendered him a cripple for life.
When the question that followed the recital was ad-
dressed, and repeated, to any present who might
have experienced similar preservations while in an
unconverted state, as to the purpose for which they
had been preserved, whether to continue the ser-
vants of sin, or to become the servants of God ; and
when they were urged to answer it, as they would
at the judgment seat, he trembled, for he felt that
this question was addressed emphatically to him.
The evil of his past life rose with appalling vivid-
ness before him. His heart melted within him like
wax, and his eyes streamed with tears. That night
he passed in an anguish of remorse bordering on
despair. Afterwards he came again and again to
the house of God. Light broke in upon his mind by
degrees, and he sought and found salvation by faith
in Christ Jesus. Not only was he now remarked for
his constant attendance upon public worship, but for
the total change which had taken place in his
character and course of life. The drunkard became
sober, the profane began to fear an oath, and the
Sabbath-breaker to account ‘ the Sabbath a delight,
the holy of the Lord, and honourable.’ He was
admitted into Christian fellowship, to the surprise
of many, and not only he himself, but his whole
family, became worshippers of God at their own


abode as well as in the sanctuary. Of course general
observation was attracted to him, ridicule was un-
sparingly heaped upon him by his former boon com-
panions, and every method was resorted to which
malice could devise, to drive him from his determined
perseverance in his new and better ways. But all
this was in vain. The work was of God, and could
not be overthrown.
“ The beneficial influence of this happy change ex-
tended where it might have been least expected ; for
it broke down a wall of prejudice which had arisen
in the mind of the young Yicar of the place against
the nonconformists of his neighbourhood. Of their
minister he had formed the grossest misconception ;
and in his zeal to prevent defections from the parish
church, he himself called at the house of the indi-
vidual of whom lam now writing. He found him
engaged at his work in his truly humble abode, and
was received respectfully and deferentially. Upon
inquiring the reason of the shoemaker’s absence from
what he affirmed to be his proper place on the Lord’s
day, the Vicar received from him, while his eyes
streamed with tears, such an account of the trans-
formation which had taken place in him, and the
manner in which it had been wrought, as greatly
affected the prejudiced clergyman.
“ ‘ Oh, sir ! ’ said the poor man with deep emotion,
‘ what a change ! This room was once a little hell;
it is now a little heaven! ’
“ Shortly afterwards the Yicar called upon me, and
entered into familiar conversation with me on the
great truths of the gospel, evidently as the result of
the impression which the shoemaker’s wonderful con-
version had produced ; thenceforth his kindly feeling
towards me never declined, and this was the more


to be remarked on account of his high standing in
the episcopal church, as respected his learning, ora-
torical power, and zeal for God according to his
knowledge. He was comparatively young, but with
a magnanimous mind he had early determined to
appreciate truth and goodness wherever they were
found, and to follow them whithersoever they might
lead.”
11l 1824 Mr. Leifchild removed to Bristol,
where he remained till 1831. There his
ministry was also attended with evangelic
power; and, in addition to extensive useful-
ness, he enjoyed the society of that distin-
guished trio—Hall, Foster, and Thorpe. In
pure mental power and high literary polish
he was much the inferior of Foster and Hall;
but as to immediate ministerial usefulness
he was just as much their superior. His
powers were more concentrated on the work
of saving souls; and he aimed at it with a
force and directness for which neither, per-
haps, had the native ability or educational
aptitude. One of the most glorious sermons
of Dr. Leifchild’s ministry was preached, on
a most extraordinary occasion—to thousands
who had witnessed the execution of three
young men—while he resided at Bristol.
“ .Remarkable Facts,” pp. 280-4.
In 1831 Mr. Leifchild removed, at the
earnest call of the church in Craven Chapel,


to minister to the vast congregations which
already thronged that sanctuary. At a time
—his fiftieth year —when other men begin
to slacken effort, he buckled on his armour
for a new campaign,—the longest and most
brilliant of his life. For full three-and-twenty
years he ministered in Craven Chapel, often
to more than two thousand of an audience ;
but always to full congregations, till his voice
began to fail in his later years. If ever there
were an earnest and successful ministry, ac-
cording to the highest signification of these
words, it was his ministry during this, his
largest pastorate. He studied and prayed,
and read and lived to preach Christ, and
gather lost ones to Him. His journeying
to the provinces, on occasional services, were
of frequent recurrence and rich in fruits, and
his fame drew many strangers to hear him
in his stated sphere. Here he attained his
highest fame, both by his oral ministry and
by his books; for his ambition aimed at the
highest use of the pen and the power of the
press. With the pen, however, he did not
attain a power or celebrity equal to his pulpit
performances. This partial failure was com-
mon to him with other powerful extempore
speakers ; and he was by no means uncon-
scious of the fact and the causes of it. He


himself says, in his preface to his sermon on
the Christian Course —“ There is usually a
great difference between a sermon delivered
from the pulpit and one issuing from the
press. In the former case it possesses all the
advantages of the living voice, the associated
throng, the attentive eye and ear, and the
hymns of praise sung by glad voices, utter-
ing their sacred joy ; —of all these it is de-
prived when it comes calm and still from
the press.”
His written sentences—so correct and
neatly balanced—always convey important
truths or facts; but, when compared with
his electric utterances, they are feeble. They
have solidity and shape ; but the iron has
cooled after the casting. You cannot judge
from the solid lava, even though some fissures
in it reveal the burning deeps, what was its
grandeur when issuing from the glowing
volcano. From none of Dr. Leifchild’s books
—excellent though they be—can the reader
conceive what the preacher was, when his
great soul, instinct Avith holy emotions, light-
ened and thundered the truth on his hearers.
In Craven Chapel he reached, as we have said,
the climax of his power, fame, usefulness and
happiness ; and from it he retired like a
warrior from his crowning battle-field, or


like a victor from finishing his course. Of
this, however, I need not speak to you, who
knew him so well, and saw him rejoicing as a
strong man to run his race. An appreciative
people and a generous public, on his resig-
nation, presented him with two thousand
guineas at his valedictory service, with a view
to add comfort to his declining years. But
even then his public race was not concluded ;
for he had a ministry to fulfil in the new and
beautiful chapel in Queen’s Square, Brighton,
where he laid the foundation of a now flour-
ishing church and overflowing congregation.
Failing strength caused him to resign the
oversight of that flock and retire to the
suburban residence, where he so lately closed
his course on earth.
I have failed, I fear, to give you my idea
of his course. How long, how laborious,
how brilliant it was, some of you, who knew
him the last forty years, can better tell than
I. He girded himself manfully and in the
strength of the Lord for it; he ran it vigi-
lantly and well, as under the eye of the
great cloud of witnesses, in presence of his
Lord and in sight of the crown of glory
that fadeth not away. He far out-distanced
most of his contemporaries, both in holiness
and usefulness. We shall by-and-by say


something of how he finished his course.
But, oh, how great is that glory, how high
that society, into which he has now entered
among his fellow-victors in heaven !
Thirdly: How he kept the faith we shall
let his dying hours disclose.
The time drew on when his powerful
frame and astonishing vitality could rally
no longer from the pressure of years and the
repeated attacks of disease; yet, in his 81st
year, he began a new common-place book,
and greatly relished reading, or having read
to him, the best authors. When released
from the studies and responsibilities of the
public ministry his powers had freer play,
and the breadth and geniality of his nature
shone beautifully forth in his green old ago.
The devoted affection of his son and his
niece blessed his home ; and, whenever he
went abroad, his old friends and his children
in Christ showered respect and benediction
on his venerable head. His admiration and
love of God’s works grew with his years.
His last little tour into the country was to
Norwood, in the spring before his death.
He often desired to be taken out to the
sweet little garden of the house where he
lodged; and there, with more than the fresh-
ness of childhood’s delight, he marked the


opening flowers and listened to the songs
of the birds; and, as he did so, lifted his
thoughts to a. brighter world and sweeter
songs. He delighted when happy to “ sing
psalms.” When I lately visited Maple Dur-
ham, in company with friends who had been
with him there some two years since, they
pointed out the spot where he looked with
rapture on the setting sun, and got them all
to sing hymn after hymn, his own voice
leading, and his whole countenance beaming
with expression. When drawn out in his
bath-chair, he generally brought home some
wild flowers, on whose delicate beauties he
would dwell with devout admiration. Often
in these airings he would fall into conversa-
tion with some stranger or friend, into whose
heart he would seek to drop seeds of holy
thought. When last he was out on Primrose
Hill, a school of little girls were there at
play. He soon had a circle of them around
him, putting to them riddles, getting them
to sing, and finally telling them anecdotes
and colloquially preaching Christ. They
were charmed with the dear old man, as if
in him each orphan had found a father : so
sweet, so beneficent was his declining sun.
His niece, —to whom it was given to minister
to him, with remarkable tact and tenderness.


and whose invaluable notes of his last days,
will yet, I trust, be published,—says, “In
him there appeared absolute trust and con-
fidence in God, which came forth in child-like
expression. There was constant spontaneous
reference to God, and aptness to praise in
the minutest things. To the end he culti-
vated bright, cheerful views of things. His
life in God was so manifest, that in thinking
of him it seems impossible to dissociate a
single act of his from the Great Being in
whom, through whom, and to whom he lived.
All he did, 'purposed, desired, and enjoyed, was
in and with God. He delighted in uttering
—‘ Whose lam and whom I serve.’ One
text in the Psalms, he said, he could never
make his own —‘ I thought of God and was
troubled.’ There was in his experience the
entire absence of doubt and fear, or question.
In that respect it was ‘perfect love.’ Yet
he delighted to maintain his communion
with the outer world. He had the deepest
sympathy for the widowed Queen ; and was
greatly interested in the affairs of Italy and
America. He took pleasure in ‘ rubbing
up his Greek ’ by teaching ; and gave
Gerard lessons in elocution, teaching him
how to read Milton. On Sunday, March 30th,
I left dear uncle alone while I went to chapel.


On my return, he said, ‘ I felt solitary and
was going to hang my harp on the willows ;
but I thought, no I must hang it yonder :
And I heard the voice of harpers harping
on their harps; and I heard them sing;
and this was the strain ; —Jesus, the prince
of prophets; Jesus, the priest of all true
worshippers; Jesus, the mystic ladder of
ascent to the Deity; Jesus, one with the
Father, through the Divine Spirit —one God
for ever.’ Amen.”
On another occasion, quoting the words—
‘ I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee,’
he said, c And he never will. Oh, the glory
of his power ! In one moment he can dart
such energy into a human soul as shall make
it ready to go through fire and water to him.
What are we but channels through which
he acts? We must all be brought to that
one point— are you ready to go into
eternity to your Lord?’ On one occa-
sion he said:— ‘ Well! I shall soon know it
all; and I long to know it and see Grod ! I
can enter into John Foster’s intense yearn-
ings to pierce the veil—to stretch into the
invisible—the infinite.’
On Sunday, April Ist, he said—“ I awoke
this morning with an indescribable spring
of my heart to Grod, ‘ Oh, God, thou art my


God/ I cried, with a transport I had never
felt before. These are sweet days ; —my last
days are very sweet to me/
On the 21st of May, in his 79th year, his
brother, William Gerard Leifchild, died in
the peace and joy of his Lord. The death
of his only brother —and such a brother by
double bonds —deeply affected Dr. Leifchild.
His head bowed and his heart appeared to
sink. The stroke told awfully; but after a
while he raised his eyes and said, ‘ I shall
not mope, my God never made me to mope.
I will rejoice in Him.’
His own change of worlds was hastening
apace. The instincts of the divine life
within him were deeply stirring and craving
flioht to their native clime. His niece
O
writes :
“He said to Dr. S—, ‘ I think I have
taken a turn, but whether it is as a living
man here, or to be all life there, I do not
know. Do all the good you can ; live for
others, and God will make yon happy.’
“ He never omitted, till the last two days
(when his voice was gone), assembling the
household to family prayer, and engaging
himself. Lately thanksgiving was the pecu-
liar element of his spirit as displayed in
prayer. He never took the smallest article


of refreshment without a word of thanks.
Once, as I was trying to induce him to take
nourishment, he said, * Sit down and talk
about the bread of life. I see a great mean-
ing in Zechariah’s vision of the bowl/ He
then discoursed of free grace and the cove-
nant being for all nations.
“ On another occasion, when arousing from
a doze, he exclaimed, ‘ Great Comforter, de-
scend and bring some tokens of thy grace/
I said, ‘ You have had many sweet tokens
as you lay on this couch/ ‘Oh ! more than
I can ever describe or record. Not merely
rapture, hut peace and confidence. Satan has
not been permitted to disturb that for a
single moment. And yet I have had the
whole array of malignant spirits before me;
but I have defied them in Christ’s name.
Oh, the peace ! the peace ! Oh, that the
world could know it—the whole world ! But
I cannot tell them.’
“ Again : ‘ I do so like what A. H. says
of the religion of Christ being love, and
Christianity being designed to establish a
personal human affection between man and
God. It is true in my own experience. My
soul springs to God with an irrepressible
affection.’
Two nights before his departure he took


a most tender and cheerful farewell of his
son and niece; and sent by the latter the
following message to each of his brothers'’
children. ‘ Give my love to them, and say
from me —God is love. Live in love and it
shall be well with you; and remember part-
ing is not separation.’ Which message he
repeated thrice. Adding ‘ I cannot mention
all their names but say it to each.’
His last night on earth will never be for-
gotten by those who were with him. Though
he never closed his eyes, and displayed all
the restlessness of approaching change, bis
joy was overflowing. The spiritual world
appeared to open around him. He seemed to
be already ravished with the music of heaven,
crying out, ‘ What! don’t you hear it P don’t
you hear it ? Oh, those beautiful harps ! ’
A concourse of persons seemed to sur-
round him as he made his way to the golden
gates. After many expressions of realizing
faith and joy, that seemed full of glory, he
devoutly said, ‘ Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit.’
About two hours before he died, (June
29th, in his 82nd year) he called me to
him to write; and then, as if composing
or delivering a sermon, said— * First: Have
a great aim in life. Second: Try to please


Clod, —try to please God; ’ —adding in a per-
suasive tone — c Will you ? 5 On being an-
swered, ‘I will;’ be said, ‘that’s well,’
f Thirdly : Shine . That will do for the
present. Good night.’ ”
This was the great preacher’s last sermon.
Here was the ruling passion strong in death.
These were his last words. They spoke the
principles that underlaid his whole life. May
they come to our souls with all the weight
of his life and death, and by the power of
God’s blessed spirit.
“ Shine ■. Good night.” And he com-
posed himself to gentle slumbers through the
soft silent night that precedes the resurrec*
tion morning. Soon the placid, infant-like
smile of death settled on these worn but
massive features. Good night, thou man of
God, thou father in Israel! We say, good
night; but a voice hath said from the other
side the veil, “ Arise and shine, for thy light
is come, and the glory of the Lord hath arisen
on thee.” Amen.


Blfcuo
F (004Oh>
fc
