

THE
LAND LAWS OF IRELAND,
BY JOHN LYNCH.
A PAPEE EEAD BEPOEE THE BALLAEAT
ASSOCIATION, ON 7th AUGUST, 1882. CNI
:
LUPLAU, KENWOOD, & EIDER, PRINTERS, &c.. 20 STURT STREET.
MDCCCLXXXII.


'coy •


LAND LAWS OF IRELAND.
BY JOHN LYNCH.
A PAPEE BEAD BEFOKE THE BALLAEAT ECLECTIC
ASSOCIATION, ON 7th AUGUST, 1882.
PBICE : SIXPENCE.
sallarat:
LITPLAU, KENWOOD, & RIDER, PRINTERS, &c., 20 STURT STREET,
MDCCCLXXXII.




4' L '7 1
THE LAND LAWS OE IRELAND
JOHN LYNCH.
To understand the land laws of Ireland and their bearing
upon the social, political, and moral character of the people, we
must not confine ourselves to any one epoch of her history—we
must trace them up from that early period when the ancient
policy of the nation first felt the disturbing influence of external
and hostile interferences. It is by thus unfolding the sequence of
events that we can at all hope to apprehend the meaning of a
question surrounded with obscurity, difficulty, and danger.
The Irish mind has never yet become reconciled to the idea of
absolute ownership in land. The Feudal System, which vested that
ownership in a single person, has been certainly established there,
but that was only done through the agency of force, and not with
the consent of the people, who have always manifested their repug-
nance to it. According to ancient records, and these are abund-
ant, the laws regulating property in Ireland were essentially
different to those which obtain now and since the establishment of
feudalism in the other parts of the British Empire. The succession
to property was treated in manner similar to that which was em-
ployed in settling the succession to the throne and high offices of
state. Election, in all cases, was the mode resorted to. During the
lifetime of the reigning head, his brother, son, or
nearest of kin was elected to succeed him—sometimes heredity
was disregarded, and some aspirant who had courted and w;on
popular favor was raised to the supreme dignity.
The successor thus appointed, the tribal Caesar, was called
“Tanist.” Outside the higher offices the good things of life were
regulated by a custom called “ gavel-kind ; ” this custom was not
peculiar to Ireland, for it prevailed among the primitive Teutons
and Celts alike. Under it property, on the death of a chief, was


divided equally between all the sons —some extra privileges and
immunities were reserved to the eldest in consideration of the dignity
and authority he was called upon to maintain. If the chief died
without male issue, then the property was divided amongst the
nearest male relatives, and if a tenant or obscure member of the
tribe died his property was divided in the same manner among the
members of the tribe. In all cases females were excluded from
inheritance, but not illegitimate children, between whom and those
lawfully begotten there does not appear to have been any social
difference. As property is the chief bond of society, the mode of its
distribution herein cursorily sketched must appear to our modern
notions provocative of danger to peace and industry, yet, it must
havo harmonised with the genius of the people, and. answered all
their requirements, seeing that it had subsisted for 15 centuries,
and that it was everywhere abolished by the strong arm of
adverse power, against the wishes of the masses, who, in song and
legend, revere its memory to this day.
In the middle of the twelfth century a grant of the Island was
made by Pope Adrian IV. to Henry 11. the Norman King of England.
This would have assuredly been a magnificent donation had the gift
been his own, but seeing that it was not, and that its bestowal, under
false and flimsy pretexts, was but a wanton exercise of usurped
authority, the Act must be regarded as one of colossal iniquity.
By it the liberties of an ancient and highly civilised nation were
sacrificed, and a deluge of woes entailed upon untold generations.
The people to whom this tempting gift was tendered were the
descendants of those filibusterers who, a century before, had in-
vaded England, and in one disastrous battle overthrew its mon-
archy, and subjugated its inhabitants to cruel bondage, which
lasted for a space of at least four hundred years. These valiant
marauders were, as usual, successful at the first onset—they se-
cured a firm foothold in that portion of territory known as the
“ Pale” and comprising about half the area now comprehended
within the present counties of Meath, Kildare, Dublin, and Wex-
ford. Their subsequent advances were not so fortunate. They
often met with resistance as stubborn as their own, and had it
been as well sustained as theirs, and not fitful and irregular, the
destinies of Ireland might have been in reality, what the fancy of
the poet wished them to be, “great, glorious, and free.” As it
was, the accession of Henry VIII. found the brigands only in pos-
session of the spoils won in the first irruption, and sorely pressed
to preserve even them. Outside the Pale, and beyond the
limits of those ill-fated marches which so often witnessed the
dashing razzia of the invader, and his sullen retreat, the ancient
management continued in force, whilst within the Pale, and
throughout the contested borders surrounding it, the tenure was


that of a semi-military occupation. In the reign of Philip and
Mary some considerable acquisitions were made by the annexation
of the King’s and Queen’s counties, which still owe their bap-
tismal names to the royal favor of those austere and morose
monarchs. Under Elizabeth, the counties of Cork, Kerry, Lime-
rick, and Waterford —the extensive regions which acknowledged
the lordly sway of the great Earl of Desmond—were confiscated and
given away to Her Majesty’s favorites, among whom were the
enterprising Raleigh, and the author of that poetical rhapsody,
“ The Faery Queene.” In the next reign, the principality of the
O’Neil in the north, comprising the present counties of Armagh,
Tyrone, Derry, Donegal, Fermanagh, and Cavan, were declared
forfeited to the Crown, and that new settlement resorted to which
is called the plantation of Ulster. Under Cromwell extensive
tracts in Munster, Ulster, and Leinster were confiscated and dis-
tributed amongst the military saints that followed the banner of
the Protector. The main object which Cromwell had in view was
to obtain money for the payment of his army, which the Parlia-
ment of England was about to disband. Accordingly debentures
were sold for 4s, and ss. per £l, and 20s. worth of debentures
would purchase two acres of land. The arable land in Ireland, at
that time, was estimated at 8 million acres, and at the above rate
of purchase the whole of it could be obtained for one million of
money. The extent of arable land was not then as large as it is
now, but, even then, it was greatly under-estimated. Its super-
ficial area is about 21 million acres j of this area there is at least
12 arable, 3 of bogs, capable of reclamation and of being brought
to a high state of fertility, and, probably, 3 more of mountain and
waste land which could, by drainage and other processes, he
brought under cultivation, or at least made useful for pasturage.
No statesman of his time had more intimate knowledge of the
affairs of his country than John Fitzgibbon, Earl of Clare, and the
following is his estimate of the forfeitures up to and ending with
the Revolution of 1688, as stated in his celebrated speech on the
question of Union :
Acres.
The whole of Ulster ... ... ... ... ••• 2,836,837
Set out by the Court of Claims at the Restoration ... 7,800,000
Forfeitures in connection with the Revolution ... 1,060,792
T0ta1—11,697,62$
Apart from documentary evidence, a good idea may be ob-
tained of the thorough character of those clearances from the fact
that only three of the ancient ruling families were left in possession
of even small portions of their hereditary domains—these were
O’Neil, in Ulster; Kavanagh, in Meath; and O’Brien, in Clare.
Cromwell, before finally disposing of the lands, had them surveyed,


and valued in suitable lots ; then the several regiments, troops,
companies, etc., cast lots in the prescribed order, and when this
procedure was completed, and their allotments registered in
the regimental books, they gave up their debentures. In
order the better to secure these ricketty titles, the former owners
were compelled to effect conveyances in favour of the newly-
installed proprietors, after which they were told that they might
betake themselves to Connaught, or some remoter and hotter
place of abode whose limits are not yet very strictly defined. The
gentleman to whom the survey of those lands was entrusted was
William Petty. He seems to have been blessed with a large share of
worldly prudence and versatility of talent. His first appearance on
the scene was in the capacity of surgeon—for his services he re-
ceived the sum of £1 per day, and he spent five years in the practice
of that honorable and useful profession. At the end of that term he
seems to have discovered that he had, as regarded his personal
prospects, mistook his calling, and that, however eminent his ser-
vices might have been in healing infirm bodies, a wider scope for
usefulness awaited him as surveyor-general of all the lands won by
the sword of the British Joshua from the unregenerate Canaanites.
He was appointed, and he improved the occasion so well, that in
a short time he realized £l3 000, which he invested in soldiers’
debentures, whei’eby he became owner of 50,000 acres in Kerry,
and of property in other parts worth, at that time, £3,100 more,
and, with these acquisitions to begin with, laid the foundation of
the fortunes of the noble House of Landsdowne. It was stated that
the confiscations at the Revolution amounted to over one million
of acres. In rewarding his friends at the expense of his enemies,
the “ Deliverer” was by no means remiss. The prodigality with
which he showered favors on some of his adherents was by no
means relished by other expectants, and indeed to such a height did
discontent arise that an Act of Parliament was passed resuming the
lands so granted, and directing a public sale of such of them as
belonged to the late King James 11. Out of 76 grants which passed
the great seal there were 8 which attracted adverse notice :
135,820 acres to Lord Woodstock (Van Benteck)
108,633 ~ ~ Lord Albermarle (Keppel)
95,649 ~ ~ Countess of Orkney (Mrs. Yilliers), this lady was
a great favorite
49,517 „ ~ Lord Eomney (Sidney)
39,871 ~ ~ Lord Eochfort (Zuleistein)
36,148 „ ~ Lord Galway (Euvigny)
30,512 „ ~ Marquis de Puizai
26,480 „ „ Earl of Athlone (Ginkle)
522,630
I believe all these grantees, except one or two, were Dutchmen.


We see then, that in the space of 1 40 years, that is, from the
reign of Philip and Mary to that of William, there were no less
than two partial and two general confiscations of the national pro-
perty. Such despoilments, of course, suggest modes of action and
conduct .in keeping with the passions that prompted them. The
evidence on this head is complete. The barbarities that were de-
liberately practised would stagger belief, had we not the testimony
of the perpetrators themselves to silence incredulity. Gladly would
I have avoided this painful subject, had I not thought reference to
it necessary to maintain the connection which I have in view.
Besides, I do not apprehend that any retrospection of the crimes
and follies of people that have passed away more than two
centuries ago can give any offence now. Lord-Deputy Mountjoy,
writing to the Secretary of State in Elizabeth’s time, complacently
tells him that his raids have been so successful that he has left
nothing behind him but “ caraasses and ashes. ’ In 1644, an Act
of Parliament sets forth that “no quarter is to be given to an
Irishman, or any one born there. A. Puritan officer, Gol,
Lichbourne, writes to say that there was neither man nor beast
between Drogheda and Dundalk, or nearer than Carrickmacross,
•Sir William Cole tells us that he “ caused to be slain in a short
period, 2400 swordmen, and 7000 of the vulgar sort.” Cromwell
in 1649 issued an order “that no mercy be shown the Irish, but
that they should be dealt with as the Canaanites in Joshua’s
time.” On one occasion this hero of the moralist Carlyle pro-
mised quarter, but broke his promise, and in giving an account
of the transaction to the Parliament exults in his perfidy. 300
women and children had taken refuge in the Church of Drogheda,
and he ordered them to be s'aughtered without mercy. Sir Wm.
Parsons advised the burning of all the corn, and Sir Adam Loftus
approved the advice, saying that it was a common practice in the
time of Elizabeth, and’ that its object was to make the enemy
devour one another. Of course, all the horrors of famine and
pestilence followed upon the other deeds of desolation. Colonel
Laurance, a Puritan historian, says— “ I have seen these miserable
creatures plucking stinking carrion out of a ditch, black and
rotten, and have been credibly informed they digged corpses out of
the graves to eat.” Borlase avers that, in 1654, 27,000 were
banished, either hunted into servitude in England, or transported
to the West Indies or America as slaves. Ludlow, one of the
regicides, states in his memoir, that he knew of an instance in which
a number of frightened creatures secreted themselves in a cave to
avoid the soldiers on their march from Dundalk to Castleblaney,
but wmre discovered, and smothered by his men lighting fires at its
mouth. It will be seen from this that Pelessier was but a poor
copyist after all. Sometimes the wearisomeness of the heavy


tragedy business used to be laid aside for lighter play. Here is an
exquisite piece of acting, in which cant and pharisaism are play-
fully commingled with the more serious incidents of the plot—Sir
Wm. Herbert writing to Burleigh, in 1588, says—“ Our pretext in
the enterprise of plantation was to establish in those parts piety,
justice, civility, and comfort—our drift now is, being possessed of
the land, to extort and make the state of things turbulent, and to
live by prey and pay.” Tired at last of those appalling cruelties,
and dissatisfied with the tardiness of the depletion, Clarendon in-
forms us that they hit upon a more summary device, which they
called an act of grace, and this was to banish them into the wilds
of Connaught, whither they were ordered to betake themselves be-
fore a certain day, on pain of being killed by any person who met
or saw them in any other part of the Island after that day. I
leave this disagreeable episode now, merely remarking in the words
of Lord Clai’e, that those lurid deeds were not a true reflex of the
character of the nation in whose name they were inflicted, but
were the work of a colony composed of the various sects which in-
fested that nation, such as Anabaptists, Socinians, Brownists,
Muggletonians, Millenarians, Fifth Monarchy men, et hoc genus
omne. From this motley crew is descended many of the ruling
families of Ireland to-day—powerful landlords and legislators.
The fatal attachment which the deluded Irish always
evinced towards the perfidious house of Stuart buoyed up many a
sinking heart with the hope that should the exiled Charles be ever
restored to the throne, their fidelity would be rewarded. But those
hopes proved illusory, for when the royal profligate was restored,
he not only forgot his obligations, but enforced the severe ordi-
nances lately made against them, and confirmed the regicide soldiers,
and the adventurers who had advanced money to carry on the
wars, in the possession of their newly acquired lands, houses,
immunities, and privileges. But a footing thus acquired could not
be looked upon as secure. Notwithstanding the sweeping efforts
made to extirpate the native race enough sffill remained to en-
gender disquietude. The new comers, therefore, sought for another
auxiliary, and found it in the safeguards of legal enactments.
Through that agency the natives were degraded to lives of hopeless
toil. The cultivation of the land for their masters, and the drudgery
of all the menial offices were to be their future lot; around them were
woven an intricate network of harassing and disabling restrictions,
which were the fit prelude to that draconic assemblage of enact-
ments known as the penals laws of William, Anne, and the two
first Georges.
In speaking of the native population, it might be as
well to guard here againt an egregious, but very common error.
It is commonly supposed that this has been exclusively confined


to the aboriginal stock. This is not the case. There is, perhaps, no
population more mixed than that of Ireland. In many cases the
aboriginal stock is in a decided minority, and it was so in those days
in parts of the country where persecution was most rampant. It
may be reasonably asked here how it occurred that if the depopu-
lation was so thorough, it was so soon replenished as to cause
apprehension. The explanation is to be found in the fact that vast
numbers of the expatriated were re-admitted. They were admitted,
not from love or kindness, but from cupidity. Land was worthless
without labor, and the conqueror would not stoop to predial pur-
suits. Experience had taught him that no man would sell his
labor at so cheap a rate as the indigenous outcast, and
that with fair play there could not be found a
more valuable tenant. Were it,otherwise, his banishment would
have been perpetual. The truth of this statement is clear from
the testimony of English officers, and of the landholders themselves.
When the Pale was first planted in the x’eign of Henry the 11.
and his successors, not an acre of freehold was left within its con-
fines to the aboriginal residents; yet, in the reign of Henry the
VIII, “ the greater part of the English tenants avoided their lands,
which were for the most part occupied with Irish folk and Irish
tenants.” In the reign of Elizabeth, according to Lord-Deputy
Grev, “ the great men had grants made to them at first by the
kings of England in regard that they should keep out the Irish,
but now, instead of keeping out the Irish, they do not only make
the Irish their tenants on those lands and thrust out the English,
but also some of themselves become more Irish.” When the
Desmond estates were forfeited there was another effort made to
plant them with English settlers, but Payne, an active agent in
the work of appropriation, tells that “ The worsen sort of under-,
takers have much hurt the country, and discouraged many from
the voyage. They will not let the land for any term above 21
years, or three lives, and they demand for rent 12 pence per acre.
They find much profit from the Irish tenants, who give them the
fourth sheaf of all their corn, and 16 pence yearly for a beasts
grass, besides divers other accustomed duties, so that they care not
if they never place an Englishman there.” Again, “ But the better
sort of undertakers, being many good knights and gentlemen of
great worship, do seek by all possible means to plant the lands
with English, more according to the meaning of her majesty s grant.
They offer any man 300 acres by lease for 100 years for 6 pence an
acre without fine.” Notwithstanding these encouraging terms, the
English settlers had not thriven, and the Irish were found to be
more profitable, and, consequently, succeeded to the tenancy of the
greater portion of the lands. The ownership, however, remained
undisturbed. In the reign of James I. a similar state of things


obtained in Ulster, as regards the disposition of the O’Neil for-
feitures. Captain Pynnar, in his survey of Ulster says : —“ There
are five of the properties assigned to the several London companies
which are not yet estated to any man, but are in the hands of
agents, who, finding the Irish more profitable than the British ten-
ants, are unwilling to draw on the British.” In regard to the areas
granted to the Ironmongers’ and Mercers’ Companys, the same
officer reports : —“ Here is an infinite number of Irish upon the
land which give such great rents that the English cannot get any
land; again, the tenants pay such dear rates for the land that
they are forced to take Irish tenants under them to pay the rents.”
In the next reign the agent of the London Corporation, Sir T.
Philips, complains to Charles I. “that they (the Londoners)
have omitted the principal point of their grafit, which concerned
the safety of the country—the fundamental point being the
avoiding of natives, and planting wholly with British; but they
found that the natives willing to overgive rather than remove,
and they cannot reap half the profits by the British which
they do by the Irish, whom they use at their pleasure.”
These facts culled here and there from numerous entries
of a like kind, should-leave no doubt on the mind of any
impartial hearer that the tales invented about the unthriftiness
of the Irish tenantry are the result of wrong impressions, or
worse still, malignant fabrications. I think, however, that it
would be safe to admit, that, as a general rule, the land in Ulster
is better cultivated than it is in most other parts of the country,
but this, if correct, would prove nothing more than that the en-
couragement given by the planters and their descendants has borne
fruit, and has not arisen from any superiority of one clasp over
another. This is further corroborated by the fact that in Antrim,
Down, and Monaghan, counties not included in the forfeitures, and
which remained for the most part in possession of the original
inhabitants, are, and have been, at least as well managed as those
entrusted to the British settler. Were I desirous of making out a
plea for the superiority of the Irish agriculturalist, I could adduce,
abundant proofs in the account given by Arthur Young himself,
one of the most scientific agriculturalists of his day. His tour
through Ireland in 1776 is so full of valuable information
on the subject of land tenure that it is still referred to as a guide
in all discussions on the subject. He is unusually severe upon the
destructive method of treating the land under fiax cultivation in
the north, and says “ If I had an estate in the south of Ireland,
I would as soon introduce pestilence and famine as the
linen manufacture upon it, carried on as it is at present in
the north of that kingdom,” He further says, in reference to the
ill-considered, though oft-repeated taunt of irresolution on the


part of the small Irish cottier ; —“lt is evident from the whole
they are uncommon masters of the art of overcoming difficulties
by patience and perseverance. Give the farmer of 20 acres in
England no more capital than his compeer in Ireland, and I will
venture to say that he will be much poorer, for he would be utterly
unable to get on at all.”
Seeing that the Briton in his competition with the
Hibernian was not able to supplant the latter, a scheme was
set on foot to induce foreigners to come over to effect that
object by offering them naturalisation. In furtherance of this
scheme, 87 Palatine families, from Germany, were imported in
1700, and £24,850 voted from the revenue, for their, maintenance.
They were settled in various parts of the country as tenants and
laborers, and petted and fostered in the most indulgent manner.
For all that, the plan did not answer, the foreigners displayed few,
or none, of the special qualities imputed to them at a distance, much
less did they succeed in fulfilling the original design of expelling,
or crushing out the native population, Arthur Young, alluding to
this episode, says, “The poor Irish are very rarely treated well, and
when they are, they work much more greater improvements than
are common amongst the Germans. lam convinced that no
country, in whatever state it may be, can be improved by colonies
of foreigners.” Several subsequent experiments were made in the
same direction, but they all collapsed in dismal failure. It is a well-
known fact that an Irish tenant or laborer will cheerfully accept
conditions of living which no other person in his grade
of life will submit to, and that where he fails it is
useless for any one else to expect success. Notwithstanding,
however, manifest proofs of the Irishman s indomitability,
it is no less a fact that Ireland, in the matter of cultivation, is
behind England and Scotland, but the cause of this disparity is
easily found in the encouragement afforded to the tillers in the
sister kingdom, which has been denied to fellow labourers in
Ireland. Hitherto you will have observed that the regimen
applied has been violence in every degree and form of diversity.
We are now entering upon a new mode of treatment, where the
work of devastation is considerably taken from the sword, and
entrusted to a weapon more refined, but not less incisive, I
mean the penal laws, or rather such of them as bear more
pointedly upon the question of land. Indeed, I might venture to
assert that the whole code, whatever may have been its ostensible
object, originated in the apprehension that possessions acquired by
rapine and slaughter required to be vigorously guarded, whilst the
bereaved were still living around in numbers exceeding the des-
poilers in the proportion of five or six to one. Well might the
humane Dr, Johnson exclaim, in reading a description of that


code, “ that it was worse than the ten persecutions of the
Christians,’’ and Burke declare that it was “ a machine of wise and
and deliberate contrivance, as well fitted for the oppression,
impoverishment, and degradation of a people, and the debasement
in them of human nature itself as ever proceeded from the perverse
ingenuity of man,” Under it, Catholics are:
1 Disarmed.
2 Incapacitated from purchasing land,
3 And from lending monep on mortgage.
4 Compelled to gavel their estates among all their children,
5 Compelled to make an 7 child who abjures heir to the whole, and
6 In case of a son abjuring, the father becomes a pensioner in favor
of such son, and loses power over his estate,
7 Disabled to take leases for more than 31 years,
8 And the rent must be two-thirds the full value.
9 Disentitled to keep a horse of value exceeding £5.
This, as I have stated, is a short summary of the portions re-
lating to land occupancv, as they appeared to Arthur young, in
1777, when they were greatly relaxed from their former ferocity.
Under them the Catholic population were entirely deprived of
civil rights, and as a political factor that body, comprising five-
sixths of the population, disappear for a lengthy period—their
very existence being ignored bv the laws and constitution. With
them, as might be expected, fled for generations the spirit of in-
dustry, and the blessings of contentment and social happiness. Let
us see • now how the lordly owners of the land demeaned them-
selves during the period of these degrading disabilities. We have
abundant evidence from a high authority. Dean Swift writes :
“ Another cause of this nation’s misery is that Kgyptian bondage
of cruel, oppressive, covetous landlords, expecting all who live under
them should make bricks without straw ; who grieve and envy
when they see a tenant of their own in a whole coat, or able to
afford one comfortable meal in a month, by which the spirits of the
people are broken and made fit for slavery. The farmers and
cottagers being almost through the whole kindgom to all intents
and purposes as real beggars as any of those to whom we give our
charity in the streets.” Writing in 1724, he says “ I hese cruel
landlords are every dav unpeopling the kingdom, forbidding their
miserable tenants to till the earth, against common reason and jus-
tice, and contrary to the practice and prudence of all other nations,
by which numberless families have been forced to leave the king-
dom, or stroll about and increase the number of thieves and
beggars, etc. ; the miserable dress and diet, and dwelling of the
people, the general desolation in most [tarts of the country, the
families of farmers who pay great rents, living in filthiness upon
buttermilk and potatoes, without a shoe or stocking to their feet,
or a house so convenient as an English hog-stye to receive them.”


Further on he says, “ There is not an argument used to prove the
riches of Ireland which is not a logical demonstration of its
poverty. The rise of our rents is squeezed out of the very blood
and vitals, and clothes, and dwellings of the tenants, who live
worse than English beggars.” Adverting to the consolidation of
farms, then in vogue, he exposes its nefariousness in language of
inimitable irony. “ Let 8000 families (grazier) be divided among
the 4 provinces and making equal allowance of 8 to a family, the
number of inhabitants will amount to 67,200 souls. To these we
are to add a standing army of 20,000 English, which, together
with their trulls, bastards, and horseboys, will very nearly double
the count, and be sufficient for tlie defence of the kingdom, as well
as to enrich our neighbours, expel popery, and keep out the pre-
tender ; and lest the army should be at a loss for business. I
should think it would be very prudent to employ them in
collecting the public taxes for paying themselves and the civil
list. I advise that all our owners of these lands should be
constantly in England, in order to learn politeness and qualify
themselves for employments ; but for fear of increasing the natives
in this island, that an annual draft, according to the number born
every year, be exported to whatever place will bear the carriage, or
transported to the English dominions on the American continent,
as a screen between his majesty s English subjects, and the savage
Indians.” Later on we find the celebrated Bishop Berkeley
propounding the following queries ;
“Whether there are upon earth any Christian or civilized
people as beggarly, wretched, and destitute as the common Irish 1
“ Whether, nevertheless, there is any people whose wants may
be more easily supplied from home 1
“ Whether, if there was a wall of brass a thousand cubits high
around this kingdom, our natives might not, nevertheless, live
cleanly and comfortably, till the land, and reap the fruits of it 1
“Whether a foreigner could imagine that one-half the people
were starving in a country which sent out such plenty of provision ?
“ Whether it is possible that the country should be well
improved while our beef is exported, and our labourers live on
potatoes 1
“ Whether the trade be not then on a right foot, when foreign
commodities are imported only in exchange for domestic super-
fluities 1
“ Whether the quantities of beef, butter, wool, and leather
exported from this island can be reckoned the superfluities of a
country where there are so many natives naked and famished,”


It is clear from the cautious manner in which these queries
were put, and from the latent meaning discoverable in them, that
the learned bishop knew that the misery of the nation was owing
to the controlling force of external agencies.
The first relaxation of the savage penal code was conceded in
1772, and no disquisition, however pathetic or labored, could give
us a better idea of the prostration of the Catholic majority, than
an extract from the Relief Act itself. It enacts that “every papist
who shall be desirous to employ his industry and his money for
the improvement of the kingdom by the reclaiming of unprofitable
bogs, shall be at liberty to take a lease of any quantity of such
bogs, not exceeding 50 acres, and one-half an acre of arable land as
a site for a house, or for the purpose of delving for gravel or
limestone for manure next adjoining to such bog; and to hold
the same at such rent as shall be agreed upon between him and
the owner of such bog for any term not exceeding 61 years.” It
was further provided that the lease should be void unless one-half
of the land were reclaimed within 21 years, and that the bog
should be at least 4 feet deep, that ten acres at least should be
reclaimed to entitle to the benefit of the Act, and that the Act
should not extend to any bog within one mile of a city or market
town. A further relaxation in 1782 enabled him to hold land in
fee.
After the accession of George 111. in 1760, there arose in
many parts of Ireland, but principally in the south, a violent
tumult in respect to land. The persons implicated were called
Whiteboys, Hearts of Steel, and other fantastic names. The
Encyclopaedia Britannica describes their origin in the following
words : —“ A foreign demand for beef and mutton having become
uncommonly great in England and on the continent, by reason of
a violent cattle distemper, ground appropriated to grazing became
more valuable than that employed in tillage, the cottiers became
everywhere dispossessed of their holdings, which the landlords let
to persons who could afford to pay higher rents. Whole baronies
were now left open to pasturage, whilst the former inhabitants
were driven desperate by want of subsistence. Numbers fled to
large cities, or emigrated to foreign countries.” To the reasons
here given may be added another more cogent, namely, that the
landlords in their greed began to enclose the commons which here-
tofore were regarded as the patrimony of the poor. The grinding
exactions in the matter of rent-raising, and the encroachments on
the commons were the true causes of the disturbances, which the
government construed into acts of violence against itself. The
illegality of the proceedings rarely went beyond the turning up of


pasture grounds, levelling enclosures, holding nocturnal meetings,
maiming cattle, and such other wild and unavailing actions as
famished creatures driven to desperation are goaded to commit.
Numbers were apprehended in Limerick, Cork, and Tipperary,
and executed. The unhappy wretches instead of being made the
victims of the law’s extreme vengeance, should have been looked
upon as objects of pity, and their grievances inquired into and
amply redressed. The Hearts of Steel confined their exploitations
chiefly to parts of Ulster, and were instigated to their excesses by
attempts on the part of the landlords to appropriate the commons
and abrogate the custom of tenant right.
However intolerable the evils of absenteeism may have been
before the Act of Legislative Union, they became prodigiously
intensified after that event, and know no remission yet. Ever
since the memorable year, 1782, those who could afford the means
were taking farms, and, notwithstanding the vexatious charges
levied on that industry, farmers were able to live on account of
the high prices of agricultural products during the period of the
American and Napoleonic wars. The exactions arising out of
rack-rents, middlemen extortions, tithes, church rates, grand juiy
cess, and other imposts, had at last become so unbearable that the
peasantry were again provoked to lawless resistance, which of
course was suppressed in the usual way, by hanging, transportation,
and imprisonment. Although, as I have shewn, the condition of
the tenant was anything but enviable, he had all along some security
against capricious evictions. Leases had been freely given, and small
farming encouraged. Landlords, in order to extend their political
powers, had reduced the franchise to forty shilling freeholds, and
with this dual privilege, leases and political consequence, tenants
were ordinarily secure from arbitrary evictions. But in 1815, soon
after the close of the long and expensive wars, Sir Robert Peel
brought in, and got passed the first of a series of cheap ejectment
bills. It provided that in all cases of holdings, the rent of which
was under £2O, and these included all the small farms, the
assistant barrister at sessions could make a decree at a cost of a
few shillings to eject a man from house and farm. Two years
after, proceedings in ejectment were simplified by an Act making
the sole evidence of a landlord or his agent sufficient proof for ascer-
taining the amount of rent due. These two Acts left the class of
occupiers known as tenants-at-will utterly defenceless. The foxty
shilling freeholds were still for the most part left unmolested,
but, simultaneously with the passing of the Catholic Emancipation
Act of 1829, that description of freehold was extinguished, clearly
in retaliation for the services rendered by it in winning that
insidious concession. In 1838, two Acts were passed of momentous


consequence; these were the “Poor Law,” and “Tithe Com-
mutation.” The immediate effect of the first was to swell the
category of evictions. Those who were too poor to emigrate were
compelled to seek the shelter of the poorhouse, and in taking that
step abandon for ever the sentiments of pride, decency, and
independence. This institution has never been popular in Ireland,
nor has it deserved to be. The second Act abolished tithes, or
rather commuted them into a charge upon the land, payable
ostensibly by the landlord, but in reality by the tenant, whose
rent was raised to cover the disguised impost. Under this
equivocal guise it remained until the disestablishment and dis-
endowment of the church gave relief from the burthen a few years
ago.
In 1843 extermination of tenants was more sweeping than
ever before, and of course the usual concomitants—privations of all
sorts —ensued, and were keenly felt, yet in that same year more
than three million quarters of grain, besides nearly a million head of
live stock, and more than five millions of rental were carried off to be
consumed in England and elsewhere. It was in that year, also,
Parliament appointed an imposing commission to inquire into the
various relations of landlord and tenant in Ireland, and report
with the view to redress of grievances. It was entirely composed
of landlords, the chairman, Lord Devon, being one, and an Irish
absentee besides. It would not be unjust to designate the whole
proceeding from beginning to end a huge mockery. The object was
not redress or amelioration, but depopulation. O’Connell said of
it, “That you might as well consult butchers about keeping Lent,
as consult these men about the rights of tenants.” An abstract of
their report, which was a voluminous one, has been published for
the sake of ready access, but very few have ever consulted it.
The conclusions arrived at might have been easily predicated.
They are against the Ulster “ tenant right,” or, at all events,
against an unlimited use of it. They are in favour of consolidation
of farms, and in favour of extensive emigration, which of course
means the wholesale extrusion of what was called by way of
euphemism “ surplus population.” Seeing that the Acts of 1815
and 1817 were worked with admirable effect, it was thought
desirable to extend their “ benefits ” as the phrase went, and
accordingly in the first of George IV. an Act was passed extending
the power of summary ejectment at quarter sessions to holdings of
less than £5O rent, and at the same time reducing considerably
the cost of procuring ejectment processes.
I have said that the Devon Commission was emphatic against
tenant right. It says, “It is even questionable whether this
growing practice of tenant right, which would at first now appear


to be a valuable assumption on the part of the tenant, is so in
reality, as it gives him without any exertion on his part an
apparent property or security , by means of which he is enabled to
incur futux’e incumbrance in order to avoid present inconvenience ;
a practice which frequently terminates in the utter destitution of
his family, and in the sale of his farm, when the debts thus created
at usurious interest amount to what its sale would produce.”
This custom of tenant-right is said to have originated with the
plantation of Ulster in the time of James I. ; but this is a mistake,
it is, in truth, a relic of the ancient polity of Ireland, and was
retained perhaps in Ulster on account of the good understanding
that has existed there between owners and occupiers for
generations back, and because it was the last portion of the island
that was conquered. It existed in many parts of Ireland as well
as in Ulster, and had no fixed standard, being regulated by local
custom. Neither has it a legal status anywhere before the Land
Act, 1870, therefore its value depended upon the mutual good un-
derstanding of the parties concerned, and the force of local sanction.
In virtue of this custom, a tenant, even at will, if he surrender his
lands to his landlord, or, should he be evicted, becomes entitled to
a money payment for the “ good-will,” or should he sell out to
another tenant, he is entitled to get whatever he can from the
incomer. The landlord is prevented from raising rent arbitrarily
if the improvements are considerable. The tenant, on the other
hand, cannot transfer indiscriminately to any person he wishes, as
the landlord has the power to exclude an improper tenant; of
course, the greater the improvements, the greater is the money
value of the “ good-will.” This, then, is the custom from which
the Devon commission “ foresee some danger to the just rights of
property.” Its leading principles are now the law of the land.
On the subject of consolidation they say, “ When it is seen in
the evidence, and in the return of the size of the farms, how small
these holdings are, it cannot be denied that such a step is absolutely
necessary.” How this opinion was given effect to let statistics
furnished by Captain Larcom, in 1848, reply The decrease in
farms from 1 to 5 acres, 24,147 ; from 5 to 15 acres, 27,379 ;
from 15 to 30 acres, 4274 ; whilst of farms above 30 acres, the
increase has been 3670. This is the clearance for one year. In
Leinster the decrease in the number of holdings not exceeding one
acre, as compared with the decrease of 1847, was 3749 ; above
1, and not exceeding 5, was 4026 ; of 5, and not exceeding 15,
was 2546 ;of 15 to 30, 891 ; making a total of 10,617. In
Munster the decrease in the holdings under 30 acres was 18,814 ;
whilst the increase over 30 acres was 1399. In Ulster the
decrease was 1502 ; increase, 1134. In Connaught there were
26,499 holders evicted, the greatest havoc having been made


amongst the smallest holders.” The calculations made by the
commission furnish the fact that the scheme of “ consolidation of
the small holdings up to 8 acres would require the removal of
about 192,368 families.” The number of houses levelled between
1841 and 1861 was 270,000, representing at least a population of
1,300,000 souls, according to Lavelle.
These were busy times for the officials engaged, from the
assistant barristers who signed the “ death warrants,” in the shape
of cheap ejectment orders, to the executioners called “ Crowbar
Brigades.” Of those evicted, no doubt, 500,000 perished of cold and
hunger in that very year in which Captain Larcom estimates
the agricultural produce at £44,958,120, an amount moie than
sufficient to feed double the whole population. Begging, even if
anything was to be had by it, was forbidden by a recent enact-
ment making the penalty for vagrancy one month’s imprisonment
with hard labour. Harboring the evicted was tantamount on the
part of the offender to a sentence of banishment against himself.
John Mitchel, in his history of Ireland, invites attention to a
paragraph from the commercial reports of the Irish papers, which
state that “ upwards of 150 ass hides have been delivered in Dublin,
from the county Mayo, for exportation to Liverpool. The car-
casses, owing to scarcity of provisions, had been used for food.”
The same authority informs us that he, himself, in his capacity of
lawyer, often “ defended poor devils on charges of trespass for
gathering seaweed below high-water mark,” I can myself vouch
for scenes of horror far more appalling than any thing here related.
The poor laws were always viewed with disfavor in Ireland.
The cost of administration always bore disproportionately to their
real or reputed value. The rates, pressing heavily on the small
holders, in addition to county cess and other charges, were in the
eyes of such holders an irritating source of depletion, without com-
pensation or equivalent. Now, in 1847, an additional tax Act was
passed called “The Labour-rate Act,” which completed their
inability to pay* They, therefore, in vast numbers had to give up
their holdings, and, for support, seek employment on the useless
government works then started in connection with the out-door
relief provisions against the famine, In the “ Out-door Relief Act
there was a clause providing that if any person sought relief under
it for himself or his family, he should not obtain it until he had
first surrendered all his land to his landlord, except one-quarter of
an acre. Thousands were compelled to do this to save themselves
from famishing, and thus, through the operation of this “ quarter*
acre clause” was inaugurated the cheapest and most effective
instrument of depopulation the world had ever seen.
Lady in March, 1847, there were 730,000 heads of families
wasting time on those worthless public works. Suddenly, and


without warning, orders were issued for gradual reduction, and in
about a month the numbers were reduced to about 500,000, After
this the work of disbandment proceeded with fearful x*apidity to
the end. No provision was made for those vast numbers thus un-
expectedly thrown out of employment. Out door xelief they could
not get if they held more than the prescribed quarter-acre. Emi-
gration or the poor house remained the alternative resources against
starvation. 200,000 corpses in 1846 alone signalised the triumph
of this detestable policy. The repeal of the Corn Laws, so
beneficial to England, was really detrimental to the farming
interest in Ireland. That country had rights which foreign
countries had not, there being no duty on Irish provisions brought
into the English market. Henceforth the agricultural produce of
all nations was to be admitted free. The effect of this law was,
that whilst it cheapened breads in England, it made it more
inaccessible in Ireland, for it cheapened the price of farming
produce, the only commodity the Irish had to sell.
The next Act of any importance was the “ Encumbered
Estates Act.” Before its time, the transfer and conveyance of
land was confined to the slow and expensive process of the
Court of Chancery. That court had to be satisfied in many
essential matters of original title, which in the case of many
Irish estates were not, and could not be, forthcoming. The
great bulk of the proprietors held under patents granted by
Cromwell. Since the famine set in a large number of estates got
inextricably involved, and a cheap and summary method of selling
them became necessary, and was urgently wanted by the money-
brokers and the insurance companies. This demand gave birth to
the “ Encumbered Estates Act,” which was meant to satisfy the
creditors, and effect a quiet transfer of so much property to
English and Scotch capitalists, who, it was supposed, would
succeed the old embarrassed holders. It did not, however, answer
this purpose to the extent expected, although, as against the
poorer class of tenants, it proved fatally efficient. The incoming
owner looked upon his purchase in the light of a speculation. He
purchased for profit, and did not care whether that profit came
out of rents exorbitantly raised, or by high-class farming, which
would require a thorough clearance of that human encumbrance,
the existing tenantry. Mr. Allan Pollok, with his 32,000 acres
of Galway territory, from which he expelled 5000 pei’sons, is a
good specimen of the latter economy. In 1846, there were at
least 84 millions of people; in 1851, there should have been,
allowing for natural increase, 9 millions ; but the census return
only gave millions, leaving a deficiency of 2£ millions.
If the laws were purposely designed to accomplish this
destruction they could not have been better directed. I know the


calamity is generally ascribed to an uncontrollable cause, but this
is rank ingratitude tpwards the bounty of Providence. Only one
article of consumption perished that frail one, the potato—
whilst the harvest in every other gift was unusually abundant. In
the midst of abundance, then, one out of every four disappeared in
a population of over 8 millions, and in a country capable, under
proper management, of supporting 18 millions of human beings.
For this estimate we have the testimony of Dr. Kane, the greatest
living authority on the industrial resources of Ireland.
The term “ tenant-at-will ” will assail the ear frequently in every
discussion of the Irish land system. Few, perhaps, are impressed
with the terrible significance of its meaning. It is nowhere else to
be found under the canopy of heaven. Lest a descripton of it may
-suffer by any explanation of my own, I shall give it to you in the
words of Van Raumer, a learned German, during a tour in Ireland.
“ How shall I translate tenants-at-will 1 Wegjagbare, expellable
serfs ! But in the ancient days of vassalage it consisted rather in
keeping the vassals attached to the soil, and by no means driving
them away. An ancient vassal is a lord compared with the present
tenant-at-will, to whom the law affords no defence. Why not call
them jadgbare (chaseable) ? But this difference lessens the analogy.
That for hares, stags, and deer there is a season during which no one
else is allowed to hunt them ; whereas tenants-at-will are hunted
all the year round; and if anyone would defend his farm (as badgers
and foxes are allowed to do) it is here denominated rebellion.” While
on this topic, I will quote the opinion of Lord Clarendon, expressed
at a meeting of the West Herts Agricultural Society. It is as
follows :—“ They were practical men whom he was addressing, and
he would ask any gentleman present if he were to take a farm at
will, upon which the landed proprietor never did, and never
intended to do anything, and were to build upon the farm a house
and homestead, and effectually drain the land, and then be turned
out on a six months! notice by his landlord, would any language
be strong enough, not forgetting the language made use of at
public meetings, and in the press recently in this country, to
condemn such a felonious Act as that. Far be it from him to say
any such proceedings were resorted to on large and well-managed
estates in Ireland, of which he could give a long list, but the
power did exist of turning out a tenant under such cii’cumstances.
It was often exercised, and ought to be abated, because as long as
it existed there could be no confidence between landlord and
tenant.”
“ The land of Ireland,” writes Mill, “ the land of any country
belongs to the people of that country,” and again “ the claim of
the landlord is altogether subordinate to the general policy of the
state. The principle of property gives them no right to the land,


but only a right to compensation for whatever portion of their
interest in the land it may be the policy of the state to deprive
tli6in
I have stated that from 1793 to 1815, while rents were
high and punctually paid, owing to produce being at war prices,
there was but little disturbance of tenures. The proprietors found
some gratification in the political importance which a numerous
enfranchised tenantry brought them. But after the cessation ot
hostilities, and the consequent diminution of rents, and more
irritating still, the refractory spirit shewn by the voters at
elections, particularly the famous election of Clare, in which
accelerated the Catholic relief measures, all the safeguards that
hitherto protected them were swept away. The work ot
devastation then begun went on with vigor until it reached its
culmination in the monster clearance of the famine period.
Prior to 1845 there never-was a single attempt made to
ameliorate the condition of the tenants by legislative enactment.
It was different on the landlords’side. Judge Pennefather, in a
charge delivered by him in 1843, says that “ the legislature on the
subiect of land is a progressive code, giving in each successive Act
additional remedies to the landlord.” “In their favour, he says,
“ the principles of the common law were subveited.
O’Connell illustrates the position in a public letter, in 1843.
“ It has been said that to legislate against the landlord would be
to deprive him of his property, or to depreciate it, and that
therefore no law ought to be enacted to benefit the tenant at the
expense of the landlord. Those who reason thus forget that
several Acts of Parliament have been passed in favour ot the
landlord against the tenant. Let there be no Act of Parliament
on either side, and the condition of the tenant will be greatly
benefited by depriving the landlord of much of the legal machinery
by which he is enabled to extort exorbitant rents from the
occupying tenants. All that would be necessary * would be to
repeal a few Acts of Parliament, and to restore the ancient
common law of England with respect to the relations of landloid
and tenant. For example, if there were no Act of Parliament m
favor of the landlord, he could distrain the tenant who owed him
rent, but he could not sell the distress. The distress would remain
in his hands as security or pledge, which the tenant could at any
time redeem by paying the rent. The Act of larliamen ,
therefore, which gave the landlord liberty to sell the effects seized
for rent, took away a great benefit from the tenant, that is the
right of redeeming his property. The next advantage which the
landlord got was by another Act of Parliament. If the tenant-
lease did not contain an express clause of re-entry for non-pay men
of rent, it was impossible for the landlord to evict the tenant tor


owing him rent, and even when there was such a clause, there were
technical difficulties which made it nearly impossible to evict the
tenant for non-payment. An Act of Parliament intervened on
behalf of the landlord, and dispensed with all matter of form. It
enabled the landlord, by mere service of ejectment, to proceed to
evict the tenant who owed him a year’s rent. The third Act of
Parliament which gave additional power was this. We have seen
that the tenant might have been evicted by the landlord if his
bargain was that the landlord should have the right of re-entry for
non-payment of rent, but the landlord’s power over the tenant in
this respect was increased by another Act of Parliament, which
even in cases when it was not the tenant’s bargain or agreement
that the landlord should have that power, which was not in the
lease, yet the third statute gave the landlord that power which
was not in the lease, and enables him to evict the tenant as if
that power had been in the lease. A fourth Act of Parliament
gave the landlord additional advantage, that if the tenant when
distrained upon insisted that his rent was paid, and failed in
proving that it was discharged to the last farthing, if his proof of
payment failed to the amount of one farthing, the tenant then is
made liable to double costs. The landlord’s power over the tenant
was again increased by a„ fifth Act of Parliament. The ejectment
against a ruined tenant was an expensive remedy. The landlord
is therefore by a fifth statute relieved from the expense in all
cases where the rent does not exceed £2O, and is allowed to evict
the tenant by a civil bill before the assistant barrister. Another
addition to the landlord power was made by a sixth statute, by
which the chief mode of eviction by civil bill was extended to all
cases in which the rent should not exceed £SO a year. Then the
common law has been altered in flavor of the landlord, and
against the tenant, by several Acts of Parliament. These Acts
have totally changed the relations of landlord and tenant. At com-
mon law the extraordinary powers as between debtor and creditor,
which the landlord had, was that of seizing the distress for rent
due, and holding it as a pledge. In every other respect the landlord
had at common law only just the same power which every other
creditor has over his debtor, that is, the power of sueing him, and
obtaining an execution for the money due. The result was, that
the landlord in letting his land was under the necessity of looking
to the character and solvency of the tenant, and also of leaving him
the means of paying the rent, after deriving a support for himself
and his family, out of the land. The landlord had an interest in
the prosperity of the tenant, for if the tenant were ruined the rent
would be lost, and the land remain uncultivated.”
This summary does not include all the one-sided Acts on the
question, nor the worst of them, such as that enabling the landlord


to evict on a six months’ notice to quit. The summary, as you
will notice, was published prior to the facile modus of the quarter-
acre clause.
The first effort to change the current of this nefarious system
of legislation was made by Lord Stanley, in 1845, who brought in
a bill to provide compensation to tenants on eviction. The bill
was lost in the House of Lords, where it was brought forward, but
it furnished Mr, Gladstone with material for his Land Act of 1870.
In replying to an objection on introducing the bill, his lordship
said, “Now imagine the case of one of your lordships having an
estate of £20,000 a year divided into 20-acre farms, the owner
never visiting the tenants, those tenants under an intermediate
lease, and, astenants-at-will only, paying a rack rent, and required not
only to make good and keep in repair all drains, fences, and out-
buildings, but even to build their own dwelling houses, could the
noble lord be surprised to find that no improvements took place on
those farms, and that the dwellings of the tenants were mere
hovels.”
During the space of 40 years, from 1819 to 1850, there were
no less than ten committees and commissions appointed to inquire
into Irish agrarian grievances, but after wasting lots of paper with
reports that were never considered, papers and all were consigned,
with other loads of learned lumber, to eternal oblivion in the
repository of shams.
Six times, from 1834 to 1847, the indefatigable Sharman
Crawford brought in measures dealing chiefly with the question of
leases and compensation, but although moderate to a degree of
weakness they were rejected.
Overlaid by the terrible inflictions of 1846 to 1848 the question
slumbered, but only to awaken in 1850 to unwonted activity.
In 1850, the “Irish Tenant League” was formed with a
council of 120 gentlemen, comprising some of the most practical
men of the kingdom. Its articles of creed were fixity of tenure,
fair rents, and free sale. It was enthusiastically taken up in all
parts of the country, and at the general election of 1852 had
acquired strength enough to return 50 Irish members pledged to
its advocacy. This league would doubtless have accomplished good
things, had not other questions of a discordant nature intervened
and impaired its authority and capacity for usefulness. From 1853
to 1870 there was no advance; but in the latter year an Act was
passed which purported to effect organic changes in the principle of
tenure ; although, owing to the timidity of its authors, and other
causes, it effected no permanent good. You have heard how, in
the past, the landlord had used his authority over his tenant.
With the view of restricting the exercise of that unlimited
authority, the Act of 1870 annexed penalties for eviction for any


other cause than non-payment of rent. If the tenant is evicted
for any other cause, he is entitled to compensation in either of two
ways, which are left to his own choice. He can claim for the
improvements made by himself or his predecessors in title, or for
disturbance. The amount recoverable for disturbance is pro-
portional to the rent paid for improvements, to their value,
and the length of their enjoyment. The scale of compensation
for disturbance ranges from seven times the annual rent as a
maximum, in case of its being under £lO a year, to one
year’s rent where it reaches £IOO or over; but in no case can
more than £250 be recovered. The second part of the Act
contains what are known as the “ Bright ” clauses, they were
meant to facilitate purchases of their holdings by the tenants of
estates under petition of sale in the “Landed Estates Court.”
The Board of Land and Works has authority to advance two-
thirds of the purchase money, which is to be repaid by annual
instalments extending over 35 years. All this looks well on
paper, but when it came to be tested it was found to be utterly
unworkable. Mr. Gladstone would not like to acknowledge so
much, but a cooler and closer observer, his colleague, the Marquis
of Hartington does, and stated so at a liberal dinner in Blackburn,
in November-last. His judgment upon it was that it “ practically
broke down,” and “had become virtually a dead letter.” It did
not deserve a better fate, because it was not what the Irish, people
wanted. Security of tenure is what they wanted, and it was no
use trying to put them off with patchwork legislation anent
improvements, whilst the landlords retained the power of eviction.
The Act of 1870 did not deprive them of that power, for they
exercised it after with fearful vengeance. There were so many
conditions, stipulations, and reservations in it, involving so much
trouble, expense, and uncertainty, that no sane person would have
the temerity to risk his fortunes in such a legal labyrinth, whilst
it ominously omitted to provide security for the tenant against
arbitrary increase of rent, or the power of eviction consequent upon
such increase. The “ Bright ” clauses broke down through this
complication of conditions. The proceedings in the Landed Estates
Courts were too costly and cumbersome. The lots were unsuitable
to the wants of tenant purchasers, whilst everything seemed done on
purpose to accommodate the buyers of large lots, and defeat the
whole intent and meaning of that portion of the Act. Nor do the
“ disturbance clauses ” fare better. The power of the landlord to
borrow money for payment of penalties is greatly facilitated; the
amount recovered on ejectment never compensates the ejected,
whilst the legal costs in some instances absorbs the whole sum. The
maximum sum to which a disturbed tenant is entitled is 5 years
purchase of the rent, and this is rarely, if ever, reached. The im-


provements clauses are equally infelicitous. The sum x*ecovered
has scarcely ever equalled two-thirds of the tenant’s money,
outlay, and labor. Many other defects of a minor kind
are discernible in the Act of 1870 ; but as these are now super-
seded, if not repealed, by the Act of 1881, I do not think it
needful to refer to them.
In 1876, Mr. Butt brought in a Land Bill, in which it was
proposed to give tenants perpetuity of tenure at a valued rent,
with power to periodically vary the rent by arbitration. The
landlords’ reversion in case of non-payment of rent, or breach of
any of the statutable conditions as to sub-letting, &c., was reserved.
“ I go,” said that able jurist, Mr. Butt, “ on the great principles of
jurisprudence, which will allow no rights of property to stand in
the way of the general good.” This is an enunciation worthy of a
great statesman. lam afraid Mir. Gladstone has never raised his
mind to the altitude of this grand conception. While the abortive
Land Bill of 1870 was passing through the House of Commons, a
deputation of several representatives of Irish organisations, headed
by Lord Bellew, waited on him with valuable suggestions and
amendments. Mr. Gladstone was inexorable, and, in refusing com-
pliance, told them that he had to satisfy English and Scotch
opinion, which in this case unhappily ran counter to theirs.
Thus was timorously sacrificed a glorious opportunity to lay a
troubled spirit, in deference, not to the public opinion of
England and Scotland, but to the monied interests of landlords
and usurers. The provisions of the bill have been so inconsistent
with each other, that one part makes the other comparatively
valueless, for we find from statements made by Charles Russell,
M.P., in his “ New views of Ireland,” Chap, x., that some
landlords, in spite of the Act, raised their rents enormously,
and in this manner confiscated the time-honoured boon-
of tenant-right. When introducing the bill, Mr. Gladstone
gave expression to certain truths, which I thought might
very properly be re-produced here in answer to charges
frequently made to the prejudice of the Irish character. We often
hear the confident assertion that Ireland, in respect to land
legislation, is as well served as England or Scotland; that in fact
the laws are identical, and yet, whilst these countries are enjoying
the blessings of peace and contentment, Ireland remains in a
chronic state of discontent and disorder. Mr. Gladstone says,
“ It is true that the naked law of the occupation of land in Ireland
as founded upon contract, and not upon tenux’e, as in England, is
founded upon the relation of two persons, one of whom has
something that is given him by a written or an unwritten
agreement, and the other has all the rest. It is quite true that
that is the law of both countries, but only the mere skeletons of


the laws of the two countries bear any resemblance to each other.
The. flesh and blood with which the figures are invested are
wholly different. All the circumstances, all the associations, and
all the accretions that have grown round the naked ideas are
different in the one country from what they are in the other. We
cannot name a point in which the relations of landlord and tenant
in Ireland and in Great Britain are the same, except in the
abstract and general idea. Down to a late period Ireland has
been full of degradation and the marks of conquest, while in
England nothing of the kind has existed. In Ireland the landlord
has commonly differed from the tenant in politics and religion,
whereas in England the landlord and the tenant have commonly
been of the same mind in both religion and politics. In Ireland
the landlord does not as a rule find the capital necessary for the
improvement of the soil, although he does so in exceptional and
perhaps multiplying instances. In England the landlord is the
person who does find the capital. In Ireland the landlord is
frequently an absentee, and unhappily has been so during the 700
years of the connection between the two countries. In England
and Scotland absenteeism is very rare. In Ireland a great
jealousy has prevailed among a large body of the landlords during
the last 40 years against'granting tenures longer than from year
to year; whereas in England and Scotland, on the contrary, the
almost universal practice has been to grant longer terms ; and in
England there is hardly a quarter to be found where such jealousy
on the part of the landlords is maintained. In Ireland where
tenant-right does not exist, the law has refused to recognise in
any, and in every shape the right of the tenant in anything
he has put into the soil; whereas, in England, there is not
a single county in which, in one form or another, customs do not
prevail which mitigate the strictness of the law. In Ireland, from
the unhappy circumstances of the country (I have no doubt as
regards the present race of landlords from their want of will), there
has not rested in the hands of the landlords the discharge of that
immense mass of public duties without fee or reward, which has hon-
orably distinguished for so many generations the landlords of Eng-
land ; which I think is a just relic and true descendant of the feudal
system; a system which never took a real or genuine root in
Ireland. And lastly, whereas in England and Scotland the idea
of holding by contract is perfectly traditional and familiar to the
mind of every man ; in Ireland, on the contrary, where the old
ideas and customs were never supplanted, except by the rude hand
of violence, and by laws written in the statute book, which never
went to the heart of the Irish people, the people have not
generally embraced the idea of the occupation of land by contract ;
and the old Irish notion that some interest in the soil adheres to


the tenant, even although his contract has expired, is everywhere
rooted in the minds of the people. If time permitted I could
prove this by a multitude of persons who well know the condition
of Ireland. Therefore, do not let us suppose or imagine for a
moment that the resemblance between the Irish and the English
law is a reason why there should not be good cause for special
legislation on the subject of the occupation of land in Ireland.”
This is excellent as far as it goes, but it does not cover the whole
case, nor refer to the most cogent one, namely, that whilst two-
thirds of the population of Ireland are dependent on the land for a
livelihood, perhaps not one-sixth of the people of England, owing
to the numerous sources of employment there, are so dependent.
In England no one is urged by the necessities of his situation to
take land at any price ; in Ireland the possession of it at any
hazard is a matter of life or death.
The Land Act of 1881 is upon its trial, and its merits or
demerits are not yet fully tested. Enough, however, has transpired
to shew that it labors under serious shortcomings, and is very
likely to prove a failure. Being in its salient points a graft upon
the Act of 1870, it shews all the fundamental infirmities of the parent
stock. Both Acts are to be read together, and their meanings are
sometimes found to be antagonistic. This is notably the case as
regards one of the “ Bright ” clauses of the former Act—that which
deals with the assessment of compensation for improvements on the
occasion of a tenant being disturbed on his holding. The provisions
of this and subject clauses are to the effect, that in assessing com-
pensation for improvements the court is to consider the time the ten-
ant had enjoyed the benefits of such improvements. According to
this view the tenant’s interest was continuously diminishing with
time, and in the end woidd pass away from him altogether, and
over to the landlord, without any consideration in return. This
clause, so far from being a source of relief to the tenant, was, as
against him, tantamount to a decree of confiscation of his
improvements. It was not intended to re-instate it in the Act of
1881, although Sir Stafford North cote proposed an amendment to
that effect, which was rejected. Mr, Gladstone on that occasion
said that the Government intended to proceed on a different basis
now, and declared that he meant the new law to affirm that the
tenant’s improvements were the tenant’s own property, and were
not to pass away from him with lapse of time. A clause intended
to affirm this principle passed, and was known as the “ Healy ”
clause, in remembrance of the member with whom its
best provisions originated. Unfortunately the clause was
worded in such an ambiguous manner as to render its
meaning quite unintelligible. It has been submitted to the proper
tribunal for an authoritative interpretation, and the decision of the


Court of Appeal is, that the provisions of the final paragraph of
Section 4, of the Land Act 1870, are applicable to the determination
of a fair rent under the Land Act, 1881. The consequences are
disastrous to the future of the bill. No greater blow could be
given it than that which discourages permanent improvements,
such as the erection of substantial buildings, drainage, reclam-
ations, and other improvements of a durable character, by
virtually declaring that the tenant’s property becomes in the course
of time the property of the landlord. In giving this decision, the
court, or rather the majority of thejudges, wishedit to be understood
that the decision bore upon special circumstances, and was not to
be taken as precedent. What makes the matter in this important
issue so provoking, is that the letter and interpretation of the law
are quite at variance with the intentions of the legislature, and
that the contretemps have arisen from the careless drafting of the
bill. One crumb of comfort, however, remains, and is to be
found in the fact that no court is bound to define the time at
which a tenant’s interest ceases. If this does not save the “ Healy ”
clause, the bill will have to be amended so as to carry out the
original object. The case in hand, Dunseath v. Adams points the
moral. A house which cost more than £240, erected and main-
tained at the tenant’s sole expense, has become the property of the
landlord. Creighton v. Nelson is another case which has revealed
similar consequences.
Already it has become necessary to amend the bill in the
important matter of arrears. The exclusion from the benefit of the
Act of all the small cottiers who had not been able to pay their rents
during the bad years of 1878, 1879, and 1880, and who were
consequently in arrear, would of itself be, without any other
defect, quite enough to evoke censure upon such time-serving and
patchwork legislation. It amounted to a sentence of ostracism
against 200,000 of the most hard-worked and deserving persons in
the country. The consequences of this exclusion were often
pointed out, but government gave no heed to advice or
remonstrance. Had they done so they could have saved them-
selves the unpleasant duty of having, within a year of the passage
of that bill, which was to give peace to the country, to hurry
through an amending bill, remedying this glaring defect. Again,
by fixing a judicial rent for a period of 15 years, based on the
quality of the land and the tenant’s improvements, these same
improvements are subjected to a process of virtual confiscation; for
the improvements should be regarded as the tenant’s own, and not
be accounted a factor in the assessment of the rent. The annual
rental of the kingdom is £17,000,000, and Mr. Bright admits that
nine-tenths of the improvements have been made by the tenants ;
this being so, the principle of the joint valuation of land and


tenements, as the basis for fixing the rent, is obviously prejudicial
and unfair to the tenant. Another great drawback to the
efficiency of the bill is the expense of proceedings in the Law
Courts, and the facilities the law affords for protracted and
expensive litigation. About 60 per cent, of the decisions up to
the first day of this year have been appealed against by the
landlords. The cost attending such a number of appeals must
have been sorely trying, if not ruinous, to many tenants, whether
they won or lost their cases. We know of many cases where
evicted tenants succeeded in establishing their claims, and had to
pay their own costs. From the last week of October to the first
week of December of last year, the commissioners decided 174 cases.
The aggregate sum of the old rental was £3754. This was re-
duced to £2895, making a total reduction of £859, or about 24
per cent. Now, to accomplish this reduction, let us examine the
outlay;—
Cost to Government ... ... ... £3500
Cost to tenants, at £2 lOs-per case ... 435
Cost to landlord, at £5 per case ... ... 870
£4805
This is a sum not far from half the amount that would be
saved to the tenants during the statutory term of 15 years.
According to the rate of progress here indicated, the present staff
would adjudicate upon 1480 cases in a year, and the 400,000 cases
which probably await decision in 273 years. It would take 30
commissioners for 36 years to effect a reduction of £2,500,000, yet
we know that in the short space of 3 months, in 1880, voluntary
and extra-judicial reductions of £3,000,000, were made through the
influence of the Land League. With the view of avoiding as
much as possible this heavy expenditure, the Land League pro-
posed that test cases—embracing every possible diversity of class
—should be submitted for adjudication, and that the judgments
in such cases should apply to every other case of a like kind.
This salutary suggestion was decried by the authorities as an
unfair interference with the administration of the Act, or as being
in restraint of it. A Parliamentary paper published in February
last, gives in detail the whole of the judicial rents fixed up to that
date. The number of cases was 1313 ; old rents, £37,441, reduced
to £28,586, or a reduction on the whole of £8855, which is nearly
equivalent to 24 per cent, on the old rental. Its greatest blemish
is, however, chargeable to its inability to arrest the frightful evil
of eviction. Under its protecting aegis it was fondly hoped that
that happy state of rural felicity would be realised, in which every
man could sit unmolested under his own vine and fig tree, Alas,
how rudely have actual facts dispelled the strong illusion. A


return of the evictions during the year 1881, informs us with
arithmetical precision that 3415 families, comprising 17,341
persons, were, in that space of time, thrust out of house and home,
friendless and destitute upon the world. Of this number of
outcasts, Ulster, despite its great bulwark of tenant-right, furnished
1219; Leinster, 692 ; Connaught, 784; and Munster, 720. The
number of ejectment decrees granted at Michaelmas session
of last year, for non-payment of rent and over-holding, was
2080, representing total claims on the part of the landlords to the
amount of £48,000. Of these decrees Leinster had to bear the
brunt of 402; Munster, 572; Ulster, 578 ; and Connaught, 528,
Another return gives of sales to tenants 31 cases, upon which the
commissioners advanced £1579. The aggregate amount advanced
or recommended has not exceeded £18,814. It would appear from
this that the purchasing clauses have not strong attractive
qualities. Not many weeks ago a telegram informed ns with cool
and sententious brevity, that 300 evictions had taken place in one
day in Connemara, that is, sentence of death, according to Mr.
Gladstone, was executed against 300 victims, for the crime of not
being able to satisfy the demands of extortionate rapacity.
Absenteeism. —This has been the bane of Ireland at all times,
and more so during the last 80 years than before. For a long time
it was discountenanced, and even visited with heavy fines. This
was the case in the reign of Charles L, when a special enactment
was directed against it. In 1715, the tax was 4s. in the pound,
“ unless such person should reside within the kingdom for six
months in every year.” From 1377 to 1753, there were legal
prohibitions against it, but after the latter date they became
entirely inoperative. Flood, in 1773, and Grattan, 10 years later,
sought to revive them ; but their efforts proved unavailing. After
the Union the evil became more formidable than ever, and has
been growing apace since. It was against this particular evil that
Swift directed the shafts of his fiercest sarcasm. “ I should,” he
writes, “be glad to know by what secret method we grow a rich and
flourishing people without liberty, trade, manufacture, inhabitants,
money, or the liberty of coining; without industry, labor, or
improvement of land; and with more than half the rent and profits
of the whole kingdom annually exported, for which we do not
receive a single farthing. If we do flourish, it is against every law
of nature and reason, like the thorn of Glastonbury that blossoms
in winter.” The rental thus drained off in Swift’s time was about
£2,000,000, in 1804 it was computed at £3,000,000, and at
present it cannot be less than £6,000,000. Some analogy to this
ruinous drainage may be found in the large sums paid by
ourselves for the right of search for gold within alienated lands.
But there is this difference, that although the landowner here does


not, as a nile, invest a penny in mining, his demands are not
recurrent, whereas, in the case of the Irish landowner, they are
perennial.
Rack Rents. —The wrongs of Ireland are of so fixed and
monotonous a character, that one may refer to any period of her
sufferings, for the last 150 years for a counterpart illustration of
similar grievances occurring to-day. It is this sameness that
gives such point to Swift’s caustic irony. But the Rabelais of
Ireland does not stand alone as the accuser and judge of this
mammoth iniquity. Dr. Woodward, Dean of Clogher, condemns it
as tyranny and extortion. Lord Clare, who well understood the
affairs of his country, who brought more zeal and ability than any
other statesman towards subordinating her to English influences,
and who invariably upheld landlord interests, as a class, is,
nevertheless, constrained to acknowledge that “ the peasantry are
ground down to powder by enormous rents.” A multitude of
writers, many of whom have been eminent historians and
moralists, could be cited on the same side. Out of the multi-
tudinous array I will content myself with a few. Wakefield says
that the sums exacted by Irish landlords from their tenants are
more than is exacted from the same class of men in any other
country. The celebrated Bishop Berkeley calls them “men of
vulturine beaks, with bowels of iron.” The Times , many years
ago, invested this same idea in a different dress, by stating that
they exercise their “rights” with “hands of iron, and fronts of
brass.” Lord Stanley, in reprobating the system, declared that
“persons having from 15 to 20 acres of land are generally from
April to September in a state of the greatest destitution, living
upon potatoes, without either milk or meat, and considering
themselves very happy if they have dry potatoes. Men whom
the landlords, letting their lands at a rack rent, may upon any day
turn loose upon the world to starve in the last degree of misery.”
Sir Francis Head called them “competition rents,” which was
a true designation. Apart from individual opinion we have the
more convincing revelations of the Land Courts, which shew that
the valuations of many estates are from 40 to 100 per cent, above
the Government valuation. Competition then urges the
unfortunate applicant to offer a greater price than he is able to
pay ; a practice which can only be justified by the common
maxim that necessity knows no law, or, at least, takes no moral
cognisance of law. Mr. Wyse tells us that the landlord takes
advantage of this dreadful necessity, and exacts rents out of all
proportion to the value of the land. Judge Blackburn, a lawyer
never accused of national proclivities, delivers his opinion in these
pregnant words, “ Land is to the Irish peasant a necessary of life,
the consequence to him of not getting it is starvation.” In


“ Bryan’s View of Ireland ”we find the following : —“ Landlords
in Ireland among the lesser orders extort exorbitant rents out of
the bowels, sweat, and rags of the poor, and then turn them
adrift ; they are corrupt magistrates and jobbing gx’and-jurors,
oppressing and plundering the miserable people,”
Agrarian Outrages.—The origin of the greater part of Irish
crime is traceable to inebriety and agrarian disputes. The
reformation that has taken place during the past ten years in the
domestic habits of the populace affords ample evidence that the
vice of drunkenness is losing its hold upon them, and that
Ireland will soon be, if it has not reached that stage already, the
soberest of the nations. The prevalence of the other I deeply
lament, knowing, as I do, that it is the greatest enemy to the
liberation and pacification of the country. In the name of
humanity I denounce it, but, in doing so, cannot forget that
however reprehensible may be the miserable resort on the part of
exasperated individuals to the law of retaliation and revenge, their
gxxilt lacks the deliberate criminality chax'geable to the authors of
wholesale extermination. In the one case is exemplified the
desperation of sensitive natxxres, smarting xxxxder the sense of cruel
treatment; in the other the unsympathetic cupidity that, at any
cost of life or happiness, will insist on exacting the literal
fulfilment of xxnattainable and impossible conditions. I do not
understand why the pxxblic anxiety should be wholly engrossed by
the troubles of the plutocrat, whilst the soxtows of the myriad
mass are sxxffex'ed to pass unnoticed and unrelieved. Sxxrely that
sentimentality must be perversely affected, which reserves all its
sympathy for the master of many manors, bxxt has not a thought ixx
unison with the wants of the hox’ny-handed helot who reclaims the
refractory moor. How does it happen that the favored few, who
neither spin nor sow, yet live in superb mansions, feast upon rare
delicacies, wear pxxi'ple and fine linen, are of more conseqxxence in
the scale of the social economy than the toiling millions, through
whose exertions the treasxxres of nature and the resources of art
are improved in the interests of civilisation. Let xxs ask ourselves
what manner of beings are those that are daily hunted like wild
game from the abodes of their birth. Have they followed in the wake
of some successfxxl marauders, spreading the fury and violence of
conquest throughout the land 1 Have they been usurpers of the
little scrap of territory, which fx-om childhood’s hour had been the
home and scene of their simple joys 1 Did they originally obtain
it by force or fraud, in the tumultuous division of unrighteous
spoils 1 Was it originally conferred as the price of dishonor upoix
any pimp, parasite, or paramour of royal or lordly profligacy, and
transmitted to the latest degenerate descexxdant of a sullied race 1
No ! Such descriptions might apply to many a titled owner, but


not to the virtuous genealogy of the humble cottager. He may
have been born on the spot which was the hereditary patrimony
of his forefathers, who reclaimed it from wild waste, and by their
labors made it productive. Every article and item of improvement,
visible and invisible, has been the work of his hands, without
one penny’s worth of aid from the owner. The rents, paid
punctually from time immemorial, being 40 per cent, or more
in excess of what was fair, have already exceeded the value
in fee of the land many times repeated. A life of unremitting
toil and forced frugality enabled him to save yearly the amount
of the rack-rent. His regular fare of potatoes and salt all the year
round, with the home-spun product of his spinning wheel for
his coarse covering, may have, in fruitful years, enabled him to
drag along his miserable existence, and even save for the “ master ”
the wager-pledges of wine and faro. But an unfavorable
harvest conies. The treacherous root, which was to him the staff of
life, fails. By the exercise of cruel privation, he still manages to
save a moiety for the master, None but an Irishman would have
done so. Another bad year ensues, and payment of any sum, big
or little, means death to his poor family. The landlord claims his
legal rights, but they cannot be satisfied. The cheap ejectment
process is put in motion, and in due time the poor cabin is
besieged by a band of bailiffs and house-levellers, assisted by
troops of soldiery, degraded from their noble calling to the rank of
executioners. The beleaguering forces are skilfully disposed, every
man at his post, from the sturdy ruffian who carries the crowbar,
to the plumed cavalier in heavy armour. The surroundings whole
are resonant with strife. The order for attack is given, and, in the
twinkling of an eye, the frail domicile is levelled to the dust.
The wife and children cling with wailing cries to the dismantled
wreck, and are rudely dragged away. The myrmidons of powerwheel
off with flying colors, and a heroic despatch announces at Dublin
Castle that the majesty of the law has been nobly vindicated, and
the invincibility of our arms signalised in the demolition of a
pauper’s crib. Misfortune has not even yet done its worst, nor has
persecution spent its malignity. Humane neighbours would harbour
and succour the afflicted, but the powers that be have set their
canon against the corporal works of mercy, and in cases like this
they are sternly interdicted. Some few sticks resting against a road-
side wall, or turf mound, and covered with coarse canvas, may be
improvised, with hazard, for provisional shelter. The catastrophe
is, however, approaching. Typhus completes what exposure and
hunger began, and the stricken creatures pass away from scenes of
sorrow to that state where the inhumanity of man can no further
pursue them. Overcome with grief, anger, and despair, the
frenzied father looks upon the mournful spectacle before him, and


as he bends over the pallet of straw, on which the lifeless forms
are stretched, to take one last look at those features which oft had
kindled into love all that was godlike in his nature, he silently
registers that vengeful vow, whose fiat removes from the roll of
living humanity the imputed author of his woes. Then rises
from the London organs of the usurers, stock-jobbers, bond-holders,
and privileged orders, a chorus howl of execration, and a fresh
demand for another instalment of the old stock-remedy—the
inevitable coercion. Not one syllable about the provocation that
has led to the lamentable event, not one hint about a remedy.
The landlord is portrayed as a paragon of all that was generous
and just. His destroyer, an epitome of all the vices. The former,
to be sure, might have been rather rigorous in exacting the full
measure of his “rights;” but this firmness, in a country
ruled on the strictest principles of political and commercial
economy, so far from being decried, should be regarded
as an austere virtue, which even a hungry, bereaved, and forlorn
outcast should recognise and adore. Were both sides of the
question fairly stated, it would be seen that the public suffrage,
which has been perverted by misrepresentation to the side of
prescriptive and traditionary abuses, would declare itself with
instinctive alacrity in favour of equal justice to all. Had honest
statements been preferred to false and misleading ones, rational
discussion to ribald abuse, and conciliation to coercion with its
rude retinue of irritating accessories, a genuine remedy would
have been applied long ago, and the patient would be to-day a
tower of strength and source of comfort, instead of being one of
embarrassment and reproach, to the empire. In Ireland, where
the true cause of this social distemper is felt and understood, there
is a truer diagnosis. There we find Tory organs and government
officials of high rank and responsibility coming forward to vindicate
their country against unqualified defamation. The instances are
too numerous to mention, but a few may not be out of place. At
the present time one of the most eminent judges in the empire,
Baron Fitzgerald, has resigned office, rather than be a party to
the supersession of that palladium of liberty—trial by jury.
Many years ago the excellent judges, Fox and Johnson, were
persecuted for their fidelity to liberty and law. Captain
Warburton, a police magistrate, in his evidence before a Parlia-
mentary committee says, “ The principal and primary object of all
associations among the peasantry is the taking and keeping of land.
“ I am not aware of any conspiracy not immediately connected
with land.” Another witness states, “And to their harshness
as landlords, their strong political feeling and bigoted tendencies,
are ascribable those dreadful outrages perpetrated by unthinking
wretches in the madness of despair.” Mr. Kemnis, a Crown


solicitor, says, “Three-fourths or more of the crimes are produced
by the landlords turning the tenants out of possession.” The
Dublin Review, a Conservative organ, after describing an eviction,
and the natural feeling of the father of his houseless children,
writes, “ Where is the father’s heart that could endure it; what
reverence for the law, what sacredness of private property, what
abstract right of men to do what they wish with their own, would
be of force to restrain our thoughts from dark imaginings, and our
hands from giving them effect. We frankly avow that we would not
submit to such treatment, but would takethelaw intoourown hands'
and, if possible, redress ourselves. Our children have a right divine
to claim from us that protection which may be denied them else-
where, and we cannot recognise any human obligation which should
or could restrain us to reject such an appeal.” And again, “ Compared
to the provocations they receive, we say the blood of Irishmen is
tame and humble, nor is there any other people upon earth who
would so long have brooked the wrongs they have endured.”
Here is an extraction, the charge of a learned judge, Fletcher, to a
grand jury many years ago. “What is the wretched peasant to do,
hunted from the spot where he had first drawn his breath, where
he had first seen the light of heaven. Incapable of procuring any
other means of subsistence, can we be surprised, that, being of
unenlightened and uneducated habits, he should rush upon the
perpetration of crimes, followed by the punishment of the rope
and gibbet. Nothing remains for them thus harrassed, thus
destitute, but with a strong hand to deter the stranger from
intruding upon their farms, and to extort from the weakness of
their landlords (from whose gratitude and good feelings they have
failed to win it) a sort of preference for the ancient tenantry.”
This was certainly a withering reproof, coming from a judge on
the bench, and addressed to a grand jury, probably composed
entirely of the class aimed at.
Having at such length treated of wrongs, you will naturally
expect me to propound a remedy. I have already occupied so much
of your time, that I could not think of detaining you any longer.
Mills’ suggestion finds more favor now than when it was first
promulgated, and it is within the range of probability that
ultimately it will be wholly or in a modified form adopted. He
recommends that the whole island, as regards ownership, be vested
in the occupiers, leaving to those who are now landlords some
rent charge over the land, the nature of which he would leave to
the determination of Parliament. The occupiers, so long as they
pay this charge, to be deemed absolute owners of the land. This
principle of settlement, which in time would bring about the
extinction of landlordism, is in substance identical with that which
Mr. Davitt proposes, and the Land League partially favors. Accord-


cr rj AS v V*- O/C
PjIBUO
(l 0 - NOV 1992 <4
nmo \e.
.. 36 Xl*
hi COiM
ing th tho reports lately given in the papers ot Mr. Davitt s scheme,
he fixes the rental of Ireland at £15,000,000, being a rise of
£13,000,000 in about 150 years. Half this increase belongs to the
landlord, and half to the tenant. At 20 years’ purchase the
landlord’s share would be £140,000,000. This sum should be
borrowed at 3 per cent., the interest being charged on the
contributions of Ireland to the imperial exchequer ; as also would
be the annual contributions towards repayment of principal. The
£140,000,000 should be paid to the landlords in full discharge of all
demands. The tenants, who would in virtue of this arrangement
become proprietors, would have to pay a tax of 10 per cent, tor
the maintenance of civil government. The annual contributions
of Ireland may be estimated at £5,000,000. These proposals would
ten years ago be stigmatised as communistic, but are now deemed
fit subjects of grave and earnest discussion. Modes of settlement
that would have been accepted then with thanks, would be now
rejected with scorn. The most advanced reformer then would
have accepted fixity of tenure, fair rents, and fair compensation
for improvements, together with security against eviction, as a
satisfactory settlement; whereas, at present, nothing short of a
revolution in the matter of ownership would satisfy him.
The story of the Sybil’s books receives here an apt illusti’ation.
The magnitude of the subject has obliged me to abridge and
condense, yet I fear that this contribution, which is essentially
a compilation, has exceeded' the limits which patience should be
called upon to endure. Had time permitted, 1 would like
to contrast the systems of land holding in other countries, with
that of Ireland • and also say something on that fascinating
phase of reform —“ The nationalisation of land.” If, however,
in the course of my eclectic gleanings, I pick up anything further
which may be worth your attention, you have only to signify
your pleasure, and it shall be my duty to comply.
For the facts here stated I have consulted as historians and
miscellaneous writers, Swift, Berkeley, Mitchel, and several others.
For the special subject, Wallace, Russell, Scully, Lavelle, and
others ; upon the two authorities last named I have drawn largely.
Sullivan’s speech on the trial of Parnell has afforded excellent
information; so have the Home and Colonial papers, and state
fUl^o
documents.
J. L.
Luplau, Henwood, & Rider, Printers and, Lithographers, “ Star” Office, Ballarat.


- . -v, • •’ : ... / ; .. •' - . .
S j IvJ . _> ¥
;■ ■ - '
'
:
■'.-■■•■■■■■ 'X '■ ' • > :
X - '' v * %
■ w ' ;■
-
.
-3; : : :■ 1 . ' m ■< -.:
■
, '-y' . ' ■ , V ; ’ , . ■ ■' ■ •-/&>*> y* V '*
' -
■ ’: - - - •
:■/ , -■ '■ ■■;
■
;■ ■ '■
* *? * 4 | t: ; •>, -
1 :


