

THE PHARAOH OF THE EXODUS
FOUND AT LAST
By G. H. BATTEN
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE
MDCCCLXXX


—.w*»v 4 .,.. VWWv .MbiiCU lO<
Political Lbctdrb.— Mr. Batten, of Bioh-
Jsond, delivered a lecture last night to a large
audience,,in the long room of Keeley’s Hotel.
The subject was the “Present Crisis.” Mr.
Batten, in his view of the “ crisis,” took a very
wide range, embracing two principal topics
popular self-government through popular re-
presentation, and the restriction of Govern-
fflent to Its proper duties. The latter head
dividing itself into two sub-beads, under one
ot which the lecturer discussed the sub-
ject of State aid to religion; and
onder the other that of Government
education. The lecture throughout was
forcible and eloquent. The earlier part, re-
fating to the subject of the day—popular
sell-government, acting through popular re-
presentation, meeting a highly sympathetic
audience, was received in its more eloquent
passages with repeated bursts of enthusiasm.
31 r. Batten would very strictly narrow the
rphere of Government duties. He is. there-
fore, opposed to State aid. He is also oppoied
to State education, believing that a self-
developing education is the only system coa-
««ttnt with the general principles of liberty
and that State education, if persisted in, will
ultimately resolve Itself, as in Chins, into an
organised system of mental enslavement. Hr
Batten s hearers by no means shared his view/
on this latter subject. The audience pail
Mr. Batten the high compliment that is
scarcely thinned during an unconscionably-
protracted lecture of two hours and a-half ia
TO AN INFANT.
Sweet babe ! while many vie, '
An offering to thy birth
And growing infancy,
To yield a gift of worth,
I’d fain this prayer of mine
Pre>ent before thy shrine.
May Heaven on thy*young head
Its choicest blessings nun ;
As many hearts have bled,
May thine ne’er bleed nor pain,—
But happy, light, and gay,
Beat with each rising day.
What sorrow is, and woe,—
What hope deferred, thy years,
I pray, may never know;
The vale of bitter tears
Shalt thou ne’er tread, 1 trust,
As most of mortals must.
I’ve seen thy father watch
Th/ sleep", thy mother press
Thee to her breast, and snatch
Ecstatic happiness,
Seeing thy sweet pure smile
Play round thy lips the while.
Then burst the voiceless prayer
Of earnest heart on high,"
From quivering lips, the tear
Bedewing th’ heavenward eye:
May Heaven that prayer accord,
And their pure love reward.
G. H. B.


THE PHARAOH OF THE EXODUS
FOUND AT LAST.
“ The question how far the records of Egypt throw any tight on the study of the
Hebrew Scriptures is one of more than merely archeological value.”
EDINBURGH REVIEW
(307), July, 1879.
The late publication of Herr Brugsch’s History of Egypt under the
Pharaohs, from the Monuments, and the masterly article thereon in the
last July number of the Edinburgh Review, wherein, the subject of the
Pharaoh of the Exodus is treated of both by Herr Brugsch and the
Reviewer, having created some public interest on this subject, the
author of this essay has ventured to place the same before the world,
notwithstanding the many previous theories of great authors; whose
views, however, are proved to be unsatisfactory by the fact of each
proposing a counter theory. Herr Brugsch, true to his school, makes
the Pharaoh of the Exodus a 19th dynasty king : his Reviewer says,
Ho, he was of the 18th. Every king, nearly, of these two dynasties, has,
in fact, been seized upon most unceremoniously by one or other of
modern theorists, and vociferously proclaimed to be the much-wanted
and long-sought-for monarch in question, and branded with all the
obloquy which attaches to that unenviable distinction. The present
writer, having thoroughly investigated these theories, does not hesitate
to say that every one of these Pharaohs, however bad his character,
has been thereby most unjustly maligned, for not one of these so per-
sistently proclaimed to be “the slippery Pharaoh of the Exodus ” was
so. The followers of Lepsius and Bunsen very energetically repudiate
the notion that any one of the kings of the 18th dynasty was the
Oppressor of Israel. “There is no evidence” (they assert) “that the
former were great oppressors. Secure in their conquests abroad, the
Thothmeses and Amenophs seem to have cherished the Shemitcs of the
Delta as useful subjects, though they employed some in enforced labour,”
&c. These remarks are certainly true; but they are equally applicable
to the kings of the 19th dynasty, to say nothing here of very much
more important objections, also equally applicable to both dynasties, as
will appear in the sequel. It must suffice here to state that one most
fatal objection, common to all these theories, lies in the fact that their


authors, having fixed upon some one ov other Pharaoh, with respect to
whom there appeared to he a few seemingly favourable circumstances
whereon to found an identification with the Pharaoh of the Exodus,
have given little or no consideration for the many attendant circum-
stances and events that must be taken into account and reconciled, pre-
cedent and subsequent to the principal event of both Egyptian history
and Mosaic narrative. No Pharaoh can he the one in question unless
all the known circumstances respecting him and his times, will fulfil
these indispensable conditions. On this point every theory hitherto
promulgated is found wanting. It can, therefore, scarcely be considered
presumptuous in the present writer, if, in a matter where so great dis-
crepancies exist, and so great diversity obtains among the highest
authorities, he should have dissented from their views, and, after the
example of their practice, seek elsewhere for the Pharaoh of the Exodus.
That he is satisfied that the question is now, for the first time, solved,
demonstrated by himself, is evident by this production. It is not
expected, however, that this ipse dixit will be accepted against all
learned authority without sufficient proof. This proof the present essay
is designed to set forth; and to effect this the first consideration is to clear
up the chronological difficulties of the Egyptian history of the period.
I. The lovers of historic truth owe Marietta Bey a great debt of grati-
tude for his discovery, a few years ago, of the quater-centenary Stela at
San, the ancient Tanis, the Zoau of Scripture ; for, next to the Rosetta
stone, its discovery has proved to be fraught with consequences more
important than attaches to any other monument. As from the Rosetta
Tablet we discovered the clue to the decipherment of the previously
unintelligible hieroglyphics, so, from the San Stela, we have obtained
tho previous vainly hoped for desideratum of Egyptian records and
monuments, a. fixed date. From this fixed date a chronological system of
Egyptian history can be developed, as will be shown, for several hundreds
of years ; in fact, from near the commencement of the 511 years of the
domination of the Hykshos, or Shepherd Kings, to the end of tho 19th
Theban dynasty, without a break during the whole of that long period.
Great as are the advantages just mentioned, the San Stela has afforded,
also, to the present writer, the clue to another most important subject—
even to the solution of the vexed question as to who were the two
Pharaohs of the Bondage and Exodus of the Israelites.
In the Christian- ,Spectator for March, 1806, appeared an able article,
signed Oriyen (haicrov, upon this San Stela, which the reader, if he can,
would do well to peruse, for its many valuable remarks respecting it,
but which the necessity for brevity compels the present writer to quote
only very concisely. With reference to the particulars revealed by the
San Stela, it must here suffice to remark, in the words of the talented writer
referred to, that “although the Stela hears the cartouch of the Hykshos
Pharaoh, Seth —who was named after the divinity in whose temple it
was found- yet its erection, and the act of worship to this god which it
commemorates, are not to be attributed to him, but to liarnses the
Great The inscription says that King Ramses ....


paid this act of religious homage on iiis own behalf, and on that of his
royal father, whose scutcheon also reads Seth, and in the names of his
ancestors in general." Strange to say, “this Stela is dated not liy the
regnal years of the reigning king, according to the uniform rule, to
which this is the only exception as yet known, but in the four kundreth
y<‘nr of the Hykshos monarch, Seth.” .... “ There, on the granite,
is the astronomical note of time (which all Egyptologists have contrived to
overlook, as they have scores of others on the monuments), which binds,
with all the rigour of a law of nature, this monumental date on our
San inscription, namely the 4th of the mouth Mesori, in the four
JmivlMh year of the era named after the Hykshos Pharaoh jSefJi,” to
the 55th year ot the Eia of Mcnophres, i.e., the Sothiac or Canicular
Period. This fact is worked out by Or'ujeu Omicron, in the article
referred to ; but it must, for the present writer, suffice to give the main
facts thus in brief. We know from the tablet, and from other sources,
that this act of adoration was paid by Ramses in his first year, which
was synchronous with the fifty-fifth year of his father, Seth I. (the first
king ot the 19th Theban dynasty), when the latter associated his son,
Ramses, with him on the throne : this same Seth I. having been, in
like manner, associated in the empire in the second year of his father,
Amenopliath, or Ameuophis—(Mcnophres, or Menophis, of Monetho) —
the 2leu-peh-Rn of the monument, the Ramses I, who was the last king
of the 18th, and father of Seth 1., the first king of the 19th dynasty.
Dr.Hineks, in his Revised Era of Meuophres, has clearly demonstrated
that this Ameuophis, the father of Seth I. and grandfather of Ramses
TL, was the Mcnophres referred to by Theon and Clement of Alexandria
in whose second year (the first of his son, Seth I.) began the Era of
Mcnophres, or the Sothiac or Canicular Cycle; and that this first year
of the era is—in accordance with the authority of Censorinus—
identical with the year b.c. 1323—n0t 1322, as was previously the com-
monly received opinion—consequently the 55th year of the Theban
Seth 1., which is also the first year of Ramses IT., and the four
hundredth year of the Hykshos, or Phoenician Seth, is synchronous
with the year b.c. 1268; and also, therefore, the first year of the four
hundred years recorded on the Stela — i.e., the first of the Phoenician
Seth is synchronous with b.c. 1667 — i.e. the first year after B.C. 1668,
in which the conquest of the Phoenician Seth must have occurred, and
from which the eia commenced.
One of the first important consequences of the revelations of' the San
Stela is, as is pertinently expressed by the talented Origan Omicron—
“ The vaunted Egyptian account of the Exodus, "which, on the strength
of an unproved connection (and irrelevant even if it were proved)
between the name of the imaginary treasure city, Rtiamses, and our king
Ramses, has gained such wide currency, to the disparagement of the
Pentateuch, is dashed to pieces against the granite of the San Stela,
even if there were no other evidence against it; for the most fervid
worshipper of Bunsen would hardly venture to date the Exodus barely
a couple of centuries before the Building of the Temple.”


Another important consequence i; is that the restoration of what lias
always seemed the liopelessly confused Manethonian tradition as to the
all-important twenty reigns embraced within the four hundred "years of
our Stela, is now quite plain sailing.'’ They are— (p,.c. 1667) Seth, 50
years; Archies, 31; Apoplii, 10; Amosis, 26; Amenoplith 1., 21;
Thothrnes 1., 13: Thotlnnes 11., 1; Ainenses, 22; Thothmes 111., 26;
Amenhotep 11., 22; Thothmes IY., 9; Amenhotep 111., 35; Hackan-
chres, 12 ; Rathos, 6 ; Acheuchethre, 12 ; Acherre, 12 ; Hor, 35 ;
Amenophis Ramses 1., 2; Seth 1,, 55; Ramses 11., 66; Menephthah, or
Amenephthes 11., 5; Seth 11., 31.
From various ancient sources we know that one — the last of the
Hykshos, or Shepherd Dynasties, was of foreign, or so-called Blmmioian,
orgin, though doubtless the term “ Canaanite ” would be the more
correct, for the word Phoenician was of somewhat later date in origin.
The first king of the so-called Phoenician dynasty is the Seth from
whom the first year of the 400 years of the Stria dates. We know,
also, that this Phoenician Seth overcame and ousted a precedent Hykshos
dynasty (the 15th), in whose stead he established his own, and thus
“ inaugurated a new' era from the year of his establishing himself >on
the throne of the Pharaohs. His family kept possession of it for nearly
one hundred years, when, after losing Memphis, under the father of the
Theban liberator, Amosis, the Phoenician Hykshos were at last forced,
in the sixth year of this first king of Manetho’s 18th dynasty, to the
capitulation of ‘ JTn-Bnl the Great, 7 on the oorrditiorr of their quitting the
country en masse. It is with this latter event that Manetho, irr a
fragment preserved by Josephus, identifies the Exodus of the Israelites;
while the worthy Clement of Alexandria has confounded it with the
expulsion of the former Hykshos dynasty by Seth, the Phoenician, nearly
one hundred years earlier, which event he dates at 345 years before the
Era of Menophres, which, of course, will be the previously obtained date
(b.c. 1668) of the Phoenician Seth’s conquest”— i.e., 633 years prior to
the foundation of the Temple.
11. To pursue this investigation with success it is of the utmost con-
sequence clearly to understand the nature and history of the Hykshos
dynasties which preceded that of the Phoenician or Canaanite Seth of the
San Stela. Mr. Osburn, the celebrated Egyptologist, who has made this
subject a special study, has elaborated it very lucidly; but want of space
necessitates here a "very brief condensation of the particulars of this
subject.
liming the whole period of the first two Thinite dynasties, a long line
of kings of the family of Menes reigned at Memphis. Of the first
Memphite dynasty (the third of the lists) as little is known as of the
two co-regnaut at This. There is no certain information as to what
caused the change from the first to the second Thinite, but it appears
to have been such as led to other changes, for about the same time the
third, or Memphite, also was changed to the fourth, and a new
monarchy, the fifth, was established at Elephantine. What we know
of the kings of both these (second and fifth) contemporary southern


dynasties is intimately interwoven with the history of those of the,
lourth Memphite, the celebrated pyramid-builders. They seem to
have gained the ascendancy over nearly all Egypt. One of them,
Mencheres, whose name appears contemporaneously in the lists of the
second and fifth, as well as the fourth, certainly became master of the
Memphite kingdom for a time, for he built the third pyramid. These
kings are said to have also “ extended the bounds of Egypt far to the
south, and to have added the greater part of Nubia to the monarchy.”
Circumstances, however, tend to raise the suspicion that the fact was
that a Nubian king (prol>ahly the first of the second Thinite dynasty)
acquired possession of Southern Egypt, rather than that an Egyptian
Pharaoh subdued ssulna. Herodotussays of the early kings, “eighteen
were Ethiopians."' Certain it is these southern kings introduced into
Egypt those gross idolatries and animal worship which seem to have
been borrowed from Nubia, and characterized the later Egyptian religious
system. The Memphite kings persistently maintained the profession of
the earlier, purer, non-idolatrous religion, which, as well as their highly-
developed system of arts and sciences,' they inherited from the first
Mizraite colonists. Hence arose a bitter religious as well as a political
rivalry between the northern and southern kings, which eventuated in
the overthrow of the original Memphites. A change from the fourth
to the sixth Memphite was the first result, whereby, as it seems, the
true Memphite king was expelled by the Thirdtes, for the names
of the sixth are those of the last Thinites. The Memphite prince,
taking refuge at Sebennytus, hi the Delta, founded there a new
kingdom, known as the ninth and tenth dynasties. It was the
kings of this line who were afterwards styled “ Shepherds ” by their
opponents.
The dominion of these lower Egyptian Pharaohs was for 285 years
“ circumscribed within the limits of a province or two on the eastern
border of the Delta, by the successes of the riv al pretension,” who ruled
over all the rest of the country, and, of course, professed the Nubian-
derived idolatrous superstitions. The Sebennytes, as the old Memphites
had done, followed the purer primitive faith of their forefathers. The
last king of the ninth dynasty, in order to regain the dominions of which
his predecessors had been despoiled, with the aid of a great body of
Cauaanite shepherds, Arc., invaded the Memphite empire, and captured
Memphis, c. 2082 b.c. This was the first so-called “ Shepherd Inva-
sion,” from which are reckoned the 511 years of their dominion. This
revolution seems to have subverted not only the Memphite but also the
other dynasties at This and Elephantine, for they became absorbed in
the eleventh Theban, which arose out of them. The Sebennyte kings,
however, were again soon confined for some considerable period (155
years) longer within little more than their old limits of the Eastern
Delta, while the victorious Theban king, Amenemes 1., became master
of all the rest of Egypt, and founded the powerful twelfth Theban
dynasty, c. 2010 b.c. Abram’s visit to Egypt took place shortly after
this last event. “The Pharaoh with whom he had intercourse was one


of the Lower Egyptian or Sebennyte kings of the tenth dynasty.'’ The
contemporary sovereigns of the twelfth Thehan were Sesortassen I.
and Anienemes II.; the date of the latter is astronomically fixed l>y
the beginning of the tropical cycle, at b.o. i’OOo, and in the reign of
the former we have monumental evidence of the occurrence of the
famine which took Abram into Egypt.
“About a century (he., S 3 years) after Abram’s descent into Egypt,
the Sebennyte kings of the tenth dynasty, with the aid of the Canaanite
auxiliaries, became once more the aggressors upon the dominions of the
Upper Egyptian Pharaohs.” Mauetho, in the fragment preserved by
Josephus, gives the details of this conquest. “Under a king named
Salatis, or Saites, they made a sudden incursion into Middle Egypt,'’
during the reign of the seventh Theban king, Anienemes IV., or Amim-
tiniieus, of whose empire they acquired much the greater part. Ainun-
tinueus tied to the southernmost part of the country, and there making
a stand, founded a smaller kingdom, the thirteenth dynasty, and his
successors continued to reign there till, fortune turning again, Amosls
burst into the Hykshos territory, and, as founder of the eighteenth
Theban dynasty, recovered possession of all the dominions of the fugi-
tive Anienemes. “ Saites, and all the kings of his dynasty, though they
were true Egyptians and lineal descendants of Menes, the first king,
were (like all their Sebennyte predecessors) called Hykshos, or Shep-
herds, in scorn and contempt, by the priestly historians and partisans of
the Theban kings, their irreconcilable enemies, because of their encourage-
ment and employment of their Canaanite auxiliaries, who mostly
followed pastoral occupations, while the Egyptians were all agricul-
turists : and because these Canaanites offered in sacrifice the animals
which wen; sacred to and symbols of the Egyptian gods they were held
in detestation and as sacrilegiously abominable.
“The third or fourth successor of Saites ” was the king who was
named Aphophis, or Apappus. . . . “ His political capital was On,
or Heliopolis . . . . at the crown of the Delta.” .... “This
Aphophis was the Pharaoh who became the patron of Joseph.” “All
things,” observes a recent writer (Dr. Smith), “ confirm the statement in
a fragment of Mauetho, that Joseph was brought into Egypt under
the Shepherd king Aphophis.” Mr. Osburu emphatically says “The
Pharaoh who became the patron of Joseph was the king Aphophis.
This is the concurrent testimony of all the Egyptian records
translated by the Greeks All ancient authorities who
have mentioned this subject agree in this with such perfect unanimity
that to reject their testimony is simply to throw overboard all anti-
quity.” Herr Brugsch, in his latest work, is equally confident on this
point; and with reference to the inscription on the tomb of Baba, at
El-Kah, respecting “a many years’ famine during the reign of Ka-
Sekenen-taa III.” (the contemporary of Aphophis, and fourth successor
of Amuii-tiimeus, in Southern Egypt and Nubia), the German professor
emphatically remarks:—“The only just conclusion is that the many
years of famine in the time of Baba must precisely correspond with the


seven years of famine under Joseph’s Pharaoh, one of the Shepherd
kings,” who, as he had just before said, ‘‘was Aphophis.” Mr. Osburu
holds the same views on this point also.
111. One of the most, important circumstances connected with the San
Stela is the fact that it throws a flood of light upon one of the hitherto
obscurest periods of Egyptian history—namely, the period immediately
subsequent to the time of the Hykshos dynasty of “ six kings ”
(respecting whom Josephus lias preserved the Manethonian fragment),
which commenced with Saites, the grandfather of Aphophis, and ended
with Assis. The sum of the reigns of these six kings, as catalogued in
the fragment, is “ 259 years and ten mouths.” The expression of
Manetho, “ these six were the first riders amove/ them” {i.e., the
Hykshos), is most significant, and well deserving of particular attention,
as it distinctly explains a statement that is made a few lines further on,
that these Shepherd kings did not end, as some modern writers repre-
sent, witli Assis, tlie sixth king, still less, as others imagine, witli
Aphophis, the patron of Joseph. “These peopfle,” Manetho goes on to
say, “whom we have before called Hykshos, and named Shepherds, and
their successors, kept possession of Egypt for 511 years. After them, the
kings of the Thehais, and the other parts of Egypt, made an insur-
rection against the Shepherds, and there was a terrible and long war
between them.” Then follow further particulars, which unmistakeably
identify tills Theban rising witli the invasion of Amosis and the expul-
sion of the dynasty of the Phiunician Seth, at the capitulation of
ILa-Var, or Ua-lial, i.e., Tanis, Avails, or Zoau.
Thus, tlie San Stela lias supplied indisputable evidence as to who were
t!ie successors of the “ six kings ” of the dynasty of Saites, which
ended with Assis, and who, in their turn, were expelled by the invasion
of the Theban Amosis. It is not difficult to perceive how this hitherto
unprecedented circumstance of a foreign conquest and firm establish-
ment of an alien dynasty came about. The tolerant policy as to
foreigners of the Pharaohs of the dynasty of Saites would necessarily
cause complicated relations with their Canaanite auxiliaries, and other
tribes beyond their north-eastern frontier, which would, in the usual
course of events, tiring about disputes, which, resulting in war about
tlie time of King Assis, very naturally terminated in the overthrow of
his now luxurious empire, and the assumption of the throne by the
foreign conqueror. What were the circnstauces that led to the invasion
of tlie Theban Amosis, and the overthrow and expulsion of tlie piowerful
and warlike Phoenician or Canaanite dynasty, have yet to he revealed.
It will be shown in tlie sequel that they were such as have never yet
been suspected by modem writers.
A very little amount of intelligence and research will suffice to dis-
cover how tlie mistakes, confusion, and fog in which modern Egyptologists
are involved on this subject have arisen despite the explicit statements
of Josephus and Manetho. The cause is plainly to be traced to the
confused state of tlie lists, as given by Africanus and Eusebius.
Africanus gives three foreign dynasties (tlie fifteenth, sixteenth and


seventeenth): one of “foreign Phoenician kings who took Memphis ;”
*“ a second of Hellenic Shepherd kings, 1 ’ called Hykshos ; and a third
of “ Shepherd kings and Theban Diospolites.” The only names are
those of the first, which arc given as “ tfaiten, Jinon, Pachnan, Staas
Archles and Aphobis.” Eusebius gives hut one Shepherd dynasty, the
seventeenth, which he entitles, “Brothers, Phoenicians, Foreigners.”
Their names are but four, “ Suites , Bnon, Archles, and Aphobis.” The
names given in the Manethonian fragment preserved by Josephus as
being those of the “ first six ” Hykshos kings of the dynasty of Saites
are—“ Salutis or Suites, 19 years; Jinon or Mueris, 44 years; Apachnvs,
37 ; Aphophis , 61 ; louias, 50; and Asses, 49”; the sum of whose joint
reigns is stated at 260 years, loss two mouths. On the San Stela wo
find the names of the three Phoenician or Canaanite kings who were
the immediate predecessors of Amosis (the first king of the 18th Theban
dynasty) to be as follows:—“ Set-aa-Seth, 50 years; Archies, 31; and
Apophi, 15 years.” On comparing the lists of Africanus and Eusebius
with these last two lists, it will at once be perceived, though it has
hitherto escaped notice, that they both have confounded the two dynasties
together as one. Africanus gives the names of the first three kings of
Saites’ dynasty with those of the three Phoenician kings, while Eusebius
gives only the first two of the one and the last two of the other' dynasty !
Thus it is some writer's consider the attack of Amosis was made upon
Aphophis, the grandson of Saites, and the patron of Joseph; whereas
it was made’ upon Apophi, the last of the line of the Phoenician
Set-aa-Seth. They have been misled by the similarity of the names of
the two kings of the two dynasties.
Mr. Osburn (who, of course, knew nothing of the San Stela) con-
cludes that the attack of Amosis was made upon Assis, the last of the
“ six kings ” of the line of Saites ; but, in his account of the war, he
has given readings from the monuments which completely refute his
theory, and demonstrate that Amosis’ attack was made upon a foreigrr
Phoenician, or,rather, Canaanite,Pharaoh. “Thothmosis,” he says, “wrote
in hieroglyphics the chronicle of this capture of Memphis by Amosis, on
the exterior of a magnificent shrine of red granite, which formed part
of the palace of Karnak They embody the following-
facts : —Amosis took Memphis when ho was twenty-nine years old. Its
name is written ‘the land of Xo]>h.’ .... It is spoken of in
the inscriptions invariably as a Canaanite city. This is the case of all
other cities of Egypt in the hands of the foreigners. Their names are spelt
according to the foreign pronunciation, and are written as those of
strange cities.” . . . . “In this chronicle the war of Amosis
against Memphis is spoken of as a war with the Canaanite nations of
Arvad and Heth ” . . . “ and the Pharaoh of Lower Egypt as the
King of Arvad.” Another page of quotation here follows, reiterating
*of the fourteenth and sixteenth no names are given, nothing is known ;
probably the sixteenth were the deeendants of the expelled fifteenth, known as
the Xoite ; while the fourteenth were, probably, those latter Thebans of whom
Kames and Amosis were the last.


the fact that tints war which terminated in the capitulation of Avaris, or
Tanis, was made, not upon any « hereditary notice Pharaoh/’ but upon
a foreign Piueniciau, or Oanaanite king, who had held northern Egypt in
subjection.
That Apohphi (or, hieroglyphically, Apepi) v:ns the name of the
Pharaoh who was attacked by Amosis, we have documentary evidence
in a papyrus in the British Museum, where it is said :—“Now it came
to pass that the land of Egypt fell into the hands of enemies; and there
was no longer any king at the time when it happened. And it was so
that tin; king Tiaaken was only a hale (vassal prince) of Upper Egypt.
The enemies wore in Heliopolis, and their chief, Apepi, in Avaris.
Here Apepi received the news of the rebellion of Timken, who
refused to worship the god Set (or Soutekh) [another name for the Baal
of Syria and Ph<enicia],to whom Apepi had built an everlasting temple.”
The ensuing war occupied the remainder of Tiaaken’s reign, the whole
of the short reign of his successor Karnes, and Die greater part of that
of Aalmies, or Amosis, who brought it to an end. We have a further
confirmation in the epitaph of the ollicor—(a namesake of the king,
Aahmen, or Amosis) —who conducted the naval operations against Tanis,
or Avaris, in which the Shepherds were shut up. No evidence or argu-
ment can be more conclusive than that of these extracts. The red
granite shrine of Thothmosis, the San Stela of Ramses, the papyrus in
the British Museum, Amosis’ epitaph, the Manethonian fragment
preserved by Josephus, and Josephus himself, all concur in one
and the same story, and mutually confirm it and each other—
i.e., that the three Phoenician kings immediately succeeded Assis, the
last of the fifteenth, and were the immediate predecessors of the Theban
Amosis.
IV. It may, however, be objected that on the Tablet of Abydos
“ the names which thereon immediately precede those of the eighteenth
dynasty ; are those of the twelfth, without a break or interval.” To
conclude from this, however, as some do, that the eighteenth dynasty did
actually follow in immediate sequence upon the twelfth, is to set aside and
ignore some of the most assured facts of Egyptian history. Between
the twelfth and eighteenth Theban dynasties the thirteenth certainly
intervened ; it consisted of the expelled Ameuemes and his feeble suc-
cessors, who ruled in southernmost Egypt and Nubia, and was
contemporary with the two successive Hykshos dynasties, founded by
Saites and the Phoenician Seth. All that the Tablet of Abydos proves
is the fact that the kings in their monuments sometimes “made a
selection from the long list of their royal ancestors (as we see in the
tablets of Thothmos and Ramses), who took pains also to obliterate the
records of their predecessors whom they regarded as usurpers.” “In
the Royal Turin papyrus, the fifteenth dynasty immediately follows the
sixth, the one concluding and the other commencing in the same frag-
ment;” thus Saites preferred his claim to be the true successor of the
Memphite kings. On the genealogical tablet of Karnak, also, the name
of this same Amosis or Aahmes, appears “ with only one ancestor,


Monmoth, between him and Menus, indicating probably the line by
which his blood was traced to the traditional founder of the nation.”
“In the lists of Eamses 11. the name of Mendopt I. alone occurs
between that of Menus and the kings of the eighteenth dynasty,
which simply means that Eamses traced his lineage up to Menes,
through the line of Mendopt.” That no further importance is to be
attached to the peculiar fact of the Tablet of Abydos is manifest from
this, our San Stela, also a tablet of this same Eamses 11., where we see
the three kings of the Phoenician dynasty of Seth placed immediately
preceding the name of Amosis. It is not difficult to perceive the
principle on which the Pharaohs of the eighteenth dynasty placed
Amosis next in sequence to Amenemes IV. on the Tablet of Abydos,
inasmuch as Amosis was really the first monarch who possessed and
ruled over the whole of the territories held by the twelfth dynasty, and
the kings of his line might, therefore, with “ superb indifference,”
choose to ignore the intervening Pharaohs, whom they would
regard as mere usurpers and interlopers, and so inscribe the name
of Amosis as next in sequence to Amenemes IV., the last of the twelfth
dynasty.
The record of tiro San Stela, however', dissipates any misconception
that may arise', from the peculiar circumstances of the Tablet of Abydos
as to who were the actual immediate predecessors of the eighteenth
dynasty. These could haw; been no other' than the dynasty of the
Phoenician Seth, placed immediately preceding the name of Amosis, and
indissolubly bound to it and Ids dynasty by the date of the 400 years of
the Phoenician lira. In tiro Sarr Stela, then, it is plain that we have a
reliable basis of calculation for 400 years of the most important, but,
hitherto, most obscure period of Egyptian history; from which, by the
aid of the Mauethouian fragment preserved by Josephus, we can count
backward with sufficient precision the succession of the whole series of
kirrgs connected with tire narrative of the Pentateuch, so that there ought
to bo, one would think, no difficulty in identifying them. Tire results of
this part of the investigation arc synoptical!}' represented in the table
of the “ Contemporaneous Theban and Hykshos Dynasties."
The table given is from that of Orujm Om.ic.nm, and that of the
celebrated Egyptologist, Mr. Eegiuald Stuart Poole, slightly modified
in accordance with the revelations of the San Stela. In the first nine
Egyptian dynasties Mr. Poole adopts the Scptuagint chronology, but it
is to be observed that our subject is in rro way committed to or dependent
on the correctness or otherwise of the Septuagirrt chronology or Mr.
Poole’s arrangement of the first rune dynasties. We have nothing to
do with any event prior' to the extinction of the Memphite dynasty by
the Hykshos (Sebennyte) kirrgs, c. b.c. 2082. Our computation is a
backward one from the assured dates of Solomon and Slrislrak to
Menophres and the Theban Seth 1., thence to the Phoenician Seth, thence
through the fifteenth (Saites’) dynasty, and the twelfth Theban to
(b.c. 2005) Amenemes 11. and Sesortasserr 1., the contemporaries of
Abram. Tire Sarr Stela fixes the date of the 19th dynasty at b.c.


1323, the eighteenth at 1576, the seventeenth, or Phoenician Seth, at
1667. The date of the fifteenth (Saitos’) dynasty is obtained from
the Manetlionian fragment of Josephus ; the duration, as before stated,
was 260 years ; the date of the conquest of the twelfth Theban, and
the expulsion of Amenemes IY. by Saites, is, therefore, c. b.c. 1927.
From -which it follows that the accession of Aphophis, Joseph’s patron,
was c. b.o. 1827 ; and his decease, c. b.c. 1766. The date of Amenemes
11., of the twelfth dynasty, is astronomically fixed by the commence-
ment at his accession of the Lunisolar or Tropical Cycle, at b.c. 2005 ;
and the famine which occurred, and is monumentally 7 recorded, in the
reign of his predecessor, Sesortassen 1., is acknowledged by the most
reliable Egyptologists to lx* that which took Abram down into Lower
Egypt. So much for the elucidation and rectification of Egyptian
chronology.
Y. We have now to consider some difficulties of chronology 7 respecting
the Biblical or Hebrew history, hirst may bo noticed the fact that
chronologists generally erroneously reckon the 130 years between the
“Call of Abram ” and the Exodus from Abram’s 75th year, when
he left Haran, whereas it should ho reckoned from his 70th year
(».«., 30 years before the birth of Isaac), when he loft “ Ur of the
Chaldees,” which is the true epoch of the migration and “ Call of
Abram.” This will make the time from the “Call” to Jacob’s
descent into Egypt 220 years (instead of 215), and it-will reduce the
period of the sojourn in Egypt to 210 instead of 215 years.
It is to be distinctly 7 understood, however, that this fact is merely
mentioned here as one worthy 7 the attention of chronologists; this
argument in no way depends on it. The date of the Exodus is arrived
at by a backward computation from Solomon, and that of the “Call of
Abram ”is 4.30 years prior, whether it be in his 75th or 70th year. The
only difference is, that, according to the old view', Jacob’s descent into
Egypt is made to fall five years earlier than hero stated : but this, happily,
as the reader will clearly perceive, is of not the least consequence to our
theory. One other thing the Biblical student will also perceive, and
that is, the fact here indicated clears up certain chronological hitches
consequent on the old reckoning.
With reference to the date of the founding of the Temple, it is well
known that the Masorote text place's it in “ the second month ” of
“ the 480th year after the children of Israel were come out of Egypt ”
(1 Kings, vi. 1). It is also known that the most reliable chronologists
repudiate this as being insufficient, and “ inconsistent with the several
notes of time contained in the books of Joshua, Judges, and Samuel.”
But the most important point is that this period of 480 years is at issue
with the statement of St. Paul (Acts xiii. 20), which makes the
duration of the interval close upon a hundred years more. His first two
periods alone, “ 40 years in the wilderness,” and, under Judges, “ about
450 years until Samuel,” at once take us beyond the 480th year of the
Masorete. To these he adds the period of Saul’s reign—4o years; to
which we must also add the 40 years of David’s reign, and the first


three of that of .Solomon ; from which we obtain the total—
(4o + 450 +4o+ 40 + 3= ) 573 years.
Kow, as we timl that our Lord and His Apostles rarely quote the
Masorete, but almost invariably a text accordant with the elder
Samaritan and Septuagint, we have, in this fact, strong' presumptive
evidence that the differences which now characterize the Masorete did
not exist in the Apostolic ago, but must have crept in afterwards;
and as there arc valid reasons for believing that here the Masorete is
defective, it certainly appears that we are far safer in relying upon St,
Paul’s numbers rather than the 480th year of the Masorete. A careful
and searching investigation of the subject by the present writer has
resulted in the conclusion that the original Hebrew text, from which
the Masorete, the Samaritan, Ac., are all derived, read “ the/re hundred
and eightieth year.” Every Biblical student is aware that the ancient
Hebrews expressed their numbers by letters, some of which are so alike
as to be easily mistaken one for another by transcribers, and that the
several seeming contradictions in the text with regard to numbers arose
from inadvertence of this kind.
The number 400 was, in ancient Hebrew, represented by the letter
n, and 500 by q (which might easily be mistaken for each other in
transcription), or by pn (i.e., 100 + 400). If, by inadvertence in tran-
scription, the p were dropped out, the 500 would lie reduced to 400
without attracting notice, and so become permanently retained in the
text. This is a simple and adequate solution of the difficulty, which is
confirmed by the significant fact (unfortunately forgotten by the author
until after the calculation had been worked out from other data) that
the Samaritan text reads/rc hundred and eighty 7. As a confirmation
of this view, the present writer subjected it to the crucial test of
verifying the correctness of these 580 years as the true duration of the
interval between the Exodus and the founding of the Temple, by
tabulating the whole series of events during that period, according to
the several notes of time in the books of Joshua, Judges, and .Samuel;
and the result is, that by 7 simply totting up the duration of the reigns of
the several Shophtim, or Judges, and Kings, from Moses to Solomon, as
given in the body of the Masorete text itself, it is seen that the period
embraces just 580 years, as exhibited in the “ Table of Biblical Events
from Exodus to the Temple.”
There is a further difficulty' in adjusting the events of this interval,
for all the dates of the Egyptian history are computed by the Egyptian
year of 3G5 days, whereas those of the Hebrew- are computed by the
early Hebrew year of 360 only, consequently 73 Hebrew years are
exactly equal to but 7 2 Egyptian or solar years. In synchronizing the
events of the history of the Israelites during this period, attention
must be paid to this fact. Prior to the Exodus the Egyptian y 7 ear
appears to have been, like the Hebrew, of only 360 days, so that prior
to that event no adjustment is required, but allowance must be made for
the difference in the two modes of computation in the subsequent events.
Thus it is that the learned Apostle Paul, living at a time when the


Egyptian year of 365 days was universally adopted, appears to have
given lus numbers, with the reservation “ about,” iu accordance with
that system: for the fact is, the 580th Hebrew year is exactly the
573rd solar or Egyptian year of the Apostle.
Now for the application of these calculations. The intelligent reader
will now, doubtless, perceive that the author has not only lighted on
the trail, but has actually run down and captured the much-wanted and
long-sought-for Pharaohs of the Exodus and the Oppression. Solomon’s
Temple, according to the most reliable ohronologists, was founded b.c.
1013 [see Blair’s Tables,] Taking this grand starting-point event to be,
according to St. Paul’s enumeration, in the 573rd solar year after the
Exodus, it follows that the said Exodus took place (1013 + 573 = ) 1580
b.c. , which was the 31st and lust year of Ahciiles, the second Phoenician
or Canaanite Pharaoh, “whoso monument has not been discovered.”
Moses, therefore, was born (1586 +BO = ) 1666 b.c., which was the
second year of Seth, the first Canaanite Pharaoh, and he lied Egypt
b.c. 1626, the -12nd year of Seth, who was therefore the “ new king
that know not Joseph.” Further, the descent or migration of Jacob into
Egypt, 210 years before the Exodus, falls in the 31st year of Joseph’s
patron, Aphophis; and the migration of Abram from “ TJr of the
Chaldees,” 130 years before the Exodus, falls in the year b.c. 2016;
and his visit to Egypt (b.c. 2010) five years before the commencement of
the Lunisolar Cycle (b.c. 2005), in the reign of Amenomes 11., and 72
years after the Shepherds captured Memphis, o. b.c. 2082.
Lo ! now, what a flood of light pours in upon the subject, dissipating
all the many difficulties and discrepancies which attach to all previous
theories respecting the two Pharaohs of the Persecution and the Exode,
whom we find to be of the accursed race of the Canaanites, at once the
oppressors of Egypt and Israel—just as both Manetho and Josephus,
hundreds of years ago, distinctly stated !
At this point this essay must, for the present, close. The author
declines any further to mutilate his original design, of which this is but
little more than an abridgement of the first part only. If sufficient
interest in the subject should exist to call for a second edition, the
author will then also venture upon a continuation, in a second part,
showing all the bearings of the theory; how it accords with every portion
of Scripture narrative, profane history, and ancient literature connected
therewith ; how the tremendous overthrow of the mighty army of the
Canaanite Pharaoh in the Red Sea brought about the invasion of the
Theban Amosis and the ultimate expulsion of the dynasty, just fifteen
years after the Exode ; how Manetho, very naturally, or purposely, con-
founded this almost synchronous expulsion with the Exode; how
Josephus saw through and understood the whole matter, and distinguished
between them, though we moderns have all been under a cloud about
it; how and wherein all other theories have failed to meet the case.
In the meantime, the author, in conclusion for the present, craves to
be allowed to say that he deems he may fairly lay claim to the merit and
the honour of having found at last the Phakaoh of the Exodus.


Note—Jan., 1880.—The author lias but just had his first sight of
Professor P. Smyth s work on the Great Pyramid, wherein he makes
1542 years from the actual birth of Christ to the Exodus, indicated by
the commencement of the ascending passage. As the a.d. era begins
four years after the true birth, this 1542 will be identical with b.c. 1546,
the author’s date, for the entrance into possession of the Promised Land,
when the Israelite polity actually began ; and he would respectfully
submit to Professor P. Smyth and his friends that the commencement
of the ascending passage is more likely to indicate that event than the
Exodus, the period between them being indicated by the bend and con-
junction of the descending and ascending piassages. The date of the
Exodus here given stands on a rock of demonstrative evidence that
nothing can shake.
P. S. —It is now over thirteen years since the author first worked out
his theory, and wrote his essay, which, in its complete form—(designed
to be exhaustive, “thorough”) —consisted of three parts; the first (of
which this article is little more than an abridgement) is devoted to the
elucidation and development of the true chronology of Egyptian history,
from the beginning of the 511 years of the Hykshos dominion to the
end of the 19th dynasty; in the second part all preceding theories on
the Exodus are tested and refuted; in the third is propounded and
demonstrated the theory which is here merely briefly stated. Up to
date the author has not ventured on publication, because publishers and
literary friends all declared it could only result in pecuniary loss, the
subject being not one of popular interest. Not caring—(even for the
laudable purpose of enlightening the world) —to incur so great a loss as
might be involved in the publication of the whole essay, the author, in
order that his unfortunate offspring should “ come to the birth,” has
compelled himself to dismember it—reduce it to a mere torso —with what
feelings only a father and an author can surmise. However, as Byron
says, on a venture of his, so the present writer—whether he will pro-
ceed with this is
“ Dependent on the public altogether :
We’ll see, however, what they say to this ;
Their favour in an author's cap’s a feather,
And no great mischief's done by their caprice ;
And if their approbation we experience,
Perhaps they’ll have some more about a year hence ”
or sooner.
G. H. BATTEN.
January, 1880.


Hebrew Years
of the
Solar Years
Intervals.
Moses and the Israelites quit Egypt
* Joshua leads the Israelites into Canaan, is judge
1586
25 years
Joshua dies, aged 110—(interval without a judge,
40
1546
18 years)
(o) The Israelites enslaved by Chusan llishathaim,
25
1521
8 years
IS
1504-1
Othniel defeats Chusan, and is judge for 10 years
8
1496
Eglon, King of Moab, enslaves Israel for 18 years
40
1456
{o) Eliud subdues Eglon, and is judge for 80 years
18
1439-1
(o) Jabin, King of Canaan, enslaves Israel for 20 yrs.
SO
1360 1
Deborah, with Barak, delivers Israel : rest 40 yrs.
20
1340
Midian enslaves Israel for 7 years
40
1300
(o) Gideon defeats the Midianites, and is judge 40 yrs.
Abimelech, son of Gideon, usurps kingly rule,
7
1294-1
3 years
40
1254
Abimelech slain. Tola, 7th judge, for 23 years ...
1251
Jair, 8th judge, for 22 years [Eli born, c.c. 1236]
(o) The 5th servitude under Ammonites and Philis-
23
1228
tines, 18 years ...
Jeplithah, 9th judge, defeats Ammonites, &c. ;
22
1207-1
rest 6 years
18
11S9
Ibzan, 10th judge, for 7 years ...
[Eli, high priest and judge for 40 years, 1178]
6
1183
Elon, 11th judge, for 10 years ...
7
1176
Abdon, 12th judge, for 8years ...
10
1166
The 40 years’ oppression of Israel by the Philis-
tines begins. [.Samson born some 20 years
previously, n.e. 1178.]
[Samuel born about 12 years prior to next event.
Ant. v. x. 4.]
[Samson captured, &c. ; dies ; judge for 20 years,
1138]
{o ) The Philistines defeat Israelites ; Ark taken ;
8
1158
Eli dies ...
Samuel defeats the Philistines, and ends the 40
20
1139-1
years’ servitude. ...
20
1119
(o) Samuel abdicates ; Saul made first king for 40 yrs
[Samuel dies, cir,, aged 90 years, 10(i0 B.c.]
Saul defeated ; slays himself. [The kingdom divided
24
1096-1
7J years]
[David sole king. Captures Jerusalem, 1048 n.<\]
[Solomon associated in the kingdom, 1017 n.c.J
40
1056
David dies. Solomon sole king
40
1016
Solomon founds Temple at Jerusalem ...
3
1013
Total Hebrew years
580
CHIEF BIBLICAL EVENTS.
FROM THE EXODUS TO THE FOUXDIXG OF THE TEMPLE.
(o) X.B.—In the b.c. column, a year in every 73 Hebrew years is deducted in
order to synchronize the Hebrew with the Solar Years, because 73 of the former
are equal to only 72 of the latter.
* Josephus says Joshua was judge 25 years (Ant. v., i. 29) ; and that the
> interval between his death and the first servitude was 18 years, as above (Ant.
vi., v, 4).


FROM Xth TO XXTI.vd.
THEBANS.
IIYKSHOS.
MEM PH1TE.
B.C.
IIERAC LEO POLITE.
SEBEXNYTE.
Sub verted
by
the
XI. c. b.c. 2082.
X. c. B.c. 2082.
Sebennytes
C. P,.C.
2082.
2082
COPTIC.
[Kings’ names nn-
hH
h-H
XII. c. B.c. 2040.
known]
Anienemes I.
2040
o
Sesortassen I.
Abram in
'■sypt
2010
o'
Anienemes IT.
Tropical c\
de begins
2005
1 “ J
Sesortassen II.
s.
Sesortassen III. ...
Phoenix cy
cle begins
1986
Amenemes III.
o
Anienemes IV.
TIELTOPOLITE.
XIII. c. b.c. 1927.
XV. c. b.c. 1927.
Amun-tinueus
Saites ... yrs. 19
1927
tr
Sekenophis I.
Munis, Bnon ,, 44
1908
Ui
X
Sebak-hotp
Apachnas ,, 37
1864
P
Sekenophis II.
Apappns.or 1 ...
P-*
e?
Sekenophis 111. ...
Apophis j ”
H
*
Jacob in E
gypt
1796
b,
b
Unas, Jonias ,, 50
...
1766
p
p-
Assis ... ,, 49
1716
M
X
PHCEN1CIAN.
CT
i—i
XVII. c. b.c. 1667.
Phoenician Era
1668
h-
Seth ... yrs. 50
Eirst Year
1
1667
g
Sebak-hotp
Archies ... ,, 31
51
1617
P
Tiaaken
Apophi ... „ 10
82
15SG
CO
no
Karnes
s
p
XVIII. b.c. 1576.
Amosis yrs. 26
92
1576
Apophi expelled 5
97
1571
p
02
Amenhotep I. ,, 21
118
1550
Thothmes I. ,, 13
139
1529
02
Thothraes II. ,. [1]
152
1516
t^r 1
Amenses ,, 22
15.3
1515
a
Thothmes III. ,, 26
175
1493
o’
iw
02
AmenhotepII.,, 22
201
1467
n
Thothmes IV. ,, 9
223
1445
g
Amenhotep ill. 35
232
1436
rt-
c
Hackanchres ,, 12
267
1401
CD
Rathos ,, G
279
1389
c>
C5 d
AchenchOthre ,, 12
...
285
1383
0
Acherre ,, 12
297
1371
cT
Her ,, 35
309
1359
s
Aracnophis I. or
344
1324
I-S
Raineses I. ,, 2
g
XIX. B.C. 1323.
Era of Menophres
CD
Seth I. ,, 55
begins
1
345
1323
P
Ramses II. ,, 66
oo
400
1268
m
Amenophis 11.,, 5
121
1202
Ct
Seth II. „ 34
161
1197
to
XX. c. b.c. 1163.
•<
Meriri Seth
ip
Ramses III.
TANITE.
OJ
Ramses IV. to
XXI. c.
b.c. 1107
1107
Ramses Xill. ...
BUBASTITE.
XXII. c. b.c. 990.
Shishak ...
990
O
>s
Jerusalem taken
972
CL
CONTEMPOEANEOUS EGYPTIAN DYNASTIES.


