

THE
WOODS OF NEW ZEALAND,
AND THEIR
Adaptability to Art Furniture.
BY
JOHANN MARTIN LEVIEN.
CABINET-MAKER. UPHOLSTERER, DECORATOR, &c.,
BY APPOINTMENT TO
|Ur Pajcstn % (pttnr, anb |jis pajrstjj tbc fling of Prussia.
LONDON;
10, DAVIES STREET, GROSVENOR SQUARE.
1861.


LONDONJ
PRINTED BY JAMES S. VIRTUE,
CITY ROAD.


THE
WOODS OF NEW ZEALAND,
AND THEIR
Adaptability to Art Furniture.
BY
JOHANN MARTIN LEADEN
CABINET-MAKER, UPHOLSTERER, DECORATOR, &c.,
BY APPOINTMENT TO
ptr piajtstg % Qvim, anb pis pajesfg % JUirg of |jrnssia.
LONDON:
10, DAVIES STREET, GROSVENOR SQUARE.
1861.


LONDONJ
PRINTED BY JAMES S. VIRTUE,
CITY ROAD.


THE
WOODS OF NEW ZEALAND.
The manufacture of superior household furniture has scarcely made so much
progress within the last hundred years as the rest of our modern arts and
manufactures. Whereas extraordinary improvements have taken place in nearly
everything contributing to the comfort of material life —our dwellings made
better and healthier, our intercourse facilitated, our modes of locomotion greatly
increased —there is very little advance visible in the construction of those highly
necessary objects comprised under the name of household furniture. Our great-
great-grandfathers had their chairs and tables, cupboards and wardrobes of
mahogany, just as we have them now-a-days; with, perhaps, this difference
only—that while their furniture was mostly really well made, ours is not unfre-
quently stuck together in a manner anything hut solid and durable. But even
with good workmanship, the household furniture of the present time really
exhibits no notable progress, as far as outward form and construction is con-
cerned. And the reason for this is obvious: our raw material is the same as it
was a hundred or two hundred years ago. Pine, oak, beech, walnut, rosewood,
mahogany, and a few other woods, were the chief materials for the construction
of furniture for the last century, and remain so to the present day. Modem
art has taught us the making of new metals, and the combination of others
already known; modern art has called steam, electricity, and the galvanic force
into its service—is silvering our spoons, gilding our plate, and metamorphosing


the precious aluminium out of the common clay; but modern art as yet has
failed to teach us how to make the slightest change with that commonest of
all raw materials—wood. So we saw our wood, and plane and polish it, as
was done, probably, by the ancient Egyptians; and the great demand of our
times, the demand to create something novel, and not before seen—obeyed
and followed on all other sides —must pass unheeded, as far as ordinary house-
hold furniture is concerned.
Yet there is one way by which novelty may be procured, even under these
circumstances. We must search our globe for new material, for new and
beautiful kinds of wood. As in all things, so in the grain and form of wood,
nature is bountiful and endlessly diversified in her productions, offering as
much, and more, than man will take. For example, wood is found in great
abundance, and of extraordinary fine quality, in New Zealand, and only awaits
the call of fashion to form an important export article from our distant colony.
The woods of New Zealand, as will be seen from the extracts of newspaper
articles appended to this short notice, were introduced into England eighteen
years ago, and, as far as they have become known, have met with the greatest
approbation. That they are not universally acknowledged the finest material for
a high description of modern art furniture is owing to causes dependent on the
commerce of this country. All trade is conservative, and opposed to changes.
The comparatively recent settlement of New Zealand, and its great distance
from Europe, have contributed hitherto to keep us, in a great degree, ignorant
of many of its minor resources. Timber, available for the purposes of the
carpenter, or the cabinet-maker, is, under ordinary circumstances, far too heavy
and bulky an article to bear the cost of a voyage half round the globe as a raw
material; and, of course, if there is not a large demand for the raw material
in the mother country, merchants are opposed to bring it over on mere specu-
lation. The same was the case with mahogany, when it was first introduced
into this country, some hundred and fifty years ago. It required a persevering
demand on the part of the public to induce shippers to treat the precious wood


of the West Indies as a legitimate article of commerce : and it was not till after
many years quiet struggle that mahogany at last began to figure largely on the
import lists of the custom house. Not a few, who liked to call themselves
patriots, then opposed the introduction of the foreign material, on the ground
that it was assuming the honours of the noblest of English trees—the stately
oak. The same argument, should it he used again, will not stand against the
woods of our rising colony at the antipodes, which, in more than one respect,
can fairly take the field at the side of British oak versus Spanish mahogany.
Besides, the claimants of the honours of oak must needs have become much
wiser since that time, and have found out long ago that there is not a cubic
inch of that inestimable wood too much in our country. Though “ the navy of
the future” is prophesied to be of iron, yet years and years must elapse before
we can dispense with oak in the “ wooden walls of England.”
It is scarcely possible to bestow too much praise on the beauty and many
excellent qualities of those noble products of a sunny clime, the woods of New
Zealand. The forest trees of that splendid colony—the England of the South
Pacific Ocean —grow to a most extraordinary size, many of them being larger
than those of America, or, indeed, any other country in the world. One of the
species of these giants of the forest, the kauri , belonging to the pine tribe,
grows frequently to the height of ninety or a hundred feet without branching;
and the branches themselves may he compared to ordinary trees. The trunk of
this species is of immense girth, and the wood tough and light, being admirably
adapted for the manufacture of elegant furniture, as well as any other purpose
for which light and durable woods are required. Another tree, called the
totara, reaches a height of from sixty to seventy feet, and a circumference of
above twenty; its wood is very hard, and exceedingly beautiful, and from its
size and strength, is admirably adapted to he a new and exquisite material for
the cabinet-maker. Quite as valuable is the puriri, or New Zealand oak, a tree
of great hardness and durability, in many respects superior to our English oak.
It has been known to remain thirty years under ground, in a wet soil, without


NEW ZEALAND WOODS.
Name.
Uses.
"So
a
£
s
4)
00
a
»
02
02
o
E-»
1. Tawhero ...
All purposes to which mahogany is applied
93
96
99
2. Matai
Cabinet work and musical instruments
73
67
61
3. Koakoa ......
(
Furniture and fancy work, for which cedar is used
Superior household furniture and fancy work, as well as all')
81
72
60
4. Totara <
works exposed to water, or under the ground, and for panel >
work of houses J
49
61
57
5. Rata
All purposes to which oak and beech are applied
89
103
138
6. Puriri |
Piles under water or ground; also all other work where dura-")
100
100
100
bilitv is required—same qualities as English oak J
7. A keako
Very hard and heavy, fit for cabinet work
8. Manuka
Turning, carving, &c
9. Mangiao
Agricultural implements, oars, and all the uses of asli
89
119
160
10. Kauri
Scantling, plank, ships’ spars, &c
90
99
102
11. Tanekahi ...
Spare of small vessels; outside work
98
103
134
12. Miro
Uses similar to Tanekahi
13. Mapau
Chair-making and carpenters’ tools
78
92
103
14. Rewarewa ...
Axe-handles and small cabinet work
54
60
85
15. Pohulukawa
Timbers of ships, and all work in which curved timber is required
126
109
94
1G. Wharangipiro
Cabinet work, in which satin wood is used
17. Rimu
All building purposes
90
81
95
18. Maire
Two varieties, white and dark: white good for sheaves, cogs, &c.; 1
the dark for cabinet work )
19. Kowhai
Cabinet work, instead of rosewood
20. Kohekohe ...
All uses to which cedar is applied
21. Rohutu
Chair and cabinet-making
22. Kahikatea ...
Inside building work ; packing cases
54
68
85
showing, at the end of the time, the slightest signs of decay; the wood is of a
dark brown colour, somewhat like mahogany, and is capable of taking a most
beautiful polish. But it is impossible, in the very limited space of these pages,
to give a detailed description of all the useful and beautiful varieties of New
Zealand timber, nearly every one of which is adapted to enter into the manu-
facture of superior household furniture. To present, however, a resume of the
vastness and importance of the produce of the colony, the following list has
been compiled, and may he depended upon for accuracy. The wood under
No. 6, Puriri, being equal to English oak in stiffness, strength, and toughness,
has been made, as will he seen, the standard of comparison.


In botany, tbe most important of the woods of New Zealand are designated
as follows:
Native Name, Botanical Name.
Totara Totara
Rimu Dacrydium cupressimum
Mai Dacrvdium taxifolimum
Mairi Podocarpus macronata
Tawsi Leioa fernum racemosum
Rata Metrosideros rolmstum
Kauri] Dammara Australis
Hinau Eleucarpus Hinau
Akiaki Metrosideros boxifolio
Rewarewa Knightia excelsia
It would be easy to fill volumes with tbe narrative of the author’s own
experience in New Zealand: how he came to discover the importance of the
native timber; how he was the first to apply it in the manufacture of household
furniture; and how, finally, he introduced it into this country, and, after great
efforts, extending over nearly a score of years, has now at last succeeded in
establishing it in the favour of the public. But it being doubtful whether
such lengthened details would be interesting enough to the reader, the writer
of these lines prefers to leave the simple tale of his life to be told by others,
namely, the organs of public opinion. With which apology for further dis-
cussion, the author begs to take leave of his kind patrons and readers, intro-
ducing the opinions of the Press.


OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
From the “New Zealand Gazette ” ( Wellington, New Zealand), December 3, 1843.
Furniture Wood. —We are glad to find a considerable quantity of furniture wood being shipped by
all the vessels now proceeding from this port to England. Mr. Levien, a highly respectable German,
and an excellent cabinet-maker, proceeds in the brig Victoria to London, with a view to establishing a
warehouse for the manufacture and sale of New Zealand wood. Mr. Levien has lived here for a consider-
able period, and has been industriously employed in proving the value of our forests, by working native
woods in all descriptions of furniture. His work is beautifully executed, and his prices moderate. The
sitting-rooms of one gentleman in the colony have been completely furnished by Mr. Levien, with articles
all manufactured by him from native woods; and nothing can be more beautiful or attractive. Mr.
Levien takes with him a large quantity of choice specimens of our woods, carefully selected by himself,
and well seasoned before embarked. We feel confident that all persons interested in New Zealand
living in England, will give Mr. Levien a helping hand in his useful enterprise. From long acquaintance
we venture to state, that those who give Mr. Levien one trial will both continue to be his customers and
make it their business to recommend him to their friends. Mr. Levien will be in a condition to undertake
orders the moment he arrives home. We hope, therefore, he will receive the encouragement of having
the various articles he may have made, examined so soon as he commences, and be liberally supported.
If each person at home, interested in New Zealand, will give Mr Levien one order, we are satisfied he
will have the foundation of an excellent business. We expect to hear of furniture made from New
Zealand wood, and Mr. Levien’s warehouse being all the fashion in London. Mr. Levien, on arrival in
London, will leave his address at the New Zealand House, Broad Street, and will be found always to
attend immediately to any instructions he may receive.
From the “ COURT JOURNAL"
[London), May 20, 1848.
The colony of New Zealand, though one that has created more than ordinary interest in the mother
kingdom, is still a terra incognita to many even well-informed persons. Amongst other things, the
woods of those islands remain comparatively unknown, though possessing properties which will ultimately
bring them into great requisition. We have had an opportunity of inspecting a variety of articles formed
of some of these, by Mr. Levien, who went out as a settler in 1841, and whose show-rooms, in Davies
Street, Grosvenor Square, contain some magnificent specimens of workmanship in New Zealand wood, which
he assures us is as durable as it is beautiful. Its fine grain renders it susceptible of bearing a degree of
polish superior to any other description of wood, although it is not more costly. Her Majesty and the
King of Prussia have both become munificent patrons of these works, the importance of which to the
young colony is very great.


From the “ M ORNING POST"
{London), April 18, 1848.
Mr. Levien and the Fdrnitdre Woods of New Zealand. —Our friends in New Zealand will be
pleased to learn that Mr. Levien has recently executed a new commission for the King of Prussia, with
which his Majesty has been so much pleased, that he has conferred upon him, in addition to a special
appointment as cabinet-maker, the gold medal awarded by the Prussian Court to persons of distinguished
merit in the arts, in which rank many of Mr. Levien’s productions in the furniture woods of New Zealand
are well entitled to claim a place. We formerly mentioned that Mr. Levien had received an appointment
from her Majesty in consequence of similar productions; and we understand that tire exquisite materials
furnished by the colony have also attracted the notice of other foreign ambassadors than Chevalier Bunsen,
and that Mr. Levien has orders in progress for other courts than that of Prussia. We trust that this wide
appreciation of the furniture woods of New Zealand will make the colonists alert as to a highly valuable
export, and anxious to preserve what must eventually become of great importance to the colony, instead of
indiscriminately destroying the magnificent forest trees, which supply a material of so great value. They
must resort to the same method as was practised by Mr. Levien himself when in the colony, viz., to select
with great care only the most valuable specimens of wood, and to export it in the log, not in the slab.
It is the latter practice, together with the want of care in the selection, which has led to disappointment in
the woods which have been thus carelessly exported from the colony. Many specimens are now lying in
the docks which cannot find a purchaser, and no wonder, for they are not worth half the amount of freight
for bringing them from New Zealand. This alone has been a serious injury to the reputation of the
woods. It does not follow that because wood comes from the colony it must be of fine quality ; there is
as much inferior timber there as elsewhere. Like all new articles in the market, the furniture woods of
New Zealand met with much opposition in their introduction into this country, and it is solely owing to
the perseverance of Mr. Levien, and the countenance shown to him by the New Zealand Company, that
they have become so favourably known. Now almost any price might be obtained for really fine
specimens. Experience has now showm that not only do the New Zealand woods retain their colour, but
that they increase in richness with age, like the finer specimens of mahogany and other woods in ordinary
use. Mr. Levien has opened an establishment for the sale of cabinet work, manufactured from New
Zealand woods, at the west-end of London.
From the “ SUN ”
{London), August 22, 1846.
Mr. Levies, his Splendid Workmanship for the Qdeen, and the Fdrnitdre Woods from New
Zealand. —We are happy to announce that her Majesty has been pleased to confer upon Mr. Levien the
appointment of cabinet-maker to her Majesty, in token of the very elegant specimens of workmanship
made by him from the woods of New Zealand. Her Majesty the Queen was the first to patronise him,
and he has secured great favour with her Majesty both by his workmanship, his skill, and his woods. We
are much pleased that a testimonial of this nature should have been conferred upon Mr. Levien, not only
as an old colonist, who, in common with ourselves, has stood by the colony “ through evil report and
good reportbut also as a most enterprising man, who has himself gone into the forests and cut down
the timber which is now eliciting the admiration of all connoisseurs of cabinet workmanship in this
country. We trust Mr. Levien’s success will be commensurate with the spirit of enterprise which he has
exhibited. The New Zealand Company estimate Mr. Levien and his high character so much as to have
permitted him the last five years to use their principal room as his magnificent show rooms, where the
public have daily gratuitous admission.


From the “ N EW ZEALAND JOURNAL"
{London), April 21, 1819.
New Zealand Furniture Wood. —We would call the attention of such of our readers as reside in
town, to a splendid dining-table manufactured by Mr. Levien from the Totara wood of New Zealand. It
is now lying at the New Zealand House. We have much pleasure in noticing the increasing demand for
this truly elegant wood, as manufactured by Mr. Levien. We have recently inspected some magnificent
specimens of artistic furniture, which he has completed in Totara and other New Zealand woods, for one
of our most munificent patronesses of Art, her Grace the Duchess of Sutherland. Indeed, Mr. Levien
may now reckon amongst his patrons many of the most influential persons in London. It is surprising
that so little of New Zealand furniture wood finds its way to this country. The shipments which have
been recently made, were selected with the worst possible judgment, and of course were unremunerative;
but of wood such as Mr. Levien himself selected when in the colony, there is the greatest abundance; and
we trust the colonists will avail themselves of his perseverance to bring into notice what should have been,
long before this, a valuable article of export. We have never seen any wood which even approaches
Totara in beauty and richness of colour. It is well worth the while of our readers to give Mr. Levien a
call at his show-rooms in Davies Street, Grosvenor Square, if only to see the great variety as well as the
beauty of the specimens of furniture manufactured from the produce of the colony.
From the “ M ORNING POST"
{London), May 20, 1858.
Carved Furniture.— Several pieces of magnificently carved furniture, commenced and finished in this
country, are at present on view at Mr. Levien’s, 10, Davies Street, Grosvenor Square. A sideboard of
elaborate and exquisite tracery, which obtained a prize at the Exhibition of 1851, having suggested the
appropriateness of a suite of apartments decorated in a similar style, a gentleman of wealth and discern-
ment has, it would seem, been induced, by the judgment displayed by Mr. Levien, to entrust the complete
fitting of a mansion in North Wales to the taste and talent of the latter. The whole of the woods are
from New Zealand, and nothing can equal their richness, beauty, and mottled character. The carvings
in relief, of figures, animals, fish, &0., are especially worthy of praise.
From the “ A RT-JOURNAL"
{London), August, 1858.
Furniture from New Zealand Wood.—We have recently examined several highly meritorious
works, the production of Mr. Levien, of Davies Street, the principal parts of which are manufactured from
a very beautiful wood, grown in New Zealand, and imported into England by Mr. Levien, who we believe
rightly claims the merit of discovering it during a brief residence in the country, where it obtains the
name of Totara. The works to which we refer consist of a dining-room suite, very elaborately and
admirably carved, for Mr. Westmacott, of Gordon Square; the “sideboard” being that very remarkable
production which was exhibited in 1851, to which a high-class medal was awarded, and which was
engraved in the Art-Journal Illustrated Catalogue. The series of tablets, closets, chimney-pieces, panels,
chairs, cornices, &c., are of excellent workmanship. Art has been somewhat extensively employed in
their decoration, exquisitely carved panels of lime-wood being introduced wherever their admission was
desirable; while the beautifully-marked exotic wood which forms their “ ground,” adds greatly to their
interest and value. We allude to the subject mainly to express our surprise that notwithstanding the
opening up of so many new sources, our wealth in this way does not materially accumulate. It is to the
credit of Mr. Levien that he has shown the way to those treasure stores which may be found in almost all
the countries of the new world by those who industriously seek them out.


From the “MORNING POST"
(London), March 16, 1860.
Sideboard of New Zealand Wood. —An opportunity for observing the adaptation of a new and
beautiful wood to the finer purposes of cabinet-making is now afforded by Mi. Levien, of Davies Street,
who has just completed, for the King of Prussia, a massive sideboard (10 feet long by 3 feet deep),
manufactured entirely from the Totara, This is one of the numerous hard woods of New Zealand. It
is of a colour something between bird maple and walnut, bears a high polish, and displays an exquisite
grain in fine and various lines of softening tint. The sideboard is of grand proportions, and the pillars
display some bold carving of artistic design and execution. {See Fig. 1.)
From the “BUILDING NEWS AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW"
(. London ), May 10,18G1.'
The Woods of New Zealand. —Our attention has been invited to some specimens of decorative woods,
natives of New Zealand, which have recently been discovered and brought to London, and which prove to
be singularly beautiful and valuable. A wood of a peculiar knotted grain, of a rich colour, and of singular
general beauty, known to the New Zealanders as Totara , claims the precedence in all those qualities
which are of the greatest importance. A noble sideboard of this wood has just been completed for the
King of Prussia, by Mr. Levien, of Davies Street, Grosvenor Square, by whom the woods of New Zealand
have been introduced to this country. Mr. Levien has long devoted his thoughtful and earnest attention
to the selection and introduction of such foreign woods as would be peculiarly calculated to prove of value
to the cabinet-maker, and in 'the important colony of New Zealand his success lias been most complete
and most gratifying. We have sincere pleasure in congratulating Mr. Levien on the result of his
honourable enterprise. He has brought into notice several woods that are pre-eminent in every most
excellent quality, and which cannot fail to become popular for wood-work of the highest order. We
cordially recommend our readers to pay Mr. Levien a visit, and we are convinced that they will feel
grateful to ns for our recommendation.
From the “ ART-JOURNAL"
( London ), March, 1861.
The Woods op New Zealand. —We have sincere satisfaction in inviting attention to the specimens
of New Zealand woods, which we have ourselves examined with the utmost gratification, at the establish-
ment of Mr. J. M. Levien, in Davies Street, Grosvenor Square. Mr. Levien has bestowed no ordinary
amount of care and thought upon the selection and importation of various woods, that are eminently
suited for the highest productions of the cabinet-maker, but which, hitherto, have been almost, if not
altogether, disregarded ; and his attention has been particularly attracted to the woods of that important
colony, New Zealand. At the present time, Mr. Levien has just completed for his Majesty the King of
Prussia, a sideboard nine feet in length, and executed with admirable skill, which is entirely formed from
a wood known by the New Zealanders themselves by the name of Totara. It is of a peculiar knotted
grain, of singular beauty, and varied in its character in a manner that is truly remarkable. The colour is
no less rich and effective than the grain, and the texture of the wood is such as to ensure its durability.
This new wood requires but to be known, to become greatly in demand; and, most certainly, the original
importer and the discoverer of its value, has just claims for that practical recognition, which has been so
significantly shown by the King of Prussia. We recommend a visit to Mr. Levien, not only for the
purpose of forming a personal acquaintance with the Totara wood of New Zealand, under the conditions
which it is taught to assume in Davies Street, but also in consequence of the high artistic character which
pervades all the productions of this able and enterprising artist-manufacturer. An improved and really
artistic style of furniture is one of the great requirements of the day, and Mr. Levien is the man who is
qualified to produce precisely such works as will prove to be in harmony with the present happy influence
of Art upon the existing requirements of every-day life.


From the “ G LOBE"
{London), March 2, 1859.
Medleval Furniture. —A very unique piece of cabinet work, the labour of modern hands, but an
inspiration of the mediaeval ages, has just been completed for Lady Seafield by Sir. Levien, of Davies
Street, Groavenor Square. It represents a coffer, is made of curious wood, richly carved with elegantly cut
brass bosses and elaborately engraved hinges, with monograms and family motto, “ Stand bast.” The
table on which it rests is a model of simple chasteness, and the tout-ensemble is a noble solidity in
characteristic harmony, and suggestive of the valuable treasures it is its office to secure.
From the “BIOGRAPHISCHEN NACHRICHTEN"
{Leipzig), July, 1858.
Johann Martin Levien was born at Barth, in Pomerania, on the Baltic, in 1811, where he was after-
wards apprenticed to a cabinet-maker. When his apprenticeship had expired, having a great wish to
travel, he visited Denmark, Norway, Sweden, sailed round the North Cape to Archangel, and having
seen something of Russia, sailed to Hamburg, and then returned home. This was only the beginning of
his journeys; he again left home, and for more than five years travelled to various parts of the continent,
perfecting himself in the various branches of his trade, and attending the drawing schools and schools of
design. He now felt a wish to visit other parts of the world, and, in 1837, he sailed for Pernambuco in
Brazil. He there commenced business, and remained two years and a half, but the climate affected his
health so much that he was obliged to leave Pernambuco, and then took a passage in a Portuguese ship
for Rio Janeiro, where he stayed five months, visited the mines and various parts of tho interior, and
collected specimens of the various woods of the forests. It then occurred to him that in other parts
of the world he might discover woods as yet unknown, and taking a passage in an English ship, he
touched at the Cape of Good Hope, and arrived at Wellington, in New Zealand, in 1840. The colony of
New Zealand was, at that time, in its infancy, the vast and dense forests extended to the sea coast; the
number of settlers was comparatively very small, and each one was compelled either to build a house or
have one built, as there was little accommodation for new comers. Mr. Levien therefore built a house, if
house it could be called, consisting of poles fixed in the ground, and having a roof of the native grass of
New Zealand, and tied with the native flax. He was assisted in his undertaking by the natives, who, as
is well known, are a fine intelligent race of people. The difficulty of communication between tho
employer and the employed must, at this time, have been considerable, Mr. Levien not being able to speak
a word either of English or of the New Zealand language. Being thus housed he commenced exploring
the forests, to select the different kinds of woods that would be most eligible for furniture. His previously
acquired experience having given him considerable judgment, he was enabled to select the best kinds of
wood. Amongst the principal of these was the Totara, an evergreen tree which frequently grows to the
height of fifty feet, and a circumference of about twelve feet; the Kauri tree, Hinau, Rimu, Rata, Mai, and
others, fit for house-building, ship-building, and other purposes. Finding the climate very salubrious, and
liking the country, he had by this time acquired so much English as to enable him to court and marry an
English lady of education, and highly respectable connections, intending to make New Zealand his
permanent home; but the disturbed state of the colony in 1844 compelled him to leave, at considerable
loss, as he had erected a good house after his marriage. There was, however, at that time no security for
life and property, so that, after collecting a large quantity of woods of the kinds he found best calculated for
working, he set sail for England, trusting that by introducing the New Zealand woods into England he
should be the means of benefiting the colony by securing to it a market for this important article of
export. On reaching England, the New Zealand Company were kind enough to allow him the use of
their premises for the display of his goods, and workshops in which they could be manufactured; and
various articles made from these woods having attracted the attention of the late Baron de Bunsen, he
gave an order for some furniture for his late Majesty the King of Prussia, who, in consideration of their
novelty and beauty, presented Mr. Levien with a gold medal and a Royal Appointment, 1848. He was also
similarly honoured by her Majesty the Queen of England with a Royal Appointment in 184 G, and in 1848
the Society of Arts decreed him “ honourable mention for his introduction and application of New Zealand
woods to furniture.” Mr. Levien received a prize medal at the Great Exhibition of 1851, and a prize
medal at the Paris Exhibition of 1855.


From the “DAILY NEWS"
[London), March 15, 1861.
New Zealand Furniture Wood.— Mr. Levien, the upholsterer, of Davies Street, Grosvenor Square,
who as one of the earliest New Zealand settlers takes a special interest in the products of that colony, has
several specimens of this and other of the native woods manufactured into tables, cabinets, sideboards, and
other articles pertaining to the drawing-room, dining-room, and boudoir. Amongst them is a sideboard
designed for the King of Prussia, and which, previous to embarkation, is on view at his factory. This
being composed of carefully selected veneers and blocks, presents a moat favourable example of the
adaptability of Totara to ornamental upholstery, and fully justifies Mr. Levien in his attempt, which has
met with encouragement from the royal family of this country as well as that of Prussia, to render the
veneers and timbers of his former home popular in Europe. It stated that the cost of these woods here
is about the same as that of the better sorts of mahogany.
From the “ILLUSTRATED NEWS OF THE WORLD"
( London ), May 4, 1861.
A Story of New Zealand Wood and a Worker in Wood. —ln the last number of the Illustrated
News of the World, we gave an engraving with short description of a sideboard of New Zealand wood;
manufactured by Mr. J, M. Levien, for the King of Prussia. Since then we have paid a visit to the
atelier of Mr. Levien, Davies Street, where we were delighted with an exhibition of industry, such as, we
believe,.exist in few other places. Mr. Levien, we were pleased to see, is one of those quiet unassuming
men whose sole pleasure-consists in carrying out a favourite idea, regardless of reward, and of the frowns
and smiles of the world The forests of New Zealand have some trees of gigantic size, and many
of which are evergreens; some exceed twenty-eight feet in circumference, and have a clear, straight trunk,
without a branch, of about fifty feet in height. The cowerie-tiee at need might be cut and set up
for a ship’s mast at once, without a tool being laid upon it; some of them are of great height, without a
branch to tire top, and “as straight and smooth as a candle.” In 1844, Levien, in consequence of the
disturbed state of the colony, left New Zealand for England, brought with him a large quantity of the
native timbers, and on his arrival at once opened shop at 10, Davies Street, Grosvenor Square, as a cabinet-
maker, and set on foot the trade, which has already grown to a considerable extent, and is rapidly
increasing, in those New Zealand woods. Some furniture made from them attracted the attention of the
Chevalier Bunsen, who gave an order for a large sideboard, and other articles, for the King of Prussia,
of the beauty of which our engraving in our last number gives but a faint idea. It is of a colour
something between bird maple and the walnut, bears a high polish, and displays an exquisite grain in
fine and various lines of softening tint. The sideboard is of grand proportions, and the pillars display
some bold carving of highly artistic design and execution. We strongly recommend a visit to 10, Davies
Street, Grosvenor Square, to all those interested in the progress of British art manufacture; and, above all,
to those who also take an interest in the welfare of our Australian colonies. With us here wood is growing
scarce, and consequently dearer, from year to year, but in New Zealand we have forests of most splendid
kinds of wood, in every respect fitter for use than those we are now possessed of, and which await but to be
known to be appreciated. There ought to be, and we trust there soon will be, a kind of noble zeal among
the well-wishers of British industry, art, and commerce to assist such men as Mr. J. M. Levien in their
arduous undertaking.


APPENDIX.
Letter of his Excellency the Chevalier Bunsen, Ambassador of his Majesty the King
of Prussia at the Court of St. James, to Mr. J. M. Levien.
Abbey Lodge, Regent's Park,
July 17, 1854.
My Deab Mb. Levien,
I cannot leave London and England without expressing to you my great
regard both for your character and for the elegance and excellence of your works. The parquet which
you have executed in Prussia House, and the choice pieces of furniture you have made for me, recommend
themselves to every one who sees them, and, I may add, have done so to me no less by their durability
than by their Art and tasteful workmanship. In taking leave of yon, I beg you to accept as a little
Andenken the enclosed volumes of the “ Life of Niebuhr,” in which you will find some pages written by
myself. With my best wishes for yourself and yours, and your continued prosperity,
I remain, my dear Mr. Levien,
Yours sincerely,
BUNSEN.


Specimens of Art Cabinet Work.
JOHANN MARTIN LEVIEN
CABINET-MAKER, UPHOLSTERER, DECORATOR, &c.,
BY APPOINTMENT TO
HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN,
AND HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF PRUSSIA.


Fig. I.—SIDEBOARD OF NEW ZEALAND WOOD, exhibited at the Great International Exhibition of 1851.
Bought by H. S. WESTMACOTT, Esq., Aberia, Penrhyn, North Wales.
(A similar Sideboard was manufactured by Mr. J. M. LEVIEN for His Majesty the King of Prussia, in 1861.)


Fig II.— BOOK CASE, exhibited at the Great International Exhibition of 1851.


Fig. III.—BOOK CASE, exhibited at the Great International Exhibition of 1851.


Fig. IV.—TOILETTE TABLE, exhibited at the Great International-Exhibitlon of 1851.


Figs. V. and VI.— CHAIR AND DIVAN, exhibited at the Great International Exhibition of 1851.


Figs. VII. and VIII.— CHAIR AND CONSOL TABLE, exhibited at the Great International Exhibition of 1851.


Fig. IX.—JEWEL CASE, manufactured for R USSELL GURNEY, Esq., Q.C., by Mr. J. M. LEVLEN.
Fig. IX.—JEWEL CASE, manufactured for RUSSELL GURNEY Esq.,Q.C., by Mr. J. M. LEVIEN.


Fig. XI. —TABLE TOP OF INLAID WOOD, exhibited at the Great International Exhibition of 1851.


Fig. XIII.—TABLE-TOP OF NEW ZEALAND WOOD (Mosaic of a great variety of wood), manufactured by
Mr. J. M. LEVIEN, and exhibited at the Paris International Exhibition of 1855.
Rewarded with a Prize Medal.
