

"^1
m BE
Mu
1 *
'. , vr
-
'» jHM
4 . MMBV
I IT" • 0 l
Jk mm
M / . jf *
M *, FP
i K # it .
? \ 4
* V ii ' -'C’vA ’ ' -■"'■ V ''
|Vr
k |« -' !*»»** 'v*i w t&^v
f .-% 3b «“ -^ v J


OAIOARWOODS
5 Ridge
Morth Sydney


ivi
III! if




RICHARD AND HIS MOTHER


=v
Kelvin Grove College of Advanced Education
- Presented by 1
i FELICITY STANDISH
• - ' I J
t M H
Blake/ H. S
The tale of
A# 14803283
B# 4204264
KG


—————————— ■—»
THIS BOOK BELONGS
It is the favourite book —
so —if you borrow it DO
take care of it, and see that
it gets back safe and sound


fc | A
r-jf v- fT~Wl
ll BHBIHalHBHBalHalHaaM I
“EACH CARPET WAS A LAYER OF SNOW."
(SEE PAGE 29)


HF/ The
Kv Ta,e
ite
jSk Little
Wh i te
< Fox
/ \Illustrated by
| j Albert a Kathleen Collins
H.S. Blake
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY WAITE <t BULL
8 r CAMPBELL STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W,


begin
Nov
let


“OLGA IS A MOST IMPORTANT
The T*le off
Fox
CHAPTER I.
WHICH IS WHERE WE BEGIN
VERY fairy tale has to have a beginning, so
we may as well begin here as anywhere
else, especially as it seems a perfectly nice
page on which to do such a thing as that, and if
we don’t make a beginning somewhere, our fairy
tale will never get finished.
Now, if you have looked at the cover of the
book, you will have seen it’s a tale about a little
white fox. Really it should be called “ The Tale
of the Tail of the Little White Fox!”, because it’s
much more concerned with the tail than with the
fox itself.
As a matter of fact, the story was called “ The
Tale of the Tail of the Little White Fox ” at first,
but it looked so funny in print that it had to have
a bit chopped off.
Then there’s Olga. We mustn’t forget Olga,
because if there hadn’t been any little girl named
Olga, there wouldn’t have been any wonderful
adventures, and we shouldn’t have heard anything
about the tail of the little white fox. So you see
how very important she is.
How the little white fox lost its tail and how
it came into the possession of Olga you shall hear
as we go on. And not only that, but how Olga,
when she found the tail, set out to find the little
white fox that had lost it, and of all the funny
company she found herself in, and of all the ex-
traordinary things she saw—all these things you
shall hear before the tale is finished.
E— — 3
PERSON ”


f
'V ' ■
m
K N w \ .
‘IVAN WAS VERY FOND
OF MOSS "
OTIHi \
And now, having told you what the tale is all
about, it may be just as well to tell you a little more
about Olga, because Olga, as we have explained
before, is a very important person.
CHAPTER 11.
IN WHICH WE REALLY BEGIN
IF you have been very attentive at your geo-
graphy lessons, you will have heard of a country
called Lapland, and you will know it’s a
strange land far away from here, with no nice shops
or picture shows. But the strangest thing of all
about Lapland is that for three months of the year
it is quite broad daylight all the time, and the other
nine months are just like one long night. So you
could almost say that a year was just one long, long
night and a day.
Just at the end of one of these long nights, and
just when the pale gleam of the sun began to creep
up into the sky, Olga was born. And a very nice
time to be bom, indeed, if you are a Laplander,
because you can be sure that, after such a dreary
long night, the people who live there are always
happy when the sun creeps up to warm them.
So Olga was made a lot of fuss of, and her
father called her a little sunbeam, because it re-
minded him of the summer whenever he saw her.
As Olga grew up she became very fond of
animals. Very often, when the snow was thick
upon the ground, she would help her father’s
reindeer to scratch away the snow and find the
moss it was so fond of eating.
Had Olga lived in this country, she would have
gone to school, just the same as you do, but there
are no schools in Lapland, and Olga stayed at home
with her mother. The nearest neighbours lived
miles away, and Olga hardly ever saw any visitors
except the traders that called once a year to buy
the skins her father had gathered together during
the winter season.'V


V
Olga always looked forward to the coming of
the traders, because, if the season had been a good
one, and her father had plenty of furs to sell, then
the food cupboards were stocked again to over-
flowing and there was plenty to eat. Sometimes,
too, the traders would give her a string of beads,
and on one very wonderful occasion, a beautiful
doll, and you can tell how pleased she was with
that, for Olga had never seen a real doll before.
During the summer months, Olga’s father
stayed at home with her and her mother. There
was a lot to be done. The sledge had to be repaired
and made ready for the winter, and the traps had
to be cleaned and got ready. Then, as the sun
began to get dimmer and dimmer and the snow
began to fall, the reindeers were put into the sledge
and Olga s father would ride away. Sometimes he
would be away for ever so long it seemed to Olga,
and her mother would keep going to the doorway,
looking anxiously to catch the first sight of him
returning through the whirling snowflakes.
Every time he came back the sledge would be
piled with furs from animals he had trapped, and
then he would sit with Olga on his knee, telling
her stories of the animals he had caught. Sometimes
there were bear skins, and Olga didn’t mind hearing
of them. The traders gave plenty of food for them,
and she didn’t feel sorry for the bears, because she
knew how cruel they were. And the wolves, too ;
Olga had heard them howling round the house, and
they made her so frightened that she used to reach
out her little hand to make sure her mother was
near. No! She didn’t mind hearing of the wolves
her father had caught. But the little white foxes —
ah, she couldn’t bear to hear of their being caught.
The little foxes she’d seen gambolling about as
white as the snow itself —it seemed cruel to her to
think they should be killed.
c a
‘AWAY THROUGH THE WHIRLING
SNOWFLAKES"


Olga’s father always laughed, and said the
traders paid well for the white fox furs.
“ Then, why couldn’t you sell the foxes with-
out killing them asked Olga. It seemed to her
that the little white foxes were ever so much prettier
alive than dead.
Olga’s father would stroke her hand and tell
her that some day she’d understand.
Perhaps you are wondering where the tail of
the little white fox comes in. We shall soon be up
to that.
At the end of one of his hunting trips, when
they were all seated around the fire, and Olga was
on her father’s knee, he drew a small parcel from
his pocket and gave it to Olga. Olga couldn’t get
it opened quickly enough, but, when she did so,
what do you think she saw < A tiny white tail,
white as the snow that lodged on the window sill,
white, and so fluffy and soft.
“ Somewhere,” said Olga’s father, “ a little
white fox is running round without any tail. This
is the tail, and it saved the little white fox’s life.
When the trap closed, there was only the tail inside,
so the little white fox scampered off home as quick
as it could run and left the little tail for me to find.”
“ Brave little tail,” said Olga, as she hugged
it. But the tears came into her eyes as she thought
of the little white fox without any tail, and won-
dered what it would do without it.
“SOMEWHERE THERE'S A LITTLE
WHITE FOX WITHOUT ANY TAIL"


CHAPTER 111.
OLGA STARTS OUT
IT may be only an old wives’ tale and it may
not, but some people say that if you like a
thing very much and take it to bed with you
and place it under your pillow you are sure to
dream of it.
Olga didn’t know anything about that, but she
took the little white fox tail to bed and placed it
under her pillow. Then she began to think about
the little fox that had lost it, and she lay awake a
long time wondering what it was doing without
any nice long tail to wrap round itself on cold
nights and so keep warm.
It seemed she had been asleep only a few
minutes when Olga heard a quiet pat, pat, on her
pillow. Olga stirred in her sleep, just as you do
when a fly settles on your nose, and tried to go to
sleep again. But the patting kept on, and at last,
opening her eyes, she was surprised to see a wee
white fox sitting on her pillow.
“ I thought you were never going to wake up,”
it said ; “and I’ve a most important thing to ask.”
“ Oh, little white fox,” said Olga, “ wherever
have you come from s'”
“ I ran all the way,” replied the little white
fox, “ ran quicker than the wind, and, because I
couldn’t get in any other way, I scrambled down
the chimney.”
Olga was sitting up in bed now, and then, for
the first time, she noticed big tears in the little
fox’s eyes, and she was just going to ask what was
wrong, when she saw that the unhappy little
creature had no tail.
The white fox went on talking. “ I want to
ask whether you’ve seen my tail,” it said, “ because
I’ve lost it, and the wild reindeer who lives in the
bush clump over the hill told me his cousin had
said to him that your father had found a little fox’s
tail in his trap, and was bringing it home for you.
Oh, do let me have my tail back again,” the little
white fox sobbed.
. , . SURPRISED TO SEE A LITTLE
WHITE FOX SITTING ON HER
PILLOW"


•BECKONING TO HER ALL THE
TIME TO FOLLOV'"
Now Olga was a kind-hearted little girl, and
she burst out crying, too, when she saw how dis-
tressed was the little white fox. She stroked it
and told it to cry no more, for she had his tail safe
and sound, and would give it back to him. “ But
first tell me what has happened to you since you
lost it,” she asked.
The little white fox brightened up and crept
close up to Olga, and whilst Olga fed him with a
crust of dry bread, it told her how, when first he
found his tail had gone, he ran hither and thither
in his fright, not knowing what to do. Then he had
run blindly home through the driving snow.
“ My father and mother and my two tiny
sisters live in a hole which my father dug in the
side of a big snow drift,” he said. ‘‘We saved all
the moss we could find last autumn and used it
to line our little house. Well, when I arrived home,
mother was very angry with me, because every
white fox is as proud as anything of his tail. We
go to the tail trimmers every week, and he rubs
it with snow to make it grow long and beautiful.
She said I had disgraced the family. ‘ No son of
mine,’ she said, to use her words. What my father
would say when he got home she daren’t even
think. So, when she wasn’t looking, I stole out of
the house, and ran and ran, asking everybody I
met whether they had seen my tail. At last I came
to the wild reindeer, and he told me where to find
you.”
Olga stroked him and said it would be all right
now. Then she turned to get the little fox’s tail
from under her pillow. When she looked at where
the fox had been a minute before, she saw he was
no longer there. He seemed to be in mid air and
gradually fading from sight. Olga held out the tail,
but he still seemed to get farther and farther away,
beckoning to her all the time to follow, until at
last he faded from sight.
n i a


■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■I II
IT y If
CHAPTER IV.
THE REINDEER HELPS OLGA
OLGA woke with a starts half expecting to T _T~~
find the white fox in her bedroom again. /
But she was all alone, and she began to
wonder whether it was all a dream after all, till she /
saw on her pillow the sooty little marks that the
white fox’s tiny paws had made. Even a white fox,
you see, cannot come down the chimney without "
getting fearfully black.
“ So it wasn’t a dream,” thought Olga ; “ and III I I (if I
the little white fox has been here after all. Oh, Ijl ll\ '/II I
why, if it had come all that way for its tail did it [|l| I 11 f
want to fade away like that, when I was just about |M 1 1 '[
to give it back to him.” ID I []Ji I
Well, since the little white fox had gone away II III /j
without its tail, and seemed so badly to want it, Dll (I '
it looked to Olga as if she would have to set out in _r[flL_r^===r
the snow and try to find it. And then she remem-
bered how the fox had beckoned her to follow. J
So Olga hastily dressed herself in all the warmest Lf
clothes she could find, and, opening her door, crept Vcj*2j5sd
past where her mother and father were sleeping. JT
Lifting the heavy latch, she gave one look over i
her shoulder and hurried out into the night. |
How cold and dark it seemed ; and now Olga
wondered which way would be best for her to go. \ , \
She walked this way and that, trying to find the SvrfL'
paw marks in the snow, and then she suddenly
remembered the reindeer. Yes, the reindeer would t
know which way the little white fox had gone.
”| “OLGA HURRIED OUT INTO
THE NIGHT ”
"
But she was all alone, and she began to
wonder whether it was all a dream after all, till she
saw on her pillow the sooty little marks that the
white fox’s tiny paws had made. Even a white fox,
you see, cannot come down the chimney without
getting fearfully black.
“ So it wasn’t a dream,” thought Olga ; “ and
the little white fox has been here after all. Oh,
why, if it had come all that way for its tail did it
want to fade away like that, when I was just about
to give it back to him.”
Well, since the little white fox had gone away
without its tail, and seemed so badly to want it,
it looked to Olga as if she would have to set out in
the snow and try to find it. And then she remem-
bered how the fox had beckoned her to follow.
So Olga hastily dressed herself in all the warmest
clothes she could find, and, opening her door, crept
past where her mother and father were sleeping.
Lifting the heavy latch, she gave one look over
her shoulder and hurried out into the night.
How cold and dark it seemed ; and now Olga
wondered which way would be best for her to go.
She walked this way and that, trying to find the
paw marks in the snow, and then she suddenly
remembered the reindeer. Yes, the reindeer would
know which way the little white fox had gone.


. .*
- v y
"THERE," SAID IVAN. "THAT'S
FINISHED'"
c a
The reindeer was sleeping with “ a weather
eye open,” as it said, because you never could tell
when the wolves would come snarling round. So
the reindeer used to take turns with its two eyes,
and slept with one open and the other shut.
“ Yes,” said the reindeer, “ I saw the white
fox go, but it went quick as the wind, over towards
the spot where the sledge overturned last winter.”
The reindeer was a stupid old thing, but he
had lived many years, and had learned all the tricks
of the cunning, cruel wolves, so when he heard
that she meant to follow the white fox and find
him, he shook his head. ‘‘You would never catch
him, for he runs like a flash of light,” he told Olga ;
“ and you would be sure to be eaten by the wolves
or lose your way. But if you will wait whilst I write
a letter in the snow to my cousin, who is coming
to visit me to-morrow, I’ll take you on my back,
and together we’ll try to find the white fox that
has no tail.”
Do you think that Olga was pleased to hear
the reindeer say this i I should say so. She sat and
watched the reindeer wipe the snowflakes from his
eyelids, and could hardly keep from laughing when
he stood on his head and began to make some
curious scratches in the snow with his horns. He
seemed to be trying to turn inside out. “ With
love from Ivan,” he concluded aloud.
“ There,” he said, “ that’s finished, and now
we’re ready to start. “ I must put it in an envelope,”
he added, and with a few scratches with his hind
legs, he covered the wiggly lines with snow.
“ But now you’ve rubbed it all out,” said
Olga.
“ Oh, no,” said the reindeer. “ My cousin will
know that I’ve written to him when he finds I’m
not here, and he’ll guess I’ve gone away.”


Olga thought it very queer to write a letter
and then rub it all out again, but she didn’t want
to offend the reindeer, and so she said nothing more,
thinking that perhaps reindeers might have ways
of doing things differently from little girls.
She climbed on the reindeer’s back, and,
telling her to hold on tightly, he started to run so
quickly that the keen air seemed to bite Olga’s
face. The snow flew past, and they were soon up
to the spot where the sledge had overturned.
Presently, the reindeer stopped so suddenly
that Olga went flying over his head into a heap of
snow. “ I’m sorry,” said the reindeer, absent-
mindedly, and he bowed politely ; “ but I knew
I’d forgotten something. I didn’t leave a kiss in
my letter for the baby.”
So the reindeer turned his nose towards home
again, and Olga sat down to wait for him to return.
Whilst she waited she tried to model a little white
fox in the snow. The curious thing was that every
time she made a long, beautiful tail for her snow
fox, it fell off and broke into a thousand pieces.
I'M SORRY." SAID THE REINDEER,
BOWING POLITELY.


U
CHAPTER V.
THE SQUIRREL-THAT-KNOWS-
EVERYTHING APPEARS
LGA had just seen the ninth tail fall into
pieces, when a little brown squirrel which
—s had been watching her intently from be-
hind a pile of snow, came and sat down beside her.
“ Hey,” said the squirrel, “ I know you —
you’re Olga.” Olga looked round in surprise, and
the snow fox suddenly went plop. Olga eyed the
squirrel up and down. It had a little knapsack
with sides bulging very mysteriously.
“ I’ve been watching you a long time,” con-
tinued the squirrel, knocking an icicle off its
whiskers. “ It’s no use trying to make a fox out of
snow,” he said ; “ it’s sure to fall to pieces, unless
you put some treacle in too, to make the snow-
flakes stick together.”
“ Ha!” he went on, as if it were, indeed, a
clever idea. “ Treacle mixed with snow will make
it stick together, I must remember that.”
“You seem to know a lot,” said Olga ; “ but
I don’t even know who you are.”
“ Oh,” answered the squirrel, “ I’m the
Squirrel - That - Knows - Everything. ’ ’
“ You see,” he explained, as he fumbled about
in his knapsack and at last brought out a hazel nut,
“ I know everything because I’ve the Nut from
Barcelona that has everything written on it.”
He held up the Nut from Barcelona for Olga
to see “ All the way from Spain,” he said.
Olga hadn’t been to any school, but she could
read a little, and on the nut which the Squirrel-
That-Knows-Everything held up to her, she could
see scratched in a very wiggly-woggly way the one
word—EVERYTHING.
'I'VE BEEN WATCHING YOU f, 9 BH
A LONG TIME"
11 vs


•
The Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything stood
in front of Olga and puffed out his chest. He was a
very swollen-headed little squirrel, who couldn’t
read a single word, but it was very impressive to
pull out the Nut that had Everything written on
it and pretend to read the answer to any question
you were asked.
“ I’m trying to find out how many beans
make five,” he explained at last, when he thought
Olga was sufficiently impressed. “ Because I’ve
been told it’s the most important thing to know.
You can know r everything else, but if you don’t
know that, you might just as well know nothing at
all,” he added.
“ Ah, then I’d like to know as well,” said
Olga. And then she suddenly had a bright idea.
“ Tell me,” she said, “ if you know' everything
else, perhaps you know where the little white fox
that has no tail has gone.”
The Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything looked
very wise, and consulted the Nut from Barcelona.
He squinted at it and turned it first one way and
then the other.
“ I can see,” he said, “ a little white fox that
has no tail running over the snow as fast as he
can go. I can see him now at the door of a white
fox’s home, but the foxes that live there will have
nothing to do with him, because he has no tail.
They bite and scratch at him, until at last he runs
away. I can see now the wolves gathering round to
catch him. And now there’s a big, big fir tree in
the distance with a hole at the bottom. It leads far
down into the earth. The wolves are nearly up to
the little white fox now. But the fox has nearly
reached the hole. The wolf nearest to the little
white fox is opening his mouth wide ; he’s getting
» 0
"CONSULTED THE NUT FROM
BARCELONA


-a®, • K
DO YOU KNOW ANY NURSERY
RHYMES V* ASKED OLGA.
■■
ready to bite the little white fox ; he’s . . . . ”
Olga was excited now, and she bent over the
squirrel to look at the Nut from Barcelona, but she
leaned too far and overbalanced. Over w r ent the
squirrel, too, and the Nut fell to the ground.
“ There, now you’ve spoilt it,” said the
Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything, “ just at the
most important part.”
“ Oh, I’m sorry,” sobbed Olga. “ Can you
see what has happened to the little white fox i"
“ I can’t see him now,” answered the squirrel,
“ but the wolves are all snarling round the hole at
the foot of the fir tree, so the little white fox must
have gone down ever so far into the earth. It’s so
dark down there that I can’t see anything else.”
So Olga had to be content with that, and the
Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything wrapped the
wonderful Nut from Barcelona carefully in a large
sheet of newspaper, and, after putting it back in
the knapsack, sat on it to keep it from being stolen.
“ Do you know any Nursery Rhymes S'” he
asked Olga. “ There’s one that goes something
like this :
Inky Doo and Dinky Dee
Started to make a cup of tea.
But they didn't ask you and they didn't ask me
What's the use of a ship without sea."
The squirrel seemed to think he’d said some-
thing very clever, so Olga told him it was a very
good one, and was just about to ask him if he
knew the one about Simple Simon, when there
was a cloud of snow that seemed to come from
nowhere and nearly buried them, and there was
Ivan, the reindeer, back again.
“ Sorry,” he apologised; “I should have
knocked first.” Then, seeing that Olga was not
alone, he blushed and looked very shy.
cj- i i


Olga was glad to see him back again so quickly,
and, after inquiring whether he’d left the kiss for
the baby, told him how the Squirrel-That-Knows-
Everything came to be there.
“ I say,” broke in the squirrel, who thought
he knew the reindeer sufficiently well to ask him
a personal question, “ do you know how many
beans make five f*
Now Ivan was a reindeer, and he didn’t eat
beans, and didn’t care a hang how many beans
made five, or six, or even six hundred. He hadn’t
any idea in his head beyond moss, but he thought
it best not to say so at once, as he didn’t wish the
squirrel to think he was stupid. So he repeated,
“ How many beans make fives'” and scratched his
head for a while and looked as if he were trying to
think very hard. “ Well, no, sir ; now you come to
mention it, I don’t,” he told the squirrel at last.
Then, suddenly thinking it might be some new
kind of riddle, he added, “ I’ll give it up ; what’s
the answer S'”
Ivan, you see, was a very nicely brought up
reindeer, and he tried to make a good impression
on his new acquaintance.
But the Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything had
no answer to give, because he himself didn’t know
how many beans made five. Ivan the Reindeer’s
brain worked very slowly. All this talk about beans
seemed utterly stupid to him. What’s the use of
beans, anyway i Much better to have some real
juicy moss.
He kept thinking like that for some time, and
then he had an idea. This didn’t happen very often,
because, as we’ve said before, Ivan’s brain didn’t
grasp things very readily. It may have been that he
was feeling hungry, but, anyway, he suddenly
decided that it was his turn to ask a question.
'I'LL GIVE IT UP. WHAT'S THE
ANSWERV


V
“IVAN SHOOK HIS HEAD
DESPARINGLY."
ii -a
CHAPTER VI.
IVAN DISCOVERS MOSS
“iipv O you know where there’s any moss S'” he
enquired.
“ We’ve got some at home/’ said the
squirrel; “we lined our house with it this year.”
“ Oh, I see,” answered Ivan, and then fell
silent. He was trying to decide whether moss which
happened to be in a squirrel’s home and which
might be miles away from the spot he stood on,
was any use for his immediate consumption.
That was a very knotty point —too much of a
problem for Ivan, and, apart from that, the squirrel
had not volunteered to surrender the moss which
his family had used as wallpaper for Ivan to feed on.
In the end, Ivan decided that the moss would
be too stale for him to enjoy, and sat down to wait
for the others to say what was to be done next.
Olga was anxious to continue the search for
the little white fox, and so she explained what had
happened whilst Ivan had been discharging his
duties to his cousin’s baby. She told him of all the
squirrel had seen whilst looking at the Nut from
Barcelona, speaking very slowly and repeating each
word twice, because you couldn’t expect such a
dull reindeer as Ivan to understand anything so
wonderful if you spoke quickly.
Ivan was interested mostly in the Nut from
Barcelona, and the squirrel obligingly withdrew it
from the knapsack, carefully removed the sheet of
newspaper, and displayed the wonderful nut.
Ivan got up on his hind legs and stared at the
Nut for quite a long time, and then shook his head
despairingly.
bbbbbbbbbh3


ljlg
“ I did think/’ he said, “ that it might have
told me where to find a little juicy moss.” Ivan
looked very dejected, and it took a long time to
cheer him up. The Squirrel-That-Knows-Every-
thing rubbed the Nut from Barcelona the better
to see if there were any trace of moss around, and
at length proclaimed that he felt sure there was
some growing at the foot of the big fir tree.
Ivan brightened up at this, and wanted to
start off at once, which shows how stupid he really
was, for, when Olga asked him if he knew where
to find the big fir tree, he looked very silly and had
to admit that he didn’t.
Olga didn’t know either, so they had to ask
the Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything to help them.
That was just the sort of thing the squirrel liked.
Once again he felt in his knapsack and carefully
unwrapped the newspaper covering the Nut from
Barcelona. He puffed out his chest and pretended
to be frightfully important.
Olga and Ivan the Reindeer sat down to watch
him. Ivan was so interested that he sat with his
mouth open, which was a way he always had of
showing real interest.
The squirrel danced on one leg and then on
the other, and then asked Olga to blindfold him.
Still holding the Nut as if he were talking to it,
he chanted in a high, squeeky voice :
“ How shall we three
Find the Big Fir Tree
With a hole in its side
For a white fox to hide i
Go north , go south,
Go east , go West,
Which of the four roads will
serve us best s'”
o
■ ?C4 a
THE SQUIRREL ASKED TO BE
BLINDFOLDED."


“ Don’t forget the moss,” pleaded Ivan.
“ Be quiet, or you’ll spoil it,” said Olga.
Then the Squirrel went through some strange
antics, and, trying to balance himself on his tail,
he threw the Nut from Barcelona straight up into
the air.
Snatching Olga’s handkerchief from his eyes,
he pointed in the direction that the Nut had fallen,
and said, “ That is the way we must go to find the
big fir tree.”
It all looked very easy to Ivan, and he was
anxious to know something definite about the moss,
so he enquired whether the Squirrel would oblige
him with the loan of the Nut from Barcelona for
a few minutes.
“ Certainly,” replied the Squirrel, and handed
it over. So Ivan took the Nut in between his front
hoofs, just as the Squirrel had done, and looked as
intelligent as he could. He puffed out his chest to
such an extent that he fell over backwards. When
he got up, he looked very sheepish, and asked to be
blindfolded. So Olga, though she could hardly stop
from laughing, tied her handkerchief over Ivan’s
eyes.
“ What do I do next i” he enquired.
“ Oh, you have to sing a little rhyme,” ex-
plained the squirrel.
That was a difficult thing for Ivan, but after
one or two tries, in which he could get no further
than “moss,” he managed :
“ Moss grows upon the castle,
Moss grows upon the ground .
Tell me, Nut from Barcelona,
Where can moss be found."
“ THREW THE NUT STRAIGHT
UP INTO THE AIR"


le sprang up in the a
wer and landed head
)ught he was goir / £n^-q
the little squirre • •)
as fast as he cou
van was going t<
id and scratd
laughing, sf W 5. |\^
, because a]
ound like i
get the re:
■ f i "LANDED HEAD FIRST IN A
Then he sprang up in the air so violently that
he toppled over and landed head first in a big snow
drift.
Olga thought he was going to disappear al-
together, and the little squirrel started to scratch
away the snow as fast as he could. He was thinking
that perhaps Ivan was going to take the Nut with
him.
He scratched and scratched, and as soon as
Olga could stop laughing, she helped as well. It
wasn’t very easy, because all the time Ivan was
kicking his legs round like windmills, but at last
they managed to get the reindeer out and on its
feet again.


The Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything picked
up the Nut from Barcelona and wrapped it up,
this time in two sheets of newspaper for safety,
and wasn’t happy till he’d placed it back safe and
sound in his knapsack.
Then, what do you think i Olga saw that
twisted round the reindeer’s horns were a few
pieces of moss. “ Moss,” she shouted.
“ Where i" said Ivan, jumping as if he’d been
shot.
“ Look, down there,” said Olga, pointing to
the hole they had made getting Ivan out of the
snow.
Ivan was back in the hole before you could
turn round, and when he came out again he said
he’s had enough moss to last him a month.
Wasn’t that a very wonderful way for the Nut
from Barcelona to answer Ivan’s question i For, of
course, it was the Nut that caused Ivan to fall head
foremost into the big snowdrift, so the Nut must
have known that the moss was there.
At least that’s what the squirrel said, and very
proud, indeed, did he feel of his wonderful Nut.
He felt into the knapsack more than once to make
sure it was still there.
As for Ivan, if you had told him that the Nut
said chalk was cheese he’d believe it, and he was
ready to do anything the squirrel asked, now he’d
such real proof of the extraordinary powers of the
wonderful Nut.
f
** **


••FASTER AND FA STEP
HE WENT."
CHAPTER VI L
THEY CONTINUE THE JOURNEY
UT it wouldn’t do to stand all day gazing at
the hole into which Ivan had fallen, or to
waste time thinking of the glorious feed of
moss he’d found in it. There was still the big fir
tree to find, which was to help them find the little
white fox.
So Olga nudged the reindeer and said if he
was quite ready to start they’d go in the direction
that the squirrel had pointed out to them.
Olga climbed on Ivan’s back and held out her
hand to the Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything to
help him up, but the squirrel didn’t need Olga’s
help, and in a twinkling he had sprung up on to
the reindeer’s neck. He landed so suddenly that
Ivan, who was day dreaming of how nice it must
be to have a nut that could always tell you where
to find moss, and so save you ever so much trouble
looking for it, got a terrific surprise, and nearly
jumped out of his skin.
At last they were all ready to start once again
and Ivan, telling the squirrel to take care not to
choke him, commenced to run in the direction the
squirrel’s Nut had shown them.
There was one thing about Ivan. He might
be stupid and very slow at riddles, but when it
came to running, there wasn’t much that could
catch him. Faster and faster he went, his legs taking
long strides over the snow —up the hills and down
the hills, like the clouds that sometimes go scurry-
ing across the sky. But though he ran for miles and
miles they saw no fir tree, nor anything else but
snow.


//-•‘O'
_ \ I \
"1 CAN SEE SMOKE?'
HE SAID.
Olga thought that they must surely soon reach
the North Pole. Ivan ran at such a pace that it was
all she could do to hold on. Several times she saw
in the distance what she took to be a fir tree, but
it always faded away long before they reached it.
Imagination does play such tricks as that on people
who travel across wide open spaces like deserts and
snow fields.
The Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything was
more at home than Olga on the reindeer’s back.
He was used to climbing trees and skipping from
branch to branch. So, as they went along, he leaned
as far forward as he could and kept a sharp lookout
for the first sight of the big fir tree. He had been
like this for a long time, when he suddenly shouted.
“ I can see smoke,” he said.
They all became very excited at that. Even
Ivan pricked up his ears and strained his eyes. The
squirrel, being very nimble, climbed up to the very
top of the reindeer’s horns, just like a sailor climb-
ing a mast, and, holding himself on with one paw,
he shaded his eyes with the other. In the ordinary
course, Ivan would have objected to having his
horns used as a step ladder, but he was too excited
to notice anything just then.


£
And indeed it was smoke. As they drew nearer
they could see things much plainer than at first.
The smoke gradually became attached to a tall,
crooked chimney, the sides of which were all
propped up with long poles to prevent them falling
over.
Then they saw the hut to which the chimney
belonged. Such an old-fashioned, tumbledown hut
it was ; every piece of it seemed about to topple over.
In some places the walls bulged out and in others
they bent inwards. At the corner a sign board swung
creaking on one hinge. The other had long ago
rusted off. Presently they were able to see some very
queer looking letters painted on the sign board.
They were all sloping at different angles, and some
of the letters were even missing, but Olga could
just make out the words, JACK FROST, CARPET
DESIGNER.
“ What a funny place for a carpet designer to
live,” said Olga. “ I’m sure no one could expect
to sell carpets so far away from everywhere as
this.”
“ Never mind,” said the squirrel. “ If Mr.
Frost is at home, perhaps he can tell us where to
find the big fir tree.”
“SUCH AN OLD-FASHIONED
HUT IT WAS.”


CRASH I WENT THE SQUIRREL
THROUGH THE ROOF."
CHAPTER VIII.
MR. FROST, THE CARPET DESIGNER
IT was just as well that they had found some-
where to rest. Ivan had run so far that his
tongue was hanging out of his head, which
made him look particularly stupid. He was tired,
and when he was tired, Ivan turned a crosspatch.
“ It’s all humbug,” he said. “ Why should I
go on chasing across the earth for white foxes that
can’t take care of their tails S'”
“ But you offered to come yourself,” said
Olga, anxious to keep on good terms with him.
“ How would you like to lose your tail s'”
“ Lost ray tail. Who says I’ve lost my tail S'”
sharply replied the reindeer.
“ I said how would you like to lose it,” cor-
rected Olga.
“ How would you like to lose yours S'” replied
Ivan, quite forgetting that Olga hadn’t one.
But now they had reached the hut, and Ivan
stopped with a jerk that sent the squirrel spinning
through the air on to the roof. Crash, crash, went
the squirrel, and disappeared through the roof,
which was only held together by old bootlaces.
“ I knew he’d do something like that,” said
Ivan. “ Now we shall have to mend it.”
“ Oh, dear, what has happened now s'” cried
poor Olga, for through the hole into which the
squirrel had disappeared, came a great cloud of
smoke.
Inside the hut they could hear a terrific din
going on. It sounded as though all the wolves that
ever lived were inside and were throwing the
crockery at each other.
f
c — AA — 3


Olga clasped her hands and wished she were
safe at home. The hut rocked first one way and
then the other, and she felt sure it would soon fall
to pieces.
Ivan would have run home if he could, but
he was so frightened that he shook like a jelly fish,
and could only bury his head in the snow.
“ It must be an earthquake,” said Olga, and
then the door burst open suddenly, and the
Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything dashed out, hold-
ing the Nut from Barcelona in both hands.
Close behind him came the most ferocious
looking bullfrog Olga had ever seen, but it couldn’t
get very far out, because of a big chain that was
fastened round its neck.
The strange thing about the chain was that,
although one end was fast around the bullfrog’s
neck, the other was quite loose and not secured to
anything, yet the bullfrog seemed to have an idea
that it was tighdy chained up inside the hut.
“ I fell right on top of him as he lay sleeping,
and he came for me like a tiger,” said the squirrel,
as soon as he could get his breath.
“ Still, you can’t blame him,” spoke up Olga,
as she pulled Ivan’s head out of the snow and tied
a big piece of ice on his head. “ Perhaps Mr. Frost
leaves him at home to mind the house, and he’d
naturally think you were a burglar to go breaking
in through the roof.”
All this time the bullfrog had been eyeing the
three with angry eyes, but he was gradually
becoming smaller in size.
Olga thought it would be a good plan to ask
the bullfrog where they could find Mr. Frost,
especially as it would prove they were not really
burglars ; but every time she took a step forward
the bullfrog glared maliciously and started to swell.
“THE MOST FEROCIOUS-LOOKING
BULLFROG OLGA HAD EVER
SEEN."


1 in* A
\ ■ m
1
I I Ai |
'T-Hfi BULLFROG GREW BIGGER
AND BIGGER .”
“I’ve often heard of people swelling with
anger/’ thought Olga. “Now I know what it
actually looks like. I must be careful never to get
so angry as that.’’
'Each time she advanced, the bullfrog began to
swell, and then, as Olga stepped back, he would
shrink again, so as Olga kept moving forwards
and then stepping back again, the bullfrog looked
very much like a balloon being blown up when
you have to keep stopping to take fresh breath.
I wish he wasn’t quite so ferocious,” thought
Olga, “ but I must find where Mr. Frost has gone.”,
So she screwed up her courage and walked forward.
The bullfrog grew bigger and bigger, till he
was nearly as big as the hut; his eyes seemed as if
they would pop out of his head, and he rattled his
chain till it sounded like thunder.
Olga stopped, she didn’t dare go another step,
so she made a cup of her hands and shouted, “ If
you please, sir, can you direct me to Mr. Frost f*
“Be off!” shouted the bullfrog, shaking with
rage.
He doesn’t seem to like us very much,” said
Ivan. “ Perhaps he’s hungry.” (Ivan was always
thinking of something to eat.) “ And it might make
all the difference if you offered him a little moss.”
“ But perhaps he doesn’t eat moss,” put in
Olga. “ I wonder what bullfrogs do eat,” she said,
thoughtfully.
“ Builrushes,” said the squirrel.
“ Bullpups,” suggested the reindeer.
“ Little girls with turned-up noses, and
squirrels and reindeers and things,” barked the
bullfrog.
®Shhbbbbbbbbbi i


“ Does my nose really turn up S'” asked Olga.
“ Then I think you’re not a bit nice, Mr. Bullfrog,
and I was hoping we were going to be friends.
Besides, we only asked you a perfectly civil ques-
tion, and there’s no need to be so horrid.”
“ Civil question, indeed,” growled the bull-
frog, and he commenced to swell again. “ Nice
way of asking a civil question you have, if you
always come through the roof to do so. Anyhow,
if you’re not burglars, what’s that one got in his
knapsack S'” and he looked suspiciously at the
Squirrel - That- Knows - Everything.
“ Only a Nut from Barcelona,” explained
Olga. She didn’t tell him what a wonderful Nut it
was for fear he might wonder where the squirrel
got it from.
“ Oh, well,” grunted the bullfrog, after a
terrific yawn. “If all you want is to know where
to find Mr. Frost, that’s easily answered. You’ll
find him designing carpets in the snowfields at
the back of the hut.” The bullfrog had evidently
decided that Olga and her two friends were not
anxious to burgle the hut, and he shrunk to quite
his normal size again.
“ Now hurry off, and leave me to sleep,” he
said, drowsily, and Olga turned to walk round to
where the bullfrog had said they would find Mr.
Frost.
The bullfrog dropped off into a sound sleep,
with its head tucked under one leg for warmth.
They hadn’t gone many steps before the bull-
frog stirred in his sleep and called after them
dreamily, “ I say, you might leave your name and
address ; I shall have to send a bill in for repairs
to the roof, you know.”
■—£4— a
“DOES MY NOSE REALLY TURN
UP*.'' ASKED OLGA.


Q
c*
At the back of the hut was a big snow field.
As soon as Olga rounded the comer she could see
in the centre of the field a big square pile of thick,
fluffy carpets. They were all the same size—about
twelve feet square —and piled one on top of another
until they made an enormous heap. Olga thought
it very peculiar to leave such valuable carpets out
in the open, but she was beginning to get used to
queer ideas now, and she walked across to the
carpets with Ivan and the squirrel following close
behind.
“ I don’t see any sign of Mr. Frost,” said
Olga. “ Perhaps he’s not here after all.”
“ There’s a ladder round the other side,” said
the squirrel, who, being very nimble, had already
run round the pile. “ He may be on top.”
So they walked round to where the ladder was
leaning, and Olga shouted as loud as she could,
“ Are you there, Mr. Frost s'” But as she received
no reply, she asked the squirrel and the reindeer
to join her in one loud shout.
Just as she was about to say “ One, two,
three,” she noticed a little bell fastened to the
side of the ladder, with a notice nailed over it,
on which she read, “ KNOCK HARD.”
So Olga stopped and told him very slowly
where she lived.
“ How do you spell Lapland S'” he asked.
Olga told him, and the last she saw of the bull-
frog he was sitting on the doorstep of the hut,
scribbling the address on a slate, whilst his head
first of all nodded and then sank lower and lower,
until his chin rested on his knees, and he was fast
asleep again.
“A UTTLE BELL FASTENED TO
THE SIDE OF THE LADDER


w
uv\. y
ir a
“ How do you knock hard with a bell i" she
asked the squirrel. “ I don’t know/’ replied the
squirrel, “ unless you knock it hard on Ivan’s
head.”
But Olga didn’t want to hurt the reindeer, so
she rang the bell vigorously until her arm ached.
At that moment a funny little old man, with the
rosiest apple cheeks and a long white flowing
beard, popped his head over the top of the carpets,
and, looking down at Olga, said, “ Did you speak i"
CHAPTER IX.
MR. FROST PROVES A QUEER OLD MAN
““TOT A QELL, that’s funny,” thought Olga.
“ The notice says ‘ Knock Hard/ and
when you ring the bell he asks if you
spoke.” But she didn’t say anything about her
thoughts. Instead, she enquired, politely, “ If you
please, are you Mr. Frost i"
“ What did you say you had lost i" asked the
old man, placing his hand behind his ear. It
wasn’t any use. Olga shouted as loudly as she
could, but he couldn’t hear, so the squirrel sug-
gested that they should climb the ladder.
Ivan stayed at the bottom of the ladder, whilst
Olga and the Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything
climbed up. The squirrel was the first to reach the
top, and when Olga was up, they signalled to Ivan
to sit on the bottom step, and then, all together,
they slowly pulled up the ladder, and in that way
managed to get the reindeer to join them.
When they were all on the top of the big pile
of carpets, Mr. Frost, for it really was he, pointed
to the rug they were standing on.
POPPED HIS HEAD OVER
THE TOP."


\ a /%y t
V j
I •
“ Here’s a very fine one,” he said, “ the very
latest fashion in design and colorings, but if you
don’t like it, I can show you others just as good at
various prices.”
He looked a very queer little man when you
saw him close. He was very small, with a head that
seemed too big for him, and a beard that nearly
reached to his knees.
“ Goodness,” thought Olga. “ He thinks we’ve
come to buy a carpet,” so she at once explained
that they had only come to ask whether he had
seen a little white fox without any tail.
The little old man was going to ask more
about the little white fox when his eye fell on Ivan,
and with a great shout he rushed over to the
reindeer. “ Here,” he shouted, “ stop eating my
carpet, or you’ll have to pay for it.” And it was
true. Stupid Ivan had mistaken the big patch of
green in the carpet for a lovely piece of moss, and
had eaten the whole corner off.
Olga felt upset at such gross rudeness by
Ivan, but Mr. Frost, who was really a kindly old
soul, told her not to mind, as he could easily repair
it after the next snowstorm.
“ But you don’t leave these beautiful carpets
out in the snow, Mr. Frost, do you S'” asked Olga,
in surprise.
“ Why not replied the old man. “ It’s the
snow that helps to make them.”
Olga looked very puzzled, and even the
squirrel, who generally knew everything, or pre-
tended to, found this was quite beyond him. The
old man must have noticed this, and he hastened
to explain.
E a


Wwf
h-rS-i t W »v .
k * j * a *x
J-'tV ' /
t.»-:- ■• i 5
< * > »>
a
" • /i
jjf'
M
4||
la ~a
“ You don’t know much about carpet making,
do you?'” he said. “ It’s a very tricky business.
Sometimes you work hard to finish a design before
another snowstorm comes, and then it doesn’t
snow for hours, and sometimes the snow lays
another carpet before you’ve half finished the
design of the one you’re working on.”
Sure enough, each carpet was a layer of snow,
which Mr. Frost first rolled very flat with a big
garden roller, and then, with a long brush and no
end of buckets of paint, he would work on it the
most extraordinary design. One he was very fond
of he called the Humbug and Bull’s-eye Design,
but you couldn’t tell which were humbugs and
which were bull’s-eyes—they all looked alike, just
as those do which you see in bottles in the sw'eet
shop windows.
He told Olga of another very wonderful design
he had once commenced, but the snow came be-
fore he could finish it and covered it all up, and
he couldn’t remember it well enough to start all
over again.
The squirrel listened attentively—he was learn-
ing something more, you see. As for Ivan, he con-
tinued to be distinctly frivolous, and just at this
point he interrupted the old man’s story to ask
whether he had any moss.
“ No,” replied the old man. “ But I’ve some
very nice carpet tacks. You shall have a whole
plate full for dinner to-night. ” Then Mr.
Frost went on explaining about his carpets. Olga
thought there seemed so many of them that he
must have had someone to help him.
“ Bless you,” said old Mr. Frost, “ I’ve been
making them for hundreds of years. Ever since
Alexander the Great was Emperor of all the
Russians.”
EACH CARPET WAS A
LAYER OF SNOW


l\ (
THE GLASS IS FAIMING,"
HE SAID.
Olga had heard of Alexander the Great, and
knew that it was many years since he was alive.
The old man’s clothes seemed to prove that he
spoke the truth, too, for they were of stiff-looking
leather, and very much different from her father’s.
One thing she didn’t know, and that was this.
Everybody grows taller and taller until they are
twenty-one, and then they stop growing. But the
very few people who manage to live for two hundred
years find that, though their heads remain the same
size, their bodies slowly become smaller and
smaller again. That was what accounted for the
little old man’s curious appearance, for he was
over 500 years old.
“ Whatever you do,” concluded the old man,
turning to Ivan, “ never become a carpet designer.
There are too many ups and downs.”
But Ivan hadn’t the least intention of ever
doing so, and Olga couldn’t help wondering what
would happen if anyone really did come to buy
one of Mr. Frost’s carpets. “ Fancy trying to
roll it up and having it crack in the middle,” she
thought. They certainly looked very nice, but Olga
couldn’t see how in the world you were to roll a
snow carpet.
“ And just think,” she went on, “ what the
people would say if they ever did get the carpet
home and laid it beautifully on the floor, and then
woke up next morning to find that the carpet had
melted away in the night.”
But she said nothing to the old man about her
thoughts, and when she looked around at him again
she found him anxiously peering into an egg boiler.
“ I’m afraid there’s going to be a snowstorm
very soon,” he said. “ The glass is falling. We had
better all get back to my hut and wait there for it
to pass over.”
, £ .■" *% v \ ; 'TJ
4 . I
■ " t I • fA. il


"JT'S ONLY A COLD
HE EXPLAINED,
« # iT
* ■■ -
♦
“ By the way/’ he went on, “ it’s Ceasar’s
birthday to-day, and we’re giving a little party to
all his young friends to-night, so you’ll be able to
• • * 1J
join in*
They thanked the old man, and found out that
Ceasar was the name of the bullfrog they’d met.
So they started to make preparations for getting
down from the carpet pile. There was Ivan to be
thought of first, as he wasn’t very good at climbing
down ladders. They told him to sit on the end whilst
they slowly pushed the ladder over the edge and
lowered him to the ground. When it was half way
over it looked just like a big see-saw, and of course
at that moment Ivan gave a tremendous sneeze.
“ Help,” yelled the squirrel, for the reindeer’s
sneeze had jerked the ladder so violently that it
had nearly shot the squirrel into the air like a pea
from a caterpault.
The old man told the squirrel to hang on by
his whiskers or he’d be finding himself landing on
the moon if Ivan sneezed again. Well, they got the
reindeer to the ground safely in the end, where he
sat sadly wiping the tears from his eyes with a
pocket handkerchief. “ It’s only a cold,” he ex-
plained to Olga, as she reached the ground. “ I
shall have to have my chest rubbed with cam-
phorated oil when Igo to bed to-night.” The old
man said there was nothing like an old stocking
tied round your throat for a cold, and, bringing
one from his pocket, he tied it in a neat bow round
Ivan’s neck


/ / / I
H§
"THE CHIMNEY HAD ALWAYS
SMOKED" HE EXPLAINED.
l ~a
They were all on the ground by this time,
and after the old man had turned the notice which
read “KNOCK HARD ” upside down, so
that if anybody called they would know he was
not home, he started to lead the way back.
And now Olga began to feel a little uneasy,
for she suddenly remembered the hole which the
squirrel had made when he fell through the roof,
and wondered what the old man would say.
She thought it best to tell him, and so she
explained how it happened, asking him not to be
angry, as it was all a pure accident, due to Ivan’s
stupidity. But the old man wasn’t a bit annoyed.
When he saw the smoke coming through the hole
in the roof, he clapped his hands and jumped about
like a young kitten. “ Hurrah,” he said, “ now I
shall be able to read and not be smoked into a red
herring. Clever fellow,” he shouted to Ivan, “ you
shall have two plates of carpet tacks for this.”
He explained to Olga that the chimney had
always smoked, and he’d done everything he could
to cure it.
At last, he had blocked it up with an old stock-
ing. “ For,” as he explained, “ if you haven’t a
chimney at all it can’t possibly smoke.”
It didn’t seem very logical to Olga, but the
old man seemed to think it was very brainy, and
besides, he was much older than Olga, and ought
to know better.
But it had never occurred to him to make
another hole in the roof to let the smoke out, and
he’d sat in the hut coughing and choking, his eyes
watering through trying to read.
So what looked like a nasty accident turned
out to be a great stroke of luck, and made the old
man fast friends with Olga, the squirrel and Ivan
—particularly with Ivan.
xS a


I * X
-THREW THE CLOCK INTO A
TUB OF WATER.”
T“
g an
CHAPTER X.
THE BULLFROG’S BIRTHDAY PARTY
old man hurried along as fast as his
his little legs would allow. Olga found it
it hard not to get ahead of him, and yet
Mr. Frost would keep calling to her not to dawdle.
Some little girls would have lost their tempers,
but Olga felt very much like laughing at the idea,
when it was all the old man could do to keep up
with her.
Caesar, the bullfrog, was still snoozing on the
doorstep when they reached the hut, breathing
heavily through his nose, so the old man tied a
trumpet on the end of it, and when the bullfrog
blew hard again, it made such a noise that he woke
up with a start.
The bullfrog must have been dreaming, for he
sprang to his feet when he heard the noise, and,
thinking it was the alarm clock, he picked it up and
plunged the clock into a tub of water.
“ That won’t do the clock any good,” said
the old man. “ Now we shall have to send it to
the water works.”
All this time Olga had been standing outside
the hut, very amused with all that was going on,
with Ivan and the squirrel standing behind her,
enjoying the fun.
‘ ‘ I don’t like the look of him at all —do you S'”
asked the Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything. He
hadn’t forgotten what had happened when he fell
through the roof, and a bullfrog looks awfully fierce
when you see him close.
■ / A


“TICKLED HIM UNDER THE
chin:
c a
The old man must have heard what the squirrel
said, for he assured them that Caesar wouldn’t
hurt a kitten, but he didn’t mention whether he
would be as kind to squirrels and reindeers, and
the bullfrog certainly didn’t look it.
“ He would look much better with another
kind of face,” said Olga, whereupon the old man
tickled Caesar under the chin and told him to
smile.
Caesar’s way of smiling was to open his mouth
from ear to ear, which made him look fiercer still,
so Olga asked him if he would kindly look natural
again.
“ Do you think my face is made of elastic f f
growled the bullfrog, as he made several gulping
noises before his face became straight once more.
“ Your guests will soon be arriving now,” said
the old man to the bullfrog. ‘‘You had better wash
your face and get ready.”
So the bullfrog sat on the step and cried as if
his heart would break, and then washed his face
in the tears. The old man put on his glasses to see
whether Caesar had washed himself clean, and,
being satisfied after a close inspection, he took from
his pocket Caesar’s birthday present. This was a
paper frill from the end of a hambone, and the
little old man tied it round the bullfrog’s neck.
The frill looked old and faded to Olga, but when
Mr. Frost explained that he kept it especially for
Caesar’s birthday, bringing it out each year and
carefully putting it away at the end of the day, Olga
understood why it didn’t look very new.
c — a


Olga volunteered to help the old man withlKe
wmma ■■ I I THE SEAL BROTHERS
f'j*. \ » g S I “LOLLY AND POP."
... ..
preparation for the birthday party, and went inside
the hut.
The reindeer and the squirrel stayed outside
with the bullfrog to watch for the coming of the
first guest, and were soon good friends, since both
Caesar and Ivan were quickly fast asleep, leaving
the squirrel alone to keep watch.
Inside the hut, Olga helped the old man to
spread the cloth and lay the places. Whilst she did
this, she told him all about the little white fox
which had no tail, and showed him the tail, taking
it out carefully from inside her dress. Mr. Frost
listened attentively till she had finished. “ I think
I know the big fir tree you mean,” he told her*
“I’ve often seen it from the top of the carpet pile.”
“ Truly i" asked Olga. ‘‘Then I shall soon
see the little white fox again and give it back its
tail. Oh, to think how happy I shall be.”
“ But we must think of a plan to get him out
of the hole at the foot of the big fir tree,” went on
the old man. “ The wolves have been prowling
round the place where the white fox disappeared
ever since.”
He became very silent and thoughtful for a
time. Then he brightened up. ‘‘l have it,” he
cried. “ We’ll frighten the wolves away. Directly
after Caesar’s party we’ll all go to the rescue of
the little white fox.”
Just at that moment, the squirrel, who was the
only one awake outside, squealed in his high-
pitched voice that two baby seals were approaching
the hut, hand in hand, and each carrying a brown
paper parcel.
“ Those must be the two Seal brothers, Lolly
and Pop. They’re great friends of Caesar’s,” said
Mr. Frost.


icm
3f- _^V*m
"THE CENTIPEDE WAS WEARING
A SAILOR HAT."
Olga and the old man went to the door. There
was great excitement outside. The bullfrog was
wide awake now and was hastening forward to
meet the Seal twins, who were hurrying across the
snow as quickly as they could shuffle along.
“ Many happy returns,” they both cried to-
gether, as they handed their brown paper parcels
over to Caesar.
Caesar thanked them and led them both back
to the hut. Lolly’s present was a box of colored
icicyles, which glistened in the light and made a
nice jingling noise when you shook them. Pop
had brought as his present a bag of marbles, which
were really moth balls that some fur trappers had
left on the ice.
The next one to arrive was a centipede. You
may wonder how he got up into such a cold climate,
and, to tell the truth, so do I. But he was there,
and that is the main thing.
The squirrel and Ivan had never seen a centipede
before. “ I wouldn’t like to keep him in boots,”
remarked the squirrel, “ he’s nothing but legs and
feet.”
“ They’re not feet —they’re hands,” said Ivan.
“You don’t hold your hat on with your feet, do
you i”
The centipede, you see, was wearing a neat
little sailor hat.
“ And you don’t walk on your hands either,”
replied the squirrel.
“ They’re hands,” said Ivan.
“ They’re not; they’re feet,” argued the
squirrel. And a nice noise they made, arguing very
heatedly about where the centipede’s arms left off
and where his legs began.


' A
m TV
“ Here’s Hector,” shouted Caesar, getting very
excited now, and he rushed to meet the centipede.
Hector raised his hat to Olga, because he was very
nicely brought up, and then Caesar introduced the
centipede to her. Olga bowed and said, “ How do
you do s'” “ It’s a good thing,” she thought to
herself, “ that you don’t have to shake hands. It
would take the best part of a day to shake hands
with a centipede.”
Hector then handed over his present to the
bullfrog. This was a scooter Santa Claus had
brought the centipede at Christmas, but, as the
centipede explained, he couldn’t manage it, as he
had far too many feet. So he gave it to Caesar.
The guests were arriving fast now. There was
a seahorse and a dogfish and a catfish, with one or
two tadpoles—distant relations of Caesar’s. There
were too many to get inside the hut, so those who
couldn’t do so had to sit on the roof instead.
The old man’s idea of giving a party was first
to have a good meal himself, and he steadily pro-
ceeded to demolish a big pile of carpet thread on
the table before him, which he did by twisting it
round his fork, very much the same as some people
do with spaghetti, whilst the others watched.
“ It improves the flavour,” he confided to
Olga, pausing with a big consignment of carpet
thread midway between his plate and his mouth,
“ if you leave it to soak overnight.”
“THOSE WHO COULDN'T GET
INSIDE HAD TO SIT ON THE
ROOF, INSTEAD


JB
LI I W
|ChPP^
VVW^
IT “3
Well, at last he was finished, and then he com-
menced to see to the others. Some of the guests
had brought their own food, which was just as
well for them, for the old man’s way of giving a
meal wasn’t a very satisfying one.
He gave Olga a plate of carpet thread which
didn’t seem very palatable to her. She pretended
to eat it, nevertheless. In front of Ivan he placed
two plates of carpet tacks, and the look of dismay
on Ivan’s face when he found them slightly in-
digestible was enough to make anybody laugh.
The din was now something awful. The
dogfish and the catfish were fighting in the corner
over a small sardine that the dogfish had brought,
and this caused the sardine to remark that he was
getting a regular cat and dog life.
XS a


n
ii ki
The animals on the roof were becoming very
impatient, and crowded round the hole which the
squirrel had made to see what all the delay was
about. The crush was so great that the seahorse,
who had been hanging half over the hole, suddenly
lost his hold, and all but fell into the fire.
The centipede was inside the hut, but he was
so small that he stood a good chance of being over-
looked, so he climbed up the table cloth and sat
on the edge of the bullfrog’s plate.
The old man went round as fast as he could
and asked each what they would like most to eat.
“ Moss,” shouted Ivan. “ Is there any moss s'”
“ Eggs, if you please,” said the squirrel.
“ Fish,” squeaked the Seal twins.


{ \
c a
The bullfrog asked for water cress, and every-
one wanted something different, so the old man
fetched his paint-box and brush and painted what
each one wanted at the bottom of his plate.
“ They won’t get very fat on that,” thought
Olga, and as she had now finished pretending to
eat the carpet thread, she took a sheet of paper and
pencil and began to make little verses about all
that happened at the tea party. Perhaps you may
like to read what Olga wrote. Anyhow, the verses
will tell you what a wonderful time they all had
at the bullfrog’s birthday party.
“ If you please , sir," said the reindeer , 41 and it's all
the same to you,
Could I change this plate of carpet tacks for a nice
warm plate of stew i
1 can very well imagine carpet tacks are very fine,
But they're not for constitutions so delicate as mine."
The squirrel wept bitterly, and many a tear he shed,
When he tried to crack his painted egg, he cracked
the plate instead.
So the old man took the plate away and broke it on
his head,
Then whipped the squirrel soundly and sent him off
to bed.
r **


\
Then a flounder which had landed for the party
rather late,
Tried to steal some juicy seaweed which was on the
tadpole's plate.
When the latter showed resentment, the flounder grew
irate,
And the tadpole hit the table in a semi-conscious
state.
The centipede rose slowly, and this is what he said :
“ Could I have a little dripping spread thickly on
my bread i"
The old man asked the centipede to throw the bread
outside,
“ I can't, because I've eaten it," the centipede replied.
“ Your pardon," said the seahorse, “ will you pass
the mayonnaise i
It may help the flavour slightly of the onions and
the sage."
So the catfish left off fighting, and with a sickly grin,
Threw at his friend, the seahorse, the empty sardine
tin.
And all the while a frightful din was going on the
floor,
Where the catfish and dogfish fought as they never
had before.
And the seals were sealing quarrels with a piece of
sealing wax,
Which they carried for the purpose in a parcel on
their backs.


I®
hhhhhhhbmbbhmhhhhhhbbmhmhhhbpvhhbhhbbhbhi
Well, the birthday party finished at last.
Those that had brought their own food had plenty
to eat, and those who brought nothing had as
much on their plates when they finished as when
they started, and most of the crockery got broken
through the guests trying to pick up the imaginary
food. When the noise subsided, the little old man
called the animals together, and as there wasn’t
sufficient room for them all in the hut, they went
outside.
Then he told them the story of the little white
fox, and how Olga wished to rescue it and give it
back its tail, so that the little white fox might go
home once again and be happy with his father and
mother. After he had finished, he asked all those
who were ready to help in the rescue to show their
readiness by standing on their heads. Instantly, as
though they were one, they all turned upside
down and waved their feet in the air (those that
hadn’t feet waved their tails). When they were
right side up again, the old man lined them up like
soldiers and numbered them off from the right.
HH i < ■ ■■■
V I • •MV"


ym W
4ft
CHAPTER XL
THEY FIND THE BIG FIR TREE
FTER Mr. Frost had sent Caesar into the
hut to take off the ham frill, as it had to
come in for several birthdays yet, the
company set out for the big fir tree.
The little old man went first—
and Olga went second —
and Ivan went third—
and the Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything went
fourth —
and Caesar the Bullfrog went fifth —
and then went the seals and the seahorse and
the centipede, the dogfish and the catfish (the
catfish was cleaning its whiskers after the sardine),
the flounder and tadpoles—and all the others.
They walked one behind the other, and it
reminded Olga of the animals going into the ark.
The old man went forward gingerly, because of the
wolves. At the slightest rustle of the wind he would
lift up his finger and hiss “ Down.” Then all the
company would throw itself flat on the snow and
wait for the signal to rise. As this happened every
other minute, you can imagine the progress was slow.
At last they came in sight of the big fir tree,
but the wolves were there, too, sitting round at
the foot of the tree and howling dismally. So they
hid whilst they waited for the moon to pass behind
a cloud, and as they waited, the old man explained
his plan. This was that whilst it was too dark
for the wolves to see them, they should build two
huge polar bears in the snow, and the old man
would paint their eyes red, to make them look
fierce, and their tongues would hang out of their
mouths, so that, to the wolves, they would look
very ferocious indeed.
(S. <J
** AjA **


“A FRESH HERRING WADDLED
OFF HOME."
They all thought it an excellent plan, and
when it was dark enough, the little old man said
“ Now.” Then, without making a sound, they
scratched and dug as hard as they could. The
centipede was very useful with so many hands
working at once, and Ivan did quite a lot, too, when
he didn’t get in the others’ way.
At last the polar bears were finished, and the
old man had painted the eyes and the tongues.
They looked so realistic that a fresh herring which
had gone in front of them, the better to see the
effect, grew so frightened that he started to waddle
off home.
They waited for the moon to come out, and
as soon as it did so, the old man shouted, “ Now,
all together, GROWL!”
No wonder the wolves were scared. If you
had been there, you would have been, too. The
wolves looked round with a hunted look in their
eyes, and they squealed as if they had suddenly
had scalding hot water poured over them. They
then slunk away as fast as they could.


r i
■ iik
! Vvi Bv
IV * / . 4m^
l ra
CHAPTER XI L
RESCUE OF THE LITTLE WHITE FOX
LGA was the first to reach the big fir tree,
and there, true enough, was the hole. She
' called down it and told the little white
fox to come out, but there was no answer. “ What
shall we do now S'” asked poor Olga.
They all sat down in a circle round the tree
to talk over what was the best thing to do. Many
solutions were put forward, but the best one came
from the brave little squirrel.
“ I know what,” he said, “ I’m small enough
to go down the hole, so I’ll go and search for the
little white fox till I find him.”
How they cheered. The flounder was so over-
come that it shed a tear. Then the squirrel went
down into the dark hole. For a time they could
hear his voice calling to the fox, but it grew fainter
and fainter, and after a long, long time he came
back. But without the little white fox.
“ Oh,” wept Olga, “ haven’t you found him S'”
“ Yes,” replied the squirrel. “ I’ve found
him, but he’s so weak and exhausted from want
of food that he can’t possibly walk.”
They all then set to work and made a little
stretcher, which the squirrel took down to the
little white fox and placed him tenderly upon it.
When he signalled to the others, they gently pulled
the stretcher out of the hole, with the white fox
still upon it.
Wasn’t Olga glad to see it. But how thin and
wane he looked.
“ Come, come,” said the old man, “ we must
get him back to the hut and feed him up.”
“ I hope you’ll give him something better to
eat than you gave the birthday party,” thought Olga.
f 1 bhhbbbhhbl
“THE UTTLe WHITE FOX WAS
UPON THE STRETCHER


(V o
"PUT HIS TAIL INTO
SPLINTS."
c a
When they reached the hut, the old man first
piled some fresh wood on the fire, and then sent
the bullfrog to search for some food for the little
white fox. Whilst the bullfrog was gone, the old
man and Olga fastened the tail on to the little
white fox and bound it up in splints.
You should have seen how happy it looked.
Immediately its little eyes lit up and the old man
said, “ Now we shan’t be long.”
Caesar brought back a nice fat chicken. “ No
questions asked,” he said, and so no one asked
him where he got it from.
Of course, the little white fox quickly grew
better, and soon they were able to take the splints
off his tail. That was a great day for all, and the
little white fox couldn’t thank Olga and all of
them sufficiently for what they had done.
CHAPTER XIII.
TELLS HOW MANY BEANS MAKE FIVE
LGA now began to think of going home
again, for her father and mother would be
missing her badly, though she hated having
to leave the little old man and Caesar the Bullfrog.
The Squirrel-That-Knows-Everything didn’t
like the idea either. He had still to find how many
beans make five, you see. So, one night, when they
were all sitting round the fire in the hut, he asked
the old man if he could tell them.
11 rc


»f
f /j|Mr/ : ' a
I ‘7 HAVE JTl”
HE CRIED.
“ How many beans make five what?"’ asked
the old man. But the squirrel had never thought
of it in that way before, and he couldn’t say what
the beans were supposed to make.
“ Well, we must know that first,” said the old
man. “ It might be five fiddlesticks, or five candle-
sticks, or it might even be five bluebottles, or, or
anything.” And certainly it might, there’s no
telling.
When the old man put it that way, the squirrel
felt very small indeed, for anyone ought to know
what they were trying to find out before they began
asking questions.
The old man thought the problem over, and
wondered a long time what it was that the beans
were supposed to make. Suddenly it came to him
in a flash, and he jumped to his feet. “ I have it,”
he said to the squirrel. “ Whyever didn’t I think
of it before ; it’s five bean-feasts, you know —
beans —bean-feasts, see S'”
The squirrel repeated, “ Beans —bean-feasts,”
in a dazed sort of way. You see, he wasn’t quite
sure it was right, but, in case it was, he wanted to
appear intelligent. “ Yes, I suppose it must be bean-
feasts,” he said at last, thinking that was the proper
thing to say. But the old man didn’t hear him, for
he was busily working out the answer. Now he
had something definite, he thought it would be
easy to find the number of beans required to make
five bean-feasts.
“ We’ll try arithmetic with multiplication,” he
muttered, moistening his pencil. And if you had
seen his paper, this is what you would have seen
written there :
Number of beans required for one bean-
feast X 5 = how many beans make five.


It’s all very well to have the problem, but to
find the answer is quite another thing, as you know
yourself, and the little old man used no end of
paper and scratched his head quite a lot.
At last he looked up with a very puzzled ex-
pression on his face. “ It’s no good,” he said.
“ I’ve got as far as 382,481,063, and I’ve still to
multiply it by 5.”
So he gave it up. But the squirrel, who was
ready to ask anyone such an important question,
turned to the little white fox, which had just
awakened from a nice long sleep.
“ I say,” said the squirrel, “ perhaps you can
tell me. I want to find out how many beans make
five, for it’s a most important thing to know, and
you can know everything else, but if you don’t
know that, you might just as well know nothing
at all.”
Now the little white fox, as we know, had
been through quite a lot, and as you will find out
as you grow older, there is nothing like experience
to teach you the answer to the squirrel’s problem.
So, just when the squirrel was beginning to despair
of ever finding the answer, he stumbled on it at
once when he asked the little white fox.
“ How many beans make five i” he repeated.
“ Why, yes, that’s easy. The answer is FIVE, only
they have to be the biggest beans you can find.”
That is indeed true, and at last the Squirrel-
That-Knows-Everything had found the answer
which the wonderful Nut from Barcelona couldn’t
give him, and which he wanted to know more than
anything else in the world.


E"” 5 * 83 ™”" 3
CHAPTER XIV.
IN WHICH THE LITTLE WHITE
FOX
GOES HOME
OON the little white fox was well enough
to go home, and so Olga climbed once again
on Ivan’s back, and the little white fox sat
beside the squirrel in front of her.
Olga never imagined it was so heartbreaking to
say “Good-bye” as she found it when it came to
leaving the little old man and Caesar. But at last
it was over, and Ivan picked up his heels and flew
like the wind in the direction of home, whilst Mr.
Frost and the bullfrog waved their handkerchiefs
until they were quite out of sight.
On and on they went, until they came to the
spot where the sledge had overturned last year,
and there Olga lifted the little white fox to the
ground. She kissed him, with the tears streaming
down her face, and then told him to run off home
to the hole which he and his father and mother
had lined with moss before the winter came.
“ And be very careful of the traps after this,”
she added.
Olga watched him go scuttling along over the
snow as hard as he could go —watched him until
he was quite out of sight, and even then she stood
for a long time, looking at the spot where she had
last seen him.
Then she turned to the squirrel. “ Squirrel,”
she said, “ I cannot bear to part with anybody else,
so you must come and live with Ivan and me for
ever more.”
And he did.
The End .
p Aj*( J
"BE CAREFUL AFTER THIS."


»
■
-
educational resource centre
KELVIN GROVE CAE.
*




ip
[t
Brisbane College of Advanced Education
RESOURCE CENTRE KELVIN GROVE CAMPUS
DUE DATE SLIP
Fines apply if this item is not returned or renewed
on or before the most recent date indicated below.
Renewals may be requested by telephone.
lllJill 3 B


iVi
lln li


84363
