



THE EUREKA STOCKADE
AUSTRALIA’S ONLY BATTLE
3. DECEMBER: 1854
BY JUSTIN CHARLES MAC CARTIE
T HE history of Australia begins properly
with the entrance of the “ first fleet ”
into Botany Bay in January, 1788;
and during the hundred and odd
years which have passed since then it has
been a record of peace, interrupted only by the
brief outbreak which culminated in the fight
at the Eureka Stockade in the Golden City of
Ballarat. While, on the other side of the world,
“ events were thundering on events,” while
the scenes of the French Revolution were being
enacted, while Jena, Austerlitz, Trafalgar, and
Waterloo were being fought, the few inhabi-
tants of the southern continent were occupied
only with struggles to subdue the wilderness,
and occasional skirmishes with black fellows and
bushrangers.
So it was on land ; and even by “ all the long
wash of Australasian seas,” the boom of cannon
fired in anger has only once been heard, and
that so long ago as 1804, when the British ship
I-hh'cj, a whaler sailing under letters of marque,
fought and captured the Dutch ship Swift off
Sydney Heads, with 20,000 Spanish dollars
which the Dutchman had on board, and towed
her prize into Port Jackson, where she was con-
demned and sold. When, after nearly forty years
of peace, Britain again took up arms, and in
rapid succession engaged in the wars of the
Crimea and Indian Mutiny, not a ripple caused
by these struggles disturbed the even flow of
Australian life, and the great American Civil
War also passed away with only one incident to
connect it with Australia—namely, the visit of
the übiquitous Southern cruiser Shcnadoah to
Melbourne towards the end of the war. The
Soudan War of 1885 brought forth the incident
of the despatch of the “ Soudan contingent"
from New South Wales to the seat of war in
Africa, and again in the Boer War which com-
menced very near the end of the last century,
the Australians fought bravely on our side in
South Africa, but these were «7ra-Australian
affairs purely, and the Eureka Stockade remains
Australia’s only battle of the nineteenth century.
Some persons may think that it scarcely merits
such a formidable title, and may regard the whole
series of events of which it was the culmination,
as mere diggers’ disturbances; but a perusal
of what follows will show that a tolerably serious
condition of affairs was averted by the fight of
Sunday, December 3rd, 1854.
In order to understand the events which
led up to the conflict, it is necessary to know
something of the history of the time. The
colony of Victoria (then known as the Port
Phillip District) was separated from New South
Wales, and created a self-governing, colony,
by Imperial enactment on the sth of August
1850. At this period the people of the colony,
numbering some 75,000, were engaged almost
entirely in pastoral pursuits, and the “squatters,”
or runholders, who were mainly drawn from the
wealthy classes of England, had a preponderating
influence in the affairs of the young country.
When the colony was made self-governing, legis-
lation was placed in the hands of a Governor and
council, the latter consisting of thirty members,
ten nominated by the Governor and twenty
elected by the people; and had matters con-
tinued on the old pastoral lines, this system
of government might possibly have answered
for some years, though it would undoubtedly
have had to be popularised as population in-
creased. As it happened, however, a completely
new and jarring condition of things arose very
soon when, early in 1851, gold was discovered
in the interior, and a tremendous influx of
people, animated by totally different aims and
ideas from those of the pastoral settlers, followed.
The settlers looked askance at the gold-diggers,
and it is well known that the squatters and


governing officials would willingly have kept
secret the fact that the country, was auriferous,
and actually, did so for several years. They
feared that the people would be diverted from
their regular employment, dreaded the influx of
large numbers of adventurous men, hated to be
disturbed in the occupation of the large areas
of land they had acquired by the simple process
of “ squatting ” on them, and generally disliked
the idea of the existing state of things being
interfered with. ,
In those days it was held that all minerals
contained in the soil were the property of the
Crown, and acting on this assumption the
Government of New South Wales first, and
that of Victoria subsequently, maintained that
it had a right to take a toll of the earnings,
or findings, of the gold-diggers, and a license
fee of thirty shillings a month was imposed on
each person who wished to seek for gold. .
From the very first this license (or “ Miner’s
Right,” as it was called) was received with an ill
grace by the diggers, and its imposition and the
harsh manner in which it was enforced were
the causes that led up to the Eureka conflict.
The license was in this form :
GOLD LICENSE.
No. 185
The bearer
having paid the Sum of One Pound Ten Shillings on
account of the General Revenue of the Colony, I hereby
License him to mine or dig for Gold, or exercise and carry
on any other trade or calling on such Crown Lands within
the Colony of Victoria as shall be assigned to him for
these purposes by any one duly authorised in that behalf.
This License to be in force until or during the
month of . and no longer.
[Signature;
Commissioner.
and then followed the regulations to be ob-
served by the person digging for gold or other-
wise employed at the goldfields.
The license was “ not transferable,” and was
“ to be produced whenever demanded by any
Commissioner, Peace Officer, or any authorised
person.”
‘ Further, it was issued from the nearest police
camp or station, and could only be used within
half a mile of the police station from which it
was issued —a most senseless and irritating
provision.
As the license had to be produced; whenever
demanded, the digger, who was perhaps working
up to mid-leg in mud and water, had to keep
the docuipent in his Docket; and, of course, was
likely to lose it or have it' destroyed, by water,
in which case he was liable to fine or imprison-
ment.
The agitation against the impost commenced
very early.
Gold was discovered in Ballarat in August,
iß;i, and on the 10th of September a goldfields
Commissioner named Doveton, accompanied by
some troopers, arrived on the field, and a week or
so later .the issue of licenses commenced. The
diggers immediately held a meeting, and sent a
deputation to the Commissioner, asking that the
impost be withdrawn. He received the men
impatiently, and replied that he had nothing to
do with the making of the law, but meant to
administer it ; for, said this polite officer, “ if
you don’t pay the fee I’ll soon make you ! ”
In this spirit were all the remonstrances and
excuses in connection with the license fee met
by the early officials, and from the first it was
collected with an unnecessary harshness and dis-
play of power, which gradually caused even the
most peaceable and law-abiding diggers to be-
come exasperated. “Digger-hunting” became a
favourite amusement of the officials and police
cadets, who were mostly “ younger sons ” of
English and Irish wealthy families, or ex-officers
of the Imperial army, and did not possess the
slightest sympathy with the independent and
democratic diggers. Scarcely a day passed that
numbers of men were not arrested and conveyed
to the “ logs ” (as the camp lock-up'was called),
and there fined because they had mislaid, or lost,
or neglected to renew, their licenses. Letters
which appeared in the Geelong Advertiser and
other papers at that time bear testimony to the
vexations the diggers were subjected to, and the
harsh manner in which they were treated. One
writer declared that men were chained to trees
for a whole night because they had not paid
the license fee. Very frequently men who were
not diggers at all were arrested -because they
could not produce a license, and “ Hullo, you
sir,” “ I say, you fellow,” were the common
preliminary addresses of the officials to the
hunted, who, however much they might disap.
prove of the impost, would, without doubt, have
paid it with only a little natural grumbling had
its collection been conducted in a gentler spirit.
In 1853 “digger-hunting” became more
general; and the troopers constantly: set out
from their camp in pursuit of unlicensed diggers,
who, from a spirit of opposition to the impost,
were now becoming more numerous. . On their
side the diggers kept a sharp look-out, and at


the cry of “ Traps! ” or “ Joe, Joe! ” a stampede
would take place to the deep shafts, down which
the unlicensed ones were lowered by their com-
rades, and lay secure in the bowels of the earth
until the troopers had retired.
The latter did not, of course, venture down
the holes when in uniform - r but after a time they
became skilful in the art of trapping diggers, and,
disguising themselves, it is said, used to work up
rows by “jumping claims,” and then, when a
crowd had gathered, a body of troops would
swoop down on it and, effecting fifty or sixty
arrests, would handcuff the men together like
felons and march them off to the camp, where
they would be fined or. imprisoned at the
pleasure of the Commissioner in charge.
An overwhelming mass of evidence goes, in
fact, to show that digger-hunting was pushed to
a point of exasperation that was bound to result
in an outbreak of popular feeling sooner or
later, especially when the fact is taken into
But the most cursory glance at the hfstoiy of
early Australia is sufficient to satisfy one that
the military and official element greatly pre-
dominated, and there is abundant evidence to
show that the British Government repeatedly
ignored, or set aside, the acts of its officials and
acceded to the wishes of the colonists. The
British Government was, in fact, more liberal
and progressive than its own officials, and
to this, fact may be attributed the peaceful
settlement of many disputes. Had the two
Governors of Victoria who were identified with
the gold license disputes acted in a constitu-
tional spirit, in accordance with later British
ideas, the • Eureka collision would never have
taken place. They did not do so, however, but,
being servants of the Crown, acted more arbi-
trarily than the Crown itself, and in a manner
more in accord with military than civil methods.
Mr. Latrobe, the first Governor of Victoria,
finding it difficult to carry on the government of
AT THE DIGGINGS.
account that the diggers were mostly men of
exceptionally independent character, and num-
bered in their ranks many who were drawn
from the Mghly-educated classes of Europe and
America.
the country owing to gaol warders, policemen,
and civil servants generally, giving up their posts
and going to the diggings, took a step which
further exasperated the diggers—that of raising
the gold license fee to £$ per month. This he


did in the hope of deter-
ring the people of the
colony from taking to
gold- digging cn masse ,
and preventing his officials
from deserting their posts.
The measure did not, of
course, have the desired
effect, and the fee was
again reduced to 30s. per
month ; but during the
period that the increase
was in force the payment
of the impost was eluded
more than ever, and in
consequence fining and
imprisonment became
more frequent, and popu-
lar indignation waxed
warmer.
A strong agitation
against the gold license
commenced in Bendigo
in 1853, and soon spread
to the other goldfields,
and reform leagues were,
formed in various town-
ships ; but no other spirit
was evoked in the Govern-
ment by these proceed-
ings than one of resist-
ance.
Mr. Latrobe was suc-
ceeded as Governor by
Sir Charles Hotham, who
arrived in the colony on June 21st, 1854, and
found himself at once in a position of extreme
difficulty. All who knew him agree in stating
that he was a man of the highest principle, and
exhibited a rigid devotion to duty which led
him to attempt tasks beyond his strength, and
is thought to have brought on the illness which
terminated his life on December 31st, 1855.
He was, however, unfortunately something of
a despot, a rigid disciplinarian, a stickler for
“ subordination,” and he totally misunderstood
the character of the people in the goldfields,
whom he imagined to be of a similar class to
the sailors he had commanded in the Imperial
navy, or to the hinds in his native county.
No sooner had he arrived than petitions
poured in, asking for a repeal of the gold
license; and for representation of the goldfields’
population in the legislative council (it must
not be forgotten that not a single member of
BALLARAT.
the council was returned by the diggers); and
to these reasonable demands the Government
replied in October, 1854, ty sending up orders
that the searching for unlicensed diggers was to
be prosecuted with more vigour than before , and
that the police were to devote at least two days
a week to the businefss.
In consequence of these injudicious orders
popular feeling began to run very high indeed
in Ballarat. Armed resistance was freely talked
of, and the more violent spirits began to collect
arms. To-day there are persons living in Bal-
larat who remember the passionate fervour with
which the Hibernian orator Timothy Hayes
used to demand of his audiences : “ Will ye
fight for the cause, boys ? Will ye die for
the cause ? ” Here it may be remarked that
when the time for fighting actually came, Mr.
Hayes, forgetting to “die for the cause,” tamely
surrendered (though many of his countrymen


fought bravely), and was reproached for cowardice
by his wife, who was, says the chronicler, “a
much better soldier than Hayes.”
At this juncture an accident hastened the
crisis. A Scotch digger named Scobie was
killed one night when knocking at the door
of an hotel where he wanted “ more drink,”
though he had already had more than was good
for him. The landlord of the hotel—a ticket-
of-leave man named Bentley—was said to
have killed Scobie, whose persistent knocking
annoyed him. The man was arrested, brought
before a police magistrate named Dewes, and
acquitted. The diggers—in particular those of
Scottish extraction—demanded vengeance on
Scobie’s murderer, and asserted that the police
magistrate was in Bentley's pay. Mass meetings
were held, and the prosecution of Bentlej' was
demanded. Tired of “ the law’s delays,” the
diggers at length, to the number of 8,000,
marched to the hotel with the intention, it is
said, of lynching Bentley; but he escaped on
horseback, and galloped coatless and terrified
to the police camp. Exasperated by his escape,
the diggers smashed the windows of the hotel,
and then set fire to it. In a very short time it
was reduced to ashes. The police marched out,
the Riot Act was read, and three men—Mclntyre,
Fletcher, and Westerbey—were arrested and
charged with incendiarism.
These men were said to be absolutely innocent
of any connection with the fire, and their arrest
caused great indignation. Fearing an outburst
of popular feeling, the authorities removed them
to Melbourne for trial, and they were sentenced
to a few months’ imprisonment. On learning
this, the Ballarat Reform League sent two of
its members —Kennedy and Black—to Mel-
bourne to demand the release of the prisoners.
The delegates reached Melbourne on November
25th, and were received by the Governor, Sir
Charles Hotham, who was attended by the
Colonial Secretary, Mr. Foster, and the Attorney-
General, Mr. Stawell.
The Governor refused to consider any “ de-
mand ” (but promised future reforms), and the
delegates returned fuming to Ballarat, deriding
“ moral force.” Alarms of insurrection were
now in the air, and troops were hastily de-
spatched to Ballarat from Melbourne, while
reinforcements of police, horse and foot, were
marched in from other mining camps which had
adopted a more pacific tone than the Golden
City. On the evening of November 28th detach-
ments of the 12th and 40th Regiments of British
infantry reached Ballarat from Melbourne, and
as they passed through Warrenheip Gully, within
a few hundred yards of the spot where the
famous stockade was erected a few days later,
they were attacked by an excited mob of
diggers. Several soldiers were wounded, and
a drummer-boy was shot in the leg while the
baggage waggons were rifled in search of arms.
This was an unprovoked attack, and was de-
precated by the leaders rf the popular party,
who knew nothing of it. All that night the
committee of the League sat in council, while
their followers made night hideous by the dis-
charge of firearms and the beating of extem-
porised drums, etc.; and the next day, November
29th, a monster meeting was held on Bakery
Hill, at which 12,000 men assembled. A plat-
form was erected, and on a pole was hoisted
the insurgent flag—“ The Southern Cross ”
which was blue, with the four principal stars
of the great Southern constellation worked on
it in silver.
The tone of this meeting was violent in the
extreme. “ Moral force ” was denounced as
“ humbug ” ; revolutionary resolutions were
passed ; it was decided that no more license fees
should be paid. Fires were lighted and existing
licenses were burned, amidst loud cheers and
the discharge of pistols and guns by the excited
diggers.
Spies in plenty attended the meeting ; and,
being quickly informed of what had taken place
there, the officials despatched messengers to
Melbourne praying for reinforcements, and the
police camp was strongly fortified. As if to force
on a conflict, next day—November 30th —the
authorities ordered a “ digger-hunt ” in force, and
at an early hour all the police and military in
the camp issued out under the direction of two
Commissioners, and, forming near the camp, ad-
vanced upon the diggings as if upon a strong
hostile force, with skirmishers in front and
cavalry guarding the wings. The diggers retired
as the troops advanced, but, collecting at various
points, they pelted the soldiers with stones and
also fired a few shots at them. A few diggers
were arrested, and the troops then withdrew
to their camp. Instantly the Southern Cross
flag flew out to the breeze on Bakery Hill, and
thousands of diggers rushed forth, many of them
armed and ripe for violent action. : Peter'Lalor
—one of the leaders—called for volunteers, and
over five hundred men swore fealty > to “ the
cause,” stretching out their right hands and say-
ing: “We swear by the Southern Cross to stand


truly by each other, and fight to defend our
rights and liberties.” Names were then taken
down and the men formed into squads for drill,
which was continued to a late hour. The men
then fell in two abreast and marched to the
Eureka plateau, “Captain” Ross, of Toronto,
heading the march with the Southern Cross
flag, which he had taken down from the pole.
The men were armed with guns, pistols, pikes,
and all • sorts of weapons, down to a pick and
shovel.
The position on the Eureka was taken up be-
cause it commanded the Melbourne road,
along which reinforcements of military for
the camp were known to be advancing ;
and there was some idea of attacking these,
tho’ugh this would have been a formidable
undertaking, as they consisted of 800 men
of regular line regiments, a large party of
sailors from H.M.S. Electro , with four
field-pieces ; the whole' supported by a
strong force of cavalry.
The erection of the stockade appears to
have been commenced on December Ist.
A square plot of ground about an acre
in extent was hastily fenced with wooden
.slabs, which seem to have been supple-
mented by overturned carts and ropes.
It was a place of little defensive strength,
and is believed to have been formed more
as a place for the insurgents to drill in than
as a fortification. Inside the stockade were
a few mining claims, and the place was
dotted all over with the shallow holes of
fossickers, and in these afterwards many
men, who were using them as rifle pits,
were killed.
Tents were erected within the barrier, and
there was also a blacksmith’s shop, in which the
forging of pikes or rough lanceS was vigorously
carried on.
The authorities at this time, and subse-
quently, believed that Frederick Vern was the
commander-in-chief of the diggers, but the man
chosen to fill that position was Peter Lalor.
Lalor, who was a civil engineer by profession,
was a native of Queen’s County, Ireland, an
electorate in which county his father at one
time represented in the English ■ House of
Commons. Young Lalor arrived in Melbourne
in 1852, and went first to the Ovens goldfield,
but was soon attracted by the richer fields in
Ballarat, and moved to the place in which he
"as to play’so prominent a part. 'He was at
this time about twenty-five years of age and
was a good-looking, strongly-built man of about
six feet in height.
He was seconded by a “Minister of War”
named Alfred Black, and the proceedings of the
insurgents (as they must now be called) from
this time on shows that they (the leaders at all
events) had no intention of fomenting a mere
riot, but held ideas that went as far as revolution
and a republican form of government.
This is the opinion of W. B. Withers and
others most competent to judge, and the leading
articles of the Ballarat Times , which supported
the diggers at that period, openly avow repub-
lican intentions, and rave in inflated language
of an “ Australian Congress.” A manifesto, or
declaration of independence, was prepared, but
was probably never issued, as the fight at the
stockade a few days later scattered all revolu-
tionary ideas to the winds.
. In order to make the rising general, messengers
and letters were sent to the other mining towns,
praying for assistance ; but, as the event proved,
none was forthcoming save in one case—that
of Creswick, Which sent a contingent of some
hundreds of men, but even they bore no part in
the subsequent fight.
During December Ist and 2nd, drilling went
on vigorously, and parties were sent out in all
directions to search for arms and ammuni-
tion, with which the diggers were very badly


supplied. Lalor issued “ orders 01 war ” for the
seizing of arms, and though payment was
promised in all cases, no refusal was taken, and
storekeepers and others were forced to give up
any gunpowder or weapons they happened to
possess.
By the evening of Saturday, December 2nd, a
fair supply of weapons had been brought into
the stockade, and others (pikes) forged ; and as
hundred of men lay around the fires preparing
arms, and cooking the meat, with which they
were well supplied, the place presented some-
thing of the appearance of a military camp.
While these events were progressing, the author-
ities in Melbourne were despatching reinforce-
ments to the field, issuing proclamations warning
all persons against breaking the peace, and
offering rewards for the apprehension of the
ringleaders of the diggers.
Here is a reproduction of one of the Govern-
ment notices: —
At Ballarat sentinels were placed at all points
of the police camp, the women and children sent
into the storehouse for safety, and all was got
ready for an attack. But none was made, so the
officer in command, Captain Thomas, learning of
the unprepared state of the diggers, determined to
take the initiative and crush the rebellion in the
bud, and to this end gave orders that the troops
and police were to be in readiness to attack the
Eureka Stockade at .dawn on Sunday morning,
December 3rd. The military leaders have been
blamed for acting thus rapidly, but their duty
was perfectly clear. With the imposition of the
license fee which had so exasperated the diggers,
or its collection, they had had nothing to do ;
but finding men in arms to oppose the consti-
tuted Government of the country, they had to
treat these men as rebels, and suppress what
was undoubtedly an insurrection.
In the stockade during Saturday and Satur-
day night, the diggers, though they had a pass-
word—“ Vinegar Hill ” —kept up bijt the loosest
possible discipline, not dreaming of an attack ;
and all day and half the night outsiders passed
in and-out of the stockade, while large numbers
of the “ sworn in ’’ men—including the Cres-
wick contingent before-mentioned—went into
the town in search of food and drink, and did
not return before the fight. It is said that
some, hearing a rumour of an attack by' the
military, deserted, and that others again, seeing
the lax manner in which things were conducted,
despaired of the enterprise and withdrew to
their own tents and huts. . Certain it is that
when the blast of a military trumpet roused the
sleepy defenders before daylight on the fateful
morning, there were not 200 men in the
stockade; but most of these, as the warning shot
of a sentinel rang out and was followed by a
scattered volley from those on guard, rushed to
the breastwork and poured in a pretty regular fire
on the line of red-coated men that could be seen
approaching at a distance of 100 or 150 yards.
The attacking force, consisting of 276 military
and police, replied to this fire with a volley by
which five or six men were killed or wounded,
and soon bullets were flying about in all direc-
tions. Orders were given to the insurgents to
fire at the officers, and very'soon Captain Wise,
of the 40th Regiment, fell mortally wounded,
and Lieutenant Paul, of the 12th, was seriously
wounded.
Lalor, standing on top of a logged-up hole
within the stockade, encouraged his men by
word and gesture, but was presently shot in the
left shoulder, and fell bleeding to the earth with
a shattered arm. Almost at the same moment
Ross was shot in the groin—a mortal wound ;
and Thonen, another insurgent leader, receiving
a bullet in the mouth, fell choking with his own


blood and soon expired. An American officer of
the insurgents, who had been shot in the thigh
at the very outset, remained, hopping about and
encouraging his men to resistance, as long as
there was a chance of resisting. Vern made no
stand, however, but fled from the eastward end
of the stockade, and was followed by many others;
but a number of pikemen still stood resolutely.
With a loud cheer the military swarmed over, or
was made up of thirty men of the mounted 40th,
under Lieutenants Hall and Jardyne; sixty-five
men of the 12th Infantry Regiment, under Cap-
tain Queade and Lieutenant Paul; eighty-seven
men of the 40th Regiment (infantry), under
Captain Wise and Lieutenants Bowdler and
Richards; seventy mounted police, under In-
spectors Furnell and Langley and Lieutenant
Cossack; and forty foot-police, under Sub-In-
“WITH A LOUD CHEER THE MILITARY SWARMED OVER THE STOCKADE."
tore down, the stockade, and though pike met
bayonet for a few minutes, the end was near.
Thy insurgents were driven into the shallow
holes, and into the tents and blacksmith’s
shop, and were quickly surrounded and
made prisoners. The military and police are
accused of bayoneting and shooting wounded
and unarmed men, and of repeatedly thrusting
their bayonets or swords into the bodies of
those already slain ; but this is, of course, denied
by writers on the military side. .. Immediately
after the assaulting force burst into the stockade
a policeman named King climbed up the flagstaff
and tore down the- Southern Cross flag amidst
the cheers of his comrades. The attacking force
spector Carter—or 176 foot and 100 mounted
men in all. This force, when extended, was able
to completely .surround the stockade, which was
too large for the diggers to defend effectively
with their inadequate supply of arms. Just
before the charge took place the fire of the
defenders slackened from want of ammunition,
and some of their weapons afterwards picked
up were found to be loaded with quartz pebbles
instead of bullets. The police and military bore
testimony to the courage with which the de-
fenders fought; and had all the enrolled men
been present, the attack would in all probability
have been repulsed, in which case other diggers
would have joined the insurgents, the movement


extended to other towns, and a very serious state
of things indeed might have arisen, as the execu-
tive could scarcely have placed even 2,000 men
in the field at that time.
Having secured 12; prisoners, the military and
police fired the tents within the stockade
wounded men are said to have been burnt to
death therein —and then returned to the camp
with their prisoners.
Of this melancholy march a correspondent of
the Geelong Advertiser writes ; "I saw a
number of diggers enclosed in a sort of hollow
square ; many of them were wounded, the blood
dripping from them as they walked. Some were
walking lame, pricked on by the bayonets of the
soldiers bringing up the
rear. The soldiers were
much excited the
troopers (police) madly
so, flourishing their swords
and shouting out, ‘We
have waked up Joe!’ and
others replied, "And sent
Joe to sleep again ! ’ The
diggers’ standard was
carried in triumph to the
camp, waved about in the
air, then pitched from one
to another, thrown down,
and trampled on.” This
writer describes what he
saw within the stockade:
“ I counted fifteen dead—
one G , a fine, well-
educated man, and a great
favourite. . . . They all lay in a small space, their
faces upwards, looking like lead. Several of
them were still heaving, and at every rise of
their breasts the blood spouted out of their
wounds or . . . just trickled away. . . . Some
were bringing handkerchiefs, others bed furni-
ture and matting, to cover up the faces. . . .
A sight for a Sabbath morning I implore Heaven
may never be seen again ! Poor women crying
for absent husbands, and children frightened into
silence.”
How many were actually killed in the fight it
is difficult to determine, as accounts vary con-
siderably. One military writer states that thirty-
five were killed and many wounded on the side
of the diggers, but most other accounts give a
lesser number. Probably thirty killed and
mortally wounded would be about correct,
while probably another fifty or sixty received
serious wounds. On the military side one captain
and four privates were killed, and one lieutenant
and many privates wounded.
When they had secured their prisoners, the
military returned with carts for the dead; and
that afternoon those of the diggers whose friends
did not claim them were thrust into rough
coffins of half-inch weather-board and buried in
one large grave in the public cemetety. The
soldiers who fell in the fight were buried close
by, and subsequently handsome monuments
were erected over both graves. The site of the
Eureka Stockade is now marked by a bluestone
stage or platform surmounted by a stone monolith,
and having a cannon at each angle. The monu-
ment is not (or was not when the writer in-
spected it a few 3’ears ago)
either very beautiful or
very suitable, and might
easily- be improved.
Peter Lalor, the leader
of the insurgents, es-
caped. Three pf his men
managed to carry him out
of the stockade and down
the Eureka lead, where
they concealed him in a
pile of slabs, whence, when
the military had retreated,
he was extricated by some
onlookers and his arm
bound up with his own
handkerchief, after which
he was placed on Father
Smy the’s horse and carried
away to a hut on the
ranges, where he was attended to by friends
till the night of the 4th December, when he was
taken to Father Smythe’s house, and his injured
arm was amputated by Dr. Doyle. The story
that his betrothed (whom he afterwards married)
saw him standing, wounded and bleeding, before
her in Geelong on the morning of the 3rd, is
one that the Psychical Research Society might
investigate.
With a reward of £2OO offered for his appre-
hension, Lalor hid in various places, and at
length was removed to Geelong, where he under-
went several surgical operations. The Govern-
ment now well knew where he was, but times
had changed and he was not apprehended ;
and on the acquittal of the other Eureka pri-
soners on April Ist, 1855, he boldly appeared in
public again. How he was chosen to represent
Ballarat in the Legislative Council, and how he
continued in political life to the day of his
THE HON. PETER LALOR.


death, is well known. He held the position of
Postmaster-General in one Government and of
Minister of Trade and Customs in another, and
was for many years Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly. On resigning the last-named position
owing to ill-health, he was voted by the
Assembly for “ distinguished services to the
State.” He died at the house of his son, Dr.
Lalor, at Richmond, Melbourne, on February
9th, 1889, and his funeral was attended by-
vast numbers of people, including most of the
members of both Houses of Legislature.
Though martial law was proclaimed on the
day following the Eureka fight, public opinion
was not with the Government. Large meetings
were held in which their policy was condemned,
and the Eureka prisoners were to a man acquitted
on April ist, 1855. A commission of inquiry held
to determine the causes of the outbreak declared
that the diggers were forced into rebellion by
bad laws, harshly enforced ; the old Legislative
Council was abolished by Imperial enactment,
and a new Constitution providing for two Houses
of Legislature, both elective, was created for
Victoria; and ever since then the affairs of the
colony have progressed peaceably.
Thus, though the Eureka Stockade was only a
very little “ battle,” it had consequences more
important than those which have followed many
a furious struggle in which blood has flowed
'in rivers, and the red earth has borne testimony
to the appalling ferocity of man.
MONUMENT MARKING THE SITE OF THE EUREKA STOCKADE.


THE ITALIANS IN THE
SOUDAN:
AGORDAT. 21 DEC. 1893.
BY A. HILLIARD ATTERIDGE.
WE are all familiar with the spectacle
of the self-made man who takes
upon himself the rule of landed
proprietor, not because he has
unv special leaning towards country life, but be-
cause *• it's the thing ’’ —because it is expected
■f him.
In somewhat similar fashion, Italy had not
■Seen main - years reckoned ns one of the Great
Powers when she began to look round for some
foreign territory to annex. It would not be of
any particular use to her, but it was “ the thing ”
for Great Powers to have colonies and foreign
possessions beyond the seas. It was hardly re-
spectable to be without such luxuries. So, being
■forestalled hv France in a plan for taking pos-
-ession of Tunis, she cast about for something
further afield ; and while we were fighting
Osman Digma and the Mahdists, and there was
talk of an advance from Suakim to Berber and
Dongola for the re-conquest of Khartoum, an
Italian expeditionary force passed through the
canal and occupied Massowah. At the same
time the Italian Government informed us that
if we made a move into the interior they would
be glad to help.
Once having got a foothold at Massowah, the
Italians began to build up their province on the
Red Sea shore, adding to it a disputed protecto-
rate over Abyssinia and a region of half-desert
land on the Indian Ocean. But in 1896 an
Italian army met with a serious defeat, and a
large tract of country was restored to Abyssinia,
which was also recognised asan independent power.
But in the scramble for Africa they have secured
a “ sphere of influence ’’ which makes a very
good show on the map, though, like most other
nations that possess spheres of influence in the
Dark Continent, they have not effectively occupied
the greater part of it, and they have found their
landholding a costly luxury, paid for with blood-
shed and much expenditure of hard cash, for
which so far there is a scanty return.
Massowah stands on an island about a mile
and a half in circumference, connected with the
mainland by a narrow causeway nearly a mile
long, another island halfway facilitating its con-
struction. The place had, to begin with, the
great advantage that, even if all the wild men of
the Soudan attacked it, it was safe so long as
there was a warship ready' to sweep this causeway
with her cannon and machine-guns. It was a
good starting-point for conquests in north-eastern
Africa. Southward, close at hand, rose the outer
bulwarks of the Abyssinian table-land, to which
narrow passes opening on the shore from Mas-
sowah to Zulla gave access. Westward, across
the coast-hills and the desert, lay the old route
to Kassala and the Upper Nile. Next, after
Suakin, Massowah is the most important har-
bour and trading port of the African coast of
the Red Sea, and though it is very' hot and
very unhealthy the advantages of its site have
been recognised by the Italians. By various
decrees the Italian possessions are constituted
as the colony of Eritrea, which has an area of
nearly' 90,000 square miles. But this colony
has not been obtained without hard fighting.
Better able than a more northern race to bear
the torrid heat of the Soudan summer, the
Italians have shown that they are peculiarly'
well fitted for campaigning in these regions.
They have, it is true, had their defeats —as at
Dogali, where a handful of Bersaglieri holding
an advanced post were cut to pieces by the over-
whelming forces flung against them, but not till
they had made a desperate defence and sold their
lives dearly. But they have also had their vic-
tories over both the Soudanese and the Abys-
sinians, and they are especially proud of their
victory at Agordat, on the way to Kassala, in
1893, because they claim that while the British
