

ONE PENNY.
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 31.
The Real Issue;
POPE or KING?
the
Rev. T. E. RUTH,
Melbourne Auditorium Address, Sunday Evening,
May 26. 1918.
Published by Critchley Parker,
Obtainable at
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
305 LITTLE COLLINS ST„ MELBOURNE,


The Real Issue:
POPE OR KING?
A cablegram reports the Kaiser’s mental condition as
causing grave anxiety to his medical advisers —he thinks
he is God! His speeches have certainly shown signs
of insanity.
In 1914 he said to his people: “The spirit of the Lord
has descended upon me because I am the Emperor of
the Germans. I am His sword, and His representative.
Therefore death and destruction be to all resisting my
will or doubting my mission. So perish all the enemies
of the German people. God demands their destruction,
God, who by my mouth commands you to execute His
will.” At the time, I remember saying that was the
mandate of a moral maniac. It was evidence of mili-
tary megalomania. But, when 1 come to look into it,
I find the sentiments, and even the sentences, startlingly
like a papal pronouncement of spiritual and temporal
power.
At the beginning of the war the Kaiser claimed God
as an ally. In his last Christmas message he said:
“The German people have in the Lord of Creation
above an unconditional and avowed Ally. The mighty
powers of Heaven must stand by us.” “An uncondi-
tional and avowed Ally”—that is God, according to the
Kaiser. “The mighty powers of Heaven must stand by
us” —the implication .is that the powers of Heaven are
Prussianised.
Now, if you substitute the Pope for the Kaiser, and
papalism for Prussianism, you have in these extraordi-
nary claims of a disordered mind precisely the claims
British citizens have to combat in the politico-ecclesi-
astical realm with the courage with which soldiers are


fighting on the fields of battle against a military-mad
Kaiser. The enemy within our gates makes precisely
the same claims as the enemy without our gates, claims
God as an ally, as an unconditional and avowed ally,
and anathema to all who dare to disagree or disobey.
Ecclesiastical Prussianism is twin-brother to military
Prussianism.
And it is not enough to say, “The Kaiser is insane;”
not enough to say, “The papal claims are absurd.” That
is true, but not the whole truth. The Kaiser’s military
megalomania disturbs not only the peace of his medical
advisers, but the peace of the world, and makes a
“scrap of paper” of the fundamental principle of civilisa-
tion, and what an Irish Catholic calls “the expensive
megalomania of a political sacerdotalism,” makes a
“scrap of paper” of the New Testament, of the funda-
mental principle of a common catholicity.
The world was prepared to live at peace with the
Kaiser, and Britishers embraced every opportunity of
cultivating the most friendly relations with Germans,
and closed their eyes to Germany’s military preparations
and their ears to the grave warnings of England’s far-
seeing men. And even now we are prepared to live
at peace with the Germans, when the Germans get back
to Germany.
Similarly Protestant citizens were prepared to live at
peace with Roman Catholic citizens —some of us have
gone out of our way to cultivate the most friendly


relations with Roman Catholics, and closed our eyes
to their militant preparations, and our ears to the grave
warnings of our far-seeing men. And even how we
are prepared to live at peace with Roman Catholics if
they will keep within their own religious rights, and
not interfere with our religious and political liberties,
plot against the sovereignty of the British throne, the
democracy of the British peoples, the independence of
the British Empire, and stain our fair land with foreign
sedition.
Let that be clear—w T e do not deny the right of men
to be Roman Catholics—a man has as much right to
be a Roman Catholic as I have to be a Protestant. B.ut
I have the right to repudiate his anathemas. I do not
want his Pope forced upon me—his conscript creed,
his conscript confessional, his conscript communion,
forced upon me. I prefer to be free. We do not
deny the right of Germans to their German Empire
they have as much right to the German Empire as
Britishers have to the British Empire; but we repudiate
their right to Belgium, France, and Britain; we repu-
diate their claim of “Germany over all.” And we will
not submit to their military domination.
Similarly, we do not deny the Pope’s claim to spiri-
tual ministry, though we think his claims to spiritual
monopoly not merely impious, but ludicrous. It is no
concern of ours that the children of his Church accept
his guidance as infallible in matters of faith and order.
But his political pretensions are of enormous concern
to us as citizens. We resent and repudiate the pagan
plea of temporal sovereignty that turns the Church
into a court, its bishop into a monarch, the mitre into
a tiara, and apostolic simplicity into regal splendour
that subordinates spiritual power to temporal ends, and
addresses the Pope on the day of his coronation thus:—
“Receive the Tiara adorned with three crowns,
and know that thou art the Father of Princes and
Kings, Ruler of the World, Vicar of our Lord Tesus
Christ.”


As British citizens, we repudiate the idea of the Pope as
“Ruler of the World,” as being as insane as the Kaiser’s
megalomania.
Ruler of the world? He is not ruler of the British
Empire. The name of Britain’s King is George V. It
is not Benedict XV. The Roman Catholic Church may
“enthrone” Benedict ruler of their sect, but we repudiate
their right to enthrone their ecclesiastical chief “Ruler
of the World.” And the war the Church has been
waging in this community and in other parts of the
British Empire, especially in Canada and in Ireland, has
opened our eyes to the political designs of the Papacy
in precisely the same way as the war in Europe has
shown up the military machinations of the Pope’s “best
European friend,” the Kaiser, and flung a lurid light
upon the past.
The evidence of the Papal-Kaiser ‘intrigue is complete.
It is proven up to the hilt that the Papacy is anti-
British. The real issue before Australian citizens is
quite clearly and unmistakably—Pope or King? That
is the real issue. And we must realise it. We must face
the alternatives and make our choice.
Mr. W. E. Gladstone, in his “Vatican Decrees,” wrote:
“Rome requires a convert who now joins her to
forfeit his moral and mental freedom, and to place
his loyalty and civil duty at the mercy of another.”
Precisely. That is the situation. No other Church


makes so impossible a demand. In his “Vaticanism/"
Mr. Gladstone said: —
“She alone arrogates to herself the right to speak
to the State, not as a subject, but as a superior; not
as pleading the right of a conscience staggered by
the fear of sin, but as a vast Incorporation setting
up a rival law against the State in the State’s own
domain, and claiming for it, with a higher sanction,
the title to similar coercive means of enforcement.”
To quote again from “Vatican Decrees,” Mr. Glad-
stone emphasised—
“Individual servitude, however abject, will not
satisfy the party now dominant in the Latin Church:
the State must also be a slave.”
And Mr. W. E. H. Lecky, the historian, puts it —
“The Catholic Church is essentially a State within
a State, with its frontiers, its policy, and its leaders
entirely distinct from those of the nation, and it can
command an enthusiasm and a devotion at least as
powerful and as widespread as the enthusiasm of
patriotism. It claims to be a higher authority than
the State, to exercise a Divine, and therefore a su-
preme, authority over beliefs, morals, and educa-
tion, and to possess the right of defining the limits
of its own authority.”
' That is a perfectly plain Protestant summary of the
facts from the point of view of a British student and
statesman, and of an eminent Irish historian, from whose
works Dr. Mannix recently quoted, with approval.
And here is the word of Thomas Aquinas:—
“The Church of Rome is one monarchy over all
the kingdoms of the earth, and is, among temporal
kingdoms, as the mind or soul in the body of a man,
or as God in the world . . . Therefore, the Church
of Rome must not only have all spiritual power,
but also the supreme temporal power.”


But that was in 1250. Perhaps the centuries have modi-
fied the claim? Well, listen to the more picturesque
language of a modern priest. Father Phelan, in the
“Western Watchman,” says:—
“If the Government of the United States were at
war with the Church, we would say to-morrow: ‘To
hell with the Government of the United States; and
if the Church and all the Governments of the world
were at war we would say To hell with all the
Governments of the world.’ ”
Father Phelan would not even give them Purgatory. He
would give them Hell. But perhaps his Irish imagination,
expressing itself in characteristic American exaggeration,
ran away with his judgment.
Let us listen to the more lucid Leo XIII. On No-
vember 1, 1885, he declared: —
“The Pope has supreme authority, spiritual and
temporal, over all societies, and has the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and has a supreme, legislative,
judicial, and coercive authority in both spheres.”
And if you want a plain practical application of that
principle in the highest realm of British politics, re-
member the English Cardinal Manning’s affirmation;—
“If an heretical prince is elected or succeeds to
the throne, the Church has a right to say, T annul
the election,’ or T forbid the succession.’ ”
Well, King George was an heretical prince and is an
heretical king. But lest you should think Cardinal Man-
ning out of date—and he ought to be —here is a modern
Irish Catholic in his book on “The Ruin of Education
in Ireland” (Mr. F. H. O’Donnell), saying:—
“It seems somewhat disconcerting to find the most
eminent living Professor of the Jesuit Society, the
Canonist and theologian of the Gregorian University
of the Vatican, the learned Father Marianus de
Luca, S.J., eruditely establishing in the volumes of


his Institutiones Ecclesiastic! Public! (igoo) that in-
stead of being educated, heretics ought to be slaugh-
tered, and that the slaughtering of them is a mark
of the perfection of the Catholic Church.”
And in the Appendix, Mr. O’Donnell quotes the learned
Jesuit as claiming:—
“The Church better entitled to kill than the State,
“The State bound to kill when ordered by the
Church.
“Not the amendment of the heretic but his death
necessary.
“Civil Governments refusing to kill heretics to
be deposed and confiscated.”
But the kindly, gentle, gracious successor of Dr. Carr
would not agree with this? No? Dr. Mannix, “Aus-
tralia’s greatest democrat,” before whom, in their pas-
sion for democracy, the democratic citizens of this demo-
cratic Commonwealth humbly kneel, to whom they do
obeisance, and whose hand they meekly kiss, would
never agree with this method of dealing with heretics ?
No?
At Kilmore, so I read in the Roman Catholic “Advo-
cate,” “on Sunday, the sth of the merry month of May,”
Dr. Mannix tells us what he said
“In a moment of truthfulness.”


He remembers that it was “a moment of truthfulness,”
without apparently remembering' what he said, for it was
in that “moment of truthfulness” that he uttered the
silly He that this was simply a sordid trade war. Well, in
October. 1913, Dr. Mannix had another “moment of
truthfulness,” in which he said :
“The Church would not admit that she exceeded
her right in having recourse to physical punishment,
as long as it was effective and suitable for the attain-
ment of her ends.”
\\ hat are her ends? The late William Arthur, in his
book, “The Pope, the Kings, and the People,” says that
when he was in Rome, a diplomatist hearing him say
“I began the study of this subject as a religious
question, but ”
finished the sentence for him—
“Yes, but you find it is all politics, and the further
you get into it the more purely political you will
find it.”
And that is the inevitable conclusion to which any unpre-
judiced student of Dr. Mannix’s speeches, a$ reported
in the Roman press, and I diligently read every one of
them —must come. The speeches, whether delivered at
Communion breakfasts, or after the Confirmation of chil-
dren, or at the blessing of some new building, or at the
crowning of some queen at a queen carnival, the speeches
are purely political, and invariably anti-British. This is
a British country. We are British citizens. Dr. Mannix
was educated in a British-endowed institution. And the
time has come for every citizen of this British country,
every citizen of every creed to affirm his loyalty to King
George and his repudiation of every other sovereign.
At the blessing of a new Church school at Elwood, on
Sunday, April 28th, Dr. Mannix publicly committed him-
self to the policy of repudiation of the War Loan. He


said (I am quoting from the verbatim report in “The
Advocate” of May 4)
“These lip-loyalists who are not going to the front,
because they are presumably ineligibles, saw to it
that they got from 6 or 7 per cent, interest before
they subscribed to the War Loan. Even then they
had to get exemption from Income Tax, in order to
induce them to finance the war. But somebody must
pay in the end, unless our debts are repudiated. . . .
This discrimination between rich and poor is what is
really tempting people to talk about repudiation,
and surely it is reasonable to repudiate an arrange-
ment which is bound to press upon the poor.”
Apparently no policy is too immoral for Archbishop
Mannix publicly to bless providing it be anti-British, and
he associates the blessing of an immoral political policy
with the blessing of a new Roman Catholic Church School.
I say nothing for the moment about that sinister associa-
tion. Dr. Mannix would insist that he advocated the
immoral policy of repudiation of Government debts
as a citizen. As a citizen, he should be held responsible.
The recruiting situation is so serious that it is considered
necessary to censor the Fifth Commandment, the prin-
ciple of parental control, to induce school-boys to enlist,
but the Federal authorities do not censor the seditious
speeches of this avowed Sinn Feiner. The financial
situation is so serious, that some of the laws of the
realm are held in abeyance to allow the War Loan to
be raised, methods are adopted that offend the moral
sense of the community; but, the War Loan being raised,
a most influential citizen is allowed publicly to advocate
the policy of repudiation.
Professor Meredith Atkinson, a passionate patriot, is
severely reprimanded for mildly criticising a’method of
currency, but Dr. Mannix can advocate with impunity
the repudiation of Government contracts, Government in-
tegrity, Government honesty.


The Federal Treasurer knows Dr. Mannix has publicly
advocated the immoral policy of repudiation. As Acting
Prime Minister, he permits it to be done apparently
without even a protest. It is time the Federal authori-
ties abandoned their senseless favouritism, their offence
against public equity. Dr. Mlnnix is still a Chaplain-
General of the Australian Forces.
But there is another aspect of this policy of repudiation,
as advocated by Dr. Mannix, that I want to consider and
to apply: —
“Surely it is reasonable to repudiate an arrange-
ment which is bound to press upon the poor.”
Is it? Then why doesn’t Dr. Mannix repudiate ihe ar-
rangement of Peter’s Pence, which presses upon the poor?
Why doesn’t he repudiate the arrangement of paid
prayers for a mythical deliverance from a priest-invented,
priest-managed Purgatory, which presses heavily upon
the poor? Thomas Griffin, of 2331, N. California Avenue,
Chicago, wrote, on January 18th, 1918: —
“When I arrived at Killarney, my sister told me
she thought I was dead. She had gone to her priest
to confession, and told him that she was worried
about her brother who was in America, and that she
had not heard from him for a long time.
“The priest told her that I was dead, and in pur-
gatory, and that he would pray me out for* fifteen
dollars a year, and she had been paying him that


sum for a number of years. When I appeared on
the scene, he tried to make my sister believe that I
was not her brother, but he failed to do that.”
Why does Dr. Mannix not repudiate that sort of thing?
He says, “Surely it is reasonable to repudiate an ar-
rangement which is bound* to press upon the poor.”
If what Roman Catholic schools raised for patriotic
funds be taken as a guide to Roman Catholic invest-
ments in the War Loan, the policy of repudiation would
not unduly hurt Roman Catholics. While State
Schools raised £225,000, the Roman Schools raised £1
15s. 6d.; but why doesn’t Dr. Mannix repudiate the policy
that threatens to make Roman Catholic Australia like
Roman Catholic Ireland, according to an Irish Catholic,
a country of
“Palatial churches and pauper flocks,”
where
“The people asked for bread and the priests gave
them mountains of cut stones”?
“Surely it is reasonable to repudiate an arrangement
which is bound to press upon the poor.”
But that is their Church business? Well described.
Leave it at that.
I am, however, still concerned with this reasonable
repudiation policy as applied to citizenship.
Dr, Mannix, as an avowed Sinn Feiner, knew the Sinn
Fein policy expressed at the inaugural meeting of Sinn
Fein at the Rotunda, Dublin, on November 28, 1905: —


“The most important of all matters was the anti-
enlisting crusade. The Irish Nationalist who entered
the English army or navy ought to be flogged.”
Seeing Dr. Mannix was educated at an English-endowed
institution, by which he was then being supported, surely
he should have repudiated that policy. Did he?
On August 14, 1914, the leading article of “Sinn Fein”
contained these wotds;— 1 4
“Ireland is not at war with Germany. England
is at war with Germany. Who can forbear admira-
tion of the Germanic people whom England has
ringed about with enemies, standing alone and un-
daunted against a world in arms?”
So far from repudiating that policy, Dr. Mannix's
sentiments have been suspiciously like those of Sir
Roger Casement: —
“In this war Ireland has only one enemy. Let
every Irish heart, let every Irish hand, let every
Irish purse be with Germany. The day a German
sea victory tolls the death-knell of British tyranny
at sea, it tolls the death-knell of British rule in
Ireland.”
But my concern is with British rule in Australia. We
do not want Irish chaos and papal muddle in this
country. The Roman Catholic “Tablet” says:—
“Ireland is a Catholic country; the real constitu-
ents of it are the bishops and the priests. There
are, of course, exceptions, places where lay influence
predominates; but, on the whole, the Irish repre-
sentation is the work of the priesthood. The Irish
members are in Parliament because the priests have
sent them there,”
And to show the consistency of the anti-British policy
of the Papacy, even as long ago as July 26, the
“Tablet” said


“Neither in England, nor in Ireland, will the
Roman Catholics obey the law, that is, the law of
the Imperial Parliament. . . . The Pope’s command
will be, or rather has been, and is being, carried
into effect.”
That is the issue here and now: Who is sovereign in
this country, Pope or King? Whose law is supreme?
Does anybody in anything take precedence to the
King? If so, surely it is reasonable to repudiate that
arrangement.
If this is a British country, and there is an arrange-
ment which provides for the prosecution of a poor gro-
cer’s assistant for a minor offence, and the public re-
buke of a patriotic professor for offering advice, while
an archbishop is free to advocate disloyalty and poli-
tical immorality, surely it is reasonable to repudiate
that arrangement.
If this is a British country, and there is an arrange-
ment which provides for the parade in our public streets
of seditionists in their regalia and prevents the parade of
loyal Orangemen, surely it is reasonable to repudiate
that arrangement.
If this is a British country, and there is an arrangement
which provides for the imprisonment of the agitators
of the Independent Workers of the World, and gives
license to the impudent wreckers of Empire, surely it
is reasonable to repudiate that arrangement.


If this is a British country, and there is an arrange-
ment which prevents the display of Sinn Fein emblems,
and yet permits public men to say they are Sinn Fein
to the backbone, surely it is reasonable to repudiate that
arrangement.
If this is a British country, and men are permitted
to say that their policy is to shake the dust of the
British Parliament off their feet, some arrangement
should be made to take their feet off British soil.
If this is a British country, let the British king reign!
Surely it is reasonable to repudiate an arrangement
that gives precedence to a foreign potentate. Surely it
is reasonable to repudiate an arrangement which makes
British public servants subordinate to the policy of a
foreign sovereign. Surely it is reasonable to repudiate
an arrangement which confuses ecclesiastical loyalty
to a sectarian chief with the political loyalty due to the
king.
And if a man is not prepared to repudiate every other
political sovereignty, he has no prpper place in British
public service.
With the content of the Christian religion, with what
all catholics —with a small “c”—have in common, inde-
pendent of the political sovereignty of the Pope, I shall
be dealing in this Auditorium for the next fifteen Sun-
day evenings.
Wholly Set-up and Printed in Australia
by Varleys Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.


Wake Up, Australia!
While men slept the enemy sowed tares
among the wheat.
SEDITION.
SECTARIANISM.
SINN FEIN ISM.
Seventeen Auditorium Addresses
REV. T. E. RUTH
One Shilling.
Postage, One Penny.
[Library Edition, 2/ 6. |
Also by Rev. T. E. Ruth:
SINN FEIN (“Ourselves Alone).
Are Australians Sinn Feiners?
FHE ENEMY WITHIN OUR GATES.
IS THE PAPACY ANTI-BRITISH?
Price: One Penny each.
IHE VATICAN, THE KAISER, AND THE WORLD
WAR
A collection of athoritative evidence, beginning with the
papal concordat or treaty which preluded the assassina-
tion of Archduke Francis Ferdinand and tracing the
activities of the A r atican in the World War, paying
especial attention to the Gerlach intrigue and events as
late as the papal plea for condonation of Kaiserism.
By Charles M. Lee.
Price: Threepence.
Other Pamphlets dealing with different phases of the
Disloyal Movement in Australia are obtainable from—
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
305 Little Collins Street,
Melbourne.
