

THE
SEVEN ROVERS.
A ROLLICKING RECORD
OF
PLEASURE, PRIVATION, AND PERIL
AFLOAT AND ASHORE,
BY
ONE OF THEM
(THE POET).
ILLUSTRATED
In their Doings;
ILLUMINATED
With Wit;
AND
BOUND
To he a Success.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED AND ALL WRONGS DISPERSED.
Robart:
Printed, for Private Circulation only, at the “Mercury” Steam Press.
1884.




THE
SEVEN ROVERS.
A ROLLICKING RECORD
OF
PLEASURE, PRIVATION, jIND PERIL
AFLOAT AND ASHORE.
FROM THE 11th TO THE 23™ FEBRUARY, 1864,
BY
ONE OF THEM
i’wbiut:
Printed, for Private Circulation oniy, at the 4 - Mercury ” Steam Press.
188-1.
(Tin-: POET),
Ami Published at the Special Jteqaest of the Others,
ILLUS T R Al' E 1)
In their Doings ;
IL LU MI NATE I)
With Wit;
AND
BOUND
To be a Success.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED AND ALL WRONGS DISPERSED.


I DEDICATE
This Truthful Narrativ:
to
MY BROTHER ROVERS
Past and Present;
Whose many Good Qualities and Sterling Worth
I have proved ;
Whose Friendship I prize j
and
Whose unbounded Charity
Has covered the multitude of Faults,
and
Borne with the thousand Failings ,
of
THE AUTHOR.
Hobart , 6th March, ISS4.


PROLOGUE.
Read at the Meeting of the Rovers, March 6, 1884,
Bellgarde, Hobart.
and ROVERINES —if I may be permitted
thus to designate you who are of us, but have not been
$ & with us —Rovers and Roverincs, you are here to listen
for a short time, while I “a round unvarnished tale
% P deliver;” wherein “I’ll speak of most disastrous chances,”
of hairbreadth ’scapes from iplood and fire, of imminent peril
from hideous monsters of y the deep, of sickness, privation,
want —should such a tale of dire calamity call forth the
sympathetic tear, restrain it not; or should laughter move you,
laugh while you may, loud and long.
My brother Rovers have requested me to represent them;
why, they know best, for many of them have qualifications
far greater than I possess. I have not the commanding
eloquence of the Statesman Rover; nor the precision and
acumen of the Legal Rover; nor the far ranging knowledge of
the Commercial Rover; nor the magnificent grasp of facts of
the Scientific Rover; nor the scholastic training of the A.A.
Rover. Cela va sans dire. lam a simple Poet; and as wc
Rovers know, it takes an Isabel to interpret an Allen, and with
flashing eyes and heaving breast to make his words instinct
with life. I await my Isabel.
One word of Caution. —Remember a Rover’s axiom:—
“ The less one expects, the less will be the disappointment,”




THE ROLLICKING RECORD.
fOMEONE, somewhere has said, that life would be
tolerable were it not for' its pleasures. Poor
pitiable being, who by thus speaking has shown
his double ignorance ; ignorance of what a life of
real work is, and also of the absolute need Of the
recuperative power of “ pleasure ” to make that life
not only “ tolerable,” but possible.
We are seven, that mystic and perfect number : and such a
seven 1 From the young man glorying in his physical strength
and manly beauty, through every Stage of age and physique, to
the grey-bearded mentor, our venerated guide, philosopher, and
friend. But far above and beyond the perfectness of number,
is that perfect faith in one another which renders stich a season
of recreation so peculiarly refreshing —in the unrestrained play
of one’s whole nature without any fear of being misunderstood.
The vessel that we have selected for our fortnight’s home on
the ocean wave, bears the pleasing name of “ Gertrude,” and is
a thoroughly staurtch sea-going craft of 35 tons, well found in
every respect; she is barge rigged, that is, she has two masts
with fore-and-aft canvas, mainsail and maintopsail, mizen and
mizentopsail, jib and staysail. She has also a Centre-Board,
to assist her in going to windward by holding the water—of
which more anon. Her complement of hands consists of three
brothers, familiarly known as Fred, Tas, and Val, and one
“ hand,” Gus—and here permit me to anticipate, in order that I
may give emphatic testimony to the good qualities of all four,
on whom no small part of the thorough enjoyment of our trip


depended. They are, one and all, up to their work. Fred,
the captain, quiet, cool and capable; Tas, the chief officer,
active, full of resource, and every inch a sailor; Val, the
youngest, alert and cheerful; while Gus was always there,
cooking, steering, or mounting aloft to set or stow the topsails.
Courteous, obliging, and ever ready to minister to our enjoy-
ment, I never wish or expect to sail with a pleasanter crew.
Having duly placed all our provisions and bedding on the
craft on the previous Saturday, we step on board very early on
Monday morning, and at once the moorings of the vessel are
cast off and we commence to haul out of Constitution Dock.
'The wind blows in strong gusts from the S.W., which somewhat
delays us, as well as the necessity of taking on our two
boats—a light commodious waterman’s boat, “ The Little
Dick,” and a capacious well-boat for keeping our fish alive.
About 2 a.m. we are fairly underweigh, sailing with a fair S.
Westerly breeze, the night being bright, with the moon nearly
at full. During part of the time I have described, we have been
busy below deciding on our respective sleeping positions and
making our beds. To make matters clear to the uninitiated I
will describe our ocean home as best I can. We have but one
room —accommodating my language to the capacity of landsmen
and landswomen —which comprises the entire centre of the
vessel, length 18ft., and height under the beams about sft.,
just the correct height for constantly ascertaining the hardness
of the timber and the hollowness or otherwise of one’s head ;
indeed it was most remarkable how time after time this was
repeated, with always the same result, the timber had the best
of it; it stood without a mark, which is more than could be
said of our heads. And now for the glorious Centre-Board,
which for about ten feet divided the hold from keel to deck. It
is a solid structure made of massive baulks of timber securely
bolted together, but leaving space between for the descent and
ascent of a “ Board ” —and such a board I weighing nearly a
ton. I have before mentioned that the use of this board is to
enable the vessel to work to windward, and at such times it is
lowered so that many feet of it are in the ocean below the keel
of the vessel. O noble Centre-Board ! What glorious “ music
in the waters ” thou dost make, a fitting lullaby for old Neptune


himself. Can words describe that music ? Our “ Man of
Scienceessayed to do so, and this is his puerile effort as com-
pared with the undescribable original:
Plash —BLASH —Sh Sh
BLASH BLASH Plash
Sh Sh BLASH.
Well, four beds are spread out on the one side of the Centre-
Board, and three on the other, the clear space under the hatchway
being reserved as the dining-room when it should be too rough
or too cold to have our meals on deck. Forward of our beds
there is the ballast, in the form of stones, and a splendid 400-
gallon tank of fresh water —for which we one and all tender
sincere thanks to our gallant captain —and aft a further supply
of stone ballast.
The vessel is now clear of the harbour, and the word is
given to “ turn in,” as it is past 2 o’clock, with every prospect of
its being rather rough when we get outside into Storm Bay.
Kxpcrientia sapientia docct, so we had decided not to take any
kerosene this time, its smell on the last trip pervading every-
thing down below even to our very food, so, lighting the candle
lamps, we proceed to our beds. Besides his bedding, every
man has his box or bag, and these having been duly stowed
away, mostly at the foot of the bed, the next thing is where to
put the garments we are taking off? And here I may remark,
for the benefit of future “ Rovers,” that the pleasure of a trip
such as ours, is much enhanced, and its comfort greatly pro-
moted, by the varied qualifications of the members of the
party—one is fitted by nature or by training for one thing,
a second for another, and so on. For instance, among
us there is “ the ” Man of Science, who not only is a Solomon
in the range of his knowledge, but, unlike his predecessor, is
not in the least puffed up by the possession of that knowledge ;
who is condescending to our ignorance, and ever ready to illu-
mine the darkness and denseness of our minds. Did we bring
him what we foolishly thought was only a periwinkle. Behold !
he takes it into his hand, and immediately it is transformed
into a Corissimus diaholus cloudiana , and, in simple words suited
to our ignorance, he explains how the diaphragm of the in-
voluted cutaneous crustacean becomes corrugated in one
9


species, and elongated in another, thus proving it to be a true
descendant of the Olynthus fregdofytus, of the sub-glacial age,
17 millions of billions of years before the year One. But,
revenons a nous nwutons , or, in other words, going back to
where we were —where were we to put our coats, etc. ? “I
have a tool basket/’shouts out our mechanical genius, ‘' and
in it you will find all manner of useful articles.” “ Hand it
here,” sings out our “ Thor,” the man who could wield the
hammer. It is handed out, and in it arc all manner of useful
things, nails and screws, hammer, saw and chisel, gimlet, brad-
awl and screw-driver. Oh ! thoughtful man of mechanics, we
blessed you then and ofttimes afterwards. Nails arc soon
hammered along the sides of the vessel and against the Centre-
Board (noble Centre-Board) and coats and waistcoats and caps
and all that makes up a gentleman’s toilet are hanging thereon.
Experience has taught us “Rovers” the great value of Axioms ,
not stale ones, but freshly made for each trip, and here we made
our first one : “ The last man blows the candle out.” (The
rule is that axioms once made cannot be broken throughout
the whole trip- they arc as binding as the laws of the Medes and
Persians.) Darkness soon reigns below, and all is silence save
the plash, plash, against the side of the vessel, as she steadily
moves through the waters, lulling all to sleep.
Hallo 1 Who’s that ? And turning our eyes to where the
daylight glimmers down the hatch, we behold a white-robed
figure slowly ascending the ladder that leads to the deck.
“It’s only me,” is the ungrammatical reply; but we pass that by,
as grammar is one of the trammels of civilisation that wc have
left behind us. “ What’s the weather ?” shouts one; “how’s
her head ? ” sings out another : and without any reply wc
know from the motion of the vessel that she has passed the
“ Pot,” that she is on the starboard tack, and, most evident of
all, that the Centre-Board is down, for now for the first time
wc hear the ever-to-be-remembered Plash, BLASH. The
white-robed figure speedily finds his angel-like clothing too
scant and the breeze too cool, and comes down the hatch to
array himself in warmer and more substantial garb ere lie
ventures on deck again.
10


There is one influence in human life which, while it lasts,
is acknowledged by all to he “ Lord and King,” I allude not
to love, but to sea-sickness. While suffering from that malady
it is no matter what has happened, or what is about to happen.
We may be on our wedding tour, or catching our last chance
of life in a voyage to the antipodes in the good ship “Sobraon
we may be certain of future felicity, or have the greatest doubts
upon that subject —it matters not one dump to us while in the
throes of that marine malady. I remember when, as a boy,
T first went to sea, and the first night came, and with it rain
and wind and an angry heaving sea. It was about 10 p.m.,
but I cannot be sure of the time to a handful of hours, when
the second mate, in walking forward on the lee side of the
main deck, kicked against an object lying all "wet in the lee
scuppers. That object so pitiable to look upon, and so help-
less, was myself, apprentice-boy aboard the barque “ Jane
Frances.” “Hallo! Who are you, and what are you doing
here ? ” shouts a not unfriendly voice. “Oh 1 pitch me over-
hoard,” I feebly groan ; but the kind heart, though rough hand,
did not do so, or I should not he here to tell it to you. He
picked me up, took me below, and saw me crawl into my
bunk. I have forgotten his name, but not the kindly deed.
Various have been the so-called remedies and preventives
of sea-sickness. Last year four of us dosed ourselves for days
previous to our voyage with bromide of sodium , a harmless,
yea, an inviting looking liquid, but oh I the taste —I shudder
at the bare recollection—it was assuredly a compound of the
very essence of seawater, soapsuds, and bitter aloes. The
old poet, the one who boasts of being nasdiur, non fit, sings—
“ Better to have loved and lost
Than never to have loved at all.”
The new poet, however, whose glory is to be fit, non nasdtur ,
sings
“ Better, the throes of mal dc mcr
Than sodium’s fearful nausea.”
Therefore we took no bromide ofisodium, and on the whole are
decidedly the better for so doing.
Wc arc, as I have already said, seven- -but now only six
below, for one is on deck. I plainly gather from some well-
known indications that all is not as it should he, so giving play
11


to my exceedingly kindly nature, I take the tour of the beds.
I approach No. i—And how are you, Sir ? “ All right, but
leave me alone,” and he turned on the other side. “ Poor
fellow,” I remark to myself, “he isn’t exactly right and I must
make allowances.” No. 2 —“ How are you old fellow ?”
“ Bad ” —that was all —one word, only one, but it conveys a
world of meaning. No. 3 —“ Now young man, how are you ?
Come, get up and take some coffee.” “No thank you ; very
much obliged to you, but coffee always makes me bilious of a
morning • I don’t just feel as if I cared about getting up this
morning.” I then cross over to the other side of the Centre-
Board (glorious old Centre Board), where No, 4 lies coiled in
his shaggy covering. I approach him softly. I feel for him.
Nature has no secrets from this man—she is to him as an
open book. He is her master —and yet, and yet, oh pitiable
sight 1' the sportive play between wind and ocean—the gambols
of exuberant nature, have utterly prostrated him. The BLASH —
Plash of the Centre-Board, the dash of the rising waves, the
whistling of the wind through the cordage, the rolling of the
bilge water —all seem to blend into one mocking and discordant
laugh of derision as they behold him prostrate. With soft and
cautious tread I approach him. I had never addressed him in
the familiar language of an equal. I said —“ I trust the rosy
and jocund morn finds you salubrious.” His answer is—
“ Basin,” and nothing more. “ And thou, too, then art only
mortal,” is my silent comment. No. sis already up and doing.
It is he of the tool basket. I said he was not only up but
doing—and what is he doing ? Grasped tightly in one hand is
a mirror and in the other an open razor, while the lower part of
his visage lias assumed an ashy whiteness. What desperate
deed is he about to perpetrate ? Are the agonies of sea-sickness
too much for him and existence become unbearable ? “ Hold,
rash man,” I exclaim, “ stay your desperate hand.” He
grins a ghastly grin ; his lips move but utter no sound ; and to
my intense relief I perceive he is—shaving himself. Yes,
actually shaving himself! Recreant to the Rover’s vow to leave
the hated bonds of civilisation behind, he proves himself not
worthy of our glorious liberty, only a poor slave to habit.
The sea and wind are now rising, and four prostrate suffering
12


forms so touch our hearts, that in a weak moment we igno-
mihiously turn tail and run back for shelter into Bull Bay,
where we drop anchor.
A few words will suffice to describe this Bay. Compared
with the Bey of Tunis, and other Eastern Beys, Bull Bay is
nowhere. No picturesqueness, no passion, indeed a very
Common-place Bay. Its calm, however, soon has a beneficial
effect, as one by one the prostrate forms are seen emerging
from the regions below and coming up on deck.
As the sun declines towards the western horizon the wind
and sea go down, and a gentle air springing up from the
westward, we weigh anchor and stand out of the Bay. The
sun has just sunk below the mountains on the one side, as the
full refulgent orb, which mortals call the moon, rises on the
other, flooding the ocean with a broad shining track of silvery (
light. It is a glorious evening. A gentle breeze, just sufficient
to ripple the waters and make them dance, O, so merrily 1
slowly urges us on our way, as we head tovrards the dreaded'
“ Raoul.” As night closes around us the breeze slightly freshens,
and when we retire for the night—after reading a portion of
God’s most holy Word, and commending ourselves and our
dear ones to His merciful keeping—the frowning Cape is some
ten miles distant.
Is it midnight ? Is it the darkness that heralds the dawn ?
What matters it. We awake to the fearful rolling of the vessel,
the flapping of the sails, and the awful swaying and swinging of
the terrible MAIN BOOM. Do you know the MAIN
BOOM ? Have your ever been shipmates with the Monster ?
You are sailing with a fair wind right aft, and you walk the
deck with a feeling of pride and mastery, when suddenly the
sharp cry rings out “ Look out for the MAIN BOOM.” Down
goes the proudest head almost level with the deck—as when
a galling gun decimates a whole regiment—and crash goes the
BOOM right across the deck, carrying with it the coils of the
Main Sheet, only too ready to take a round turn round your
neck and hurl you overboard —the whole ending with a jerk
that sends a shiver through the entire vessel ; or, you are
gathered together on the weather side of the vessel, deeply


interested in the most exciting portion of one of Walter
Bcsant’s novels, which is being read aloud, when LEE, O I
suddenly startles you ; down goes everyone on to the deck
again, for the MAIN BOOM is master of the situation.
But, to return to the fearful rolling. We are mid-way
between the “ Raoul ” and the “ Pillar.” The wind has fallen
light, and the rollers roll in from the great Southern Ocean.
Oh 1 for a breeze from any quarter. As the Captain afterwards
told us, the rigging, sails, and running gear suffered more in
these few hours than they would have done in many weeks of
fair sailing. Slowly we forge ahead, and finally round the
“ Pillar,” when the sea becomes smoother. I draw a veil over
suffering humanity during that night and morning, the only
consolation being that it served us jolly well right, for had we
not cowardly turned back as we did, we would have carried the
breeze with us.
The day is bright and very pleasant, but,' unfortunately, the
wind draws right ahead, and at the same time freshens into a
stiff breeze with a rising sea. A consultation is held, “ Shall we
hold on, beating our way along the coast ? or, shall we take
shelter in Fortescue Bay ? which now opens before us. Again
the pitifulness of our nature gains the day, and we decide to
run into the Bay and anchor there. One more tack off shore,
and then we stand in. It is about as glorious a bit of sailing
as any one has ever enjoyed ; a strong fresh breeze, giving full
command over the vessel, enables the captain to bring his tight
little craft so close to the stupendous rocks that you can chuck
a biscuit ashore, while almost every yard the vessel proceeds
brings into view new forms of rock, and fissure, and overhang-
ing cliff. The contrast from the rugged boldness of the entrance
to the land-locked security of the head of the Bay is very
striking. About mid-day we drop anchor. The poor mortals
who were unable to take their breakfast were now clamorous
fora “ square meal,” “a regular ‘square meal,’ and nothing else,’*
they say, so I help our ship’s cook to prepare a STEW. Yes,
certainly a stew constitutes a “ square meal.” It is, in the first
place, filling ; in the second place there is enough for all and
something to spare (I never knew a properly-made stew run
short); in the third place it is a 'arming. This stew was made


thusly 41b. of lean mutton, cut into pieces sufficiently small
to go comfortably into one's mouth; 7 large onions (one
a-piece) cut into slices ; half a vegetable marrow, cut small ; all
well peppered and salted, and about 2 pints of water. When
this has boiled for nearly half an hour, peel some potatoes, cut
them into quarters, and fill up the stewpan ; boil for another
half-hour and don't stir. Then when the stewpan is brought
on the table the potatoes are not mashed, and there is plenty of
gravy; add, if you like, some “Lea and Perrin.” Mind, always
have an extra supply of potatoes boiled in their jackets for those
who want them. Yes ; there can be no doubt of it, a hungry
man and a full man are two very different beings. Axiom.—
Always ask a favour of a man after he Iras had a good dinner
and enjoyed it.
Dinner ended —I forgot to state that we finished up with
Queen cake, tarts, and such like unconsidered trifles—some
betake themselves ashore with rod and gun, and some go
a-fishing to “ shoot ” the nets, as Fortescue Bay is a noted fishing
ground. The shore party succeed in hooking a dozen Bream,
just large enough to be seen by the naked eye, and report the
shooting of a snake. I don’t say they did’nt shoot a snake —I
only say they said tlrey had done so, and you know they are all
honorable men ! We, of the fishing party, have a capital haul of
the nets —fine perch and trumpeter, not escaping the usual
quantity of sharks, parrot fish, and such like rubbish.
That night we slept, and if it was not the sleep of the just, at
at any rate it was the sleep of the quiet -
Rover rest, thy tossing’s o’er,
Sleep the sleep that knows no breaking,
Dream of Boom and Board no more,
Sleep the sleep that knows no shaking.
'Flic next morning (Wednesday) we are waiting for a breeze
to take us out of the Bay— we whistle for it, but it will not
come, so we stretch our legs ashore. Just as we come aboard
to lunch a light air springs up, so up anchor and away. As we
approach the entrance of the Bay the wind heads us, still
light, and worst of all, a heavy N.E, swell rolls dead into the
Bay. For four mortal hours we do battle against this sea,
which almost knocks the masts out of us, and the only thing


that appears to enjoy it is the MAIN BOOM, and HE has a
fine time of it. Now jumping up into the air—now dashing to
starboard —now to port —plainly saying in his own dumb way
“ Ha, ha, ha, a Jolly old Dog is the grand old BOOM. Ha,
ha, ha, all that I want is room, more room.” I had almost
forgotten our glorious old Centre-Board; he also enjoys it in
his own lumbering way—with a BLASH and a Plash and a
lengthened Sh —Sh —Sh. Sometimes wegain a fewhundred yards
and then we lose what we have gained. Anywhere else, say a
mile to the southward or the northward, our situation would be
highly dangerous, but our cautious captain takes care to keep
Eortescue Bay open under our lee. Well, after four hours of
this hammering we find ourselves drifting so ominously near to
the great cruel rocks, that the captain gives orders to get the
boat ready for towing the vessel off. The tackles are got ready,
when the practised eye of the captain discerns a ruffle and a
ripple.on the waters inside the Bay steadily approaching us.
“ Plold hard there,” he cries, “ here’s a Bully Breeze coming.”
“ Stand by the main and mizen sheets,” and almost before you
could say “Jack Robinson,” the “ Bully Breeze ” is upon us, and
merrily.we speed away from Fortescue Bay, bound straight for
Maria Island, distant some 30 miles.
When the moon rises about 9 p.m. broad on our starboard
bow, we plainly discern the outlines of the high land of Maria
Island, to which with a light breeze we are slowly approaching,
and shortly afterwards we bid adieu to the deck and retire for
the night.
Very early the next morning, just as the eastern horizon
becomes streaked with the first glimmerings of dawn, we are
aroused by the heeling over of the vessel, the rush and dash of
wind and rain, the voice of the captain giving quick and sharp
orders, and then comes a crash which fairly makes us jump.
Starting up on our beds, we behold the same white-robed
figure —or at least part of him—forcing his way up the hatch-
way, which had been covered over to keep out the rain, and
in his eager excitement he has knocked the hatch down into the
hold, among stewpans, and fryingpans, and billys. “ Hallo,
there ! What are you up to ?” we shout, but he takes no heed,
and leaves us to put the hatch on again as best we may. Soon


we hear the pleasing sound of “ Let go the anchor,” followed
by the rattling of the chain, and we know that we have reached
the haven of our rest, Oyster Cove.
The squall of wind and rain—“ bully rain,” as our captain
lovingly called it —soon passes away, and when we, the jolly
seamen of the party, go on deck, the old familiar scenes burst
upon our view in all the glory of a heavenly summer’s morn.
“ There, look there,” says one, “ that’s our camping ground,”
pointing to a beautiful spot a mile away. “ And there’s where
we got our Sting Ray,” says another ; “ And there’s where we
didn’t get our ducks,” says a third. “ Come on deck, boys,”
we shout to the poor landsmen down below. The youthful
Giant and the Man of Science, and the famous Cricketer soon
join us, and so elated are we all that, joining hands and forget-
ful of grammar, we sing—
The perils and the dangers of the voyage are past,
Our ship to her moorings has come at last,
The sails are all furled and the anchor’s cast,
Who so brave a sailor as me, me, me.
The crew, having been up all night, need a few hours’ rest.
As soon as they come on deck, about 8 a.m., we trip our
anchor, and in a short time bring up opposite our camping
ground, about a couple of hundred yards from the shore.
Who can adequately describe the intense enjoyment of a
camp life far from the busy haunts of men. No post —no
telegraph—no newspaper —and, most delightful of all, no Shirt
Collar. You ladies may think this latter a little thing — so it
is in itself —but do you know what a shirt-collar means ? It
means the presence and the tyranny of woman. Could we dare
appear in her presence without this badge of servitude ? Yes,
1 did once, and I shall never forget it- it sends a cold
shudder through me as I recall it. It was one day last year,
and I knew it not. When the day’s work was over, and I had
retired into the bosom of my family —what a capacious phrase 1
—my daughter said to me, “ Why, father, where’s your shirt-
collar ?” Instinctively I put up my hand to the place where the
collar ought to have been. It was not there. Oh, horror 1 and
I had been in the presence of at least a hundred ladies that
c


day. But no more of that an’ you love me. It was the most
copper-coloured act 1 have ever been guilty of.
Ashore! Ashore! Let’s have our breakfast ashore I so,
rigging the tackles, we soon have the “ Little Dick” in the
water and loading her with tent, cooking utensils, and no end
of provisions, we pull ashore. The spot on which we pitch
our camp is on the side of a gently sloping grassy hillock,
park-like in its clumps of trees and absence of fallen timber.
Our old fireplace, formed of stones, we find intact. We soon
have a fire under way, and procure and fix two forked sticks
with a connecting pole, on which to hang our bil'.ys and
frying-pans.
What shall our first shore breakfast be ?
Shall we have coffee, or shall we have tea ?
The milk has turned sour, but what do we care,
For tins of Swiss milk are plentiful here ;
The bread’s become stale and mouldy I ween,
But that matters nut when the appetite’s keen,
And should it all go, or be hard as the stones,
We've a jolly old boy who will feed us on scones.
There’s mutton, there’s beef, there’s bacon and ham ;
There’s eggs by the score, and black currant jam ;
There’s and tarts, and peaches in jars
(God bless our dear wives, our sweethearts and ilia’s) ;
There’s sardines and fresh herrings, and yet something more,
A whole roasted goose with stuffing galore ;
And last, but not least —as sure as I’m sinner—
Four bonnie plum puddings to top up the dinner.
But the great difficulty is, what shall we have fur breakfast ?
We decide on ham and eggs —three eggs a-picce, with ham
ad libitum, and a billy full of coffee. Sharpening his knife and
clutching the ham by the knuckle —it is a glorious ham,
weighing some i6lbs. —the chief cook soon has the great
revolving pan full of juicy slices, while crowding around him
with eager faces and ravenous appetites, expectant, exulting,
his half-dozen subordinates grin with delight as they smell the
frying fumes, and hear the preparatory frizzle. “ Off with you,”
he shouts, “ every man do his duty, and don’t stand grinning
here —you get the plates and make them hot— -you get the eggs
out of the box— -you open the tin and mix the milk —you get
the salt and mustard— -you get the mugs and knives and forks —


you cut the bread.” It is a new version of the old nursery
rhyme—
Mr. East he gave a feast,
Mr. North laid the tablecloth,
Mr. West did his best,
And Mr. South burnt his mouth,
Because he wouldn’t wait for the blessing.
At last, at last, all are satisfied, and as there is an end to all
good things on this sublunary sphere, so our first camp meal is
a thing only to be remembered, and lighting our pipes we
serenely give up the next quarter of an hour to that quiet enjoy-
ment, which is the real oasis in man’s weary journey through
the desert of life. Body and mind being alike rested and
refreshed, the next thing is to erect our Tent, a new Tent,
devised from the accumulated experience of many similar out-
ings, and executed with the skill of a practised hand. Ten
minutes secs it standing, erect and taut —gleaming white in the
bright sunlight, a tiring of beauty and a joy for ever. But
think not that we are going to be such fools as to commit our
finely formed bodies—especially that of the valued Man of
Science, whose was a picture fit for a painter’s eye to rest on
with delight—to the tender mercies of the cold, cold ground.
Between our bodies and mother earth there need be something
soft, springy and fragrant, so all hands go to work with a will to
gather the young shoots of what common people call gum and
peppermint, but which felt all the softer and smelt all the
sweeter, when named by our Man of Science Eucalyptus din-
oniis giganiea and Peppercastrum euphorbis mariana. Another
trip to the vessel, and another boatload brings ashore all our
bedding, which each man unrolls and places as arranged, the
place of honour, the starboard one next the tent, being always
reserved for our Mentor. When all is done, it is Lunch time,
jest a snack, not a square meal —that is reserved for 6 o’clock.
It is one of our Axioms —“ Never rise from one meal without
deciding the substance of the next,” so we decide that the
square meal shall consist of a Curry, a genuine Curry, not one
of your lukewarm messes, neither cold nor hot, but such a
Currie as a former cook’s mate declared, when asked how he
liked it, “ It made me puspire,”
c-i


After lunch we decide to explore the country, and stretch our
legs, some taking the sea-beach, and others searching after
game, if such haply might be found-—the total results being a
duck and a half-fledged duckling. At any rate, if it did nothing
more, our tramp gives us excellent appetites for dinner, which
consists, as already arranged, of a “puspiring” Curry, with
rice and potatoes, and a “ top-up ” of one of the four excellent
plum puddings. The shadows of night are stealing o’er us,
so, making up the fire, we adjourn to the tent for reading.
Reading a novel to one’s self and by one’s self may be all
very well, hut to thoroughly enjoy a story there is nothing like
reading it aloud, either, as we are now doing, in the tent, or, as
we often did, under the shade of a spreading forest tree. The
characters stand out in living form as we make our comments
and discuss the men and women of the novelist’s creation. We
admire or condemn them in our hourly talk, and they become
distinct additions to our party, without adding to our number
or decreasing our stock of provisions. The novels we took
for our reading were very happily chosen, and though, of course,
we read them one by one, and the reading extended over our
whole trip, I will now speak of them collectively. The four
were —Besant’s “All in a Garden Fair,” the same writer’s
“ Monks of Thalema,” James Payn’s “ From Exile,” and
Manvillc Fenn’s “Parson o’ Dumford.” The latter, “'The
Parson o’ Dumford,” was, by unanimous voice, declared the
best. It contained both the best and the worst character of the
lour. Richard Glairc was voted a “ beast ” and the Parson a
“ trump.” There was a“go ” in the story which both excited
our interest and enchained our attention. As proof of this —we
were getting towards the end, the time was ro p.m. “ Time to
close,” I said. “Oh, another chapter,” said our venerable men-
tor. That was read. “ Oh, another,” and yet another, til! we
finished the book sometime after midnight. “ From Exile ” was
readable, and full of the author’s well-known “ cheeriness,” but
the denouement of the plot was too evident from the beginning.
The hero was without doubt a very copper-coloured villain.
Besant’s “ Monks of Thalema ” was excellent: rich in
humour, full of character, and well constructed, it sustained our
interest to the very last page. “ All in a Garden Fair ” proved


of the least interest to us —not from any fault of the writer, for
Besant cannot write a bad story, but it did not suit our humour
so well as the others.
The next morning (Friday) we are up betimes and have a
cup of steaming coffee, and then with towel on shoulder wc
march in single file to the sandy beach to have a swim in the
salt, salt ocean —and most refreshing and invigorating it proves
to be.
Our day’s programme is, of course, first Breakfast—again
it was ham and eggs—and afterwards a sail in the boat to the
head of the bay, taking with us our harpoon and ample supply
for our mid-day Lunch —that wc never forgot. The sport was
to be Sting Ray hunting. Sailing on to our hunting ground,
which consists of a long expanse of shallow water, with a
gleaming sandy bottom on which the black-backed monsters
can be clearly distinguished, we lower the sail and take to the
oars. The weather is all that can be desired —almost a calm
with a bright warm sun, enticing our prey close to the shore.
The requisites for this exciting sport are : a whaler’s harpoon,
a sharp eye, a steady hand, a docile and obedient boat’s crew,
and a capable steersman. The first we have in a trusty weapon
which has slain its score or more ; the second and the third wc
also have in the wiry form and long arm of our venerated
Mentor ; the fourth are somewhat wanting in docility, and given
to have opinions of their own and to express them too, which,
as everyone knows, is subversive of all discipline ; but the
fifth, the steersman —whether it is from wilfulness or not, I
can’t tell —but when the boat ought to go to starboard it is
sure to turn to port, and vice versa. The steersman says that
everyone is giving him orders at the same time, and contra-
dictory orders too, so the upshot is that he won’t steer at
all, which proves after all the best.
Picture us, then, silently and slowly pulling on the glassy
surface of this inland sea. In the bows the long form of the
Harpooncer with weapon ready poised, keenly peering into the
water ahead, while two look-out men search the sandy bottom
on either side. “ Steady men—pull silently.” There ! there !
what’s that ? “ Starboard ” is the order, and holding our
21


breath we fix our eyes on the uplifted arm of the Harpoonccr.
Nearer and nearer we draw. Now 1 now '.--only a patch of dark
seaweed ! And so not once, nor twice. There ! right ahead—
yes, there is no mistake this time. “ Way enough.” Hush !
The arm is raised ready to hurl the vengeful steel, when—
-7c-h-e-7c’—he’s off into deep water. A second and a third
attempt, but they arc too wide-awake. ‘‘Never mind, boys,
better luck next time.” Steady ! just as she goes —a bright
gleam of flashing steel ! a plunge ! a fearful turmoil of foaming
water ! and away dashes the monster, carrying with him the
fatal weapon deeply buried in his body till all the line is out,
and in the force of his mad career he swings the head of the
boat round. “ Pull, boys, pull for the shore.” The rowers
strain to their utmost, and slowly we near the beach—then a
couple of us jumping into the water, seize the rope, and drag
the huge fish ashore and kill him. We gather around the now
quivering but lifeless mass, and listen with absorbing interest to
the Man Of Science as he proceeds to describe in language
adapted to our ignorance, the various parts and their uses.
We leave the spot and once more enter the boats, congratu-
latihg the Harpooneer on the prowess of his sinewy right arm,
and presenting him with the bony sting, to be handed down from
generation to generation, a visible record of his mighty achieve-
ment.
All this, though it takes but a few minutes to describe,
occupied about a couple of hours, or more. So as it is now
intensely hot, “ with not a breath the blue wave to curl,” we
haul the boat up On the beach, and taking the materials for
our Lunch with us, and one of our books, we seek the cooling
shade of an umbrageous tree—a Upadeldoc Ornithoryncus as
Out Man of Science quietly informs us—a name which rather
startles us on account of its association in sound with the fatal
Upas tree of the East. We take it to be a native cherry tree.
Lunch and reading together, and perhaps a quiet nap in the
intervals—for the heat is too intense to warrant our leaving the
friendly shade —brings us to 5 p.m., when we decide to return,
having a three mile pull before us. When we reach the boat,
lo ! the tide has ebbed, leaving a stretch of some 50 yards of
shallow' water, about a foot deep between the shore and deep
22


water. Nothing for it but off boots and stockings, tuck ap
trowsers, and push her off on rollers —at least five of us do so,
the other two ignominiqusly coming on board, carried ort the
shoulders of their comrades.
When we reach home —for surely it was home to us, a band
of brothers—we find that the crew of the vessel had secured
for us a plentiful supply of trumpeter, which are kept alive in
the well of our fishing boat. The ship’s cook has prepared
half-a-dozen fine ones ready for the pan, so setting two of our
“ boys ” to work, preparing the bread crumbs and beating up
the eggs, I superintend the pan. I think I have mentioned
before that our pan is a circular revolving one, say about aft. in
diameter. The fish are so fine that even such a pan could
only hold a couple at a time, so we have our fish hot and hot —
three pans full—not bad for seven men and a washer-up. A
pipe, a read, a talk round a glorious camp fire and then to bed.
Saturday.—Another fine day. Coffee —swim —the usual
meals—reading—a shooting of the nets —and a general loafing
about brings this day to a close ; the last thing before retiring-
being a gathering round the camp-fire to drink to wives and
sweethearts, a custom we sailors have of a Saturday night.
Sunday. Another splendid day. Again a swim and then
a general change of clothing, just to distinguish this day from
others, one or two going to the exteme length of a Shirt-collar.
At n a.m. Divine Service in front of the tent, to which the
crew come by invitation. Singing, reading, prayer, and a short
discourse from the lips of our esteemed pastor. Rest is the
ordet of the day, and not one of us fail in that duty. To
bed early, as on the morrow we have to be up betimes to strike
tent and bid adieu to our pleasant camp.
Monday morning.—What a contrast to last Monday at this
hotir ! Such is life. Somewhat saddened by the thought that
one week of fny brief holiday is gone. Waking at an early
hour, and before my comrades Were astir, I thought I’d treat
them to a nice cup of hot coffee before they got up. Quietly
rising, and stealthily steppihg over their sleeping forms, I get
outside. I turn the corner of the tent on my way to the fire—
I 100k —I stand rooted to the spot in sheer amazement —There !
23


there 1 with back towards me, stooping over the fire, stands an
angelic being, or what appears to me to be one, robed in white.
I rub my eyes to make sure that I am wide awake, and look
again. “ Yes,” I say to myself, “it must be the sweet spirit of
the island, grieved at our approaching departure, come to say
‘ farewell,’ ” and I am about to address her, when a slight move-
ment oh her part, or, perhaps, a light current of air, discloses to
my astonished gaze an unmistakable pair of hoofs. With an
instant revulsion of feeling, I jump to the opposite conclusion,
and feel certain the figure is the Evil One himself, clothed as an
Angel of Light, for had not my Mentor taught me that he often
thus appears. “ I’ll make it hot for him,” I say to myself, “ I’ll
exorcise him, so that he shall vanish, leaving only a slight trace
of sulphur. I’ll anathematise him in every language I know of
for fear he should be so ignorant as not to know English,
“ Abracadabra Nebuchadnezzar Tonnere Donner
und Blitzen.” Startled, he turns his face towards me and it
is—it is
The jolly old boy—God bless his old bones
In his wife’s kitchen apron, a-cooking of scones.
And every morning after that, from Monday to Saturday, we
have hot scones for breakfast.
We take our last swim in the bay, eat our last breakfast at
the camp, strike tent, and gather together all our traps ready to
send aboard.
For the first time our party is to be divided. Three deter-
mine to walk to Darlington, and get what sport they can by
the way, and the others prefer to sail along the coast. As
soon as everything is on board we start with a fine fair breeze.
It is not given to every man to be a “ Mark Tapley,” to be
always jolly, and all the more so when circumstances naturally
tend to depress the spirit. I was leaving a spot that had become
endeared to me by many fond recollections ; where the ordinary
friendship of every day intercourse had grown into something
deeper and stronger. Shall I ever re-visit this place ? I leave my
comrades, silently proceed aft, and leaning over the bulwarks


I give way to sad and pensive thought, and thought finds aud-
ible expresssion in these words :
Sweet island home ! Farewell ! Farewell !
Thy shady copse ; thy grassy dell ;
Thy sunny beach ; thy ocean swell ;
Fare thee well, oh ! fare thee well,
My island home, a long farewell.
Where shall I find a spot so fair ?
Where shall I breathe such balmy air ?
Where is thy compeer any where ?
Fare thee well, oh! fare thee well,
My island home, a long farewell.
My mem’ry still will turn to thee,
With thoughts of all thou’st been to me,
Rest, Repose, sweet Liberty.
Fare Mee well, oh ! fare thee well.
My island home, a long fareweU.
And must I go? Thou’rt fading fast.
One parting look, perhaps the last
That on thy shores I’ll ever cast.
Fare thee well, oh I fare thee weU,
My island home, a long farewell—-
and the unbidden tear falls into the ocean and is lost
for ever.
As we sail northwards along the coast, we are delighted
with a glimpse of our comrades bravely marching on-
wards, for their road in many places brings them close to the
beach, and we greet each other with shouts of welcome. About
mid-day we bring up in Darlington Harbour, and are soon ashore
exploring the old prison buildings, all of which bear evident
mark of the ruthless work of “ time’s devouring hand.” Rot-
ting roofs, crumbling walls, tottering fences, prostrate gates,
sunken bridges —solitude, decay, death everywhere. Here, on
all sides of this dismal quadrangle, rank with noxious weeds,
fit habitation for venomous snakes and crawling reptiles, rises in
double tiers, long rows of narrow dens—2oo in number—in
which human beings, day after day, for weeks, and months, and
years were wont to be entombed, for 12 or 14 hours, alone.
Here, with its massive bars and double doors, is the place of
punishment, Here the abodes of the cruel jailors. Here the


mansion of the stern and despotic ruler, No lively place this,
and we care not to linger within its depressing precincts,
After we have seen all that is to be seen, we go a-fishing, for
a notable fishing ground is Darlington Bay, and so we find it,
for we have some splendid hauls with the nets, and no end of
crayfish—detestable creatures. But what is our Man of Science
about all this time ? Little cares he for anything so modern as
the present century, or the works of men’s hands. His field of
research extends far, far back, into the reons of the old, old
world when time was young. So off he went with a couple of
companions—of course to ensure his return—to explore a noted
inland range, which, when he came back, he described as
“ magnificent,” 400 ft. of perpendicular fossiliferous rock, bring-
ing with him quantities of specimens, and wishing for days, to
learn the story of those rocks. And our sportsman, he must
needs at sundown take his rod ashore and try his luck for tittle-
bats ! Well, the place where he went was just the spot where
mosquitoes “ most do congregate,” and so he found it —say fifty
bites to one fish.
Come, what’s your notion ? what’s your notion ? sounds
in our cars early the next morning. It is the voice of the
Chief Officer, calling down the companion to his mates below,
and rousing them to be up and doing, for there is a fair wind
and we must be off as soon as possible ; so immediately after
an early breakfast we weigh anchor. The breeze leaves us just
as we arc clear of Maria Island, where we are becalmed for an
hour, the captain and mate taking rest, as they expect to be on
deck all night. A light air from the N.E. soon freshens into a
fine breeze, and still further strengthens into a genuine “ bully ”
breeze, with which we round the famous Southern Headland
and pass the picturesque Raoul, the breeze finally leaving u s
becalmed some four miles up Storm Bay. All that night we
make but little progress, and morning finds us still 20 miles from
the Passage mouth which we enter about mid-day (Wednesday),
and night closes upon us becalmed in the Channel, between
Bruni and the Mainland. The coast being strange to the
Captain, he determines to get close inshore and anchor for the
night. The order is given, “ out sweeps,” and soon the crew


are labouring at the long oars, while our Man of Science—a
regular universal genius—cheers them with the solemn strains of
the Banjo, while we make the waters vocal with our sweet voices.
The only event worthy of record this day is the capture of a
fearfully ugly creature, with long grasping suckers; which our
Universal Genius calls a Galapagos- Inamorata Bibulus, and
which he deems such a prize that he at once places it in a
bottle of spirits, for presentation to the British Musem. I had
nearly omitted the one and only .first-class riddle that was manu-
factured during the trip. It is quite too good not to be recorded;
—“What eminent living English statesman does our vessel
resemble, and why ? ”*
Two days and nights at sea and not at our destina-
tion yet —oh, for a run ashore. We pull long faces, as in
the morning the sun rises on a calm sea. After breakfast
a light air springs up, and weighing anchor, we slowly move
from our snug bay. With a freshening breeze we find ourselves in
about three hours off the entrance to Taylor’s Bay, when the
wind dies away and it becomes intensely hot, making us glad to
get w r hat shade we can on the deck. “ Bully breeze coming out
of the bay, right ahead,” says the Captain, and we see the ripple
on the water. It approaches rapidly, and as it strikes the
vessel it makes her heel over, giving us the pleasing prospect of
a long beat to windward. We are hungry—no fresh meat, no fish,
no nothihg but a bit of boiled bacon, oh so fat! But eat we must,
so we arrange our meal on the main hatch and gather round
the inhospitable board. “A little lean,” is the universal
request, but how is a fellow to do so when all is fot. Carving
this slippery joint is rather difficult, but it is accomplished at
last, and with the addition of potatoes, we are doing our best, -when
above the noiseof wind and wavethe Captain’s voice rings out loud
arid clear, “ Look out there, let go the topsail haulyards, let go the
sheet, clew them up,” and we get it hot and strong and no
mistake. Away goes the bacon, away go the potatoes. Plates,
riiugs; knives and forks race towards the lee scuppers, where
the water is rushing over the deck. “ Bully gale, we arc laying
up straight for the anchorage now,” says the Captain as he takes
his station at the main sheet, easing it off as the fury of the
” The answer to this fiddle will be given in our next.


squall strikes the vessel and buries her deck-deep in the water,
“ you will be able to finish your dinner, gentlemen, when we
anchor.” The gallant craft ploughs her way through the seeth-
ing waters in splendid style, and in a very short time, that which
we feared would have taken us hours to do is accomplished, and
we arc riding safely in smooth water close to the landing place,
—and we finish our dinner in peace.
“ Out boats and a run ashore,” is the order, which is soon
done, and while some walk along the sandy beach gathering
shells, the others, with the crew of the vessel, start for a three-
mile walk to South Bruni lighthouse.
When we anchored there was an extensive bush fire raging a
mile or two to windward, which the strong gale brings rapidly
nearer and nearer to the shore, right down upon us, to the spot
where stands the boathouse and store-shed belonging to the
lighthouse. The appearance as evening draws on is grand in
the extreme, with a spice of real danger as the dense clouds of
smoke envelope us, and the burning flakes of fern and leaves
drop on the vessel’s deck, and into the surrounding water. Just
then the party returned from their visit to the lighthouse, bring-
ing with them the lighthouse keeper, who, seeing the extreme
danger of his sheds, determines at once to get off their contents
to the vessel. We all go to work with a will, first launching
the large whaleboat, which we have to drag some distance
through the shallow water until she floats, and then carrying out
to her the contents of the shed. It is a very exciting scene —
the lurid light of the roaring fire, the occasional dense clouds of
smoke, the burning embers carried by the force of the gale and
dropping all around us, and every now and then the crash of a
falling giant of the forest, while we are hurriedly wading through
the water with packages of stores in our arms and on our heads.
When all is done that foresight can suggest, we calmly await
the approach of the fire, now within a couple of hundred yards,
when suddenly the wind shifts a few points, changing the course
of the fire from directly down upon us to along the crest of the
rising ground, towards the next point, at the head of the little
cove. It is a very narrow escape indeed, and we thank our
stars, as from the deck of the “ Gertrude ” we watch the des
tractive force of the terrible element, burning up the under


growth and clutching in its fatal embrace the monarchs of the
primaeval forest. Especially grand is the sight as the fire
reaches and envelops a fine old tree that stands in bold relief
on the extreme point of the nearest headland, illuminating shore
and sea and vessel.
Friday dawns with the wind still blowing fresh, which pre-
cludes our leaving our snug anchorage for the fishing-ground off
Partridge Island, as we had purposed doing, for we all had
promised our wives—at least those of us who had such treasures
—to bring them home plenty of fish. What shall we do? The
lighthouse-keeper kindly offers us the use of his 5-ton sailing
craft to go across to Michie Bay, from whence it is only a short
walk over the neck of land to Cloudy Bay. We accept the offer,
and taking with us the fishing boat, we unmoor the craft, and,
hoisting sail, a fair wind soon brings us to our desired haven.
Four of us start for the walk, and, following the track, soon
find ourselves on the shores of the “ Narrows,” which join the
Lagoon to the Bay. Here our Man of Science is soon busy
gathering all sorts of what appears to us to be rubbish, chief
among which arc two sea-slugs of a colour and consistency
exactly resembling black currant jelly, and which completely
filled a pint mug we had with us. It was the first time I ever
saw him nonplussed for a name, and he dare not invent one or
I should have been down upon him at once, from my intimate
acquaintance with the classical languages, A walk on the shore
of the Great Bay, on which the surf is breaking gloriously, and
it is time to return to our comrades and have lunch. We find
that they have had a “ shot ” of the nets with no result what-
ever, so the order is given to get back to our vessel.
“ Who goes in the craft ?” It is still blowing fresh, and, of
course, dead against us. “ Not I,” says one, “ I don’t like the
look of it.” “Not I,” says another, “not in that craft if I
know it.” So three start off to walk round the Bay, and three
decide to go by water, I among the latter.
Our Captain and Chief Officer compose the crew, and we
three are the passengers. We have thorough confidence in
them, much more so than in the craft, for she is rather crank.
The mainsail is double reefed and the jib unbent, the kedge is


hauled aboard, and away vvc went (instead of “ go,” which
wouldn’t rhyme).
In my time I have played many a part, and have sailed in
many a craft, but the experience of this little voyage is some-
thing to be remembered. I have said that outside the little
bay in which we have brought up it was blowing a stiff
breeze, dead ahead. A minute or two after getting
under weigh we feel the breeze, and the craft lays over,
but she is still partially sheltered. A few minutes more
and we are out in the open, and thankful we are now
for the precaution of our Captain in shortening sail, for
with only double-reefed mainsail and staysail we heel over
to the squalls, till the water covers the lee side of the deck
right up to the open hatchway. This in itself would hardly be
worth recording, but we soon discover something else which is
not at all pleasant —the top sides of the craft leak like a sieve.
At first we think it only unpleasant, and might wet our feet, so
one of us gets a pannikin and begins to bail. In a very short
time the water rises and the pannikin is discarded for an old
tin. Faster and faster rises the water in the bottom of the
boat, and another has to set to work bailing with a large billy
which fortunately we have with us. It is tiring work for both
arms and legs, for our position is very cramped —not only must
we stick to it to keep the water from gaining on us, but now it
is a dire necessity that all three of us should bail away as fast
as we can, and only through the vessel righting a little now and
then do w T e succeed in keeping the water down. The captain
looks on as he skilfully steers the craft and urges us to renewed
efforts, until after an hour’s hard and continuous work we find
ourselves in smoother water, and with an experience that we
will not soon forget. Of course we could have turned tail and
run back, but then we should have had the laugh all against us.
In justice to the owner of the craft, it must be said that he was
profuse in his apologies, and had no idea that his little vessel
was so fearfully leaky, not having had her out in such a breeze
for ever so long.
Having refreshed our inner man —that phrase sounds well -
we all determine that by hook or by crook we must get a supply
of fish, and not disappoint the old folks at home. The light


house-keeper, who is well acquainted with all the fishing-grounds
about, informs us that he knows where Flounders come to your
call and ask to be caught.
“In that other Bay—a mile away —
That’s the place where th.e Flounders play.”
You come with rno some moonlight night,
When all is calm, and all is clear,
And I will show you such a sight
As can’t he equalled, far or near.
Why, I have stood on that there spot,
Whistling a tunc or two I knew ;
“ Should Auld Acquaintance be Forgot
“ The De’il awa’ wi’ the Exciseman flew.”
When up there comes from out the sea.
The finest Flounders that ever you saw ;
They frisked and jumped, quite full of glee,
Hundreds and Thousands, and more and more.
I saw them come up with my very own eyes :
I noticed that they were of every size ;
The matronly Mother and the maidenly Maid ;
The Infant of months, and the old grey head.
They walked on the beach ; they ran on the sand ;
They climbed o’er the rocks ; they danced hand in hand ;
And when my song ceased, away they all ran ;
But I know where to find them, said that Nautical man.
Such an account of the wealth of Flounders close to us, fills our
hearts with brave resolves to get hundreds, nay thousands,
why not MILLIONS of Flounders to take home to our dear ones.
The old man eloquent, appears to be the very soul of truth and
honour, and we almost worship him. “ Will the well of the
fishing boat be large enough to hold all our Flounders ? ” No,
no, a thousand times, NO, —“ We’ll take all the baskets, all the
buckets, all the billys.” Hurrah for Flounders I
Just as the sun sets behind the western hills, we pull to
Flounder Hay, piloted by the noble Hawkins, “ Flounder ”
Hawkins we call him in our exuberant gratitude. To make
assurance doubly sure, we decide to attract the fish close to the
shore by enormous fires on the beach. Toiling, rejoicing, some-
thing attempted, great things done ; behold two huge piles of
wood, magnificent funeral pyres, devoted to appease the manes


of the myriads of Flounders we purpose capturing. They blaze,
sending heavenward forked tongues of fierce fire, and the whole
bay is aflame.
“ Now is your time, boys,” Hurrah ! hurrah 1 “ See I see !
There ! there I how they leap out of the water ! What glorious
ones ! ” “ Porpoises,” shouts the Captain. Slowly, surely, the
boat pulls out seaward, paying out the net as she goes, and
making a wide encircling sweep, comes to the shore again, leaving
both ends of the connecting rope in our hands. While the boat
is away, we have not been idle, for all along the shore stands a
goodly array of baskets, billys, and vessels of all sorts and sizes
which we trust will be sufficient to hold our catch.
“ Pull in on the ropes, boys,” “ Pull steadily,” “ Keep your
hands low, so that the net will not rise off the bottom.” We
pull hand-over-hand with a cheerful song. The two lanterns,
carried about in the excitement, flash into our faces and reveal
therein a determination to conquer success. The net itself now
reaches our hands, and the floating corks reveal its extensive
circle. A minute more, and half-a-dozen daring spirits dash into
the water, and circling the outer edge of the net, beat, and
splash, and shout, to terrify the captured fish, and prevent their
leaping over and escaping. Lanterns ! lanterns ! quick, quick !
“ t Don’t you hear the splash and the floundering I ” Ha 1 Ha !
Flounders floundering ! excellent joke. So high are our spirits,
that we can laugh at anything —at nothing. “ Baskets, boxes,
billys, bring everything.” They shall hear of this at home, and
in all the future annals of our race, this day shall be kept as
FLOUNDER DAY.
One united pull, one united push, the net is on the beach,
and a dozen ready hands dash at the contents to throw them
into the long array of baskets. By firelight and lamplight we
eagerly search and are rewarded with —one baby flounder and
three smaller fry.
Aboard ! Aboard ! All aboard ! and, gathering together our
pile of baskets, as empty as when we started, we wade to our
boat, and, jumping in, bend to the oars, and soon are on the
deck of the “ Gertrude.” It is now getting late, but, as it is
the last night that we shall spend together, we decide to com-
32


memoratc it with a farewell supper. When we were at Cloudy
Bay we collected from off the rocks a couple of handkerchiefs
full of fine large Periwinkles,. and, having had them properly
cooked, we now gather round the large dishful, and, by the light
of a couple of ,lanterns, proceed,to satisfy our appetites. Eat-
ing Periwinkles with a pin—that is the orthodox way—is a
delicate, deliberate, and absorbing process. The shell in which
the crustacean finds its lodgment is convoluted —I have not been
unmindful of the teaching of our Man of Science —and to draw
out the whole animal —for its extreme end, which terminates in a
point, is the most luscious of all —is no easy matter, and a novice
is sure to bungle. The only way in which you can secure the
much-coveted morsel is to take the shell in your left hand and
the pin in your right; insert the latter within the shell until it
enters into the “ winkle ”; then with a steady and dexterous
twist of the left hand, adapted to the “ whorl ” of the shell, and
a gentle strain on the pin, out comes the prize, little by
little, till you hold it before your eager and sparkling eyes, whole
and entire, when, shouting “Eureka,” you open your mouth and
place it therein.
Our instructions to the Captain are to get under weigh early
in the morning, as being some forty miles from Hobart and
the wind uncertain, we must not lose an hour ; so Saturday
morning finds us with a very light air, barely giving us steerage
way, slowly leaving our snug anchorage. HOMEWARD
BOUND! Joyful sound! Calms and light winds prevail for
most of the way, and when the time arrives for our last meal,
about sundown, we find ourselves still a few miles down the
river. The last gathering together —the last meal—the last
request “ Pass the sugar this way, old fellow ; ” “ dip us another
pannikin of tea,” and we look at one another. It is the voice
of our Poet that breaks the silence—“ Rovers, we have had a
splendid time of it f— (yes, yes, from everyone)—physically we
are all the better for it, and are ready to go to work again
manfully—(so we are). We are all jolly good fellows —(cela va
sans dire , old fellow) —but I single out one of our number to
whom we all owe special thanks ; one who, filled with know-
ledge, has not kept that knowledge to himself and despised our
ignorance, but has enlightened our minds and imparted to us
33


all something of his own enthusiasm for the wonders and
beauties of Science. May he always be with us on every
future trip. Here’s to our “Man of Science,” the jolliest Rover
of us all.” Wild and ringing cheers bring the whole crew to the
hatchway to see what’s the matter. Then we pass a special
vote of thanks to the lady who, at much cost of time and
no little trouble, each year undertakes the purchasing and
safely packing of the hundred various articles which minister
so largely to our comfort and enjoyment. One thing more
remains to be done. Who shall write the Record of this
glorious trip ? “ The Poet! The Poet! He is the man,” and
the Poet bows his assent.
And so ends “The Rollicking Record of the Rovers.”
Mercifully preserved through many dangers, known and un-
known, we are safe ashore and at home once more ; and, warmly
grasping each the other’s hand, we say “ GOOD BYE, GOOD-
BYE.”
Printed at “The Mercury” Office, Hobart.
34


