

V a
►
STUDY IN THE PROPHECIES,
Tv'
TEN KINGDOMS,
•♦• V t ;
A LECTURE
DELIVERED AT A MEETING OF THE ST. GEORGE’S CHURCH
MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION.
ON THE IST JULY, 1 87 3,
ilp.
. 'J
EDWAED ALEX. lE2, E IsT UI IE
Vice-President.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
SYDNEY;
JOHN -MAILER, BIBLE HALL, 256, GEORGE-STREET ; S. MULLEN,
COLLJNS-STREET, MELBOURNE j S. W. PARTRIDGE AND CO.,
LONDON. • ,
An .
1873-


“The foreknowledge of the actions of intelligent and moral
agents is one of the most incomprehensible attributes of the
Deity, and is exclusively a divine perfection. The past, the
present, and the future, are alike open to his view, and to His
alone ; and there can be no' stronger proof of the interposition
of the Most High than that which prophecy affords. Of all
the attributes of the God of the Universe, His prescience has
bewildered and baffled the most, all of human per-
ception ; and an evidence of the exercise of this perfection in
the revelation of what the infinite mind alone could make
known is the seal of God, which can never be counterfeited,
affixed to the truth which it attests.”—Kev. Dr. Keith.
JOHN LUTTON, PRINTER, 257, R 1 LEY-STREET.


s. v \ '-V-TS’S s
,r ' an \q *
i Ciirist 15 there is liberty,”—and thus when a nation is truly
Christian it is really free, and the more thoroughly it becomes
righteous so will it be exalted, and so will its power surely
become universal. Can we say and foresay this of any
existing Power ? Let us see.
The beast power as representing “Moral Force,” exercised
humanly under Satanic influence, ends in a lake of fire,—but
* moral force ’ exercised humanly under Divine influence,
has no end, its dominion “ shall not pass away, and his
kingdom that which shall not be destroyed,” it shall “ be
9 to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose
is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him.”.
So also “Physical Force”—the great image of metal-
exercised humanly and under Satanic influence, degenerated
from gold to clay, and is then scattered to the winds before
physical force” employed under Divine direction and influ-
ence, symbolised by the stone cut out without hands, growing
into a mountain and filling the whole earth—a new empire set
up by the God of heaven, “which shall never be destroyed,
and the kingdom shall be left to other people, but it shall
break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall
stand for ever,” a rod of iron. These statements, of
course, mainly refer to the future, but at the present time
what is the ruling power in the world considered simply as
“ physical force” as possessed of superior physical resources ?
Is it not the British Empire ? Who founded it ? Who set
it up Considered as “ moral force,” where is the great
moral influence exercised over the world in the interest of
the King ? Is not the answer again in the British Empire ?
With all the admitted follies and imperfections of its
rulers, where is the nation that can claim to be recognised as
governing according to God’s revealed will, as a religious
Power ? What sovereign could say as our own beloved queen
has said, that the Bible was the foundation of her throne
V £ an d the secret of her strength ? Indications are not wanting
W that the power now in the hands of the Anglo-Saxon race is
| yet to be greatly extended. The enlargement of Japhet
K is not yet complete. He has not yet fully realised the
m blessing of dwelling in the tents of Shem, under the full in-
F i fluence of the benign Spirit of Redemption. For anything
k. A we can tell the day may not be far distant when Britain shall


