

THE
CRY OF THE WIDOWED WIFE
AT THE CLOSE OF
THE CHARTIST TRIALS,
CONSIDERED
IN A LETTER TO THE WORTHY AND INDEPENDENT
ELECTORS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND.
“ While the dock was being cleared, a piercing shriek hurst forth from a remote
corner of the court, which was understood to proceed from the wife of one of the
prisoners.’’ —Vide Times Newspaper, September 3 rd, 1818.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY ARTHUR DTSON, 231, SHOREDITCH.
MDCCCXLVIII.


THE
CRY OF THE WIDOWED WIFE.
Gentlemen,
For the special protection of your lives and property, as well as
for the preservation of those peculiar privileges which you, the one million
law makers and tax makers enjoy, to the exclusion of the other seven
millions of adult males dwelling in this land, who have nothing to do with
the laws hut to obey them, or with the taxes, but to pay them, —I say, for
your special service, there has been lately a very serious drama got up,
the last act being just closed by the condemnation and fearful punishment
of a body of men, who, treated as outcasts by society, saw in rebellion
against society, a sacred right, if not a duty.
Now, gentlemen, I am quite aware that the honest juror, who, before
these men were tried, intimated his candid opinion that they all ought to
be hanged, represented the intelligent and humane feeling of a considerable
portion of that class from which jurymen are taken; he proclaimed openly
his thirst for bloodshed, as plainly, at least, as any of the prisoners; yet
his very merciful remark only raised a laugh. Whether the judges laughed
or frowned we are not told—indeed this matters nothing—l only mention
it to have an opportunity of saying, that to men who think as he thought,
the cry of a bereaved woman or the groans of orphan children would only
provoke a sneer of derision ; for no doubt this worthy man has a shop to
be kept open, a till to be filled, and goods to be sold in the dearest market.
What are starving women’s tears or children's moans to him, compared
with such great and noble purposes, for which, no doubt, nature brought
men into existence in these islands.
I address not such persons : I address those men with kind hearts and
noble dispositions, who carry about with them the old English spirit of
manliness and love of justice, who are to be met with (and 1 thank God
I can say this from personal knowledge of such men) in every grade of
English society ; and I implore them, now that those who threatened dis-
turbances are crushed, and safety is promised for a time, calmly to reflect
on what has passed before them in this late eventful drama ; to read care-
fully the reports of the trials, (your hanging man will not take the trouble
to do this, but the intelligent, honest and benevolent merchant, fanner or
trader assuredly will) —to read through, I say, every word of these trials
to note how those conspirators became conspirators, what exquisite pains
were taken to make them so—to note how, in this Christian land, in which
millions are expended annually for bishops and pastors, there are wretched
loathsome beings, who urge their brethren on to crime, and then sell their
blood for twenty shillings per week to the high-minded, chivalrous and
heaven-born legislators who compose the Cabinet of St. James’s. A
thorough knowledge of these matters may not be amiss, as exhibiting in
true colours the characters of the men who govern us ; although, to fair
dealing traders, who never stoop to trickery, or soil their hands by traffic


with thieves or pickpockets, these transactions may not appear to add
much additional lustre, to the brilliant names of our Russells, Greys,
Morpeths, or Macauleys. And when, gentlemen, you have gone through
the ordeal of reading all this evidence from lying Tom and others, at which
your hearts will sicken to think humanity should assume such cursed
forms; when you have tried to understand all the legal jargon, and
pondered over the counsel’s argument and eloquent appeals to the jury;
when you have noted how the Attorney-General feels himself disgraced
hy being a member of the same profession as the Irish Barister who
dared preside at a repeal meeting; and how the Irishman immediately
points to the dirty fingers of the Crown Lawyer, still uncleansed of the
filth of corruption from Horsham ; when you have read how the judge
insults counsel who do not sufficiently reverence the much-respected
police ; when the summing up passes painfully before your eyes; when con-
viction is obtained, and fierce words of defiance hurst from the men who feel
that every man’s hand is against them : then, when the gloomy sentence
is pronounced,—amid this clash of confusing sounds will come the piercing
cry of humanity—the cry of a woman—the shriek of the wife—torn, perhaps,
for ever from the bosom of him who, in his suffering and ignominy, is
dearer to her than all else on earth—the man who has toiled for her,
struggled for her, sought to raise himself and his toiling class to the rank
of citizens ; but who, falling upon evil days and evil counsels, has been
entrapped into error, and is now lost for ever.
And will you, the Electors and Jurymen, say he is the only criminal in
this matter ? I seek not to apologise for his offence. He has sinned,
and terrible is his punishment. God preserve me from adding thereto by
one unkind word. Let learned and pious Judges aggravate, if they please,
the terrors of the sentence, hy telling such men they are traitors to their
wives and children. No! thou heart-broken and care-worn man, tom
away from all that was worth the living for, believe it not; thy wife does
not curse thee ; she will never teach thy little ones to curse thee. She
may curse those who add to her misery hy robbing thy children of the
little thou hast acquired by thy labour, to pay it “to the Queen!” She
may even curse the receiver of it, hut she will not curse thee, for all that
may be said hy that ermine-clad . I fear, Gentlemen, lam being led
away hy my feelings in this matter ; I will abstain from using offensive
words ; but at that moment a sentence of Coleridge—not the Judge, but
the Poet —flashed across my mind. I must repeat it from memory. It
is pertinent to the present case.
This is the process of our lore and wisdom,
To each poor brother that offends against us,
Most innocent, perhaps!—and what if guilt; 7
Is this the only cure 7 Merciful God !
Each pore and natural outlet shrivelled up
By ignorance and parching poverty—
His energies roll back upon his heart,
And stagnate and corrupt, till, changed to poison,
They break on him like a loathsome plague-spot!
Then we call in our pampered mountebanks.
And this is their best cure :—uncomforled
And friendless solitude, groaning and tears.
• * * • So he lies
Circled with evil, till his very soul
UnmoulSs its essence, hopelessly deformed
By sights of evermore deformity!
With other ministrations, thou, 0 Nature,
Hcalcst thy wandering and distempered child:


Thou pourpat on him thy soft Influences,
Thy sunny hues, fair Conns, am) breathing sweets;
Thy melodies of woods, and winds, and waters,
Till he relent, and can no more endure
To be a jarring and a dissonant thing
Amid this general dance and minstrelsy;
But, bursting into tears, wins back his way,
His angry spirit healed and harmonised
By the benignant touch of lore and beauty.
Now, Gentlemen, this teaching has been repeated to the world from the
days of Jesus of Nazareth to those of John Milton, and from the days of
John Milton to those of Samuel Taylor Coleridge; and yet, with the
shriek of that woman ringing in your ears, you can scarcely take comfort
to your souls, and say that mercy, kindness, or even justice have been
exhibited toward that class of the community, who are at present suffer-
ing from ignorance and poverty, and by that very poverty and lack of know-
ledge, often rendered desperate and ruined men. Forget not this woman’s
cry, ye who undertake to govern society, who falsely declare, “We are
society —we have the intelligence and the virtue which fit men to govern
and guide in a nation; the rest of men are not fit to share the rights of
citizens, because they have not that intelligence and that virtue, and
because they are poor.” Alas ! the condition of humanity in this fair and
once “ merrie England,” affords but poor proof of virtuous, honest, or in-
telligent Government. Strange sounds, I tell you, are heard in every
corner of the land—not merely that frightful shriek of agony in the Old
Daily, but other cries, mingled with poor men’s curses—are being uttered
in the squalid home of the uncared-for, perishing labourer; and there
are men into whose souls these sounds have penetrated, and they swear
to rest not until some remedy, some amelioration is attempted, I tell
you, Electors and privileged law-makers, you stand before the world, not
guiltless of this woman’s cry of misery, nor of the thousand other cries of
misery which resound throughout England, to say nothing of what is
heard in that still more dismal scene on the other side of St. George’s
Channel. I tell you, that you are the Criminals; history will record it
of you, that never in any period of the world’s existence was a nation
governed with a greater amount of cant, fraud, and cruelty; never was
there a time when human rights were demanded more fairly or more in-
telligently, by the multitudes, than at this moment; never was there less
reason to deny those rights ; never was there a time when the privileged
few had greater cause to resign their assumed dominion. For, I say
again, your rule has been distinguished neither by superior intelligence
nor superior virtue. The very religion you profess so loudly, and endow
so richly, teaches a morality utterly at variance with the principles upon
which you act; it teaches that all men are brethren; that God hath
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom of
heaven. Do you acknowledge anything of this kind P Do you not
exclude the poor man, however virtuous, however honest, from his share
in that heritage which God has bestowed equally upon all men ; I mean
that right to live his own life ; or, if that life be placed within the pale of
laws and institutions, to have his voice fairly heard in society. You deny
your brother man this right. If the Teacher of Nazareth—if St. Paul or
Socrates, dwelt among us, you—the pretended disciples of Christianity,
but in reality the worshippers of Mammon— you would shut them out of
the right of citizenship, because of their poverty; for remember, such
men, like William Thom in our own times, oftentimes know not where to
lay their heads.


You stand guilty, I repeat, of that woman's misery—of that woman’s
cry of agony. Before those men were conspirators they were what is
called Chartists ; they appealed to you thus :
“ Give us the vote, for we are men like you ; give us the vote, for we are
badly governed. Vice and misery are among the poor; corruption and selfish-
ness are paramount in high places; taxation is becoming a burden too heavy
both for us and you to bear; religion is become the tool of Government;
extravagance and “ barbaric splendour” hold their sway in the courts of
princes; whilst peasants and artizans suffer the pangs of want, and
starving women die by their own hands in wretchedness and ignominy.
We feel as men that we have rights; we know also that we have duties ;
recognise, then, our rights; give us the vote of citizens, that we may
perform our duties. We seek not plunder, but we will not be plundered.
If the tax-gatherer is to call, and take from our hard earnings a share
thereof to support Government and law, we claim to be heard as to how
that money shall he spent. If you call upon us to obey laws, we claim,
as men and as equals, to share with you the right of devising or amending
those laws. Give us, then, the vote for our own interest and for the
interest of all society ; that, having mutual rights, we may all be equally
prepared to defend them; and that, having equal duties, we may all feel
an interest in fulfilling them.”
This was the Chartist prayer. Abuse it as you will, it must some day
be listened to. It has been long treated with contempt and derision;
ay, even by many who well know it to be a just and reasonable prayer. It
should have been granted long ago; and then that mournful cry would
not have been heard ; those poor entrapped men would not have been
torn away from their homes, to perish in a distant land.
I have appealed to your sense of justice,rather than to your fears,because
this woman’s shriek has cut me to the soul, and made me a sadder man ;
but there may be others in whose bosoms it will engender a different feeling.
Do not suppose you have for ever put down rebellion. The Government
have rather shown how alarmed they are; and depend on it, plots will
abound, and conspiracies increase, whilst a slave class remains and in-
creases in society. There will always he desperate men in such a class;
and the only warning they will take, will be to be more prudent and more
secret in their designs. I confess I tremble when I think of the con-
dition of this country. Peace, order, and good government is what I
desire. lam the servant of another man; have been fortunate in serving
kind employers; and each day of life labour for the support'of a family.
Believe me, Gentlemen, the writer of these lines would probably suffer as
much as any man, should times of disorder and confusion arise in society.
He desires peace, and has pleaded for peace among his fellow-workmen.
It is in the spirit of peace he appeals to you to do justice, for no true peace
can exist in a state where justice is not. John Milton told us this a
century or more ago; he shrank not from defending rebellion against
tyranny. John Hampden shrank not from drawing the sword in the
same cause; yet these were both in heart men of peace; and your man
of peace now a-day should not shrink from the recollection that
He speaks the tongue that Milton spoke.
Would that the spirit of such a man as Milton were now among us. Ay,
even your Conservative Poet—your contemplative Poet—your Poet
Laureate, Wordsworth—cannot help crying out in the truthfulness of the
Poet’s thought—


“ Miltuii, tliou slmiildst be living at this lionr,
England bath need of thee; she is a fen
Of stagnant waters. • * •
We are selfish men ;
Oh, raise us up ; return to us again,
And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power.’’
A bright day will it be for humanity when sentences of poets are more
familiar to our ears than the sentences of judges. In that day, jurors and
judges will have learned that there are better ways of guiding and govern-
ing our erring brethren than that hanging plan, suggested by the sensible
and amiable juryman who immortalised his name at the Chartist trials.
I have said before, I desire to appeal to your sense of right and justice
in considering this cry of the oppressed; and to your power of giving redress,
rather than to your fears, or to any selfish motives whatever; still, it will
be worth while, perhaps, to allude to one thing which struck me forcibly
in reading these trials. Flushed, probably, by the success which had
attended every step of these government prosecutions, and drawing an
inference therefrom, of the apparent hatred of the middle classes toward
Chartism, the Attorney-General ventured to denounce as illegal, the
“ Chartist Association." One of the counsel for the prisoners, Mr. Parry
(whose eloquent appeals, by the bye, I have reason to know were not
artificial, but genuine as his own love of justice and freedom), interrupted
the government mouthpiece with the remark. Then the Anti- Corn-Law
League was illegal! Strange to say, the Attorney-General, who, with
the rest of the Whig crew clambered into office on the shoulders of the
League men, replied, He could not say but that it was so ! Now, gen-
tlemen electors, are you prepared to allow this doctrine to be adopted ? A
great many of your body seem to be of opinion that many social, financial
and legal reforms are imminently necessary; and you know that you can
never get the shadow of a reform in this country until you have taxed
your pockets unmercifully, as well as your time, in getting up associations
from one end of the kingdom to the other, paying lecturers, printing
pamphlets and placards, contesting elections at enormous expense, and by
a host of other contrivances which are unfortunately too well known to
every Englishman who has ever had the slightest crotchet of a reform in
his head. Believe me, if this doctrine of the Crown Lawyer be adopted,
and old musty Acts of Parliament are to be raked up to prevent combina-
tion and so on (my legal knowledge is not very extensive; but I have no
doubt that plenty of Acts might be found to hang, transport or imprison
almost any body and every body who had ever taken a part or opened
his mouth on political matters) there will very soon be attempts made
which at present you little dream of. It appears evident to me that the
belief of My Lord John Russell and the rest of the present cabinet is, that
this country and all that is in it were mercifully brought into being, in
order that Whig lords might rule, and Whig underlings obtain fat
places at home and abroad; and I believe they would honestly deem it
their duty to transport, if possible, every body that disturbs the peace of
society, that is, their peace, by teaching any other doctrine. Toryism is
a very convenient theme for them to talk and rail upon when occasion-
ally out of office, or at election times ; it is, however, generally speaking,
very serviceable, as it helps them to support at all times all the abuses of
Government, of which both parties are equally fond. But Chartism is a
low thing, which annoys them very much, and asks curious and imperti-
nent questions about the necessity of so much extravagance in Govern-
ment. Why our ambassadors in foreign courts should receive six times


the amount of salary compared with what those of other countries (aye,
countries where people are not starving) receive ? Why it is necessary
that Bishops with £ 10,000 or ,£20,000 per annum, should be employed
to teach the people that “ It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
a needle, than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of Heaven ?" This is
the mad talk of seditious Chartists; and let me observe, Gentlemen, that
among your own class, some men are moving, who begin to ask similar
awkward questions. There is a Tract, No. 1, just printed, to show us
what a very expensive luxury Royalty is. At present Her Majesty’s
Government, it would seem, have not sufficient courage or loyalty to
defend her in this matter; they make it sedition for any poor Chartist
to imagine the cutting off any of the Queen’s titles, &c., &c., but cutting
away even one half of her incpme is still held to be, I suppose, a loyal
thought. The Times, however, which I regret to think is held to be a
sort of Fifth Gospel by many of the middle class, takes up the cudgels
against these economisers, and a pretty mess it makes of it. I confess, as
a thick-headed working man, I am rather puzzled at the following
sentences:
“ Cut the civil list down to £200,000 a year, and you will forthwith find
your sovereign reduced to a second-class noble, and Royalty swamped
in an irresponsible and most probably factious aristocracy.”
Rather complimentary this to “ our brave Peers of England, pillars of
the State.” Before the week is over, the Times will probably be giving an
elaborate leading article in praise of that most important branch of our
glorious constitution, the House of Lords.
Let me trouble you with one more sentence from the Times on this
question:
" Any West-end Milliner will say that a maid of honour might spend
£3OO on her dress alone ; but it is insinuated more than once that the
nobility are wealthy enough to discharge these offices gratuitously. There
could not be a more foolish or mischievous suggestion: it would deliver
Royalty, bound hand and foot to the power of the Aristocracy, &c., &c."
There is little need for comment on this paragraph ; it is a sermon in
itself. But I would seriously caution this wholesale libeller of Royalty
and Nobility, that he treads on dangerous ground when he associates the
word milliner in the same lines with the talk about royal extravagance,
or even with maids of honour, who spend £3OO a year in dress. For who
sees that word milliner, and does not think of the milliner’s pale assistant,
who stitches out her existence fourteen or sixteen hours a day, occasionally
all night, when some drawing-room beauty requires to curtsey before
Majesty in all her glory P Who, when this subject of stitching is once in
his mind, does not go on to think about “ The Bong of the Shirt”—the
actually starving shirt woman, and all the other sad conditions of woman’s
lot, in this age of refinement and civilisation ?
Enough for the present; I have humbly sought to draw attention to
this piteous cry of the widowed wife, because I feel it is but as the echo
of a thousand other cries to which trodden-down humanity is giving utter-
ance. Too plainly do they tell that the land mourns because of oppression
and misrule.
Gentlemen, electors of England, it is for you to say—There is a remedy
for all this evil, and that remedy is— Justice I
London : Pdntod ky Whttb Je Co., 981, Shoreditoh.
