

Np
323.33
JEF
Wvc £
&EM J&Ufcs. 'JtTT£^S.


***■ KSmkf
THE ENFRANCHISEMENT OF LABOUR :
LECTURE BY THE
EEV. JAS. JEFFERIS, LL.B.


THE ENFRANCHISEMENT OF LABOUR.
LECTURE by THE RET. J. JEEFEEIS, LL.B.
On the 4th day of August, 1876, in the course of a review of
Parliamentary legislation during 1875, Disraeli, now Lord
Beaconsfield, gave utterance to the following statement : “ For
the first time in the history of the country the employer and the
employed sit together under equal laws.” You will, lam sure,
think with me that it is a statement full of grave meaning. Possibly
a Liberal leader of the House of Commons would hardly have
ventured to speak of the present condition of the employed in so
cheerful a manner. The wonder is that a Conservative leader, and
even so jaunty a one as Disraeli, should have given such a
backhanded stroke to the Constitution which every Tory squire for
generations has spoken of as the very model of justice between man
and man. But the Premier was right. It is a fact, no less sorrowful
than true, that the greater number of our countrymen up to this year
of grace, 1875, have been unequally dealt with by the laws of
England. It is a fact, no less cheering than true, that in a most
important sense, the working classes have at length achieved their
freedom. I do not think lam taking a too enthusiastic view of the
so-called “ Labour Laws ” when I say, that they are at once the
measure and the index of one of the greatest social revolutions that
have ever taken place in the history of Britain. We have had
revolutions aforetime, Magna Chartas of progressive liberty, Habeas
Corpus Acts, Petitions of Bight, and what not, which have upheaved
society from its depths. And we have had in our own days one as
full of serious meaning as any of these, and carrying with it even
more momentous consequences. Who can doubt that more than once
during the past half century the champions of justice were gathering
for an attack on the champions of order. If the struggle had
actually come, not in peaceful legislative halls, but with such strife as
has been seen once and again, it would have changed the history of
England and of the world. We should have lost India. We should
probably have lost our Colonial Empire. Our commercial supremacy


would have been endangered. With all our advantages these have
actually been at stake. And if Britain is, as I believe her to be, the
stable centre of the moral and intellectual world, the threatened war
of classes would have retarded by half a century the progress of the
world’s civilization. Happily the danger is passing. One by one
rights have been conceded. Tory legislators have granted, with a
benignant smile, what, forty years ago, would have been looked upon
as the voidest demand of revolutionists. For myself I confess that I
breathe more freely I was in England, as an Australian spectator,
during the passing of the llcform Bill of 1868. I saw in the faces of
the East London poor the brand of bitter hereditary poverty, the low
retreating forehead, the dull sunken eye, the pale scrofulous cheek.
And I saw in the surging masses of the mob of Bristol, in the tide of
drunken ferocity poured forth from its beershops on the day of a
fiercely contested election what elements of danger there were
threatening the commonwealth. Since that eventful year, thanks to
leaders like Gladstone, and rank and file like Plimsoll, triumphs of no
mean order have been won in the cause of the working man. Nor
need we grudge their meed of praise to Disraeli and Mr. Cross, even
if we believe them to be reaping a harvest sown by others. There is
toil in reaping as well as in sowing.
I propose, with your leave (after the manner of parsons) to take the
words of Mr. Disraeli, already quoted, as a text for a sort of lay sermon
on the “Enfranchisement of Labour.” I want to tell the story to-
night of the British workman’s career, to show how, during a thousand
years and more, he has been pushing his way upward wrestling in
grim and terrible earnestness with the hard conditions of his being,
achieving one victory after another, until now, as the result of his
latest battle, he has become a true son of freedom, sitting with
owners of coronets and owners of capital, under equal laws. I only
wish I could tell you that story rightly. If you be generous it would
then move you to sympathy. If you be emotional it might even
move you to tears. For I have to deal with battles in which the
successive triumphs have been those of merest right against shame-
ful wrong, in which law, and learning, and even religion herself, have
too often been found fighting for an evil cause. I have to speak of
rights which are the heritage of our common manhood, slowly wrested
from cruel godless power, which for long centuries held the millions in
subjection. However imperfectly I may succeed I shall count myself
to have failed utterly if you do not share in my rejoicing that now, in
our day, a great blot has been removed from the escutcheon of
England’s fame, and one more guarantee given for the permanence
and stability of the Empire.


I distinguish four periods, not to be very accurately marked out
by time, but corresponding to four several conditions of social life,
each passing almost insensibly into the stage above it —the period of
the servus or slave, of the serf or villain, of the servant, wherein not so
much by social feeling, as by legislative enactment, the idea of
continuous mastery is implied, and lastly of the ivorhman, a term now
used by the legislature as a general term for those who live by labour.
Etymology is not a very safe guide in history, because we are apt
to change meanings without changing words; but there is some-
thing of real importance to our enquiry in the term I have just
quoted. Servus is the Latin for slave. It carries with it the idea of
absolute and exclusive possession by a man of the life and fortunes of
another. Men and women with living souls are reckoned with ox and
ass and household goods as mere chattels. Serf is the same word in
Norman French, but slightly changed in meaning. It indicates a lot
intensely severe and degrading, in its lower aspects genuine and
unmistakeable slavery, but carrying with it in its higher aspects the
germs of freedom. The term Servant as used in our day is altogether
free from the idea of slavery. But no one who has traced the slow
progress of liberty since the feudal times is surprised at the constant
recognition by law of a master’s rights over his servant. We come
lastly to the Workman, a term of high and honourable meaning,
indicating to us that in the eyes of law, henceforth and for ever, the
son of toil is delivered from the last badge of servitude. The Act of
1875, the “ Employer and Workman” Act, proclaimed the enfranchise-
ment of labour.
I shall now proceed to show how the English peasant and the
English mechanic have gradually, during successive ages, risen from
slavery. I shall endeavour to show to you the actual conditions
through which they passed, as recorded by history and seen in the
laws, and to trace the leading causes which have been almost con-
tinuously at work in securing for them the liberty and equality they
now enjoy.
1. — Slavery. For slavery in its worst form, such as lately
prevailed among the planters of the Southern States of America, we
must go back to Roman time—to the first four centuries of our era.
The Imperial city, incarnation of brute force, sits crowned upon the
seven hills, trampling the liberty of a hundred nations into the dust.
In their unbridled lust of conquest, the legions of Rome have crossed
the seas into Britain. Csesar has come. Claudius has come. Able
generals one after another have harried and slaughtered the free
barbarians. In vain has Caractacus, with princely daring, in vain has
Boadicea, with queenly virtue and courage, striven against the cruel


might of the invaders. Armed opposition has ceased. Revolts have
been crushed out with merciless severity. Britain has become a
Roman province. Roman laws and Roman luxuries and Roman vices
have been introduced. The free inhabitants of Britain, all at least
who dared to preserve the least trace of a desire for freedom, have
been reduced to abject servitude. Slavery, with all its horrors, such
slavery as she made who trafficked in the “ souls of men ” has become
the bitter lot of the sons and daughters of Albion. Something of its
nature you may learn from the pages of Tacitus, who wrote the life of
Agricola, the best and most successful of all the governors of Britain.
Agricola has carried his legions northward beyond the Tyne, against
the indomitable Caledonians. Somewhere upon the skirts of the
Grampians, Galgacus, the last of the British heroes, is encamped with
the united remnants of the tribes. Before the fatal battle begins,
Tacitus represents Galgacus as haranguing the multitude eager for
the fray. If we do not get the chieftain’s own words, we probably
have his thoughts. “ We, the noblest sons of Britain, undebased by
slavery, far from the view of servile shores, have preserved even our
eyes unpolluted by the contact of subjection. These plunderers of
the world, after exhausting the land by their devastation, are
plundering the ocean. To ravage, to slaughter, to usurp under false
titles, they call empire; and where they make a desert, they call it
peace. Our children are torn'away by levies to serve in foreign lands,
our wives and daughters, though they should escape the violation of
hostile force, are polluted under the names of friendship and
hospitality. Our bodies afe worn down amid stripes and insults in
clearing woods and draining marshes. Wretches born to slavery,
are once bought, and afterwards maintained by their masters. Britain
every day buys and every day feeds her own servitude.” The picture
thus drawn by the great historian of the Ist century is no whit
exaggerated. It would be possible to fill the outline with yet darker
colours. As Rome declined to her fall, cruelty became more
malignant, and vice more devilish. There are aspects of Roman
slavery so bad that they must remain concealed under the veil of a
learned tongue. Only at the great schools of modern learning is it
thought needful to pollute the minds of our British youth with the
abominations of Terence and Martial. Think then of the condition
of our ancestors, ground down beneath the exactions of the Roman
yoke during those four long centuries, when the brutality and
debauchery of the decaying empire were at their height. The most
stalwart of the youths were drafted into the legions, and sent to serve
upon the banks of the Danube, or under the fiery sun of Africa. If
their fate was less fortunate, they were put in training for the bloody


fights of the amphitheatre, or dedicated together with their sisters to
the infamous service and yet more infamous pleasures of their wicked
masters. The remainder were condemned to gang labour in the
mines or the fields, to wear out life in cruel hopeless thraldom. We
know but too well the character of Roman slavery. The slave was
denied the rights of marriage, and the commonest rights of humanity.
No law protected him. His owner could torture or kill him if he
pleased. We read of a slave condemned to be eaten by fishes for
breaking a goblet, of another crucified for some trivial offence, of
another put to death, because in killing a wild boar of unusual size, he
had dared to use the spear of his master. We learn that the Roman
ladies were accustomed to wear as part of their household equipment
sharp pointed stilettos, with handles of gold or ivory. These were for
delicately and gracefully stabbing their handmaidens who displeased
them. The fields of Italy and Gaul and Britain were worked by gangs
of slaves under brutal overseers. Sick, the slave was left to die;
dead, he was cast without burial into some deep hole. Laws of the
most terrible kind were framed to prevent any rising among the
slaves. If one of them, goaded with despair, smote and killed his
master, all his fellows who were in the same house, or within hearing
of a man’s voice, were, without distinction, condemned to die. In
those days manhood had no rights of its own. There were rights of
nobility, rights of wealth, rights of Roman citizenship, but human
nature itself had none.
Of course the day of reckoning came. No nation can ever
continue to exist which has slavery for the basis of its social fife.
The free races who pressed southward upon Rome from the forests of
Germany and the forests of Scandinavia, and the deserts of Mongolia,
found multitudes of willing helpers ready for the work of destruction.
The wrongs of centuries were avenged by Alaric and Attila, and
a hundred nameless freebooters. Rome was sacked and spoiled,
and all over the fair fields of Italy and Gaul famine and pesti-
lence stalked hand in hand. Britain was one of the first of the
provinces to become free, but long continued slavery had destroyed
the noblest feelings of her manhood. The Romans left her weak and
helpless, an easy prey to the next invader. Happily for our country
the invaders who came after, in somewhat swift succession—Angles,
Saxons, Danes, Normans—were all of the noble Teutonic race, a race
never at rest, a race never to be at rest while a new home in a new
land is to be won by invasion or colonization. Exeunt Romans !
Enter Saxons ! A new order of things now begins. The Saxons
were very different from those whom they succeeded. They brought
with them out of their forest homes in Szeswig and Friesland some


recognition of the rights of manhood. Slaves there were —it could
hardly he helped while war continued its ravages—hut they were not
treated as if utterly beneath the notice of the laws. Nor were there
many of them ; for through the whole of the Saxon era and during
the joint ascendancy of the Danes, we see a free peasantry engaged
x n tilling the soil. In the majority of cases these cultivators were
likewise owners, owners at least of some portion of land which was
regarded as their own. It is open to question whether, up to the
days of William the Conqueror, the great mass of workers were even
reduced to the condition of serfdom. All honour to the noble Saxons,
with King Alfred of blessed memory at their head. To them in chief
we owe the Common Law of England, and those free institutions
which have given our country its name and place among the
kingdoms of the earth.
2. — Serfdom. If my lecture were intended to he historical, I
should be obliged to depict the invasion and conquest of England by
the Normans. Consider it accomplished. The battle of Hastings
has been fought, and the whole country from John O’Groats to
Land’s End has become the prey of the victor. Now begins the era
of serfdom. Onwards, for something like four centuries, the curse of
it lies heavily upon the people. How customs linger long after their
original meaning has been forgotten ! When a boy at boarding
school many a time I used to lay awake listening to the ringing of the
Curfew, which every night at eight o’clock (so early were we sent to
bed) pealed out from a neighbouring steeple. Just so was it rung
nearly 700 years before, by the arbitrary commands of William, as
the signal for all fires and all lights to be put out by his Saxon
subjects.
I shall not attempt to enter into a description of the celebrated
Feudal system. It would sorely tax your patience, and would carry
me far beyond the limits of a popular lecture. All that I shall seek
to do will be to indicate, in the fewest possible words, the condition
of the lower classes of our countrymen during the period from the
days of William the Conqueror to those of (say) Queen Elizabeth—
from the establishment to the abolition of serfdom. Many of you
will remember the picture of the Normans in the brilliant pages of
Macaulay, one of the most striking and beautiful of the many that
are given in his fascinating book. No doubt they were, as he tells
us, refined and chivalrous, bqt they had no mercy upon the peasant
proprietors of England. They seized their lands. Never was the sub-
jugation of a people more complete. With few exceptions all the lands
of the kingdom were parcelled out among the great captains, who in
their turn divided their share among their companions and vassals. Every


such grant of land, down to the very lowest, carrying with it some service
to he rendered to him who made it. From a compact like this even
the conquered Saxon was not entirely left out. Land in those days
was not worth much, and since there was no getting work out of a
man without feeding him (a problem that a good many have tried to
solve without success), the easiest method was to allow him a piece of
land from which he might feed himself. So it became common
enough for the peasant to have fields of his own, from which he and
his family were sustained, while for the greater part of his time he
worked for his lord. He did not get the fee simple of his bit
of land. There was no Eeal Property Act for him to take out a title
under. He was only a tenant at will. At any moment his master
could come and take possession, and if he had cattle, or swine, or
sheep, they could be taken too. He could not leave his master’s
service ; if he tried to he could be brought back again by a writ of
l :w. His children were serfs like himself; he and his wife and they
were sold with the land, if the land were sold. So hopeless was his
condition that even his lord could scarcely set him free even if he
wished, for he too was bound by feudal tenure to a lord above him,
and this lord to another or to the Crown, and it was an established
maxim of the feudal system that on no account must the land suffer.
The land was made to be tilled, and the tiller must remain. The serf
could not get his liberty without the consent of all the lords up to
the highest. Hot much hope of manumission while this was the rule.
Bad as this was, it was not slavery. There was no recognition of the
serfs in and by themselves as a distinct class in the eyes of the law.
The law did not say to the worker —you are a serf; his master could
say it, but if his master did not say it he was regarded as free. And
then there were limits to his master’s power over him. He might be
imprisoned, or kicked, or beaten, or knocked down with fist or staff;
but if in any assault by his master eye or limb were lost, or if death
ensued, or if a female slave were grievously dishonoured, the master
was indictable at common law, and might himself be fined or
imprisoned.
Thus, then you will remark, the worker on English soil has
advanced one step on the road to freedom. His life is declared to be
his own. He is shielded from excessive cruelty. He begins to have
rights of property. Possession is nine points of the law, even for a
serf. Only his master can claim his land or his goods.
But upon the most favorable view it was a dreadful condition.
We know enough of the passions of human nature malignant and vile,
at least we lords of creation do, to guess pretty well as to the doings
of these Lords of the Manor, and as to the suffering and degradation


of their serfs. Everywhere the cry of the worker went np, invoking
the judgment of God on the oppressor. Now and then there were
insurrections with Jack Cade and Wat Tyler for their leaders,
wanting little hut true leaders to have become national revolu-
tions. Deliverance came, not swiftly as men always want, but slowly
as God usually wills it. For there is a life of a nation as well as a
life of the individual. Caiaphas was not far wrong when he said, “It
is expedient that one man should die for the people.” The whole of
history teaches us that the salvation of the many springs out of the
suffering of the few. Centuries passed, but all the way along improve-
ment was visible. It is a long step from William the Conqueror to
Queen Elizabeth. Not till the year 1574 do we hear of the last of the
serfs. The Maiden Queen by a writ under her own hand set free her
own bondsmen. From the well known temper of that good lady, I
question if any Lord of the Manor in her dominions dared to keep
serfs afterwards.
But what brought about the extinction of serfdom or villeinage ?
We may ascribe it, we do ascribe it to a beneficent Providence; but
then Providence does such strange things that I for one am obliged
to believe where I cannot trace its working. We may ascribe it, as
Mr. Buckle does, to the progress of intellect altogether apart from the
progress of morality. “ The actions of bad men produce only
temporary evil, the actions of good men only temporary goqd. But
the discoveries of great men never leave us, they are immortal, they
contain those eternal truths which survive the shock of empires, out-
live the struggles of rival creeds, and witness the decay of successive
religions.” A very striking passage, but one that leaves out of sight
altogether the impulse given to the intellect itself by that mighty but
unknown force we call religion, a force not measured by creed nor
expressed in worship, but operating continuously as a sentiment or
passion upon the production of ideas and the conduct of life. I
venture to think that there were two causes in chief which contributed
to English freedom, religion, and commerce. I know but too well, and
feel it somewhat acutely, that we parsons are charged with being a
dead weight upon progress. Mr. Buckle thinks that the benighted state
of Scotchmen is due entirely to ministerial oppression. A clergyman
of our own days cannot even take a voyage between Sydney and
Melbourne without being thought to lessen the speed of the vessel.
And yet it seems clear, not upon the testimony of parsons, but of
sober judging historians, that religion did very great service in the
promotion of English liberty. Bead Hallam, read Eobertson, read
Macaulay. They all unite in declaring that liberty enshrined in the
Eoman Catholic faith contributed powerfully to the abolition of


villeinage. When the dying serf-holder asked for absolution he was told
to put away his sin. “ Set thy slaves at liberty, and I, holder of the
keys, will unlock the door of Heaven. If thou wilt not, chains and
slavery for thee in the prison house of eternal justice.” Superstition P
Indeed I know not the form of religion, from that which is robed in
scarlet and crowned with tiara, down to the shivering naked spirit-
ualism of our day, which has not in it a considerable element of
superstition. We, all of us, stand smitten with ignorant wonder in
presence of the Divine Mystery of being, believing many things that
are not, as well as those that are. But if there be a wisdom ever
struggling with ignorance, work in God’s world ever making our mad-
ness sane, a spirit, clearly from on high, prompting men to dive into
the deeps of human misery and rescue brothers that are there, we will
not call this superstition. In God’s name let us honour the good, even
if we mark the evil that in this world seems inseparable from it.
Commerce too, in a more round about way worked to the same
end. Trade it is that builds towns, and towns have always been the
originators or defenders of liberty. Think of the glorious freedom of
your own municipal institutions. What would Sydney be without its
Mayor, and what is a Mayor worth if he cannot now and then do
battle with abuses that fetter liberty. It was the same municipal
spirit, generated by the attrition of mind with mind, stimulated by the
progress of manufactures, broadened by the activities of a widening
trade, which rendered serfdom impossible in England. We can
can scarcely claim for our own country the commencement of the
crusade against oppression. The cities of Italy were in the van.
Made wealthy by Eastern commerce, they bought or extorted large
immunities from the Emperors. France followed suit. Her kings
found that cities were more loyal than great feudal lords, and were
able to hold them in check. The inhabitants were enfranchised,
and formed into Corporations or bodies politic, with council and
magistrates of their own nomination. England, somewhat more
slowly, but far more effectually, imitated their example. The
municipal system was the very thing for the stout hearted islander,
yearning after the visionary Saxon times. Deep into the soil of
English life its roots were struck, and upwards into the broad free
air the tree of liberty grew. Like Clan Alpine’s pine,—
Moored in the refted rock,
Proof to the tempest’s shock,
Firmer he roots him
The ruder it blows.
Thus a great body of the people was released from servitude and
from arbitrary and grievous impositions, and the democratic spirit
from a number of living centres spread its influence over the entire


country. At length the very name of personal servitude, in country
and in town, was banished from England. No formal laws were
passed by the legislature. The institution of villeinage has never
been abolished by statute even to this day. But by the end of the
15th century the distinction between master and serf had virtually
ceased, and by the end of the 16th the last traces of it had
disappeared.
lII.—We come now to our modern period. Slavery is gone.
Serfdom is gone. No harsher term than servant can be employed to
indicate the relation of the workers of England to those above them
in the scale of life. But how clear it will seem to you who look
oeneath the mere surface of things, that change of names and change
of institutions do not always imply change of facts. Mere power is
always selfish, and if it can still keep up its old grip on the soul and
body of the worker, it will do it to the end of time. These feudal
aristocracies, with the bluest of blue blood running in their Norman
veins, these aristocracies of wealth that have of late been jostling
Dukes and Earls in the race for power, I do not find them much
changed in spirit from the old times when the born thrall waited on
their pleasure, and spent life in their service. If you will think of it
rightfully, it is just labour, the labour of the free worker wisely
directed, that has made England what she is, a spectacle of wonder to
the earth, and to all the ages. Think of what she has done, with her
true thinkers and her brave workers in the conquest of material
nature. How her children have wrestled, too often in great dumb-
agony with the stern facts of existence, and how they have conquered.
What inexhaustible treasures have they dug from mines! Before
how many flaming forges have they smote with mighty hammers the
intractable metals. How have they rescued from moor and fen, and
wild worthless forest the corn-bearing land covered with golden
harvest. How with their looms and spinning jennies have they
clothed the naked of the world in seemly garments of wool and
cotton. What sea have they not crossed P What land have they not
explored P From ice-bound Canada to the sunny regions of Australia,
spurning the allurements of home, recking little of polar cold and
torrid heat, have they not laid the foundations of empires that in
the coming years will be as great and strong as they are already free.
Labour it is, thoughtful, stern, sad, continuous labour for these last
two centuries, that has wrought all this. Ido not find much done by
other means.
But now let us ask how the toilers have been rewarded. What
has been the life condition of the millions during these two centuries
of material progress, such progress as the world has never seen till


now ? For myself I think it a most pitiful story. Wealth beyond
he dreams of Croesus, private mansions such as Nero might have
envied, a great titled and a yet greater untitled aristocracy living in
luxurious ease, the greater number of them absolutely idle, and at
their wit’s end to find new methods of spending money. On the
other hand poverty more dreadful than in the days of serfdom,
dwellings a disgrace to humanity, a factory population (I speak of
forty years ago and on the evidence of a Eoyal Commission), “ pale,
thin, emaciated, subject to permanent deformities of body, showing no
disposition to mirth or cheerfulness” ; and an agricultural population
about whom let Canon Girdlestone speak, as he did in 1867 :
“ Wages, 7s. and Bs. a week for able-bodied men, 7d. and Bd. a day for
women ; breakfast, tea-kettle broth ; luncheon and dinner, bread and
hard skim milk cheese ; supper, potatoes and cabbage, with just
a flavour of bacon if he is allowed to keep a pig. “Is it any wonder,”
he asks, “ that the West of England labourer is at his best days but
feeble, at 45 or 50 is crippled with rheumatism, and dies on parish
pay or in the union. And if the master’s horses and cattle are better
housed than the labourer’s family is it likely that chastity among the
women and self respect among the men can be looked for, when they
crowd together like swine, and dress and undress and sleep in the
same room.” Yes, serfdom is gone. Yilleinism is abolished. Yet if
I had to choose between becoming a Saxon serf in the days of the
Plantagenets, and a Devon or Wiltshire peasant of the early days of
Victoria’s reign, I should hardly know which lot to choose ; for it had
actually come to pass, through a weak minded piece of legislation
more fitting the genius of France than of England, that some of the
worst evils of serfdom were again in force. In the reign, of Queen
Elizabeth every Englishman was guaranteed the right of maintenance.
If he were out of work, or suffered from temporary or prolonged
illness, or had reached that stage of life when he could work no
longer, he was to have help from the state. This universal state help
lended to keep wages down at starvation point. The employers of
tabour chiefly profited, and because the state never gives its money
for nothing, the poor paid for it in freedom. Every man who would
have help must have it through his own parish officials, his own
parish being that in which he was born. To such an extent was this
legislation carried that any two justices of the peace could remove
any person out of the parish in which he resided, unless he were born
in it, or rented a house of £lO a year. The result was that men could
not pass from one part of England to another in search of employ-
ment. Practically they were restricted to the place of their birth.
Every incentive to independent exertion was taken away. The issue


was seen —it may, alas !be seen even to this day—in the armies of
hereditary paupers, clad in sombre uniform, dwelling in huge barracks
all over England ; able-bodied paupers the most of them, cursed with
pauperism as some people are cursed with leprosy. To me the
“ unions ” of England are among the saddest features of the Empire’s
life. I pray God that they may not be perpetuated here.
The laws of which I have spoken were intended to be kind.
There were other laws that professed to be restrictive. To these I
must call your special attention, because they have of late, and
especially within the last three years, been swept away. The theory
of these laws seemed to be this : Capital has rights, labour has
duties ; let capital concede what it will, that is optional; but labour
must discharge its obligations, that is imperative. In two directions
especially legislation bore hard upon the worker, expressed by the
laws of conspiracy and the laws of contract. Tip to the year 1824 it
was not lawful for two workmen to agree together to ask for higher
wages ;to seek for higher wages was a crime. By a law passed in
1720 every workman who dared to ask more than the wages settled
by the act was to be imprisoned for two months. Even the master
could not give more. Lord Kenyon, in a trial in 1799 of some
journeyman shoemakers for conspiring together to get higher wages,
said that the masters of the town who had voluntarily agreed to give
more (this was a fact which came out in evidence) were liable to an
indictment for conspiracy. The law of contract was equally severe.
Up to the year 1867, if there were a quarrel between a master and a
servant about work, the servant could be proceeded against just as if
he had committed a crime. Armed with a warrant obtained by the
master a policeman could arrest him and drag him off to gaol like a
thief. The magistrate could convict him and fine him an arbitrary
amount. If the fine were not immediately paid, with costs, he could
be sent to prison. There was only partial relief from this up to 1875.
Do you wonder that Mr. Disraeli should characterize these laws
as unequal, i.e. as unjust. The modern view, which is likewise the
view of an enlightened political economy, regards capital and labour
as uniting in a bargain with equal rights and equal duties. I, capital
furnish the necessary means. I, labour, furnish thenecessary manual
toil. We stand upon equal terms. Any infringement of our mutual
contract must be dealt with in the same way for both, without fear
or favour. But it took a long time for the legislature of England to
see it. Long after the worst features of both these laws had been
practically set aside, the Statute Book of England was encumbered
and disgraced by their manifest injustice. It would take me beyond
limits to refer to the several victories gained by the workmen in


regard to the laws of conspiracy and contract. They belong chiefly
to the past 10 years. Let it suffice for me to say that many centuries
of wrong have just come to an end. Several important principles
have been clearly laid down in the recent labour laws, every one of
which is a gain to freedom. Henceforth a breach of contract between
a workman and an employer is not to be treated as a crime. Never
again is imprisonment to enforce a contract, except in so far as this
may be the usual process of the common law in civil cases. If a
breach of contract is accompanied by acts of a criminal nature, these
acts are to be defined and made criminal by special laws. The
common law of conspiracy is totally abolished. The law now deals
with the capitalist and the workman as upon the same level. The
rights of labour and the duties of wealth are now as clearly established
as the rights of wealth and the duties of labour. Before the tribunals
of this Empire the rich and the poor meet together, and equal justice
will be administered to both.
There have been other victories of labour with which you will
be more familiar. The rate of wages has very greatly increased. The
hours of toil have been sensibly shortened. A number of Factory
Acts have done away with the worst abuses connected with the
employment of women and children. Field-gang work is absolutely
prohibited. Female labour is excluded from the mines, several
merchants’ shipping acts, beginning with that of Sir James Graham,
have relieved our sailors of much suffering and delivered them from
much tyranny. The entire agricultural population of Great Britain have
begun to emerge from a degradation that has long been a scandal to
the Empire. Education is now the heritage of the poorest. On these
I must not dwell, though the themes are tempting enough.
Consider for a moment the causes which have brought about these
happy results. I do not find them to be much within the realm of
law. The freedom of the workers would never have been secured by
the legislators themselves. The appeal was made to Parliament by
the people against the decisions of the Bench of Judges, and against
the laws which were in force. Nor do I find that religion did much—
the religion I mean that is established by law, and expressed in
the dominant and leading churches. How could State Christianity
engage in a crusade of liberty when she has actually been employed
for the last 40 years in rivetting the shackles of a human priesthood
upon the souls of men ? But Ido venture to believe that the spirit of
religion common to all, and the spirit of Christianity common to most
have had to do in very high degree with the enfranchisement of labour.
The Gospel, after all is said and done, is the true Charter of liberty.
The Christ of Nazareth who despised not the craft of the carpenter,


nor the toil of the fisherman, has been the true leader even of those
who have disowned his authority. In spite of sneer and sarcasm and
well merited reproach against modern Christendom, I believe that
England is more truly and intensely Christian than she has been for
some centuries at least. The Spirit of Christ has secured the
enfranchisement of labour.
Among the immediate causes I am inclined to attribute no small
value to the influence of the Colonies on the Mother Country. In
these new lands personal freedom speedily asserted itself in spite of
law. The old ties of feudal subordination were broken and flung
away. America first, Canada and Australia next, have taught the
lesson which men are always trying to learn and always learning to
forget, that “ a man’s a man for a’ that.” Just as the freedom of
Greece was increased and conserved by her Colonies, so Colonial
thought and Colonial life, acting upon modern England, have mightily
contributed to make her what she is to-day. Much is due to the
action of Trades Unions. Let no one denounce these because of
certain manifest abuses. The combination of workers is essentially
just and actually necessary. Above all let the Press be honoured.
The diffusion of intelligence among the people at large, the spread
among them of just notions of right and duty, is to be ascribed chiefly
to that vast body of writers who are at once the pride of our country
and the defence of our noblest institutions. The fourth estate, which
is more truly representative than Commons or Lords, and more
powerful than either, have been the teachers of the many in factory
and field, and their champion in halls of legislation.
How shall I single out the personal leaders. They have been so
numerous that if judged by effort in the cause of freedom, their name
is legion; if judged by success they are still a multitude. I will
mention only one or two names that are still prominent among living
workers. First of all I shall put Gladstone, the noblest leader of the
House of Commons that England has ever had. A Tory by birth and
education, a Liberal by experience and conviction, he has done more
than any one man to break down class distinctions and equalize class
burdens, and introduce the people at large to social and political
liberty. Hor let us forget Lord Beaconsfield. If in passing the
Reform Bill of 1868 he took a “ leap in the dark,” at the stern
application of Gladstone’s spear, let us not forget that he rode
gallantly and well, and discomfited the foes of freedom. To him too
must belong much of the credit given to Mr. Cross, his able lieutenant,
for the Labour Bills of 1875-6. Mr. Plimsoll will be spoken of with
respect and affection wherever our innumerable merchant seamen are
found. The very intensity of his passion on their behalf, defiant in


its sacred rage of parliamentary usage and order, lias endeared him to
England at large. And lastly, let me mention witli due honour the
name of Joseph Arch, the Methodist local preacher, champion of the
agricultural labourers. Peasant-born as he is he has more power
to day over the class to which he belongs than any man of our time.
Like another Moses he has rescued hundreds of thousands from
degrading servitude.
We have abundant reason to thank God for the hind of leaders
we have had. No worthless demagogue has had any wide-spread
influence with the people of England. The Odgers and Eenealleys
have flourished only for a while. Never in the history of our country
has a great social revolution been more admirably conducted. The
last few years especially have been full of lessons of inestimable value,
showing how a great crisis may be met, and untold dangers averted
by the use of legitimate means.
IY. Let us now consider the position we have won, and look upon
the omens of the future. The last remnants of feudal subordination
have been removed by law. The Parliament of the Empire has declared
in language that cannot be misunderstood that henceforth the worker
is absolutely free. No longer ago than 1867, an Act which granted
bim great concessions was called the “ Masters and Servants ” Act.
The Act of 1875 is called the “Employer and Workman ” Act. Great
significance is there in the change of title. So far as law can effect it,
wealth and labour stand upon an equality.
You will think at once of concessions that have yet to be
made in the mother land, of political rights still to be won by the
many. And you would be right in thinking that the franchise is still
withheld unjustly from millions. But reform in this direction is
coming, perhaps fast enough. Here in Australia the thing is done.
With universal suffrage and the ballot box, the most zealous advocate
of liberty must surely be satisfied. And Australia, methinks, is
beginning to furnish her quota to the history of social and political
economy in a way that is creating much astonishment and some
amount of consternation among her sons. I share with many of my
audience grave fears about some aspects of our future. Rejoicing as
I do in the more recent victories of labour, and especially in its last
and crowning victory, by which it has been enfranchised wherever
British Law is the arbiter between man and man, I am not insensible
to dangers into which the ultra-democratic principle may lead us.
There is a great and a happy future for these colonies, but only as the
champions of liberty respect the safeguards which are furnished to
society by intelligence and necessary order, and the principles of
natural and revealed religion.


I am not, like that social cynic Mr. Greg, about to utter any
“ warnings of Cassandra.” Ido not believe in his “ rocks ahead.”
I do not believe that the character of the British workman is
deteriorated, and that the higher wage and shorter hours, and increase
of independence, are going to destroy the commercial supremacy of
Britain. On the contrary, I believe that with better food and a
better home, and more leisure and more manliness, the worker of our
day, both in England and her Colonies, will do a greater amount of
work, and do it in better style than the worker of 50 years ago. Let
me refer you to a high authority—one of the very highest from his
wide range of practical experience, Mr. Brassey, in his admirable
volume on “ Work and Wages,” shows conclusively, and, speaking
from a master’s standpoint, that “higher wages” do not mean
increased cost of work, and “ lesser hours ” do not imply a diminished
amount of work. He cites examples from his father’s immense
contracts throughout the world, and sums up thus : “ High wages
and short hours of work may not be found incompatible with a
diminished cost of production, and low wages and long hours may
sometimes prove less advantageous to the employer than shorter
hours of labour and a higher rate of wages.” Mr. Greg’s dismal
forebodings are not justified by the canons of political economy, nor
by the teachings of an extended experience.
The dangers that I see, or seem to see, may be summarized und6r
the following particulars. They stand intimately connected with the
victories of labour and the advance of democracy. 1. An unsound
basis of political power. 2. False conceptions of national duty.
3. Wrong conditions of social life. 4. A lessening of the obligations
of religion. I shall fetch my arguments and illustrations rather from
Australia than England.
Danger 1. —An unsound basis of political power. When the
Colonies obtained self government every man of adult years not
incapacitated by crime was admitted to a share in it. The franchise
was conferred upon all. It was a daring experiment. What the
people of England have been striving after for centuries, what they
have been slowly gaining by progressive effort, the people of
Australia won in a moment. There was no training and no race for
power; the goal was reached at a bound. We have been long enough
n existence with our Houses of Assembly, the product of universal
suffrage and the ballot box, to be able in some measure to calculate
results. I contend they are not satisfactory. We do not get the
best and worthiest men to represent us, because we have no means of
excluding the ignorant and incompetent from those who elect them.
Let us have the suffrage wide enough to include, so far as we may,


all who are really worthy, but let us shut out the criminal, the
ignorant, the pauper. Let no one who has been convicted of crime,
no one who receives aid from the public charity, no one who is unable
to read and write, be numbered among the electors. I grant that by
the operation of such general principles as these some might suffer
wrong. But I hold that it is far more dangerous to the public weal
to include many that are worthless than to exclude a few that are
worthy. In another way, too, the rule of the multitude is operating
disastrously. Instead of saying to the man of their choice—“ You
are to act for us, within limits to which you have pledged yourself, to
the very best of your judgment and ability ” —which alone is true
representation—they say “ You are to speak as we at any time may
tell you, and vote as we at any time may bid you.” Demagogues
without wit to think or courage to act may submit to this dictation, but
the wisest and best men will not. There are many crises when the quiet
thought of a few is far better than ;hc passionate opinion of the
many.
2. — False conceptions of National Duty. If pride is the darling
sin of aristocracies, selfishness is the darling sin of democracies.
There is not a colony that does not show it, but Victoria has been
displaying it of late to a degree that may excite our wonder. The
workers are chiefly chargeable with this state of things. They have
lent a too willing ear to fallacies that have long been exploded.
Under the plea of establishing manufactures, and finding plenty of
work at high wages, they have been unjust to a large section of the
community, unjust to neighbouring colonies, and grievously unjust to
the mother land. They have discouraged emigration and paralyzed
trade. They are reaping the harvest that has been sown, and selfish-
ness in national policy yields but sorry sheaves. Their manufacturers
have lost their hopes. Their merchants have lost their profits. Their
politicians have lost their heads. Unless they give up their present
policy Hew South Wales will outstrip them, and South Australia will
overtake them. Worse even than this, instead of the admiration and
envy with which the world has been wont to regard them, Victoria
will be used “to point a moral and adorn a.tale.” My patriotism is
for Australia, and not for a single colony. In the interests of this
great Colonial Empire, soon surely to be confederated, I hope Hew
South Wales will never abandon the principles of free trade.
8. — Wrong conditions of Social Life. lam not going to tire
you with a moral lecture about these. But I will venture to assert
that the two social dangers to which the working man is chiefly liable
are want of thrift and love of strong drink, and that these are the
fruitful sources of pauperism and crime. Thrift in the old country


was a sort of impossible virtue. If state aid lias been found necessary
to help able-bodied labour to exist, there was little chance of laying
by. But the conditions of life are vastly changed in these new lands.
Men who will to save can save, from the labourer with his 65., 7s. and
Bs. a day up to the higher sort of artizans and mechanics earning 12s.
to 14s. a day. Wo doubt there has been improvement. The Savings
Banks and the Building Societies of Australia tell a pleasing tale.
But it is not the less true that economy amongst English workingmen
throughout the world is an exception rather than a rule. In Mr.
Brassey’s great contracts in France, where Englishmen and Frenchmen
were working side by side, the Englishmen at nearly double wages,
the Frenchmen were glad to have their pay day only once a month,
the Englishmen were scarcely content with it once a week. They had
not learnt to save. This habit of spending immediately everything
that it earned appears to me to be most disastrous in its operation
upon the true freedom and real elevation of the worker. A man who
spends all his wages when in full work is in a pitiable condition
during the intervals (and they must be expected) when employment
is not to be had. He runs in debt to the storekeeper, pawning his
future earnings—and debt to every true man is intolerable bondage.
He is obliged in too many cases to accept the first,work that comes in
his way, too often at less than market prices, and by this his sense of
independence is impaired. I say nothing of the sorrow of wife and
children, who are compelled in too many cases to accept the boon of
charity. Charity may be necessary at times, even for the able-bodied
worker. The fluctuations of trade in new countries are many and
frequent. But woe it is to those who get to depend on charitable
help. The charities of England have made pauperism hereditary.
They have saved many lives, but they have destroyed, in innummerable
cases, that which is better than life. So far as I have seen within the
limits of my own experience, it is almost impossible to retain the
dignity and freedom of manhood, where there is frequent need and
frequent appeal for the help of others. The habit of thrift would, I
am persuaded, almost put an end to the miserable pauperism of the
able-bodied. Charity would then be set free to do her true divine
work in mitigating the calamities which form an inevitable part of our
human lot. Widows and orphans, the sick, the diseased, the lunatic,
the outcast, how much nearer they would come to our sympathies and
how much more effectually they would be helped.
But what shall I say of the love of strong drink, that fatal
madness which yearly consigns so many of the brave workers of
Britain to the gaol and the lunatic asylum, and a dishonoured grave.
The habit itself even when not pushed to absolute excess means loss


of money, loss of self-determination, loss of mental power. lam not
able, like some, to regard total abstinence as the panacea for all the ills of
drunkenness, but I do look forward to a change in the drinking customs
of Australia, to a conquest upon a national scale of this foul passion.
It will not be achieved, I think, by attempts at moral reformation.
There is room for the work of philanthropists and legislators. Good
Templarism and the Permissive Bill have their mission. But Ido
not think that the mighty passions that defile and degrade human
nature will be conquered by anything short of the still mightier
passion of religion. Love to God, loyalty to the pure, the personal
Christ will cast out the devils of drunkenness and unchastity, but
nothing else, upon a wide scale, will do it. This leads me to the
fourth source of danger.
IY.—The alienation of the working classes from modern Chris-
tianity, I have already expressed my conviction that England is more
truly and intensely Christian than she has been for some centuries.
But the Christianity of our century centres chiefly in the middle
class. Too certain it is that the workers have to no small degree
become alienated from Christian worship, and from union with the
Christian Church. About 12 years ago a remarkable conference was
held in London between a number of representative ministers of
religion, and working men. At that conference many came forward,
one after another, and distinctly stated the reasons which they had for
refusing to attend public worship. Some of them were cogent enough,
while others were feeble. This at least I will venture to assert, that
there is nothing in the relation between ministers of religion, taken as
a whole, and the great body of workers, to account for it. I do
honestly believe that there is a most sincere desire on the part of the
clergy generally to be helpful to the working men generally in the
highest of all interests. I feel certain that they would do anything
within their power to effect it.
If I were asked to give the chief causes of the present alienation
of the workers from modern Christendom, I should be inclined to
attribute it to defective modes of worship, to wrong methods of
teaching, and above all, to a want of that genuine spirit of brotherhood
which ought to be found within the Christian Church in higher degree
than anywhere else upon earth. Our worship is not what it should be.
Embroidered garments and theatrical posturings and wax candles
burning dimly in the daylight are offensive to a manly piety. And
the worship of the free Churches is so wanting in the expression of
united devotion, so centres itself upon one man, who is the sole
mouthpiece of the congregation, that many cannot and will not bear
it. Neither is our mode of teaching what it should be. There is


undue reticence in the pulpit about matters of the utmost importance
to man’s life. There is too much time spent by religious teachers in
explaining the Gospel, which does not need much, instead of applying
the Gospel, which is very greatly needed. Christianity belongs to the
whole life, national, political, social, and the Pulpit has a right to speak
out on all the grave questions that affect society, not however to
engage in the strife of parties, not to attempt the immediate solution
of problems that are agitating men, but to lay down principles and
truths which are of eternal obligation, by which senates and .chambers
of commerce and trades unions ought to be guided, and by which too
the conduct of the individual man ought to be determined in every
department of life. We do not want to secularize religious teaching.
What we want is to imbue all so-called secular subjects with the
Spirit of Christ.
I can recognize no victory as complete until the labour of the
country has become permeated with the Spirit of the Gospel. Looking
back across the centuries of progress, I find that religion, imperfectly as
it has been expressed, has been one of the chief agents in securing
the enfranchisement of labour. It were indeed cause for alarm if
there were proof that the workers of Britain at home and in the
colonies were permanently alienated from Christianity itself. I myself
do not believe it. On the contrary, I feel sure there has been advance-
in the right direction. There has been throughout all classes a relaxa-
tion of dogma, but there has not been a letting go of the principles that
underlie the dogma. The characteristic truths of Christianity which
have helped so much in securing the liberties of our empire, were
never more operative than now.
I have thus passed in review some of the leading questions which
have occupied my mind of late, touching the battles and the victories
of labour. There are others I might have discussed—such as the
present unsatisfactory relations between capital and labour, the history
and influence of Trades Unions, and the rise and development of the
co-operative principle. But I have said enough for your time and
your patience. I shall be content if what I have said may induce
any of you to entertain more just and liberal views about the rights
of labour which have of late been so universally conceded. There is
still a ferment of opinion about their expediency and their justice. It
could scarcely be helped. In the flush of a revolutionary victory there
is always danger of revolutionary license. Some ardent enthusiasts
will see the millenium of society in the dissolution of social order, and
in the destruction of rank and privilege won bj industry and virtue.
On the other hand just and good men, alarmed by the frequent ex-
travagancies of opinion and occasional excesses in practice, are inclined


to repudiate concessions already made. The bitterness of controversy
has not indeed reached the height in the colonies that it has in
England. The conditions of life are happily different. There is no
such sharp distinction between class and class as prevails in the old
country. But the bitterness is not altogether wanting. There are
grudges between capital and labour even here, and now and then they
show themselves in a way painful enough. The part of a good
atriot is to endeavour to allay animosity by appeals to justice. This
have at least attempted. I can only hope that the attempt may not
e altogether in vain.
Fouler and Fairfax, Steam Machine Printers, Sydney,


31508022937285


