



r*
i


Extracted from Vol. X., Part 1, of the “Proceedings
of the Linnean Society of New South Wales.”
THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN AUSTRALIA.
Plates YU. and YIII.
By R. von Lendenfeld, Ph.D.
Introduction.
During a recent expedition to the central part of the Australian
Alps I have discovered undoubted traces of ancient glaciers, and
can assert accordingly that Australia also has passed through a
glacial period.
Before entering into a description of my discoveries, I think it
my pleasant duty to express my thanks to those who materially
assisted me in the accomplishment of my work, by lending me
instruments and maps, and many other services.
The Hon. Mr. Abbott, the Minister for Mines, supplied me with
railway passes, for which lam particularly indebted to him. The
Surveyor-General supplied me with several instruments and
and I am also indebted to him for many practical hints drawn
from his own experience on the mountain.
Mr. Wilkinson, the Government geologist, supplied me with
instruments and his assistant, Mr. Cullen, rendered me invaluable
services during the expedition ; also in other ways Mr. Wilkinson
aided me very much in my research. The greatest practical
assistance was rendered me by Mr. Betts, the district surveyor at
Cooma, to whose energy and chivalrous courtesy alone our advance
was made possible, and the difficulty of getting along the bulky
luggage, provisions, instruments, &c., overcome.
Literature.
In literature there are a few statements regarding the ancient
glaciation of Australia, but they are all very vague or made by
people of not sufficient practical alpine experince. I shall review
what I have found in a few words.
/V3is *lf ?j
-2’6> 77


THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN AUSTRALIA,
Tenison-Woods (1) says—“ There is no satisfactory evidence of
a former participation in the great ice age by the continent of
Australia. One or two instances of grooves or striations are
recorded, but standing alone in so vast a territory the ice origin is
very doubtful.”
Howitt (2) says—“ Nowhere in Gippsland have I been able to
detect any appearances which I could in any away refer to a
glacial period, analogous to that of the Northern Hemisphere. I
have nowhere met with grooved or scratched rocks, erratic
boulders, moraines, or any traces of ice-action.” He goes on to
say that the ancient lake-basins near Omeo might suggest the
action of ice.
Whilst these two authors do not believe in a glacial period
having ever occurred in Australia, Professor Tate and Mr. Griffiths
assert that there are such traces, but their observations are very
vague, and it appears that these gentlemen as well as those
mentioned above, had looked for glacier remains altogether in the
wrong places.
Professor Tate (3) states that he found erratic boulders and
striated rock surfaces on the beach near Adelaide. To look for
glaciers one must go up the mountains not down to the sea.
The evidence collected by Professor Tate proves by no means
that any glaciers had ever existed in Australia, and it is probable
that the erratics found by him were deposited on the beach by ice
bergs stranded there, which may have drifted to the South Coast of
Australia, from the South Pole at the time when it was colder in
the southern hemisphere than it is at present.
Mr, Griffith’s (4) evidence is of a still more vague character ; he
finds a lot of gravel and clay, and concludes that this must have
been formed by glacial action. Mr. Griffiths did not however,
(1) Tenison-Woods. Physical structure and geology of Australia. Pro-
ceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales. Yol. VII., p. 382.
(2) Howitt. Geology of North Gippsland, Victoria. Quarterly Journal
of the Geological Society of London. Vol. XXXV., p. 35.
(3) Tate Anniversary Address to the Royal Society of Transactions of
the Royal Society of South Australia, 1878 —1879.
(4) Griffiths. On the Evidences of a Glacial Epoch in Victoria during
past nuocene times. Royal Society of Victoria, 1882.


BY R. VON LENDENFELD, PH.D.
take the trouble to go up to the place where all this gravel and
clay was said to have been brought down from, so that, as he
himself states, his evidence is very unsatisfactory. He also tries
to bring some other geological facts in connection with a glacial
period. I however, perfectly agree with Hutton (1), that all the
formations referred to by Mr. Griffiths, could just as well have
been formed in another way, and I do not think it likely that
Mr. Griffith’s clays and gravels are of glacial origin.
Own Observation.
Every child in the European Alps knows that glaciers are
formed on mountains and nowhere else. So if one wants to find
glacial remains, of course up the mountains one must go. If the
glaciers at any time since the land has attained its present shape,
have extended so far as Tate and Griffiths assert, if the Omeo Lake
has been scooped out by glacier ice which Howitt considers possible,
how much clearer must the evidence of glaciers be then, in the heart
of the mountains down the sides of which they must have extended
and where they must have originated.
On the other hand, if no evidence of glacial action is found in
the low lands, that is no reason why glaciers could not have been
present on the slopes of the highest mountains.
It is quite evident from this, that the glacial traces must be
looked for in the mountains first, and then, when the existence of
traces of prehistoric glaciers there have been found, the investi-
gation can be extended down to the low lands to ascertain how far
the glacies reached. The gentlemen mentioned above never took
the trouble to look for the glacial traces in the alpine valleys, so
that of course no reliance whatever can be placed on their state-
ments where negative, and even where positive, they will not be
satisfactory.
On these grounds I undertook an expedition to the highest
mountains in Australia, knowing that I could easily decide the
question of pre-historic glaciation there.
(1) Hutton. The Origin of the Fauna and Flora of New Zealand, part 11.,
p. 16.


THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN AUSTRALIA,
Between the sources of the Murray in the west and the sources
of the Snowy River in the east, there lies an extensive plateau on
an average about 5000 feet high and extending over about 160
square miles. This plateau extends N. and S. for about 22 miles,
and has an average breadth of 8 miles. A mile to the east of the
western margin of the plateau the main range is situated
extending in the same direction as the plateau from N. to S. In
that part of the main range lies the highest mountain in
Australia which I mapped, measured, and ascended for the first
time, 7256 feet high, Mount Townsend. In a western secondary
range, a mile to the north of my highest peak, another mountain
is situated, which has been frequently ascended and which is
crowned by a stone cairn. This latter has the name Mount
Kosciusco or Mueller’s Peak, and is 7171 feet high. Round
about on this plateau there are numerous hills over 7000 feet in
height, and the fiat extended bottoms of some of the valleys lie
about 6000 feet high.
Even now we find small patches of snow lying on the south-
eastern face of the ranges, the remnants of snow drifts all the
year round in heights above 6500 feet. These snow patches are
never found in “deep ravines” as Mr. T. Stirling (1) states.
Snow patches such as those on Kosciusco only lie close to the
exposed parts where the wind blows a great amount of snow
together and stores it for the summer.
Where eternal snow is to be found even now there glaciers
must have been at the time of the glacial period, if it ever
existed. I found in reality, as I anticipated, most beautiful and
indubitable traces of glacial action in these valleys, and I con-
clude from my observations that the glaciers of that, very recent,
glacial period in Australia, covered a part of the plateau mentioned
and extended over about 100 square miles.
The evidence of glacial action which I discovered were roches
montonnees, glacier polished rocks, in several places above 5800
feet. Wherever the rocks protrude from the face of a mountain
(1) Stirling. Remarks on the Flora of the Australian Alps, &c. Southern
Science Record, January, 1885, p. 12.


BY R. VON LENDENFELD, PH.D.
to form a spur there particularly, but also at other places, one
may expect to find these traces. The ice-stream moving down the
valley presses with the greatest force against the protruding parts
of the sides of the valleys on the way, against the spurs. Any
rocks or small stones which may have been accidentally frozen
into the ice, and which may be situated near the bottom, will,
when hard and protruding, cut deep grooves in the rocks which
they pass over slowly, with the immense pressure of the whole
glacier behind them. In this way the protruding rocks will be
polished down more and more. As soon as the glacier retreats
these polished rocks will be left bare and exposed to the air.
In our case these rocks are granite without exception, and their
surface withers very fast. The grooves and scratches soon become
oblitered, but the shape of the extensive polished surface remains
and indicates to an experienced eye immediately the action of
moving ice.
Further proofs for the correctness of the supposition that we
have to do with the effects of ice, are furnished by the relative
position of joints and surface. The polishing goes on of course
quite regardless of joints, and consequently in 99 cases out of a
hundred, one will find the polished surface cutting the joints at
varying angles, and not parallel to the direction of any one system
of joints.
I have examined the direction, dip, &c., of joints in 12 of the
rocks which I consider as glacier polished, and found in every case
that the direction of the polished surface followed the direction of
the valley, the direction in which the glacier there, once had moved,
and was never parallel with any system of joints. The rounded,
always convex shape, and particularly also one fact proves the
glacial origin of these surfaces without a doubt—viz., that the
polished surface is continuous for a long distance in some places.
That is to say, in those parts numerous isolated rocks, in different
parts of the hill side or spur, are polished down to exactly the
same level.
One of these instances, on a spur high above a tributary to the
Snowy River, was so remarkable, that my assistant, who had never


THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN AUSTRALIA,
seen any rbches moutonnees in his life before ; was immediately
very much struck by the appearance of it.
There, there is one rock polished off with a surface of about 3
acres and about 25 other much smaller ones around it, all polished
down to exactly the same surface, divided from one another how-
ever by depressions of varying depth.
The most numerous and the best preserved of these roches
moutonnees are found in a valley, which I name after our
President the Government Geologist, Wilkinson Valley. As I
have studied this valley most minutely and as it is doubtless the
highest valley in Australia, I shall describe it and also the glacier
which at one time filled it.
On Plate 7 and 8, the Wilkinson Valley is represented, as seen
from Mount Townsend, which I ascertained to be the highest
peak in Australia. The Wilkinson Valley is enclosed by the
Abbott Range and Muller’s Peak in the north and north-west, by
the Main Range for a mile on the east and by the Wilkinson
Range on the south-east. Its main direction is from N.E., to
S.W. For the upper three miles of its length its bottom is broad
and flat and lies very high, forming part of the Kosciusco plateau,
Then the fall which is only about three feet to the mile in the
upper part rapidly increases and at the same time the valley
becomes quite narrow so as to represent a steep ravine.
From the Abbott Range a broad spur descends in a southerly
direction into the upper flat part of this valley and forces the
stream in its bottom to curve round in the same direction.
On the sides of this valley but particularly on this spur roches
montonne es are very numerous and it is easy to see how far the
glacier reached up the hill side by the extent of these glacier
polished rocks.
In plate 7, this spur with the polished rocks is seen “en face ”
just opposite.
Plate 8, represents the probable shape and size of the glacier
when it filled that valley. Of course I name the glacier after the
valley which it helped to scoop out.


BY R. VON LENDENFELI), PH.D.
The picture is the same as plate 7, and I have drawn the glacier
to that height, at which roches were observed by me.
The other parts are of course drawn without regard to the denu-
dation since then, and I have used my alpine experience in giving
a picture of the distribution of rock and snow, as it would probably
be in summer, were Australia now subjected to a glacial period.
To those who have not seen the glaciers in the high alps, the
picture will convey a better idea of the character of the country at
that time than any description.
The picture pretends to nothing but a hypothetical value, and
will, I hope, be judged accordingly.
Conclusions.
On going to the place where glacier traces might have been
expected, these were found in the shape of roches
scattered over an area of about 100 square miles on a plateau
above 5,800 feet.
That part of Australia was therefore not so long ago certainly
covered by ice.
The question arises whether the glaciers did not extend further
down than that. I have looked carefully around on my way up
and down the mountain, but I was not able to detect any trace of
glacial action below 5,800 feet. In the Snowy Valley a glacier
might be expected to have descended for some distance from the
mountains, and I think it very likely that moraines will eventually
be found there. This valley is, however, the only one in which
moraines may be expected, because it is the only one which comes
down from an extensive plateau on which a glacier was formed.
It is difficult to fix the time of the glacial period, but it is evident
that it was in all probability simultaneous with the glacial period
in New Zealand.
According to von Haast (1) the glaciers there descended at that
time into the sea on one side and down to a height of a few
hundred feet on the other. In New Zealand there are high
(1) Von Haast. Geology of Canterbury and Westland


mountains on the slopes of which the glaciers were formed, and
New Zealand also lies further south than Mount Kosciusco.
Further there is no doubt that there were warm dry winds from
the interior of Australia blowing over the Kosciusco plateau at
the time of the glacial period as they do now, winds which must
have diminished the size of the nevees very considerably.
Taking all this into consideration we must come to the conclusion
that the glaciers of the glacial period in Australia need not have
been very extensive, even if nearly the whole of the middle Island
of New Zealand were covered by eternal ice at the time.
Hutton (1) is not inclined to believe that the glacial period in
New Zealand was so severe as is generally believed, in consequence
of the great abundance of animal life at that time. I must say
that Ido not see this at all. Chamois and many other mammals,
as well as birds, live always high above the glacial terminations in
summer and winter in Europe, so that there is no reason to suppose
that there should not have been an abundance of animal life even
if the glaciers had extended further than von Haast (2) states.
Hutton (he.), is quite right when he says, that if the glaciers in
Australia had had that extent which Griffiths supposed, that then
the climate in the South Island of New Zealand (I suppose the
Middle Island is meant), would have been polar.
This certainly was not the case, as the fossil fauna shows, and
therefore, the simultaneous glacial period in Australia could not
have been very severe as Hutton very ingeniously concludes.
My own observations tend to prove the correctness of his state-
ments, and the extent of glaciers in the glacial period of Australia
according to my observations, is quite in accordance with the much
greater extent of glaciers in New Zealand.
(1) Hutton. The Origin of the Fauna and Flora of New Zealand. Par
11., p. 16.
(2) Von Haast. Geology of Canterbury and Westland.


BY K. VON LENDENFELD, PH.D.
The state of preservation of the roches moutannees in the
Australian Alps, is nothing like so good as in the New Zealand
Alps. I am, however, not inclined to ascribe that to a difference
in age. I consider it simply as a consequence of the difference in
the rocks; there hard metamorphised slates, here granite.
The difference between diurnal and nocturnal temperature will
doubtless also be much greater on Kosciusco, with a continental
climate, and nearer the equator, than in New Zealand where an
island climate prevails, and where the sun is never so hot in the
day time.
I have in another paper (1) drawn attention to the immense
amount of weathering caused by differences of temperature, and I
think that the rocks on Kosciusco are accordingly exposed to a
much more energetic processs of weathering than those in New
Zealand.
These differences I think suffice to explain the difference of
preservation of the polished rocks in Australia and New Zealand,
and I believe I am therefore justified in considering the glacial
period of Australia and that of New Zealand to be isochrone.
In another paper (2) I have tried to show that this latter was
very recent, and we should in that case have to assume that also
the Australian glacial period had occurred at a relatively recent
date.
Result.
1. At the time of the glaciation of the Southern Hemisphere,
Australia was subjected to a glacial period as well as New
Zealand.
2. The climate was then not very cold so that the glaciers only
covered the highest part of the Australian Alps, and were conse-
quently very small.
(1) Von Lendenfeld. Der Tasman Gletscher und seine Umgebung.
Erganztmgsheft, Nr. 75 zu Petermanns geografischen Mittheilnngen.
Seite 42.
(2) Von Lendenfeld. The time of the glacial period in New Zealand.
Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales. Vol. IX.,
p. 806.


THE GLACIAL PERIOD IN AUSTRALIA,
3. One glacier system has been discovered on the highest part of
the Australian Alps. The glaciers extended from a high plateau—
Mount Kosciusco —down into the valleys around. The glacial area
may be estimated at at least 100 square miles. There were small
glaciers at the source of the Murray, not extending far down the
plateau, there was a small glacier at the head of the Orackenback.
The largest glacier filled the valleys at the sources of the Snowy
River and probably extended for some distance down the Snowy
Valley.
4. As even on the highest elevation the glaciers were so small
it is not likely that glaciers existed anywhere else in Australia
at the time.
5. The glacial period in Australia was probably isochrone with
a pluviatile period, when the rivers were large and when there was
a dense vegetation in many parts of the country which now are
barren, and which was sufficient to feed the gigantic Diprotodon
and other fossil marsupials.
EXPLANATION OF PLATES.
Plate 7. —Muller’s and Abbott Peak and Wilkinson Valley from Mount
Townsend from a sketch taken by the Author on 11th January,
1885.
Plate 8. —The same as it would appear in the glacial period.


P.L.S. Vol 10.
Abbott’s peak
Mueller's peak
Pl. 7.
THE WILKINSON GLACIER from Mb TOWNSEND,
probable sfape, and sijt at the Hwe of tfe Glaoial period.




At bo Its peak
Mueller’s peak
PIS, VOL 10,
Pl. 8
y. Xjendanfelci d&t...
THE WILKINSON VALLEY from M T TOWNSEND.
from a- sketch ta-ken on Januofry 11 18&5.
S . Sedj field tith.


*
•


BlSuo
r((s~7&
a/ a^if
\ 1
v|


