

THE LATE
CHARLES WHALAN,
OF OBERON;
BEING
REPRINTS OF ARTICLES
FROM THE “ BATHURST FREE PRESS” AND THE
“ WEEKLY ADVOCATE” (SYDNEY),
ETC., ETC.
BATHURST:
G. Whalan, Printer, School of Arts Buildings,
Howick Street.
. >*lBB7-


THE LATE
CHARLES WHALAN,
OF OBERON;
BEING
REPRINTS OF ARTICLES
FROM THE “ BATHURST FREE PRESS” AND THE
“ WEEKLY ADVOCATE” (SYDNEY),
ETC., ETC.
BATHURST:
G, Whalan, Printer, School of Arts Buildings,
Howick Street.
XBB7.




Knowing that many of Mr. Whalan’s
friends have not seen the articles here
reprinted, and that many others who
saw them would like to have them in a
more permanent and readily-accessible
form, it has been decided to publish
them as a pamphlet. In addition to
what has already appeared is a copy of
the inscription on the tablet ercdled by
Mr. Whalan’s friends in the Wesleyan
Church at Oberon, and a synopsis of
the address delivered by Mr. Joseph
Booth after the unveiling of the same
by the Rev. R. Caldwell. To the
friends who eredted the tablet, and all
other friends of the departed, these
pages are respectfully addressed.
Prefatorn Note.


In Memory of
CHARLES WHALAN,
Who Died February 2nd, 1885,
Aged 74 Years.
THIS TRIBUTE OF RESPECT
WAS ERECTED BY THE MEMBERS AND FRIENDS
OF THE WESLEYAN CHURCH, OBERON,
WHERE HE LABOURED IN THE LORD’S VINE-
YARD OVER 40 YEARS.


THE LATE MR. CHAS. WHALAN.
From the Bathurst Free Press.
Although for some years past the subjedl of
this notice took but little part in public
affairs, few men were more widely known in
the district or more generally respedted.
Born in Sydney in 1811, he was amongst the
oldest native residents of the colony. His
early life was spent at Prospect, where he
saw much of the convict population—his
father having much to do with that class of
men, and having several of them assigned to
him as servants,
In 1838, with his wife and wSe-young
childr-s», he crossed the Blue Mountains,
and took up his residence at Fish River
Creek, and was the pioneer of civilisation in
that part of the country. Here he resided
for well-nigh half a century; and was, as an
old resident remarked, “ a father to the
neighbourhood.” His prominent charac-
teristic was unselfishness ; and there are few,
if any, persons in the district where he lived
who have not been placed under obligations
to him. Many a new arrival was helped by
him to make a start; and not a few dif-
ferences between neighbours were amicably
settled by him.


For about thirty years he discharged the
duties of an honorary magistrate, having
been appointed to that office during
the Cowper administration in 1857. He
took a lively interest in all public questions,
and was amongst the earliest advocates of
the formation of a railroad to Bathurst,
when that now happily accomplished fact
was looked upon as an impossibility, and
pooh-poohed as a Utopian dream.
In 1838, his brother—the late Mr. James
Whalan, who had, in company with the
police, been searching for the thctb'HotQneuD
bushranger McEwan—reported to him
having seen the mouth of a large cave
as they passed along the top of the lime-
stone mountains to the Mftffreast of the
Fish River. Ever feeling the liveliest in-
terest in natural wonders or curiosities of
any kind, Mr. Whalan at once made pre-
paration to go in search of the caves.
Having obtained careful directions from his
brother, he started forth with two com-
panions (both of whom deserted him before
the object of his search was accomplished),
and thus became the discoverer of the now
far-famed Fish River, or Binda, or Janolan
Caves. On the occasion of his first visit he
had but time to enter and partially explore
the great arches. He soon went out again ;
and whenever he could contrive to spare the
time he prosecuted his searches, until he had
penetrated many of those underground


“crystal palaces,” whose wondrous beauty
has since won the highest admiration of all
who have gazed upon them; and nothing
gave him greater pleasure than to condudl
his friends to the halls of matchless loveli-
ness which he had discovered. Visitors
came from far and near, for the fame of the
caves soon spread ; and many a party has
he conducted to and through them. There
were no hotels in the neighbourhood in those
days, and visitors to the caves made his
house their stopping-place going to and
coming from them, always finding a hearty
welcome, and receiving every attention from
Mrs. Whalan. Until his sons were old
enough to undertake the work, Mr. Whalan
was the only guide to the caves ; and either
himself or some member of his family con-
tinued (of course gratuitously) to adt in that
capacity until the appointment of a guide
and caretaker by the Government.
For many years he endeavoured to obtain
the reserve and survey of a portion of land
for a township, but met with much opposi-
tion from official and other quarters. How-
ever, he persevered, and eventually the town
of Oberon was laid out and the first lots
submitted for auifiion.
In addition to his intensely atftive secular
life, Mr. Whalan took the deepest interest
in religious matters ; and whilst the friend of
all Christians, he particularly devoted him-
self to the establishment and advancement of


the denomination of his choice—the Me-
thodist body. For over 40 years he laboured
in various offices in connection with that
body; and often, in the absence of the
ministers of religion, he has ministered to
the dying, cheering their last moments, and
pointing them to “ realms beyond the sky.”
People of all denominations were accus-
tomed to send for him ; and it mattered not
whether the message came in the daytime or
at the dead of night, he has always gone—
no matter how far or at what personal in-
convenience.
Believing .the country around his residence
to be rich in minerals, he spent much time
and capital in seeking to develop its re-
sources. He had several likely looking
copper lodes opened out and sunk to a con-
siderable depth; but meeting with no
success, he turned his attention to gold-
mining and searching for precious stones,
only, however, to meet with a like fortune;
and Mr. Whalan lost heavily.
Old age was now coming upon him, and
his losses and disappointments seem to have
been too much for him ; his mind began to
show evidences of giving way, and his
mental powers continued in a clouded state
to the end. On the 2nd February, 1885, he
quietly passed away, being 73 years of age.
His remains were interred with those of his
father in St. John’s Cemetery, Parramatta,
and were followed to their last resting-place


by many old and prominent citizens of that
historic borough, who had been his friends
in the days of his boyhood and manhood.
Besides an aged widow, he leaves four
daughters and three sons, a large number of
grandchildren, and some great-grandchildren,
by whom his good name and consistent life
are considered greater wealth than any ma-
terial inheritance that could have been
bequeathed them.
IN MEMORIAM.
Weekly Advocate.
The late Mr. Charles Whalan was born in
Sydney on the 17th May, 1811. He spent
several years of his boyhood at Government
House, in companionship of the son of the late
Governor Macquarie Mrs. Macquarie had
taken a fancy to her young friend, and he
was educated with her own son. Charles,
after this, removed with his parents to
Prospedt, and at the age of 25 was married
to Miss Elizabeth Harper.
In 1838, Mr. and Mrs. Whalan removed
to Glyndwr, near where the town of Oberon
now stands, Mrs. Whalan being the first
white woman to set foot in that part
of the country. The first Christian minister
who visited them was that unwearying
labourer, the late Colin Stewart, who bap


tized their second child, and gave an earnest
and impressive address. From that time
the family altar was set up in the home, and
the parents sang the praises of God to-
gether.
Mr. Whalan was not clear in his conscious-
ness of acceptance with God for some time ;
but having gone to join in special religious
services, as he was returning, crossing the
plains, the light beamed upon his soul, and
he was made unspeakably happy through
faith in the atoning Saviour. That veteran
pioneer, the Rev. S. Wilkinson, was taken
to Mr. Whalan’s house by the late Mr.
Richard Mutton, in 1843. Several families
of Methodists from the North of Ireland had
settled on his (Mr. Whalan’s) estate at
Glyndwr, and Mr. Wilkinson formed a class,
appointing Mr. Whalan to the office of
leader, and afterwards to that of local
preacher, both of which he continued to fill
until his work was done.
It was my good fortune to become ac-
quainted with Mr. Whalan in the beginning
of iB6O. In the months of September and
October following, a blessed work of God
broke out among the young people who
attended our little chapel at Glyndwr, and I
shall never forget with what rapturous de-
light—the tears streaming down his cheeks
in meeting after meeting—the good man
entered, heart an soul, into the spirit of the
work, while we sang, “ O happy day, when


Jesus washed my sins away.” Some who
then professed their acceptance of Christ
have passed away to Heaven, and some
are pillars in the Church on earth;
while others, alas ! never loved Him well,
and have lost the love they had. Mr.
Whalan continued his godly work for over
40 years. One feature of his devoted life I
must give prominence to. He was accus-
tomed to retire to his room about 8 o’clock
every evening for communion with God.
There he interceded for the members of his
class, sometimes by appointment for the un-
converted ; and his soul, all aglow in that
inner chamber of Divine communings, found
expression in the rapturous song, “Praise
God from whom all blessings flow!” with
which doxology he usually concluded.
Generosity to a fault was one of the cha-
racteristics of Mr. Whalan. He was one of
the most unselfish men I ever met with : of
this, I am sorry to say, some designing per-
sons took advantage. He was a Justice of
the Peace for many years, and discharged
the duties of his office in the interests of
truth and good will.
For a short time prior to his death his
brain was clouded, and it was deemed neces-
sary to remove him to Sydney, at which
place he died on the 2nd February, 1885.
He was buried in the family vault in St.
John’s Cemetery, Parramatta, where his
father, the late Sergeant Whalan, was buried


in 1839. Mr. Whalan’s numerous friends in
and around Oberon resolved to evince their
regard for his memory by placing a tablet in
the Wesleyan Church there.
As one who had known him for many
years, I was asked to preach and unveil the
marble which had been placed upon the wall.
On the Bth of August last, I reached the
Church for this purpose, and, although the
weather was very inclement, a large congre-
gation assembled. Before the close of the
service, Mr. Joseph Booth, of Parramatta,
delivered a very impressive address, in course
of which he spoke of his own great indebted-
ness to the spiritual counsels and help given
him by Mr. Whalan; passed a high eulo-
gium upon the singlemindedness, fervour,
and devotedness of his Christian character,
and pleaded with the young to follow him in
the paths of true usefulness.
R. CALDWELL.
Mr. Caldwell’s sermon was a most impres-
sive discourse from the words—“ Gather my
saints together unto me; those that have made a
covenant ivith me by sacrifice." —Psalm L, 5.


MR. BOOTH’S ADDRESS.
My Christian Friends, —It gives me
much pleasure to be with you this after-
noon, especially when I see that the purpose
of your coming together is to show the
great love and esteem you have for your late
dear friend, Mr. Charles Whalan, by placing
a tablet to his memory in this Church. Had
you eredted one composed of ivory and gold,
your friend was worthy of it. It may not be
uninteresting to you who are present, seeing
that some are young, and some strangers, for
me to give you a little of the history and
Christian life of our late brother, and also of
the Church in this place. It is forty-three
or forty-four years since I was riding in the
bush, when my attention was attracted by
hearing a man singing; lat once recognised
it to be my friend, Charles Whalan’s voice,
and, on going to him, he told me of the great
change that had taken place in him, and
which had filled his soul with holy joy. He
had been to Bathurst, and had attended
some of the revival meetings which had been
held there, and was troubled about the sal-
vation of his soul. On his return home, at a
place called Salt Water Creek, he was
enabled to venture his all on Christ, and
take Him as his Saviour. His soul being
filled with love for God and for all mankind,
he earnestly entreated me to do.likewise. I
did not cavil at this advice, for having been


brought up from infancy to respedl religion,
I knew that he was right. A few weeks
later, the Rev. S. Wilkinson came to the
Bullock Flat, as it was called in those days,
and preached in Mr. Whalan’s house. The
little room was filled, not only with hearers,
but with the Holy Spirit, and after the
sermon a prayer meeting was held, the result
being that six penitents were pleading for
mercy, and they found pardon ; I was one
of the number. I shall never forget the
earnest manner in which Mr. Whalan
exhorted me to believe, saying, “ Oh, do be-
lieve!” and I crying, “ I do believe!” then,
with his hand upon my shoulder, he prayed
that God would make me useful. Thank
God for His Grace and Holy Spirit on that
afternoon ! The next morning Mr. Wilkin-
son held the first class-meeting in Mr.
Whalan’s house ; and, as I look around this
Church this afternoon, I can see two only,
besides myself, who were present on that oc-
casion—they are Mrs. C. Whalan and Mrs.
Graham, —the others have all passed away,
and gone to their great reward. From that
time, Mr. Whalan began to work for his
heavenly Master, and told me he would try
to preach ; I agreed to teach the children.
The next Sabbath he gave exhortations in
his own house ; and I, with two others com-
menced the Sabbath school in the new
house, which was only partly built. He next
established preaching and prayer meetings in


the houses of Mr. Campbell Whalan, Messrs.
John and William Armstrong, and Mr. W.
Fleming; Wednesday evenings being the
times for the prayer-meetings, at which
members of every family were saved. Those
were the days of small things here. He then
had his name put on the list of local
preachers, and, although his appointments
were at a great distance, sometimes leaving
his home on Saturday morning and not re-
turning till Monday night, yet he was
always ready at his post—even rain and
snow did not prevent him. As a preacher,
he was to the point, and very earnest. His
theme, attended with pathos and power, was
always Christ. It was manifest that he felt
what he preached, for it was not an unusual
thing to see the tears chasing each other
down the cheeks of himself and of those who
were listening to him. As a class leader he
was faithful, and entered into the sympa-
thies of his members. Oh that I could take
you in imagination to a meeting when he
was giving out such a hymn as “ My soul
through my Redeemer’s care;” he would cry,
“ Praise God, my soul!” and turning to the
members, would ask them by name, if that
were not their experience. His soul being
filled with holy joy, the rest would partake
in the same blessing. But what was the
secret of his success ? Soon after his con-
version he was dissatisfied with his spiritual
state, and being a firm belipver in the doc


trine of entire sanctification of the heart, he
pleaded with God, and found the great
blessing, and afterwards preached it, exhort-
ing all others to pray for it. In his social
life he was greatly respedted and loved, for
to do a kindness, whatever the sacrifice, was
no burden to him. At all times his hand was
ready and his purse open to assist and
relieve the distressed. His hospitality was
unbounded to friends and strangers’alike. He
was often guide to parties to your magnificent
caves, without fee or reward, except having
the praise and good-will of all to whom he
was leader. When those caves were dis-
covered; he was the first to explore them,'
and now he is spoken of in the highest terms
of esteem by those who have enjoyed the
hospitality of himself and his family. And
now, my young friends, you have heard
what religion has done for the man of God,
whose tablet you see on that wall. Follow
his footsteps so far as he followed Christ’s,
and if one thing more than another could
add-to his happiness in heaven it would be
the knowledge that you young men and
maidens gave your hearts to God on this
occasion.
G. WHALAN, PRINTER, HOWICK-ST., BATHURST.


~y. U —; ’
' ■'Util
j{r'j Qkutfi ■ -


tymm of mill ftiijjlj, >»., JuiIucd.
Adelaide Photo. Company.
,j (OVER MARSHALL'S CHE|llsjr|li
Opposite "Criterion Theatre. Copie.sl can ajways be obtained.
