

(rrT A
“VCOUijhlfiK/l
How the Coastal Service Has Been Developed.
' c 3 ‘ i>
W. A. Somerset
The Skipper rapped his pipe-bowl vigor-
ously on the rail; then, grasping it pistol-
wise, pointed the stem aross the river.
“ You don’t see the likes of that every
day of your life,” he remarked. “ Nor
wouldn’t in any other country that I know
trade only,” he added.
Following the sweep of his pipe-stem,
we noted the long line of masts and fun-
nels, black, white, red-ringed and buff.
“ There’s five ships there,” he explained,
“ flying the house flags of the fve biggest
companies that, between them, own nine-
tenths of the coastal shipping in Aus-
tralia. Three of them are the crack boats
of their companies, and, let me see, seven—
five —four, yes! they register over 26,000
tons between them. Then there’s a couple
of two-thousand tonners and a turbine. A
cool million pounds’ worth of inter-State
shipping is tied up to those wharves; you
take my word for it.”
We took it in all seriousness; for al-
though his “ skipper ” is a brevet rank,
and his “ command ” a little five-horse-
power tub in which, to quote Mark Twain,
there would be room to swing a strict-
ly moderate-sized cat this blue-eyed,
weather-seasoned seaman has a passion
for shipping and a knowledge of it that
is wide and accurate.
“ No,” he continued, “I’ve knocked round
the world a bit in my time, and I never
struck a coastal service that could touch
SEVENTY YEARS OF STEAMSHIP DEVELOPMENT.
The smaller boat represents the first steamer that ran in the inter-State service, from Mel-
bourne to Sydney In the year 1840; the larger represents the best type of boat now running.
It is a contrast between £3OOO and £140,000 in value; between 400 tons and 7400 tons in register,
and between 250 horse-power and 7000,
0 0 <7


THE ROMANCE OF AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING.
this. They’ve got some speedy boats
running from Holyhead to Belfast and
Dublin, and some pretty good ones be-
tween London and Liverpool, but for all-
round work, you know —speed, comfort,
safety, regularity, charges and so on —
boats like these ” (and he took in the
wharves opposite with a comprehensive,
sideways nod) “ leave ’em all miles be-
hind.”
The Luxury of Travel.
As we talked, the “ Karoola,” the very
latest note in inter-State vessels, glided
slowly out_of_the_ Sock in which she had
been overhauled aftef : faer maiden voyage
out from Glasgow, and we watched her
with interest manoeuvring into her berth.
“ That’s just the way the coastal service
has grown up—bigger and better boats for
every geneiation, till now we’ve got ’em
like this,” and he scanned the great,
painted cliff that towered above our tiny
craft. " I don’t wonder Jack London was
surprised that a country with a population
of five millions should he running 7000-tnn
boats in its coastal service. Of course,
you expect that sort of thing with the
over-sea mailboats; but we’ve got boats
now running round our coasts with goods
and passengers that make the crack Eng-
lish liners of a few years back look cheap;
and, except for size, are as finely finished
and furnished as the best of ’em now. I
saw only last week diagrams of a billiard
table with a patent swinging base they’re
B rnjgm 1
' 4s *mt ■ * I
S.S. “ KAROOLA.” M‘ILWRAITH, M‘BACHARN’S NEW INTER-STATE STEAMER
Then we dropped down for a closer in-
spection.
“ I should think she’s about as far as
they can go in shipbuilding?” I suggested.
The Skipper glanced up to where, sixty
feet above water-level, an officer, in a uni-
form as obviously new as the whole of the
ship’s fittings, was leaning over the end of
the bridge.
“ For the present, yes,” he replied, “ but
we are always thinking we’ve got the limit,
and then comes something better. I re-
member when we thought the ‘ Arawatta,’
the ‘ Marloo,’ and the ‘ Peregrine,’ were
the limit, and before them the ‘ Gabo,’
and the ‘ Burrumbeet,’ and before that
the ‘ Flinders,’ the ‘ Leura,’ the ‘ Tyrian,’
the ‘ Dandenong,’ and the ‘ Gunga.’ Why,
it is not so very long since the old
‘ Edina,’ that plugs up and down between
Geelong and Melbourne, was one of the
t'p-toppers of the Queensland run.
fitting up for ships, and one of these days
you’ll see every boat with its billiard
room, and they’ll play snooker from Fre"-
mantle to Brisbane. I guess shipbuilders
are just working their brains overtime,
trying to devise improvements, and when
you come to think of the great difference
between a boat of to-day, and one of even
ten years ago, it’s —well, it’s marvellous.
Every berth has got its own porthole and
a writing desk no less. You can have six
different kinds of shower-baths; the
swivel chairs run on ball bearings, and ”
—here the Skipper’s tone was not un-
tinged with scorn—“ blest if the third class
isn’t fitted out with chairs in padded plush.
Travelling? I call it picnickin’ from the
time the steward wakes you with coffee
at seven, till the orchestra plays you -off
to sleep after your bread ’n’ cheese.
“ Some of the top men in Australian
shipping to day, let me tell you, came out


THE ROMANCE OF AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING.
THE STEAMSHIP “ YOU YANGS,” ONE OF THE PIONEERS OF THE INTER-STATE TRADE
She made her first trip to Sydney in 1862
here in boats that hadn’t padded plush in
the first class. Suppose you gentlemen
don’t remember the ‘ Great Britain ’?”
We shook our ignorant heads.
A Crack of Other Days.
“ She was a great boat in her day, a
great boat. ‘ Greyhound of the Deep,’
they called her in the papers. Two hun-
dred and ninety feet long, six hundred
tons register, two hundred horse-power.
We used to think she was a crack, and her
skipper was as proud as Lucifer of her.
Seems like yesterday, but I suppose it must
be forty years ago; and many’s the score
of people she carried from Sydney to Mel-
bourne, and t’other way round—people who
would kick up fine now if the electric light
went wrong or the fifteen-course menu
didn't happen to please them on one of
these 7000 tonners.”
“ You go farther back than forty years,
though, Skipper?”
He smiled. “ Fifty good years it is
since I came out first. Worked my pas-
sage out at a shilling a month and earned
three bob on the voyage.”
“They pay better than that now, eh?”
The “ crew,” who had been enjoying a
quiet smoke in the bow, took out his pipe
long, enough to comment, “ They got to!
The Skipper looked at the great broad-
shouldered young fellow indulgently. “ He
thinks he’s a socialist,” he said, “ but he’s
only a humourist. I keep telling him
that he’s the luckiest dog on the sea. Get’s
double the wages he would in any other
S.S. “ RIVERINA,” HUDDART, PARKER PROPRIETARY LIMITED.


THE ROMANCE OF AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING,
The cook’s galley has developed into an hotel
kitchen.
country; better hours; better food; better
chances, and ”
“ By the way, do you remember the first
Australian steamer —the ‘ Express ’?”
‘ Bluebottle,’ or the ‘ Buzzfly,’ or some-
thing.*
“ The first intercolonial steamboat was
the ‘ Clonmel.’ I’ve got the record some-
where of her maiden trip—her only trip,
in fact, because on her second voyage she
came to grief. She left Melbourne, if 1 re-
member rightly, on a Monday in December,
1840; got to Sydney on Thursday night;
back again to Melbourne on the following
Thursday; did a trip to Launceston in
thirty hours, and was lost on her way to
Sydney the second time. The fares were
£l2 12s. a head for a bunk, and £6 for a
deck passage. She was a Britisher, but,
curiously enough, the first steamer from
America that tried the Melbourne to Syd-
ney run also went ashore on her first
voyage. She was the ‘ Monumental City,’
and went to smash on Tullaberg Island
with considerable loss of life.
A GLIMPSE OF CAIRNS, ONE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT AND BEAUTIFUL OF AUS-
TRALIA’S NORTHERN PORTS.
It was clumsy steering, but it served to
bring the Skipper round to the course
again.
“ Steady, now,” he remarked, “ I’m not
Noah! But I remember her successor, the
‘ You Yangs.’ And neither of these, bless
your heart, was the first steamboat in Aus-
tralia —not by a long shot. The first
steamer in the Yarra was a little hundred-
ton paddleboat that came out in 1838 and
ran between Melbourne and Williamstown,
charging 2s. 6d. each way for passengers,
and about the same freight that the inter-
state boats now charge from Sydney to
Fremantle. I think they called her the
* This was the “ Firefly,” a funny little boat
described by “ Garryowen,” in his chronicles of
Melbourne, as “ an incommodious little tub more
inclined to buzz than to fly, and having more
smoke than fire.” She was, however, the only
steamboat on the Yarra for nearly three years;
her engine being finally taken out and put into
a sawmill at Brighton.
“ And what has been responsible for this
extraordinary development of coastal ship-
ping? Why should Australia have the
best coastal service in the world? How
has it come about?”
Smoking-rooms and lounges are furnished like
private drawing-rooms.


THE ROMANCE OF AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING.
S.S. “ YONGALA,” OF THE ADELAIDE STEAMSHIP CO.
S.S. “ WYRBBMA,” OP THE A.U.S.N. CO.


THE ROMANCE OF AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING.
The Skipper indulged in a broad smile.
“ Depends on the way you look at it,” he
replied. “If you ask this chap he will
tell you it was the Labour Party; if you
ask the shipping companies they will tell
you they did it; if you ask me, I’d say it
was the country.”
“ And that means?”
“ Well, I suppose if you come down to
the real reason, it means that the country
has been able to afford the luxury of do-
ing the thing in style. Australia has de-
manded it, and has been lucky enough to
have men with sufficient brains and brass
to respond; hence the rise of these great
shipping companies. You see, Australians
are a coastal people—though you don't
think of them as such. Out of our total
population of four and a quarter million,
over two million live within ten miles of
the coast, and the bulk of them within
actual sight of the sea. We’ve got plenty
of coastline, too, when you come to look
at it; according to Mr. Knibbs, the Fede-
ral statist, there’s 11,000 miles of it alto-
gether. So that we’ve got to have a
really good, quick, reliable ship-
ping service for purposes of commu-
nication and trade. And then, natur-
ally, there’s the element of compe-
tition, not only between company and
company, but between sea-travel and
land-travel. The ship always has one pull
over the train; she’s the forerunner. You
can’t make a trial run in a locomotive
without putting down a set of rails; but a
boat can dodge in anywhere—and that’s
just how the greater part of the Australian
shores have been opened up. Besides,
when the line is laid and competition be-
gins, the boats can always carry the pas-
sengers for half the price of a railway fare,
and feed them into the bargain. You
take almost any port-to-port trips round
the coast, and you’ll find boats going as
regularly, almost as frequently, and very
nearly as fast, as trains.”
Where the Money Goes
“ Nice, fat dividends they earn, too,” in-
terrupted the “ crew.”
“ Well, it stops in the country,” retorted
the Skipper, ,jl and that’s more than you
can say of half the mining companies.
And when it comes to earning, look what
they spend! I reckon there are pretty
nearly 17,000 people employed in the ship-
ping service ashore and afloat; the com-
panies’ wages alone run into a million and
a quarter a year; and if a man tried to fol-
low out the indirect employment they give,
he’d get brain fever. Besides, look at the
fares and freights! I’m willing to wager
you can’t find another country with prices
to touch them. Take any of the fares
from port to port, America, England,
South Africa or the Mediterranean, and
you’ll find in those countries that the fares
and freights all round are nearly half as
much again as Australian coastal fares
for equal distances—and inferior accom-
modation at that. I’ve compared ’em and
1 know.”
“Which is the busiest port in Australia?”
“ Sydney,” replied the Skipper, prompt-
ly. “ She is in the first dozen of the busi-
est ports of the globe. There are only four
ports in the British Empire with a bigger
annual tonnage in and out. Roughly, hei
record is 6,000,000 tons a year—oversea
and coastwise —and Melbourne has be-
tween four and five million. If you put
Melbourne and Sydney together, they head
New York.”
“ What proportion of that would be
purely Australian?”
“ Can’t say without looking it up; but
I know that we add about ten ships a
year, big and little, to our fleet, and there
are nearly 1200 steamers registered at the
different Australian ports.”
“ And what is navigation like in Aus
tralian waters?”
1?
1 • V
n
THE SKIPPER ADJUSTS HIMSELF TO THE CLIMATIC CHANGES OF HIS RUN.


THE ROMANCE OF AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING.
SYDNEY HEADS FORM THE BUSIEST GATEWAY FOR AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING.
“ There’s the man you want to ask that
question,” replied the Skipper, and he
pointed aloft again to the figure in the
gleaming buttons.
As a matter of fact, it was in the cabin,
and later on the bridge, of one of the big
coasters that I gleaned my next lesson in
coastal navigation from one of the most
popular of all the Australian captains, a
man with the broad mind, the genial
manner, the hearty frankness, that
seem to come as part of the sea-
soning of a seaman. Who he was
is a riddle with a dozen answers,
for he was typical of the modern ship’s
master. He agreed cordially with the
Skipper’s views of the life on the ocean
wave. “ I’m not denying,” he said, with
a laugh. “ that a comfortable berth ashore
with £2OOO a year attached to it would
not be a temptation, but it is a fine life-
especially when a man is master of the
best boat in the service. There’s the end-
less variety of men and women he meets;
the constant change of scene—from east
to west; from tropical north to temperate
south—there is something that makes his
‘ common round and daily task ’ a little*
different, from that of the landsman.”
“ And what is the order of that ‘ com-
mon round ’?”
“ Of the master?”
Yes!’
The Master’s Daily Round.
“ Depends, of course, on whether his
boat’s in port or at sea. The skippers
making the longest runs —such as Cook-
town, Cairns, or Townsville to Melbourne;
Sydney to Fremantle and Geraldton, and
so on—spend something like five-sixths of
their time aboard, and get to their homes
perhaps once, perhaps twice, in three
weeks. A typical day at sea begins for
the captain at—well, according to his per-
sonal fondness for early rising. He sets
the course, and then leaves the bridge in
charge of one of his four to six officers,
who keep alternate watches. That being
done, he is free (until called to alter the
course or meet some emergency) to de-
vote himself to the well-being of his pas-
sengers. He conducts a daily tour of in-
spection of his vessel, and sees that his
passengers and crew are being properly
cared for - meets in conference every
morning the chief officer, the chief engi-
neer, and the chief steward, and settles any
points that may have arisen. The first is
responsible for the smooth working of the
ship; the chief engineer has all the
complicated machinery of the modern
vessel, concerned with cleaning, lighting,
refrigerating, and so on, under his charge:
and the chief steward for feeding, comfort-
ing and entertaining the travellers in all
'■lasses.”
We talked again of the changes in
steamships. “It has been most remark-
able.” said the captain, “ during the past
ten years. Prior to that there was little
difference in the type of the best steam-
ships. in the nineties, boats of 2000 an!
3000 tons were considered great, and they
were, and still are fine boats; but the com-
panies have made such strides that they
have had to take third and fourth rank to
such vessels as these,” and he glanced for?
Rnd aft alone: the magnificent ship.
“ And with this growth in the size of the
vessels, the captain’s responsibilities have,
of course, increased?”
“In degree, yes; in effect they are the
same. He has a more valuable and com-
plicated vessel in his care, and more people


THE ROMANCE OF AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING.
to look after; but to balance this he has
the most up-to-date appliances, and cor-
respondingly efficient men under him. It
is the conditions of his work rather than
the responsibilities that have altered. The
day of the hard-fisted, loud-voiced skipper,
who looked after everything from the
bridge to the pantry, and ruled with an
iron rod, is past. Your modern ship’s
master is the head of a big establishment;
his voice no longer need ‘ outroar the
stormy blast;’ he says quietly ‘Full speed
ahead,’ or ‘ Stop her,’ and a quiet voice
replies ‘ Full speed ahead, sir,’ whilst its
owner moves the handle of a telegraph
that carries the order down to the engine-
room. He may discuss with his chief
steward the general arrangements of the
saloon; he may, if necessary, investigate
the quality of the soup served out to the
third-class passengers, but he no longer
worries about details of food supply, or
the employment of competent stewards.
In short, whilst he is directly and solely
responsible for the navigation of the ves-
sel, he is, in other respects, the superin-
tendent of a number of departments that
are managed by specialists.”
“ Does navigation in Australian waters
present any peculiar difficulties or perils?”
“ It has its own characteristic features;
out navigation in Australian waters, com-
pared with that in most countries with a
big coastal trade, is simple. For example,
it is child’s play compared with navigat-
ing the English coast with its thick fogs
and heavy traffic. Indeed, the lot of the
Australian coastal seaman is by no means
unpleasant. True, the northern seas from
Brisbane up to Thursday Island tax the
mariner’s ability to the utmost, requiring
special knowledge and skill, on account of
the Barrier Reef. The Barrier Reef, by
the way, the innocent landsman imagines
to be a sort of unbroken, natural break-
water, stretched along the coast by a
beneficent Providence to keep him from
being seasick; but in reality it consists of
a thousand reefs and atolls that make the
chart look like a wrecked spider’s web.
Then there are certain passages that call
for knowledge and vigilance, such as, for
example, the heads at Port Phillip and
Port Jackson. But in between there are
long, fair runs of hundreds of miles at
a stretch. Much the same as this ap-
plies to the weather. A captain has
nothing to complain of in the way of
variety of climate in making any of the
Australian coastal trips, and perhaps the
pick of them is from North Queensland
to Victoria, at, say, the beginning or end
of winter. I would like to take some of
these-people who brag about the glorious
blue seas and skies of the Mediterranean,
round Australia in spring, or autumn, or
even midwinter! We could show them
some sea and skies to talk about. In the
winter, running to and from Cairns and
Melbourne, we regulate the temperature
by only three changes of clothing. Win-
ter for the north, summer for the west:
that’s the rule of the coast, and if any
man wants a more pleasing variety of
scene and climate than he can find run-
ning round Australia, he’ll find it difficult
to discover.”
Reprinted from
“Life” Magazine,
Printed by
T. Shaw Pltchett,
Dec., 1909,
Melbourne.
