





“THE SOUL AND GOD,”
BY THE
REV. WILLIAM HENDERSON,
CONTENTS-
L—ALONE WITH GOD.
lI.—AT PEACE WITH GOD.
111. WALKING WITH GOD.
IV. AT HOME WITH GOD.
BALLARAT:
Published by J, Summerscales, Bookseller and Stationer.




PREFACE.,
These four short papers have not, I am afraid, very much
worth in themselves, but they have to do with the highest
subjects that can occupy the mind of man. The wants of the
human soul on the one side, and the grace of God that has
come to meet the needs of the human soul on the other—these
are surely just the two things of supreme moment for us all.
If any hints that have been thrown out by me in these pages
can help any enquiring fellow-creature of mine to find the way
by which he or she has to walk, to feel any the more sure of a
love of God that is round us on every step of our pilgrimage,
at every moment of our lives, then I shall have reason to
rejoice over this little bit of work I have done.
The publisher has thought these “ leaflets” worthy of sep-
arate reproduction; I have only to pray that they may serve
as a finger-post for one or another human heart that is asking
after “ the Way.” If the way is found and followed, it will be
small matter if the poor, unimportant finger-post is forgotten.
Deo Gloria. W. H.


i a. i
1 ■ *
. . * '
I . ■
-
. i,'
-• ;
•, , U/ • I ■ -I
s
' ,
. .. \
J<l I •
~; r , •• . .. .4 . :
. k .


THE SOUL AND GOD.
ALONE WITH GOD.
HAVE our readers ever, at any moment of their lives, come
to feel what it is to have to do with Gon ? With the world
and all its cares and troubles, its temptations and its changes,
its joys which last for a moment, its sorrows which come when
we look not for them we have only too much to do. But in
some pause and lull of life, God comes to make Himself known
to the soul, gets it away and apart where He alone can deal
with it alone. The conscience hears His voice amid all its
slumbers. The feeling of guilt in the presence of the Most
High God oppresses the heart. God has laid His hand upon
us, and the whole world cannot come in between us and Him
any more. His time has come to deal with us. He will have
no interference from any one. He has, to use the prophetic
phrase, “ allured us, brought us out into the wilderness,” apart
from the world and all its vanities, and there He must speak
to us, have it all out with us. We have to feel that it is a
fearful thing thus to fall into the hands of the Living God.
In the first book of the Bible, we read of a young man who
had been brought up in a pious home, who had been taught to
worship “ the God of his Fathers,” but whose religion ap-
parently had never had any very deep effect upon his heart.
He had not loved righteousness: he had been very largely
living a life of deceit and lies. But his sin had found him out.
The last and greatest of all his deceits had brought his life
into peril, and he had to flee from his father’s tents, a lonely,
almost despairing man. When, at the end of his first day’s
march, he lay down, foot-sore and weary, beneath the stars of
those Bethel plains, with nothing but the softest stone he could
find for his pillow, and nothing above him save God’s own sky,
and the silence and the solitude of the wilderness around him


on every hand, was there, in all the world, any more lonely
soul than the fugitive Jacob ? But it was there that God—as
God had all along designed to do, found the man whom He
had destined to be one of His chief servants in the world.
When the world had nothing more to offer him, and all his
sins and lies had proved to be vain and useless for him, and
his past lay all behind him as a guilty mistake, and his future
lay before him as a hopeless blank, then ho had to find that
God was near him. But the finding of God, whatever good it
might bring to him afterwards, was not an altogether pleasant
thing to him. He had to say “how dreadful is this place !”
The dreadful place was indeed to prove a very gate of heaven
to Jacob. But the J(arfulne*s of the presence of God must
always be the first feeling. What! Here am lin my sinful-
ness, and I have to do with God in his holiness. I have sinned
against Him, and now I know—know with all certainty, that
He has been taking account of me and of all my sins. lam
lying naked and open before Him who is my Judge. The
world cannot help me any more at all. Meanwhile its voices
are silent and its vanities are fled, and I am alone with God.
My sins that had separated me from Him rise up before me,
and in the light of His eyes, there is no excuse or covering for
me. What can I answer to Him ?
Ah ! it does not need Bethel wilds or other solitary places to
work this impression on the soul. It may come to us in the
crowded city, as well as in the lonely deseit. The soul is made
independent of its surroundings when its ear has got opened
to hear the voice of God. The Father of Spirits can bring
the soul apart and have it all to Himself for a while, in what-
ever outward circumstances it may meanwhile be placed. And
when He calls, it must obey, must, for a little, listen when Ho
speaks to it. Such a time is very sure to come in the lives of
all men. It is the day of their visitation, the time in which it


is to be decided by them what their relation to God thence-
forward is to be. God is making His most solemn appeal to
the soul: “ Wilt thou be Mine henceforth.' Wilt thou trust in
Me, give thyself up to Me, that I may make of thee what I
would have thee to be, one with Myself for time and for
eternity. Wilt thou not trust in Me.”
Alas 1 with so many the time of grace passes over and
leaves no permanent result. The temporary impression—the
feeling, “ how good it were that I should be sure of the favour
of that God whom I have offended, from whom I had separated
myself ” —that passes away like the morning cloud, like the early
dew. God has made His appeal, has claimed the soul for His
own. And then He has left the soul to choose for itself. And
when the time of passing penitence and alarm has passed over,
the world has come back with all its allurements again ; and
time, with all its vanities and temptations, has thrown its
influences anew over the heart, and he who was so very near
the kingdom of heaven allows himself to drift back again into
the currents that lead away from that shore of blessedness,
and get lost. But when any soul has been able, in that time of
dread, yet also of infinite hope when God has come so near it,
to yield itself up to the warning, yet also winning influence of
that voice of the Eternal that has come speaking to it, to give
itself up wholly unto Him, then there is the beginning of a new,
of an Eternal Life for the soul.
For the most of people unfortunately God is little more than
a Being of hearsay. Pious words have been spoken to them
about Him from the beginning of their days : they have read
multitudes of pious sentences about Him, and they are quite
content to believe, or at least to profess some manner of belief,
in an Almighty Creator, of whom so much has been told them.
Why should they be vexing themselves with doubts so long as
it is so evidently the correct thing to believe ? What a different


thing it is when the soul is at last, as we may say, brought
face to face with God Himself, and that which had been heard
of with the hearing of the ear becomes an awful, present
reality! All disguises are stript off from us. The religion of
form and of outward profession itself is felt to have been onlv
a vain and hollow thing, a hypocrisy of which we tried, nov
that the conscience is fully awake, only to be ashamed. We
can live in that vain, unreal form of religion no more. One
way or other we must get out of that. God will have His answer.
It is to be one thing or other with us. The form will not serve
us in any stead further. If out of that we can grow up into
the true reality of all religion, and find the God whom we had
offended, and the beginning of all blessedness in His society,
then indeed we shall have reached the true end of our being.
But if not, then the form itself shall become fatal for us.
Headers ! God has to do with you, and you have to do with
God. Will you only try for a little to settle for yourselves how
you stand with Him ? That is the most important of all mat-
ters that you can think about. The world has nothing to do
with that question: it is for yourselves alone. You alone
have to do with God alone. Meanwhile He seeks to deal with
you in the way of love and mercy. He is waiting to be
gracious to you. Come and give yourselves up to Him now.
By and bye, if you neglect His warnings and invitations, you
as guilty shall, if you have neglected your day of visitation,
have to do with Him, —you alone with Him alone, in the way
of judgment.
AT PEACE WITH GOD.
TO be at peace with God—to know that there is nothing any
more separating us from Him, or preventing the light of
His favour from shining upon us, that our sins have been


forgiven, and that the Divine love which we had so foolishly
forfeited has come back to us —that surely is the one thing
most of all to be desired by any soul of man. If we have come
to know any thing about God and our relations to Him, then
we shall wish, as our very highest good, to be at peace with Him.
Time was in our lives, it may be, when we thought we could do
what we liked regarding Him and all His affairs. We did not
care. We could do without Him. We were not going to allow
ourselves to be interfered with by Him or by all we had heard
about Him. We felt strong enough to push Him out of our
minds, out of any management of our lives. “Whether He is
to be a Friend or an Enemy of ours is not a question of any
moment for us. We shall not allow Him to trouble us. On
this particular spot of the world in which our lives are being
lived, we shall not allow Him to make or meddle at all.” It was
as if we had said that we were stronger than He, and that no
power of His could affect us in any way whatever.
That is indeed the state of mind in which, whether it is so
expressed or no, too many of our fellow-creatures now are.
They are without God in the world; they are even aqainst God.
But if to us there has come that feeling spoken of in the first
of these papers, of having to do with God, and of having God
to do with us, if we have been brought face to face (as we may
say) with a Living God, then our one next great desire must be
to be brought heart to heart with a Loving God. Fearful to fall
into the hands of the Living God, to meet Him as a Searcher
of hearts, a Judge, even an Enemy ! Ah ! He is stronger than
I, He holds me in His hands as a little thing. I have dared
to set up my poor proud will against His ; but now what is
there left for me but the publican’s prayer, “ God, be merciful
to me a sinner.” He is stronger than I, and I submit to His
strength. But now it can be no longer a question of strength.
I am so utterly weak and helpless and sinful that there is and
can be nothing for me but an appeal to His mercy. I made


light of His law. and now that law has become a source only of
condemnation for me. Is it possible that behind the thunders
of an insulted Law I may still come to hear the whisper of the
still, sweet voice of Almighty Love ?
If we are ever to come to be at peace with God, it is very
evident that that peace must first of all come from Himself.
The state of enmity, of alienation and of war, sprang from us.
But when we have come to feel His power falling over us, able
and seemingly ready to crush and to destroy us, then we know
that all the rest, all that may prove hopeful or joyous for us
hereafter, must spring only from His own Fatherly grace and
love. We cannot fight against Him any more. But then, also,
we have to feel that we have no claim upon Him any more.
He must do with us even as He will. We can only cry to Him
in our trouble, in the loneliness and despondency of our souls,
for mercy.
How can I who am sinful come to be right with God ? The
thing is impossible for me ; if reconciliation is to come, it must
come from His side and not from mine. I long for forgiveness; I
know only too well what a dark and hopeless case must be mine
without that. But I can do nothing further. I must only wait
to see whether any grace will be extended to me. God is so
just, but what can Justice do for me? I lie open to His con-
demnation—“ God, be merciful to me a sinner.” But then on
the other hand, Infinite Justice may perhaps delight rather in
justifying than in condemning. A father has not put his erring
child right with himself by merely condemning him for his
disobedience, by merely punishing him for his fault. The
separation between parent and child may in that way be only
made greater. It is reconciliation that is needed —that for
which the true parental heart pants; that which can rectify
alone the evil that has arisen in that relation between parent
and child. Punishment may have become necessary ; but the


parent hates that method of rectifying the wrong more even
than the child does. It is hateful to him. And God as the
Heavenly Father feels even so. “ I have iCt> pleasure,” He says,
“ in the death of the wicked, but would rather they should turn
unto Me and live." He whom we have been fighting against
—He whom we have been offending by all our folly and our
sinfulness—is our Best Friend after ail. It is His wish to have
us reconciled to Himself
But how is the great reconciliation to be accomplished ?
Atonement —the coming to be at-one with God, is and must ever
be the one great want of the human spirit, but how is it possible?
The good news that has come to us through Christ means that
it is not only possible, but that it has been wrought. The
great question for us was, how could we come to be at-one with
God; and now God has solved that problem for us by becoming
one with us. The awful enigma which had rent the souls of
men, and had begotten pain and despair within human bosoms,
has found its solution in the name Immanud —God with us.
God’s justice by itself could not meet the wants of men. But
in God Justice can never be separated from love, but must
accomplish itself in the way of love. They are wrong who
make separation between the justice and the mercy of God, as
if these were two contrary powers, fighting against one another,
striving after different things. The two strive towards the
same end. Justice seeks to justify, but sin is there ; and mercy
seeks to pardon, but the law is there; and then they strike
hands —these two; and the sin is taken away, and the mouth
of the condemning law is shut, and the way between man
and God is set open, and the soul of the sinfullest is made
welcome to come and partake of the grace of God, and to rest
in His love as that of a Heavenly Father.
It is in the cross and the empty grave of Christ, in His death
and in His victory over death, that this glorious result has been


reached, has been realized for us. Divine Justice and Divine
Mercy both have attained to their brighest result in the death
and the resurrection of Christ. Christ died for us. That was,
as we may say, God’s sacrifice in order to work out the deliv-
erance of those whom He was seeking to make one with
Himself. A Divine Person has come and walked the ways of
this low earth, has been one with us, one with the lowest, the
poorest, one in life with us—one in death with us. A love
that does and that suffers nothing for those whom it professes
to love is as good as no love at all. When love has become
self-sacrifice then and then only do we know that it is love
indeed. The cross of Calvary is, when we have come to read
the whole meaning and mystery of it aright, the brightest
possible exhibition of Divine love. The Infinite love is seen
there, perfecting itself, in Infinite pain.
WALKING WITH GOD.
THE peace which the awakened soul longs for in relation to
God is not of the sort that may exist between two powers
that have been at war with one another, that have inflicted
much and serious loss on one another, until at last the one has
felt too weak to continue the conflict further, and must consent
to accept such terms as the victor may impose. A few years
ago the world was disturbed by the sight of two of the greatest
powers of the world engaged in fierce and deadly struggle with
each other. The jealousies of centuries had burst out into the
wrath and the bloodshed of ruthless warfare. In swift suc-
cession, one life-devouring battle after another had to be fought;
pasture lands which had been loud with the bleating of sheep,
and fields where the corn had been passing from green to
yellow in preparation for the harvest, had to assume a fearfuller
colour and grow red with the blood of men. But the time came
when the wild war-storms had exhausted themselves, and peace


came back, to smile, alas! only on desolated homes and on
hearts which, even on the victorious side, were too heavy,
in many cases, to make much of all the gladness. Peace: yes!
but what a peace! Are the hearts of the two rival nations
drawn any nearer to each other? Have not the ancient
jealousies grown more intense, more bitter? Have French and
German come to love one another any better in consequence of
the peace that has come ? Or is it not true that they hate one
another rather more than ever ?
It is no such patched-up peace as that we think of when we
think of coming to be “at peace with God.” It is not merely
that we submit because we have had to find out that He is
stronger than we. The conscience has had to feel that the only
ti ue blessedness must be found by us in a true oneness of heart
with the God Whom we had offended. It is no sullen sub-
mission on our side, no mere yielding because we cannot help
ourselves, that can make the reconciliation complete. Once,
indeed, we were terrified by the thought of His strength; but
now that we know Him better, we are only attracted by His
love. We see now that when He seemed the most to be fighting
against us, He was in reality fighting for us, thinking far
better thoughts about us than any we could think about our-
selves. He was indeed fighting our battles, while we were
foolish enough to put ourselves in the ranks of His foes. And
when that conviction comes at last to take possession of the
heart, then the peace sought after and obtained is not that of
haughty power on the one side and of sullen submission on the
other. It must become a true union of loving hearts—the
feeble and erring human heart resting in the blessed assurance
that the Love of the Infinite, Divine One, is all its own.
Forgiveness itself is not enough to express the nature of that
relation which comes to exist between God and the soul that
has after all its waywardness and its wanderings, its folly and
its sin, come back to Him. The Father in our Lord’s parable


might have pa'-doned his prodigal, now penitent son, and yet
have given him no higher place in his household than that
which was all that the lost youth, when he “ had come to
himself,” had thought he could dare to pray for—that, namely,
of a hired servant. Instead of ring and robe and fatted calf,
there might have been only the menial dress and the dish of
herbs ; instead of all the tumult of joy that filled the house
over the penitent’s return, there might have been only the
mean work and the small wages that any other domestic might
have had. He surely would have had no right to complain.
So far he would have been forgiven, as being not excluded from
the house. But things could not run now on any such footing
as that. The reconciliation must be complete. The sin and
the shame must be blotted out, hadto become as if they had never
been. We are to think even so of the grace of the Heavenly
Father towards those who return to Him. He has shewn that
His love cannot content itself with anything less than an entire
atonement. The mission of Christ into the world had this as
its supreme aim. God has become “ one with us,” that we
might be made one with God.
And so life, for the truly believing heart, becomes a living in
God, a walking with God. Life is rightly represented as a
journey. It has its smoother and its rougher passages. There
are times when all is bright and pleasant, when the heart is full
of hope, and the step is elastic, and there is delight in moving
forward from one gladsome scene to another; and then others,
when the heart is heavy and the foot is sore, and the weary
pilgrim must still stagger on under a burden which he feels is
almost impossible for him to bear. But suppose that the
pilgrim who has had his soul vexed by finding the hollowness
of all the things of the world, and how little is to be gained by
walking in the wai s of the world, has found at last the assur-
ance of a Divine companionship upon all the way he has to go;
that the Heavenly Guide has come to him, and he on his side


lias gladly, willingly yielded himself to that sweet and blessed
direction, then how pleasant it is thenceforward to walk on in
the assurance that, trusting in that loving guidance, he cannot
any longer go wrong. The soul has to feel itself like a child
that had lost itself on wild forest paths, over whom the bleak,
cold night had fallen down when it was far from home and the
way thither wholly unknown, who had dared to fill the lonely,
uusj mpathizing air with feeble cries for help, and has at last,
through the daik, heard the father’s cry as he hastens to the
nlief of the lost one, and has felt a joy in that deliverance
greater than all the more staid and quiet life of the home itself
had ever given it. “ I was lost, and now my father has come,
and has found me; there is no fear now but I shall get home
again—l don’t know the road, but the Father does, and with
my hand in his, there is not one doubt or dread left in my soul.”
Has it come to anything like that with you, dear reader ?
There was a time when you had tried to take the management
of your life into your own hands, when you were perfectly
satisfied that you knew the way for yourself and did not need
any guide at all. The road was pleasant, and there was nothing
but pleasure in the soul. If warnings came to you that you
were ft flowing wrong and foolish paths, you laughed all such
warnings to scorn. But has there not come to you the
time when you felt yourself lost , in ignorance of where you
were, knowing only that you had gone wrong, and fearfully
conscious that it was impossible for you to bring yourself right
again. Ah ! and then has there not come to you the hearing
of the voice from above —a voice which at first seemed far oil
and strange, tilling you only with new alarm, but which, as it
came nearer, was recognised by you—o so gladly ! —as the very
voice of the Infinite Love Itself, that was seeking after you,
seeking to bring you to Itself? And after that, has not life
become a different thing for you.—a true walking with God as
your best and truest Friend, your unfailing Guide ?


Think of it earnestly: the life you are now living,—that
brings all its changes to you, its brighter or its darker days,
its sunshine and its storm, its laughter and its tears ;—that
may become, —ought indeed to become for you a walking wi'h
Qod ! There may be trial and pain for you along the road, even
in that Divine society; and the ills of life, its change and un-
rest and sorrow may have to fall upon you as upon others; and
now and then you may be tempted to feel that God Himself
has been dealing hardly with you. But the assurance that He
is still beside you, that He has love and sympathy for you in
all that may vex you most, ought never to leave you. Trusting
in and following after Christ as your true Lord and Leader, by
Whom you have found your way to the Father, you need never
despair. Confiding in Him, you can march on bravely, patiently,
because He has said to you, “I am the Way.” You can cast
all uneasy doublings and fears from you, because you have
heard His voice saying to you, “I am the Truth." You need
stand in no dread of time and all its changes, its trouble and
pain, or even of the death itself which it is by-and-bye to bring
on you, seeing through all time’s darkness and uncertainty,
His voice has come to you : “I am the Life.”
AT HOME WITH GOD.
THE faith that we have in God and in the Christ whom God
has sent into the world for our salvation cannot get itself
fulfilled here on the earth. It must look forward to what shall
be, and must become a hope as well. We are saved by hope,
the apostle tells us. Faith would be a poor and barren
thing if it were not just for the hope by which it is sustained.
The true problem of life cannot be solved here and now ; we
have always to feel that the perfect solution can be found only
outside the world and outside time in the solemn eternity that
is coming. Not here amid all the confusions of the world, and


not now amid all the change and the unrest of time, can we
come to read with perfect clearness the true meaning of the
lives that we are living in the flesh —lives each of which is the
very embodiment—the incarnation of a thought of the Almighty
God. The endless difference there is between good and evil,
between the life of faith and a life of folly, between the fellow-
ship of God which is the secret of all true living, and the
slavery of sin which is the proper meaning of all false living,
cannot be fully shown amid all the infinite variety of change,
amid all the vanity and vexation of things that are seen and
temporal. Even that peace with God into which our faith
brings us must still mean a hard aud stern conflict with the
world and all its temptations, and finds its chief confirmation
in the thought that our oneness with a Heavenly Father will
be realized by-and-bye—yonder above where there shall be no
more any sin to tempt or any trouble to annoy, where nothing
unclean can enter and where God Himself shall have wiped
away the tears out of all eyes. Our walking with God here
below would lack the greater portion of all its comfort and its
confidence, if it were not for the assurance that He has an
Eternal Home to which He is guiding us.
Jesus could not have been the Saviour for us that He is, the
True and Only Reconciler of God and man, if He had not been
able to throw light for us upon the “ other side,” the future
that lies awaiting us after this mortal life and we have parted
company, as we soon must do; if He had not, to use the
Apostolic expression, “ brought life and immortality to light
by His gospel.” The message He had to bring to man—the
salvation He had to accomplish for men—could not perfect
themselves within the narrow bounds of time. He was the
Way by which men could come to the Fat hey. But the full
coming to the Father, to whatever extent it may be realized in
the believing heart here upon the earth, can be attained only
in a “ Father s house,” an actual home of our spirits, that lies


outside the world altogether. And hence it was one of His last
words to His Church ere He went away, “in my Father’s
house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told
you: Igo to prepare a place for you.” The Way therefore leads
to the home. If we are at peace with God now, we are taught
to expect that we shall be at home with Him by-and-bye.
“It it were not so” —if there were no Father and no
Father’s house for us—then, says Christ, “ I would have told
jou.” It was one of the grandest of all the grand and mar-
vellous words that He has spoken regarding that Eternity
which lies before us all. We want to be told , to have some
sort of knowledge and assurance regarding what may await us
after our course is run, after our pilgrimage here on the earth
is past. All is so dark for us. But here is One—a true Teacher
sent from God —who knows, who has come to tell us. He
brings good news to us--good news that reach through all
Eternity. To all those who trust in and follow after Him hero
He gives the assurance that there is an Eternal home provided
for them. But our eyes are dim and our souls are doubtful and
we are ready to ask, “How can these things be?” And He
turns to us and says, “Do you think I would deceive you, that
I would say any thing but the truth to you ?” “If it were not
so, I would have told you.”
A German writer has, in the form of a dream, tried to tell
us what Jesus would have had to tell us if things had been
“ not so.” He had laid himself down on a hillside in a summer
afternoon, fronting the sun that was now sloping down towards
its setting. Sleep had come upon him there, and dreams, and
in his dream, the writer sees himself in the God's-acre , the
place where the dead are lying. It is night and there is no sun
or star in the empty heaven. But the graves begin to open
around him and there are multitudes of bodiless shadows in
the air. All, save the children, who still sleep, leave their


coffins. Avalanches fall and the earth reels like a drunken
man. The church itself totters ; unclean beasts brood beside
the porch. And inside the shadows have gathered round the
altar and tremble, striking their hands upon empty breasts.
And the sublime form of Christ comes down upon the altar,
and the dead cry out in their pain, “ 0 Christ, is there no God;
and He with a pain greater than theirs, says, “ There is none.”
He has gone through all the worlds, the furthest suns, the
bleak wastes of space! and there is no God and no home for
the human spirit. He has called out, “ Where art Thou, 0
Father,” but there has been no answer. He has looked up
through all the Infinite of space to see the eye of Infinite Love,
but has beheld nothing but the dark, empty eye-socket. Eternity
lies upon Chaos ; God is not to be found. And the shadows of
the dead flee away in their terror, and then the children also
come up out of their graves before the Christ on the altar and
plead with Him, asking, “Jesus, have we no Father?” and
with streaming eyes, He has to say to them, “ No ; we are all
orphans, you and I; we have no Father.” And then the
dreamer tells us that he awoke ; and his soul wept for joy that
he could still pray to a Father in heaven. Around him the
whole world, in the peaceful summer gloaming, was rejoicing
in the feeling of a present God, even of Him Whom Jesus had
come to reveal, and to Whom Jesus has to bring us home.
If it were not so—if we were orphans, you and I—if there
were no Father and no home for the spirits that are within us,
then Christ says that He would have told us. However sad it
would have been for Him to say, and however terrible it would
have been for us to hear, He could not have withheld the truth
from us, if that had been true. But now the message He has
had to bring to us is of a very different sort. He is mean-
while leading us on homeward to the Father, and we
haye to think of Him also as waiting for us on the other side,
ready to welcome us into that glory into which He as our


Surety and Forerunner, lias already entered. Meanwhile we
have to feel ourselves strangers and pilgrims here upon the
earth. Our time here is to be short, our years here in the
world are to be few. A little while, and then our last breath
shall have been drawn, and our last pulse shall have beat, and
the solemn dark shall have fallen over the seeing eyes, and the
death-damps shall have gathered over the brow. We shall
have to bid farewell to the world and all its cares and concerns.
We shall be away outside the world altogether. The dead body
which we inhabited shall be lying behind us, laying on those
that survive us the duty of taking it and burying it safe
beneath the earth. But we ourselves —how is it to be then
with us ? Shall we then have got to be at home with the
Father Whom we have learnt to trust in here below ?
J. Summerscales, Bookseller and Publisher, Ballarat.




