

/\/
■ 7/




THE FEDERAL CAPITAL
DALCETY
CANBERRA:
WHICH ?
A PAPER
HEAD AT A PUBLIC MEETING (CONVENED
BY THE MAYOR) HELD AT QUEAN-
BEYAN ON 21th OF JULY, 1907, AND
ORDERED TO BE PRINTED.
HALE & KNOK, PRINTERS, QUEANBEYAN.




THE FEDERAL CAPITAL.
DALGETY OR CANBERRA:
WHICH ?
HE introduction recently into the House
/I | of Representatives of the Common-
ly j wealth Parliament of the Federal Ter-
ritory and Capital City Site Bill must
be accepted as evidence that at last the
long-deferred question is to be discussed and
decided. The preamble of the Bill seta out that
the Seat of Government and the territory shall
be in the neighbourhood of Dalgety, and the
the area of the latter about 900 square miles.
The schedule to the Bill defines that area. Hence
it is seen that the Federal Government has com-
mitted itself to the choice of Dalgety, regardless
of the wishes of New South Wales, from which
State the Federal territory is to be acquired. But
there are not wanting strong proofs that there is
a potent section of the Commonwealth Parliament
as now constituted opposed to that choice and
prepared to contest it. It is equally clear that
there is an overwhelming majority of the people,
including the members of the Government and of
the Parliament of this State, equally strongly
opposed to the Federal Government’s proposal;
both the latter and the dissenting members of
the Commonwealth Parliament being on the best
of grounds convinced that there far better sites
to be obtained than that described in the schedule
appended to the Federal Capital Site Bill now
before the Commonwealth Parliament.


This paper is written in advocacy ot one of such
preferable sites: that is, the proposed Federal
Territory and Federal Capital City Site of Quean-
beyan, an area of 100 square miles, as shown on
sketch map appended to the late Mr Commissioner
Oliver’s Eeport on Sites for the Seat of Govern-
ment ot the Commonwealth, extended to about
900 square miles (admitted by the late Mr Oliver
and others to be a not excessive area) by the in-
clusion of part of the extended Yass site and part
of county ot Cowley near Tharwa, commencin';
on the east bank ot the Muirumbidgee Riverami
embracing a large area of moderately-level coun-
try, with gentle undulations gradually ascending
to high ranges affording perfect shelter from tho
raw south and south-west winds.
The plea for the advocacy of this suggested
site rests on several grounds, viz.: —
(1) That it has been pronounced by many ot
the members of the Federal Parliament who have
seen it to be by far the best of all the sites they
have visited. (2) That it has the approval of
members of the State Government and Legisla-
ture and of officials of departments whose duties
have included the inspection and survey of tho
various sites. (3) That it has been deemed even
by Sir John Forrest as the only site approaching
Dalgety with any pretence of rivalry. (4) That
its location comes more reasonably within terri-
tory suggested by the prohibited 100-mile radius.
For further consideration of these points, it is
jiroposed to take the grounds of dissent in tho
order in which they are set down.
1. A not inconsiderable number of members of
both the House of Representatives and Senate of
the last, and several of the newly-elected mem-
bers ot the present Commonwealth Parliament,
who embraced opportunities of inspecting the
whole, or the greater part at least, ot the 23 pro-
posed sites, and are therefore qualified judges of
their respective merits, have given their opinion
that what is now better known as the Canberra
Federal Capital Site and territory is far and away
the best of them all in every essential feature, —
such as climatic and physical conditions, accessi-
bility, character ot neighbouring country having
regard to facilities for mineral products, capacity


to support a considerable population, and con-
ditions favourable to commercial and industrial
development.
2. Members of the State Governments, past
and present, who have either inspected Canberra
as one of the proposed sites, or from previous
knowledge of it, and have also personal acquaint-
ance with most of the other proposed sites, have
given unhesitating preference to Canberra. The
same opinions have been expressed by members
of the State Parliament and some of the depart-
mental engineers who have been sent to report on
the several sites. One of these in particular: said
to the writer: “ I think none of the other sites,
and I have inspected them all, can compare with
Canberra, taking into account all the required
conditions.”
3. Of course the Report of Sir John Forrest is
clearly hostile to Canberra, inasmuch as that ho
places Dalgcty first, compared with all the sites
ho visited. But when it is remembered that in
his recent minute he institutes comparisons as
between Canberra and Dalgety only, it is fairly
to be inferred that ho awards the former second
place in the strength of its claims for choice for
the Federal Capital.
This is a concession which justifies argument in
favour of its claims as against Dalgety. It is to
bo contended with every show of reason that Sir
John Forrest’s qualifications for instituting com-
parisons between Canberra and Dalgety are slight
indeed, and that his Report is in consequence
bristling with inaccuracies. That he is biassed
in favour of the Southern-Monaro site is manifest,
and that must be regarded as the natural conse-
quence of his loyalty to the Qovernmentof which
he is so distinguished a member. It must not bo
overlooked that Sir John’s only visit to the Can-
berra site, on 4th Juno last, consisted of a trip,
to and fro, of something like 42 miles, occupying
about 10 hours; that he could not therefore have
gone far off the beaten road, which includes no
points of elevation, and along only a few miles of
which the Federal City site is visible only from a
low-level point of view. One-half of his journey
lay through timbered country affording limited
landscape view, and at least two hours of the 10
must have been spent in inspecting some miles
upwards of the Cotter River, the terminal point
of his trip. Yet upon the slender information


thus acquired Sir John pros nines himself quail-
fiod to judge of tho relative merits of Dalgety
and Canberra as Federal territory sites.
It follows that proofs should bo adduced of the
alleged inaccuracies contained in Sir John For-
rest’s minute which would operate adversely to
the claims of Canberra. His Report ia based c.n
nine factors, every one of which is admittedly an
essential element to be looked for in a suitable
Capital city. These, as set out in the Report,
are—
Factor A. —To be distant from Sydney not less
than 100 miles, and to be in height not less than
1,500 feet above the sea. The first inaccuracy is
in Sir John Forrest’s statement that Canberra and
Dalgety equally fulfil the requirements under this
head. It Sir John means by this that distance
from Sydney is immaterial so long as the site is
outside the 100-mile radius, and the chosen area
as close to the borders of a neighbouring State as
it is possible to get, and as remotely as possible
from the prohibited radius, is as equally fulfilling
the condition as if the selection were of an area
just outside the 100-limit, then he is asking tho
public to accept an illogical absurdity. There is
no equality in the circumstances. It was no con-
dition ot federation that the Federal territory
should be as practicably as possible on or as near
to the borders ot another State, and the Federal
Capital city be as nearly as possible equi-distant
from the two greatest cities of the Commonwealth.
But it was a condition fairly implying thatof two
or more sites, in all respects equally suitable, the
nearest to the 100-mile radius should have pre-
ference.
Tho other feature associated with this factor is
elevation. This, too, is unfairly dealt with in tho
Report. While it is ccrrectly stated that the
altitude of the Canberra site is 1,000 feet abevo
the sea, pains have been taken to add the altitude
of Mount Ainsley and other neighbouring heights,
in order to magnify tho elevation of Canberra to
2,700 feet above tho sea. Then, omitting all ref-
erence to tho mountains and other elevations in
tho neighbourhood of Dalgety, its elevation above
sea level is given as 2,500 feet an advantage to
Dalgety, from a climatic point of view, of 200 ft.
This is plainly disingenuous. Why mention tho
elevations near to the Canberra site and omit all


reference to the elevations at Dalgety, and the
adding of them to the elevation of the city site
there ? Why not have simply set forth (which is
a matter of fact) that the Dalgety city site is
2,500 feet above the sea and that of Canberra
1,900 feet ?—the difference in favour of Canberra,
for climatic conditions, being 000 feet. What
becomes of the alleged equality in this feature
non* ?
Factor I!.—An abundant water supply from
perennial sources.—Sir John Forrest’s dictum
in regard to this factor, summed up, is to the
effect that, although a sufficient water supply
could be obtained for a moderate-sized city at
Canberra, it is not such a splendid supply as
exists on the Snowy Eiver for Dalgety. Is (ho
ease fairly stated here ? No one denies the vast
possibilities of the Snowy Eiver. It is not, how-
ever, a question of super-abundant supply, but of
sufficiency for domestic uses, for irrigation, for
conservation purposes —such as the creation of
larger expanses of water for recreation,sport,and
adornment; and, lastly, for power for electric
lighting and industrial purposes generally. If
Canberra cannot boast ot a Snowy Eiver, the
extended site here proposed includes the Mur-
rumbidgeo Eiver —second largest river in Aus-
tralia—with its many and considerable affluents,
some of them having their sources in the Alpine
ranges, spread like a network throughout the
proposed extended area, presenting in the
aggregate advantages in many respects equal, if
not superior, to those afforded by the Snowy
Eiver, their distribution facilitating supply for
all the possible uses mentioned, including ade-
quacy of power for the production ot electricity
and for mechanical purposes generally. We may
go further, and note the reasonable proximity to
Jiarrcn J.ack Weir, which Mr. Chief Engineer
Wade says can transmit 5,000 horse-power, at an
economical cost to Canberra, for lighting, tram-
way, and general purposes; and the natural
facilities at points actually within the proposed
area below the junction of the Murrumbidgee
with the Molonglo Eiver —presented for cheaply
constructing a concrete weir which, besides
furnishing additional power for electric purposes,
would create vast reaches of impounded water
within a few miles of the city site itself. The
same may bo said of the Molonglo Eiver near
Quoanbeyan, which alone would., provided witli a


sufficient storage reservoir, furnish water power
equal to the requirements of a city of 100,000
inhabitants. For water for ornamentation and
irrigation purposes, contrary to Sir John Forrest’s
statement,(the presence of considerable creeks, in
addition to the Molonglo Eiver below its junction
with the Qucanbcyan Eiver, . traversing the
undulations of the plains north and south of the
Canberra Federal City site, suggest numbers of
localities for impounding large sheets of water
for the purposes of embellishment and sports.
The cost of water supply by gravitation has been
greatly over-estimated by Sir John Forrest.
For example, ho gives the length of pipe from
the Cotter Eiver to the service reservoir at
Canberra as thirty miles. Of course, the exact
length of mileage would depend on the position
of the storage reservoir on the Cotter Eiver. But,
allowing that, for the purpose of sufficient fall,
to be six miles up from the river’s confluence with
the Murrurabidgee, the extreme distance cannot
exceed 20 miles. This source alone can, accord-
ing to Mr. Weeden’s report, supply sufficient
water—soft, clear, and free of silt or organic
matter held in solution—for a city of a quarter of
million of population. It the contribution of the
Gudgenby Biver’s supply (of water equal to that
of the Cotter) be at any future time required, it
can be brought on to the southern boundary of
the Canberra Federal territory at a cost of about
seven or eight miles of pipe, and extended to the
service reservoir at Canberra by less than thirty
miles of pipe from its storage reservoir.
Factor C —Good climate summer and winter.
—Sir John Forrest avers that in these respects
there is much similarity between the two sites
under comparison, and he quotes rainfall and
temperature statistics to support his statement,
adding that, “ though with the information
before him it is impossible to say wfiether one
has any advantage over the other, probably
Canberra is a little milder than Dalgety in
winter, and a little hotter in summer.” Sir
John omits, however, all reference to the length
of the winters in the respective localities and
their humidity. This it is the object of this
paper to supply. The real winter months—if wo
may call winter weather winter months—at
Dalgety are at least five in number; while those
at Canberra never exceed three (May, Juno and
July.) The late Mr. Commissioner Oliver never


Spring ...
55.0
40.0
Summer...
(31.1
03.1
Autumn...
50.1
08.9
Winter ...
43.0
50.0
had Dalgety under review As a Federal Capital
site it has been born out of duo season. But
from his statistics wo take the following average
climatic conditions of the Bombala-Eden
(southern Monaro) site, part of which is included
in the recently-proclaimed Dalgety Federal
territory, and those of Queanbeyan (Canberra)
Bombala Queanbeyan
Those statistics support our contention as to
the extent to which the spring and autumn
months in the Canberra territory show to ad-
vantage over the same periods of the year in the
Dalgety territory.
Again, as to atmospheric conditions : Dalgety,
like other parts of Monaro, is well known for the
frequency, density, and long duration of its fogs;
while such meteorological conditions aro of rare
occurrence in the Canberra territory, where even
the air of winter is for the greater part dry and
crisp.
Factor D.—Accessibility by rail from Sydney
and Melbourne.— Reckoning by existing railway
lines, Dalgety is 30 miles south of the nearest
terminus (Cooma); Canberra, eight miles from
Queanbeyan railway station. Taking possible
extensions into account, the construction of a line
from Ccoma to Bairnsdalo would pass through
Dalgety in the event of its being the determined
site, just as the construction of a loop-line from
Yass to Queanbeyan would confer a like advant-
age on Canberra. With what result ? the bring-
ing of Canberra within 43G miles of Melbourne
and 223 miles of Sydney, via Yass. Dalgety,
however, would, with the advantage of the Yass-
Queanbeyan Icop-lino, bo 544 miles (an excess in
distance of 109 miles) from Melbourne, and 290
miles from Sydney. Sir John Forrest’s figures
include the distance of Dalgety from Melbourne,
via Bairnsdale, 303 miles, or 91 miles less than
the route via Albury and Yass. But no railway
statistics affecting the alternative line to Mel-
bourne, via Monaro and Gippsland, give a saving
of anything like 91 miles only halt that dis-
tance or little more.


Factor E. Great water-power for electric-
lighting and power, and other applications of
electricity.—Sir John Forrest’s minute dismisses
this factor as “ not worth considering when Can-
berra’s resources are compared with those of
Dalgety.” Our answer to tins assertion, and its
complete refutation, will bo found in statements
in our treatment of Factor B.
Factor F. "Water frontage for recreation,
sport, and beauty ; good approach ; and comman-
ding view.—To quote Sir John Forrest’s Report:
“ Canberra is distinctly inferior to Dalgety under
this heading. It has no water frontage except
the Molonglo River, which is almost dry in sum-
mer. . . There could not bo any large expanse
of water for boating, etc., without immense ex-
penditure.” Here, again, there is an attempt to
belittle the facts. Mr Chief-Engineer Wade tells
us that the Barren Jack scheme will result in a
magnificent inland lake within reasonable dis-
tance of Canberra Capital City site a pleasure
resort where boating, yachting, etc., can be in-
dulged in, almost as large as Sydney Harbour,
with easy means of access to feeder streams amply
stocked with trout and other kinds of fish. A
weir of very modest pretensions would, if erected
in the vicinity of the Black Hill, or nearer still to
Canberra, createa sheet of water intersecting the
city site itself, and extending through the adja-
cent plains for several miles, which in the worst
of our droughtcycles (when only does the Molon-
glo River diminish in its flow, and not with every
summer as is alleged) would only triflingly shrink
by evaporation. As proof of this assertion, such
a weir has been constructed at Queanbeyan, above
the confluence of that river with the Molonglo,
and although only 10 feet high impounds a reach
of nearly two miles of deep, broad boating water,
and through a period of more than six years of
severe drought its water has only rarely ceased
to flow over the weir wall. Its total cost was less
than .£2,000 a mere bagatelle for the results
produced. A similar weir, at the point indicated,
would arrest the additional inflow of the Molon-
glo River and three considerable creeks, enough
to yield permanent supply to the miles of water
frontage it would create at, and in view of, the
Canberra city site. How, then, does Sir John
Forrest account for the“ immense expenditure ” ?
Will there be no great expenditure in the artifi-
cial creation of the 10 miles of boating water he


talks of as the one possibility, in tbo wayof boat-
ing facilities, at Dalgety ? And why confine his
attention to the city site itself ? As it has already
been shown, many an ornamental sheet of water,
of no mean pretensions, can bo inexpensively cre-
ated on Canberra Plains within actual view of the
city site. But it is only fair to go further afield.
Why this reticence as to water frontages else-
where within the suggested Canberra Federal
territory ? A glance at the map appended to Mr
Commissioner Oliver’s Report on the Queanbeyan
site shows a length of 15 miles along the Mur-
rumbidgee River as part of the territory’s west
boundary. The modified area suggested in this
paper extends westerly into the county of Cowley
from the banks of this magnificent river for at
least an equal length. Just over the Mugga
Mugga Range, which divides the Tuggranong or
Waniassa Plains from those of Canberra and Pi-
nligo orMajura to the eastwards, there are grand
facilities for the multiplication of inland sheets
of water of expansive area, in addition to those
indicated near Canberra. We have already men-
tioned the proximity of Canberra to the head
waters of that great national undertaking the
Barren Jack Weir; and the practicability of im-
pounding the waters of the Murrumbidgee, the
Cotter, the Gudgenby, and the Molonglo Rivers,
just below the junction of the last-named stream
with the Murrumbidgee, at a point where, as at
Barren Jack, natural formation has minimised
the costliness of the work of weir-building. In
every instance hero named there are “ the good
approach, the beauty, and commanding view”
which Sir John Forrest declares to bo non-exis-
tant. Even nature’s “ commanding views,” un-
aided by art or skill, throughout, and for miles
beyond this area, have excited the admiration of
travellers over since the district became settled—
all of whom have declared that inland, through-
out Now South Wales there is nothing to equal
them. It was Sir John’s misfortune to traverse
the only route where, as he says, “ the site is not
visible till you get near to it, while the view'from
it is not commanding.” Had he ascended the
slopes of Mount Ainsley or the elevations of the
Mugga Mugga Range, as previous Parliamentary
visitors have done, ho would have borne different
testimony. With reference to '■these and other
commanding views and objects of paramount in-
terest it is the intention of this paper to treat
(under Factor I), and to refute the statement


that " there are no great remarkable features
which would specially qualify Canberra for selec-
tion as a site for the great Federal City.”
Factor G.—Commanding sites for public buil-
dings.—Granting, for the sake of argument, that
Canberra may be interior to Dalgety in this re-
spect, as is alleged by Sir John Forrest, he is open
to challenge as to the accuracy of his statement
in detail. He saw (indeed, from his view-point
he could only see) the spurs of Mount Ainsley,
and no other rising ground suitable for public
buildings. As a matter of fact, the topography
of the country around Canberra (which is not the
“ level, grassy plain ” as described by Sir John)
affords scores of magnificent elevations suitable
for public edifices, while the western slopes of
Mugga Mugga Range and the picturesque Yarra-
lumla estate around its homestead, present as
many splendid sites for private or official struc-
tures, surrounded by ample undulating areas
designed by nature tor landscape gardening, and
other ornamentation.
Factor H.—Fertile territory and other natural
resources surrounding and adjacent to Capital
site. —Sir John Forrest’s minute concedes equality
between the rival sites in these respects. Our
contention is, superiority in respect to Canberra.
The difference in altitude and temperature, and
the greater lengths of the seasons favourable to
growth, not only cause greater fertility, but con-
ditions favourable to the production of semi-tro-
pical fruits which, though successfully grown at
Canberra, cannot be produced anywhere on Mo-
naro, and especially within the Dalgety Federal
territory. In the vicinity of Canberra there is
enough land to supply the wants of the Capital
with such necessary food products as cannot well
be brought from a distance. The meat, milk,
butter, grapes, apples, potatoes, and other fruits
and rootcrops raised or grown in the surrounding
district cannot be surpassed in any part of Aus-
tralia; while all the English fruits and flowers are
at home, and those that make the South of Fiance
to be so attractive come to perfection here. Offi-
cial reports estimate that within twenty miles of
Canberra there are upwards of 100,000 acres
available for cultivation.


Factor I.—Surrounding and adjacent scenery,
with great natural features, and within conveni-
ent distance.—“ Canberra is distinctly inferior to
Dalgety under this heading,” is the opinion of
Sir John Forrest; and ho supports that opinion
by claiming that the Snowy Hirer and the Snowy
Mountains, with Kosciusko, 7,238 feet above sea-
level, are within 40 miles of Dalgoty, and that
electric tramways could bo utilised to reach them.
On the other hand, he asserts that “ there is no-
thing of particular importance in either scenery
or great natural features at Canberra.” If Sir
John means within the city boundary of Canberra,
same may bo said of the Soutliern-Monaro city.
Is there anything in the form of great natural
features or scenery at Dalgoty except the Snowy
River ? Sir John has to go 40 miles to find them,
in the Snowy Mountains and the giant Kosciusko.
Within far shorter range from Canberra exist,
not one or two, as instanced by Sir John Forrest,
but scores of natural features of wonderful inter-
est. If Canberra has not a Kosciusko within 40
miles (though the “ Roof of Australia ” is not
twice that distance from Canberra), it has within
a day’s ride mountains of majestic proportions,
including Coree —sister mountain to Kosciusko —
whoso peak is little less than 0,000 feet above the
sea, and such other hoary giants as Tennant and
Tidbinbilla, nearer still. No more expansive, no
more sublime landscape view is there anywhere
in Now South Wales than tint afforded at a point
on the Drindabella road, and within 300 feet of
Coree’s peak. Here the tourist views, without
obstruction, westwards, a stretch of wild, moun-
tainous country, billowy as a storm-tossed sea,
extending far beyond Tumut and the county of
Wynyard; while, eastwards, lie outstretched
plains, intersected by bolts of wooded country,
which cannot fail to delight the rye, extending
almost, if not quite, to the sea-board itself ; and,
northwards again, the like scenery, stretching far
away beyond Yass, Downing, and the Abercrombie
Ranges. Can Dalgoty compare with this ? Near
to Canberra—from the Yass-road near Hall, from
Mount Ainsley, the Black Hill, and the Mugga
Mugga Range—wide-spreading and enchantingly
beautiful landscape view's —an outlook limited
only by the Alpine heights westwards and south-
wards—are to bo obtained. Close at hand are the
magnificent Gininderra Falls; a little farther on
the stupendous Cutter Falls, presenting a sheer
unbroken descent to the plateau below of from


1,200 to 1,500 feet. In addition to these are other
smaller waterfalls on the Molonglo and Quean-
bcyan Eivers, with many a grand cascade in the
course of these streams and the Murrumbidgee.
In the deep, dark gullies over the Murrumbidgee
and close at hand are fairy-like avenues of tree-
ferns, under whoso giant fronds, as beneath a
canopy, horsemen rde with ease. Somewhat far-
ther distant, but still much nearer to Canberra
than the 40 miles which stretch between Dalgety
and its few objects of interest, are Lake George
(the largest lake in Australia) and Lake Bathurst.
While, southwards, and nearer still, is the curious
freak of nature known as London Bridge, over
whose broad and level roadway vehicles can pass
each other at a height of 50 feet or more from
the stream flowing underneath. Beyond all these
are multitudes of minor physical features of un-
challengeable beauty in every direction around
Canberra. Of the existence of these Sir John
Forrest evidently knew nothing all of them
to be reached by shorter journeys and with
greater ease by road or tramway than is the case
at Dalgety.
It may be observed just here that Senator Sir
Josiah Symons was not aware that Canberra—
embracing the beautiful Duntroon estate pos-
sessed all these natural attractions and facilities
for the creation of a great city when he said a
year ago that ho doubted whether a more ideal
spot could be found in the world, and that if it
was accepted by the Commonwealth it would not
only bo the show-place of Australia, but would
attract tourists from other lands.
Closely allied to picturesque scenery and natu-
ral objects of paramount charm and beauty, are
such manly fleldsports as hunting, shooting, and
fishing. Game is everywhere plentiful. Besides
kangaroo, wallaroo, and wallaby of many sorts,
the wombat has its haunts hereabouts —to say
nothing of the übiquitous rabbit, hare and fox.
We may even include the stately deer which are
already in considerable numbers on the park-like
uplands fringeing Lake George. Birds of game
include the beautiful lyre-bird, brush and plains
turkey, curlew and plover, and, in their season,
snipe and quail ; wild-duek, teal, swan, redbill,
water-hen, and other aquatic fowl; so that em-
ployment for the gun can always be depended on.
As for the rod, the Qucanbeyan district stands an


easy first—albeit the fame of the Snowy Hirer—
for its trout (that garaest of our fresh-water
fishes) and its trout-streams, and the princely
Murray-cod, the bream and the perch (indigenous
and English), to which will shortly bo added the
handsome English roach.
4. The fourth and last ground of dissent has
already been argued under Factor A.
There is one essential qualification fora Federal
Capital City which, somehow or other. Sir John
Forrest has quite overlooked : that is, what, in his
list of physical requirements, the late Mr Oliver
mentions as “ the possession of, or proximity to,
stone, timber, and other building material.” The
importance of these can hardly be over-rated.
Whatever may bo claimed by Dalgety in these
respects, so far as concerns its building timber,
that will have to bo brought from long distances
—probably by sea, via Twofold Bay; while Can-
berra has on the spot or within easy access every
kind of building material of superior quality.
Just across the adjacent Murrumbidgee Biver
there are hundreds of square miles of the very
best of hardwoods for building and other uses ;
while on and immediately around the city site
itself are inexhaustible beds of granite, limestone
and freestone, with quarries of marble and slate,
and extensive bods of fine clays and sand ; so
that for the highest styles of architecture, little,
if any building material will have to be brought
from far.
If access to sea-board bo a sine qua non—con-
cerning which there is a diversity of opinion—
the port of Merimbula is nearer to Canberra,
and through country of easier grade, than Two-
fold Bay is to Dalgety, and at much less cost can
be made to afford ample shelter and anchorage
for the requirements of a Federal Capital City.
To sum up: We have shown that in every
essential factor Canberra stands unrivalled. It
possesses water supply for all possible require-
ments ; in summer and winter its climate has all
the desirable conditions; in accessibility it has
decided advantages over Dalgety ; in fertility of
soil and hygienic conditions nothing is left to bo
desired; its possession of stone, timbers, clays.


and other mineral deposits are close at hand and
inexhaustible ; and its scenic charms and natural
objects of interest are unique and wondrously
varied. It is almost impossible to conceive of a
site more perfect in all its essentials, where nei-
ther great heat nor cold is often experienced, or
in such an altitude snow and fog so rare, or a
climate more free from the rawness so common at
such elevations. One cannot contrast the meteo-
rological conditions obtaining here with the cold
cutting winds and dank and enduring fogs of
Southern Monaro without a strong conviction of
the justice of the claim of Canberra to fair, ex-
haustive and impartial consideration at the hands
of the Commonwealth Parliament. Here the
clear and over-flowing Jlurrumbidgce sparkles
through our splendid site and brightens it; hero
our stupendous Alps slacken the cold blasts from
the west and south and refresh the eye with their
over-varying aspects; while the balmy, but fresh
and invigorating air gives such health and vigor
as to cause work to be easy, appetite sharp, and
sleep certain.
For sporting purposes, also, this locality has
been shown to possess great advantages. A
national Park as large as, and infinitely wilder
than either of those which Sydney possesses, and
in which zoological specimens could bo kept in
conditions adapted to their natural habits, could
be created without impoverishing the State.
Fishing, too, can bo had in abundance ; and the
advantages of this exciting and beguiling sport
are increasing as the beautiful and dashing trout
is becoming more and more plentiful every year
in all the rivers and streams of the district.
For excursions, the attractions which are acces-
sible are numerous. Within a day’s drive a
drive through such mountains and wild scenery
as many travel hundreds of miles to see —are the
vast and still unexplored caves of Coolamon;
while the better-known caves of Yarrangobilly
are only some dozen miles further on. At Coola-
mon, also, can be seen the phenomenon of a river
which disappears and runs under ground—doubt-
less, through a series of unknown stalactic caves
—from which it emerges as the wild aud dashing
Goobradigbee. In another direction. Lake George
so varied in its aspects will often be worth
visiting; while a climb to the summits of Corce,
Tidbinbilla, and Tennant will make pleasant and


exhilarating many a day’s outing (within easy
reach of the entire Commonwealth) without in-
curring the extra expense and toil involved in a
journey of upwards of a hundred miles further
to reach Dalgety with its proved inferiority in
many respects to the site of the Federal territory
and Capital City of Canberra, with its historical
associations, dating back to the early days of the
colonization of New South Wales.
♦a* ♦s» «$♦
GALE & KNOX, PRINTERS, QUEANBEYAN,
