

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
MAURITIUS
THE CO-OPERATIVE CREDIT
SOCIETIES ORDINANCES
4 of 1913, 25 of 1915, 13 of 1916 and 6 of 1924
TOGETHER WITH
CONSOLIDATED RULES
MADE UNDER ARTICLE 31 OF ORD. 1 OF 1913
PORT LOUIS
THE GOVERNMENT PRESS
1924




ORDINANCE No. 4 OF 1913
AN ORDINANCE
Enacted by the Governor of Mauritius, with the advice and
consent of the Council of Government thereof
To provide for the constitution and control of
Co-operative Credit Societies
* I assent,
J. R. CHANCELLOR,
Governor.
1 2th July, 1913.
WHEREAS it is expedient to encourage thrift, self-help, and
co-operation among agriculturists, artisans, and persons of limited
means, and for that purpose to provide for the constitution and control
of co-operative credit societies :
BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Governor, with the
advice and consent of the Council of Government, as follows :
Preliminary
Definitions. 1. In this Ordinance, unless there is anything repugnant
in the subject or context —
(а) Bye-law” means a rule made by a society in the exercise of
any power conferred by this Ordinance, or by any rule made under
this Ordinance;
(б) Committee ” means the governing body of a society to whom
the managenent of its affairs is entrusted ;
(c) Member ” includes a person joining in the application for
the registration of a society, and a person admitted to memberships,
after registration in accordance with the bye-laws and any rules
made under this Ordinance ;
(d) Officer ” includes a chairman, secretary, treasurer, member
of committee, or other person empowered under the rules applying
to any society or the bye-laws thereof to give directions in regard
to the business of the society;
(e) Registrar ” means a person appointed to perform the duties
of a registrar of co-operative credit societies under this Ordinance ;
and
(/)“ Society ” means a co-operative credit society registered
under this Ordinance.
Constitution
Constitution of 2. —(1) A society shall consist of ten or more persons
Societies. 0 f a g e residing in the same locality provided that, with
the sanction of the Registrar, any person residing outside the locality for
which a society is formed may be admitted as a member.


(2) When any question arises as to the residence of any person for
the purposes of this Ordinance, the same shall be decided by the
Registrar, whose decision shall be final.
Members of society. 3. The members of a society shall be :
(а) Person joining in the application mentioned in article 5,
paragraph (1), and registered as a society under paragraph (2), of
the same article ;
(б) Persons qualified in accordance with the requirements of
article 2 and admitted by the society in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance and with the bye-laws of the society.
Provided that a person so admitted shall not exercise the rights of
a member, unless or until he has made such payment to the society in
respect of membership, or acquired such interest in the society as may
be prescribed by the rules made under this Ordinance or by the bye-laws
of the society.
Registration
to°r er irit GoVerilor overnor ma 7 appoint a person to be Registrar
Registrar. of co-operative credit societies.
hico^oranotfof 1 -^- n y ten or more persons qualified in
Societies. 3 10n ° accordance with the requirements of article 2, and agreeing
each to make such payment or acquire such interest as
aforesaid, may apply to the Registrar to be registered as a society, and
the persons by whom or on whose behalf such application is made shall
furnish such information in regard to the proposed society as the
Registrar may require.
(2) If the Registrar is satisfied that the persons proposing to form a
society are qualified in accordance with the requirements of article 2,
and have complied with the provisions of this Ordinance and with the
rules made hereunder, he may, if he thinks fit, register the society
accordingly, and the society shall thereupon become and be a body
corporate by the name under which it is registered, with perpetual
succession and a common seal, and with power to hold property movable
or immovable, to enter into contracts, to institute and defend civil suits
and to do all things necessary for the puposes of its constitution.
(3) Every society shall have an address registered in accordance
with the rules made under this Ordinance, to which all notices and
communications may be sent.
(4) If the liability of the members of a society is limited, the word
“ limited ” shall be added to the registered name of the society.
(5) No charge shall be made for registration under this article.
(6) A certificate of registration signed by the Registrar shall be
conclusive evidence that the society therein mentioned is duly registered
unless it is proved that the registration of the society has been cancelled.
byelawsT/^ the N° amen dment of the bye-laws of a society
Society. shall be valid until the same has been registered under
this Ordinance, for which purpose a copy of the
amendment shall be forwarded to the registrar,
2


(2) If the Registrar is satisfied that any amendment of the bye-laws
is not contrary to this Ordinance or to the rules, he may, if he thinks
fit, register the amendment.
(3) When the Registrar registers an amendment of the bye-laws for
a society, he shall issue to the society a copy of the amendment certified
by him, which shall be conclusive evidence that the same is duly
registered.
Liability of 7, The liability of each member of a society shall be
unlimited or limited, as may be provided by the bye-laws
Or by any rules made under this Ordinance.
Disposal of profits. g, The capital of a society shall not be distributed
among the members by way of bonus or dividend or in any other manner.
Provided that after crediting one-fourth of the net amount profits to the
reserve fund the remaining annual nett profit may be distributed by
way of dividend subject to any restrictions laid down in the bye-laws or
rules made under this Ordinance.
Restrictions on 9, A society may receive deposits from members
borrowing, without restriction, but it may borrow from persons who
are not members only to such extent and under such conditions as may
be provided by its bye-laws or by rules made under this Ordinance.
Restrictions on 10. —(1) A society shall make no loan to any person
loans ' other than a member ; Provided that, with the consent of
the registrar, a society may make loans to another society.
(2) Save with the permission of the registrar, to be given by general
order in the case of each society, a society shall not lend money in the
security of movable property.
(3) The Governor in Executive Council may, by general or special
order, prohibit or restrict the lending of money on mortgage of immov-
able property or any kind thereof by am>- society.
Restrictions on 11. Save as provided in articles 9 and 10, the
transactions of a society with persons other than members
shall be subject to such prohibitions and restrictions, if
any, as the Governor in Executive Council may by rules, prescribe.
Deposit of society’s 12. A society may deposit its funds in the Government
Savings Bank or with any banker or person acting as a
banker approved for this purpose by the registrar.
Shares and Interest of Members
Limit on capital 13. Where the liability of the members of a society is
aeld y members, United by shares, a member shall not hold more than
such portion of the capital of the society, subject to a maximum of one
fifth as may be prescribed by any rules made under this Ordinance :
Provided that no member of such a society shall hold more shares than
represent a nominal value of one thousand Rupees (Rs. 1,000).
Votes of members. 14—(i) Where the liability of the members of a society
is not limited by shares, each member shall, notwithstanding the amount


of his interest in the capital, only Lave one vote as a member in the
affairs of the society.
(2) Where the liability of the members of a society is limited by
shares, each member shall have as many votes as may be prescribed by
the bye-laws of the society.
Restrictions on 15. —(1) A member shall not transfer any share held
transier oi siiar© or -i -i • i • • . . • .i •.in-i •
interest. by illm or his interest in the capital of the society or
any part thereof, unless he has held such share or
interest for one year at least.
(2) The share or interest of a member in the capital of a society
shall not be transferred or charged, except to the society’or to a member
of a society, and subject to any conditions as to maximum holding
prescribed by this Ordinance or by the bye-laws or by any rules made
under this Ordinance.
noUkble to ter6St Subject to the provisions of article 21, the share
attachment 0 or interest of a member in the capital of a society shall not
be liable to attachment or sale under any decree of a
court in respect of any debt or liability incurred by such member, and
neither his assignee in insolvency under Ordinance No. 23 of 1856 as
amended by Ordinance No. 12 of 1896 nor the trustee appointed under
Ordinance No. 23 of 1887 shall be entitled to, or have any claim on,
such share of interest.
Transfer of interest 17.—(1) On the death of a member a society may
on death of member. , r A n • , , n f J
transfer the share or interest of the deceased member to
the person nominated in accordance with the rules made in this behalf,
or, if there is no person so nominated, to such person as may appear
to the committee to be the heir or legal representative of the deceased
member, or pay to such nominee, heir or legal representative, as the
case may be, a sum representing the value of such member’s share or
interest as ascertained in accordance with the rules or bye-laws ;
Provided that —
(а) In the case of a society with unlimited liability, such nominee
heir or legal representative, as the case may be, may require payment by
the society of the value of the share or interest of the deceased member
ascertained as aforesaid ;
(б) In the case of a society with limited liability, the society shall
transfer the share or interest of the deceased member to such nominee
heir or legal representative, as the case may be, being qualified in
accordance with the rules and bye-laws for membership of the society
or on his application within one month of the death of the deceased
member to any person specified in the application who is so qualified ;
(2) A society may pay all other moneys due to the deceased member
from the society to such nominee, heir or legal representative, as the
case may be;
(3) All transfers and payments made by a society in accordance
with the provisions of this article shall be valid and effectual against
any demand made upon the society by any other person.
4


Liability of past 18. The liability of a past member for the debts of
tbe society, as they existed at the time when he ceased to
be a member, shall continue for a period of one year from the date of
his ceasing to be a member.
Liability of the 19. The estate of a deceased member shall be liable
members <leceased for a period of one year from the time of his decease for
the debts of the society, as they existed at the time of his
decease.
Priority of Society’s Claim against a Member
Priority of claim of 20. Subject to the prior claims of the Government on
cro|»Agricultural the property of its debtors and of landlords in respect of
produce, cattle rent, or any money recoverable as rent, subject also to
implements and t p e un paid vendors’ privilege, a society shall be entitled
law matena ' in priority to other creditors, to enforce its claim. —
(a) Upon the crops or other agricultural produce of a member or
past member, at any time within two years from the date when
manure was advanced, or money for the purchase of manure or for
the purpose of cultivation was lent to such member or past member
in, respect of the unpaid portion of such advance or loan ;
Nothing in this article shall affect the rights of a mortgage
under a mortgage inscribed at the date of the coming into force of
this Ordinance.
(6) Upon any cattle, agricultural or industrial implements, or
raw material for manufactures supplied by the society or purchased
in whole or in part with money lent by the society, in respect
of the outstanding liability on account of such supply or loan ;
Anything in the Civil Code to the contrary notwithstanding.
charge and set off 21. A society shall have a charge upon the shares or
in respect of shares j n^erest i n capital and on the deposits of a member or
or interest ot r . . , r , , £
members. past member and upon any dividend, bonus, or profits
payable to a member or past member in respect of any debt due from
such member or past member to the society, and may set off any sum
credited or payable to a member or past member in or towards payment
of any such debt.
Audit Inspection and Inquiry.
Audit inspection 22. —(1) ' :i: 'The Registrar shall audit the accounts of
and inquiry. eac b goc j once l eas t in every year.
(2) No charge shall be made in respect of any audit made under
paragraph (1).
(3) The audit under paragraph (1) shall include an examination of
overdue debts if any, and a valuation of the assets and liabilities of the
society.
(4) The Registrar, or any person authorised in this behalf by the
registrar may at any time inspect the books, accounts, papers amd
securities of a society, and every officer shall furnish such information
in regard to the transactions and working of the society as the person
making such inspection shall require.
* Repealed. See Ordinance 25 of 1915 below.
5


(5) The Registrar may of bis own motion, and shall on the application
of a majority of the committee, or of not less than one-third of the
members, hold an inquiry into the constitution, working and financial
condition of a society, and all officers and members of the society shall
furnish such information in regard to the affairs of the society as the
Registrar may require.
(6) Where an inquiry is held under paragraph (5), the Registrar
may apportion the costs, or such part of the costs, as he may think right,
between the society, the members demanding an inquiry, and the officers
or former officers of the society,
(7) Any sum awarded by way of costs under paragraph (6) may be
recovered on application to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place
where the person from whom the money is claimable resides for the
time being by the distress and sale of any moveable property, within the
limits of the jurisdiction of such magistrate, belonging to such person.
Copy of Ordinance 23. Every society shall keep a copy of this Ordinance
to be op^n b to ' laWS ’ an( l t^le m les governing such society, and of its
inspection. bye-laws, open to inspection free of charge at all
reasonable times at the registered address of the society.
Regi f' rs° f 24. Any register or list of members or shares kept by
any society shall be prima facie evidence of any of the
following particulars entered therein
(а) the date at which the name of any person was entered in
such register or list as a member;
(б) the date at which any such person ceased to be a member.
Mode of prodf of ; 25. A copy of any entry in a book of a society
books 8 m S ° CietieS r Pg u l ar ly kept in the course of business shall, if certified
in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made
under this Ordinance, be received in any suit to recover a debt due to
the society as prima facie evidence of the existence of such entry, and
shall be admitted as evidence of the matters, transactions and accounts
therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent as, the
original entry itself is now by law admissible, but no further or otherwise.
Inspection of books 26. —(1) The Registrar shall, on the application of a
of indebted society. re( j- tor () £ a inspect or direct some person
authorised by him by order in writing in this behalf to inspect the
books of the society.
Provided that: —
(a) the applicant satisfies the Registrar that the debt is a sum
then due, and that he has demanded payment thereof and has not
received satisfacfion within a reasonable time ; and
(h) the applicant deposits with the Registrar such sum as security
for the costs of the proposed inspection as the Registrar may require.
(2) The Registrar shall communicate the results of any such
inspection to the creditor.


Dissolution of a Society
Dissolution. *27. —(1) If the Registrar, after holding an inquiry
under article 22, paragraph (5), or on receipt of an application made
by three fourths of the members of a society, is of opinion that a society
ought to be dissolved, he may cancel or may refuse to cancel the
registration of the society.
(2) Any member of a society may, within two months from the date
of an order under paragraph (1), appeal from such order to the
Governor in Executive Council.
(3) Where no appeal is presented within two months from the
making of an order cancelling the registration of a society, the order
shall take effect on the expiry of that period. Where an appeal is
presented within two months, the order shall not take effect until it is
confirmed by the Governor in Executive Council.
(4) Where an order made under paragraph (1), cancelling the
registration of a society takes effect, the society shall cease to exist as a
corporate body.
Cancellation of 28. —(1) Where the registration of a society is
cancelled under article 27, the Registrar may appoint
a competent person to be a liquidator of the society.
(2) A liquidator appointed under paragraph (1) shall have power to
institute and defend suits on behalf of the society by his name of office,
and shall also have power —
(a) To sue for and recover any sums due to the society at the
date of such cancellation;
(h) To determine the contribution to be made by the members
and past members of the society respectively to the assets of the
society;
(c) To investigate all claims against the society, and subject to
the provisions of this Ordinance, to decide questions of priority
arising between claimants;
(d) To determine by what persons and in what proportions the
costs of the liquidation are to be borne ; and
(e) To give such directions in regard to the collection and
distribution of the assets of the society as may appear to him to be
necessary for winding up the affairs of the society.
(3) Subject to any rules of procedure made under this Ordinance, a
liquidator appointed under this article shall, in so far as such powers
are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article, have power
to summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses, and to compel the
production of documents by the same means, and (so far as may be) in
the same manner as is provided in the case of a District Court under
the District Courts Constitution Ordinance No. 21 of 1888.
(4) The rules may provide for an appeal to a District Court from
any order made by a liquidator under this article.
(5) Orders made under this article may be enforced as follows :
(a) When made by a liquidator, by any Civil Court having local
jurisdiction, in the same manner as the decree of such court;
* Repealed. See Ordinance 25 of 1915 below.


(6) When made by a District Court, in the matter of any such
appeal as aforesaid in the same manner as a decree of such court
made in any suit pending therein.
(6) Save in so far as hereinbefore expressly provided, no Civil Court
shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter connected with the
dissolution of a society under this Ordinance.
Exemptions from Taxation.
Power to exempt 29. —(1) The Governor in Executive Council by
InTreglstratloif Proclamation in the Government Gazette may, in the case
fees. of any society, remit —
(а) The stamp dut} 7 with which, under any law for the time
being in force, instruments executed by or on behalf of a society, or
by an officer or member, and relating to the business of such
society, or any class of such instruments are respectively chargeable ;
(б) Any fee payable under the law of registration for the time
being in force.
(2) A notification exempting any society from the fees referred to
in paragraph (1), sub-paragraph (b), may provide for the withdrawal of
such exemption.
Debts due to Government.
Recovery of sums 30. — (1) All sums due from a society, or from an
due to Government. o £Q cer or mem b e r or past member of a society as such, to
the Government including any costs awarded to the Government, under
article 22, paragraph (6), may be recovered in manner provided for the
recovery of Crown debts by Ordinances Nos. 16 of 1876 and 13 of 1881.
(2) Sums due from a society to Government and recoverable under
paragraph (1) may be recovered, firstly, from the property of the society,
secondly, in the case of a society of which the liability of the members
is limited, from the members, subject to the limit of their liability ; and
thirdly, in the case of other societies, from the members.
Rules.
Ru^es- 31. —(1) The Governor in Executive Council may,
for any society make rules to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may —
(а) Prescribe the forms to be used in applying for the registration
of a society and the procedure in the matter of such applications;
(б) Prescribe the conditions to be complied with by persons
applying for registration and by persons applying for admission or
admitted as members, and provide for the election and admission
of members from time to time and the amount of payment to be
made and interests to be acquired before exercising rights of
membership ;
(c) Provide for the withdrawal and expulsion of members, and
for the payments to be made to members to withdraw or are
expelled, and for the liabilities of past members ;
8


(d) Provide for the mode in which the value of a deceased
member’s interests shall be ascertained, and for the nomination of
a person to whom such interest may be paid or transferred ;
(e) Subject to the provisions of article 13, prescribe the maximum
number of shares or portion of the capital of a society which may
be held by a member ;
(/) Prescribe the payments to be made and the conditions to be
complied with by members applying for loans, the period for which
loans may be made and the amount which may be lent to an
individual member;
(i g) Regulate the manner in which capital may be raised by
means of shares or debentures or otherwise ;
(h) Provide for general meetings of the members, and for the
procedure at such meetings and the powers to be exercised by such
meetings ;
( i ) Provide for the appointment, suspension, and removal of the
members of the committee and other officers, and for the procedure
at meetings of the committee and for the powers to be exercised
and the duties to be performed by the committee and other officers :
( j) Prescribe the matters in respect of which a society may or
shall make bye-laws, and for the procedure to be followed in making
altering, and abrogating bye-laws, and the sanction to be required
to such making, alteration, or abrogation;
(h) Prescribe the accounts and books to be kept by a society, and
provide for the audit of such accounts, and the charges, if any to
be made for such audit, and for the periodical publication of a
balance sheet showing the assets and liabilities of a society ;
(l) Provide for the persons by whom, and the form in which,
copies of entries in books of societies may be certified ;
(m) Provide for the formation and the maintenance of a register
of members, and, where the liability of the members is limited by
shares, of a register of shares ;
(n) Provide for the rate at which interest may be paid on deposits,
for the formation and maintenance of reserve funds, and the objects
to which such funds may be applied, and for the investment of any
funds under the control of the society ; •
(o) Provide that any dispute touching the business of a society
between members or past members of the society or persons claiming
through a member, or past member, or between a member or past
member or persons so claiming and the committee or any officer, shall
be referred to the Registrar for decision or if he so directs,to arbitration,
and prescribe the mode of appointing an arbitrator or arbitrators, and
the procedure tolje followed in proceedings before the Registrar or
such arbitrator or arbitrators, and the enforcement of the decisions of
the Registrar or the awards of arbitrators ;
(p) Prescribe the conditions to be complied with by a society
applying for the financial assistance of Government ;
(q) Determine in what cases an appeal shall lie from the orders
of the Registrar, and prescribe the procedure to be followed in
presenting and disposing of such appeals ;
9


(r) Prescribe the returns to be submitted by a society to the
Registrar and provide for the persons by whom and the form in
which such returns shall be submitted ; and
(s) Prescribe the conditions under which profit may be distributed
to the members of a society with unlimited liability and the
maximum rate of dividend which may be paid by societies.*
(3) All rules made under this article shall be published in the
Government Gazette and shall be laid on the Table of the Council.
(4) A copy of the rules relating to a society, and of the bye-laws
thereof for the time being in force, shall be kept open to inspection at
all reasonable times, free of charge, at the registered address of the
society.
Miscellaneous.
Companies 32. The provisions of “The Companies Ordinance
not tTapply 912 ’ 1912” shall not apply to societies registered under this
Ordinance.
Special power to 33 —(i) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Executive Council Ordinance, the Governor in Executive Council may by
to register any special order in each case, and subject to such conditions
associations under ag ma y impose, permit anv association of not less than
I irdiriTnce » a x •< .
ten persons of age to be registered as a society under this
Ordinance.
(2) A society so registered shall be subject to the provisions of this
Ordinance to the same extent as any other society : Provided that the
Governor in Executive Council may at any time by order exempt such
society from any of such provisions, or taay direct that they shall apply
to such society with such modifications as may be specified in the order.
Cancellation of 34. Where it is a condition of the registration of a
society^ 1013 ° society that it should consist of at least ten members, the
Registrar may, by order in writing, cancel the registration
of the society if at any time it is proved to his satisfaction that the
number of the members has been reduced to less than ten.
Short Title. 35. This Ordinance may be cited as “The
Co-operative Credit Societies Orninance, 1913.”
Passed in Council at Port Louis, Island of Mauritius, this first day
of July, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.
E. BATHFIELD,
Clerk of tke Council of Government.
Published by order of His Excellency the Governor, this twelfth
day of July, one thousand nine hundred and thirteen.
J. MIDDLETON,
Colonial Secretary.
*See Ord. 13 of 19)6 para, (t) below.
10


No. 173. 28th August, 1915.
His Excellency the Governor directs the publication, for general
information, of the following Consolidated Rules made under article 31
of the Co-operative Credit Societies Ordinance No. 4 of 1913.
J. MIDDLETON,
Colonial Secretary.
RULES made under article 31 of the “ Co-operative Credit
Societies Ordinance No. 4 of 1913 ”
[CONSOLIDATED],
1. All applications for registration shall be made in writing.
2. The capital of a society may be raised by shares or debentures.
If the liability of members is unlimited no member shall hold more
shares than represent a nominal value of Rs. 1,000.
3. The supreme authority shall be vested in the general meeting
which shall be held :
(а) in July (this shall be called the annual general meeting) ;
(h) whenever summoned by the President;
(c) at the written request of one-fifth of the members ;
(i d ) whenever summoned by the Registrar.
Every resolution passed at a general meeting shall be duly signed
by all the shareholders present who have voted in favour of the resolution.
Thumb marks shall be taken in the case of those who are illiterate.
One-third of the members of a society shall form a quorum. At
general meetings postponed for want of a quorum, one-fifth of the
members shall form a quorum.
4. The general meeting shall :-~
(1) elect the Committee ;
(2) consider the annual balance sheet and the report of the
Committee thereon ;
(3) determine the use to be made of the reserve fund and declare
a dividend and otherwise direct the disposal of profits;
(4) fix the amount of loans, if any, to be raised by the society ;
(5) consider the proposals of the Committee on the inspection
and audit notes of the Registrar ;
(б) consider proposals of the Committee in regard to the business
of the society.
5. A true copy of all resolutions passed at a general meeting of the
shareholders of a Co-operative Credit Society shall be forwarded by the
Secretary to the Registrar within forty-eight hours after the dissolution
of the meeting.
6. The Committee shall consist of 5, 7 or 9 members elected by the
general meeting for one year and removable during their term of office
only by a two-thirds majority.
11


Members of the Committee shall be eligible for re-election. In case
of death or removal a fresh member shall be chosen by the remaining
members of the Committee.
It shall elect its own President and shall be responsible for the
efficient working of the society,
7. The appointment of the members of a Managing Committee
elected by the shareholders shall be subject to the approval of the
Registrar.
8. Meetings of the Committee shall be held whenever necessary and
in any case once in each month and all business shall then be transacted.
Three members shall form a quorum.
9. The President or in his absence some other member elected by
the Committee members present shall preside at all general meetings and
at meetings of the Committee.
10. Every member shall have only one vote and all matters shall be
decided by an ordinary majority of votes, the President or other presiding
member having a casting vote in case of an equality of votes. No voting
by proxies shall be allowed and no member shall vote on any matter in
which he has a direct personal interest.
All members of the society shall be entitled to attend meetings of
the Committee but only members of the Committee shall vote at such
meetings.
11. The Committee shall have the following powers and duties :
(1) To fix the rate of interest on loans to members ;
(2) To borrow money on behalf of the society whether by way of
deposits or of loans subject to any restriction framed by a general
meeting or the Registrar, and to repay such loans or deposits ;
(3) To appoint, fine, suspend or dismiss the Secretary ; . , .
(4) To recommend the expulsion of a member;
(5) To accept the resignation of a member;
(6) To hear and decide complaints ;
(7) To deal with applications for loans and to accept or reject
sureties for loans;
(8) To receive, withdraw or disburse or by special order in writing
authorise one or more of its members to receive, withdraw or
disburse money or other property of the society, and to arrange for
the safe-keeping of its funds and documents;
(9) examine and check the accounts kept by the Secretary;
(10) To supervise the punctual repayment of loans and to make
proper arrangements for their recovery ;
(11) To see that loans are applied to the purpose for which they
were granted ;
(12) To fix dates for the payment of instalments towards shares
and for the repayment of loans ;
(13) To levy a charge on overdue loans and instalments towards
shares;
(14) To extend the time for payment of instalments towards
shares and for repayment of loans ;
12


(15) To submit the accounts of the society to audit ; •
(16) To call the annual general meeting ;
(17) To submit to the annual general meeting a balance sheet
and a report on the work of the year ending on 30th. June
preceding ;
(18) To make proposals to the general meeting for payment of
dividend and disposal of profits and reserve ;
(19) To consider the inspection audit notes of the Registrar ;
(20) To institute, conduct, defend, compromise, refer to arbitration,
or abandon through any of its members or the Secretary legal
proceedings or claims by or against the society or the officers of the
society concerning the business of the society ; The proceedings
taken against a shareholder shall within one month be laid before
a general meeting for the information of members ;
(21) To receive applications for membership ;
(22) Generally to carry on the business of the society.
12. The duties of the Secretary shall be :
(1) To summon and attend all general meetings and meetings of
the Committee ;
(2.) To record the proceedings of such meetings in a proceedings
book which shall be signed by the President or other presiding
member in token of accuracy ;
(3) To keep accurately and up to date all accounts and books, to
prepare all vouchers and other documents required for the
transaction of the business of the society, to conduct correspondence,
and to supply all necessary information to the members;
(4) To prepare in the first week of July in each year: —
(a) a statement showing the income and expenditure of the
society for the year ending on the previous 30th June ;
(h) a statement of the assets and liabilities of the society as
they stood on the said 30th June ;
(c) any other statements or reports that may be prescribed by
the Registrar or the Committee.
13. The Secretary shall not be permitted, unless he is a member of
the Committee, to receive, hold or disburse any money or other property
of the society.
14. Every society shall, subject to the provisions of the Ordinance
and any rules made thereunder, make bye-laws in respect of the
following matters:
(a) The qualifications requisite for membership ;
(h) The liabilities of members and their election, expulsion,
removal and withdrawal;
(c) The ascertainment of a deceased member’s interest and the
nomination of persons to whom such interest shall be paid ;
(d) The limitation of the maximum number of shares held by
a member subject to the provisions of the Ordinance and the rules
made thereunder:
13


(e) The purpose for which loans may be issued, their
acknowledgment, application and repayment, and the interest to
be charged;
(/) The raising of capital.
A bye-law made by a society shall not take effect or be altered or
rescinded otherwise than :
(a) by a vote of a three-fourths majority of members assembled
at a general meeting and
(b) with the sanction of the Registrar.
15. (a) The books of accounts kept by the society shall be in the
form prescribed by the Registrar ;
(b) All members shall be given a pass-book showing their
accounts.
These pass-books should be written up whenever any transaction
takes place.
16. The name of nominated successors in case of death shall be
entered in a column of the register of members of the society and such
entry shall be signed by the signature or mark of the member and
attested by the President and Secretary of the Society.
17. The registers of a society shall always be open to the inspection
of members.
18. Copies of such entries in the books of a society as may be
required for the purpose of the Ordinance of 1913 shall be made by the
Secretary of the society and shall be certified correct by him and by
some member of the Committee.
19. (1) The profits earned on any Government loa,n shall be credited
to the reserve fund. Such profits shall be calculate! by the
Registrar on the whole profits for the year.*
(2) Of the remaining profits, or, in the absence of a loan from
Government, of the wßole profits, one quarter at least shall be
credited to the reserve fund.
(3) From the balance, dividends on shares actually subscribed
may be paid but shall not exceed 10 per cent, until the rate of
interest charged has been reduced to 6 per cent.
(4) Any balance remaining shall be credited to the reserve fund,
20. The reserve fund may be utilised in the business of the society
and a portion of it may be applied at any time :
(1) to paying off the liabilities of the society ;
(2) to making a deposit in the Government Savings Bank or with
any joint stock or other bank approved for this purpose by the
Registrar.
. Supposing that the society possesses Rs. 5,000 in shares and obtains a loan of
Rs. 5,000 at b per cent, and charges 12 per cent, interest, the profit on the loan from Government
would be calculated as one- third of the whole profits.
14


21. The reserve fund shall be indivisible and no member shall have
any individual claim to it. If the society is liquidated the reserve fund
shall with the sanction of the Registrar be disposed of as follows :
(a) It may be applied to some local public object approved of
by the members;
(b) If the Registrar is of opinion that a similar society can be
started again within a reasonable period he may direct that the
money be temporarily deposited in the Savings or other bank
until required for this purpose, and if the new society be not
started he may dispose of it as in (a).
22. The society shall be liquidated only by order of the Registrar
or by the vote of a three-fourths majority of the members assembled at
a general meeting held for this purpose and with the sanction of the
Registrar, The Registrar may then appoint a liquidator to settle the
accounts.
23. Disputes regarding rules or bye-laws or between members
regarding the operations of the society shall be decided by the Registrar,
whose decision shall be final.
24. The amount advanced to any society from State funds shall be
in even fifties of rupees and shall not exceed twice the total amount of
paid-up share capital, and shall not in the case of any one society
exceed Rs, 10,000.
25. The advance or any part of it shall not be repayable by the
society for two years from the date of registration of the society, unless
the society is wound up within this period. Thereafter the advance
shall be repayable by annual instalments which shall not exceed ten.
26. Any instalment or part of an instalment may be repaid by the
society at any time before it falls due, together with interest up to the
date of payment. If any instalment is completely repaid more than one
month before it is due, the society shall be entitled to such reduction in
the amount of any subsequent instalment as the Registrar may determine.
27. The advance shall be free of interest for two years from the
date of registration of the society and shall subject to the provisions of
clause (28) below, bear interest at 4 per cent, per annum, after the
expiry of that period.
28. If any instalment due from a society be not fully repaid on the
date due, interest at 8 per cent per annum to the date of repayment
shall be recoverable on the amount overdue, unles the Registrar, by
special order, exempts the society from this liability.
29. A society requiring an advance shall submit to the Registrar an
application in Form A. The Registrar may sanction the payment of the
advance from the Treasury or from the office of any District Cashier,
and shall prescribe the number of instalments of repayment. His
sanction will be accorded in Form B. One copy of this order shall be
forwarded to the society and two copies to the Receiver General for the
issue of the payment order to the Treasury or the Cashier concerned.
15


30. Payment of any advance so sanctioned shall be made to the
persons authorised to receive the same on behalf of the society, on their
producing the Registrar’s order at the Treasury or at the. Cashier’s office
named therein, and on presenting a registered agreement in Form C.
to the officer in charge of the Treasury or the Cashier. After the
payment is made, the officer in charge shall forward the agreement to
the Registrar, who will examine it and thereafter forward it to the
Receiver General for safe custody.
31. The Registrar shall keep a Ledger of all advances made, in
form D.
32. The Registrar may, if sufficient cause is shown, and if all
the interest has been paid, suspend the repayment of any instalment.
In such case the repayment of that instalment and of all subsequent
instalments shall be postponed for the period of one instalment.
33. If any instalment or part of an instalment or any interest is not
paid on the date due the Registrar may, if he does not take any action
under cluse (32) above, issue a requisition to the Crown Attorney to
recover the amount due as if it were an arrear of Crown debt recoverable
under Ordinances No. 16 of 1876 and 13 of 1881,
34. The Regulations published under Government Notifications
No. 180 of 13th September 1913 and No. 250 of 27th December 1913
are repealed.
Approved by the Governor in Executive Council at a meeting
held on the twenty-third of July 1915.
E. BATHFIELD,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
Laid before the Council of Government at a meeting held on
the 27th July 1915, and neither amended nor disallowed within
one month after.
E. BATHFIELD,
Clerk of the Council of Government.
FORM A.
Application for an advance from Government.
No.
To
The Registrar, Co-operative Credit Societies, Port Louis.
We the undersigned being duly empowered in this behalf by the
Bye-Laws of the Co-operative Credit Society
do hereby apply for an advance of Rs. from the
Government, to he paid at the Treasury or the office of the District
Cashier of
16


Amount borrowed
From
whom
Rate of
interest
'
Terms of repayment
'
(2) The amount of capital raised from admission fees, shares and
deposits received from the members is Rs.
(3) We request that the advance may be made repayable at the
Treasury or office of the District Cashier of in annual
instalments, the date of payment in each year being the
(4) Particulars of the indebtedness of the society are as follows :
(a) Due to the members on account of deposits Rs.
( h) The amount borrowed from other sources and the interest
payable on each amount borrowed are as under :
(5) We attach hereto a copy of the Resolution of the general meeting
held on the authorising the taking of an
advance from the Government and specifying the members of the
Committee who may, in conjunction with the President, receive the
amount and enter into an agreement with the Government for its
repayment.
President.
Members.
Dated the 19
FORM B.
Order sanctioning an advance from state funds to a Co-operative
Credit Society.
(1) Sanction is accorded to the payment of an advance of Rs.
from the Treasury or the office of the District Cashier of
to the undermentioned Co-operative Credit
Society, subject to the following conditions as to repayment:—
Name of society.
Registered address.
Number and amount of annual instalments of repayment.
Date on which each instalment is to be recovered.
(2) The date on which the society was registered is the
and the advance is free of interest for two years from that date.
(3) The allotment for such advances at my disposal is
(Vide letter No. )
The aggregate amount of advances hereto sanctioned is Rs.
not including the amount sanctioned now.
17


(4) The persons recognised as authorised by the society to enter
into an agreement for repayment of the advance and to draw it from the
Treasury are the President and the members of the Committee below.
President :
'I
2
Members 3
4
Dated the 19
Registrar Co-operative Credit Societies.
. .... FORM C.
Bond.
I President and we
members of the Managing Committee of the Co-operative
Credit Society being duly empowered by the said society in this behalf,
do hereby acknowledge to have received from the Government of
Mauritius the sum of Rs. for and on behalf of the said society
subject to the conditions laid down in the rules made by the Govern-
ment under Notification No. dated the and
hereby agree and declare as follows :
Firstly, that the loan shall bear no interest till the
192 , and that no portion of the loan shall be repayable before the said
date except in the event of the said society being wound up.
Secondly, that from the said date of 192 , the
loan or such portion of it as may remain unpaid shall bear interest at
the rate of four per cent, per annum, and the interest accruing on the
same shall be paid by the society at the Treasury
on the said date of every year until the whole of the loan is liquidated ;
Thirdly, that the said society shall repay the loan in ten annual
instalments of Rupees each at the aforesaid Treasury
on the above mentioned date in the following years, namely :
And fourthly, that if the said society defaults in the payment of
any instalment or part thereof on the date fixed for such payment, penal
interest at the rate of eight per cent, per annum will become payable on
the overdue amount.
Given this day of
192 , under hand at
18


-
Reference to order sanc-
tioning the loan.
I5C
Date of execution and
registration of the
bond by the society.
M
Amount of loan.
#«■
Date on which the loan
was actually taken.
'
Registrar’s initials.
05
Number of instal-
ments.
& P
3 iT
|b
5a*
ert- m
O
a - c
cd <j
||
-
Date on which it
is due.
1
1 00
Principal due.
CT
Interest due.
O
Total amount due.
o cr
r-t- w
-
Date of payment
CD
M | N umber & date of
** 1 Treasury receipt.
h-
CO
Principal re-paid
3
§
£
Interest paid.
3
p
O-
CD
O
7?
o
3*
«rP
Ol
Penal interest at 8
per cent, per an-
num on overdue
instalment, if any
05
Total amount paid.
Registrar’s initials
»— *
00
Remarks
FORM D.
Dl* Ledger of loons by the Government of Mauritius to Co-operative
Gr-edit Societies.
Name of Society
Account No.
Date of Registration
ORDINANCE No, 25 OF 1915
AN ORDINANCE
Enacted hy the Governor of Mauritius, with the advice and
consent of the Council of Government thereof.
To amend the Co-operatiye Credit Societies Ordinance,
1913.
I assent,
J. CHANCELLOR,
Governor.
1 ith December, 1915.
BE IT ENACTED by the Governor, with the advice and consent
of the council of Government, as follows :
Article 22 (l) of 1. Article 22 (1) of Ordinance No. 4 of 1913 is
1913 'repeated' ancf repealed and replaced by the following
replaced.
Audit inspection and 22. —(1) The Registrar or person duly authorized
inquiry. g p a |i auc |i t the accounts of every society once
at least in every year;
Article 27 of 2. Article 27 of Ordinance No. 4 of 1913 is repealed
a 4 ad f ™d replaced by the following
replaced.
Dissolution. 27. —(1) If the Registrar, after holding an
inquiry under article 22, paragraph (5), or on receipt
19


of an application made by three-fourths of the members of a society,
is of opinion that a society ought to be dissolved, he may cancel or
may refuse to cancel the registration of the society.
(2) Any member of a society may, within one month from the
date of an order under paragraph (1), appeal from such order to the
Governor in Executive Council.
('3) Where no appeal is presented within one month from the
making of an order cancelling the registration of a society, the
order shall take effect on the expiry of that period. Where an
appeal is presented within one month, the order shall not take effect
until it is confirmed by the Governor in Executive Council.
(4) Where an order made under paragraph (1) cancelling the
registration of a society takes effect, the society shall cease to exist
as a corporate body.
(5) It shall also be lawful for the Governor in Executive Council
when satisfied that such a course is expedient, to order the
dissolution of a society ; and thereupon the registration of the
society shall be cancelled, and the society shall cease to exist as a
corporate body.
Short Title. 3, This Ordinance may be cited as “ The Co-operative
Credit Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 1915.”
Passed in Council at Port Louis, Island of Mauritius, this
twenty-sixth day of October, one thousand nine hundred and fifteen.
E. BATHFIELD,
Clerk of the Council of Goverment.
Published by order of His Excellency the Governor, this fourteenth
day of December, one thousand nine hundred and fifteen.
J. MIDDLETON,
Colonial Secretary.
ORDINANCE No. 13 OF 1916.
AN ORDINANCE
Enacted hy the Governor of Mauritius , with the advice and
consent of the Council of Government thereof.
To amend the Co-operative Credit Societies Ordinance,
1918.
I assent.
H. HESKETH BELL,
Governor.
31st August , 1916.
BE IT ENACTED by the Governor, with the advice and consent
of the Council of Government, as follows :
Short Title. 1. This Ordinance may be cited as “ The Co-operative
Credit Societies (Amendmetn) Ordinance 1916.”
20


No tl fon\m}° ld 2. The following paragraph is added to article 31 of
addedto.' the Co-operative Credit Societies Ordinance, 1913 :
{t) Prescribe the conditions under Avhich it shall be lawful for a
Society to enter into contracts for the sale of agricultural products
for such of the shareholders of the Society as shall have authorised
the said Society to enter into such contracts on their behalf.
For the purposes of such authority, the cross or mark of any
shareholder unable, from ignorance or physical incapacity, to sign
his name shall, when attested by the President and the Secretary of
the Society, be held to be equivalent to and to have the same legal
effect as the signature of the said shareholder affixed to a document
under private signatures.
Passed in Council at Port Louis, Island of Mauritius, this twenty-
fifth day of J uly, one thousand nine hundred and sixteen.
E. BATHFIELD,
Clerk of the Council of Government.
Published by order of His Excellency the Governor, this thirfy-first
day of August, one thousand nine hundred and sixteen.
H. HENNIKER HEATON,
Acting Colonial Secretary.
No. 252. 2nd December, 1916.
His Excellency the Governor directs the publication, for general
information, of the following Rule framed under the Co-operative Credit
Societies Ordinance 1913 as amended by Ordinance No. 13 of 1916.
H. HENNIKER HEATON,
Acting Colonial Secretary.
Rule framed under article 31 of The Co-operative Credit
Societies Ordinance 1913, as amended by Ordinance
No. 13 of 1916.
The Committee shall have power to enter into contracts on behalf
of a Society for the sale of Agricultural commodities in accordance with
the following rules :
1. When the number of shareholders desirous of entering into the
contract shall exceed 2/3rds of the members of the Society.
2. After the contract has been submitted to and passed by a general
meeting and afterwards sent to the Registrar for approval.
3. Such contract shall be binding solely upon such members as
shall have given their consent on the Form A, and for a period of one
year only. The form shall be certified by the President and the Secretary
of the Society and shall be attached to that copy of the contract to be
retained by the Society when it is forwarded to the Registrar for approval^
4. The transactions both for the sale of produce and purchase of
commodities shall be recorded in such books and in such a manner as
may be prescribed by the Registrar. No transaction whatever in
connection with the sale of produce by a Society shall be entered into
any of the books dealing with the ordinary business of the Society.
21


Signatures
Attestation of President
Attestation of Secretary
Date
Certified correct
President
Secretary
5. Payments to officers of the Society or other employees for work
undertaken in connexion with sale of produce may be made on the
recommendation of the Committee and after approval by the Registrar,
These payments shall be met from the receipts for produce sold and not
from the general funds of the Society.
Approved by the Governor in Executive Council at a meeting held
on the 27th October, 1916.
E. BATHFIELD,
Clerk of the Executive Council.
Laid before the Council of Government at a meeting held on the
olst October 1916, and neither amended nor disallowed within one month
after.
E. BATHFIELD,
Clerk of the Council of Government.
FORM A
We, the undersigned members of the Co-operative
Credit Society desire to enter into contract with
fortlieP” chase |of for the year
and are hereby agreed to be bound by the terms of such contract, viz :
No. 250 15th October, 1920.
His Excellency the Governor directs tiie publication, for general
information, of the following regulation :
Regulation made by the Governor in Executive Council
under article 31—(1) (k) of the Co-Operative Credit
Societies Ordinance, No. 4 of 1913.
The Registrar shall have power to decide the contribution which
shall be paid by a Society to the cost of the audit and inspection of their
books and accounts. Such contribution in any year shall be based on
the profits of the preceding year, as shewn by the books of each Society,
22


such contribution shall not in any event exceed 8 per cent of such net
profits. The Registrar shall further have power to exempt a Society from
making such contribution, if the conditions of the affairs of the Society
are in his opinion such as to render such contribution inexpedient.
Approved by the Governor in Executive Council at a meeting held
on the eighth day of October, 1920.
ORDINANCE No. 6 OF 1924.
AN ORDINANCE
Enacted hy the Governor of Mauritius , with the advice and
consent of the Council of Government thereof.
To extend to Rodrigues Ordinance No. 4 of 1913
and the rules made thereunder
I assent ,
HEBKETH BELL,
Governor.
29th March , 1924.
BE IT ENACTED by the Governor, with the advice and consent
of the Council of Government, as follows; —
Short Title. 1. This Ordinance may be cited as- “ The Co-operative
Credit Societies (Rodrigues) Ordinance, 1924.”
Ord en No on 4°o f fi9i3 2 - The Co-operative Credit Societies Ordinance, 1913,
and amending amended by the Co-operative Credit Societies
Ordinances and (Amendment) Ordinance, 1915, and the Co-operative
Rodrigues. Credit Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 1916, and the
Rules made thereunder, shall in so far as applicable,
extend to the Island of Rodrigues.
Provided that all sums due from a society or from an officer or
member or past member of a society as such, to the Government,
including any costs awarded to the Government may be recovered
under the Court of Rodrigues Jurisdiction (Extension) Ordinance, 1913.
Passed in Council at Port Louis, Island of Mauritius, this twenty-
fifth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.
E. J ULLIENNE,
Clerk of the Council of Government.
Published by order of His Excellency the Governor, this twenty-
ninth day of March, one thousand nine hundred and twenty-four.
A. Grannum,
Colonial Secretary.
GOVERNMENT NOTIFICATION
No. 131. 23rd May, 1924.
His Excellency the Governor directs it to be notified, for general
information, that he has been pleased to approve, under the provisions
of Ordinance No. 6 of 1924, of the appointment of the Director of
Agriculture as Registrar, Co-operative Credit Societies, Rodrigues.
A. Grannum,
Colonial Secretary.
2743-400-7.24
23






