

THE ART
OF THE LATE
TOM ROBERTS


THIS EDITION IS LIMITED TO 350 COPIES
[?]


TOM ROBERTS
(From a Photograph)


TOM ROBERTS’ PLACE IN AUSTRALIAN ART
BY J. S. MACDONALD
Tom Roberts was the first painter to show Australians how to see their
own landscape; Australian painters that is—and through them Australians
generally. Had he settled in the Argentine he would have done the same
for the people of that country for he had a strong, clear mind which loved
sifting facts and falsehoods and making two piles of them; so that he
knew just where he stood. This gave him authority. His arguments, both
oral and depictive, were always strong and they were always consistent.
When, in 1869, at the age of 13, he arrived in Australia, there was no art
here. He worked at the Coliingwood School of Design at the Trades Hall
where classes of drawing were held, and also under Mr. Thomas Clarke at
the National Gallery School. When he was twenty-five he went to Eng-
land. From there he went to France, where he studied at Julian’s. At this
time Bastien-Lepage was one of the foremost painters of the day. With
good judgment Roberts took Lepage for a model. Lepage was a direct and
simple painter whose method of working was well fitted for stating
impressions naively come by. That is, it was suited to depict subjects for
which tradition had not yet prescribed a way of regarding and handling.
Roberts returned to Australia in 1885, aged 29 years, and stayed here for
1 8 years.
His first labour was to make his friends see the need for getting out
of doors and working there; away from tricky memory and the brown
shadows of the studio. In those days there was no talk of “abstraction”
—that shoddy cloak for feeble or botched work; no critic-brewers of jargon
potions to drug the public and the weakling painters. Dealers and
journalists and their common interest, advertising, had not taken a smirch-
ing hand in the affairs of art.
Roberts took in hand the education of McCubbin, Streeton, and
Conder, Others affected but less immediately by his precepts and example
were Withers and Davies. He preached direct painting “relative values”
and true pitch of key. The square, flat brush he used was and still is the
best painting tool.
He went to Sydney, and there he, Streeton and Conder worked. They
also founded the Society of Artists. Those who had painted there before
their time might just as well have been depicting the Lake District, These
three painters gave the harbour its brilliance, its milky beaches and “crushed
sapphire” waters. Back in Victoria, at Box Hill with McCubbin, sound
painting was continued for a while, but soon the company began to break
[ Continued, Page 7


No. 13 WOODLAND BATH


/-<-2 r/'L.
up. Conder went back to England, Streeton went to Sydney, McCubbin
moved away. However, Roberts had done his guiding of them well, for
though their work changed (Streeton’s less than the other two) thanks to
Roberts they could never plead ignorance of the law. From these men are
descended those painters of the Australian scene who may be reckoned
as worthy.
In 1903 Roberts went to England, staying there for 20 years, four of
which were served in the British Army Medical Corps—strenuous work for
a man of his age.
In 1923 he returned to Australia and settled at Kallista, Victoria. He
was soon into his stride and giving us all a taste of his quality. As in
everything else, in painting, character tells, and in Roberts’ case it showed
in a fine independence of mind, which, when one thinks of it in a work
of art, is the most desirable factor. To throw a new light on a subject, to
reveal it in a way oneself has never envisaged, is the great art. Unstrained
originality is the precious thing and the greatest example and encourager of
others working in the same field.
A properly representative show of his work has long been wanted. In
it one should be able to see the development over 50 years of the art of a
man of strong mind and acute feelings, of great natural gifts highly developed
by hard training. He never stopped working and never stood still, so that
his latest paintings reveal his art as still growing. Yet, perhaps, even more
than his work, his words and personal bearing made him the influence he
was. For he was above ail things masculine and robust. To him a painter
was a fellow-artisan to the smith and as far as possible removed from the
namby-pamby, human, sensitive-plants with whom art has always been and
is now more than ever afflicted.
Actually he was more truly sensitive than any of that breed, but for
us he has the sturdiness, the unafraid character that is indispensable to the
pioneer. He convinced by his arguments; he convinced by his painting, and
he also did what only the elect can do, he convinced by his presence. He
had no guarded secrets; he gave away his knowledge wherever and when-
ever he could. He encouraged anyone who worked at art and without
patronising, gave them good advice. He was tolerant of the layman but
the know-all who presumed got from Roberts nothing but a good quilting.
Not for his wanderings but for his wisdom and his command of devices he
was the Ulysses of Australian Artists.
TOM ROBERTS’ PLACE IN AUSTRALIAN ART (continued)


N o. 29 THE PINK COTTAGE


x~d/~
CATALOGUE
No. Title Kindly lent by
1 Bourke Street, Melbourne, Commonwealth Government
1 887 The Trustees,
2 Penelope, 1919 National Art Gallery of Victoria
3 Study for Jephthah’s Daughter
4 The Golden Fleece
5 Self Portrait, 1924 I The Trustees,
6 in the Shadow of the Hills, c National Art Gallery of N.S.W.
1924
7 Sir Henry Parkes
8 Eileen, 1892
9 Coogee, 1888 R. M. Clark, Esq.
10 Roses, 1891 F. J. Wallis, Esq.
1 1 Madame Pfund, 1890 Dr. R. J. Loosli
12 Mountain Clouds, 1924 H. Spry, Esq.
13 Woodland Bath, 1918 A. 0. Barrett, Esq.
14 An Island on the Tweed, 1920 W, Bardsley, Esq,
15 Shearing the Rams, 1890 C. W. Trenchard, Esq.
16 April Girl, 1909
17 Wounded Digger, 1919 c A B urchiil, Esq
18 Brocklesby, 1889
19 The Coming of Spring
20 A Portrait L. McCubbin, Esq.
, -r, r, ... .. The Trustees,
21 The Reconciliation Castlemaine Art Gallery
22 Mentone, 1887 F. W. Thompson, Esq.
23 Two Roads to Monbulk, 1924 Dr. R. R. Wettenhall
24 Bailed Up, 1895/1927 Mrs. J. W. Maund
25 Bellagio, 1913 Mrs. C. Cower
26 The Quarry, 1926 Dr. Oscar Paul
27 The Northern Cobbler Miss Bage
28 Venice Miss Bage
29 The Pink Cottage, 1924 J. H. Connell, Esq.
30 Nell Simpson, 1888 Mrs. Bridges
31 Autumn in the Woods Mrs. Bridges
32 Ring o’ Roses, 1931
33 She Oak Hill, Tasmania, 1927
34 Lytchett Matravers, Dorset, - Mrs. Roberts
1922
35 A Pastoral, 1929


No. 20 A PORTRAIT


[?]
AN APPRECIATION
BY F. W. EGGLESTON
Tom Roberts was an artist in life. He would not have cared for you
to say that he was more than a painter, for that would cast a doubt on the
scope of his art, but qualities that gave him artistic vision and inspired his
painting irradiated the whole of his life, gave a charm to his conversation,
a fascination to all his personal relations and a fruitful attitude to life's
problems.
I only knew Roberts during the last eight years of his life, but such
was his power of conversation and vivid reminiscence that the whole of his
life became real to me. His early struggles for livelihood, his fight for
art in a philistine community, his relations with famous artists, the know-
ledge of life he got from men of affairs, so many of them his sitters, the
calm of his later years, all created a fascinating picture of a man full and
true.
The lady who introduced me said: “Oh, you two will never get on.
Tom is so talkative, and you are so silent,” and in a few hours she was
amazed that I had done most of the talking. That illustrates his way. His
great joy was the interchange of personality. He was a great talker, full of
fun and whims and wisdom, but he was no egotist and no monologist. He
was rarely silent, but when he spoke it was always to evoke the answering
play of his comrade. He would not permit the silent listener. Every
moment brought the call for active comradeship, participation in the passing
of life and enjoyment of beauty. He could not have lived without this
active interchange of affection and friendship; a life alone would have been
an impossibility.
Roberts’ contributions to life around him were manifold and rich. His
knowledge of literature was great, and he could quote at length on nearly
every subject of human interest. He combined in a very rare way the
versatility and exuberance of the Celt with an Anglo-Saxon capacity for
reflection through which he reaped the wisdom to be derived from his
extended experience. His work brought him into contact with high per-
sonages, men of affairs and political leaders from each of whom he had
added to his stock of wisdom, and he thus built up a singularly valuable
philosophy of life. He deprecated very much the picture of the frail artist,
victim of circumstances, beating his wings ineffectively. The painter was
a man in a world of men. His role was akin to that of the professional
man, a creative factor in the social life who demanded respect not patronage.
He several times dwelt on the financial stability of the artists he had
known. The letters he preserved however, show how that his sympathy and
encouragement was valued by artists who struggled as he had struggled in
his early life.
This penetrating mind was a factor in his success as an artist. Official
pictures present almost insuperable difficulties to the true artist, and Roberts
would not have cared to be judged by the picture of the opening of the
Federal Parliament, It would be hard to over-estimate, however, the his-
torical value of this picture in indicating the type of men who dominated
in the most creative period of our national life. Where he was more free,
[Continued, Page 11


No. 42 FARM, MT. ROLAND


f s r{ -
*
as in the portrait of Sir Henry Parkes in the Adelaide Gallery, we feel some-
thing which only great art and great thought can give us. It shows the
imagination of the statesman, the pallor of the warrior old and spent, the
character of the pioneer, the stigmata of struggle and disappointment. It
is the very epitome of the story of political leaders in this young democracy,
a priceless historical document, as well as a noble work of art.
It was this intellectual factor which enabled him to do such service to
Australian Art. The extensive claims put forward on behalf of men often
produce an ungenerous reaction, and it is necessary to say that Roberts
himself never made a claim to be the father of a school of Australian Art.
His title to a creative and pioneering influence is, however, very well attested
and acknowledged by true artists. We hardly realise how much our vision
of the external world is determined by the vision which artists have put
before us by conventions, by memories derived from other scenes.
The first few generations of Australian settlers tried to live in Australia
as they would have lived in the old country, in similar houses and clothes,
with similar amenities and a similar outlook. It took some bitter experience
to change them. The early Australian artists, great men some of them,
selected from Australian landscape the themes most like those they had
left.
The service of Tom Roberts was that he pioneered a new convention
or rather changed the old convention and pioneered a new vision, and he
did this by applying to a new life in Australia a method which was new in
Europe at the time. Thus he made Australians see that they had a country
full of new themes of interest to the painter, new light, new colour, new
line, new form. Thus our greatest artists return to find Australia paintable
for the sake of the new beauty that had been discovered. This is a great
service and deserves recognition.
Like most innovators he was criticised and attacked, and the story of
his struggles to convert the community and assist his fellows is a most
fascinating one, which should be told. Roberts got many nasty knocks, and
as usual the perpetrators never forgave him for the injustice they had done
him.
Roberts never fought for himself but for his ideas and his comrades,
and he succeeded by the personal touch. He actually fathered the school,
was counsellor and guide and teacher in the wider sense, and when a few
got more prestige than he did or went further in their achievements, he
was the first to rejoice with them and to recognise their prowess. It is
fitting that his work should be collected and exhibited so that a recogni-
tion of his worth shall be given. This exhibition is but a temporary collec-
tion but before it is dispersed we may get from the pictures which surround
us some measure of his soul.
“Is it so small a thing
“To have enjoyed the sun
“To have lived light in the Spring
“To have loved, to have thought, to have done
“To have advanced true friends and beat down baffling foes.”
Tom Roberts did all of these, and not for himself alone.
AN APPRECIATION (CONTINUED)


No. 16 APRIL GIRL


?U-
No. Title Kindly lent by
36 Thames and Cleopatra’s
Needle, 1884
37 The Storm Cloud, 1929 Mrs. Roberts
38 After the Storm, 1929
39 Portrait, I. C. Boyes, Esq. Mrs. I. C. Boyes
40 A Portrait, 1930 J, W. Boyes, Esq.
41 Morning M. U. Boyes, Esq.
42 Farm, Mt. Roland, 1930 Miss Boyes
43 Joy o’ Gums George Fielding, Esq.
44 Portrait, Tom Roberts, by R. 3
Casas, Granada, 1 883
45 Portrait, Arthur Streeton, 1 881
46 Sketch Portrait, H.M. the King,
1903
47 Sketch Portraits—Sir E. Barton, I iwi r <- D n hortc
R. E. O’Connor, and J. Walker
48 Portrait, L. Buvelot (etching)
49 Print, Opening Ist Common-
wealth Parliament (artist’s
proof)
50 The Three Graces, by Sir Wm.
Etty, R.A.
51 Pastel Portrait, 1898
52. Pastel Portrait, 1898
53 Tasmanian Landscape, 1925 :,erts ’ Esq.
54 English Village
55 Portrait, Miss Walker (ex-
hibited Impressionist Exhibi-
tion, 1889)
56 Winter Morning after Rain;
The Old Bridge, Gardiner’s I Mrs. C. Burchill
Creek, 1 882
57 Near the Artist’s Camp, Box
Hill, 1888
58 Chinese Cafe, 1888 (etching)
59 Ring o’ Roses (etching) The Fine Art Society
60 At Phillip Island, 1886 Miss J. C. A. Traill
(etching)
61 Pastel Portrait, Miss Elmhurst Miss Goode
Goode, 1900
62 Portrait, Professor Marshall Mrs. Marshall Hall
Hall, 1900
CATALOGUE (CONTINUED)
