

PRISONER GARDINER
THE PREROGATIVE OF PARDON
M (Jhapteij of JUistoqy
By HENRY PARKE S. M.P.
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
PRICE SIXPENCE




THE CASE
OF THE
PRISONER GARDINER
THE PEEEOGATIVE OF PAEDON
M (fJbapteii of
By HENEY PARKES, M.P.
GEORGE ROBERTSON
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE v




THE PREROGATIVE OF PARDON.
THE CASE OF THE PRISONER GARDINER.
In the year 1862 the crime of bushranging broke out with much
violence in New South Wales, and in particular the name of
Frank Gardiner became notorious as that of the reputed leader of a
gang who stopped and robbed the gold escort at Eugowra. Several
young men, arrested on the charge of being engaged in the escort
robbery, were tried before Sir Alfred Stephen, Chief Justice, and
capitally convicted of the crime, one of them suffering death.
Gardiner, however, was not apprehended until February 1864,
when he was discovered keeping a store at Apis Creek, in Queens-
land, under the name of Christie. He was brought up for trial
before Sir Alfred Stephen in July following, not for the escort
robbery, but on two charges not capital, of which he was con-
victed, receiving three cumulative sentences amounting to thirty-
two years’ imprisonment, the first two years in irons. Mr.
Martin, then Attorney-General (now Sir James Martin, Chief
Justice), stated, in a minute :—“ The only capital case against
Gardiner appears to be the case of the escort robbery, and as to
that it seems to me that a conviction could not be reasonably
expected,” adding his reasons for this opinion.
In 1871 —a little more than seven years after Gardiner’s convic-
tion—two sisters of the prisoner got up a petition for his release;
and they succeeded in obtaining in support of their petition the
signatures of many respectable persons, including some who had
held high offices in the colony. Mr. William Bede Dailey, who had
held office as Solicitor-General, and who is now Attorney-General
of the colony, signed his name to the following recommendation:—
“We the undersigned beg most respectfully to recommend the
foregoing petition to your Excellency’s merciful consideration, the


more especially from the desire to reform evidenced by the
prisoner before capture, and his conduct since his incarcerationj
and trust that your Excellency may be pleased, under all the
circumstances of the case, to deem the period of the sentence already
expired, sufficient for the ends of justice." Mr. Dailey must have
signed this recommendation before the end of 1871, as the next
minute on the same sheet is dated December 29th of that year.
Among others who signed recommendations in the above form
were Richard Driver, Esq., M.P.; Richard Hill, Esq., M.P.;
Joseph Eckford, Esq., M.P., and a number of magistrates and
well-known merchants and traders. Mr. William Forster, M.P.,
who had filled the office of Colonial Secretary at the time of
Gardiner’s conviction, was specially referred to in the body of the
petition. It stated that, on the occasion of an outbreak of
prisoners in the gaol, Gardiner’s conduct was “so noticed
by the Inspector-General of Police that he assured the prisoner
that he would see the Colonial-Secretary (Mr. Forster), and
have a record of it made for the future benefit of the prisoner.”
The petition, with this special reference to himself, was taken to
Mr. Forster (then o\it of office) for his signature ; and, with his at-
tention thus challenged, he wrote, and subscribed his name under, the
following words : —“ Having been referred to in a petition for the
mitigation of the sentence of Francis Christie, as holding the office of
Colonial Secretary when an outbreak occurred in Darlinghurst Gaol,
I have much pleasure in testifying to the fact of Christie’s good con-
duct on that occasion, as well as to his general conduct during the
entire period of his incarceration, so far as it came under my
notice in either case. lam glad to record this opinion, so that it
may operate as it ought in the prisoner’s favour. And, so far as
these and other circumstances mentioned in the petition entitle
his case to the favourable consideration of the Government, I am
willing to add my testimony and recommendation.” The “recom-
mendation” of Mr. Forster was dated December 29th 1871
about seven years and six months after Gardiner’s conviction—
and it was written immediately below Mr. Dailey’s “ recommenda-
tion,” which expressed the hope that the Governor would be
pleased, “ under all the circumstance of the case, to deem the period
of the sentence already expired sufficient for the ends of justice ,”
I entered upon the duties of the Colonial Secretary’s Office on
the 14th May 1872, and the petition for the mitigation of


Gardiner’s sentence came to me in due course to be dealt with.
As the prayer for the mitigation principally rested on the ground
of Gardiner’s good conduct in prison, I sent the petition in the
first instance to the Inspector of Prisons for his report. As
reports from this officer are not called for in all cases, my calling
for a report from him in Gardiner’s case was subsequently
attempted to be tortured into evidence that I had some design to
favour the prisoner. But it must be obvious to every intelligent
and unprejudiced mind that, in a case of so much importance,
where the question was one mainly of the prisoner’s good conduct,
if I had not obtained the report of the only officer whose busi-
ness it was to be well acquainted with his prison-life, I should
have greatly failed in my duty, and laid myself open to well-
merited blame. With this report, and reports from the officers of
the gaol, and all other papers connected with the case, the petition
was sent for the report of the Chief Justice, who had tried and
sentenced Gardiner. So far from seeing any impropriety in the
report from the Inspector of Prisons, the Chief Justice in his own
report characterised that officer’s remarks as “ very judicious.”
Having thus brought together all the facts of the case, the
opinions and testimony of the principal officers who had had
charge of the prisoner, and the views of the judge by whom he
had been tried, I submitted the petition to the Governor with a
written minute of my own explaining the standing of the
principal persons whose names were appended to it. This I did
more fully in conversation with His Excellency about the same
time, but I certainly had no desire, and never intended at any
time, to do more than fairly explain both sides of the case. I took
this course of explanation because His Excellency, having but
recently arrived in the colony, could not be supposed to know
either the special features of the prisoner’s case or the positions of
the persons who were seeking to exercise their influence in his
favour, two of whom were ex-members of the Executive Council.
Up to this time I had regarded the prerogative of pardon as
vested absolutely in the Representative of the Crown, and I was
aware of my own knowledge that two Governors at least—Sir
John Young and the Earl of Belmore—had exercised it, as a rule,
without the advice of Ministers.
On receiving this petition, in December 1872, what did the
Governor himself do 1 He did not grant the prayer of the


petitioners. He did not concur in the recommendation of Mr.
Attorney-General Dailey in December 1871—that the ends of
justice would be answered by the seven years and six months of
his sentence which the prisoner had then suffered, and that he
might be released instantly and unconditionally. He did not
yield to the specious “ recommendation” of Mr. Forster, who had
recorded his opinion in December 1871 also, il that it might operate
as it ought in the prisoner’s favour.” Sir Hercules Robinson
judged the case on its merits, possibly attaching some weight to
the opinions of the two ex-members of the Executive Council,
but really mastering for himself the perplexities which surround
the abnormal condition of our prison population. He knew that
good-conduct prisoners are immured for unlimited years within the
four dead walls of the same gaol in few Christian countries. His
decision, I believe, while merciful to the prisoner, was just to
society, and thoroughly sound in the interests of criminal treat-
ment, He decided that, if the prisoner’s conduct continued good
for the term of ten years, he might then be allowed to exile him-
self. In arriving at this decision Sir Hercules Robinson took
care to state that he “ did not concur with the petitioners that the
sentence which the prisoner had undergone was sufficient for the
ends of justice.”
Several months after this decision in favour of Gardiner’s exile—
namely, in the early part of 1874—another petition was got up by
one of the prisoner’s sisters, praying that he might be released in
the colony ; and I find the name of Mr, Attorney-General Dailey
appended to this second petition. The case was again referred to
the Inspector of Prisons for his report, and was then submitted to
the Governor with the following words covered by my initials :
“ The Sheriff* strongly deprecates a compliance with the prayer
of the petition.” The Governor minuted the petition simply
“ Refused.”
This, then, was the case, as favoured by the powerful influence
of Mr. Forster in 1871, as dealt with ministerially by me and as
decided by Her Majesty’s representative in 1872, which in 1874
was inflamed by political passion and distracted by misrepresenta-
tions in order to overthrow a Government whose measures and
policy were generally approved and which was now vigilantly
seized upon for that purpose by Mr. Forster himself amongst
* The Sheriff at this time also held the office of Inspector of Prisons.


others. The atmosphere is now somewhat clearer and calmer, and
it may be well to follow the course of events through the turmoil
which was created out of this prisoner’s case.
In April 1874, I was questioned by a member of the Assembly
whether the Government intended to release the prisoner Gardiner
before the expiration of the sentences passed upon him. As my
reply was not considered satisfactory, this gentleman moved the
adjournment of the House, to enable him to express his views on
the subject. A somewhat heated discussion was raised, in the
course of which I offered some fuller explanation to the House of
what had been done. Speaking of the difference between the
exercise of the prerogative of pardon in England and in the
colonies, I am reported to have said :
“ Here that power was vested in the representative of the Crown alone; and
though most probably His Excellency would not disregard any representation
that might be made to him by his responsible advisers, yet it was entirely
removed from the province of their duties ; not only need the Governor not
seek the advice of his Ministers, but he might even act in opposition to their
advice if tendered. Now, what had he done ? When this petition came
before him, he went out of his way to place all possible information before
His Excellency. Of course the matter was referred to Sir Alfred Stephen,
who tried the case, for his report; and, besides this, he had taken the unusual
course of calling upon the Sheriff to send in a special report upon this prisoner,
so that the Governor, who had not been long in the colony, might have the
best information possible to guide him in his duty ; and when he referred
the petition to His Excellency, he did so with some remarks upon the position
of the different gentlemen who had signed the petition. It had never
occurred to him that these names were nothing more than a delusion. He
presumed that they all expressed what was intended, and that the intention
would not afterwards be repudiated. The Governor then had the fullest infor-
mation that the judge could give him, that the head officer placed over the
prison population could give him, and His Excellency also had such informa-
tion as he (Mr. Parkes) could give him as to the standing of the gentlemen
who signed the petition ; and on these facts His Excellency was pleased to
say that the prisoner should be liberated after the expiration of ten years’
imprisonment. He had never intruded his advice upon his Excellency in
cases of this kind ; for, if he shrunk from anything, it was from putting him-
self forward to do what he was not entitled to do. As he had no power in
the matter, he had given no advice upon it ; though, had he possessed the
power, he should not probably have incurred the responsibility of liberating
this prisoner at so early a date as ten years. He did not say this by way of
inferring in any way that a wrong act had been done, because it was an
exceedingly difficult thing to decide upon the proper mode of dealing with
that class of prisoners.”
Some of the speakers charged me with seeking to shelter myself


from my just responsibility by improperly bringing forward the
Governor’s name. Charges of similar character were in later dis-
cussions dealt out in every conceivable form. On this occasion,
however, I claimed my privilege to explain at the close of the dis-
cussion what I had really said, and I find myself reported to have
used the following words :
“ So far from explaining, or saying anything that could be construed into
bringing the Governor’s name forward as a cloak to his proceedings, he
simply stated that he informed His Excellency of all the facts of the case,
and did so in the light of not interfering in any way further. He stated that
if he had been asked for advise, it was doubtful whether he should have
taken the responsibility of recommending the man’s release at this early
period ; and there was nothing inconsistent with that in the remark that he
was willing to bear any responsibility that might devolve upon the Govern-
ment in this matter. He should have committed a very doubtful act, con-
sidering that he had no real power in the matter, by interfering between the
Governor and a prisoner in the exercise of the prerogative of mercy.”
Some expressions of mine (included, I believe, in the above
quotations), as they appeared in the reports of this first dis-
cussion of the subject in the Assembly, were displeasing to
the Governor, who told me next day that he had dealt with
the prisoner’s case under the impression that I was not unfavour-
able to a merciful consideration of it, and that he thought it was
improper for me to express my doubts whether, if I had been
asked for my advice, I should have dealt with it as mercifully
myself, which seemed to imply disapproval of what he had done,
when I had expressed no disapproval at the time of his decision.
I think, however, that the force of His Excellency’s objections
applied more to his reading of what I had said than to the
meaning I had endeavoured to convey to the Assembly. What
I meant was, not that any wrong decision had been given, but
that the Minister in such case, acting under his sense of responsi-
bility to Parliament, would have acted, though perhaps uncon-
sciously, in view of hostile criticisms from his political adversaries,
and therefore was not in a position of equal independence with the
Governor. This was in accord with opinions I have frequently
expressed on the exercise of the prerogative. With the exception
of this misunderstanding in the first instance, the Governor, so
far as I am aware, was perfectly satisfied with my course through-
out; and the existence of this misunderstanding I explained in my
speech on June 3rd in the Assembly.


The case of Gardiner now became the subject of frequent ques-
tioning and reference in the House, and Mr. Edward Combes, then
member for Bathurst, gave notice of a condemnatory motion,
which, as the case had been considered in connexion with twenty -
three others, finally took the following form : —“ That this House
disapproves of the release of the long-sentenced prisoners whose
names are set forth in the returns laid upon the table of this
House by the Honourable the Colonial Secretary on the 22nd May
1874, including the name of the notorious prisoner Gardiner.”
Mr. Combes made his motion on June 3rd, as an amendment on
going into Supply, and the debate was continued over several
nights, closing on June 11th with a division of 26 to 26. The
motion was negatived by the Speaker’s casting vote.
In the meantime I and my colleagues had addressed ourselves
to the consideration of the position in which the prerogative of
pardon was actually exercised, and what ought to be the respon-
sibility of Ministers in relation to its exercise. It appeared to me,
and I believe to my colleagues also, that the questions we had to
consider were perplexed rather than cleared of perplexities by
recent despatches from the Imperial Government on the subject.
The result of our deliberations was embodied in the following
paper:—
“ Minute for His Excellency the Governor.
“ I have given much consideration to the expediency of changing the
system of treatment in the cases of petitions presented for the absolute or
conditional pardon of convicted offenders, and have carefully read the
correspondence on the subject, commencing with Lord Belmore’s dispatch
of July 14 1869, and closing with Lord Kimberley’s despatch of February
17 1873.
“ The minute of Mr. Robertson, which gave rise to this correspondence,
does not appear to me to deal with the real question which the dispatches
of the Secretary of State present for determination in the colony. That
question, in any view, is the extent to which the Minister is to have an
active voice in the decision of these cases ; but in my view it is much more
—it is whether the Minister is virtually to decide in every case upon his
own direct responsibility, subject of course to the refusal of the Crown to
accept his advice, which refusal at any time should be held to be, as in all
other cases, tantamount to dispensing with his services. The seventh para-
graph of the minute alone touches the question of the Miuister’s relation
to the Crown, and it seems to prescribe a position for the Minister in which,
on submitting petitions to the Governor, he is to express an opinion on each-
case, to be “viewed as embodying no more than a recommendation,” after
which he is to have no further concern in the matter. I cannot subscribe
to this principle of Ministerial conduct, if this be what was intended by
Mr. Robertson.


“ There can be no question, I believe, that from the beginning of the
present reign the Home Secretary in England decides absolutely in all
matters of this kind in the name of the'Crown, and that the Crown does
not in practice interfere. At no former time when the Crown took an
active part in such decisions could the Crown, in the nature of things, be
subject to a superior or an instructing authority. The wide difference
between the position of the Minister and his relations to the Crown and to
Parliament in the colony and in England is at once apparent on reading
the dispatches from the Secretary of State. The Governor is invested with
the prerogative of the Crown to grant pardons, and, by the letter of the
instructions conveyed to him by Lord Kimberley’s circular of November 1,
1871, he ‘is bound to examine personally each case in which he is called
upon to exercise the power entrusted to him.’ By the instructions previously
conveyed to the Governor of this colony by Lord Granville, in reply to
Lord Belmore’s despatch of July 14, 1869, he is told that ‘ the responsibility
of deciding upon such applications rests with the Governor,’ and, in reference
obviously to advice that may be tendered, it is expressly added that the
Governor * has undoubtedly a right to act upon his own independent judg-
ment.’ And finally, after the question has been re-opened by Sir Alfred
Stephen, it is repeated by Lord Kimberley’s dispatch of February 17 1873,
that ‘in granting pardons ’ the Governor ‘ has strictly a right to exercise
an independent judgment.’
“ It seems to be clear that the ‘ portion of the Queen’s prerogative’ entrusted
to the Governor of a colony, unlike the prerogative in England, is intended
to be a reality in its exercise. It is undeniably the case that the repre-
sentative of the Crown in a colony, unlike the Crown itself, is subject to a
superior or instructing authority. What then is the position of the
Minister, and what is intended to be the nature of the advice he may be
called upon to give, and under what circumstances is that advice to be
given ?
“ In no sense of responsibility in this respect has the Minister in this
colony hitherto been in the same position as the Home Secretary in
England. He has neither exercised the function of pardon, nor as a rule
been asked for advice. Except in rare cases, and then only in a limited
degree, when special features or new facts have presented themselves, he
has never actively interfered. What would be his position if he entered
upon a system of partial advice, and accepted in matters of the gravest
moment a secondary or limited authority, irreconcilable with the nature
of his duties and responsibilities a a Minister under Parliamentary Govern-
ment 1
“ Lord Granville says, ‘ The Governor would be bound to allow great
weight to the recommendation of his Ministry.’ The circular of November
1, 1871, says, ‘ He will of course pay due regard to the advice of his Minis-
ters.’ Lord Kimberley, in his dispatch of February 17 1873, repeats the
words of Lord Granville.
“ It cannot be doubted that the advice here intended is wholly distinct in
its nature from the advice given in the general conduct of affairs. In the
general case the advice is uniformly accepted, as the first condition of the


adviser continuing to hold office. In all his acts the Minister’s responsibility
to Parliament is simple, undivided, and direct. But in pardoning convicted
offenders, the Governor, although he is to ‘ pay due regard to the advice of
his Ministers,’ is at the same time informed by the Secretary of State that
he * is bound to examine personally each case in which he is called upon to
exercise the power entrusted to him,’ and that with him rests the responsi-
bility. The exceptional advice implied seems to be of the nature of opinions
or suggestions to which weight may be attached as coming from persons
‘responsible to the colony for the proper administration of justice and the
prevention of crime,’ but which in any case, or in every case, may be
partially or wholly disregarded.
« it does not appear to be clear that the Governor is required by the
Secretary of State to seek even this secondary class of advice in all cases.
It would rather seem that the instruction does not necessarily extend
beyond cases in which pardons are proposed to be granted, in which cases
the Minister would simply have to concur in a decision already formed, or
be placed in the somewhat invidious position of objecting to the extension
of mercy. This view would shut out from the Minister’s limited power of
advice the numerous cases in which much concern is frequently felt by
portions of the public, where a merciful consideration is prayed for and is
refused.
“ I entertain grave doubts whether any change at present from the system
which has hitherto prevailed will be beneficial to the colony. In a com-
munity so small as ours the distinctions between classes are very slight.
The persons entrusted with authority and the relatives and friends of
prisoners move closely together. The means of political pressure are easily
accessible. A larger share by the Minister in the exercise of the prerogative
of pardon would not, in my judgment, be more satisfactory to the public.
But if a change is to take place, and the cases of prisoners are to be decided
on the advice of Ministers, I can see no sufficient reason for making a dis-
tinction between this class of business and the ordinary business of Govern-
ment, The Minister ought to inquire into and examine each case, and each
case ought to be decided on his advice. The refusal of the Governor to
accept his advice in any case of this kind ought to have the same signifi-
cance and effect as a similar refusal in any other case. In no other way can
the Minister be fairly responsible to Parliament for what is done. Either
« the responsibility of deciding upon such applications ’ must still ‘ rest
with the Governor,’ as Lord Granville expresses it, or it must rest with the
Minister in the only way in which it would be just to hold him responsible.
“ Henry Parkes.
“Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, 30th May 1874.”
The change proposed—namely, that the prerogative of pardon
should in future be exercised on the advice of Ministers—met with
the approval of the Governor, who signified his concurrence, with
a full explanation of his own views, in the minute which I now
subjoin :


“Minute by the Governor for the Executive Council.
“ I have read the minute of the honourable the Colonial Secretary upon
the subject of pardons, and it has occurred to me that the difficulty of
dividing the responsibility in this matter, in the manner suggested by the
late Secretary of State, can perhaps best be illustrated by showing how
such a system would work in the practical transaction of business.
“ Hitherto the practice here has been for all applications for mitigation
of sentences to be submitted to the Governor for his independent decision
thereon. Some are sent to him direct through the post by the petitioners,
others are presented personally by influential persons interested, whilst the
remainder reach him through the Colonial Secretary’s office, without any
expression of opinion from the Minister. Taken altogether these applica-
tions are numerous. I have not kept any count of them, but I should
think that a weekly average of twelve would certainly be below the
number. All are carefully perused by the Governor. Some —in which the
grounds stated, even if proved, would be insufficient to justify remission—
are summarily rejected ; others, upon which inquiry may seem desirable,
are referred for the report of the Sheriff and the sentencing official, and
sometimes the opinion of the Crown Law Officer is asked for. Previous
petitions and papers in each case (if any) are carefully perused, and
eventually the Governor gives his decision according to his own independent
judgment. The papers are then sent to the Colonial Secretary’s office,
where the necessary official steps are taken to carry the decision into
effect, without, I believe, in ordinary cases, the matter being even brought
under the notice of the Minister.
“ If a change such as has been suggested were to be carried out, the first
question to be decided would be by whom should all petitions and applica-
tions for mitigation of sentences be considered in the first instance—by the
Governor or by the Minister ?
“ If, as at present, by the Governor, what would be the consequence under
the instructions contained in the Secretary of State’s circular dispatch of
the Ist November 1871? The words of that dispatch are as follows
“ ‘ The Governor, as invested with a portion of the Queen’s prerogative, is
bound to examine personally each case in which he is called upon to exercise
the power entrusted to him, although, in a colony under Responsible Govern-
ment, he will of course pay due regard to the advice of his Ministers, who
are responaible to the colony for the proper administration of justice and
prevention of crime, and mill not grant and pardon without receiving their
advice thereupon.'
“ The last few words which I have underlined are not quoted by the
Colonial Secretary in his minute, but they are important as showing the
precise view taken by the Secretary of State. The Governor apparently
may, after personally examining any petition for mitigation, and after
giving due weight to the advice of his Ministers, exercise an independent
judgment, and reject the application. He may say ‘ No’ on his own authority,
but he can only say ‘Yes’ on the advice of a Minister. The idea would
seem to be to make the Governor and the Ministers mutually act as checks
on each other. Either can negative a prayer for pardon, but both must


concur before any such application can be granted. If, therefore, the
petitions were considered in the first instance by the Governor, all cases
rejected by him would at once be withdrawn from the cognizance or
control of the Minister —a proceeding of which the latter might justly
complain if any responsibility at all were to be imposed on him in this
matter. In all cases in which the Governor proposed to mitigate the
sentence, his decision would have to be approved and confirmed by the
Minister, who might, if he saw fit, veto the merciful intentions of the
Governor. It appears to me the Governor and the Minister would occupy
somewhat anomalous positions in such cases. Under a constitutional form
of Government the Crown is supposed to accept or reject the advice of
responsible Ministers : in this matter the Minister would adopt or reject as
he pleased the advice of the Representative of the Crown !
“ But suppose, on the other hand, that all petitions were considered and
reported on in the first instance by the Minister, what would then be the
result ? Why, all cases rejected by the Minister need never be sent on at
all to the Governor, to whom they would be addressed. For, as the Governor
could not pardon without the advice of the Minister, there would be no object
in troubling him with applications which he could not comply with. In
cases in which the Minister advised a mitigation, the Governor could of
course, if he saw proper, in the exercise of his 1 undoubted right,’ reject
such advice—upon being prepared to accept the consequences. But practi-
cally he would never do so, except in cases which in his view involved such
a gross abuse of the prerogative that both the Secretary of State and local
public opinion would be likely to support him in the adoption of extreme
measures. In all ordinary cases, in which neither Imperial interests nor
policy were involved, the Governor, whatever his own private opinion might
be, ‘ would be bound to allow great weight to the recommendation of his
Ministry, who are responsible to the colony for the proper administration of
justice and prevention of crime.’ Practically under such a system the pre-
rogative of mercy would be transferred from the Governor to the Minister
charged with such duties.
“ It was perhaps the recognition of some such difficulties which led to the
suggestion of a compromise between these two systems, thrown out in Lord
Kimberley’s last dispatch on the subject. In effect, his Lordship appears
to suggest that the Governor might continue, as at present, to examine
into and deal with all petitions for pardon; but that he should, before
granting a mitigation of sentence in any case, ascertain by means of
informal consultation that the Minister concurred in such a step. 1 fear
that such a plan would not work well,, and that its effect would simply be
to fritter away any real or clearly-defined responsibility in such matters.
In the first place, who would be responsible for the appeals rejected upon
which charges of sectarian partiality or official corruption might possibly be
based ? Is the Governor to remain responsible for refusals, and the Minister
to become responsible for pardons ? Again, if the Minister is to be respon-
sible for pardons, he would have, unless his concurrence were a mere matter
of form, to go through all the reports and papers in each case in which a
pardon was proposed by the Governor ; and, as I have before shown, he would


have to place upon the papers in writing his final acceptance or rejection of
the Governor’s advice. If such grave matters were disposed of in informal
conversations, such a loose mode of transacting business would inevitably
result in mistakes and misapprehensions. The Governor might decide a
case under the full impression that the Minister concurred in his view, and
yet he might find subsequently that there was some misunderstanding, and
that his decision was repudiated and condemned.
“ For these reasons I entirely concur in the conclusion arrived at by the
honourable the Colonial Secretary in his minute—that the responsibility
for the exercise here of the Queen’s prerogative of pardon must either, as
heretofore, rest solely with the Governor, or it must be transferred to a
Minister who will be subject in this as in the discharge of other adminis-
trative functions only to those checks which the Constitution imposes on
every servant of the Crown who is at the same time responsible to Parlia-
ment. The real question at issue is thus brought within narrow limits.
“ The Colonial Secretary expresses ‘ grave doubts whether any change at
present from the system which has hitherto prevailed here will be beneficial
to the colony,’ and he thinks that under the circumstances existing here
the prerogative of pardon will be better exercised by the Governor than by
the Minister. If the validity of such an argument were once admitted, it
might perhaps be held to extend to other branches of administrative
business. But the very essence of the Constitution is responsibility to
Parliament for the administration of local affairs ; and possessing, as the
system does within itself, a prompt and effectual means of correcting any
abuse of power, there can be little doubt that political training and official
experience will soon impose restraints upon those impulses which sometimes
mar the earlier attempts at self-g'bvernment.
“ I have felt ever since my first arrival in the colony that the practice
which has hitherto prevailed here, of entrusting an important branch of
local administration solely to an officer who is not responsible to Parliament,
is highly objectionable ; and as I fail to see that any plan of divided
responsibility in such a matter can be devised, I can only repeat here what
I have on several occasions since the receipt of Lord Kimberley’s last
dispatch stated to the Colonial Secretary in conversation—namely, that I
am quite prepared to adopt a change of system ; and I think for the
future all applications for mitigation of sentences should be submitted
to me through the intervention of a responsible Minister, whose opinion
and advice as regards each case should be specified in writing upon the
papers, “ Hercules Robinson.
“Government-house, Ist June 1874.”
The Executive Council, on 2nd June, approved of the change,
which was at once acted upon in all new cases. This step was not
taken by me without serious misgivings, which I still feel, as to
the entire wisdom of the change. But it seemed that the
Ministers of the day had forced upon them by an unscrupulous
party movement the choice between responsibility without
authority and the authority of an active judgment coupled with a


just responsibility. The new practice has now been substantially
approved by the Secretary of State.*
After the defeat of Mr. Combes’ motion on June 11th, Sir
Hercules Robinson sought, as most persons will consider he had
a right to seek, a consultation with the Chief Justice—Sir James
Martin—(Sir Alfred Stephen having resigned in November,
1873) —to enable him the better to decide on a reconsideration
of Gardiner’s case. This consultation took place at Government-
house on June 14th, the third day after the division in the
Assembly. I and my colleagues, having regard to the exceptional
state of the prerogative question up to that time, did not look upon
Mr. Combes’ motion as one entitled to political significance ; and,
as we were then over-burdened with public business, no communi-
cation in reference to it was made to the Governor for some days
afterwards. On June 18th the Assembly sat all night, not rising
until ten minutes past eight o’clock on the following morning. On
that morning I received a letter from His Excellency, informing
me that he had been anxiously reconsidering the whole case;
that he had a long conversation with the Chief Justice on the
subject; and that he had been led to the conclusion, in which Sir
James Martin entirely concurred, that his only course was to let
Gardiner have the conditional pardon promised to him, taking all
practicable securities to prevent his returning to Australasia.
The Governor further informed me in this letter that Sir J ames
Martin said that if the reasons which had led to this conclusion, as
explained by His Excellency to him, could be made known,
public opinion would turn round and approve of the course taken ;
and His Excellency asked whether I thought it desirable to give
publicity in some shape or other to his views. My first thought on
reading Sir Hercules Robinson’s letter was that if Gardiner’s case
could be reconsidered under the new practice of direct advice from
Ministers, I might at once relieve His Excellency from all further
embarrassment; and I wrote the following reply, which I am
permitted to publish :
“ Colonial Secretary’s Office,
“ Sydney, June 19th 1874.
“My dear Sir Hercules — I did not leave the Assembly until after eight
o’clock this morning, and then had to go out to Ashfield ; in consequence, I
have only just reached the office —twenty minutes past one p.m.
“ I take up your note of yesterday respecting the prisoner Gardiner.
* See Lord Carnarvon’s dispatch of October 7th 1874, No. 54.


“ Do I rightly understand that you desire me to tender to you my opinion
or advice on the case as it stands ? and I do not think Gardiner’s case can
be separated from the other twenty-three.
“ I may say at once (though only as a private person) that my advice as
Minister would be that you should strictly adhere to whatever you consider
has been a positive or implied promise ; and I am of course quite prepared
to stand between you and Parliament, and take all the responsibility of such
advice.
“ I should be glad to learn, however, whether you wish that my opinion
should cover the proposal you explained in a previous letter to send the
prisoner to England, to be kept there under the observation of the police.
“ Very truly yours,
“ Henry Parkes.”
I received an immediate answer to the effect that the Governor’s
sole object in writing to me was to ascertain whether I thought it
desirable for him to place before the public the reasons which had
led him to the conclusion that he was bound in honour to carry
out the implied promise of the Crown to Gardiner, no reference
being made to my offer of advice. I have His Excellency’s per-
mission to publish my reply to this second letter.
“ Colonial Secretary’s Office,
“ Sydney, June 19th 1874.
“My dear Sir Hercules —l do not see very clearly how you are to place
before the public (except at a future time when your dispatches may be
published) the reasons which have'led you to your conclusion in the Gardiner
case. Already statements and comments in variously tortured form are
made to fix upon your advisers —and myself especially—charges of unworthy
conduct in seeking to shelter ourselves by your interposition between us and
Parliament. These unscrupulous references, often in a shape which it is not
easy to notice, cannot be other than unpleasant to you, and they are
extremely annoying to us. Any paper of the kind you suggest of which I
can form a conception would be seized upon and used for this purpose.
So I think.
“ I believe your course throughout has been quite right with the single
exception of a difference in point of time in Gardiner’s case (two to four
years only), in which my view may not be correct after all. And I should
indeed be glad if anything could be done to make this appear more clear to
the public. But the principal persons who are making this commotion do
not want it to be made clear.
“ As to the general public, the feeling will soon work itself to a sober and
sound state.
“ Yours faithfully,
“ Henry Parkes.”
One of the many charges levelled at me in 1874, intensified by
endless repetition, was that I endeavoured to shield myself from
the displeasure of the Assembly by the interposition of the name


and authority of the Governor. This charge in one of the daily
papers assumed the odiously specific form that I, as a sworn
adviser of the Crown, had led the Governor into a difficulty and
then shrunk from my responsibility and sought to cast the blame
upon innocent persons. The explanation now made will surely
convince all honest minds of the injustice of those charges. My
letters of June 19th will also show that, so far from counselling
the minute of June 23rd, my unbiassed judgment was unfavour-
able to any publication at that time ; and that I clearly foretold
the use that would be made of any document of the kind. My
judgment, however, was overruled; and I eventually consented to
the now famous minute of His Excellency, and became responsible
for laying it before Parliament. From that responsibility, once
incurred, I never for a moment shrank.
I will not here attempt to defend the minute of June 23rd* from
* The following is a copy of the minute of Sir Hercules Robinson :
“ Minute by the Governor for the Executive Council.
“I have to lay before the Executive Council six petitions and memorials
which have been addressed to me with regard to the proposed mitigation of
Gardiner’s sentence. These representations, viewed in connexion with the
public discussions which have recently taken place on the same subject,
have led me very carefully to consider whether any fresh facts have been
brought to light which would justify me in disappointing now the expecta-
tions which I raised when this prisoner’s case was first submitted to me—
about eighteen months ago.
“ It is true that no positive compact was then made with the prisoner, or
any decision given in the nature of an absolute remission, which would of
course have been irrevocable; but it is beyond question that a hope was held
out to him by my minute of the sth December 1872 that, if he continued to
conduct himself well, he would in all probability be allowed a pardon,
conditional on his leaving the country, so soon as he had served ten years of
his sentence.
“ I think that this may fairly be held to have been tantamount to a
promise, contingent alone on the prisoner’s good conduct in gaol; and
that it was so viewed by myself at the time, and by the honourable the
Colonial Secretary subsequently, is apparent from my minute of the 7th
December 1872, in which I stated—‘l have already decided to grant a
conditional pardon at the termination of ten years’ imprisonment;’ and
from the Colonial Secretary’s minute of the 24th April last, in which, when
submitting to me a petition for Gardiner’s unconditional release, he observes
—‘ The prisoner has been authorised a conditional pardon, the condition
being exile.’ The Sheriff, too, obviously viewed the matter in precisely
the same light, and referred in his letter of the 21st January 1873, and
in his minute of the 20th April 1874, to Gardiner’s case as one that had
been practically decided and disposed of.


the attacks made upon it by gentlemen like Mr. Alexander Stuart.
It has been defended with conclusive argument by the Governor
himself in his despatches to the Secretary of State. But it is
“ I may mention that it has been the practice here for many years for the
Governor, when dealing with applications for mitigation which have
appeared premature, to fix a date at which the case might again be brought
under his consideration. Hopes so held out have always been regarded by
the prison authorities, and by the prisoners themselves, as equivalent to
promises of pardon, conditional on good conduct; and in every such case the
expectation so raised has been, I believe, scrupulously fulfilled. I remember
one case in which Sir Alfred Stephen, as Administrator of the Government,
intimated to one of the most prominent and daring of the bushrangers that
his case might again be brought forward for consideration as soon as he had
served seven out of the nineteen years to which he had been sentenced.
The papers came before me at the time specified, and, as the case appeared
to me a bad one, I declined to sanction any greater remission than that con-
templated under the general regulations for bushranging cases, unless Sir
Alfred Stephen’s intimation was held to be a promise. I was informed by
the Sheriff that this was unquestionably the view in which the decision had
been looked on in the gaol, and I accordingly authorised the prisoner’s
discharge on a conditional pardon four years before the date at which he
would have been eligible for exile under the special mitigation regulations
laid down for such cases.
" Of course I am aware that, under certain circumstances, it might be wise
and proper to withhold the fulfilment of such promises, whether positive or
implied. For example, a promise given under false representations would
not be binding; and a promise to release a prisoner which it was subse-
quently found would, if carried out, imperil the public safety, should be
cancelled. The practical question for consideration in the present case is,
therefore, simply this—Are there any such grounds that would justify me
in now withholding the conditional pardon which nearly two years ago I
led Gardiner and his friends to expect that he might receive about this time
“ I have seen it urged that Gardiner’s case was decided upon false repre-
sentations—it being alleged that some of the signatures attached to the peti-
tion were forgeries, and that there was a previous conviction against Gardiner
in Victoria which had been concealed. But I think these grounds, even if
they were facts—which they have not been proved to be—would be quite
insufficient to release me from my implied promise. In a petition so numer-
ously and influentially signed, a few signatures more or less of persons of
whom I had no knowledge would have been immaterial; and I cannot say
that my decision would have been different if it had been stated on the
papers that, before Gardiner commenced his criminal career in New South
Wales, he had been convicted in Victoria of horse-stealing in 1850 —nearly
a quarter of a century ago. In view of the grave character of his crimes in
New South Wales such a comparatively minor offence would have appeared
insignificant. I must, therefore, as I have said, dismiss these pleas as insuf-
ficient.


quite clear that even Mr. Robertson, with all his lynx-eyed watch-
fulness for favourable points of attack, saw nothing very objec-
tionable in this minute until he became aware of its effect upon
« The question remains—Would the public safety be in any way jeopar-
dised if the expectation held out to Gardiner of being allowed to exile
after ten years were now fulfilled ? I think not. Sir Alfred Stephen
observes, in his letter on Gardiner’s case, that * the end and object of all
punishment are—first, the preventing of the individual, and secondly, the
deterring of other individuals, from the committing of similar crimes.’
Have these ends been attained in the present case ? I think they have-
The sentence of thirty-two years passed upon Gardiner was imposed at a
time of great excitement, and his punishment would seem to have been
measured more in view of the crimes with which he was supposed to have
been connected than with reference solely to those of which he was actually
convicted. It was probably never intended that such a sentence should be
served in full ; and, looking dispassionately at all the circumstances of the
case, I consider that ten years of rigorous penal discipline within the walls
of a gaol—the first two years in irons—followed by expatriation for a
further period of twenty-two years, is a punishment amply sufficient to
satisfy the ends of justice and to deter others from following Gardiner’s
bad example.
“ Whether Gardiner’s apparent reformation is sincere is a point which
time alone can determine. lam myself disposed to think that, after the
experience he has gained, and under the altered circumstances of the colony,
he might be released even in Sydney without any substantial danger ; but
there are many persons who apparently think differently, and who believe
that if Gardiner had an opportunity he would revert to bushranging ; and
these fears, which are entitled to consideration, have been aggravated by a
few isolated robberies which have occurred just at the time when this case
was attracting public attention. Assuming, however, that these appre-
hensions are reasonable and well-founded, it appears to me that they are
fully met by the condition of exile, which the Government will of course
take effectual means to enforce, A legislative enactment authorises and
empowers the Government to take the necessary steps for this purpose, and
none of the old and settled counties will offer opportunities for the peculiar
crime of bushranging, even if Gardiner were disposed to revert to it. Ido
not think that sufficient weight has been allowed throughout the community
to this condition of exile which it is intended to attach to Gardiner’s
pardon, and which supplies, in my opinion, effectual security for ‘ pre-
venting the individual from the committing of similar crimes.’
“ The end and object of all punishment would therefore seem to have been
secured by the course which it is proposed to adopt in the present case.
The prisoner has, I hold, been sufficiently punished, and he can, I conceive,
with safety be set free upon condition of his leaving the country. If, while
entertaining as I do these opinions, I were to break faith with the prisoner,
and retain him in gaol beyond the time specified for his liberation, I should
be doing so, not because I think such a course necessaiy, but simply in


the heated feelings of less intelligent persons. The minute was
laid on the table on the last day of the session t, June 25 th. The
next session commenced November 3rd, when the minute had been
before the public more than four months. Mr. Robertson did not
fail to attack the Government the moment the House met, but the
Governor’s minute on the Gardiner case did not form one of his
grounds of attack. He submitted an amendment on the address,
censuring the Government for not calling Parliament together at
an earlier date, for its conduct in the matter of the Pacific Mail
Service, and for other matters; but his motion contained no
word of censure on the Governor’s minute. On this motion
of censure Mr. Robertson was beaten by 37 to 13, showing
with sufficient clearness the feeling of the Assembly on the
general policy of the Government, On November 25th Mr.
Combes brought forward a resolution condemning the Governor’s
minute, which was substantially copied by Mr. Robertson as his
amendment on the address in January following. The House
divided, with 28 to 28, Mr. Combes’ motion being again negatived
response to clamour which I believe to be unreasonable and unjust. It is
indispensable for the maintenance of prison discipline that every hope held
out to prisoners should be scrupulously fulfilled ; that every promise made
or implied should be held sacred, or broken only on grounds the sufficiency
of which would be apparent even to prisoners’ minds. I can see no such
grounds in the present case, and I am convinced that the moral bad effect
upon the whole body of prisoners throughout the colony, as well as upon the
community generally, which would result from disappointing without suffi-
cient reason an expectation raised by Her Majesty’s Representative, would
be infinitely greater than any practical inconvenience which would be likely
to result from keeping faith with the prisoner, and allowing him to leave
the country.
“ For these reasons I think that Gardiner should receive a conditional
pardon at the time when he was led to expect one; and that the
Government should at the same time take steps to secure, as far as
practicable, the continued absence of the prisoner from the Australasian
colonies during the unexpired term of his sentence. lam sorry to think
that such an exercise of the Royal prerogative of pardon is unfavourably
regarded at the present moment by certain sections of the public, but it
appears to me that the course which I suggest is the only course now
open to the Government consistent with honour and justice, and I confi-
dently anticipate that the fairness of this view will eventually be
acknowledged by all impartial and reflecting members of the community.
“ Hercules Robinson.
“ Government-house, 23rd June 1874.”
•(• The dates will show that it could not have been produced earlier.


by the Speaker’s casting vote. Ministers could not regard this
decision by the vote of the Speaker as they regarded the decision
of June 11th. The terms of the motion, and the course of action
virtually marked by disapproval, were wholly different, and
assumed more distinctly a political complexion. We could not
hope after this vote to conduct business in the Assembly with
satisfaction, and we therefore advised the Crown to dissolve the
House, which in any case was approaching, under the new Trien-
nial Act, the end of its existence.
The general election that followed resulted in the return of a
large majority of members who either openly approved, or abstained
from expressing disapproval, of the general policy of the Govern-
ment. The new Parliament met on January 27th 1875, and Mr.
Robertson, having learned a lesson from Mr. Combes, abstained
from attacking the Government on general grounds, but moved an
amendment on the address in the following words :
“ We would desire, with reference to the important matter which led to
the dissolution of the late Parliament, most respectfully to express our
regret that your Excellency’s responsible Ministers should have advised you
to communicate to the Legislative Assembly your minute to the Executive
Council, dated the 23rd June last, with reference to the release of the
prisoner Gardiner, because it is indefensible in certain of its allegations, and
because, if it is considered to be an answer to the respectful and earnest
petitions of the people, it is highly undesirable to convert the records of
this House into a means of conveying censure or reproof to our constituents ;
and if it refer to the discussions in this Chamber, then it is in spirit and
effect a breach of the constitutional privileges of Parliament.”
Thus, the Governor’s minute, which had been entirely overlooked
by Mr. Robertson in the beginning of November, was in January
made Mr, Robertson’s battle-ground. It was decided by my
colleagues, contrary to my wish and advice, that I should follow
Mr. Robertson in the debate. No other Minister spoke, nor was
any motion for adjournment proposed. The division was taken
before midnight on the 28th, and in a House of 62 members the
Government was defeated by a majority of four.
The defeated Ministers did not wait for any further expression
of the feeling of Parliament, but on the next day our resignations
were tendered to the Governor, who, however, declined for several
days to accept them. His Excellency very naturally felt aggrieved
by the words in the amendment which declared that his minute
was “indefensible in certain of its allegations.” The address as
amended was presented by the Speaker, no motion having been


made for its presentation by the House. On February 2nd His
Excellency sent down by his aide-de-camp the following message
in reply :
“ 1. The Governor, having been precluded by the mode of presentation of
the address of the Legislative Assembly in reply to his opening speech from
giving his answer in the usual manner, deems it respectful to the Assembly
to do so by message.
“ 2. He acknowledges with satisfaction their expressions of loyalty to Her
Most Gracious Majesty.
“ 3. He cannot, consistently with his duty, acquiesce in the statement
that a minute laid by him before the Executive Council was indefensible in
certain of its allegations. As ultimately responsible for the exercise of the
prerogative of mercy, the Governor claims for himself unreserved freedom of
communication with the Executive Council while seeking its advice, and
he cannot admit that the minute, viewed in that light, was not entirely
justifiable.
“4. While thus asserting the constitutional rights of the office which he
has the honour to hold, the Governor trusts he will ever pay the fullest
respect to those of the representatives of the people, and he therefore, with
this qualification, is prepared to accept the decision of the Assembly.
“ Government-house, Sydney, 2nd February 1875.”
The Governor in the first instance entrusted the formation of a
new Administration to Sir William Manning, and it was not
until Sir William returned his commission, on February sth, that
Mr. Robertson’s services were sought by His Excellency. When
Mr. Robertson attended at Government-house, in obedience to the
Governor’s summons, the following memorandum was handed to
him at the same time that he was asked by His Excellency to
undertake the task of forming a Ministry: —
“ Memorandum by His Excellency the Governor for Mr,
Robertson.
“ I desire to point out that for any delay or difficulty connected with the
formation of a new Administration I am not responsible.
“ If the amendment to the address had stopped, as I think it should have
done, at the end of the first sentence—expressing regret that I had been
advised to lay my Executive Council minute upon the table of the House—
all difficulty would have been obviated. I should, in such case, have
accepted the resignation of Ministers, and probably at once have sent for
Mr. Robertson to form a new Administration. I should not myself have
concurred with the House as to the impropriety of the step censured, or as
to the importance attached to it; but my own views on these points would
have been immaterial, I should have recognised the fact that the matter
was one upon which it was competent for the House to hold and express its
own opinion, and I should at once have proceeded to give to that opinion its
intended constitutional significance.


“ But the amendment went further, and proceeded to give reasons for
the regret entertained by the House, which it was quite unnecessary to
communicate to me. The first reason advanced was that my minute to the
Executive Council was indefensible in certain of its allegations. It
appeared to me that this was not only a personal imputation upon myself,
but an invasion of the constitutional rights of my office ; and that the
Legislative Assembly were not justified in presenting to me an address
couched in such terms.
“My difficulty was increased by the unusual mode adopted by the
Assembly as regards the presentation of the address. It has been the
almost invariable practice for the Legislative Assembly to attend at Govern-
ment-house with the address in answer to the Governor’s speech on
opening Parliament, to which the Governor has been in the habit of giving
a verbal reply. On this occasion the course adopted left me no alternatives
but silence or a message ; and I had no opportunity for the latter subse-
quent to the resignation of Ministers, which took place late on Friday, 29th
January, before the following Tuesday, the 2nd February—the next day
appointed for the meeting of Parliament.
“ When, therefore, the Cabinet tendered their resignations, I felt placed in
a position of unprecedented difficulty; for, whilst I was prepared to give
effect to the implied wish of the Assembly as regards a change of Ministry,
I was not prepared to pass over in silence an encroachment upon the pre-
rogative of the Crown. But I could not accept the resignation of Ministers
until I had placed the formation of an Administration in other hands. If
I had sent down my protest against what I conceived to be the unconstitu-
tional part of the Assembly’s amendment before accepting the resignation
of Ministers, my readiness to acquiesce in the decision of the Assembly upon
that part which was clearly within their constitutional rights might possibly
have been called in question. If, on the other hand, I had sent for Mr.
Robertson, and entrusted to him the formation of a Government, and then
sent down my protest to the House, Mr. Robertson, and probably the leading
Members of the Opposition who had carried the amendment, would have
been absent from their seats. It appeared to me indispensable that the
leaders of the party who had carried the amendment should be present in
their places and free to take what action they pleased when my message in
reference to the amendment was read to the House.
“A fair escape from these several difficulties presented itself in the
selection of Sir William Manning, a distinguished member of the Upper
House, to form a Government. Sir William Manning’s ability and character,
and the high respect in which he is held throughout the entire community,
appeared to fit him especially for such a position. He had been associated
with Mr. Robertson in former Administrations, and he had been designated
by public rumour as one of the leading members of a new Government, in
the event of Mr. Robertson being entrusted with its formation.
“ Besides, apart from the special reasons which led me to ask Sir William
Manning to undertake the responsibility of forming an Administration, the
plan seemed to me to offer the best possible chance of forming a strong
Government. It appeared to me that, supported as I thought he would


have been by the leading members of the Opposition, it would have been
possible for Sir William Manning to have united under his leadership a party
able to carry on the Government of the country with vigour for a lengthened
period. I have been disappointed in the experiment ; but, looking to the
state of parties in the Assembly, the narrowness of the late majority, and
the exceptional character of the question which resulted in the present
crisis, I fail to see that there was any arrangement which held out a better
prospect of success—viewed solely in the light of the public good. Ido
not regret, therefore, having made the attempt.
“ With these observations, which are, I think, called for from me under
the peculiar circumstances of this case, I am prepared to give effect to Sir
William Manning’s recommendation, which is that, as he has failed in
obtaining the help he anticipated, I should now send for Mr. Robertson.
“Hercules Robinson.
“ Government-house, Sydney, sth February 1875.”
Under these circumstances Mr. Robertson came back to office in
February 1875, having succeeded in converting the Gardiner case
into a lever to displace a Government, respecting whose general
management of affairs there was no evidence up to the last that
the country disapproved. With him, and by the same means
also, came back—one as Attorney-General and the other as
Colonial Treasurer—Mr. Dailey and Mr. Forster, who had been
the most active influential agents in obtaining the mitigation of
Gardiner’s sentence. The change is unique, and it is to be hoped
will not soon be paralleled in the progress of responsible govern-
ment in the Australian colonies. Yet it cannot be denied that
Mr. Robertson and his friends are in one sense deserving of the
prize which, after so many desperate efforts, they have at length
grasped. Ro men ever strove more laboriously, or hesitated less,
in their sacrifices to obtain their object.*
It may be doubted still whether this noble struggle for office will
prove an unmixed good to our political institutions. Precedents
may possibly be drawn from it hereafter to justify unlooked-for
courses of action. It is difficult indeed to foresee what resistance
to majorities, what abuse of Parliamentary forms, what desperate
use of favouring chances, what bold repudiation of one’s own incon-
venient words or actions, what reckless misrepresentation of others,
what wholesale traffic in calumny, what systematic waste of public
time, could not be supported by the examples afforded by Mr.
* In a marked manner the tactics of the Opposition to the Parkes Adminis-
tration in the session of 1873-4 was to occupy time so as to render the
progress of public business next to impossible. Four of the present
Ministers during that session made no fewer than 1800 speeches.


Robertson and some of his present colleagues when lately in
Opposition.
One word as to the predicted consequences of Sir Hercules
Robinson’s decision in Gardiner’s case. Have any of the evil
prognostics been fulfilled 1 Has bushranging been encouraged into
fresh life 1 Has crime erected a more defiant crest 1 On the other
hand, has any clearer or safer rule of criminal treatment been
established by the intemperate agitations which Mr. Robertson did
his utmost to keep alive till his end was answered 1 Has he in any
way contributed one jot of wisdom towards the settlement of the
difficult question of prison management 1 Is it not a fact that Mr.
Robertson’s Government, during the eleven months of its existence,
has released prisoners whose cases are worse than the case of the
prisoner Gardiner 1 On the whole, the result proves that the
Governor’s decision to allow Gardiner to exile himself, in considera-
tion of his ten years of good conduct in a close gaol, was well-judged,
sound, and wise.
HENRY PARKES.
Sydney, January 4th, 1876.
Mason, Firth <fe M'Cutcheon, Printers, 61 & 53 Flinders Lane West, Melbourne.


.


JUST PUBLISHED. PRICE 16s.
SPEECHES
ON VARIOUS OCCASIONS
CONNECTED WITH
THE PUBLIC AFFAIRS
NEW SOUTH WALES
From 1848 to 187 5.
By HENRY EYRK BS.
With an Introduction by David Blair .
Mdhonxnt:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, LITTLE COLLINS ST. WEST.
Sydney : 125 New Pitt Street.






*■ %
