

. -t
y
OF THE
AS PRESERVED IN THEIR
fl LECTURE
BY THE
SYDNEY,
ARGUS PRINTING WORKS, SINGLETON
THE RELIGION
ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA,
LEGENDS AND CEREMONIES :
REV. PETER MACPHERBON, A.M.,
DELIVERED IN THE MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE, SINGLETON, 25th
JANUARY, 1883,
v A.




THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES
A Lecture on “ The Religion of the Aborigines of Australia, as Pre-
served in their Legends and Ceremonies” ; by the Rev. Peter
McPherson, A.M., Sydney.
It is more than a hundred years now
since Captain Cook arrived at Botany
Bay and saw the Australian Aborigines.
From an early period Europeans began
to make observations regarding these
people, so that even before the beginning
of the present century, we find the
names of Eden, White, Tench, Hunter
and Collins, all concerned in recording
something about the aborigines.
During the present century scores of
writers have continued the work. The
result is that we have a considerable
mass of materials setting forth the
manners and customs, the language and
legends, as well as the religious cere
monies of the sable occupants of the soil,
who preceded us in this Southern land.
When we examine the stores which
have been accumulated, as now des-
cribed, we find that the aboriginal
legends are full of a belief in evil spirits,
malignant demons, which destroy men,
women and children. But when we
ask the question—what notion had the
aborigines of God—of a beneficent and
righteous Creator and Ruler, the
answers are very conflicting. Some
observers have been quite satisfied that
the aborigines had a belief in such a
deity, and others have been quite as
convinced that they had no belief what-
ever in a Creator and supreme Ruler in
Providence. We may just observe in
passing, that, as among professing
Christians, so there may have been
whole tribes of aborigines who possessed
more of a religious endowment than
their neighbours. In such cases the
observer has founded his conclusions on
what he himself witnessed, while his
field of observation embraced only a
small portion of the whole. In dealing
with the matter it is our purpose to
depend as little as possible on the mere
impressions produced on observers, but
to examine carefully what cm be found
embodied in trustworthy legends of the
rigines, and embedded in their re-
ligious ceremonies. A principle or a
truth which has once taken hold upon a
nation, which has been periodically set
forth in dramatic representation, pos-
sesses in many cases a tenacity of life
which neither space nor time, neither
migration nor revolution can destroy.
DEMONS AND DEVILS.
In view, then, of the body of
materials already preserved, can we do
anything to breathe into that body the
breath of life, make it stand on its feet
and answer questions ? Let us begin
where our materials are abundant. We
can start with aboriginal belief in
demons and evil spirits. Mullion is
the name of a wicked being who used to
seize and devour blackfellows. He
lived in a high tree. Wurrawilburu is
a dreadful demon who dwells still
higher, in one of tho dark spaces of the
Milky Way. Mailkun, is a female
demon, of a most formidable character,
and a great deal worse than her husband.
There is also Kurriwilban, another
female demon, who impales unfortunate
blackfellows, carries them away upon
her shoulders to a secure retreat and
there roasts and eats them. Here we
have four demons ; what can we find out
regarding them ? In regard to the first,
Mullion, this name is a common term
for eagle. We understand at once now
that he dwells in a high tree. We see
also that the eagle has had to take the
place of a model to supply the materials
for description, including embellish-
ments of course, for a malignant being.
In the second of the demons, Wurra-
wilburu, wo soon detect the middle
portion Wil, as equivalent etymologi-


cally to the mul in inullion. Accord-
ing to the laws which regulate sound
such forms as ml, mhl, bl, pi, wl, are all
very closely associated, and are mere
modifications of one root. As to Mail-
kun, the first part “ mail ” is, philologi-
cally, just the same as mul in Mullion.
Once more then we are brought to the
eagle. Moreover, the termination kun
or gun is a common feminine termina-
tion of many words in some Australian
dialects. Mailkun, then, is simply the
female eagle, and as to her ferocity we
can see rvell enough how that quality is.
developed in the protection of her young.
As to the fourth demon, Kurriwilban,
we again at once detect the form wil,
precisely as in the fearful demon
Wurrawilburn ; here we have again one
of the mere ordinary modifications of
the root ml. It may be observed that
the form ml, bl, wl, in words meaning
eagle or some bird of the same character,
is found in N. S. Wales, Queensland,
Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania
and Western Australia.
It strikes us as in every way natural
that the eagle should be chosen as the
representative of evil powers or beings,
especially in a region where he was, per-
haps, the most destructive of land
animals to the aborigines. Even in
countries in which lions and tigers are
found, the vulture has acquired unto
himself an evil name of a high order, by
real merit raised to that bad eminence.
Of course we are not surprized to find
that mixed up in this matter will be
Various species, and even genera of
destructive creatures, whether birds or
mammals or destructive creatures of any
kind. Thus while the lordly eagle has
supplied us with a list of demons and
evil spirits who lake their pedigree from
him, we shall find that more humble
creatures have eontributed their share in
the matter. J ake the following in con-
nection with the sparrow-hawk. A
French voyager, named D’Urville turned
his prow towards the shores ef Austtalia.
After visiting various localities, and
collecting vocabularies of aboriginal
words, he fwuud his way to Jervis Bay,
on the east coast of N. S. Wales. Here
he recorded the local word for sparrow-
hawk. This was Tchonoutchonot. Now
across the coast range, and down on the
banks of the Murray we hear of an evil
spirit celled Ngout-ngout. Across the
Murray and in the West of Victoria we
find the Devil under the name Ntgatga.
A still farther modification of name for
the same personage is Nutchie, and this
again in tbe course of wear and tear is
scraped down to Nitt. At Ntgatga,
however, we have a branch off following
the guttural letter instead of the nasal
at the beginning of tbe name. Thus in
South Australia, we have Kootchie for
for Devil; and as in the line of the nasal
we come to a form so bare as Nitt, so in
the line of the gut tural we have not only
Kootchaly, but the much longer form
Guambucootchaly, as the designation of
a very wicked spirit on tbe Murray. As
to this long name, it is plain that we
have bodily the addition Guambu, to
Cootchaly, this latter being but an
obvious variation of Kootchie.
From this summary view of the
modifications of the name of the sparrow-
hawk at Jervis Bay, we see bow a name
for evil spirits and the devil himself has
been supplied for three different colonies,
New South Wales, Victoria and South
Australia. As far as our materials go,
we thus get a real and a clear insight
into the Demonology of the Australian
aborigines. If the ancestors of the
aborigines, in the far back ages brought
over with them a belief in a wicked
spirit, they have clearly localized him
by reference to creatures actually living
in the country.
Let us come now to the famous
Bunjip. Before we try to experiment
upon his name, perhaps a reference to
Buayip literature may not be out of
place. Flanagan, who wrote a history
of N. S. Wales in the year 1822, has a
sensational account of two men, declar-
ing upon oath, that they had seen, about


two miles from Liverpool, a monster
forty-five feet long. They declared they
had seen it rear its snake-like head
five feet above the ground. So great a
curiosity was not likely to be dis-
regarded. A number of people started
for the spot, but lo ; the monster was
gone I It was never found, alive or
dead.
Lieutenant Colonel Mundy has also
some remarks on the Bunyip. A
peculiar skull was found on the banks
of the Murrumbidgee, and so great an
authority as a bluckfellow declared that
it belonged to a bunyip. A comparative
anatomist, however, declared that the
bony structure was the cranium of a
foal, somewhat abnormal in shape owing
to a hydrocephalous affection. The
gallant soldier is very merry over the
discovery of science, and rejoices in the
adoption of a very suitable term,
bunyip, which for a time became
popular in the colony to indicate an im-
postor, an unconscionable pretender.
He admits indeed that the scientific
result made simply no difference to the
aborigines, who believed as much in the
bunyip as ever. Their terror of the
deadly grip of the monster which haunted
lagoons, rivers, and swamps was in no
way removed. But to the careful
inquirer into the ultimate facts of the
matter, what was the real value and
significance of the discovery of an
abnormal skull about which a black-
fellow ventured to make an assertion ?
A very brief period of reflection will
convince the inquirer, that this unfor-
tunate skull could have had nothing
whatever to do with the origin of
legends wi ich had spread across the
whole of Australia long before the birth
of the creature which possessed the
abnormal skull.
In these circumstances it is perhaps
not very wonderful if bunyip literature
continued to advance. If the monster
could not be produced, dead or alive, it
was at least some satisfactioi to know
that the outline of the creature had been
drawn as it lay dead on the turf. It
had been haunting some waterhn'es near
a place called Challicum, in Victoria,
in the western portion of that colony,
and had been killed. A visitor
to the locality gives an account of his
visit, and supplies a wood-cnt outline of
the creature. From the scale attached
to the sketch, the curious monster, so
difficult to get into any one’s hands,
must havs been upwards of thirty feet
in length. It should be mentioned
that the artist who cut the form of the
supposed bunyip as it lay dead, was
fortunately, or unfortunately—a black-
fellow. What is to be made of such an
incident ? There was the figure cut out
on the sod. What ideal had the operator
in his mind when he cut it out. The
size at once banishes all idea of a bird
from the region of possibility. The
very short appendages are possibly in-
tended to set forth fins which would
lead us to some marine animal such as
the whale. The scene of the sketch was
only about 50 or 60 miles from the sea
shore on which whales are stranded from
time to time. A lead cetacean on the
sea beach is the occasion of rejoicing
far and wide, and tribes collect from
great distances to feast upon the monster.
Some astute aboriginal, after spending
a fortnight in festivity upon the dainties
afforded by the petrifying whale has
returned to his own country and re-
vived savoury memories of past enjoy-
ment by reproducing at least the shape
of the creature whose flesh and blubber
supplied the feast. As to the bunyip
being heard at times roaring and bellow-
ing in the rivers, this part of the des-
cription is palpably supplied by the com-
paratively harmless seals whi h find
iheir way up the rivers and into water-
holes many miles from the sea coast-
The seal, however, jannot for a moment
pass muster as the bunyip, the terrible-
destructiveness of the latter putting a
wide gulf between it and the seal.
Now let us glance at the recorded
doings of such a creature as is suggested


by the hunyip literature. This, of course,
is the alligator of the more northerly
latitudes ot Australia. Captain Stokes
gives an exciting and graphic account
ot a race for life which he had with an
The water was fast rising
between him and the land in a channel
in which he found the saurian survey-
ing ihe >-ituuiion of aftairs with great
equanimity. The monster waited quite
quietly, as if perfectly conscious of his
advantageous position. The captain
must cross the channel, as the rising tide
would soon cover the ground on which
he was standing. The captain started
ofi at full speed along the channel. The
alligator also immediately sped his way
n the channel to intercept his intended
victim so soon as he should attempt to
cross. The captain saved his life by a
very few seconds. He das! ed across
the channel, and had barely time to
drag himself up the hank when looking
round there was the monster with ex-
tended hut disappointed jaws gaping
after him.
Much more recently C. H, Eden
describes a painful incident. He and an
attendant were in a boat crossing a river
when the boat swamped. Eden struck
out for the hank to which the boat had
been in progress, where his wife and
son were encamped at a fire. His at-
tendant, however, tried to reach the
bank which they had left. In a moment
Euen heard a shriek and a splash which
were followed by a sudden silence. The
sudden incident made him start half
out of the water, He escaped safely to
land, tut his attendant had been taken
down by an alligator.
E. B. Kennedy mentions that tl e
settleim in Queensland are constantly
losing valuable dogs, and this he attri-
butes to the alligators lurking about the
lagoons and swamps.
James Morrill or Murrells, who was
seventeen years among the aborigines of
Northern Qutensland, declares that he
bad seen “ dozens ” of the natives
dragged under the water and destroyed.
From time to time the illustrated papers
01 the colonies depict scenes in wl ich
alligators are the destroying agents. A
tribe of blacks encamp on the bank fo
a river or near a water-hole. One of
the children goes into the water to bathe.
Suddenly the whole tribe are startled
by a scream of terror and pain. Frantic
with excitement, and yet quite power-
less to help, they are just in time to see
the poor child dragged beneath the
waters to be suffocated and then de-
voured. Now if the ferocity and the
vicuusness of eagles and sparrow hawks
have given rise to such legends as are
current regarding demons and evil
spirits, it would be quite extraordinary
if the deadly alligator did not give rise
to a class ot legends taking hue and
character from himself. Such scenes as
those noticed above would never be for-
gotten by those who saw them. They
might travel far south of the limit to
which the saurians extend their migra-
tions, but they would carry with them
terrible memories of the destructive
monsters of the north. Those who had
never seen an alligator would listen
with eager attention to the tales which
would be brought by those who had
seen them, and had seen some of their
sable friends dragged under the water
by them. Here would be a never-fail-
ing source of interest ann excitement to
the groups gathered around the camp-
fire after the day’s adventures in hunt-
ing.
As the hunyip legends occupy so large
a place in the folk-lore of the Austra-
lian Aborigines, it may be allowable to
illustrate them a little more fully. Even
on the supposition that the alligator is
the real source of these legends, one can
easily understand that when we get
beyond the latitude of thin saurian, new
peculiarities will be ascribed to him
which do not really belong to him. Then
we need not wonder that in regions in
which bunyip legends are found, but
where there are no alligators, the seal is
sometimes made to act as the model for


the bunyip. Hence accounts of ronring
and bellowing already noticed. Still it
is plain that the harmless seal can never
be the originator of the legends of the
deadly alligator. As regards the ex-
travagances which have sometimes been
incorporated with the bunyip stories,
it is curious that precisely the
same thing happened in Europe with
regard to crocodiles. We also have
legends according to which monsters
are introduced into the British Isles,
which never existed there, at least
during tire Christian era. Those who
have read “ The Book-Hunter ” by John
Hill Burton, will remember the story of
Colurnba ordering one of his band to
cross the river Ness for a boat. Lurk-
ing in a deep pool is an aquatic
monster. It makes its appearance on
the surface, and with distended jaws, it
is just about to devour the swimmer.
The saint, however, orders the monster
off and he must go. As Burton points
out, this monster, by the description, is
plainly a crocodile. But there were no
crocodiles lurking in the Ness in the
days of Colurnba. Another story of
similar character is noticed by the same
author. A girl is washing au article of
dress on the banks of a Jake. An aquatic
monster comes and swallows her up
bodily. St. Colraan learns the state of
affairs and extracts the girl alive from
the inside of the monster. Again here
from the description, the monster could
only have been a crocodile. If, then,
even in Europe, such legends could pre-
vail so far from the latitude of actual
crocodiles, we need not wonder that
legends of the alligators of Queensland
or the North of Australia generally
should be found in parts of the country
far removed from the region in which
alligators now live. If mistakes in
geography and zoology were made by
historians in Europe, it is not very
wonderful that such mistakes were
made by savages in Australia.
But can we push our inquiry beyond
the point indicated above ? There are
bunyip legends of a deadly monster,
and these legends extend over most of
Australia. Moreover there is the
deadly alligator actually inhabiting the
northern part of the country over which
th-se legends spread. Moreover it was
long ago suggested by Professor Owen
of London, that probably the Saurians
of the north gave rise to the stories
found in the more southerly regions of
destructive monsters inhabiting rivers,
lagoons and swamps. Can we now go
a step further, and make anything out
of the name Bunyip? At Mackay in
Queensland, one name for the alliga or
is Munni Munni. Now in dealing with
the laws which regulate letters, we
find that the nasal in has a
special affinity for the labial h.
Where the one is the other very easily
slides in. Also when the more solid
labial gets hold, the nasal often dis-
appears. Thus we would get Munni—
Mbunni, Bunni. According to pbi’o-
logical principles, what is now given
one of the commonest developments of
phonetic change. Furthermore, in
Western Australia we :.nd a fabulous
monster called Bunnyar, which we may
reasonably take as one of the Munni-
Bnnni race. In Victoria we have the
Bunyeep, and in N. S. Wales the well-
known Bunyip. That the Munni of
Queensland is the Bunni of the other
colonies is supported by the twofold
proof of meaning and shape of word.
The terminations yip and ar oryar seem
variable, while the Munni or Bunni
remains. Perhaps also in accordance
with the fact that Munni-Munni means
an alligator in Queensland, is the fact
that Muunee means a lizard in Victoria.
The Munni-Munni, with his name
repeated, is the big, the monster lizard,
the saurian.
In the matter before us, it is worthy
of remark that amid diversity of detail,
there are certain points which seem
fixed. On all hands there is the deadly
character of the bunyip. In the Boy
legends his very name has become a


synonym for death. Once in his power,
escape seems hopeless. This throws
s« als and dngongs out of competition.
Agabi, the deadly monster lurks in
swamps, lagoons, and rivers. This
throws sharks out of competition. The
converging lines from all quarters, in-
cluding especially the name, bring us
steadily to one point, namely, the con-
clusion that the alligator of Queensland
is the more immediate origin of the
bunyip legends of Australia. Of course
we must not forget that we may have to
go a step beyond eagles and alligators
for a still more deadly enemy than both
of these put together.
But we are not yet done with the
alligator. As far back as 1845 an
aboriginal, a native of Cook’s River dis-
trict, gave evidence before a select com-
mittee in Sydney. In this evidence it
transpires that what is known as the
devil amongst us, had his exact equi-
valent among the aborigines. This evil
being was called Boy. The words of
Mahroot, the Cook’s River aboriginal,
are very explicit; he says “ Boy just the
same as yon call Devil.” Now in the
old vocabularies of Tench and Hunter
of last century, we find the words Boee,
and Boye meaning dead, also death,
and ghost. The association ideas of
here is plain enough. But can we make
anything out of the name Boy ? If we
ran up the name bunyip to the present
name Munni-Munni for alligator in
Queensland, can we accomplish any
similar process with this name Boy for
Devil ? When we go to the Malay
Archipelago we find the forms Buwaya,
Buaya, Boya and Baya as Malay words,
and especially Javanese words for the
alligator. Moreover the root can be
traced as far as Madagascar, where it
appears in the forms Voaya and Yui
for alligator. And, lastly, on the Gold
Coast of Africa, we find the form Baiya,
which means the Devil. It would no
donbt be interesting to discover whether
any similar forms of word for alligator
actually still exi«t in the northern region
of Australia But in any case the fore-
going materials adduced are sufficient to
give some colour to the conclusion that
Boy and Bunyip refer to the alligator,
and that the saurian named has afforded
a very apt groundwork for aboriginal
allusions to a destructive, powerful, and
living being, who is the natural enemy
ot the human race. In view of both the
bunyip and the mullion legends it is
proper to notice again how amid various
extravagances, certain points tenaeionsly
maintain their ground. Thus as already,
stated, the bunyip is associated with
swamps, lagoons and rivers. With re-
gard to the legends of the mullion class,
we come prominently into view of the
fact that demons are both male and
female, and that of the two the female
is the more ferocious. This fits perfectly
to the fact that among eagles the ferocity
of the female is naturally developed in
the protection of her young. But we do
not find any difference between the male
or female bunyip. The one seems to ba
just as bad as the other, and both to be
as bad as description can make them.
PIAME.
Perhaps the materials already pro-
duced will suffice to establish the tact
that the aborigines have a strong belief
in evil beings. Had they a belief in a
good, a benevolent being ? Here we
are met with conflicting testimony.
Some inquirers have expressed the
fullest belief that the aborigines acknow-
ledged ci supreme being of a good
character. Others again have declared
that after years of intimacy with the
blacks, they never could discover that
they believed in a God of goodness,
however much they believed in evil
spirits and demons. With regard to
this question it must be acknowledged
that the associations of the aborigines
with the white man, and especially with
the Missionaries, invest the enquiry with
extreme difficulty. If questions are
put to the blacks about a benevolent


deity, and if a favourable response is
obtained, it is simply impossible to avoid
the suspicion that the answer, or even
the belief at the time, has been more
or less shaped, if not altogether pro-
duced, by what had been previously
learned from the white man. A pious
settler in the far interior, reading a
chapter of scripture in the hearing of
one of his domesticated aboriginals,
might easily be the occasion of exciting
ideas which would onerate in the brain
of the bia'-k man all the remaining days
of his life. In such circumstances can
we work upon materials which are free
from the drawback indicated above ?
Have any European travellers recordi d
ceremonies which they saw performed,
in which we can detect any indication of
the acknowledgment of a benevolent
deity ? In answer to this question we
turn to the work of John Henderson,
published in Calcutta in 1882. He saw
important ceremonies performed by the
Wellington blacks on the banks of the
Macquarie, Now amongst these
ceremonies were certain dramatic per-
formances. One which occupied a con-
spicuous place was the destruction of the
evil spirit. Now we are at once
interested to find that the evil spirit is
ernl lematically set forth by the
eagle-hawk. Who then destroys the
evil spirit ? We find it is a personage
called Piame, Who then is Piame ?
We find that he is the father of the
black race ; that he once dwelt among
men ; that he set up the system of re-
ligious mysteries which obtains amongst
the natives, and that he is to return
again. Now may we not submit that
ibis goes far to establish aboriginal
belief in a deity of a wholly different
stamp from such as may be grouped
under the Mnllion and Bnnyip clusses ?
The very fact of the conflict with the
eagle-hawk, the representative of evil
almost carries with it the conclusion
that the dramatic representation which
was celebrated in the forests of the
Wellington district, was designed
directly to set forth the struggle
between the good spirit and the evil
spirit. Now here we are independent
of such answers as we might get by
asking whether or not an aboriginal
believed in a benevolent deity. We
find the very fact of such a belief im-
bedded in the very ceremonies which he
and bis forefathers have been celebrating
during past ages. It may be added
that the subsequent investigations of
Ridley and othe r s have ten ed to confirm
this conclusion.
Having reache 1 Piame, the repre-
sentative spi'it of goid, can we make
anything out of the name ? Amongst
the various forms in which the name is
sometimes presented to ns we get
Baiamai, Baiame, Byamy and others.
The meanings attached to these forms
are Maker, God, Creator. Now the
roots ha and ma which, philologically are
very closely associated, are very common
in the Australian dialects for father.
Also the doubling of the root is very
common as baba, mama, or modifications
of these. Henlerson also distinctly re-
cords that Piame was regarded as the
Father of the black people.
We may notice indeed that the eminent
scholar Max Muller has had bis atten-
tion drawn to the name Baiamai as the
name for Creator amongst the Australian
Aborigines. He points out the necessity
of making some discount on the score of
danger from theological bias, but also
adds that there is an agreement between
such a name and the root hhai which
means to make, to cut out. But there
is not the slightest necessity for any
ultimate antagonism between the two
ideas. More immediately, an extensive
induction seems to favour the idea that
Baiamai i* the great Father in aboriginal
theology. We recognize at once that
the form pi ox pa, with its more immedi-
ate phonetic equivalents ha and fa and
ma is one of those wide-spread roots
which appears to be co-extensive with
the human family. This root applies
to all languages. Wholly excluding


those languages which recently were
called Indo-European, Sir John Lubbock
has collected lists of many scores of
tribes and people in all the great
divisions of the world, including
Australia, in which the forms ha and
ma, with manifold modifications and
combinations, meant father and mother.
It is indeed very worthy of notice that
the form ma often means father. The
same happens in the Australian dialects.
Philologically this occasions no difficulty
owing to the relationship of the letters
m and h. In any case it is interesting
to notice that the good, the benevolent
deity, even among the poor wandering
prodigals the aborigines of Australia, is
that deity whose name embodies twice
over the root which means Father.
But what have we reached in the
religious beliefs of the aborigines ?
Dramatic celebrations to set forth the
conflict between the good spirit and the
evil spirit. Here is a most important
theological belief embodied in the abo-
riginal ceremonhs. W hence came it ?
Did some saeacimus blackfellow, of
philosophic tendencies, first elaborate
the idea of conflict between powers cf
evil ai d of good, and then did he set
about constructing a system of cere-
monies in which this important dogma
should be both embodied and taught?
It is certainly more easy to suppose
that the ceremonies and emblematic per-
formances which Henderson saw in the
forests of the Wellington district are
the remnant of ceremonies which were
brought over from Asia, than 1© supj ose
that they were invented and established
on AustraTan soil.
The Mystic Triad.
Have we any indication of any other
benevolent duly besides Piame ? In the
case of the Mulliou demons, and the
Bnnyip devils, we have at least two
classes of evil beings. Is there any evi-
dence of a plarality of benevolent beings ?
In Victoria we hear of Kurukurook as
a deity of whom the blacks speak with
veneration. The mythological tradition
in connection with this deity, otherwise
called Karakorok, is described as the
snblimest of all traditions which the
blacks possess. It is in fact a fire-legend,
and Karakarok, as well as W aung ap-
pear as the friends of humanity by ob-
taining fire for poor shivering mortals,
to enable them to warm themselves in
the cold weather, as well as to cook
their food. There are sundry other indi-
cations of benevolent deities, but the
forgoing will suffice for the purpose of
this paper. We shall have to take up
Karakarok more minutely hereafter.
Having got thus far we pause for a
moment to survey the situation and
determine oar next line of inquiry. We
have clear evidence of both benevolent
and malignant beings. We have seen
that of the benevolent beings, Piame
is the one whose name seems to indicate
the idea of Father, Can we find any
trace, in all the materials to hand, in
the Australian mythology, of that
trinity which was so extensively known
in the ancient world ? We have the Hin-
doo trinity, the Egyptian trinity, and the
Assyrian trinity, besi ies others. We
need not doubt for a moimnt that
elements of divine truth were preserved,
although, in an idolatrous manner, in
the foregoing cases. In the Assyrian
trii ity, rendered familiar by the
sculptures brought from the East ly
Luyard, we have the first person repre-
sented by a venerable old man. The
third person is represented by the wing
and tail feathers of a dove. This
appears very extraordinary, but we must
bear in mind how much of the light of
divine troth floated about for centuries
amongst the people who lived after the
deluge without any record of it having
been preserved. Moreover, we have to
recall the suggestiveness of an expression
used in the beginning of Genesis. It
is said the spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters. Now the ex-
pression admits of more specific descrip-
tion than is denoted by the word moved.
It is—hovered, fluttered, as a dove


flatters. But what of the second
person of the trinity ? In the Assyrian
sculptures He is represented by a circle.
Of course the three are all so fitted to-
gether as to give the idea of trinity in
unity. But whence the circle to re-
present the second peison of the trinity?
This embodies a reference to the primal
promise made in Eden to our first
parents —the seed of the woman
shall bruise the serpent’s head.
But how is this made out ? The word
Zero has come to us from the East, and
and it is employe ! by us to denote a
cypher or circle. Now Zera, a word
closely resembling it, is the one used in
the Shemitic languages to signify seed.
In the Chaldean mysteries a system of
equivoques was constructed by using
words, wbiih had two meanings, one to
the initiated, a mystic meaning, and
quite another and a common meaning
to the general mass of mankind.
Words, whether ident'eal in form, or
closely resembling each other, were con-
venient for this purpose. Thus the
circle to the uninitiated was a mere
zero, but to the initiated, it was Zera, the
promised seed, the Messiah, the second
person of our Christian trinity. In the
religious systems of the old world the
circle in fact has a double reference. It
was the symbol of the sun among the
fire-worshippers, and curiously enough,
here also it fits into such a biblical
reference to the Messiah as that which
calls Him the Sun of Kighteousness.
In the old pagan world, then, we find,
as on the Assyrian Sculptures, that an
idolatrous record of a knowledge of the
trinity was made centuries before the
Christian era. These Sculptures exist
as evidence to this day. The Egyptian
records afford abundant evidence of the
i lea of trinity in connection with deity.
Triadic arrangements of the Gods are
common. Also associated with the
triadic . nature of deity there arose
triadic arrangements designed to set
forth the action of deity whether on
matter or spirit. Now we find an
Australian triad, as preserved bj
Threlkeld which takes its place most
naturally in the list of those collected
from various sources by Sir Gardiner
Wilkinson, Here are four triads :
1. Will, light, life,
2. Fire, water, air,
3. The egg, fire, water,
4. Ulorau*, chusorus, the egg.
Of these triads one is Phoenician, two
are Greek, and the remaining one is
Australian. It must be confessed that
they have a very great family likeness.
The one word which sets forth the
Australian trial is Yarro. It means an
egg, but mystically fire or water to the
initialed. Moreover there is the
mystic egg which also occurs elsewhere
in Australian mythology. In the old
world the mystic egg was the well known
symbol of the ark in which Noah and
bis family were preserved. This gives
us the connection between the mystic
egg (ark) and the water (deluge.) Still
further in the religious scheme of the
old world, as water had become the
symbol of purifying and also of destruc
tion (as at the deluge), so fire came to
occupy a similar place. It was both the
purifier and the destroyer, hut the mystic
egg, with its reference to the deluge, is a
subject of itself, and we come it
here only incidentally.
We return to our four triads :
1. Triad of Orpheus.
2. Triad ot Pherecydes at Syros.
3. Triad of the Australians.
4. Triad of the Phoenicians.
I do sincerely plead on behalf of the
Australian triad that it appears to be
quite as respectable as its Greek and
Pioenciian brethren, and that as a
historical, or spiritual, or metaphysical,
or transcendental settir g forth of any-
thing, it is quite as philosophical and
satisfactory as its neighbours. It would
do no discredit to the list of triads in
?Ir Gardiner Wilkinson, It will be
noticed that at two points out of three
it actually agrees with the triad of so
aristocratic an authority as Pherecydes


of feyros, the master of the illustrious
Pythagoras. At the third point the
Australian triad has the honour of
agreeing with the Phoenecian triad.
Now is this association of ideas in the
Australian triad, bearing so striking a
family resemblance to the others adduced,
the result of mere coincidence ? At
the least, will anyone confidently deny
the possibility that we have in this
mystic scrap, fortunately preserved by
Threlkeld, a far-travelled remnant of
speculations which occupied the intel-
lects of Greeks and Phoenicians more
than a thousand years before the Chris-
tian era, and of the Egyptians at a
much more remote period ?
THE MYSTIC STONE.
But we push on. If there are traces
of a trinity, and if, in the Assyrian
sculptures we can quite easily perceive
the intention to indicate the Father, the
Promised Seed, and the Holy Spirit,
can we find anything in all that has
been witnessed and recorded of Aus-
tralian beliefs and ceremonies, which
points to the distinction of persons in
the Trinity ? The answer to this ques-
tion will require some remarks by way
of introduction to bring us abreast of
the matter now to come before us.
However as the key note of the subject
it may be said, that as zero, and z ero, or
dialectic modifications thereof, were con-
venient to signify either the promised
Seed, or a mere circle, so we shall find
throughout ancient literature sacred
and profane, as well as in Australian
religious belief the Mystic Stone occupy-
ing a singularly prominent place. Now
according to the system of the Chaldean
mysteries the words hen (a son), and
then (a stone) were convenient, with
their dialectic variations, to signify to
the uninitiated merely a stone , while to
the initiated the reference was to the
son, the Divine Son, the promised
Messiah.
As regards introductory remarks let
os glance for a moment at the way in
which the oracles of Greece as well as
the equivoques ot the Chaldean
mysteries were managed. The oracles
which prophets of old delivered from the
Almighty needed no subterfuges. The
others required great care as to the
manner in which they were drawn up.
The one grand art was to have the
oracle true to the letter whatever hap-
pened, and whoever might be deceived
and ruined. Cicero, in his work on
Divination, supplies us with two dif-
ferent kinds of oracle. There is the one
which was given to Pyrrhus. “ Aio ,
te, ASacida, Romanos vincere posse.”
“ I tell you, oh son of ißacus, that you
can conquer the Romans ” ; or “ I tell
you, oh son of YBacus, that the Romans
can conquer you.”
Here the construction is ambiguous.
The words can be read, correctly to the
letter in two ways which are quite oppo-
site to each other. Again
“ Croesus, hy crossing the Halys, will
destroy a great empire .”
The ambiguity here is as to which
empire it was that would be destroyed.
Croesus too hastily took for granted
that it was his enemy’s empire that
would be destroyed. The result was the
other way, still vhe treacherous oracle
was true to the letter. Again
“ Ibis redibis nuuquam peribis,”
“You shall go, you shall return,
never shall you perish.” Or
“ Yon shall go, you shall return
never ; you shall p- nsb.”
Here the ambiguity is produced by
writing the words without pu.iciuaiion,
or by uttering them without pauses.
Turning now to the Chaldean mys-
teries we find how words ol different
meanings, but which were the same iu
form or only slightly different were em-
ployed so as to have one meaning to the
initiated and a different meaning to the
general public. Thus with regard to
the words hen and ehen, son and stone,
Ebn hatul—swathed stone.
Kbn hattul—sin-bearing son.
What to the uninitiated was a stone
with a bandage around it, was to the


initiated a condensed system of theology.
Let us proceed now to state some of
'the facts regarding the mystic stone in
Australian mythology, and their corres-
pondence with what we find elsewhere
in the world. We read frequently of
sacred stones among the aborigines.
There was the wiar or sacred stone
which was kept by the Chief. There was
the muramai which was used as a talis-
man. This last, in the form murramai ,
is specially described by Tbrelkeld. It
was a quartz-like substance, about the
size of a pigeon’s egg ; but rolled up in
many yards of woollen cord made from
the for of the opossum, till the whole
was as large as a cricket ball. The
mative who bad possession of it was very
much concerned that no female should
see it. The small particles which may
become detached from the stone are
•swallowed by the aborigines under the
impression that sickness is prevented
thereby.
In vi w of the foregoing, let us now
•consider that we have a mystic stone in
scripture. By mystic we mean references
which have some hidden meaning, which
bring ns to something more than a mere
stone. Far back in the early history of
the world, when Jacob was on his death-
bed we find him speaking of the “ stone”
'(eben) of Israel, But this stone is also
•explicitly the Shepherd of Isra 1, that is
the Messiah. Again, there is the great
proph cy in Isaiah about the stone—the
tried stone laid in Zion. Now this
prophecy is explicitly stated to be ful-
filled in “ Jesus of Nazareth.” In the
grand visions of Daniel we have the
stone cut out of the mountain, rolling
down, destroying the great image, and
■rising to universal dominion. Under
this mystic stone is very plainly con-
tained a reference to the Son the Mes-
siah, and his Kingdom.
When we turn to pagan literature and
‘Sculpture we find abundant reference to
the mystic stone. In many countries
there were sacred stones, but we are in
search of certain specific points which
may explain the foundation on which
the sacred stone now rests. Thus we
have the sacred Baityloi of the Greeks.
Now here we find that these sacred
stones had life in them. That does not
necessarily bring us to the Messiah, but
it is an important step in the direction
indicated. Again, then, we have in
Ovid two or three lines about a character
called Olenos. Like Melchizedeck, we
get a momentary glimpse of him, but
what we ascertain is extremely signifi-
cant. This Olenos was turned into
stone. Here is one term of the problem
secured, but what of the second term
the divine Son? Why was Oleonos
turned into stone ? Because he took
upon himself the gu'lt of others while
he himself was guiltless- This is pre-
cisely what the Messiah did. And yet
again. In a Roman writer, Aulus Gel-
liu->, we have a very mysterious piece of
information. It is that the most awfully
sacred and binding oath which could be
sworn was in the form “ Per Jovem
Lapidem.” By Jove the stone ! We
ask at once what lurks under this ?
Bring it to the p'ains of Chaldea, and
test it by the rules applied to the mystic
equivoques, and you get “ By Jehovah the
Son ! ” This explains the sacrednees
of the oath and the mystic stone at
once.
Having so far gained a footing with
regard to the mystic stone, we have
other particulars to examine. The Aus-
tralian mystic stone was carefully rolled
up in many yards of string made of
opossum fur. Now in the sacred or
the Pagan literature of the ancient
world had the mystic stone any connec-
tion with a proc-ss of this kind ? As
to the mystic stone of Scripture, that is
the S<»n, the Messiah, there is the fact
that He was to be horn as a little child
and to be wrapt in swaddling clothes
The promise of the son was given to our
first parents in Eden, and it is impos-
sible to escape the conclusion that the
account of it was handed down from
generation to generation, and was spread


abroad from tribe to tribe of the human
rac<“. If we find the facts curions'y
transform'd in the course of subsequent
ag< s we need not wonder. In the Pagan
mythology we find Saturn and Rhea
< ccupying a place very analogous to
that of Adam and Eve. Saturn is des-
cribed as the son of Coelus and Terra—
Heaven and Earth—not by any means
an inappropriate description of the
of the fact ; for while Adam was the
“Son of Cod ’ ho was also made of the
dust of the earth, But now comes the
curious point. The pagan story repre-
sents Saturn as devouring his male
children. Now Rhea made up her mind
to save ore—Jupiter, and for this pur-
dose made arrangements whereby Saturn
devoured a swaddled stone instead of the
real and living son, Jupiter. It is
curious that we should have such a myth
preserved to us in pagan literaturee
bringing ns back, too, to the very cradle
of our race. Besides what is to be
found in pagan literature, there are also
the figures on ancient coins which throw
light on the subject. The lepresenta-
tions of the Temple of Diana at
Ephesus, contain a huge figure standing
in front of the Temple. Now this figme
is swathed like a mummy. Moreover, it
may be noticed by the way, that the
head is surrounded with the halo or
circle This could be accounted for by
the fact that Diana was the twin-sister
of Apollo, the sun-god whose symbol
was a circle. We have also seen, how-
ever, that here the symbolism also points
to the idolatrous representations of the
divine son promised to Eve. There is a
third particular which is worthy of
notice regarding the mystic stone.
Threlkeld states that the sacred quartz
which he saw unwound had been rolled
up “ in many yards of woollen cord,
made from the fnr of the opossum.”
Now this is curious, for we find in Pagan
literature that covering the mystic stone
with wool was a part of the ceremonies
observed in the case, i bus we know
with regard to the mystic stone pre-
served near Delphi, that the ceremony
of anointing it and covering it with
wool was performed. When we transfer
this to the region of the sacred orach s,
we know at onse what the anointing
meant—the selecting, appointing, and
qualifying for office. Nor do we pause
long to find the significance of the wool.
This points to the atoning sacrifice of
the Lamb, and the garment of righteous-
ness with which He supplies all His
people. As set forth according to the
style of the Chaldean mysteries, we
should have
Ebn hatnl—the swaddled stone,
Ebn hattul—the sin-bearing son.
There is still a fourth point which
should be noticed. Threlkeld records
that the small grains that are broken
off the Crystal are swallowed by the
natives, under the idea that these frag-
ments thus disposed of will prevent sick-
ness. We have already seen that Saturn
devoured a swaddled stone instead of
Jupiter. Now what originated such an
idea in the old pagan world, and how
do we find something so like it on Aus-
tralian soil ? Of what is this a
symbolical representation ? In what
possible shape did Adam or Eve swallow
their own children, swaddled or un-
swaddled ? They swallowed the pro-
mise of a child, a son, who was to
redeem a lost race Here let us bear in
mind some peculiarities of oriental
language and customs. In the books
of Moses we have the case of one who
was to swallow a written enrse. The
words were written out, scraped off into
wat°r, and in this shape the curse was to
be swallowed. There was again, the
inscribed roll which Ezekiel was com-
manded to eat. feo also in the case of
Jeremiah. Nay, even so far down in
the ages of history as the time of Christ,
we find the Messiah himself using these
remarkable words : “ Except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you.”
Now what are we to make of the-
rather startling correspondence which is-


found in Australian mythology, with
both ancient classic pagan literature,
and the sacred oracles themselves of
divine truth ? Did they originate on
Australian soil, or are they the water-
worn remnants of what was set in
motion rolling down the stream of time
thousands of years ago, and have they
been urged on by various currents till
they were cast upon the Australian
shores ? Or, on the other hand, what
philosophic or theologic blackfellow took
it into his head to raise up a sacred feel-
ing about pieces of quartz ? How
came he to make swathing so important
a ceremony in connection with it ?
How did he fix upon the most wool'y
covering which the zoology of Australia
supplied ? And how did he ever
elaborate the idea that swallowing the
small grains that got broken off the
quartz would prevent sickness? It
must be confessed that it is much more
easy to suppose that these things
travelled into this country titan that
they sprang up spontaneously on the
spot.
Fire Legends.
We have got something out of the
mystic triad, and out of the mystic
stone ; but there are yet in aboriginal
religion the mystic crow and the irystic
■egg, as well as the mystic fire. Can we
discover anything lurking under these ?
Let us try the crow. Starting wit i the
information that the crow occupies a
most prominent place in Australian
mythology, what would we expect to be
the character which will be ascribed to
him ? We know already how service-
able eagles, hawks, sparrow hawks and
such birds have been for constructing
an aboriginal system of demonology.
What place will the crow occupy ?
What good does he do ? If he is not
so ferocious as the eagle, he is yet very
destructive. As to honesty, he is not
to be trusted, unless within reach of a
boomerang, and scarcely that, for he is
an incorrigible thief. But to come to
the point : We learn to our no small
astonishment that he is the hero of toe
fire-legends of Australia, He is the
veritable Prometheus, the fire-briuger,
the benefactor of the human race 1
Surely some mystery lurks under this,
and it might be interesting to solve this
mystery. As to his name, he is called
Waung, and many variations of spelling
are to be met with, generally agreeing
in the root wa or wah, which is obviously
imitative of the noise which he makes.
In Victoria he is also known by the
name Karakorok, which irresistibly
reminds us of the Greek korax, korakos,
nominative and genitive ot the word for
crow. This, too, is probably imitative,
the root being gar , which is iound in the
word for throat in some languages. The
throat, of course, in such circumstances,
is associated with the voice or sound
win h proceeds from it. In the Vic-
torian mythology, however, the mom
classic name Karakorok seems to be
more restricted to the mystic crow,
while such forms as Waung apply both
to the sacred and the common crow.
Perhaps his importance is also to be
seen in the fact that he has been ele-
vated to the skies by the aborigines and
associated with the most brilliant stars.
The magnificent star Canopus is a male
crow, while a red star is employed to
indicate the female crow. The red
colour is obviously suitable lor the wire
of the fire bringer.
The Mystic Fire.
There is no doubt a very close con-
nection between the mystic fire and the
mystic fire-bringer, yet each may be
regarded as a subject, and treated to
som« extent at least independently. We
shall take up the subject of the mystic
fire first, and then proceed with the fire-
bringer. The large work of R. Brough
Smyth contains a number of legends
in which the mystic fire occupies a pro-
minent place. One of these embodies
the finest piece of literature which is to
be found in the whole department of
aboriginal lore, and it will be given in
full at the close of the lecture. It is


token from Milligan, and is of Tas-
manian origin. It is to be lound also
with con nn nts in Bon wick. Tbe loss
or want cf the mystic fire and its resto-
ration or procurement by some one very
friendly to tbe human race, at once puts
tbe Australian legends on tbe same
level with tbe great fire legends of
classic literature as so fully set before
us in the tragedy of iEscbylus known
as tl e Prometheus.
Broadly the question meets us—what
was the fire which was lost? Was it
that whereby men cook their food, waim
themselves in the cold weather, and
work in metals and the various arts?
Can these legends by any possibility
refer to a time when fire was lost or not
to be obtained by the sons of men on the
earth ? Within historic times it is ex-
tremely improbable that such people as
tbe Greeks, Egyptians, Assyrians, Per-
sians, Chinese, Hindoos, and many
rnoie, were all simultaneously nnalle to
produce fire, supposing it to have been
lost. Nay, it is a most extraordinary
sup( osition that all these people and
many n ore should all at tbe one time
have sc mehew or other lost the useful
eh merit of fire. But how does the
question stand when we try to penetrate
the mysteries of prehistoric man ? We
need not pause at what are known as the
metal ages, for the working in metals
implies the knowledge and the use of
fire. When we go back to the stone
age, we find evidence of tbe existence
of fire. Ibis age is divided by'arcbmo-
logists into three periods. Now going
back upon these we meet first the polished
stone age coincident with the period of
domesticated existing animals. This
age is well represented in Denmark by
enormous accumulations of shells. Mixed
up along with these are found the bones
of mammals, birds, and fishes. Nowin
association with these have been dis-
covered “ the remnants of hearths,”
“spets which still retained traces of fire ”
(Figuier.) But going back still another
stage we come to the epoch of Migrated
existing animals, or the Reindeer epoch..
This was the time when man chose such
rock shelters as at Bruniquel on the
banks of the Aveyron, Here again
are the hones of mammals, birds, and
fishes, along with hatchets and imple-
ments cfbone and flint. Figuier says,.
“ Ihere was discovered in 1866 a tire-
hearth of the prehistoric period. This
hearth and its surroundings have afforded
us the most complete idea of one of the
rock shelters of man during the Reindeer
epoch.”
Going still farther hack we come to
the age of tbe mammals, now extinct,,
which were contemporaneous with man.
In the famous cave of Aurignac and
associated with it, have been found
human skeletons, bones of extinct ani-
mals and beds of ashes from five to seven
inches thick. Along with skeletons were
found necklaces and bracelets, indica-
ting that in this early period of human
history men had the custom of placing
such things in graves with the dead.
Amongst the bones were found the
remains of the extinct tear and mam-
moth as well as of others. r l hese facts go
far to show that there never was a time
when fire was unknown among men even
the most primitive and barbarous. It is
pntty plain that the fire which was lost
was seme mystical fire.
Looking hack into such fragments as
have reached us about the ancient
Cabeiric ceremonies in honour of
certain Pelasgic Gcds, we get an item
which is perhaps helpful to let us see
how the idea of the loss of the common
element of fire came to secure a footing
in the minds of men. These Cabeiric
ceremonies were celebrated on the island
of Lemnos, as well as at a number of
other places. Now regarding the
Lemnian celebration we learn that, as
an important part of the ceremonies, all
fires on the island were extinguished.
The insular character of Lemnos
imported great completeness to the idea
of the total loss of fire. After a
certain time new fire was introduced


from Delos, the island of Apollo the
sun-god. After the absence of fire nine
days, the new and pure element from
Delos was distributed, and, wo are told,
a new life began. The name Cabeiria
with the secret celebrations, held at
night, reminds us ef the Australian
Keebarrah, or great national ceremony
of man-making among the Australian
aborigines. There are not wanting
some interesting points of association
between the two, but we must pass
them by just now.
We come back, then, to the question
what was set forth mystically by the loss of
..re ? What great loss of any kind has
actually befallen the human race that
can by any reasonable possibility ac-
comodate itself to the circumstances of
the fire legends of the world ? Who
was it that encountered the terrible
sufferings which Prometheus end-.red
because of his befriending the human
race ? Can we find any case in which a
great benefactor of the human race
brought upon himself the wrath of the
Supreme God as an inevitable conse-
quence of his befriending ma .kind ?
To ask these questions is to answer them.
The loss of the divine spark of
spiritual life is not inaptly set. forth by
the loss of fire as happening to the whole
human race. The Prometheus who re-
stored the fire, brought back the divine
spark, was the Messiah of the Jewish
sacred books, and in doing so he brought
upon himself the wrath of the Almighty
iu ways and tor r. asons which are made
known to us in the sacred ora' les. No
one can read the Prometheus Yii.ctns of
without beiug struck with
many expressions and lines of thought
which remind him of the Jewish
Messiah, and produce the impression
that the less of the mystic fire is a
legend of the Fall. Mo.cover it will be
hard to say why any distinction should
be made between the origin of fire
legends in Asia or Europe, and of those
in Australia.
THE MYSTIC FIRE-BEIKGER, THE CROW.
We are now in a position to proceed
with our investigation with regard to the
mystic crow. At onoe the question
comes upon us, why among all the six
hundred species of birds in Australia
has the crow bean honoured with so
high favour as to be considerd the mystic
fire-bringer, the Messiah of the human
race, or even of the aboriginal race
alone ? With all the disadvantage
which appears to press upon us at
starting, let us not fail to observe
one most important point in our
favour. We are not now following up
any suggestion which by any possibility
could have been obtained from mission-
aries or by contact with the white man.
Here surely we have a genuine ele-
ment of the aboriginal mind, rendered
all the more certain by the number and
dispersion of the legends in Australia,
in which the family of the Corvida*
figure as the fire-bringers. Is it pos-
sible then to get any clue to the reason
why the Corvidas, whether in the per-
son of genuine raven or in
that of crow should supply a model for
the aboriginal Mes«iah ? We can
understand how eagles and alligators
should supply models for Satan and
evil spirits, but how does one of the
Corvids coma to set forth the greatest
Benefactor of the human race ? What
service does he ever render to the
aborigines ? I never heard but one
case of a crow doing any good what-
ever to a blackfellow. It became the
subject of a ballad which was made
known to me by a squatter on the
Bogan. The blackfellow was asleep
when a sable brother was taking atm at
him to spear him. The cawing of a
crow awakened him just in lime to pre-
vent the miscreant from dealing a
deadly blow. The ballad ran thus
Waagin Waagin !
Yarratab,
Mooleyooanee,
Marrumboola,
Thurinya,


“ Curriathee,”
Translate n
A crow, a crow ! (awoke him while)
Dreaming (he saw a man)
Just going to spear him,
1 airing straight aim
In order to throw.
“ Stop that,” (he cried.)
In dealing with the fire legends we
have the great classic tragedy of
Hwhylus affording us common ground
for both Australia and the old world,
including both Asia and Europe. The
Aiabitn astronomers supply us with
common ground on the specific point
that the crow or raven was important
enough to have a place assigned him in
the skies, for, on the celestial maps and
globes, there he is even unto this day
with his Arabic name Al-goreb for a
particular star, and the Latin name
Corvus for the whole constellation.
Here again the Chaldean mysteries help
us. We have seen how the equivoque
for seed and circle could be applied.
We have also seen how the similar
words hen and ehen could be employed
to set forth the son, the Divine Son, as
well as a mere stone. We again con-
sult the Shemitic dialects which spread
over Syria and Chaldea and we look for
the connecting link of idea which shall
bridge over the chasm between crow or
raven and the Messiah. What do we
find ? That orehh or goreh the word for
raven means also a schety I It must
be confessed that this is curious, and
that it is sufficient to explain the
mystery at once. It is the name of the
crow which has brought him to such
honour not his real character or deserts.
As we look back again over the fire-
legends in connection with this new
idea, it is certainly worthy of notice that
the mystic crow goes about killing
snakes, and that it is while in the very
act of striking a reptile with a yam
stick, that the stick breaks, when out
flashes the fire which is thenceforward
preserved for the human race. These
points and still others fit at once
to what we find elsewhere. In the
Egyptian carvings and pictures we
have the figure of a person with
a long stick crushing down the
head of a serpent. In the sacred oracles
we have the great primal promise given
in Eden that the promised deliverer was
to bruise the serpent’s head. He was
also to tread upon the lion and the
adder. It was in accomplishing this
work that the divine fire was restored
and secured to the human race. Also
in the celestial maps already noticed
the crow is represented as driving his
beak into the great Hydra, or water
serpent. In the Tasmanian legend, the
destroyer is represented by a sting-ray,
who kills two aboriginal women. The
fire-bringers, two black men, restore
these women to life—a circumstance in
which we have a trace still preserved in
the legend it may be that life, as well
as fire, was restored by the great bene-
factor. Nay, possibly, that the mystic
fire restored was the real spiritual life
which had been lost. It is very notice-
able that the beautiful Tasmanian fire-
legend consists of two parts. The first
is simply the legend of the fire-bringers.
The second sets forth the benefactors
not only as the fire-bringers, but also as
the life-restorers.
So far, then, we have tried to tap a
subject of some interest. It would be
premature to attempt to arrive at any
very specific conclusions as to the origin
of the aborigines and the period when
they first appeared upon Australian
soil. The whole subject of language,
both vocabulary and grammar, is yet
open for investigation. From the days
of Eden and Collins, similarities have
been pointed out between the Australian
and other languages of the world. Yet
the subject, as a whole, has to be syste-
matically examined, and the results have
to be ascertained. A remark or two in
reference to the matter which has come
before us is all that can be hazarded.
The question has deen raised—could not
the aborigines of Australia, as well as


the Red Indians of America and some
others, be regarded as specific creations ?
May not Australia have been one centre
of creation for hnman beings, America
another, and so on ? If there are some
coincidences between these special crea-
tions and other special creations, may
not these have happened by importation
in the course of commerce or settlement ?
On this theory the mystic triad, the
mystic stone with the swathing, wool-
covering, and swallowing of particles, as
well as the mystic fire and fire-bringer,
become all the more difficult of explana-
tion. The same applies in full force to
the correspondence between the abori-
ginal marriage laws and those found in
other parts of the world, as set forth in
the researches of Howitt, Ridley, and
Fison.
But the theory of special centres of
creation is invested with unexpected
charms by being associated with a
geological argument in the case of the
Australian aborigines. The observa-
tions of Earl, and especially the elaborate
researches of Wallace in tbe Malay
archipelago, have given probability to
the supposition that the Australian
mainland once included New Guinea,
and extended to a short distance from
Timor. One most interesting fact has
been amply demonstrated by Wallace,
namely, that the whole character ot the
Indian animals is different from that of
the Australian. On the Indian area
we have elephants, tigers, and monkeys,
but none on tbe Australian. On the
other hand, on the Australian area we
have kangaroos and wombats, but none
on the Indian. The same applies to
birds. Moreover, tbe nearness to each
other to which these different zoological
conditions approach is very remarkable.
The peculiarities of the Indian fauna
extend along to the island of Bali,
while across a strait only fifteen miles
wide, namely, on the island of Lombok,
the Australian fauna begins. Farther
north along the dividing line the case is
*?en more surprising. The large island of
Borneo presents the Indian fauna, while
the neighbouring island of Celebes pre-
sents the Australian. Here, then, it is
argu a d that of old, dating even from the
geologic ages, the Indian was one and
the Australian another. This holds in
regard to the lower animals, but how
stands the problem when we introduce
man on the scene? We are told that
nearly the same dividing line which
separates the Indian from the Austra-
lian lower animals, separates the Malay
variety of man on the Indian side from
the Australian and Polynesian variety
of man on the other side. But what
real analogy have we here ? The fact
is very curious, but, after all, the Malay,
the Polynesian, and the Australian are
all undoubtedly one species. But the
elephant and the kangaroo are not one
species ; the tiger and the wombat are
not one species. The separating line in
the one case is very slight; in the other
it is an unfathomable gulf. A few
thousand years might easily bring us to
the one family fro n which sprang the
Malay, the Polynesian, and the Aus-
tralian ; but how far back shall we go
before we find the one pair from which
by evolution came the elephant, and by
evolution in another line came the
kangaroo ?
As regards the probability that at one
time the Indian mainland and the
Australian mainland approached eaca
other much more nearly than they do
now, it may be pointed out that this
consideration diminishes the necessity
for resorting to the theory of a special
centre of creation of human beings in.
Australia. The hundred fathoms’ line
joins Australia and New Guinea and
extends to a point quite close to Timor.
On the other side the fify fathom line
joins Java, Sumatra and Borneo
to the Asiatic mainland, Geologically
there is no doubt these shallow seas
have been shallower still, for at this
present time the whole north eastern
coast of Queensland is sinking, and
numerous places within both the Indian


and Australian areas are known to be
sinking. A comparatively slight eleva-
tion of the Malay Archipelago would
reduce the problem of migration from
Asia to Australia to the mere passage
along the stepping stones, islands, which
extend in a straight line from Bali to
Timor. At an early period in the
world’s history thousands of families of
one race and of one early religion could
have passed along such a line of
migration and in the course of a century
peopled the land of Australia. Such
a start would readily account for that
unity of race and radical similarity of
language, as well as general identity of
belief and customs which so much im-
pressed Flinders, Grey and many
others.
I have now to conclude this paper by
giving the Tasmanian legend of fire
already noticed. It was published by
Joseph Milligan, who was for many
years Medical Superintendent of the
Tasmanian Aborigines, both at Flinders
Island and also at Oyster Cove. The
legend accounts for the origin of fire at
least in Tasmania, and relates the fact
that the two benefactors who brought
the fire were elevated to the rank of
gods in the skies. They are now
identified with the Twins (Castor and
Pollux) one of the signs of the Zodiac.
The original document is printed in the
ordinary style of prose. It has, how-
ever a metrical character about it on
account of which I have arranged the
composition in the style of poetry. The
peculiar flow of the legend very closely
resembles the style of poetical narrative
which Sir George Grey took down,
apparently word for word, from the lips
of an aboriginal in Western Australia.
The native was under the excitement
occasioned by a journey into the country
in se arch of a European who, unfor-
tunately, was found dead. Although
the Legend of the origin of fire is now
to be given in the style of poetical
composition, yet not a word has been
altered.
Tasmanian fire legend.
“ My father, ray grandfather,
All of them lived a long time ago
All ovt-r the country.
They had no fire.
Two blackfellows came.
They slept at the foot of a hill—
A hill in my country.
On the summit of a hill
They were seen
By my fathers, my countrymen—
On the top of the hill
They weieseen standing.
They threw fire like a star.
It fell amongst the blackmen
ATy countrymen.
They were frightened,
They fled away—all of them I
After a while they returned,
They hastened and made a fire—
A fire of wood,
No more was fire lost in our land.
The two blackfellows are in the clouds
In the clear night
You see them like two stars,
These are they who
Brought fire to my fathers.
The two blackmen stayed a while
In the land of my fathers.
r l wo women were bathing.
It was a rocky shore,
Where muscles were plentiful.
The women were sulky,
They were sad ;
Their husbands were faithless—
They bad gone with two girls,
The women were lonely,
They were swimming in the water,
They were diving for cray-fish,
A sting-ray lay concealed
In the hollow of a rock—
A large sting-ray—
The sting-ray was large.
He had a very long spear.
From hie hole he spied the women,
He saw them dive.
He pierced them with his spear,
He killed (hem,


He carried them away.
Awhile they were gone out of sight.
The sting-ray returned ;
He came close in shore,
He lay in still water,
Near the sandy beach.
With him were the women—
They were fast on his spear
They were dead !
The two blackmen
Fought the sting-ray.
1 hey slew him with their spesrs,
They killed him !
The women were dead !
The two blackmen made a fire—
A fire of wood.
On either side they laid a woman.
The fire was between—
The women were dead !
The women are with them—
They are stars above.*’
Erratum.— ln page 5, second column, 20th line from the
bottom, for : “ Some astute aboriginal,” etc., read —“ Some
artistic aboriginal,” etc.
The blackmen sought some ants ;
Some large blue ants.
They placed them on the bosoms
Of the women.
Severely, intensely, were they bitten
The women revived,
They lived once more !
Soon there came a fog—
A fog dark as night,
The two blackmen went away,
The women disappeared,
They passed through the fog.
'1 heir place is in the clouds.
Two stars you see
In the clear cold night.
The two blackmen are there.


