

The War
and the
Jewish Question.
Harris & Sou, Printers, 175 George-street, Sydney


THE WAR AND THE JEWISH QUESTION.
TO THE JEWISH RESIDENTS OF N.S.W.
In this crisis of the world’s affairs, the
Jewish people is paying its share in blood
and treasure—more than its share in the
devastated regions of Lithuania, Poland,
and Galicia, About half-a-million Jews
are fighting under various banners for the
liberties of the world; untold misery is
the fate of those non-combatant Jews, in-
dividually and collectively, who stand in
the way of the contending armies in
Eastern Europe. A free Belgium, a re-
constituted Poland, a strengthened Serbia
—such are the preliminary conditions
which English Jews, together with their
Christian fellow-citizens, confidently anti-
cipate as the outcome of this struggle for
the rights of the “small” nations.
What about the Jews? Will their sacri-
fices leave them better or worse?
You, who are in a favoured position,
have a great responsibility. You may
have given a contribution to relieve the
indescribable sufferings of your kith and
kin in Poland and Palestine, but have you
identified yourself more closely with their
fate and their future?
To you individually this Appeal is now
made for the moral support of the one
Jewish Organisation with a definite, im-
deviating aim for the liberation not only


of individual Jews, but for the regenera-
tion of the Jewish People. Zionism stands
forth to-day, at this turning-point in his-
tory, as the only national endeavour of
the whole Jewish race to help itself.
In the past, the English-speaking Jews
have earned a high reputation for secur-
ing the interests of the Jews of other
lands. Will you help to maintain this
great tradition?
In 1913, at the last Zionist Congress,
about 120,000 Jews all over the world de-
clared their adhesion to Zionism, a num-
ber far beyond the membership of all the
other “representative” Jewish bodies put
together. Will you now join the Zionist
ranks, so that at the next World Congress
the Zionist representatives will be able
to speak for you, for the whole House
of Israel?
A unique opportunity for pressing a
settlement of the Jewish question will
arise on the termination of hostilities.
Will you strengthen the Zionist organisa-
tion so that they can be in a position to
speak on behalf of united Jewry? Now
is the time to join. Kindly send your
subscription (minimum, five shillings per
annum) to the Hon. Treasurer, Sydney
Zionist Society, Mr. M. B. Michelson, 64
Pitt-street, Sydney.
Issued on behalf of the Sydney Zionist
Society.
N. A. ESSERMAN
Hon. Secretary
Tishri, 5676.




J. k. FERGUSON ESQ., LL.B.,
142 PHILLIP ST.,
