





j MAm a 1. Mf A <A. if
■■MMSSrSfAV BaA * A&9 */
MEfw ■gfcjMyPQT •WBfe f *




The OilEilNl DRAGON
©IF Itlhie P@ir@img©iryps
(Copyright)
gtfsie jVI. Que*
(Author of “Wim-Wam Tales")
ILLUSTRATIONS:
Printed and Published by
PATERSONS PRINTING PRESS LTD.
65 Murray Street, Perth
PRICE 6/6




I N
- S*
' '**■**<- \
Revised and printed by kind
permission of "The Western Mail"
Initial letters by Miss H. Williams


. • . . .i. .
-


He started many bushfires.


.


CHAPTER I
WE MEET THE DRAGON
NCE UPON A TIME hundreds and hun-
dreds of years ago, there lived in Western
Australia, so it is said, a very large
dragon; this was long before there were
any white people in this country, so that
there were only natives to see him, and
I fear he worried them quite a lot
Although he was so very big he was only young
as dragons go and often went skipping about over
the hills for sheer joy, but on other occasions he
behaved very badly and dashed about blowing out clouds
of smoke and even sparks which naturally caused many
bushfires and one very bad one which the tribe were
obliged to put out just when they were starting on a
“walkabout.”
This sort of thing occurred so many times that the
tribe grew very weary of the dragon and his moods and
at last the headman called a council of menfolk and they
decided to hold a corroboree; this is very important in the
lives of the native people, and is only done on great
occasions. There was a great deal of excitement amongst
the women of the tribe but they were only allowed to sit
in the corroboree for a little while and make drumming


•• '■
noises with their hands on their sides. Strange sounds
were heard in the bushland, singing and dancing, wailing
and drumming far into the night, this continued for days
and nights but for some reason or other nothing could be
decided about the dragon.


,. j§g;' " 4 * i|A^jP
* ~~~1 - '•
• V %fe ». IF ~ &&&&&<*£&■$ >■■ -^••\V*$.£«Kl&it sS-i&$F*&R’ /
: v ■ ' : ’>*.)£■.; _ ' ■'FfcjS'* ' ' ■ j
V " >•- .p *
mA.
They decided to hold a corroboree.


??' r ? :
VK -


w
CHAPTER II
THE DRAGON GROWS LAZY
URING THE DAYS of the Corroboree no
one had bothered very much about the
children; they played games and raced
around as children always do and some
got into mischief, but one little girl sat
down quietly thinking about the dragon.
At last she thought there might be a good reason
for his bad behaviour; perhaps he was hungry!
She jumped up and fetched a dish of honey
and went as near as she dared, to the cave where the
dragon lived; he was nowhere to be seen so she put the
dish down and hurried home as fast as she could.
The following day the great beast returned and
sniffed the honey, then he tasted it and finding it good,
ate all of it, and sat down in great content, licking the
dish from time to time. This news was carried to the
headman at once by a crowd of excited children, so that
he came to see for himself. The dragon looked so satisfied
and lay so quietly that the headman told the tribe they
were always to put out honey and two kinds of jam near
the cave so as to keep the dragon happy and contented;
on this diet he grew fat and lazy, lying sprawled in the
sun, and never bothered to blow out smoke or sparks any
more.


CHAPTER 111
THE COMING OF THE GREAT HEAT
HE NATIVES SOON lost most of their
fear of the dragon and sometimes
would venture quite close to him, but
he slept most of the time, or would
lazily open one eye and then go to
sleep again. So the time went on
through long, hot days of summer, and in winter the
dragon just withdrew into his cave while the wind and
rain lashed the great bare rocks, until at last the spring
came round again.
Everything prospered with the tribe, and they began
to think the dragon was good luck to them; he had grown
to an enormous size and they were very proud of him—
indeed they quite forgot that he had ever been a nuisance
to them.
Then came the summer of the great heat; every day
the sun shone down so fiercely that the tribe suffered
very much indeed and even the dragon became uneasy.
The rocks were so hot he had to move down into the
shadow, and at last he followed the tribe into the deep
bush where they sat or lay down beside the rivers in the
hope of finding a cool place.


The dragon was very restless and could not settle
anywhere. He wandered about over the hills and valleys,
frightening all the bush creatures who thought he must
be the nightmare itself.


CHAPTER IV
THE DRAGON MEETS A LOVELY STRANGER
FTER WANDERING for a long time,
the dragon at last came to the sea at the
place where the town of Albany now
stands; he stood looking in amazement
at such a wide expanse of water and he
couldn’t quite understand it, but after
a while he somehow knew that here
was relief from the dreadful heat, and with a wild rush
he plunged into the cool waves.
The results of the great beast’s sudden dive were
rather startling. He made nearly as much swell as a tidal
wave, and created a terrible commotion amongst all the
fish-folk; they imagined it must be an earthquake. He
snorted and splashed and thoroughly enjoyed himself for
a long time and when he was tired he crawled out on to
the sand and fell asleep. When he awoke it was morning;
there was a soft haze over the sea and everything looked


He created a terrible commotion.


\' f )
" ' ' ' ■
She sat quietly on a rock.


quiet and peaceful. Joyfully the dragon plunged in for
his morning swim. The water was lovely; he rolled and
splashed and floated on his back for a long time. Closing
his eyes he drifted happily farther and farther out to sea.
When the sun began to beat down on him he sat up
suddenly and found how far he was from the shore. With
a great bound he turned and swam strongly toward the
beach; it was then he saw the mermaid!
She sat quietly on a rock combing her beautiful gold
hair. Plaiting it up, one plain and one purl; so busy she
was that she didn’t notice the dragon—thinking he was
just another porpoise, but when she did see him she was
so surprised that she fell from the rock in astonishment
and had to dive down after the comb she had dropped.
.. - -
W .. "2rs^^te : —•”■


4
4J
CHAPTER V
THE DRAGON FALLS IN LOVE
F THE MERMAID was surprised, so was
the dragon. He had never seen anyone so
lovely in his life and when she so suddenly
vanished he was very upset; he swam
around the rock for hours hoping she
would return and at last, utterly weary,
he scrambled out and lay exhausted on the sand.
Next morning the dragon was awake very early before
the magpies or the kookaburras. He slid silently into the
water so as not to disturb her if she really was there. He
swam around with no fuss or commotion and there he
saw her sitting on the rock. Although she was very
frightened she sat and waited for him; when he was
quite near she put up her hand to keep him at a distance
and looked at him for a long time.
The mermaid thought him very ugly, but he seemed
to be friendly enough. As for the dragon, he had fallen in
love so completely that he was overcome with shyness
and did a back somersault just to relieve his feelings.
After this they saw each other almost every day, and
at last they became quite friendly. Soon the dragon tried
to persuade the mermaid to come with him to a lake he


4 V x
i_ v ' ■"* i5jS ‘ *~ ', ■*
:" ' H* ' : ntttt v^^^Bm>:- ' j y -—«««. /v « v ji'fcir* '^'-^‘"ijiywJ^^^^^BBB^y
j£~ v j&|eW
Diving down to the sea caves.


He sat on
ledge
blowing bubbles.


knew of, and leave the sea, then they could be together
always, but the mermaid was not so easily persuaded.
She told him she must go and see her father and ask his
advice. Next day she was not at the rock; she had gone
diving down to the sea caves where the old merman, her
father, sat on a ledge of rock blowing bubbles with a clay
pipe.
The pretty little mermaid was full of her romance,
and eagerly told him all her news, then she asked his
advice as to what she should do.
He shook his head gravely and removed the clay pipe
from his lips. “Do as you think best, daughter,” he said,
“But remember, if you had been meant to live on dry
land you would surely have had two feet.”
The mermaid left her father rather sadly because she
had already made up her mind to go with the dragon, but
not for a little while, she wanted to make sure that she
really did care for him to leave her loved sea caves and
go adventuring on dry land.


CHAPTER VI
THE DRAGON’S SONG
“Oh lovely mermaiden
just listen to me
Til tell you a few of the
sights you will see.
There’s a lovely lake where
a black swan glides;
Upon its banks
the platypus hides.
Down sunny hillsides
the kangaroos leap,
And waterfalls glimmer
where grey rocks rise steep
How sweetly the Magpie
will carol and trill;
The joyous notes echo
from valley and hill.
HAT IS IT LIKE, away over the hills?”
the mermaid asked. “Are there shells,
and caves? and are there porpoises?”
So the dragon sat and thought for
some time; then he cleared his throat
and sang in a quavering nervous sort of
voice!


Queer little hoodie rats
hop from their holes;
While soft furry possums
climb jarrah tree boles.
The lake in the evening
is quiet and still
You may swim at your leisure
or rest at your will.
Oh lovely mermaiden
don’t break my poor heart.
I should die, I assure you,
If we had to part.
Here he stopped and looked so pathetic that the
mermaid felt sorry for him, and it has been said that pity
is akin to love.
In the morning very early the dragon went for his
swim. He was lying on his back floating lazily, when he
was joined by the mermaid. She swam about and seemed
to be very happy but silent. Still the dragon was happy
and content just to be with her. They remained together
all day and it was just about sunset when the mermaid
suddenly threw her arms about the dragon’s neck and told
him she was quite prepared to go with him as soon as
ever he liked; so glad was the dragon that he danced
clumsily up and down the sandy beach.


CHAPTER VII
IN WHICH THE DRAGON IS DISTRESSED
i SOON AS the dawn came the two
set out for the dragon’s home. Lifting
the mermaid to his shoulder he strode
off at a great pace, and in his excite-
ment he quite unconsciously blew out
fire and smoke, which terrified the
poor mermaid who cried out in alarm.
He was very sorry indeed and promised not to do so any
more and, to do him justice, he kept his promise faith-
fully.
They journeyed happily for many miles until the sun
arose and began to beat down on them. Then the mermaid
began to feel very uncomfortable, so the dragon gently
lifted her down and let her slide down beside a log. She
was not very happy she felt so hot and dry; indeed, she
had never been out of the water so long before.
The dragon didn’t realise this and he went on to
describe all about the bush, to tell her the names of the
trees and the birds, but as the heat was so great she suf-
fered terribly. At last they set off on their journey once
more and the dragon dashed along the bush tracks,
anxious to get home as quickly as possible.


c n
c
cs
.a
‘5
cr
w
a bt
K ’E
o
>
0>
0)
JS
c
a-
CS
a*
-c
H


i \
, 1 ' x v
He even went as far as the billabong.


As the time went on the poor little mermaid became
very sunburned indeed, and the dragon stopped near a
billabong which, fortunately, had not become dry. But
the mermaid was so very unhappy that they decided to
stay beside the water until the sun set.
At last the heat became less and the moon> rose. Then
once again the dragon lifted the mermaid on to his
shoulders. He travelled at an even pace so as not to
inconvenience his dear little friend, and she did not com-
plain, but she was so weary and unhappy she was afraid
she might burst into tears.
Some time about midnight they reached the dragon’s
cave. The mermaid slipped to the ground and the dragon
carried her tenderly inside and laid her gently on his
bed of gum leaves. She tried ever so hard to keep from
crying, but her arms and her back were paining so much
she began to sob, and she just couldn’t stop. She sobbed
on and on.
The poor dragon was very distressed. He couldn’t
think what to do for her, and he rushed about outside
the cave and became quite distracted. Thinking to com-
fort her he brought in a dish of honey, but the mermaid
had cried herself to sleep so he sat there waiting for her
to awaken and at last he fell asleep himself and the honey
trickled down on the ground.
As soon as the dawn came the mermaid awoke and
slipped from her couch. Painfully she slid along on her
fish’s tail until she came out into the bush, then she gave


a wild cry of joy. There in front of her stretched a beauti-
ful blue lake, its cool waters still and silent. Somehow she
managed to reach its bank and with a great sigh of relief
she slipped down and down into the cool depths.
When the dragon found that the mermaid was gone
he dashed up and down the banks of the lake calling her,
but there was no answer. For many days he went search-
ing the bush. He even went as far as the billabong, but
the lovely mermaid was never seen again.
THE END
->C
'tit






1508
02233167


i
