

■ A wW -


. ' S ■ I . ■
;
I . || g t |
■
i
.


"The Brymay Toy Book"
Sent to you with the Compliments of
BRYANT & MAY PTY LTD,,
Richmond, Vic.


BRYMAY Toy Book
MAKING THE WORLD'S BEST MATCHES
Match-making is a fascinating industry, and is seen at its best in the
factory of Bryant & May Pty. Ltd. at Richmond.
Whole forests of timber come from Queensland to Bryant & May to
be made into matches and their boxes. Thus, you see, employment
is found for many more Australians than those actually working in
the factory. There are axemen, teamsters, railway men, seamen,
and scores of others, in Victoria, Queensland and other States.
These logs are peeled to the exact thickness of a match stick, or
match box, and are cut to their exact size at the rate of 1,000 per
second. They are then placed in huge match machines which, with
more than human accuracy, handle about one hundred million per
day. They are then placed, automatically, into the boxes.
Quite an important branch of Bryant & May's factory is the Printing
Department. Here, all the labels, wrappers, and a great many other
jobs, including the printing of this little booklet, are executed.
The side of the industry with which Victorians are not so familiar is
the manufacture of wax matches, and to see wax taper being made
at the rate of 60 miles per hour gives one some idea of the huge
quantity used in Australia.
Bryant & May do all that they can to make the lives of the people
who make their matches happy and contented. They have provided
club rooms; dining rooms, where refreshments are served free at
lunch time; tennis courts; cricket pitches; a bowling green and a
basket-ball ground.
Because of this wonderfully happy organization, Bryant & May make
matches equal to the world's best.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
o
c
o
E
_c
u
cxL
ro
>N
u
o
u
fO
LU
~0
~a
o
'0
_c
c
~u
aZ
>V
CO
:>
o3
-4
c
CO
>*
CQ
>v
_Q
"O
0
ZJ
tj
CO
ZD
a
CO
£
co
U
"O
o
Q.
0
O
0
E
O
oo


1
The BRYMAY Toy Book
A PHOTOGRAPH OF THE MODEL OF THE FACTORY
This model, which took over six months to build, won first prize in Bryant &
May's toy-making competition held in 1928. It is built entirely from match-
boxes, matches and coloured paper, and is mounted on a piece of board. It is
an exact replica of the Factory, and will show you that there is practically no
limit to the scope of model-building with match-boxes.
On the last pages of this book we reproduce photographs of the other prize-
winning models in this competition.
Great thought, care and hours of work have been put into these models, and
there is no reason why you should not build even better ones.


FOREWORD
ACH year many thousands of pounds worth of materials are wasted, and
this is a problem that everyone has to face.
We all try in one way or another to save something which previously has been
thrown away, and the match-box, so casually tossed into the fire or the dust-bin,
is one little waste which need not continue.
With patience and a little work, the Bryant & May match-box can be made
into many useful things, and this booklet will show you how to start to kill that
ever-present giant "Waste." It is a pity that Jack the Giant-Killer is no longer
with us to deal the death blow, but let us see what you can do yourself
Start saving all the Bryant & May match-boxes you can, and with the aid of
some glue and coloured paper, make the toys and models described in this
booklet. But don't stop where this booklet does,- go right ahead and construct
models of ships, houses, churches, schools, and so on. You can soon think of lots
of things, and practice will make you attempt a great many models which, at the
present, appear too difficult.
You will find that Bryant & May's products are much more suitable than any
other make. They have strong, straight sticks; the boxes are made accurately,
and they are the only match marketed in the patented cardboard inner box,
which is used in the construction of all the designs depicted in this booklet.


: •••
rhe BRYMAY Toy Book
A wax vesta box showing
the two ends pushed out.
The ends make very good
wheels.
Safety match-boxes. The part with the label on is known as the
"Outer Box/'while the tray or the container for the matches themselves
is known as the "Inner Box". Throughout this booklet we refer to the
boxes in these terms.
Joining two 'lnner Boxes". Here you see how to join two inner
boxes by simply sliding them into an outer box
Joining two ' Outer Boxes". The drawing shows how simple it is
to join two "Outer Boxes" by means of an "Inner Box".


fif * In ■■■f
V o V o ]Kr
The BRYMAY Toy Book
TRAIN
Requirements: Three outer boxes
(Engine) Five inner boxes.
Both ends of three wax vesta boxes
Paper to make the funnel and cover the
front of the engine.
Join two outer boxes together with an inner box, leaving about I" of the inner
box showing between each outer box. Into this space fit another inner box
vertically. Glue a complete match-box on to the top of the front outer box,
and insert an inner box into the lower outer box; thus forming the buffers.
Glue half an inner box on to the back, as illustrated, to form the tender. Attach
the ends of the wax vesta boxes with pins, to act as wheels. The whole engine
may then be covered with paper and the funnel added.
Requirements: Two complete boxes.
(Carriages) Both ends oi two wax vesta boxes
Carriages may be made by gluing two boxes together, covering with brown
paper and gluing small squares of white paper on to the sides to act as
windows. Attach the wheels in the same manner as to the engine.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
HALL STAND
Seven complete boxes
Brown paper.
Join two outer boxes together by
means of an inner box, and do the
same with two more outer boxes;
then glue together, edge to edge.
Acompletebox is then glued cross-
wise on the top of the four. Cover
completely with brown paper.
The umbrella stand is made with
two inner boxes joined by means
of one outer box. The upper part
of the stand is made similarly, but
with the bottoms of the inner
boxes cut out. Glue together, as
illustrated. A small square of silver
paper forms the mirror, and
matches act as clothes pegs.
MOTOR AMBULANCE
Requirements : One outer box.
Three inner boxes.
Both ends of two wax vesta boxes.
Take two inner boxes and cut out one end from each; then glue them together,
face to face, covering entirely with a piece of white paper. Insert (upside
down) the remaining inner box into the outer box, leaving about 1" protruding.
Glue the two inner boxes on to the outer box, with the opening toward the front,
as illustrated. Pin on the wheels. A red cross can be drawn on the white paper
with crayon.


~
The BRYMAY Toy Book
TROUGHS
Requirements : Two complete boxes
Glue the two inner boxes end to end, and strengthen by gluing a piece of
cardboard underneath, the full length of the two boxes. Then glue the inner
boxes to the outer boxes, as illustrated.
CRUMB TRAY AND BRUSH
Requirements: One inner box.
One match.
A piece of coloured paper.
Double a piece of paper about i" wide and glue it around the end of the
match; cut the paper into strips to form the brush jiairs. Cut the inner box in
half to form the tray. Tho handle of the tray can be added by gluing a strip
of paper at the back.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
COUCH
Requirements: Nine complete boxes
Glue three boxes side by side, to form the seat. Glue the edge of one box on
to the top of another, thus forming one arm of the couch. Make the other arm
in a similar manner. The back is formed with the remaining two boxes glued
together. Coloured paper glued all over, strengthens the couch.
WEIGHING MACHINE
Requirements:
One outer box.
Three inner boxes.
A circular piece of white paper.
Two pieces of cardboard.
Join two inner boxes together by means
of an outer box. The back of the upper
inner box should be facing towards the
front. The lower inner box, however, should
have its inside towards the front. Place
the third inner box (bottom upwards) into
the lower inner box. Cut the cardboard to
form hand-rails. Glue the circular piece
of paper on to the front of the top inner
box, and draw in the needle and figures,
as illustrated.


1
P?®#' t :£i& . - .: . ' J
11 A". 5
1
! USSi
\
'X
The BRYMAY Toy Book
CHEST OF DRAWERS
Requirements: Six complete boxes
Glue the six boxes together, as illustrated. Glue paper around both sides
and the back of the boxes. A piece of cardboard may be glued on to act as a
top Paper fasteners, inserted in the ends of the inner boxes, act as qood
knobs for the drawers.
TABLE AND CHAIRS
Requirements: One complete box.
One wax vesfa box.
Cut both the inner and outer boxes completely in halves. Glue one half of the
inner box on to the top of half of the outer box to form a chair. Glue a square
piece of cardboard (any size you wish) on to the top of the wax vesta box
to form the top of the table.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
FIRE-PLACE
Requirements : Two outer boxes
Three inner boxes.
Two pieces of cardboard
Brown paper.
Red crepe paper.
Glue brown paper around each box, and glue a piece of cardboard on top of
the two ends to form the shelf. Then glue the ends on to the hearth, which
is an inner box with one side cut out. A piece of card glued over the back
closes the grate in, and three narrow strips in front will form the bars. The
red crepe paper is used to represent the fire
WASH STAND
Requirements
. Three outer boxes.
Two inner boxes.
Coloured paper.
White card.
Cover the three outer boxes with
coloured paper, and glue them to
form the table, as shown. Glue the
two inner boxes together, cutting out
the ends in the centre, and glue at
right angles to and at the back of the
table. Glue on the white card to act
as the table-top. •


The BR.YMAY Toy Book
PIANO
Requirements: Six outer boxes.
Three inner boxes.
Join the six outer boxes into pairs with the inner boxes, as shown in the front
of this book. Stand two of these joined boxes on their edges, and glue on
the top of them and at right angles thereto, two more boxes, to form the
key-board. Glue the third pair of joined boxes at right angles to the key-board,
forming the upper part of the instrument. Cover the whole with brown paper,
and make pedals and legs from strips of cardboard. Panels of coloured paper
may be glued on if you wish.
PIANO STOOL
Requirements: Two outer boxes
One inner box.
Glue one outer box on top of the other. Cut one side out of the inner box and
glue it on to the top of the two outer boxes.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
ROUNDABOUT
Requirements: Two inner boxes
Two wax vesta boxes.
Two cardboard strips 6"x|"
Giue the cardboard strips together to form a cross,- make a hole in the exact
centre, and push a match through it. Now make holes in the two wax vesta
boxes, and put the end of the match-stick into the one which will be the bottom
box. Next, insert the other end of the match into the other end of the vesta
box. Glue this box on to the cardboard, but not on to the bottom box. Cut
the inner boxes into halves for the seats, and glue one on each end of the
card strips. The model should now revolve.
BABY'S PUSH-CART
Requirements: One complete box.
Both ends of a wax vesta box.
Cut both the inner and the outer boxes in halves Glue one half of the inner box
on to the top of half of the outer box. Insert the other half of the inner box
mto the half outer box, and facing the same way as the top. Cover with
coloured paper, and pin on the ends of the wax vesta box to act as wheels.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
TRAM CAR
Requirements: Ten outer boxes.
Twelve inner boxes.
Both ends of two wax vesta boxes
Brown and white paper.
Join three outer boxes by means of two inner boxes, to act as the base of the
car. Join two outer boxes by means of one inner box,'and glue (on their
edges) on top of the three outer boxes already joined. Repeat this. Then glue
the two com'plete sets together side by side. The remaining inner boxes, glued
together, form the upper deck of the tram. White paper cut into squares and
pasted on the sides, appear as the windows. Pleat two strips of brown paper
for the stairs. Pin on the ends of the wax vesta boxes to serve as wheels. Steps
and hand-rails may be made of paper.
GRANDFATHER CLOCK
Requirements:
Two outer boxes.
One inner box.
A piece of brown paper 6" x 4f"-
Join the two outer boxes together by means of the
inner box. Glue the brown paper around the boxes
thus joined. The paper will be higher than the
boxes, so tuck it in on three sides; then cut to a
point in front of the clock, as illustrated. You may
then draw in the dial and door.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
TEACHER'S DESK
Requirements: Fifteen complete boxes
A piece of cardboard.
Glue seven complete boxes together, as illustrated. Place the piece of card-
board on top, allowing i" to overhang all round. Paper fasteners inserted in
the ends of the inner boxes make knobs for the drawers. Glue eight complete
boxes together and cover with brown paper. This forms the base for the desk.
Glue the desk on to the base and cover with coloured paper.
WARDROBE
Requirements: Seven outer boxes.
Six inner boxes.
Coloured paper.
Join three outer boxes together by means
of two inner boxes. Do the same with the
other three outer boxes. These two sets
form the sides of the wardrobe. Glue a
complete box between the two sides to
form the bottom shelf and drawer, but as
this will be too long, you will have to cut
it accordingly. Cut an inner box to form
the shelf, and glue it near the top. Cover
with paper and cut a shaped top. The door
is of cardboard, with a paper-fastener
handle. A piece of silver paper will make
' a mirror for the front.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
PLATE BASKET
Requirements: One complete box.
A narrow strip of paper.
The inner box forms the basket, and the outer box is broken into pieces to
/form the divisions, as shown. Glue the paper on to the sides of-the inner box
to form the handle.
HAND CART
Requirements: One inner box.
Both ends of a wax vesta box
A piece of cardboard 2"x J"
Glue the cardboard to the end of the inner box, and glue half a match to the
other end of the cardboard to act as a handle, as shown. Complete the cart
by pinning the ends of the vesta box to the sides of the inner box to act as wheels.


The BRYMAY Tov Book
WAGGON
Requirements: One outer box.
Two inner boxes.
Both ends of two wax vesta boxes.
A strip of paper 4" x 2£"
Glue the inner box on the top of the complete outer box and affix the paper,
as illustrated, to form the cover. Pin on the wheels and push matches into the
ends of the bottom inner box to form the shafts.
SEE-SAW
Requirements: One complete box.
One wax vesta box.
A piece of strong cardboard 6"x|"
Glue the wax vesta box on to the top of the outer box, as illustrated. Cut the
inner box in half to form the seats, and glue them to each end of the strip of
cardboard. Pin the card (in the centre) to the top of the wax vesta box.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
DRESSER
Requirements: Six outer boxes
Ten inner boxes.
Glue three complete boxes together side by side. Cover them with paper and
glue them to the two boxes that form the legs of the dresser. Glue a complete
box, lengthwise,between the bottom of the legs. Glue four inner boxes together,
as illustrated, to form the plate rack. The ends of wax vesta boxes make good
plates.
Model of a School House,
which won third prize in the
1928 toy-making competition.


The BRYMAY Toy Book
SIDE VIEW
SIDE VIEW
SHOWING HOW THE LADDER
WORKS WITH A FALLING MOTION
Mo.I DISPLACING No 2 AMD SO 0«
SHOWING
1 m \
I
FIG. I Fic.3
FIG. 2


The BRYMAY Toy Book
JACOB'S LADDER
Jacob's Ladder is one of the oldest toys that the world knows. It is first traced
in China, and has been used by children there for the last 2000 years.
Requirements : Tops of twelve outer boxes.
Eighteen strips of paper ("tape") 2i" x i"
First of all it is necessary to glue the tops of the boxes together in pairs, with
the label at the back upside down.
Commencing with the top pair of labels, with the Crown facing upwards, glue
the tips of two tapes (one on either side) to the back, leaving approximately
If"sticking out. Bring these over the face of the label and on to the back of
the next pair of labels (No. 1, Fig. 2, right-hand side). Then take another tape
and glue it on to the back of the top label (in the centre and at the bottom);
bring it forward between the two labels, straight across the face of the
second one, twist it over at the bottom, and again glue it at the back (No. 2,
Fig. 2, left-hand side).
All the labels are joined together in this manner, and the string may be made
as long as you wish.
When you have completed this, hold the top label, with the others hanging
down (as illustrated in Fig. 1), then slowly turn the top label completely around
(as shown by arrows in Fig. 3). All the other labels should completely revolve
by themselves, one after the other.
Model of a Steam Roller, which
won second prize in the 1928
toy-making competition.
Model of a New Guinea Hut,
which won fourth prize in the 1928
toy-making competition.


c, V I8 "" " ""* £ ° VGA
A B
FIG.3
G H
g=—
The 6RYMAY Toy Book


BRYMAY Toy Book
MODEL AEROPLANE
This is the most difficult toy in this book to make, and it needs a lot
of attention to detail, otherwise the Aeroplane will not fly when
completed.
Requirements : Sixteen outer boxes.
Two thin pieces of wood 18" x I" x
Two pieces of tin li" x f".
One piece of wire.
One glass bead.
Glue eleven of the boxes side by side, with the centre one on its
edge, as shown in Fig. I. It will be found necessary to put a weight
on top of these while they are drying to ensure that the finished wing
is in a straight line. When they have dried tie two pieces of cotton
around to strengthen them. In the same manner, the five boxes
build the tail wing of the 'plane (Fig. 2). Join the two wings together
with the two pieces of wood. Glue the wood to the inside of the
vertical boxes in both wings, as at A in the tail, and B in the front
wing.
Next, drill a hole in the centre of each of the two pieces of tin and
bend into shape, as in Fig. 4, to fit around each end of the pieces
of wood at C and Din Fig. 3. Take a piece of wire and thread it
through the piece of tin which is to fit at D; thread on the glass bead
at F, and bend according to Fig. 5.
Next, make the propeller. This can either be carved with a pocket-
knife from a light piece of deal, or it may be made from a thin strip
of wood 8" x I", as in Fig. 6. Cut the propeller down the dotted
lines (J, Fig. 6). Then soak it in boiling water for about five minutes.
When the wood is thoroughly soft bend it, as shown in K, Fig. 6, and
hold in the bent position until thoroughly dry. When the propeller
is completed affix it to the wire at Ft, Fig. 5.
Complete the Aeroplane by putting a strong piece of elastic from
the hook at G, Fig. 5, to the piece of tin at C.
When the propeller is wound sufficiently the Aeroplane should fly.
It will, of course, require to be launched by hand.


'
MM p
IS3>
This book was wholly produced
in the Printing Dept. of
BRYANT & MAY PTY. LTD.,
Richmond, Vic.
"NATIONAL LIBRARY OF *\UH tIiALWA


1 ' \!
*
■
<
.
■
■


''""ifflf' -■ ■■■■ ■■'--■--•^ i ' j .
■; \ »
Best in the long run f
