

THE HORSE IN THE HEALTH:
ITS DISEASES:
[?]
[?]
[?] STREET SYDNEY.








EXPLANATORY NOTES.
The horse in slings shows the best and safest method of
slinging; the positions, too, of most leg diseases are marked,
the pulse, and place to bleed.
The next plate shows how to bandage for poulticing the
neck and throat, and jaws—a matter of great importance.
Plato marked B is the roof of mouth, and the letter
shows the spot to puncture when blood is required to be
taken from mouth.
Plate marked A is the sole of foot, and the letter denotes
the spot to bleed from. .
Under this is shown how a wound is to be stitched with
pins or thread.
Plate to the left of this gives the section of a foot and
fetlock joint, showing the upper and under pastern bones,
the coffin and navicular, and the joints.




EXPLANATORY NOTES.
Plate 1 is the front view of a Year-old.
Plate 2 is the front view of a Two-Year-old j the same
number of teeth are present, but the parts near the gums are
much constricted.
Plate 3 is the front view of a Three-Year-old, known by
the two large horse teeth above and below.
Plate 4 is the front view of a Four-Year-old, known by the
four large horse teeth above and below.
Plate 5 is the face and front view of a Five-Year-old, known
by the full view of all the marks in the teeth.
Plate 6 is the mouth of a Six-Year-old, known by the loss
of the mark in centre teeth.
Plate 7 is the mouth of a Seven-Year-old, known by the
loss of the marks in four teeth.
Plate 8 is the mouth of an Eight-Year-old, known by the
loss of all the marks of all the under teeth.
Plate 12 is the mouth of an aged horse.










THE
HORSE IN HEALTH:
AND
ITS DISEASES;
fjatuxc, Symptoms, anb Crtatnwni
BY
J. S. POTTIE,
VETERINARY SURGEON TO THE GOVERNMENT OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
&ESntj:
GIBBS, BHALLARD, & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS & PUBLISHERS,
108 Pitt Street, Next Union Bank.


CONTENTS.
PAOR.
Dedication 3
The Hoese in Health 5
Detection of Disease G
Breathing ... ' ... ... ... ... 8
The Skin and Coat ... ... ... ... 9
Digestive Organs ... ... ... ... !)
Symptoms of Particular Diseases ... ... 10
Diseases of the Feet—
Corns ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
Sandcrack ... ... ... ... ... 13
Quilter .. ... ... ... ... ... 12
Thrush 13
Canker of the Frog or Sole ... ... ... 14
Pricks and Injuries to Feet ... ... ... 14
Laminitis, or Founder of the Feet ... ... 15
Navicular Disease ... ... ... ... 1G
Greasy or Chapped Heels ... ... ... 17
Ring-bone ... ... ... ... ... 18
Sprains ... ... ... ... ... ... 18
Open Joints ... ... ... .. ... 19
Broken Leg ... 20
Injuries to Legs ... ... ... ... ... 21


Diseases of the Digestive Organs ... .. 21
Defective Teeth ... ... ... ... 22
Inflammation of the Mouth ... ... ... 23
Lampass ... ... ... ... ... 23
Sores at Angle of Lips and under the Tongue.. 24
Blain ... ... ... ... ... ... 24
Choking ... ... ... ... ... 25
Loss of Appetite ... ■ ... ... ... 25
Indigestion ... ... ... 26
Assimilation .. ... ... ... ... 26
Gorged Stomach ... ... ... ... 27
Gastritis, or Stomach Staggers ... ... 27
Colic ... , 28
Inflammation of the Bowels ... ... ... 28
Strangulation of the Bowels ... ... ... 29
Constipation ... ... ... ... ... 30
Peritonitis—lnflammation of Outer Coat of
Bowels ... ... ... ... ... 30
Acute Diarrhoea . . ... ... ... 31
Chronic Diarrhoea ... ... ... ... 31
Worms .. ... ... ... ... ... 31
Itching of Anus ... ... ... ... 32
Protrusion of Anus and Gut ... ... ... 32
Respiratory Organs—
Catarrh or Common Cold ... ... ... 33
Influenza ... ... ... ... ... 34
Ozena ... ... ... ... ... ... 35
Bronchitis lnflammation of the Tube of
Wimlpijje and Lungs , ... ... 36


Pneumonia or Inflammation of Lungs . 36
Thick and Broken Wind ... ... ... 37
Pleurisy... ... ... ... ... ... 38
Roaring... ... ... ... ... ... 38
Diseases of the Urinary Organs—
Paralysis of the Penis ... ... ... ... 38
Nephrites, or Inflammation of Kidneys ... 39
Diureses, or Diabetes ... ... ... ... 39
Irritation of the Bladder ... ... ... 39
Hematuria, or Bloody Urine ... ... ... 40
Diseases of Nervous System—
Tetanus, or Lock-jaw ... ... ... ... 40
Paralysis ... ... ... ... ... 41
Megrimes ... ... ... ... ... 41
Hysteria ... ... ... ... ... 41
Hypochondria ... ... .. ... ... 42
Diseases of the Liver—
Inflammation of Liver ... ... ... 42
Splenitis, or Inflammation of Spleen ... 42
Diseases of the Eye—.
Inflammation of the Eye ... ... ... 43
Specific Ophthalmia ... ... ... ... 44
Diseases of the Skin—
Scarlet Fever ... ... ... ... ... 45
Measles ... ... ... ... ... 45
Carbuncular Erysipelas ... ... ... 46
Mange ... ... ... ... ... ... 46
Surfeit ... ... ... ... ... ... 47
Purpura Hoemorrhagica ... ... ... 47
Lyrnphitis or Weed ... ... ... ... 48


Strangles—
Symptoms of Regular Strangles ... ... 49
Symptoms of Irregular Strangles ... ... 49
Symptoms of Complicated Strangles ... ... 50
Chill and Exhaustion ... ... ... ... 50
Rheumatism ... ... ... ... ... ... 51
Sympathetic Eever ... ... ... ... ... 52
Eistulous Withers ... ... ... ... ... 52
Poll Evil ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
Open Joints ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
Capped Hock ... ... ... ... ... ... 53
Chronic Capped Elbow ... ... ... ... 54
Wounds and Injuries ... ... ... ... 54
Fomentation ... ... ... ... ... ... 55
Poultices ... ... ... ... ... ... 56
Alterative Medicines ... ... ... ... 57
Colic Drenches 57
Condition Medicine ... ... ... ... ... 58
Diuretic Medicine 58
Receipts for Sprained Legs ... ... ... 58
For Healing 59
Blisters ... ... ... * ... ... ... 59
For Proud Flesh and Warts ... ... ... 59
Purging Horse 59
The Age as fixed by the Teeth ... ... ... 62


Sydney, April, 1872.
To Captain McLerie.
Sir,
Permit me to dedicate to you
these brief recommendations for the treatment
of the Horse in Health and Disease, as a small
tribute of esteem, and also as soliciting the most
fitting Patron. The great success of your
selection of Remount Horses for the Police
Force, and the excellent system pursued, has
secured a stud admired by all, and the envy of
many. This little work is the first of the kind
published in the Colonies. It might have been
made more voluminous, but the aim was merely
a practical guide for those far removed from
professional skill and advice. It embraces the
most modern classification and treatment of the
Diseases of the Horse.
I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient servant.
J. POTTIE, V.S.


THE HORSE IN HEALTH.
The first point necessary for every owner of this noble
animal, is to accustom himself well with his appearance
in health. Mark fyim while pasturing—the bright, in-
telligent eye —the glossy, even coat—the graceful action
of the limbs—the regular play of the ribs and easy
movement of the muscles of the chest during inspiration
and respiration—the clear, bright, flesh colour of the
lining of the nostril—perfect beauty in every move-
ment, whether running, walking, rolling, or resting.
Mark him in the stable standing, as in the paddock,
with perfect grace; eating with a hearty appetite the
hay or corn placed before him. No licking of the
stable wall—no picking about for pieces of soft, musty
feed—no restless pawing of the feet; in fact, nothing
but perfect ease and composure, accompanied with a
soft Aguiar motion of the ribs while breathing—a
clean," moist mouth and tongue —an equable warmth of
the whole skin, and the slow, regular, full action of the
pulse. Now, if an owner will at once make himself
complete master of the characteristics of a healthy
horse, he will readily notice any deviation therefrom,


and will at once note the symptoms and treat the
animal accordingly. There can be no greater pleasure
for one who takes an interest in the possession of fine
stock than to see his animals in the enjoyment of per-
fect health. And once healthy the observance of cer-
tain sanitary laws will greatly conduce to this end.
DETECTION OF DISEASE.
As before stated, one thoroughly accustomed to a
healthy horse and his appearance will quickly observe
the first symptoms of disease; and in order to make
himself thoroughly acquainted with the nature thereof,
will at once seek his knowledge from
The Pulse. —This may he termed a true index to the
internal state of the animal; so long as the pulse re-
mains healthy there is no immediate fear. It is caused
by the flow of the waves of blood through the arteries,
coming from the heart, and returning thereto in twenty
seconds. The pulse may be felt just within the infe-
rior curve of the lower jaw; gently press with your first
and second fingers and you will feel a small, cord-like
structure, you will then detect a regular, gentle swell as
the artery fills with blood at every pulsation of the
heart. Note the character of the beat, as well as its
number per minute. Before examining a pulse tor
disease, due regard and allowance must be made for the
state in which the animal is. If frightened, the pulse


■will be more rapid—if dull, slower. In a healthy ani-
mal, the pulse varies from about thirty-seven to forty-
two per minute ; however, I have found them perfectly
healthy as l6w as thirty-five per minute. But the
character of the pulse is of as much importance as the
number of beats; for instance, a full, bounding pulse
indicates the early stage of inflammation—a hard, firm
pulse, the second stage of inflammation—a steady,
small, wiry pulse, the advanced stage of inflammation
—a' quick, small, thread pulse, the approach of death.
But even these conditions of pulse may he temporar y
as in colic; or heat thus a few minutes and change
as in congestion. If, then, the pulse is strong, full,
and hard, fever or inflammation is indicated. If
small and very rapid, it indicates great debility as well
as fever—if a quick and forcible beat of the pulse is
followed by a sudden cessation, structural disease of the
heart may be apprehended—if the pulse is intermittent,
that is, if it, as it were, occ a sionally misses a heat, it is
generally owing to some obstruction in the heart or
lungs’ circulation, inflammation of the brain, or even
indigestion with flatulence may produce it. When the
pulse seems to resist compression, we call it hard or
firm—when small as well as hard, we term it wiry.
The Tongue. —This organ also affords conclusive in-
dications of disease. Moisture may he regarded as
favourable. Dryness points to diminished secretion,
and is common in acute diseases, also in fevers. A


furred tongue denotes irritation of the mucous mem-
brane, and is common in almost all acute or dangerous
maladies; while a tongue with red sides and tip denotes
gastric affections and bad cases of indigestion.
BREATHING.
The action of the lungs in a healthy animal is per-
formed with perfect ease. In case of disease a sym-
pathetic action is quickly observable, so that rapid
breathing does not always indicate disease of the lungs.
When free from all excitement, and in health, the
horse will breathe at the rate of from twelve to four-
teen respirations per minute, to each of which the pulse
will average three beats; while, in disease of the lungs,
he will respire at the rate of about sixty per minute.
The manner of breathing should also be noted; in cases
of pleurisy, where the action of the lungs against the
pleura gives pain, the animal’s nostrils will have a
pinched appearance, the back slightly arched, while
the act of breathing is limited and constrained, and
accompanied with a peculiar tremour of the chest
muscles. If the hands are pressed on the animal’s
sides there will be a shrinking, and a low, painful kind
of grunt. The manner of breathing in sympathetic
fever is somewhat different—it is rapid and free—no
constraint, no tremour of the muscles of the chest, no
shrinking, or evident pain on placing the hands on the
animal’s sides. Close attention to disturbed respira


tion, and how performed, whether quick and deep, or
short and limited, will soon enable to decide by this
means whether the respiratory organs are primarily
affected, or whether the unusual respiration arises from
sympathy with other diseased parts of the body.
THE SKIN AND COAT.
The skin, like many other organs of the body, quickly
manifests sympathy in case of disease, and may he seen
on examining carefully the state of the coat. In disease
it is dry, staring, or pen-feathered; sometimes the ani-
mal rubs himself a good deal, or he is denuded of hair
generally, or merely locally. On touching the skin or
coat in fever, it presents a harsh, dry, burning heat—it
no longer, through its pores, rids the system of what is
injurious to its welfare. This is a very unfavourable
symptom in cases of inflammation of internal organs.
If perspiration follows, accompanied by amelioration
of local symptoms, it is favourable; if without any
other favourable indication, it is a dangerous sign. Pro-
fuse perspiration in a horse, on trifling labour, is a sign
of weakness.
DIGESTIVE ORGANS.
These organs should be carefully studied, as they are
subject to a number of diseases. Through these organs
the constant waste of structure and tissue must he re-
placed, and is replenished by the food introduced into
the stomach. The functions of the digestive appara


tus in health are performed with regularity and ease.
Derangement may he easily detected by the foul breath-
coated tongue, capricious appetite—the animal fre-
quently preferring earth, or half-rotted hay to that
which is good—irregular action of the bowels, which
emit an odour as of rotten eggs—aversion to food—and
alternate constipation and diarrhoea. All owners of
horses should see that their animals are regularly and
properly fed with food most suitable to the work re-
quired of them. Attention to this rule would save
their animals from diseases too numerous to particu-
larize.
SYMPTOMS OF PARTICULAR DISEASES.
Each disease has two classes of symptoms—the one
class present in almost every disease, the other peculiar
to one disease only. In this little work we purpose
directing the attention to the latter class of
thus producing less confusion in the mind of amateurs
when combating disease; and in all cases of disease
we advise attention to be fixed more particularly on
this class of symptoms, and thus get at once to the
centre and root of the disease.


DISEASES OF THE FEET.
Diseases of the feet are very common in these colo-
nies, owing in some measure to the excessive heat, and
dryness and brittleness of the hoof. A good sound foot
is of great importance in a horse. It should he nearly
round on the ground surface, slighly oblique, dark, and
close in fibre; the frog should he strong, broad, and
deep, and the foot should be well proportioned to the
pastern.
CORNS.
Corns are very common in this climate, and give rise
to lameness and derangement of the system. They
may be found generally on the heel of one or both fore
feet. At first, if of recent growth, on the removal of
the horn, they are of a bright red colour, if of long
standing, dark red. When very old, the horn at this
part becomes quite spongy, and infiltrated with blood.
Sometimes they suppurate, and matter oozes out at the
top of hoof: this is generally the case where side bone
is present.
Causes. —Chiefly bad shoeing, resting on the heel, shoes
nailed too tightly to feet—shoes which are too short—
badly seated shoes—shoes left too long on the feet.
Treatment. —ln all cases remove the shoe and thin
the sole all along that side, lower the heels, and rub


coronet with receipt No. 1, and fix on a poultice; re-
peat this until the animal is sound, then fix on a well
fitted shoe and elastic pads. Don’t thin the hoof only
at corn, as this will make it worse. Keep the feet well
stopped with receipt No.
SANDCRACK.
Symptoms. —A split in the wall of hoof; it may
occur from the top down, or from below upwards.
Causes. —Dry, hard hoofs, bad shoeing, hard running,
weak and defective quartered feet; it. produces great
lameness.
Treatment. —The simplest form of treatment is the
following:—lf the crack be below, take off the shoe,
and lower the wall from the crack to the heel, then if
great pain exists apply Lotion No. 1 and poultice the
foot, the crack must also be cleaned of all dirt and grit.
When the lameness has gone, fix the shoe on the foot;
let it be clear of the crack; at the same time fix on a
small strap about the foot firmly, and keep the strap on
until a growth takes place one inch down from the co-
ronet. Keep the foot moist daily with Foot Ointment,
No. 6, adopting this plan the horse will not be two days
from work.
QUITTER.
Symptoms, —lt consists of chronic abscess of the foot,
a small swelling takes place about the top of hoof, in


time it bursts and discharges an acrid form of matter,
pipes or sinuses sometimes go from this opening to the
bones of the foot.
Causes. —Pricks, and injuries of all sorts if ne-
glected.
Treatment. —Remove the shoe, pare the sole thin,
make, if possible, an opening, so that the matter can
escape when formed; get the opening in sole and coro-
net connected, then inject with a syringe receipt No.
7, or Bluestone and Arnica, and keep the hoof soft with
receipt No. 6, and fix wet swabs or cloths on. Unless
the pain is very great the animal may continue at slow
work.
THRUSH.
Symptoms. —An inflamed state of the sensitive
tissues of the frog; a discharge, from between the clefts,
of foetid matter.
Causes. —Disease of the feet bones, standing in wet
manure. The latter is the predominant cause,' and
should be guarded against, as this disease often termi-
nates in canker.
Treatment. —Clean the clefts of the feet by inserting
pieces of cotton to the bottom of the cleft; do this re-
peatedly until the parts are clean, then sprinkle Calomel
over a pledget of tow, and puu it to the bottom of cleft,
fill the hole up with cotton and tar; this may be done
daily, and if the horse is fat and gross give him a
physic ball.


CANKER OF THE FROG OR SOLE.
Symptoms. —An arrested state of horny secretion,
disease of the sub-tissues of the feet, the frog and sole
often being completely eaten away.
Causes. —Filth, neglect, thrush, and diseased feet.
Treatment. —The same as for thrush, also fix a plate
over the shoe with screws, which must be adjusted to
give pressure; this is best secured by placing an India
rubber sole under the plate and over the dressing, renew
the dressing daily, and give the animal daily doses of
Arsenicalis, forty drops at a time.
PRICKS AND INJURIES TO FEET.
These are produced by a variety of agents, and
should always be attended to promptly, as tetanus or
sympathetic fever may set in and destroy the animal.
Treatment. —Remove the shoe, and carefully pare
the foot until the sole yields under the thumb; do not
make too large an opening, but just sufficient to get
out foreign bodies, dirt and matter which may be there;
then over the part fix a small piece of the extract of
Aconite and poultice the foot; give the animal forty
drops of Aconite daily in his drink. If the pain con-
tinues, bleed at the toe and blister the coronet; some-
times on first noticing any injury, matter has collected
under the sole and frog, but on no account remove
the sole or frog, or the cure will prove worse than
the disease. If the nail has penetrated the point of


frog, he should not he put to work for four days, even
although he does not appear lame; if he is worked he
will surely go lame, and remain so for weeks. If the
nail has penetrated the joint, and this will he known by
the continuance of excruciating pain, unnerve or shoot
the animal at once. The after , treatment of all cases
must he strictly attended to by putting between shoe
and hoof a leather sole and stopping. Do not drive
the shoe firm to the foot; also apply daily Arnicated
Oils. Brittle feet —weak feet—flat feet are best reme-
died by the persistent use of wet swabs and a dose con-
sisting of one drachm of Arnica in water should he
given daily.
LAMINITIS, OR FOUNDER OF THE FEET.
Symptoms, —lnflammation of the laminae of the
hoof. The animal is generally attacked first in the
fore feet; he is dull and restless on his feet, pointing
one, then another; appears stiff all over, gets worse,
moves with his hack arched as though it were broken,
stands with his hind legs forward under him, and moves
very reluctantly if at all. This disease demands .prompt
treatment.
Causes. —Overfeed of corn, fed or watered when too
hot, overdriven, constitutional disease.
Treatment. —At once give one drachm of Arnica in
a pint of water, and bleed from the neck until the
animal staggers or falls. If he is one day had before


treatment commences, bleed from the toes of fore feet
as much as can be got, and give a drench three times a
day of one drachm Arnica. If the animal stands, fix
him in a mud hole up to his belly; if he lies, poultice
his feet with large poultices. When the disease has
been the result of overfeeding,' it often shifts suddenly,
when at its height, from . the feet to the bowels;
when such is the case, blister the belly, and give ten
drops of Aconite every hour till it returns to the feet*
Sometimes the poultices drive it from the feet, when it
is so keep them off, and apply arnicated lotion. This
form of treatment will cure any case in fifteen days;
but the animal should get daily in his feed one drachm
lodide of Potassium.
NAVICULAR DISEASE
Is situated in the foot, at the junction of the coffin
and coronet and navicular hone. Most cases lie be-
tween the tendon and navicular bone.
Causes. —Bad shoeing, hard work, with hot, dry feet.
Symptoms. —The horse points his toe, sinks it in a
hollow when standing, is always stiff at the fetlock
joints, moves with a short, paddling step. The disease
generally begins imperceptibly, and is always worse
after hard work.
Treatment. —Bad cases can only be cured by cutting
the nerves which run down along the pastern bone.
The operation may be performed between the knee and
the fetlock. To accomplish this the animal must be


thrown. The diseased foot is then fastened to a stake,
a longitudinal incision is made over and along the
course of the nerve, the nerve _ is then lifted with a
hooked needle and cut in two, a cold-water bandage
is then fixed over the wound. There is much danger
in performing this operation, as the vein and artery lie
close to the nerve, should either of these he injured,
the animal will bleed to death. The disease may be
palliated by the means adopted to cure the simpler
form, which is*to remove the shoe, paring the sole until
it springs under the finger; fasten on a tip shoe and
an elastic pad, keep the foot soft with cold, wet swabs
by night, and hoof-ointment by day, and administer
one drachm- of Arnica tincture to the animal in one
pint of water daily.
GREASY OR CHAPPED HEELS
Are of three kinds—simple, compound, and grapy.
In the simple, we have very small bleeding cracks ; in
the compound, cracks with an ichorous, fetid discharge ;
in the last, fleshy growths like grapes.
Causes. —Bad stable management, constitutional de-
rangement, clipping the heels at the wrong time and
way, dirt, filth, and neglect.
Treatment. —In all cases give internal medicine-
twenty drops Rhus Toxidendrum in one pint of water
daily ; apply a lotion to the heels of liquid Blue Stone;
Tincture of Arnica, and Glycerine, one part of each to


a quart of water. Grapy Grease requires two parts of
the former to one of the latter. The legs must always
be well hand-rubbed, and all dirt removed ; under all
circumstances, bandage the legs of the animal immedi-
ately its work is done; keep the legs as dry as pos-
sible.
RING-BONE,
Side bones, splints, and spavins are all bony deposits.
Eing-bone forms on and about the fetlock joints. Side
bone forms on the upper and back parts of the four
coronets; splints on the leg between the knee and fet-
lock ; spavin on the inside of hock.
Causes, —Bad formation of limbs and hard work.
Treatment. —French fire the protuberance, and apply
daily a Bin lodide blister, and over this fix a piece of
fresh, newly-killed sheep’s hide, leaving the woolly side
out. This course of treatment must be continued till
the enlargement is removed.
SPRAINS.
Causes. —Excessive or exhausting work.
Symptoms. — Shoulder Sprain is known by the circle
formed by the foot when the animal is in motion. The
point of the shoulder will be warmer than usual, and
pressure will evidently give pain.
Elbow Sprain is known by excessive lameness, car-
rying the limb close to body.


Leg Sprain—By the heat, stiffness, and swelling.
Fetlock Sprain—By the heat and knuckling of
foot.
Navicular Sprain. —More heat than usual at heel,
excessive lameness; when at rest the patient will inva-
riably put diseased foot in advance of the other, travels
with ease up a hill, but, coming down, the gait much
affected.
Hip Sprain—By the lowness of bad hip.
Stifle Strain—By the dragging of toe.
Hock Sprain—By the stiffness and heat of hock.
These are the only symptoms which characterize the
lameness of one part from another, although the sprain
itself may be simple or severe, acute or chronic.
Treatment. —ln all recent sprains give one drachm
of Arnica in a drench, and rub the parts with Olive Oil
and Arnica, half and half, three hours a day. Best the
animal, and bandage the leg. Where there is great
sympathetic fever, bleed at the toe of diseased foot,
freely. All old sprains must be bandaged and blistered,
first with Mustard, then with Bin lodide Ointment, No.
8, repeating every third day until the parts are well.
OPEN JOINTS.
If there is a deep gash, shoot the animal at once,
unless it he a beast that must be preserved.
Treatment. —First apply pure Turpentine to the
wound, and lay on layer after layer of Fuller’s earth,


pipe-clay, common clay, chalk, or flour. The first is
the best; and give Aconite, ten drops every hour until
the fever subsides. All open joints must be stopped.
In some cases the firing iron must be used, and a
blister put all round, but not on the wound: this is
never resorted to but in extremities. Soft cooling food
and plenty of cold water.
BROKEN LEG.
This may he cured, if the horse is young, and worth
the trouble.
Treatment. —First put about the leg a temporary
bandage, then sling the patient. Put behind him a
bar on which he may rest; then take strong gutta
percha splints, and bandage the part firmly up with
worked cotton bandages. Leave him thus for eight
weeks, and then you may remove the bandages. Where
the flesh Or skin is cut, apply Carbolic Acid and water
before fixing the bandages. If the break is above the
hock or knee, a wooden splint must be used, extending
from the fetlock above the wound, and small pieces
must be nailed across to keep up the bandages in their
place. This splint must be fastened to fetlock, the fet-
lock bandaged, and the under end of splint fastened
firmly there.


INJURIES TO LEGS
Are produced in a variety of ways. All cuts over
two indies must be sewn or bandaged, and kept cool by
cold water. The horse should receive a physic hall.
In all cases of wounds on the legs, or other parts,
whether slight or severe, the part should be well
cleansed with cold water, by aid of a large syringe, and
Arnica lohion applied several times a day, in conjunc-
tion with cold water bandages, which should be re-
moistened many times during the day.
DISEASES OF THE DIGESTIVE ORGANS.
These comprise the mouth, lips, teeth, gums, tongue,
pharynx, asophagus, stomach, 98 feet of intestines,
liver, and pancreas. These organs with their intricate
structure constitute the digestive organs. The act of
digestion is performed thus ; —The teeth and lips secure
the food, the tongue and cheeks and teeth grind and
mix it with an alkaline fluid called saliva, then it is
swallowed, enters the stomach, and is acted on by the
rolling motion of that organ, and comes in contact
with the gastric juice, a powerful agent which will
melt all it touches. By the natural motion of the
stomach the more indigestible food is moved into the
centre, and the process of moving the food about and


mixing it with the gastric fluid goes on until the food
by degrees becomes like milk, it is then called chime.
It then passes into the intestines and mixes with a
fluid secreted by the glands of the intestines, liver,
and pancreas. The nourishing elements of the
digested food are then sucked up by little suckers
fixed all over the coat of the intestines; this milky
fluid is then passed into a large vein and mixes with
venous blood, this is purified by the lungs and goes
forth to nourish the whole system. This beautiful
chemical action goes on from day to day, so that the
hardest and softest food are changed into blood, and
each organ and each different organized part of that
organ, takes from the system exactly what suits it, and
so is strengthened for its office. This natural process
of the digestive organs comprises health; but in disease,
how different; if one organ or one set of small glands
be disorganized, diseases of different kinds quickly
declare themselves.
DEFECTIVE TEETH.
In youth the teeth may not be properly shed, and
this sometimes produces starvation, or the teeth in
adult life may be irregular, or decayed toothache super-
vening, or the teeth may have grown spikelike, inca-
pacitating the animal from partaking anything hut
soft food.


Symptoms. —The animal manifests a difficulty in
chewing hay, corn, &c., putting it out of his mouth in
quids; when such is the case, the noise of grinding is
never heard. There is an unpleasant odour from
rotten teeth.
Treatment. —Remove all shells, loose, and decayed
teeth, rasp all uneven teeth, the inner edge of under
jaw and outer edge of upper jaw. The best remedy
for a foal with irregular teeth is to give two drams of
Sesquichlonde of Iron every morning, and frequently
rub the jaws with Arnica.
INFLAMMATION OF THE MOUTH.
A common disease in young horses, or horses fresh
from the country.
Symptoms. —Frothy saliva flows from the mouth,
especially when the hit is in the mouth. On looking
into the mouth, it is found full of froth. The animal
does not eat with comfort, sometimes not at all.
Treatment. —Wash the mouth with salt and brandy.
LAMPASS.
Symptoms. —Undue growth of the first ridge of the
palate immediately behind the front upper teeth; it is
accompanied with much inflammation and is often so
much swollen as to hang below the teeth and impede


the process of mastication. It most frequently occurs
in young horses when first fed on hard feed. The horse
is afraid to partake of any sort of food.
Treatment, —Lance the upper jaw on the first bar
with a needle or small sharp knife, or if the lampass is
very large and very sore, cut it with a hot iron, which
should have a sharp cutting edge, the surface should
be free from scales and of a high temperature, and it
should he only applied where there is swelling. The
eyes of the patient should first be blindfolded and the
mouth held well open. If the bleeding is great insert
a pledget of tow saturated with turps,
SORBS AT THE ANGLE OF LIPS AND UNDER THE TONGUE
These sores generally contain barbed seed which fix
themselves there, and are most frequent in old horses.
Symptoms, —Saliva dribbles from the mouth, cheeks
swollen, under the tongue very red, and on examination
a small hole filled with seeds may be detected.
Treatment. —Remove the seeds and foreign bodies,
wash the mouth well and inject into the hole some
liquid Sulphate of Zinc, receipt No. 3. This may
be required to be done repeatedly.
BLAIN.
Symptoms. —Blisters and ulceration of the tongue
and cheeks often occurs in conjunction with other
diseases, influenza, &c,, hut is unfrequent alone.


Treatment. —Borax and Honey applied three or four
times a day; this treatment is good for all injuries
to the tongue.
CHOKING.
This accident occurs generally when feeding greedily,
or by pins and needles, or any foreign body.
Symptoms. —The animal stamps with his feet, holds
out his open mouth, grunts and coughs, the belly is
drawn up, the back arched, muscles of the neck drawn,
the horse tries to vomit, and thick mucous comes from
mouth at each effort.
Treatment. —First pour a little oil in the animal’s
mouth, then ascertain, if possible, the position of cause,
and stroke the throat downwards with the hand. If,
after some time, the animal cannot remove the obstruc-
tion, the hand must be inserted through a balling iron,
and the throat manipulated; if you fail to reach it
recourse must be had to the probang.
LOSS OF APPETITE.
This is a most common complaint in stall-fed horses,
and although a constant attendant on all forms of dis-
ease, it often occurs without any other marked consti-
tutional disturbance, and is caused by irregular or


excessive feeding, bad forms of food, derangement of
liver or pancreas, &c. Sometimes the animal becomes-
disgusted with one form of food, while he will partake
freely of others.
Treatment. —ln most cases begin with five drachms
of Aloes given in a drench, and two of ginger, espe-
cially if there is any symptom of acute disease. If
there is debility and low fever, give four drachms of
Oxide of Iron, If the animal absolutely refuses a par-
ticular kind of food, you must prepare the food of
which he is fondest, and mix with it a little of that to
which he manifests antipathy; mix it into a sloppy
mash, and keep him short of water, and for the sake of
the drink he will soon partake of the objectionable
feed.
INDIGESTION.
Symptoms. —Food in an undigested state passing’
with the dung. The food lies long in the stomach, and
the animal manifests no desire for more. He is also
dull, heavy, and unthrifty.
Treatment. —Give forty drops of liquid Arsenicalis-
daily; it may be divided amongst all his feeds.
ASSIMILATION.
Symptoms. —ln this disease, contrary to the above,
the animal is fond of food; he appears to digest well,
and yet he is hide-bound, poor, feeble, and ill-looking.


The fact is, the food passes off not in the dung, but
through the lungs, kidneys, and skin ; it is not taken
up by the system.
Treatment. —lodide of Potassium, one drachm daily.
If the animal licks the walls and dirt, give Hyposul-
phate of Soda, one drachm.
GORGED STOMACH
Is produced by inordinate eating of rich, succulent food.
Symptoms. of the whole abdomen through
gas; great pain and complete restlessness of the animal,
who rolls and plunges for a quarter of an hour at a
time, ceasing only through exhaustion; if the stomach
bursts, there is vomiting, &c.
Treatment. —ln the early stages give one drachm of
Carbonate of Ammonia, well mixed in treacle, every
hour until there is relief; also use the stomach pump,
and give injections. But if inflammation has set in,
give one drachm Tinct. Aconite. But if the stomach
be ruptured, which may be known by placing your ear
to the animal’s chest, when a gurgling sound will be
heard, and will likely be accompanied with vomiting,
shoot the animal at once.
GASTRITIS, OR STOMACH STAGGERS.
Produced by large quantities of unsucculent bay, and
certain forms of poisonous weeds.
Symptoms. —The animal is always voracious; on


moving, the symptoms of this disease may be quickly
seen. The animal reels and staggers like a drunken
man, the countenance dull and stupid, the breathing
deep and slow; or he will sometimes dash recklessly
about.
Treatment. —Six drachms of Aloes and two of Gentian
given in liquid, followed in four days by one drachm of
Muriate of Iron daily.
COLIC.
There are many kinds of this disease, caused chiefly
by worms, dust balls, flatulence or nervous colic, sudden
changes of food, bad feed, bad water, overfeeding, &c.
Symptoms. —The animal is attacked suddenly, kicks
at his belly, lies down and rolls about, gets an interval
of ease, the pulse resuming its healthy beat, but is soon
altered by another paroxysm of pain.
Treatment. —Flatulent colic, where there is disten-
sion, Garb, of Ammonia and Nux Vomica, given in one
drachm doses alternately. Most cases will yield to ten
drops Tincture of Aconite. Give injections, rub the
body and belly, and let the animal roll about.
INFLAMMATION OP THE BOWELS
Is produced by overwork, exposure to cold, sudden
change to succulent food, worms, dust balls, purgation,
unsuitable medicinal treatment, hernia, and inter-
susception.


Symptoms, —They set in almost imperceptibly; rest-
lessness, continuous pain, increasing so rapidly that the
animal manifests increasing violence, pawing of the
ground, rolling over repeatedly, the abdomen looks
tight and is sore on pressure, pulse high and inflam-
matory.
Treatment. —Do not move the patient about, let him
have plenty of room and comfort, each stage of this
disease has its peculiar form of treatment. If you
commence treatment when the pulse is full and strong,
bleed until the animal staggers, blister tbe belly with
Cantharides, and give ten drops of Aconite every twenty
minutes. But if the pulse has become small do not
bleed nor blister, but wrap the patient in rugs and
keep them soaked with hot water of 120 degrees
Fahrenheit, and give Bryonia, ten drops, every half
hour, bandage the legs, wet the mouth and nostrils
repeatedly with warm water. All colic medicines do
harm in inflammation. Colic may be known from
inflammation by the symptoms described. The cause
must be attended to and suitable remedies applied.
STRANGULATION OF THE BOWEL.
This though regarded as a cause, is also a disease.
o O '
Symptoms. —Great heat of the skin at the part, with
tenderness, hard, firm, yet elastic prominence. There
are different kinds of profusions or hernia of the
bowels occurring at the scrotum, navel, under or at


side of the belly, or at the flank. If the prominence
yields and disappears with gentle pressure, you may
safely conclude that there is no strangulation.
Treatment. —Lay the animal down and hoist him up
by the heels, this will generally displace the strangu-
lated part. But if the rupture has swollen, a slit must
be made through the skin sufficient to allow the bowel to
be replaced, which when done must be stitched up and a
cold water bandage kept continually over the part and
fastened round the body.
CONSTIPATION,
This may be mechanical through obstruction in the
bowel, or it may be from stoppage in the bowel secre-
tion.
Symptoms. —The dung, such as comes away, will
come in pellets and covered with blood, pain in bowels,
swelling, stoppage of dung.
Treatment. —For mechanical constipation, give the
animal half a gallon of salt water, and run him up and
down a steep hill. For the second or constitutional,
give ten drops Nux Vomica every hour; in all cases give
injections every hour.
PERITONITIS—
INFLAMMATION OF OUTER COAT OF BOWELS.
Caused by scrofulous habit of body, overstraining or
cold across the loins.


Symptoms. —The animal is attacked suddenly, rolls
and rests on his back with his feet up.
Treatment. —Bleed freely, blister across the loins, and
.give twenty drops Tincture of Aconite in water, every
hour.
ACUTE DIARRHŒA.
Caused by too much green feed of any kind, or too
much water, or overwork, or cold, or too much physic.
Symptoms.— Great and incessant purging.
Treatment. —Give one pint Liquid Tan Bark, forty
drops of Camphor, and ten Veratrum every hour till
better; feed on flour, starch, arrowroot, or thick gruel,
till the animal is convalescent.
CHRONIC DIARRHŒA.
Some horses are very liable to this, it may continue
for weeks or months or may be a sequence of another
disease ; or allowing a horse to drink too freely imme-
diately after feeding is a common cause.
Symptoms. —Continual purging of clay coloured or
dirty brown semi-fluid fsercal matters, resulting in con-
tinued weakness and emaciation of the animal.
Treatment. —Give twenty drops Tincture of Mercury
four times a day; feed on any dry or floury feed rich
in starch or gum.
WORMS.
There are three species inhabit the horse, the


Ascaris lumhricoides, something like the earth-worm,
which is usually in the small intestines and often of
great length; Ascaris vermicularis , inhabits the large
intestines in great numbers, and are of a small needle-
like appearance, and to be found in the stomach.
Symptoms. —When affecting the system there is a
dry staring coat, pinched and hide-bound, and a white
hardened mucous collects round the anus, this latter
symptom is decisive.
Treatment. —Agents used—Kerosene, Turpentine,
Oils, Aloes, Rhubarb, Salt, Savin, Assafoetida; some-
times one answers sometimes another, but the safest,
simplest, and most efficacious, is Aloes and Assafcetida in
repeated doses.
ITCHING OF ANUS.
Symptoms. —The animal is continually rubbing at
his tail; on examination a lodgment of small worms
or film may be easily detected. .
Treatment. Tobacco and Soap Injection and a
purge.
PROTRUSION OF ANUS AND GUT.
Caused by diarrhoea, injuries, and weakness.
Symptoms. —A piece of gut hangs from rectum like
a bladder.
Treatment. —lnjections of Salt and Sulphate of Iron.
Replace the parts, and fasten a bandage over them.


RESPIRATORY ORGANS.
These consist of the nasal, larynx, trachea, bronchial
tubes, lungs, and nerves. These agents are employed
in drawing in the pure air and pressing out the impure.
Their structure is very delicate, their action sweet,
easy, and beautiful. A slight murmur is produced as
the air passes through the lungs, like the gentle breeze
through a fir forest. Any deviation from this sound
indicates disease or derangement, either functional or
organic. It will be difficult at first for an inex-
perienced person to detect one malady existing in these
organs from another, as diseases of these organs gene-
rally assume a complicated type.
CATARRH OR COMMON COLD.
Symptoms. —May exist, as common cough, having its
seat in the larynx—or with sneezing, situated in the
nose; or a deep cough, having its seat in the- lungs ; or
all these conditions may exist at a time. Catarrh is
generally caused by undue exposure, bringing horse from
grass and putting him in a warm stable, or applying
the water hose to clean him. This latter act is the
cause of more catarrh among the Sydney horses than
any other cause known.
Treatment. —For cough from irritation in the larynx,
give ten drops Tincture of Drosera daily till better; for
sneezing, head cold, give ten drops Tincture of Yeratrum


daily, till better. For lung cough, give ten drops Tinc-
ture Tartar Emetic. Give each medicine in a pint of
honey. Keep the animal comfortable, steam the head,
if necessary, or fumigate with sulphur.
Colds may be endemic, that is, in a certain locality,
or epidemic, that is, general, throughout the country.
They may also be contagious or infectious : if so, the
animals should be separated, and the stables washed out
and fumigated.
INFLUENZA.
This is a term applied to a typhoid form of fever.
It may attack every organ or member of the body. The
cause is atmospherical, and it mostly attacks young
green horses.
Symptoms. —lnfluenza generally begins like a com-
mon cold, only the animal appears ill all over. The
heart may be felt beating behind the elbow, and some-
times tlie shock may be seen. It admits of three classes
of symptoms. The lungs may be the primary seat
when we have rapidity of breathing in conjunction
with other symptoms. The stomach may be mainly
affected when there will be little or no appetite, foul
mouth, &c.; or the kidneys may manifest the chief seat
of disease, when there will be weakness of the hinder
extremities, with staggering. In truth, however, the
seat of the nerves is attacked as well, hence the diffi-
culty of cure. The pulse is full at first, but gets weak
rapidly. As the disease often lasts for weeks, never bleed.


Treatment. —At first give ten drops each of Aconite
and Belladonna, three times a day. Wherever the
disease seems seated, blister the part twice a day with*
mustard; if it shifts from one place to another, follow
it with the blistering, and continue this until there is a
change.
If the seat is in the lungs continue the above medi-
cine. If in the bowels give Nux Yomica, if disease
goes to kidneys, give one drop Cantharides three times
daily. *
When convalescence approaches, give twenty drops
Muriate of Iron daily. Nursing must be particularly
attended to. Give the patient a little of anything he
will eat, but never satiate him. If he refuses food,
good honey-meal gruel must be given, ten bottles
daily. If he sinks much, give three'bottles of ale daily.
OZENA.
A disease which closely resembles Glanders, it has its
seat on the lining membrane of the nostril.
Symptoms. —lt commences with a discharge from
the nostrils, first watery, then thick white, or yellow,
and sometimes emits a frightful odour ; effusion of
lymph under the mucous membrane of nostrils, then
ulcers form. It may be known from Glanders by
the discharge coming from both nostrils, and by the
absence of the particular glandular enlargement.
Treatment. —Fumigate with lodine daily, and give
alternately ten drops Veratrum Album and Arsenicalis,


in a pint of water; follow this up with Sesquichloride
of Iron five days after, and feed well. If this does not
ctire, open the frontal bones and syringe the bones and
nostrils with liquid Bluestone.
BRONCHITIS.
INFLAMMATION OF THE TUBE OF WIND PIPE AND LUNGS.
Symptoms. —Pulse, 60-70, respiration, about 40,
thick, heavy, moist cough; mouth hot, and full of muddy
saliva; head down; rattle in the trachea, heard by hold-
ing your ear in front of chest, sometimes as if suffoca-
ting.
Treatment. —Aconite and Belladonna, twenty drops
of each in water alternately every hour. Blister the
sides over lungs, with Mustard and Flies; after six
hours of the above, give ten drops of Phosphorous
and ten of Aconite, every two hours alternately, till
better. Favourable symptoms—desire for food, cough
easier, pulse softer.
PNEUMONIA OR INFLAMMATION OF LUNGS.
This is seldom seen now except as a precursor of
typhoid fever.
Symptoms. —The animal stands with his legs wide
apart, pulse is full and strong; on placing your ear to
sides of chest, you hear a combination of sounds, vary-
ing from a wheeze to a whistle, quickened breathing.
Treatment. —Blister the sides with Cantharides, and


give every hour ten drops of Aconite and ten Belladonna
for three hours, then use Bryonia in place of Belladonna.
When convalescence takes place, give twenty drops of
Aromatic Ammonia every sixth hour.
THICK AND BROKEN WIND.
This may arise from rupture of lung cells or midrift,
or spasm, or distended stomach, or from any functional
or organic derangement of lungs or diaphragm. It is
frequently caused by bad, musty, or dirty food, ill-
treated respiratory disease, or bad ventilation.
Symptoms. —Double heaving at flanks, cough, and
shortness of breath.
Treatment. —Give soft good food and water, not too
much at a time, then give a Physic-ball, follow this up
in three days with twenty drops Belladonna, given in
water twice a day.
PLEURISY.
Consists in the inflammation of a delicate membrane
which covers the lungs, and lies between that organ
and the ribs: it is caused by exposure and fatigue.
Symptoms, —Clear, sharp, short cough, but not fre-
quent ; pulse 80, respiration 40 per minute, pain over
and between the ribs on pressure; if the ear is put to
the inferior region of the chest, instead of the even
murmur of health, a sort of rubbing, rumbling sound
is heard, which is the lungs rubbing on the diseased
pleura; the expansion of the chest on breathing is con-
strained.


Treatment. —Bleed six quarts, and apply to the sides
cold water blanket, and over all put five rugs, sweat
the animal well, give Aconite and Bryonia Tinctures,
of each ten drops hourly, alternately.
ROARING.
This is alteration of the muscles of Pharynx, the seat
of it is the throat. It is frequently caused by the ill-
treatment of Strangles, reining the animal too much
in, and large nostrils.
Symptoms. —When the animal is made to move fast,
a sound is heard at nose, it may he a wheeze or a whis-
tle, or it may be a loud roaring sound heard anywhere.
Treatment. —There is no cure but lessening the outer
opening of nose, by fixing a strap across it; also, give
one drachm Extract of Belladonna daily. If the animal
breathes with great difficulty, open the windpipe half-
way down the neck, and fix in the opening a silver tube
to breathe by.
DISEASES OF THE URINARY ORGANS,
The kidneys, bladder, &c., secrete and pass off the
urine ; it ought to be a little darker and thicker than
water, and voided freely. Any deviation from these
conditions may indicate disease.
PARALYSES OF THE PENIS.
This is caused by covering mares, and injuries,


Symptoms. —Penis hangs out of sheath constantly.
Treatment. —Throw the animal down, replace the
penis and stitch the sheath, give tonics three times a
day, lay cold water cloths across the loins, and give
very little water; if in four weeks this does not cure,
the penis must be cut off. Consult a veterinary surgeon.
NEPHRITES, OR INFLAMMATION OF KIDNEYS.
A paintul and dangerous disease, and is frequently
caused by injuries or large doses of Turpentine or
Cantharides, or Nitre, or musty food, or impure water.
Symptoms. —Stiffness across the loins, pain when
pressed, when the patient is moved he emits a kind of
grunt, voids high-coloured urine.
Treatment. —Bleed freely, and blister the loins with
mustard, and give a dose of physic, with ten drops
Tincture of lodine.
DIURESES, OR DIABETIS,
Is produced, generally, by atmospheric causes, some-
times from bad food or water.
Symptoms. —An excessive flow of urine, continually
drinking and staling, with great debility.
Treatment. —Give three drachms of lodine Tinct.
daily.
IRRITATION OF THE BLADDER.
Generally caused by over doses of Turps., Cantha-
rides, and Nitre.


Symptoms. —Pains like Colic, attempts to urinate,
back arched, tail out.
Treatment. —Hyoscamus' or lodine, twenty drops in
water every hour, till better.
HEMATURIA, OR BLOODY URINE.
A disease which generally attacks old horses, caused
generally by constitutional debility and over work.
Symptoms. —Blood mixed with urine.
Treatment. —Arnica lotion to loins, and give a cup-
ful of vinegar three times a day.
DISEASES OF NERVOUS SYSTEM.
This includes Brain, Spinal Cord, and Nerves. In
health these organs play the great part, and, if strong,
are susceptible of shocks, which result in disease. If
weak, the system is low and feeble.
TETANUS, OR LOCKJAW.
This disease may begin at any part of the body, and
creep upwards and onwards, until the whole system is
involved. Derangement of the nerves of any organ
may result in lockjaw; it is generally produced by
injuries, either neglected, or too much tampered with.
(Symptoms.—Stiffness, with hardness of any part of
the muscles, accompanied by tension, then follows stiff-
ness of the whole system, nose protruding, nostrils


dilated, eye turned back, tail erect and quivering, jaw
locked.
Treatment. —Remove the animal to comfortable,
quiet box, covered with fine straw, sweat him con-
stantly, and give him alternately Arnica, Camphor,
Nux Vomica, and Belladonna, forty drops every hour,
and injections every second hour.
PARALYSIS.
First.—lt may be partial.
Second.—lt may affect but one side.
Third.—The hind quarters only may be attacked.
It is caused by pressure on the nerves.
Symptoms. —Total weakness of the part or parts.
Treatment. —Pour cold water from a height on the
parts affected, and administer galvanism, with good,
strong, nourishing food. Keep the bowels right.
MEGRIMES.
This is a periodic weakness, caused by effusion or
growth on the brain.
Symptoms. —The animal gets giddy suddenly, and
tumbles over, but is as quickly well again.
Treatment. —Eest, physic, and regulation of the
bowels.
HYSTERIA.
Is a disease confined to mares, and is caused by uter-
ina disturbances.


Symptoms. —Wild and unmanageable movements,
falling, and dashing about of the legs.
Treatment. —Twenty drops Tinct. Pulsatilla daily,
in water.
HYPOCHONDRIA,
. Caused by a diseased state of liver and blood.
Symptoms. —Dullness and languor, lassitude of
body, disinclination for food or work.
Treatment. —Twenty drops Nux Vomica in water.
This disease principally attacks race horses.
DISEASE OF THE LIVER.
This organ plays a most important part, and is often
the seat of disease where little suspected.
INFLAMMATION OF LIVER.
This may be Acute or Chronic, and may he caused
by excessive heat or feeding, stimulating food accompa-
nied with little exercise, or over doses of Mercury.
Symptoms. —Rigours and low fever, with pain on
pressure over seat of liver, discolouration of mucous
membrane of eye, lameness in right shoulder.
Treatment. —Give one drachm of Podophyllin daily,
plain food, and regular quantities of salt.
SPLENTIS, OR INFLAMMATION OF SPLEEN.
The spleen is the reservoir for the blood and in-
flammation runs a rapid course, and is mostly fatal.


It is often caused by animals being suddenly changed
from poor to rich pasture.
Symptoms. —The animal is seized suddenly, stands
and pants, is in excessive pain, and manifests a great
■desire for water.
Treatment. —-One ounce of Ammonia every twenty
minutes, or injections of Ammonia into veins is re-
commended by Professor Balfour.
DISEASES OF THE EYE.
The eye is one of the most important organs in the
whole body, and fearfully liable to disease.
INFLAMMATION OF THE EYE.
This may be superficial, or deep seated, and may
exist as a primary disease, or as an accompaniment of
some other, and may also be caused by blows, exposure,
or from foreign substances.
Symptoms. —Water flows freely. The eye is swol-
len and red, gets white sometimes —discharge of mucus.
Treatment. —Examine the eye and inner part of lids,
and remove any foreign substance. Foment with tepid
water during the day, and apply, if necessary, two or
three times a day, Arnica lotion, weak, or alum water.
Never blow anything into the eye. If this does not
cure, consult a veterinary surgeon.


SPECIFIC OPHTHALMIA.
A deep seated inflammation of the eye, constitutional
or hereditary.
Symptoms. —Like common inflammation of eye, but
the deep-seated tissues of the eye are involved. No-
cause can be assigned. It comes on periodically, and
there is general fever of the system.
Treatment. —Give six drachms of Aloes. Apply cold
fomentations day and night, or ice placed over the eye.
Bleed from facial vein, and fix over or above the punc-
ture a plaister of Belladonna. When the inflammation
subsides rapidly, the other eye will be attacked. If
so, blister both eyes on the hollow above. Give soft
food, and wet much of it. Keep the animal in a dark
stable. Do not breed from such.
DISEASES OF THE SKIN
Are very common in Australia, arising out of the
indolent and bad system of management. It is of great
importance that the skin be kept in a., healthy con-
dition, soft and loose.
SCARLET FEVER.
There are three forms of this fever—simple, com-
pound, and malignant. The primary cause is in the
atmosphere, but it is highly contagious and infectious,
and may be communicated by any article with which a


diseased animal has come in contact. It is an epi-
zootic disease.
Symptoms. —Great heat of skin, scarlet specs on
membrane of nostrils, large raised patches on skin;
the cuticle afterwards peels off in large pieces, and
there is sudden and great swelling of the legs. It
commences with fever. In about fifty hours there are
spots or patches all over the body. About the fifth
day the disease is at its height, and the scurf com-
mences to come away. About the ninth day the erup-
tion has disappeared, but the animal is very weak.
Treatment, —Give twenty drops of Belladonna in
water three times a day. Put the patient in a com-
fortable box or stable, poultice the throat well. Con-
tinue this until • the fifth day, then give Arsenicalis,
twenty drops, three times a day in water, alternately
with Sulphur, until the animal is well. Care must be
taken lest a relapse ensue, or some other disease prove
the sequel.
MEASLES.
This disease, though not so common in horses as
Scarlatina, frequently occurs, and is often fatal. The
■causes of this disease are likewise atmospheric, and it
is also contagious and infectious.
Symptoms. —Low fever, quickly followed by high
fever, sneezing, and cough, red swollen eyes, discharge
from nose. These symptoms continue until fifth day,


when an eruption appears, seen only about the anus,
inside of legs, &c. Where there is no hair, you can
feel the pimples in patches. They join in clusters, and
die away in about three days, when there is the measle
smell.
Treatment. —Aconite, Belladonna, and Sulphur, ten
drops of each given alternately, in a little water, each
three times a day. It is important that the rash should
come well out, so, from the fourth to eighth day, give
Bryonia, and stop the former medicines. Finish up
with Mercury, three times a day. Keep the animal
quiet, and give him plenty of cool sloppy food.
CARBUNCULAR ERYSIPELAS.
This generally affects young animals, and is caused
by certain plethoric conditions of the blood.
Symptoms. —Eedness and tenderness of the part or
parts, generally about the hips—hard and painful.
Treatment. —Give six drachms of Aloes, and apply a
plaister of Belladonna on the parts ; this will generally
cure Erysipelas in the horse, as this animal is not usually
so severely attacked as cattle.
MANGE.
A similar cutaneous disease to that of itch in the human
subject, and is caused by the operations of a small
insect called Acari equi. It is fearfully contagious,
and may be caused by contact with brushes or combs.


or harness of affected horses, or standing in the same
stall.
Symptoms, —Bare and scurfy looking patches, the ani-
mal almost continually scratching or rubbing himself,
generally first about the neck, crupper or ridge of mane,
which may sometimes be pulled out in patches; patches
or spots of incrusted scab, after the casting of which,
the skin looks puckered, glazed, bare.
Treatment. —Give six drachms of Aloes, follow this up
with Sulphur,one drachm daily, and wash the animal with
Tobacco Water; also wash harness, stalls, combs, &c.
SURFEIT.
This resembles mange, is caused by check of perspi-
ration, cold drinks when heated, mouldy food, &c.
Symptoms, —It appears suddenly, and generally over
a great part of the body, lumps or pimples with severe
itching, the hair firm, no falling off even in mane.
Treatment. —The same as for mange.
PURPURA HŒMORRHAGICA.
This is a disease of a severe and fatal character, and
often associated with Scarlet Fever, caused by a vitiated
state of the blood.
Symptoms. —Sudden swelling of the body, head,
and limbs, which have an abrupt termination, patches
of effused blood under the mucous membrane of the


nose, pulse from 60 to 100, the eyelids swell and the
blood drips away.
Treatment. —Give Tincture Bryonia 10 drops every
third hour in water, use Belladonna Ointment to the
swollen parts, bandage the legs with cold water
bandages, scarify the swelling, but not on the joints.
Give nourishing food, a little, often. If the patient will
not eat pour gruel do™ its throat. Keep the animal
quiet.
LYMPHITIS, OR WEED.
This is a very common disease in Australia, not
unlike Purpura ; only one leg is attacked ; it mostly
shows itself in ill-bred animals. It is also caused by
constitutional debility, rushing the animal into cold
water, &c.
Symptoms. This disease is always ushered in by a
shivering fit, after an hour or so there is lameness in
one hind leg, if pressed on +he inside of leg great pain
is produced, the leg swells fast.
Treatment. —Bleed freely at the toe, and bandage
the leg, to stifle joint, with straw ropes; foment for
twenty-four hours with hot water; give Aconitum, ten
drops every hour. If you treat the disease at once,
when the shivering fit is on him, give a warm drink of
ale or spirits, with mustard or spice, and two hours
exercise will prevent tbe disease going further.


STRANGLES.
A disease chiefly confined to young horses. A
great number of young thoroughbreds are lost by
this disease in the colonies. The causes are here-
ditary and constitutional. It is also contagious.
Symptoms.—Dullness, swelling under the jaws, which
bursts in about eight days, running at the nose and
eyes. If it is a cart entire, the swelling may extend
up the head and down the neck, and the animal roar at
a frightful rate. The first form is called regular, the
last irregular.
SYMPTOMS OF REGULAR STRANGLES.
Sudden dullness, disinclination for food and company,
glands under jaw swollen and matter forming; in about
seven days they point, and get soft, and are now ready
to burst and may be opened.
Treatment. —Blister the glands under the jaw, open
it about the eighth day, giving tonics and soft food all
the time, keep the animal quiet and comfortable.
SYMPTOMS OF IRREGULAR STRANGLES.
Begins like the above, but the swelling under the
jaw is not circumscribed, it is over the whole cheek,
and down the throat, and ultimately involves the head;
the patient cannot breathe well, and makes a terrible
noise at each effort, abscesses form on the neck, head,
and breast.


Treatment. —Roll the head and neck up in a blanket,
and foment with hot water every alternate three hours,
when not fomenting, wrap the head and neck in hot
dry rugs, and about the eighth day, make an opening
at the throat through the skin and thrust up your
finger until the abscess is reached. Wherever you see
a large, soft, pointed swelling, open it and let out the
matter. Give one drachm Sesquichloride of Iron
twice a day, best nursing and care is also needed.
SYMPTOMS OF COMPLICATED STRANGLES.
This is more dangerous than either of the others,
for the lungs are involved. The patient appears stupid,
with all the symptoms of Irregular Strangles, but
breathes hurriedly and is terribly weak. By putting
the ear to chest and sides a variety of sounds may be
heard indicating derangement of lungs.
Treatment. Fumigate with a tablespoonful of
Sulphur three times a day. Blister the sides with
Mustard twice a day. Give twenty drops Tincture of
Phosphorous twice a day, also three bottles hot ale and
honey twice a day, and fix two setons in the breast.
CHILL AND EXHAUSTION.
A disease which affects the whole system; it may end
in resolution or in disease of an inflammatory kind,
and leave bad chronic conditions. It is caused by


undue exhaustion, or exposure, or washing the limbs
with cold water.
Symptoms. - Hedge-hog coat, shivering, smelling at
food, picking at straws, &c.
Treatment. —Aromatic Ammonia, eight drachms in a
bottle of hot ale every hour till better, rub the animal
well down with a straw wisp, put five blankets over the
body, bandage the legs after they have been hand-
rubbed.
RHEUMATISM.
This often follows Chill; it is, however, a disease in
itself, affecting one or more joints of the body, gene-
rally the shoulder. Eacers are peculiarly liable to it.
It is frequently caused by too much heating food, bad
grooming, want of care when exposure, and
hereditary scrofulousness.
Symptoms. —These, in a great measure, depend on
the situation and strength of attack. In the joints
there is great lameness, without apparent cause, often
great swelling and tenderness of the parts affected. If
the heart, or internal organs are affected, there is great
fever and rapid sinking, great thirst and grinding of
the teeth; pulse 100 per minute. The disease often
shifts about.
Treatment. —If there is thirst and heat, and dry-
ness of skin, give two drachms Tincture Aconite every


four hours, in the simple form ; and in the acute, give
this every hour also, rubbing to the affected part a
lotion composed of Arnica, Belladonna, and Oil, and
bandage the joint with hot flannels.
SYMPATHETIC FEVER.
This is an inflammatory disturbance of the whole
system, and generally proceeds from injuries received.
This fever may end in Lockjaw, Pneumonia, Laminitis,
or Enteritis.
Symptoms. Hurried respiration, pulse full and
fast, hot mouth and skin, great excitement and rest-
lessness.
Treatment. —Remove the cause. Apply to the wound
extract of Belladonna, Plaister, and give six drachms of
Aloes, two of Ginger, and one of Carbonate of Ammonia.
FISTULOUS WITHERS
Are generally produoed by pressure or blows, and
pinching of the tissues takes place.
Symptoms. A small swelling, at or about the
withers, which soon increases, gets hot and tender. This
state may pass away, and a permanent thickening of
the parts takes place, or the swelling may suppurate and
burst, pipes or sinuses form, and a constant bad smel-
ling discharge takes place.


Treatment —lf noticed at once, clip off the hair and
rub Arnica Lotion into the withers, for an hour at a
time. If it is open fistula, insert Powdered Bluestone as far
back into the sinuses as possible ; but, if the sinuses
dip, do not apply anything but clean water. Find the
bottom, and make an opening from the outside, with a
small hot probe, which will allow the parts to drain.
Wash it out at times or cut the callous part and
sew it up.
POLL EVIL.
A swelling something like fistula, situated at top of
the head, and generally produced by a blow.
Treatment. —The same as fistula.
OPEN JOINT
May take place at any joint, and is often caused by
carelessness of stable-folks, nails about the stable, inju-
ries of all kinds.
Treatment. —Give five drachms of Aloes, blister about
the joint, and dust on, for hours, Powdered Pipclay,
until the opening is plugged up. Do not move the
animal about.
CAPPED HOCK.
This may be cured by Ehus Toxidendron Tinc-
ture, diluted and rubbed in daily.


CHRONIC CAPPED ELBOW
Must Be opened, and plenty of Sulphate of Copper put
in, time after time, until the inside of swelling comes
away.
WOUNDS AND INJURIES.
These may take place in any part of the body, and
may he produced by any agents.
The healing of the wound altogether depends on the
length of time done, and the state of the instrument
that caused it; also, frequently, the state of health of
the animal. A fresh incised lacerated, or jagged wound,
done with a clean sharp instrument, may be healed at
once, either sewn or bandaged, and a weak lotion applied,
composed of Carbolic Acid and water, one of the acid to
fifteen of water—this prevents gangrene. If the wound
has been neglected, the parts must be stimulated to
healthy action, proud flesh ‘burned down, gangrene
removed, and a lotion of weak Arnica applied. If cold,
use a bandage. If it has been produced by a rusty
instrument, do not attempt to heal, for the wound will
not unite, but wash it out twice daily with Bluestone
Lotion until it looks healthy.
A punctured wound should be healed only from the
bottom. A little Turpentine and Salad Oil, half and


half—apply this frequently to bottom of wound, keeping
the mouth of wound open with pledget of cotton wool.
All wounds should not be stitched at once. If there
is much swelling, or likely to be much, first reduce the
swelling with cold or hot water, and then stitch. Use,
also, straps or bandages ; this is necessary, if the wound
is longitudinal or large.
FOMENTATIONS.
Are always essential, but they must be properly
applied or great barm will be done—thus, cold will, if
applied repeatedly and firmly, with a bandage, blister
the parts and take off the hair.
There are four forms of fomentation, viz.:—1, excessive
cold, made by a mixture of Ice and Water, or Salt, Nitre,
and Water; 2, common Cold Water; 3, very Hot Water ;
4, Luke-Warm Water; and their use is determined thus :
all deep-seated injuries must have hot fomentations, all
shallow injuries must have cold water.
How to Foment a Fore Leg. —Fix over it the
leg of a pair of men’s woollen trousers, strap them
to the fetlock, and fasten the uppers to the mane; fill
them with soft hay, and pour your water in among the
straw for six hours at a time, and continue, after an
hour’s interval, the fomentations, day and night. If the
pain be excessive, or if you cease for the night, fix a
warm, dry, woollen bandage over the parts, after they
have been rubbed with receipt No, 9.


To Bandage a Hind Leg —F ixon a succession of woollen
bandages, from the fetlock up over the part, and over
these wrap a straw or hay band, and foment continu-
ously. Merely throwing the water on the bare leg is
of no use, except for flea bites.
How to foment for Inflammation oftheßowels, —Take
a woollen rug, wrap it up under the belly, sew it over
the back, fix a strap from it round the chest, and pour
the hot water (which must be 125 degrees Fahrenheit)
from above. Continue this, until the internal pain
subsides, or until the animal winces from the hot
fomentations.
How to Foment an Inflamed Eye. —Fix on a pair of
winkers, and, between the blinds and eye, a large soft
sponge, on which pour the water,
Hoiv to Steam the Eye, Mouth, or Nostrils. —Fix a
tube to the spout of kettle, make the water boil, and
hold the other end of tube to the nose bag, which must
be fixed on head.
Flesh or Skin Wounds are greatly injured by repeated
washings and fomentations, as you thus take away the
healing lymph.
POULTICES
Are generally used for the feet, and may be either hot
or cold. In all recent deep seated injuries hot poultices
are the best, for they bring the blood to the surface, but
are old standing lamenesses are best palliated by cold.


The best and cheapest form of poultice is Cow Dung or
Marshmallows, then comes Salt, Sand, and Linseed
Meal, boiled Turnips and Carrots, Bran and Oaten Meal.
All vegetable substances should, in the first place, be
made by pouring on them boiling water, and allowed
to cool to the required heat. A poultice bag should be
made of strong bagging, and a leather sole fixed to the
bottom of it.
Poulticing generally does harm to an open wound if
it has been already cleansed, unless it has become hard
or horny.
The best substance to poultice with is Spongiopiline.
This is the lightest substance known, and may be
dipped in hot water or oil, and applied with marvellous
benefit.
ALTERATIVE MEDICINES
To act on the whole system.
No. 1 ball is composed of Barbadoes Aloes, 2 drachms;
(xinger, 4 drachms; Carraway, 1 drachm; Treacle to
make it.
No. 2. Sulphur, 2 drachms; Nitre, 2 drachms; Black
Antimony, 2 drachms ; with Linseed Meal and Treacle
to make a ball.
COLIC DRENCHES.
Linseed Oil, 1 pint; Laudanum, 1 oz.; Turpentine,
1 oz. If this drench does not bring relief do not repeat


it; but give of Tincture of Aconite, 5 drops; Nux Vom-
ica, 5 drops; this may be repeated every half-hour. If
the animal is purged, add 40 drops Tincture of Camphor
and 40 drops Chlorodyne.
CONDITION MEDICINE.
No. 1. Cream of Tartar. 1 drachm; Black Antimony,.
1 drachm; Eosin, 2 drachms.
No. 2. Sulphur, 1 drachm; Nitre, 1 drachm; Cream
of Tartar, 1 drachm; Carraway Powder, 1 drachm; may
be given as a powder, or with Linseed Meal and Treacle
formed into a ball.
DIURETIC MEDICINES.
To act upon the kidney and bladder.
No. 1. Nitre, 1 drachm: Copaiba, 1 drachm; Carra-
way, 1 drachm.
No. 2. Nitre, 1 drachm; Eosin, 1 drachm.
No. 3. Cantharides Tincture, 20 drops ; Aconite, 10
drops.
RECEIPTS FOR SPRAINED LEGS.
1. Tincture of Arnica and Olive Oil, half and half.
2. Tincture of Ehus Toxidendron and Olive Oil,
half and half.
3. Tincture of Calendula and Olive Oil, half and half.


FOR HEALING.
4. Carbolic Acid, 1 part to 16 of water,
5. Sulphate of Zinc, 1 part to 12 of water.
6. Tar, Venice Turpentine, and Fat, one part each,
melted over a slow fire in a glue pot.
7. Corrosive Sublimate and Calomel, half and half.
BLISTERS.
8. Biniodide of Mercury, one part to three parts of
lard.
9. Spanish Flies, one part to four parts of Lard.
10. Mustard four parts, Turps and Vinegar one part
each, and water, to make it into the consistency of
paste.
FOR PROUD FLESH AND WARTS.
11. Bluestone, one part to twenty parts of water.
12. Arsenic one part,'Soda ten parts, Water 100 parts,
boiled one hour.
13. Powdered Arsenic and Corrosive Sublimate, Nitric
and Sulphuric Acid. Must be used with care.
PURGING HORSE.
This is an old, and, when judiciously used, highly
beneficial course of action. There is always some amount
of danger attending the practice—danger in the ad


ministration of the medicine, and danger from its after
effects.
Purgatives are given, either in the form of a ball or
drench; the last is the best, for it acts faster and more
kindly; but, as balls are much more easily given, they
are generally used.
There are a vast number of prescriptions, varying in
kind and character, but all of them are worse than use-
less, except Barbadoes Aloes and Ginger. Calomel,
Croton, Turps, &c., &c., &c., are not required in general
purgative medicine. They are decidedly objectionable,
dangerous, and often deadly.
All horses, prior to physic, should be well prepared,
by feeding exclusively on bran mashes for two days.
Horses which will not eat bran mash should not get a ball,
but a drench, for it is impossible to prepare an animal
which will not eat bran mash, and the balls will not
operate.
In deciding about the weight of Ball, many things
are to be taken into consideration —season of the year,
age, size, and condition of the animal, and soundness.
No animal should be severely purged in the winter
time, or during changeable weather. Of course a small
animal stands less than a big one, a poor horse less
than a fat one, a long middle and loose-loined less than a
short nugget, a coarse-bred animal less than a well-bred,
a broken-winded animal one half less than a sound one, a
horse subject to colic or scouring less, an animal lately


convalescent less than one never ill. A purgative ball
will generally kill a horse nearly foundered in the feet,
or attacked with inflammation of the lungs or influenza.
Purgative halls are good for hide bound, chronic
cough, mange, over feeding. Animals which feed much,
but get no good from what they eat, will be henefitted.
Physic may require to he repeated. In such cases
do not repeat it for fourteen days, and then give one
drachm less. For ordinary saddle horses five drachms
is ample ; for carriage, six drachms ; for draught,
seven drachms.
There is a tendency in many horses to pass the phy-
sic by the kidneys; in such cases prepare the animal
well, and give a drench.
When the physic has been administered, it will take
about fifteen hours to purge, hut I have known three
days elapse. If the animal has not purged thirty
hours after, let him have a good sharp gallop and a free
drink of water ; repeat this again in five hours if not
purged.
Whenever purgation sets in fairly, let the beast have
a mouthful of corn, bran, and chaff; encourage him to
eat. If the purgation continues over ten hours, give
half a bucketful of Flour Gruel and a pint of Wattle
Bark; if this does not stop it, follow out instructions
for superpurgation.


THE AGE AS FIXED BY THE TEETH.
In the absence of the certificate of foaling, the age of
the horse is fixed by the front teeth, their colour,
shape, and wear.
Foal or milk teeth are almost white, small, and nar-
row as they enter the gums ; the front teeth are all dis-
placed by horse teeth between 3J and 4{ r years of the
animal’s age; the teeth may not come or go at the
regular fixed natural time, but this may be detected by
the general appearance of all the teeth, as they are
seldom all out of date.
The foal at birth should have two front teeth on the
upper and under jaw; at six months, four ditto; at
twelve months, six ditto ; at two years of age the middle
teeth have lost the mark ; after this date he begins to
shed those teeth, and it is done thus : —colt or filly at
three years has got two front teeth in the upper and
under jaw; at four years, four front teeth; at five
years, six front teeth; after this date the age is fixed
by the wearing out of the mark on surface. The horse
at five years has not yet lost any marks, but his
tusks are up; at six, has lost the mark of the
two centre teeth of under jaw; at seven, of the next;
at eight, of all the teeth on under jaw; after this date
the age is fixed by the upper jaw. The horse at nine
years has nearly lost the mark of the central upper;


at ten, has lost the mark of the two central upper
teeth; at eleven, has lost the mark of the' next front
teeth; at twejse, has lost the mark of all the front
teeth; after this the age of the horse is fixed hy the
length and narrowness of the front teeth ; so that hy
practice we may come within a few months of an ani-
mal’s age.
■Cibbs, Shallard, & Co., General Printers, 10S Pitt Street, Sydney.








