





THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH:
ITS PRINCIPLES AND MISSION.
ft iissrjf tosoif.
(6~SVf
Fathers and Brethren,
It is my first duty to acknowledge the honour which yon
have put upon me by confirming the action of the Presbyteries of
our Church in nominating me for the office of Moderator of the
General Assembly at this time. In ordinary circumstances this
honour would be one of no small account, but at the present time
its value is greatly enhanced by the fact that the sittings of this
Assembly are to be immediately followed by those of the Federal
Assembly of the Presbyterian Churches of Australia and Tasmania,
and that I will be enabled to attend that Assembly invested with
the honour of being your Moderator. You will accept my heartfelt
thanks for this token of your esteem and confidence; for this office, I
cannot forget, carries with it at this time special responsibilities. I
am not vain enough to suppose that I am better qualified to
discharge these responsibilities than any of my brethren. Our
Church, small as it is, can count among its Ministers a goodly
number whose age, experience, attainments, and weight of character
might well have claimed for them the honour of representing our
Church at this juncture. Nor is it necessary that I should
indulge in any of the platitudes of “ voluntary humility ” and self-
depreciation customary on such occasions ; for to be called to this
chair by so many who are themselves qualified to fill it with honour
and dignity is to me an ample pledge that my shortcomings will be
made up for by your sympathy and support, and my errors over-
looked or condoned.
The practice in other sections of the Presbyterian Church, and
the precedents in our own, suggest that I should address this
Assembly on some topic of special interest to the Church or to the
community in which we live. Within this wide circle many
subjects compete for attention, and, in these days of unrest and
innovation in matters social as well as ecclesiastical, the tempta-
tion to discourse on some one or more of the great social problems
of the day—religious education, the relations of capital and labour,
freedom of contract, courts of conciliation and arbitration, and such
like—is hard to withstand. But lam relieved from this tempta-
tion by the fact that these subjects will come up for discussion in
one connection or another in this Assembly. We are met here as
the representatives of the Presbyterian Church of Queensland, and
if any reason can be given for our distinctive existence, and
organisation, the things that concern that existence and the work of
that organisation obviously first claim our attention. In accordance
with this, and let me say also with a suggestion that has come from
a quarter to which I always listen with respect, I purpose addressing
you on the Principles and Mission of the Presbyterian Church.
What then is Presbyterianism? Not a few among ourselves
could give but a vague answer to this question, and it is therefore
no wonder that many among others have taken it for what it is not.
The word Presbyterianism denotes nothing more than the govern-


ment of the Church by Presbyters or Elders, the one of the only two
orders of Church officers mentioned in the New Testament. But
around this primary and proper meaning there have become
encrusted a number of secondary ideas, which have no real or vital
connection with it, and some of which are altogether false and
misleading.
Let us look first at the positive features of Presbyterianism. Its
ground principle is the Universal Priesthood of believers. In the
Hebrew Church the household of Aaron, the family of Kohath,
and the tribe of Levi were “an election within an election.” Their
place of duty and privilege no other house or family or tribe might
usurp. But in the Church of Christ there is no exclusively sacred
caste or order, every member of it has the charter of rank and
privilege in the inspired words, “Ye are a royal priesthood.” Some
sections of the Church have forgotten this charter. They have
followed the obsolete pattern of “ the Church in the wilderness.”
Their ministers are priests. They have been ordained by the hands
of Bishops who affect to be the successors of the Apostles. The
imposition of episcopal hands constitutes the priest a special vehicle
of divine grace, confers upon him indelible orders, and lifts him
for ever above the laity, the mixed multitude, the profanum vulgus ,
whom Christ has indeed redeemed, but who can draw near to
him only through their ministrations. The Church of the New
Testament countenances no such assumptions. It knows no priest
but one, the Great High Priest, wdio bath passed into the Heavens,
“ having by his one offering for ever perfected them that are
sanctified.” It gives to the humblest of true believers the same rank
and dignity under the Divine Head of the Church that it accords to
the most learned of its doctors and the most eloquent of its
preachers. It distributes among the whole body of the faithful the
powers and functions which the priests of Pome, and their imitators,
the would-be priests of Ritualistic Anglicanism, have arrogated to
themselves. We follow but one guide in this matter, not'Church
traditions, but the inspired teaching of the New Testament, and
therefore this Universal Priesthood of believers is the foundation
principle of our Presbyterianism.
A second feature of Presbyterianism follows by logical necessity
—that the office-bearers of the Church are representative of the
Church as a community. The Church of God is a spiritual
commonwealth. Government, discipline, worship, are not the
functions of a caste. The powers and duties of the Church are vested
in the whole body of the faithful. But all cannot rule, or teach, or
“ serve tables.” In this body there are “ diversities of gifts and
operations’’—there are eyes and ears, and hands and feet, each
fitted for its own work; and as the blacksmith when he strikes the iron
on the anvil puts into every blow the strength of his whole body, so
the powers that are diffused over the many in the Church are
concentrated in the few; the duty of all is discharged by one or more
whom the Head of the Church has fitted for it." Counsel and rule
are the appropriate work of the sagacious and prudent. Church
finance calls for aptitude in business. The care of the poor lies to
the hands of the sympathetic and benevolent. In the pulpit
learning and eloquence are consecrated to highest service. “ Division


of labour ” is the grand law of the Church as well as of secular life.
Work is assigned to the fittest, and honour conferred on the
worthiest. This representative government and administration is
the privilege of men who are born to liberty, equality, and fraternity.
This Heaven-born triad finds a home in the Church of God, and a
visible form in the polity of the Presbyterian part of it. And what
is this polity essentially but that of the constitution under which we
live? The nation makes and administers its own laws. But all
the members of the community cannot be legislators or rulers. The
body politic delegates the making of its laws to representatives in
Parliament, and concentrates the authority to put them in force in
the cabinet and throne. The authority of the powers that be is but
the collective sovereignty of the people. The Lex Rex of Samuel
Rutherford —the political text book of the Covenanters —puts it in a
nut-shell: “ the power of creating a man King is from the people.”
This analogy between Presbyterian polity and our national
representative institutions is not a mere accident or curiosity of
history. The Presbyterianism which so largely permeated the
Church of England in the reign of Elizabeth was no mean factor in
leavening the English people with the principles that triumphed in
the Revolution of a century later. Of the noble army of martyrs
who on the English Bartholomew, in 1662, gave up their livings in
the Church of England for conscience sake, the greater number
were Presbyterians, and they were martyrs in the cause of
constitutional liberty as well as of religion. The “ prentice boys ”
that closed the gates, and the men who, under the intrepid Murray,
kept the walls of Derry were mostly Presbyterians, though the glory
of their exploits has been monopolised by an English Episcopalian.
The heroes of Derry and Enniskillen were the sons and brothers of
Scottish Covenanters who had been harried and hunted on moor and
mountain, and bled at Bothwell Bridge and Drum clog, in the same
sacred cause. And to the straitest sect of Scottish Presbyterians, the
followers of Richard Cameron, belongs the honour of having
furnished the first body of volunteers that appeared for the
Revolution of 1688. When the colours which the 26th Regiment
(Cameronians) has since proudly borne on many a battle-field were
first unfurled at Dunkeld, every man in its ranks was a Presbyterian,
carried the Bible in his knapsack, and had volunteered to defend his
country’s religion and liberty against the tyranny and persecution of
the Stuarts.
On these two ground principles—the Universal Priesthood of
believers and the representation of the Christian Community by the
office-bearers of the Church—we are at one with the Congregational,
the Methodist, and the Baptist Churches. If they differ from us, it
is not so much in the powers, or functions, or rank of their office-
bearers, as in the names which they give them; and it would require
a somewhat powerful microscope to make distinctly visible any
valid ground of separation between them and us, on the score
either of Church government or the doctrines of saving faith. On
these two ground principles, however, we join issue with all the
Episcopal Churches —Roman, Greek, and Anglican.
We join issue with them also on the third characteristic of
Presbyterianism—the twofold order of the Ministry —the Presbyters


or . an( l the Deacons. The functions of the former are
spiritual; those of the latter, temporal. The Presbyters or Elders
are the instructors of the Church, its prophets, evangelists, teachers.
They are the rulers also of the Church—its bishops, in plain
English, its overseers or superintendents, as the word bishop
(episcopos) literally means. As teachers and rulers combined, they
are the pastors of the Church. Like Homer’s kings and chiefs,
they are “ shepherds of the people,” by whom the hock is to be fed
and tended.
r lhe Deacons—the other of the two orders of the Ministry
in Presbyterianism—are charged with the care of the secular affairs of
the Church. They have to do with its finances, whether required
for sustaining ordinances or for relieving fhe wants of the poor.
We recognise no authority or guide in this matter but scriptural
rule and apostolic usage. Following these, we recognise the Elders
that labour in word and doctrine as worthy of double honour, but
we give to all, whether they merely rule or also teach, the same rank
and the same voice in the courts of the Church. The members of
each order, Elders or Deacons, are equal among themselves. He
who presides is for the time being only primus inter pares, first
among his equals.
That it has been the general practice of the Church to place
some of the pastors over their fellow-pastors, to make the former
prelates, that is, preferred above others in permanent rank, honour,
and power, and that this is an ancient practice, is admitted. But
this practice or its antiquity carries with it as little authority as the
practice or the antiquity of the invocation of saints or of the worship
of the Virgin, if it is not borne out by the Word of God in Scripture.
My present purpose does not require me to marshal the arguments
for the twofold order of Presbytery and the parity of Presbyters
among themselves, as against the threefold order of Episcopacy —
bishop, priest, and deacon —and prelacy or diocesan episcopacy.
Nor is it necessar} 7 that I should do so. Leading scholars of the
Church of England have done this for us. It is now a commonplace
of interpretation that episcopos and preshyteros, “ bishop ” and
“ presbyter ” or “elder,” are in the New Testament interchangeable
terms ; and it may safely be affirmed that there is no reliable
evidence that a Bishop having prelatical authority over the other
ministers of a district or province had any existence in the first
century of the Christian Church. When such men as Archbishop
Whately, Bishop Lightfoot, Bishop EllicotiC Dean Stanley, Dean
Alford, and Dr. Hatch admit these things, it would be superfluous
for a Presbyterian to go into an argument to prove them.
There is a fourth positive feature in Presbyterian polity that
requires notice—the Gradation of Church Courts, from the Kirk
Session, as it is called in the Scottish Presbyterian Churches, the
spiritual court of the congregation, consisting of the teaching and
ruling elders; the Presbytery, made up of the minister and a ruling
elder from each congregation in a district, called its bounds, or, as
we might say, its diocese ; the Synod, embracing the districts of
several Presbyteries; to the Supreme Court of all—the General
Assembly.
I cannot go into the minute details of the prerogatives and


duties of these several Courts. It is enough to point out that in this
system of Courts, rising one above another, the members of our
Church, whatever place or office they fill, have a guarantee of the
very highest character for the enjoyment of their rights and
liberties. On the one side, a man’s reputation or Church privileges
are not made dependent on the hasty vote of a mixed and, perhaps,
ill-informed assemblage, in which the ignorant and uneducated have
as weighty a voice as the most intelligent and cultivated. On the
other hand, a man’s good name and place in the Church are
not left at the mercy of a single man, whose learning and
responsibility may not save him from the influence of prejudice or
passion. “In the multitude of counsellors there is wisdom,” and
Presbyterianism aims at securing that these counsellors shall be the
best and wisest in the Church. The humblest member of the
smallest congregation has the right of appeal from the Session, the
Presbytery or the Synod, to the General Assembly, where his
case will be considered and decided in an atmosphere as clear as
may be from party bias or bitterness, and from the warpiugs of
personal or local interests.
My object lias been, not to present the arguments from
Scripture or reason by which the claims of Presbytery are supported,
but to set forth its leading characteristics. I admit that
Congregationalism on the one side, and Episcopacy on the other,
have their advantages. We would be none the worse of a little more
of the feeling of personal responsibility in Church work which
Congregationalism tends to develop ; and I believe we would benefit
largely by a little more of the directness and promptitute of action
which Episcopacy secures through its bishops.
While we admit these things, we yet claim to occupy “ a golden
mean ” between these two systems, more consonant with Scripture
principles and precedents than either, more favourable to the
exercise of liberty and the maintenance of order, and certainly
not less fitted to call forth, combine, and concentrate the sympathies
and energies of the whole body of the Church in the work of its
Divine Head.
Congregationalism and Episcopacy both have paid a signal
tribute to the soundness of the Presbyterian principle. The former,
through the combination of its Churches into unions larger or
smaller, has endeavoured to neutralise the isolation of its
congregations. The latter has admitted the laity to its Councils and
Synods. It has invested them with legislative powers and
functions. It has curtailed the prerogatives of the bishop, in a way
which ignores apostolical succession, until he has shrunk into little
more than a permanent Moderator. We do not taunt our brethren of
either communion with this departure from the ideal of their polity.
We hail it as an acknowledgment that in Presbyterianism is found
some good thing in harmony with the ideal model of the Church.
We hail it as suggesting at least a charitable presumption that
Presbyterians who recognise neither priestly rank nor apostolical
succession in their ministers, nor sacramental grace in the outward
rites of worship, may yet be members of the visible Church of Christ,
defined by the Articles of the Church of England as “ a congregation
of faithful men, in which the pure Word of God is preached and the


sacraments are duly administered, according to Christ’s ordinance in
all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.”
I have endeavoured to set forth what are the leading positive
characteristics of Presbyterianism. But, as I have said, much that
is said of it shows that many not only do not know what it is, but
also confound it with what it is not. The name refers solely to the
government of the Church by Presbyters or Elders ; but it has also
been identified with other things which have no essential connection
with it. I would now call your attention to one or two of these.
It is made a great reproach against our Church that she teaches
the Calvinistic theology. If we err in this, we err in good
company, for the Church of England in her Seventeenth Article of
Religion is as Calvinistic as Calvin himself. The Westminster
Confession and the Shorter Catechism are indeed the standard
interpretation of Scripture and the manual of religious instruction
in almost every branch of the Presbyterian Church. But
Presbyterianism and Calvinism are neither identical nor co-extensive.
There are Presbyterians who vehemently protest against
predestination as taught in the writings of Calvin and the West-
minster Confession; and there are many strong Calvinists who
would as strongly object to be taken for Presbyterians; and the
Calvinistic creed of the Church of England has not saved her from
having a prelatic government.
Still the Calvinistic theology, in a more or less definite form, is
the recognised theology of the Presbyterian Church as a whole. But
that fact calls for no apology. Calvin’s theology has been strangely
mistaken and misrepresented. In his mental view the sovereignty
of God as the Creator and Ruler of all things took precedence of ail
other Divine attributes. But that sovereignty was neither
inconsiderate tyranny nor arbitrary caprice. It was the outcome of
the Divine omniscience, holiness, justice, and love combined—the
result of the harmonious blending and co-operation of the highest
reason, and the highest beneficence in the ordering of the grand
system of things. Calvinism is but an attempt to express the reign
of law in the moral and spiritual world. If in the mind of Calvin, as
in that of Paul and of Augustine, the majesty of the Heavenly King
sometimes in its awful splendour outshines the love of the Heavenly
Father, it is only that at other times the latter may shine forth with
the sweeter radiance. Calvin has been misunderstood, both by
friends and by foes. It has been the misfortune of every great
teacher to be followed by disciples of a more trenchant and rigid logic
than his own. So the reformer has had many followers who, to quote
the terse and happy Latin phrase, now become a proverb, have been
Calviniores Calvino —more Calvinistic than Calvin himself. Calvin’s
Divine sovereignty, divine decrees, predestination, and reprobation
have been so explained as to make man a mere tool or plaything in
the hands of an unfeeling and arbitrary tyrant; and to father upon
their Creator the utter and hopeless perdition of the heathen who
never heard of the true God or of Jesus Christ whom he has sent. He
has been made to consign to the place of the lost the multitude
which no man can number of infants and children who have been
taken away before they have learned “to refuse the evil and to
choose the good.” Such dogmas as these have been represented


as the teaching of the Presbyterian Church. Some of its theologians
have, indeed, given occasion for such representations; but a
Calvinism such as this has not for long been the teaching of any
section of the Church. With Calvin we hold the Sovereignty of
divine grace; with Arminius, the freedom of the human will;
and with Christians of every name, the infinite love, the unsullied
holiness, the impartial justice, and the all-comprehending
knowledge and all-arranging wisdom of the Divine Being; but we
shrink back awe-stricken by the unfathomable mysteries that are
involved in the union and co-operation of all these attributes in the
scheme of providence and the plan of redemption. To make the
reproach of the Calvinism of our Church a valid reproach, it must
be shewn to be inconsistent both with Scripture and with reason.
But a theology which a Macaulay could describe as superior to all
others in its philosophical truth and symmetry, and which a Fronde
could shew to have been the source of the strength of the great
apostles and vindicators of our religious and civil liberties, is not to
be sneered at by shallow sciolists, or to be cast aside as a superstition
of the dark ages.
There is another mistaken idea about Presbyterianism which I
may be allowed to notice. It has been credited with a spirit opposed
to all that is pleasing and tasteful in the forms and accessories of
worship. To believe some people, a Presbyterian would rather
worship God in a barn than under the roof of the stateliest
cathedral; would rather sing the Psalms to the drone of the
hag-pipes than to the richest tones of the organ. There have been
periods in the history of our Chuch when aesthetics in worship were
in the background; and there have been such periods! in the
history of other Churches also. The revival of the taste for the
beautiful in connection with religion is, in some of these, not of verv
ancient date ; and it may be questioned whether former shortcomings
or later extravagance should move them the more strongly to avoid
the error of throwing stones from glass houses. Indifference to the
beautiful in the service of the sanctuary cannot be charged against
either the Swiss or the Scottish reformers. The efforts of Calvin
and Knox and their confreres to provide a worthy form of psalmody
and prayer for their respective Churches shew that they were fully
alive to the influence of beauty and grace as aids to devotion.
Much has been made of the destruction or defacement of Church
buildings in Scotland at the time of the Reformation, and in
England at the time of the Commonwealth. But must this be
charged to the genius of Protestantism or Puritanism, whether
Congregational or Presbyterian ? In times of civil war, when men
are fighting for their lives and liberties, they are not likely to be
particular about grace of architecture or the beauty of painted glass.
Men who have been goaded on to open revolt against oppression
and tyranny could hardly be expected to show a fine discrimination
as to the character of the objects which have been associated with the
system against which they have taken up arms. The shallow, often
trifling, aestheticism of the present day has not depth of principle
enough to apprehend the fact that the disregard of the fine arts, of
music, painting, and architecture, and of the graceful and attractive
in general, in connection with the worship of God, was a protest and


a reaction on the part of English Puritans and Scottish Presbyterians
against the prominent features in the worship of the Roman and
Anglican Churches, by which they had been oppressed and
persecuted. Men whose fathers and brothers had been burned, or
shot, or hanged because they would not accept a doctrine which
their reason and conscience condemned, or follow a worship which
they regarded as idolatrous, or abandon the Ministers whom they
loved and honoured in obedience to a worldly priesthood or a
senseless and godless tyianny —men who had thus suffered could
not be expected to narrow, but rather to widen, the contrast between
their own simple mode of worship and that for the rejection of
which they and their sires had so grievously suffered. With the
stubborn pertinacity of the national character the Presbyterians of
Scotland were slovv to modify the stern simplicity of their worship
for w T hich their convenanting forefathers had bled, and the fiery
Scots of Presbyterian Ulster have been slower still. The worship,
of the Continental Presbyterian Churches has all along exhibited
greater variety and flexibility of form and attractiveness of manner
than that of the British Churches. But in Presbyterian Christendom
the last half-century has seen a change which might almost be
called a renaissance. In the imitation of the chastest and most graceful
models of Gothic architecture, in the supplementing of the old
metrical Psalms so dear to every true Presbyterian heart with choice
collections of hymns, in the introduction of greater variety and higher
style o( execution, in the music of the sanctuary in the blending of the
grand diapason of the organ, so detested in former times, with the
voices of the choir and the congregation, even in the use in some
quarters of “ the abomination ” of read-prayers—in all these we
have abundant evidence that a rude and barbarous simplicity, or an
unreasoning rejection of the more excellent way followed by our
neighbours, has nothing whatever to do with the spirit of
Presbyterianism.
With all this the Presbyterian Church remains true to her
ancient traditions. Except in few and rare instances the Psalms
retain their old place of honour as the chief repertory of the songs
of Zion. The music is true to the principle that the congregation is
a mixed assemblage called together to worship God, not to listen to
a sacred concert. The Church refuses to bind down the Minister
with the fetters of a prescribed form of prayer, or the congregation
to a fixed routine of ceremonial. She assumes that the Minister who
is called to pray in public may be trusted to lead the devotions of
the congregation with good sense, good grammar, and good taste.
Let us stand fast in that liberity wherewith Christ hath made us
free, and be not again entangled in a yoke of bondage. We hold
out the hand of fellowship to all who are willing to grasp it. We are
willing to learn and to adopt whatever of good we may find in the
methods of our neighbours. But we are true to the traditions of
the Church of our fathers, which we believe to have the true
Apostolic succession in holding and teaching Apostolic doctrine, to
follow an order and government based on Apostolic principle,
precept, and example, and to practice a worship of Apostolic
simplicity.
Fathers and brethren, I trust you will bear with ine while I


add a few words on the mission of our Church.
The supreme mission of all the Churches is the same—to preach
Christ crucified, the power of God and the wisdom of God for the
salvation of sinners, and to present to the world the beauty of
holiness in the character of its members, and so to exemplify,
commend, and adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour. This is the
genuine characteristic of all true Churches, whatever their specific
differences.
The Church that does not proclaim the Gospel of Salvation
through faith in Jesus Christ, the God-man Mediator ; that does not
strive to teach men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to
live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present world; that does
not exert its influence to promote the reign of truth, justice, purity,
and benevolence in the community; that does not do its part in
every movement that is calculated to educate, to elevate, to refine,
to purifiy society in the Spirit of Christ—to make them Christlike
—that Church is wanting in the signs and seals of the church of the
living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.
We claim no monopoly of devotion in the pursuit of this
mission. We cordially recognise the devotion of others. In Christ
Jesus there is neither Baptist, Congregationalist, Episcopalian,
Methodist, nor Presbyterian. We subscribe to the oft-quoted words
of Augustine, “ In essentials, unity, in non-essentials, liberty,, in all
things charity.” In the essentials of a common faith in the/iauthor
of “ our common salvation ” we rejoice in our unity with our
brethren of every Christain name. Denominational differences are
non-essentials; but liberty in non-essentials is not license; and
charity in all things is not indifference. Differences in doctrine,
in orders of Ministers, in modes of government, in forms of wor-
ship, touch at many points the life and work of the Church, and
even the mutual relations of men in secular and social life. We
claim the liberty to differ in these things from others, as we concede
to them the liberty to differ from us.
It goes without saying it, that if we regard our system of
Church government as founded on Scriptural principles and pat-
terns, it is incumbent upon us to do our utmost to establish and
extend its influence in the colony. .Religious, and civil, and social
life are closely interwoven with each other, and if the policy of
our Church is essentially the political policy under which we live,
and if in the past the struggle on behalf of Presbyterianism was
a part of the great struggle for political freedom and constitu-
tional government, the propagation of the representative institutions
of our Church, and of the Churches which have adopted the same
institutions under different names, will not be without its influence
in the consideration and extension of our liberties and self-
governing powers as a nation.
But this is a part of our mission, on which it is not necessary
for me to dilate. Political freedom may be the outcome of re-
ligious principles, and of the efforts of the Church for their vindi-
cation or extension ; but this is not the chief end, or in any sense
the direct end, of the Church’s activity. The mission of the Church
is to carry a religious message to the world. What is the message
for these days, and for this land ? What is wanted is a sound, sober,


manly gospel—a sincerely devout and at the same time rational form
of religion—free on the one side from the cant of ignorance and
mawkish sentiment, and on the other side from the mummery of
mediaeval forms. It is a hard and an unpalatable fact that religion
and intelligence seem to be drifting apart from each other. The in-
fluences to which this is due are manifold. The scientific study of
the material world is day by day opening up views of nature which
demand the modification, not so much of the essence of old beliefs, as
of the ways of stating them. The spirit of the inductive philosophy,
which insists on the verification of facts, their classification, and
combination before they can be used as the premises of reasoning, is
now dominating the sphere of religious belief and teaching as well
as of physical research. Religion, on the other hand, in some of
its forms is clinging to figments and fashions of the past, which
have ceased to appeal to the enlightened judgment. The architec-
ture and furniture of the Church, the external forms and rites of
worship, the postures of worshippers, and the orders and vestments
of Ministers are in some quarters the chief means by which religious
truth is exhibited, and the chief vehicles through which religious
worship is expressed. At the other pole of the religious world we
have bodily and mental excitement, loud-voiced rant and declama-
tion, impassioned appeals to mere sentiment and feeling, as if mere
noise were all that were needed to throw down the w r alls within
which the Devil has entrenched himself. The old ways are being
deserted. The times have been when the sermon was the chief part
of the service of the sanctuary. Perhaps it had more than its due
place. A'ow w r e are in danger of having the preacher pushed to one
side to make room for the organ, or made to give place to the actor in
a passion play, or the performers in a sacred opera. We are, I fear,
in danger of forgetting the true and supreme mission of the Church,
and the object at which/above all things, it is bound to aim. That
mission and that object require the maintenance of an instructed,
able, earnest pulpit, from which there shall be proclaimed a Scriptural
and rational theology, a doctrine that has as its aim, to teach men, and
to help them, to realise that “ godliness is profitable unto all things,
having the promise of the life that now is and also of that which is to
come.” If our Church is to make good its claim to a place and a name
in this colony, we must have a pulpit abreast of the age—a pulpit from
wduch there shall not only go forth the simple gospel of Jesus Christ
for the salvation of sinners, but which shall also be able to grapple
with the manifold forms of unbelief which are assailing society, and
especially the young, on every side. A pulpit, moreover, which shall
not isolate itself from the common and daily interests of the com-
munity, but like Him whose gospel it proclaims, identifies itself with
man in all the relations—the cares and sorrows, the trials and
struggles, the activities and the joys—of every-day life here, as w T ell as
in his hopes and prospects lor the life hereafter. We are told some-
times that the pulpit is an obsolete institution —that the Press has
altogether taken its place. The power of the Press is great; but it has
not superseded the power of the living voice. This will always be a
livingpporerw r er in the world. But the living voice to be a living power
must have something to say, and know how to say it. Our Church,
the Presbyterian Church throughout the world, has made the work of


the preacher her great work. Her popular government has been the
scatfolding on which the preacher has been elevated. She has prided
herself on the educational attainment, the intellectual ability, the
doctrinal purity, and the practical efficiency of her pulpit; if she is
to keep her place this high standard must be maintained. Her
people must not only be fed with strong meat, but the taste for strong
meat must be fostered and stimulated. Strong men are not to be fed
on milksops. Presbyterianism, as an order of government, may be of
the highest value; the worship may not only be Scripturally simple but
musically perfect; the doctrine of the Confession and the Catechism
may be impregnable in its orthodoxy and philosophical cohesion; but
all these will not avail if the pulpit dees not command the ear, the
attention, the respect of the community, not only for the educational
attainment and the intellectual force, but also, and above all, for
the personal refinement and manly piety of the men who fill it.
This, Fathers and Brethren, points out the direction in which the
efforts of our Church should be concentrated, if we are to discharge the
duties that rest upon us as a Church of Christ in this Colony. We
must see that our pulpits are filled with men who preach the simple
gospel of salvation through Jesus Christ, in view of the character of
the age in which we live, and in which they are fed intellectually by
the daily newspapers, and a literature of marvellous variety ; but in
which they need also to be reminded that there are higher and more
lasting interests than those that pertain to the body and its mortal
life, and spiritual food more satisfying and staying than is furnished
by any of the material sciences or mental philosophies—the spiritual
food that is to be found in the grand old Bible.
Muir & Morcom, Printers, Brisbane,






