

THE SACRAMENTS.
Correspondence
BY
THE REV. DR. TURNBULL,
THE REV. JOHN ROBERTSON,
AND
THE REV. GEORGE CLARKE,
ADDRESSED TO
Mr. Thomas Young
IN REFERENCE TO HIS
OBJECTIONS TO THE DOCTRINES
OF
THE REY. JOHN STORIE,
(Minister of St. Andrew's Presbyterian Church, Hobart Town)
ON
THE SACRAMENTS:
WITH
AN APPENDIX.
TASMANIA:
J. WALCH & SONS, HOBART TOWN AND LAUNCESTON.
1861
PRATT AND SON, PRINTERS.




THE SACRAMENTS.
Correspondence
BY
THE REV. DR. TURNBULL,
THE REV. JOHN ROBERTSON,
AND
THE REV. GEORGE CLARKE,
' ADDRESSED TO
M\\ {Thomas Jjonno
IN REFERENCE TO HIS
OBJECTIONS TO THE DOCTRINES
OF
THE REV. JOHN STORIE,
(Minister of St Andrew's Presbyterian Church , Hobart Town)
ON
THE SACRAMENTS:
' WITH
AIN APPENDIX.
TASMANIA:
J. WALCH & SONS, HOBART TOWN AND LAUNCESTON.
1861


PRATT AND SON, PRINTERS, HOBART TOWN.


CORRESPONDENCE.
Copy Letter Mr. Young to Lev. Dr. Turnbull.
Hobart Town, 16th August, 1861.
My dear Sir,
About an hour after you called on me yester-
day afternoon, and communicated to me that you and the
Rev. Mr. Storie had waited on Mr. Campbell, and ques-
tioned him as to the communication which I informed you
that he had made to me, but which you said Mr. Campbell
stated to you I must have misunderstood; I also called on
him, and stated what you had said to me. He was indeed
much surprised, and he immediately wrote me the note of
which I annex you a copy. He there gives the exact words
which Mr. Storie used at the communion table three days
after he and his two elders expelled me from it for alleging
that he had on a previous occasion used similar language
without even permitting me to prove what I affirmed, and
having pursued me with a malignity of feeling I should
hope never before witnessed in a body professing themselves
Christians.
The words used by Mr. Storie at the communion table
are too remarkable to be forgotten by any one, namely :
“ I don’t know how it is, but unless you eat the very
flesh and drink the very blood of Christ, ye communicate in
vain.”
Mr. Campbell also adds —“ Mr. Storie admitted, in the
hearing of Dr. Turnbull, that he used these words.”
I now see, from what you said to me, that you consider
this language correct, by your observations, that you found
Mr. Campbell did not understand the meaning of the
<e personal presence of Christ,” and that we must not give
too large a latitude to the principle of “ figurative language”
in the explanation of the Scriptures. Be this, however, as


it may, it was only a matter of fact yon had to enquire
into, and Mr. Campbell fully satisfied you on this head,
coupled with the admission of Mr. Storie in your hearing.
As I communicated the fact to Dr. Officer and the Rev.
Mr. Robertson, I will forward to them copies of this letter
and of Mr. Campbell's to me.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
(Signed) THOMAS YOUNG.
Rev. De. Turnbull.
Copy of Mr. Campbell’s Letter referred to.
Hobart Town, 15th August, IBGI.
Dear Sir,
As you have communicated to me that Dr.
Turnbull waited upon you, after his and Mr. Stone’s inter-
view with me, and said that you must have misunderstood
the nature of the statement that I made to you, I beg there-
fore to state exactly the substance of what I said to both
gentlemen, namely, that Mi*. Storie, in his address at the
communion table, made use of these words :
“ I don't know how it is, but unless you eat the very
flesh and drink the very blood of Christ, ye communicate
in vain.”
Mr. Storie admitted, in the hearing of Dr. Turnbull, that
he used these words.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
(Signed) R. CAMPBELL.
Thomas Young, Esq.
P.S.—Mr. Storie, I may add, also admitted having so expressed himself
on a previous occasion, in my house, in the presence of Mrs. Campbell.
(Signed) P, C»


Copy Letter Rev. Dr. Turnbull to Mr. Young.
Campbell Town, 17th August, 1861.
My dear Mr. Young,
I liave received your letter of yester-
day’s date.
1. The words contained in Mr. Campbell s letter to you,
as having been spoken by Mr. Storie, appear to me to ex-
press the true doctrine of the Church of Scotland. I refei
you to the xxix. Chap, of the "Westminster Confession; also
to the xxi. Article of the Old Confession of the Church of
Scotland.
2. But in your letter to Mr. Storie, of the 14th March,
1861, you charged him, in express terms, with preaching
another doctrine, namely, the doctrine of transubstantiation,
which, in my judgment, is so different from that proved by
Mr. Campbell, and admitted by Mr. Storie, that, it is ac-
tually contrasted with it in the Chapter and Article above
referred to. And, moreover, that so decided a contrasting
of the one doctrine against the other is not peculiar to the
Church of Scotland is shewn by the terms of the xxvm.
Article of the Church of England, in which, whilst the one
doctrine is allowed or affirmed, the other is declared to be
repugnant to Scripture.
3. You write as follows : —"Be this, however, as it may,
it was only a matter of fact you had to enquire into, and
Mr. Campbell fully satisfied you on this head, coupled with
the admission of Mr. Storie in your hearing.” The question
then is, What was the matter of fact I had to enquire into ?
As to this there can be no doubt. It was distinctly and in
express words agreed between you and me that the only
point to be ascertained was whether Mr. Storie had, after
all, admitted it to Mr. Campbell to be his doctrine, that in
the Lord’s Supper the bread was converted into the body of
Christ.
On my return I accordingly stated to you that which
Mr. Campbell had distinctly declared to me, namely, that
Mr. Storie had not made any such admission or statement,
but that he had admitted the employment of language simi-
lar to that used in the Standards of the Church.
When you requested me to see Mr. Campbell on. this
subject you expected him to prove to me that Mr. Storie
had admitted transubstantiation to be his doctrine; but


tvdiat 'Mr. Campbell did, in my judgment prove was, that
Mr. Storie had preached the doctrine which, in our Stand-
ards, as well as in those of the Church of England, is op-
posed to transubstantiation.
I remain, my dear Mr. Young,
Yours very truly,
(Signed) ADAM TURNBULL.
I have annexed the Extracts from the two Confessions
but every one almost has a Prayer Book at hand.
Extract from the Westminster Confession of Faith.
(Chapter xxix. 6.)
OF THE LORD’S SUPPER.
“ That doctrine which maintains a change of the
substance of bread and wine into the substance of Christ’s
blood (commonly called transubstantiation) by consecration
of a priest, or by any other way, is repugnant not to Scrip-
ture alone, but even to common sense and reason, overthrow-
eth the nature of sacrament, and hath been and is the cause
of manifold superstitions, yea, of gross idolatries. 7th.
Worthy receivers, outwardly partaking of the visible
elements in this sacrament do then also, inwardly by faith,
really and indeed, yet not carnally and corporally, but spi-
ritually, receive and feed upon Christ crucified, and all the
benefits of his death, the body and blood of Christ being
then not corporally or carnally in, with, or under the bread
and wine, yet as really but spiritually present to the faith of
believers in that ordinance as the elements themselves are to
their outward senses.”
Extract from the Confession of Faith of the Church of Scotland.
(Chapter xxi.)
OF THE SACRAMENTS.
“ So that we confess and undoubtedly believe, that the
faithful in the right use of the Lord’s Table do so eat the
body and drink the blood of the Lord Jesus, that He re-
maineth in them, and they in Him.”


Vopy Letter Mr . Young to Rev. I)r. Turnbull.
Hobart Town, 19th August, 1861.
My dear Sir,
I am favored with your letter of the 17 th
mi You say that “ The words contained in Mr, Campbell’s
letter to you as having been spoken by Mr. Stone (and
admitted in your presence) “ appear to me to express the
true doctrine of the Church of Scotland. I refer you to the
29th Cap. of the Westminster Confession; also to the 21st
Article of the Old Confession of the Church of Scotland.
I admit that the reformed and existing Article comes
much nearer the meaning of Scripture, according to the ex-
position of the best Commentators, than the old and abro-
gated Article to which you have also referred me ; but that it
would be well also if it was placed in the same category by
a new one being framed. But, even as the Article is ex-
pressed, it has not the most remote meaning to the language
used by Mr. Storie. It declares that the benefits of Christ s
death are received by the communicant “ not corporally or
carnally, in, with, or under the bread and wine; yet as
really, but spiritually present to the faith of believers m that
ordinance, as the elements themselves are to their outward
Although a much happier mode of expression might have
been used, yet this doctrine is quite consistent with Scrip-
ture. The believer, by putting to his seal by the use of the
visible elements to his belief in the atonement of Christ
spiritually receives through his belief in that atonement all
the benefits flowing from it. But this is a very different
doctrine from what Mr. Storie laid down and admitted he
held. He says that the communicant communicates in vain
“ unless he eats the very flesh and drinks the very blood of
Christ.”
Such a doctrine as this is not found in the Confession of
Faith; and, if such language does not mean transubstan-
tiation, lamat a loss to know what it means. Mr. Stone
says that he is unable to explain the fact, as well he might;
and, under such circumstances, I may ask, How could he
expect the communicants to believe in it ? An enlightened
belief can only come through the understanding; but what
Mr. Storie stated is utterly repugnant to the reasoning


powers which God has given us: and, unless a man can
address these reasoning powers, he should « feed” upon his
own dogmas in silence.
I need not say, that Mr. Storie’s language, as recorded
by Mr. Campbell, following so recently after his previous
declaration that the bread and wine used in the sacrament
became the flesh and blood of Christ when received by the
believing communicant* gave his language a meaning not
to be mistaken, although the language, taken by itself
can receive no other construction than that the believing
communicant eats the identical flesh of Christ and drinks
his very blood—a proposition so monstrous as being alike
abhorrent to Scripture and common sense. Indeed, Mr.
Storie seems to have felt this himself, by declaring that he
could not explain it; but what is stated in the Confession
of the Church is intelligible enough.
o o
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
(Signed) THOMAS YOUNG.
Rev. Ur. Turnbull.
Extract from the Sermon by the Rev. John Storie: being
the matter referred to by Mr. Storie and two of the El-
ders, in condemnation _of Mr. Young, without permitting
him being heard in his defence.
“And finally by means of these sensible signs, Christ and
the benefits of His work are presented and applied by the
The following is the language used by Mr. Storie in the delivery of his
Sermon, which as seen from the printed Record of the proceedings of
the ‘ essmn in Mr. Stories prosecution against me, I was ready to es
tablish by many witnesses, but was not allowed to do so, but was condemn
ed by the Session unheard “ The reason why so much controversy has
arisen between the Protestant Church, and the Church of Rome and the
Lutheran Church, has arisen from a misapprehension of the meaning of our
Saviour’s words— 4 This is my body.’ The bread when placed by the
Elders upon the Communion Table, is bread. After prayer offered bv the
Minister it is tread When given by the minister to the distributing
Elders, it is bread. The wme m the flagon is wine. When poured into
the cup it is wine ; but then we must remember that the Spirit of God is
present m all fas power, and that to the believing communicant they become
the flesh and blood of our Lord, Our Saviour himself has said ‘ Except
ye eat my flesh and drink my blood, ye have no life in you,' This is the view
held by our Church." T Y


Holy Spirit to believers—tlie Spirit of Christ—the living;
Spirit of the Godhead. He is present and acting through
these visible elements as the means of conveying, saving,
and sanctifying grace to the humble believing soul. When-
ever there is true waiting faith in the man baptized or seated
at Christ's table, the Spirit is there to bestow Christ and the
benefits of His life and passion as in these symbols presented.
In the one Sacrament He is present to baptize with quick-
ening life and power, to efface the guilt of original sin, to
convey Christ himself to the soul, and to purge the conscience
from dead works with His blood. In the Sacrament of the
Supper He is present to apply Jesus Christ in his refreshing
and sustaining power, and in the cleansing of sin from the
troubled conscience by the sprinkling of the expiating blood
of Calvary. In the Supper, that which the Minister breaks
is bread, and that which the Christian hands to his brother
Christian is bread—bread that has received the divine
blessing and is set apart to a holy use, yet simple bread it
remains—bread that has the power to nourish the life of the
body, and repair the waste that it sustains in daily sweat
and toil; but to every believing soul seated at that table the
Holy Spirit gives more. He gives Christ himself, Christ
in His broken body as the food of the hungry soul; Christ
as the bread of Heaven; Christ in His power to refresh, to
sustain, to strengthen the graces of the wearied and wasted
soul. And that which the Minister pours from the flagon
and the Elders hand from pew to pew is wine—simple wine,—
wine that speaks of a smiling vineyard, where beneath
Heaven's fostering eye once it grew; wine that speaks of
plenty and peace, wine that is able to revive the wounded
spirit and cheer the sinking heart, wine that has God's
blessing on it, and is set apart to a holy use —but simple
hallowed wine. This and no more is what the communicant
drinks from that cup—but to the humble, believing, thirsting
heart the Spirit of Christ gives more—He gives the very
blood of the atoning Saviour, that blood shed for many for
the remission of sins, which is still treasured in God's
presence on high, that blood with its power to take the
stain of guilt from the conscience, and speak peace to the
troubled heart. And surely this deep, but simple truth, is
the means by which we can explain the deeper meaning that
lies in the words of Jesus— f This is my body broken for you,
this cup is the new Testament in my blood.'
“ These Christ alone can give; these He is present to give;


for that table is not man’s, that feast is not the earthly
pastor’s feast. The Lord Jesus is present at that table to give
all that makes the Supper precious and helpful to the soul*
What no man can give the Son of Man bestowed then—He
bestows now. This deeper meaning in these words the carnal
views of Rome have missed and greatly misinterpreted. There
are two parties at that table, there is one seen and one
unseen—two breads at that table, one for the body and the
other for the soul; two cups at that table, the cup of wine
that man gives, the cup of redeeming blood that Jesus gives.
The Son of Man is present there to bestow no less on the
faithful communicant than His own broken body and His
own blood once shed. And the Spirit of Christ is there to
apply these saving gifts, which unless ye receive from Him,
ye leave that table with your souls unfed, for the Son of God
hath said, — f Unless ye eat the flesh and drink the blood of
the Son of Man, ye have no life in you.’
“ The question remains c Are the Sacraments essential to
salvation?’— f Yes,’ I reply—they are by Christ ordained as
mercy, and to neglect them is to treat His mercy with
neglect—they are by Christ commanded. To neglect them
is disobedience. And to live in disobedience is to live in sin;
and who can say that to live in sin is to live in salvation !
But if the question means, can the man be saved without
them ? Then I reply that God acts generally by means, but
that He can save without means—without the ordinary
means There may be cases of individual exception.
God can save man from a fiery death as in the furnace at
Babylon. He can sustain a man’s life for forty days
without food or drink! He can preserve the life of His
servant in the belly of a great fish, or in the lion’s den.
Nor is it to be expected that He will.
“ If then the Lord has given the Sacraments as means of
grace —means through which He is promising to visit His
people in covenant mercy and dispense grace to believing
men —shall we venture lightly to esteem them or neglect
their use without danger to our souls ?”
Copy Letter Mr. Young to Rev. Dr. Turnbull .
Hobart Town, 23rd August, 1861.
My Dear Sir,
I have obtained a copy of the extract which
Mr. Storie has furnished of that part of the sermon which


lie preached, and of which I complained to him of his doc-
trine. It is undoubtedly presented in a different dress from
that which he delivered, and although it is palpably elabo-
rated as a defence, still the doctrines maintained are the
same.
Mr. Storie believes in infant baptism, yet he makes
baptism “to efface the guilt of original sin.” Surely you
must admit the unsoundness of this, and that original sin
was effaced by Christ’s atonement, of which all have
the benefit, and that sin can only be committed after the
faculties are developed, to enable man to know good from
evil.
The symbols used in the sacrament of the Supper are one,
and indivisible, and are an expression merely of the affirma-
tion of a fact. He who receives them in truth, admits the
atoning sacrifice of Christ, and through his faith, receives
all the benefits flowing from the atonement; but he who
untruthfully receives them, eats and drinks them to his own
condemnation. The body and blood of Christ, through
which His atoning sacrifice was made, are spiritually present
to the faith of the believer, as much so as the symbols
themselves are to his outward senses.
Mr. Storie, however, affirms a different docti-ine. He
says “ There are two breads ! at that table, one for the body,
and the other for the soul; two cups at that table, the cup
that man gives, the cup of redeeming blood that Jesus gives.”
Here therefore, the implied declaration to man, and the
positive affirmation to God, on partaking of the symbols in
testimony of a fact, is completely destroyed. As the un-
believer only eats and drinks “ for the body ” —he cannot,
of course, as affirmed by St. Paul, eat and drink condemna-
tion to himself, because he has partaken them honestly for
the use of his own body, and not as a solemn affirmation by
him of the death of Christ as an atoning sacrifice. The
very use of the symbols, therefore, as the lively evidence of
a fact, are completely destroyed : because, according to Mr.
Storie, they may be honestly partaken either way.
The unbeliever, therefore, has not polluted his soul by any
lie affirmed by him, but to the believer Mr. Storie says :
“ The Spirit of Christ gives more, “ He gives the very
blood of the atoning Saviour ; ” or, as subsequently ex-
pressed by him at the Lord’s Table, and admitted, “ Unless
he ” (the communicant) “ eats the very flesh, and drinks
the very blood of Christ ”he communicates in vain. The


contrast drawn by Mr. Storie between the essential character
of the elements as partaken of by the unbeliever and the be-
liever establishes this : the one, he says, eats bread and wine
only for his body, the other for his soul, who partakes of the
Redeemer’s blood. The contrast therefore proves a conver-
sion of the elements. The agency by which this is brought
about is the personal presence ol Christ. So far as the senses
of man are concerned, he has no evidence of this fact, and
nothing short of a miracle could establish the fact to him.
This agency, Mr. Storie says, is the deeper meaning, by
which this conversion is brought about, from that asserted
for the same purpose by the Church of Rome. After speak-
ing of the Lord Jesus’ presence at the table to give all that
makes the supper precious, Mr. Storie adds “ This deeper
meaning in the words the carnal views of Rome have missed
and greatly misinterpreted.”
It appears, therefore, from what is above noticed that the
Church of Rome has not made an erroneous assertion in
reference to the change of substance in the elements, but
only as to the mode in which that change is brought about.
The Saviour gives the cup of “ redeeming blood, ”in other
words he converts the cup of wine intended for the believer
into his own blood. If this is not Mr. Storie’s meaning,
what can be his meaning in declaring that the visible
elements are only bread and wine to one, and the cup of
redeeming blood to the other? If this does not mean a
conversion of the visible elements when partaken of by the
believer, what can it mean, since he is only speaking of the
visible elements. The dogma of making them represent
two distinct substances, is not only unscriptural, but puerile.
Here, therefore, is the very doctrine which I called in
question admitted, but which Mr. Storie in his letter to me
solemnly denied having affirmed, and for my assertion of
which he demanded a retraction and an apology from me
and this being refused, he persecuted me with a malignity of
feeling seldom witnessed.
I received your long letter yesterday morning, at the same
time that I received the extract of Mr. Storie’s sermon.
Yesterday being the English post day, I could not attend
to either. This morning I gave both my best consideration,
and the foregoing is my criticism on Mr. Storie’s sermon.
I feel that that substantially answers your letter, although,
no doubt, if I were to answer it, I would go much more fully
into the subject. I feel however, the vanity of this. It would


only end in each of us being the more confirmed in his
views; and, besides, lam much afraid of hard things being
said which might end in an estrangement between us,
which I would sincerely regret after a thirty-six years 7
friendship, and taking place, too, at the close of my earthly
term. With this letter therefore, I beg to close the cor-
respondence.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours very sincerely,
(Signed) THOMAS YOUNG.
Rev. Dr. Turnbull.
Copy Letter from Rev. JDr. Turnbull to Mr. Young.
Campbell Town, 20th August, 1861.
My Dear Mr. Young,
I have received your letter of the
19tli instant.
It is, I assure you, very gratifying to me to perceive that
the matter now between us is narrowed and restricted to the
question : —What is the true doctrine of the Church of Scot-
land, as expressed in her ancient Articles, and more recent
Confession ?
You say u you admit that the reformed and existing
Article comes much nearer to the exposition of Scripture
than the old and abrogated Article 75 —on which statement
I wish to make two observations.
Ist. One of the grounds upon which the Westminster
Articles were received was—that they did not differ from
the old ones in point of doctrine; and, indeed, I am not
aware that any one of these Old Articles was ever abrogated,
though I believe they are but seldom referred to.
2nd. For our present purpose we shall, on consideration,
be agreed upon the point, that it is no part of the question
between us, whether the Article in question is in accordance
with the meaning of Scripture or otherwise; the simple
question is—What is the teaching of the Church ? and what
doctrines have her Ministers, therefore, bound themselves to
communicate to their hearers.


2. Pile next question springs from the folio win o’ para-
graph in your letter :
“It” (the Article) “declares that the benefits of Christ’s
death are received by the communicant, not corporeally or
carnally, in, with, or under the bread and wine, yet, as really,
but spiritually, present to the faith of believers in that
ordinance, as the elements themselves are to their outward
senses/’
Upon which I would remark, that it is not said in the
Aiticle in question that merely the benefits of Christ’s death are
present to the faith of believers, in that ordinance, as you have
inadvertently read it, but that the body and blood of Christ are
present to believers, in that ordinance, as really as the ele-
ments themselves are to their outward senses.
You will perceive that in quoting the word “ really,” I
have left out the qualifying words “ but spiritually.” I have
done so, because, for clearness sake, I wish to distinguish
between the facts expressed in the Article, and the manner
in which they take place ; the reality of a thing and the
manner of it, being quite distinct, and it is the reality only
with which we have now to do.
I would, then, draw your attention, in the first place, to
the fact expressed in the Article, from which you have
quoted it is that the body of Christ is as present to the
faith of believers, as the elements themselves are to their
outward senses.
It again we turn to the clxviii. question in the larger Cate-
chism, the matter of fact we shall find is thus expressed
“ They that worthily communicate, feed upon his body and
blood,” and in the clxx. answer it is said that this is done
“ truly and really ,” and by way of illustration, I may add,
that in the xxviii. Article of the Church of England it is
stated, that “ the body of Christ is received and eaten in the
Supper.”
Now, I believe the words quoted by Mr. Campbell as
having been spoken by Mr. Storie to be substantially correct!
Let us. now, therefore, compare them with the statements
made in the Standards.
And first, let the Old Confession of Faith speak—“ the
faithful do so eat the body and drink the blood of the Lord
Jesus, that He remaineth in them and they in Him.”
The Westminster Confession, “the body and blood of
Christ are as really present to believers, as the elements
themselves are to their outward senses.”


The larger Catechism, “ They who worthily communicate,
feed upon the body and blood of Christ truly and really.
Mr. Storie, “ They who worthily communicate eat the
very flesh and. drink the very blood of Christ.”
Now as the word “ very ” is, in meaning, identical with
“ true ” and “ real,” who then can say that there is any
difference between really and truly feeding upon or eating
the body of Christ, and eating the very body of Christ ? I
can draw no distinction between these words.
I trust therefore you will now see that I was not in error,
when I informed you that Mr. Campbell did not impute any-
thing to Mr. Storie contrary to the teaching of the Church
—more especially as Mr. Campbell expressly, and more
than once, admitted to me, that Mr. Storie did not, on the
occasion referred to, make it part of his teaching that the
elements were converted into the body and blood of Christ.
And now for the explanation.—Whilst I hold fast the
doctrine, that the believing communicant eats the identical
flesh of Christ, and drinks his very blood, as you, referring
to Mr. Storie’s words, have expressed it as being the teach-
ing of the Church ; I should be ready, with you, to exclaim,
in the words of Scripture, how can this Man give us His
flesh to eat ? had I not also before me the explanation of
the mode given in those very Articles wherein the fact itself
is so strongly asserted. The truth, is, it is the living flesh
of Jesus Christ, not dead flesh we are invited to eat, and
what is that living flesh ? If we turn to the vi. Chap, of
St. John, we shall find that that living flesh is but another
name for the person of Jesus, it is then the person of Christ,
as now existing, that is, it is Himself as He now liveth and
reigneth in glory, and as possessing no longer a natural
body but a spiritual body, that we eat in the Supper or as
is otherwise expressed, that we receive, partake of, or feed
upon, and the mean through which we do so is unquestion-
ably faith , not any carnal manducation. Though the pro-
cess, as is again and again expressed in our Standards is—
as you observe—only spiritual: it is not the less a real and
positive transaction. Our spirit receives Jesus as wholly and
truly its own. It makes Him its own, it appropriates Him
to itself, and with Him it receives all the benefits which are
His to confer; it is by this partaking of Christ, or of the
body of Christ, and of His life (the blood is the life), that
the believer is nourished and strengthened to all holiness
and purity.


And now, in conclusion, my old and valued friend, will
you bear with me if, in no controversial spirit, I draw your
attention once again to the construction you have put upon
the Article quoted by you (and also previously by myself)
from the Westminster Confession. You say “ The believer,
by putting to his seal—by the use of the visible elements —
to his belief in the atonement of Christ, spiritually receives,
from his belief in that atonement, all the benefits flowing
from it. This is, no doubt true ; but it evidently falls far
short of the meaning taught so carefully in our Standards,
and so fully in the Scriptures on the subject. . A belief in
the atonement as a fact is not the principal thing that the
Scriptures require ; —indeed I know of no passage in Scrip-
ture in which the word “faith” occurs in immediate con-
nection with the bare atonement; the Person of the Lord
Jesus is always interposed. The only apparent exception I
am aware of is in the xxv. verse of the iii. chap, of the
Epistle to the Homans, where, in our translation, we have
the expression “ Through faith in His blood” ; but it would
appear that the whole clause, if properly translated, would
run “ Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation in His
blood through faith.” The command is to believe in the
nayne of the Lord Jesus, who Himself said “ Whosoever
believeth in Me hath everlasting life; that is, Whosoever
putteth his trust in Me, as a person, shall live, I will raise
him up again at the last day.” And it is therefore that in
the communion, whilst the benefits secured to us by the Lord
Jesus, and more especially his propitiation, are prominently
brought before us, there is yet something more glorious still,
which occupies the first place namely, the person of the Lord
himself, whom, faith then receives into its embrace as all its
own ; and the benefits of Christ then belong to it, inasmuch
as it hath already received him, whose they are, and from
whom they proceed.
The Scriptures appear to employ the term “eating,” and
our standards, the words u feeding upon Christ,” in order
to represent our closing with Christ, or (as the occasion may
require) renewing our interest in Him, because no other set of
words could adequately express the idea that the reception
of Christ by the soul has its only analogy, and consequently
its only exponent, in the reception of food by the mouth, for
the nourishment of the body. It is only when Christ him-
self is ours, that we have any title to his benefits.
Lest it should appear strange to you that I have omitted


all reference to the elements themselves, in what I have now
said, I would add that no language could be too strong to
sio-nify my conviction that they are mere symbols, to point
out the successive steps of the process by which in our spirits
we realize, through faith, the mystery of Christ’s body, now
in glory, with our interest therein; and to help the mental
operation by which such realization is attained; I may how-
ever add, that inasmuch as the bread and wine,. are the
analogies by which the truth is suggested to our minds,. the
name°of the sign is sometimes attributed to the thing signified
fas you will perceive by the ii. Article ot the xxa ii. Chap, and
the v. Art. of xxix. Cap. of the Westminster Confession)—a
notable instance of which practice is to be found in the xxviii.
Article of the Church of England, and in the x. Chap, of the
Ist Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians, in the latter clause of
the xvi. verse of which, the question is put, “ The bread
which we break is it not the communion (or participation or
partaking) of the body of Christ ? IVhere, the bread being
the sign or representative of the truth, or, as it has been
sometimes called, the “ Vehicle of the truth respecting Christ,”
the eating of it is put as identical with that receiving of
Christ into the soul, of which it is, in strictness, only sug-
gestive.
Do not suppose that in all this, I am actuated by the
spirit of sermonizing or dogmatism, or that, in our present
mutual relation, I presume to speak to you authoritatively.
I may sincerely state, that I have not the most distant desire
to impose my own views upon you; but Ido wish you, with
all my heart I do wish you, prayerfully and earnestly, to
consider the matter afresh for yourself. It is my prayer
that, wherein either of us may be deceived, we may be set
right; and Ido hope, that our present may not,
in’God’s Grace, be without its use to both of us.
I remain,
My dear Mr. Young,
Yours very sincerely,
(Signed) ADAM TURNBULL.


Copy Letter from Rev. John Robertson to Mr. Young.
Botlrwell, 11th September, 1861.
My Dear Sir,
nt ~ , Dr - Turnbull transmitted to me a conv
of a letter lie wrote to you a few days after I last saw you
on the unpleasant subject of Mr. Storie. From that letter I
S 10U infe f tllat tlie difference between you and him with
regard to the matter in debate, arises entirely from a mis-
interpretation of eath other's language. He refers to the
Confession of Faith, and I have the "most fhorotlh confi!
denee Uiat he does so in the most perfect good Ifth “nd
wtthout any reservation. Now nothing cat? be stronger or
mor e explicit than the words of the said Confession aSainst
the no ,on of a conversion of the elements in the suppe'So
pWe 7 “Tlm°o t C Ff’ “ * he papists “dersfand the
setaoartfoP outward elements m this sacrament, duly
set apart to the uses ordained by Christ have such a relation
. Him jellied, as that truly, yet sacramentally only they
a/ e sometimes called by the name of the things they Represent to
m ure thtTnf" ? fCh *U albeit/in sisCe and
That doc riJe wfib 6111 ™/-' 7 T* °“h Uead and wine.
bread “T 1 8 f clla "g e of the substance of
lead and nine into the substance of Christ's body and
rfa p““t m or 7 bv d tr “ sufetant “on) by consecration
o• J , 1 y , an T ot lcr wa 7? 1S repugnant not to
Scripture alone, but even to common sense and reason-
andk'theta ‘ the Sacramen t; and hath been
«T h e'£?'of:idolatries.'’
carnallv bf “•?. °° d °! C \ nS ‘ bein S then not corporally or
carnally in, with or under the bread and wine, is really but
.pmua y present to the faith of believers in that ordinance ”
Such is the doctrine of the Church of Scotland, and sub
“•in j 6 “, of ,England, concerning this Sacra-
Tui-nbnli 4 ' d n llch, i T , d ?™ t ! wt ’ 18 the doctrine of Dr.
1 uinbull. The whole difficulty, appears to me to have
arisen from a misapprehension of the rather unlucky and
somewhat awkward phrase about “the body and blood of
Christ being really present, not corporally or carnally but
Wrf wfeh f to 1? ° f belie ™' B i’ean-
|fi; , ‘ . ’ ab<:r a 1 18 c J® ar enough, and ought not to
ea l e.ther Dr. Turnbull or Mr. Storie one inch astray, even
m the appropriate use of terms. J ’


It is greatly to be regretted, were it only for his own sake,
that Mr. Storie founding on the above phrase, should have
taken a fancy to indulge in such mystical language respect-
ing the communion—language which, though it may be
logically defensible, as in accordance with the Confession, or
rather not directly contrary to it, and not necessarily invol-
ving the popish absurdity of transubstantiation, yet borders
so closely upon the latter, as to be to ears not familiar with
the subtle distinctions, and word-fencings of the old scho-
lastic theologians, not easily distinguishable from it. Such
language not tending to instruction or edification, as he must
by this time have discovered, nay, unavoidably leading, more
or less, to misconstruction, if not to serious error, ought, on
every principle of prudence, propriety, and good sense, to be
carefully avoided : for the early Reformers, to whom he no
doubt may appeal, there is this excuse; they were originally
Romanists; they, not unnaturally, thus felt an extreme
difficulty in shaking themselves, at once, altogether free of
a mysterious dogma which seemed to have some countenance
in the words of Scripture, and which had struck very deep
roots in the public mind: (Luther never got over this
prejudice—his doctrine of consubstantiation is merely ano-
ther—and if possible worse and more irrational—edition of
transubstantiation ; they therefore continued to employ the
old phraseology to which they had been trained, very
slightly modified, to adapt it to the new, and not always
very clear views, which had dawned upon them, respecting
this subject. This was the case even with Calvin, (whom
you must not charge with all the extravagances of those
who assume his name —he was confessedly the most learned,
the ablest, the most philosophical and clear-headed of. all
the reformers), who, while stigmatising and anathematizing
transubstantiation as an abominable and utterly irrational
heresy, made desperate efforts to express his own notions on
the same point in terms as analogous as possible to those long
in vogue with the papists. He would, doubtless, have first
laughed, and then grimly frowned, at Mr. Storie’s conceit
of the two breads , and two cups —language, however, which
ridiculous, and on that account reprehensible as it is, I must
add as one not quite unversed in this sort of dialectics, is
altogether inconsistent with a belief in transubstantiation —is
in fact directly contradictory of it; for the papist does not
believe in two breads , or in two cups —he is too good a logician
for that; what he believes is, that the bit of wafer placed on


his tongue is the very body and blood, soul, and divinity of
the Saviour, all in one. Mr. Stone’s doctrine of the two
breads and two cups,, is simply an affected mystical jargon
fiom which the initiated may easily extract a very harmless
and strictly orthodox meaning, but which, to all who are not
adepts in this antique cant, must sound very like either non-
sense or worse. If the young preachers of the Free Church
really indulge to any extent in this piebald, motley, monkish
mysticism, it is proof positive that Mr. Barr’s description of
them as half-educated is too just; and no marvel if they are
rapidly emptying their churches. Like the majority of my
brethren, I was once a great stickler for that body; lam
now convinced we were all wrong; and that it would have
fared better with us, every way, had we stood by the old
and National Church.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours truly,
(Signed) JOHN ROBERTSON.
Thomas Young, Esq.
\
Copy Letter from Rev. John Robertson to Mr. Young.
Bothwell, 16th September, 1861.
My Dear Sir,
I duly received your letter of the 12th
current, and\ along with it a copy of the correspondence
(now returned) between yourself and Dr. Turnbull about
Ike—what I must call—unfortunate affair of Mr. Storie.
I have carefully perused it, and with no small interest and
surprise—interest in the controversy, and surprise at cer-
tain of the doctrinal views avowed and defended by both
the reverend parties. For this reason, having some time on
my hand, and being now for the first time, put in possession
of the real merits of the case, I have resolved, should you
muster patience to read it, to write you at full length, and
unreservedly, the honest, unbiassed, conclusions I have
arrived at. I mean so far as the doctrinal bearings are con-
cerned after mature consideration of the subject.
I must, however, first premise that I am not one of those


who look on all error as damnable; who measure the piety
and virtue of a man’s life by, or make his hopes of salvation
depend on, the rigorous orthodoxy (as I understand that
term) of his religious notions. I believe salvation in the
life to come, and the practice of every virtue in the life that
now is, may be quite compatible with much theological
error, much indistinctness and confusion of ideas, respect-
ing abstruse, mystical, or transcendental points of faith. If,
therefore, in what follows, I make strong exception to any
dogmas, or opinions professed by both, or either of those
reverend gentlemen, or fairly deducible from the language
held by them, as irreconcilable with what appears to me to
be the verity of Scripture, as re-produced in our Church
Standards, you must not set me down as imputing to them
any moral pravity, or as inferring that they are in any way
worse men or worse Christians than myself, or that their honest
adoption and maintenance of such errors (assuming them to be
errors) excludes from any of the promises and blessings of the
gospel. First of all, I must do Mr. Storie the justice to say
that the extract from his sermon gives me a high opinion of his
mental power —of his eloquence, his copiousness both of lan-
guage and ideas. I fear in this you will not at all agree with
me : it is, however the impression—right or wrong —for in
such things I claim no infallibility—left on my mind, after
perusal. It is too plain, however, that in straining after
something more telling and more evangelical than is found
in our Confession of Faith, or in Scripture, with regard to
the Sacraments, he has not only slipped into Puseyism, but
verged closely—nay, actually poached a little, on the con-
fines of the u One Infallible Church.”
(1.) Mr. Storie’s doctrine with regard to baptism, as
conveyed in the unqualified language of the extract differs—-
in nothing that I can see—from that of Rome and of Dr.
Pusey. It is certainly not the doctrine of our Standards,
nor of Scripture, as I understand Scripture ; and is at
variance with universal experience. Baptism is no more
regeneration than circumcision was. There are. few
scoundrels at Port Arthur who have not been baptized ;
but he would be a bold man indeed, who would dare, in so
many words, to assert that they were thereby, though the
Catechisms of the Churches of England and Rome roundly
assert it, u made members of Christ, children of God, and in-
heritors of the kingdom of heaven;” or, in Mr. Storie’s still
stronger language, il received quickening life and power;


had the guilt of original sin effaced; had Christ himself
conveyed to their soul; and their consciences purged from
dead works by his blood.” No, their original corruption
remained unmitigated; from first to last they manifested and
do manifest, by a consistent perseverance in rascality, vil-
vice, that they have ever been, and are, the children
of the devil, the sworn subjects and inheritors of his kingdom
rather. To speak honestly, preaching or teaching of this
sort, is neither more nor less than what Mr. Carlyle—not a
Aeiy oithodox theologian it is true, but from whom much
useful matter may be gathered, notwithstanding—denomi-
nates sham, un-veracity, un-reality ; what every man’s own
observation tells him is such; and can never lead to any pos-
sible manner of good. Shams, falsehoods, palpable, open to
the eyes of all the world, never can. And no sham , or false-
hood, more patent than this pretended magic-work of moral
n d spiritual renovation by baptism—whether the operator
be Dr. Willson, Dr. Nixon, Mr. Storie, or Mr. Dowling—
was ever attempted to be palmed on the credulity of an
easy-going world. Do we not every day witness the very
same results following the handiwork of each, whether he
be (as they will have it) a legitimate spiritual desendant of
the apostles, or simply the successor to some LL self-consecrated
cobbler, or some ranting tailor who fancied himself inspired ”
—-to borrow a phrase from the Member for the Huon.
Some of those whom they sprinkle or dip turn out well,
good Christians (as, however, do even a larger proportion of
Quakers who are not sprinkled or dipped at all) so far as the
eye of man can see ; others, rather indifferent, and of some-
Avhat doubtful sainthood; and not a few so shockingly bad
w o evince from birth to death such dispositions and tem-
pers hat the very largest charity can scarcely come to any
other conclusion than that they would be quite out of place
m the inheritance of glory. When I say this, you must not
misundei stand me, as if I would depreciate the holy sacra-
ment of baptism : I would only indicate its true place and
meaning in the Christian scheme. It is merely a ritual
ordinance; but, as the sign and seal of the covenant of grace
of our engagement to be the Lord’s, and as expressly en-
joined on this account by the Saviour, it ought to be reverently
observed. Apart, however, from the inward disposition with
winch it is received and followed up, there is no virtue
whatever in the ceremony, no grace conveyed thereby. The
mere mechanical act of baptism with water no more ensures


the baptism by the Spirit, nor does the privation of it neces-
sarily prevent the baptism by the Spirit, than the partaking
of the bread and wine in the communion ensures the remis-
sion of sin and the sanctification of the sold to the mechan-
ical recipient, or than non-communicating, under circum-
stances, necessarily obstructs the bestowal of these blessings.
This, at all events, is the doctrine of our Church as expressed
in her Creeds, and explained in her Catechisms; and also, if
Ido not grievously misapprehend them, of the Scriptures.
“ I thank God,” (says St. Paul to the Corinthians) “ that I
baptized none of you save ” (a very few individuals whom
he mentions), “for Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the gospel.” Could the apostle possibly have given
utterance to such a sentiment, without a fearful dereliction
and transgression of duty, were his views regarding baptism
at all in accordance with those exaggerated notions of its
necessity and efficacy embodied in the extract of Mr. Storie’s
Sermon, and in the Romish and Anglican Catechisms ?—I
may add, that infant baptism, as every unprejudiced student
of the New Testament, and of the history of the primitive
Church must admit, was unknown to the Apostolical age,
none being then admitted into the Church without a previous
personal profession of faith. The rite, as now administered,
is quite a different thing ; and language which then might
be very properly applied, may be very inapplicable now.
But I have expatiated more than enough, perhaps, on this
head.
(2.) With regard to Mr. Storie’s views concerning the
Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, as deduced from the
Extract—his language is sufficiently cloudy and wild, but
you are unquestionably labouring under a misapprehension in
construing it as involving the popish tenet of transubstan-
tiation. What his words imply, if Dr. Turnbull can be
admitted as a correct interpreter, is the Lutheran whim,
almost, if not quite as absurd, of consubstantiation; although,
with the exception of one passage, which I am inclined to
place to the account of sheer nonsense, (all of us preachers
occasionally, through haste or inadvertence, fall into such
mistakes), the whole is, perhaps, really capable of being
explained in a way not altogether inconsistent with the sober
and rational doctrine laid down in the Westminster Confes-
sion. The distinction between transubstantiation and con-
substantion is this : —According to the former, the bit' of
bread or wafer, is actually converted into the very body and


blood—the very body and blood born of the Virgin, that
suffered on the cross, that was buried, rose again, and
ascended into heaven, —into the soul and divinity of Christ:
the wafer is no longer a wafer, but the true, whole, incar-
nate Christ—worshipped accordingly. According to the
latter, there is no conversion of the elements ; these remain
what they were, mere bread and wine; but the very body
and blood of the Saviour are not the less present, invisibly,
in, with, or under the bread and wine,'” and received in
like manner by the communicants : and this erroneous non-
sense, (it involves, you will observe, only one small degree
of absurdity less than transubstantiation), these sophisters
strive to. explain on the principle of what they call the com-
munication of properties, that is, the communication of
the properties or attributes of the divine to the human nature
of Christ—of omnipresence and invisibility for example, to
his body and blood. That this is really the doctrine taught
in Mi. Storie s sermon X will not affirm, for his language is
not only extremely rhetorical, but very indefinite and incon-
sistent ; it is now that of the missal, now that of Luther,
moie generally, I think, that of Calvin, who, it must be
confessed, from an over-anxiety to conciliate Luther on this
monstrous dogma, shrouded his sentiments concerning it in
a mist of miserable, quibbling, ambiguous-looking meta-
physical verbiage; but it seems to me clearly to°be the
doctrine which I)r. Turnbull understands Mr. Storie to
hold ; for, if I can make anything of it, it is the doctrine
which the Doctor in his letter, endeavours to defend, enforce,
and illustrate a doctrine wide as the poles asunder from
that contained in the Confession of Faith, the Larger and
Shorter Catechisms.
The extraordinary passage in Mr. Storie’s sermon above re-
ferred to is, that, where it is stated that the Spirit of Christ, in
addition to the wine, u gives the very blood of Christ, shed
for the remission of sins, which is still treasured in God’s
presence on high.” This, indeed, at the first blush, looks
very like consnbstantiation run~more4han-mad , but I think
should in all chaiity, be construed as an unmeaning well-
intended rant. The very blood shed can only mean, unless
one will take refuge in a most objectionable—intolerable-
perversion of language, the true, real physical, material
human blood of the Redeemer shed on Calvary; but the very
gross idea of tnis very blood being treasured—stored up for
special uses—separate and apart from Id's glorified body,


u before God on high,” is not only a conception quite ori-
ginal (to my judgment at least) but, literally interpreted,
an extravagance so outrageously, I had almost said, blasphe-
mously absurd, that I cannot bring myself to believe that
either Mr. Storie, or any other man of sensible and sane
mind, for one moment, ever seriously entertained it. It
should be passed over as one of those unlucky slips of the
tongue and pen to which great rhetoricians are peculiarly,
at times, liable.
(3.) So much for Mr. Storie. Dr. Turnbull’s defence
and explications (and this I say with the most kindly feel-
ings towards the Dr., with a very high sense and apprecia-
tion of his many merits and solid worth, both as a man, and
a Christian minister) are exceedingly more objectionable, on
both logical and doctrinal grounds, than all, or any thing,
that is found in Mr. Storie’s sermon. There is little, as
already remarked, so far as the controversy about the com-
munion is concerned in the latter, which, however exag-
gerated, mystical, and injudicious the rhetorical language
employed —may not, with a little gentle forcing, be recon-
ciled to the doctrines of our Church, to Scripture, and com-
mon sense. ‘ 4 E ating the very body and drinking the very blood,
the two breads and the two cups,” is certainly not “ sound
speech that cannot be condemnedstill he may, at bottom,
have meant nothing more by this than realizing to the mind
by an act of lively faith the person of the Kedeemer suffering
for the salvation of the world. But I cannot, in honesty,
suggest any such evasion for the Dr. To use a very signi-
ficant American vulgarism, he manfully “ goes the whole
hog.” It is now with him, transubstantiation, now con-
substantiation, now new, and never-before-heard of, contra-
dictory whimsies of his own, evidently invented—l should say,
which evidently suggested themselves to him—on the spur
of the moment, for the occasion : all this, however, in good
faith, and without the remotest consciousness of any inten-
tion to impose. The whole strange phenomenon is easily
accounted for on the hypothesis (which I have no doubt is
the true one) that his mind had never been previously
directed to the scientific investigation of the subject, and
that he had formed no clear, precise, logical convictions con-
cerning the points at issue. Launching thus, without chart
or compass on the ocean of scholastic metaphysics, he has
fairly landed in a bottomless bog of what, if not nonsense,
is what in Scotland would—very foolishly indeed, but most


certainly—be branded and persecuted as heresy. The Dr,
would have had humbly to recant, or undergo the mar-
tyrdom of deposition.
I have already, I am well aware, trespassed far too much
on your time and patience; but, having thrown out such
grave imputations and objections against the soundness of
the Dr’s, arguments, and the correctness of his statements
and doctrinal positions and conclusions, you must bear with
me a little farther, while I endeavour to demonstrate by a
few illustrative instances that I have neither written at
random, nor done the excellent Dr. (for such I sincerely do,
and must ever, esteem him) an injustice.
(1.) Dr. Turnbull maintains the teaching of the Church to
be, that the worthy communicants “ eat the very flesh and
drink the very blood of Christ” —“ the identical flesh and
blood of Christ”—that is, taking the words in both their
obvious, natural, and their technical theological sense, the
very body born of the Virgin, that suffered, was dead, bu-
ried, rose again, and ascended to heaven. And this he pro-
ceeds to establish by a mode of proof quite as extraordinary
as the proposition itself. Nothing, indeed (I must again
express my regret to be obliged to give utterance to such a
sentiment, affecting a gentleman whom I so truly respect as
the Dr., but truth is truth, and claims precedence to all
other considerations) can well be conceived more disingenu-
ous, more of the nature of special, petty-fogging pleading,
than the Dr’s course of argument here. He first misquotes
and garbles the language of the Confession and Catechism,
and from these “ cooked” quotations deduces syllogistically,
with an air of triumph, a conclusion the very opposite of
what the passages referred to —taken in their natural con-
nection and sequence, and honestly interpreted—imply. By
even less violence to his text, I could easily prove that the
Psalmist was an atheist ; for, by simply omitting the words
(f The fool hath said in his heart,” can it not be shown that
the expression “ there is no God” is solemnly used by him ?
“ The Westminster Confession” (says the Dr.) “has these
words : c The body and blood of Christ are as really present
to believers as the elements themselves are to the outward
senses.’ In the 168th question of the Larger Catechism
the matter of fact is thus expressed : ‘ They" that worthily
communicate feed upon His body and blood’; and in the 17 Oth
answer it is said that this is done ‘ truly and really .’ The
conclusion necessarily follows. As the Confession affirms


the body and blood of Christ to be as really present to be-
lievers as the elements to their outward senses; and the
Catechism that worthy communicants feed upon his body
and blood, truly and really; and, as the words truly and
really are completely synonymous —identical in meaning—
with very ; therefore, the teaching of the Church is, as Mr.
Storie has expressed it, f They who worthily communicate
eat the very flesh and drink the very blood of Christ”
Whoever will take the trouble to examine and compare the
Confession and Catechism must very soon discover that this
is only the teaching of Dr. Turnbull and Mr. Storie; and
that “ the teaching of the Church” is something very differ-
ent, nay, the very reverse. The words of the Confession are
to this effect: “ The body and blood of Christ are not cor-
porally or carnally present, only spiritually and to the faith
of believers.” The quotation from the 168th question—a
clause in a long sentence —is correct; but the reference to
the 170th is calculated solely to confound and lead astray.
In the answer to that question is subjoined the explanation
of the phrase used in the 168th, “ feeding upon the body of
Christ.” The passage is: “As the body and blood of
Christ are not corporally or carnally present in, with, or un-
der the bread and wine (the consubstantiation of Luther)
in the Lord’s Supper, yet are spiritually present to th qfaith
of the believer no less truly and really than the elements
themselves are to the outward senses,” &c. &c. What then,
I ask, is the meaning—the true meaning—of this phraseo-
logy ? Nothing can really be plainer. The wayfaring man,
though a fool —the simplest and most unlearned of mankind
—need not surely lose himself here. It is just this—nothing
more nor less —The very body and the very blood of Christ
are not present: they are in heaven in glory. Communi-
cants, believing or not believing, can neither physically eat,
nor feed upon, what is removed from them by an immea-
surable space; but, in partaking of the symbols represent-
ing that body and blood, the believing communicant, and he
alone, realizes, by an act of faith, to his own spirit, or con-
scious mind, the fact of the person of the Redeemer having
been once offered up on the cross at Jerusalem for his salva-
tion —the propitiation to God for his sins; a transaction the
whole truth and reality of which are thus made as apparent
to his intellectual perception—his spirit soul—as the
material elements before him, and which he applies, are to
his bodily senses. If the language in question does not


mean substantially this, or means more than this, it is undi-
luted nonsense, self-contradictory, and has no meaning at
all. Matter and spirit are the converse of each other.
When, therefore, we say that a body, composed of material
atoms, situated in space at a distance all but infinite from
us, is spiritually and by faith present to us, a pure act of
the intellect can only be meant. In such a case spiritually
can have reference only to our own spirit; for matter has
no spirit—it is the negation of spirit.
The Dr’s, remarks about very being in meaning identical
with true and real, and his inference deduced from this, are
really and truly very sophistry, most pitiful of its kind. He
can see no distinction between feeding spiritually and by
faith really and truly upon the body of Christ; and eating
the very body or flesh and drinking the very blood of Christ.
I am sorry for this, because the former is the doctrine of his
own Church—the Church of Scotland; the latter, that of
the Church of Rome; I must also add of Luther, who still
stuck with the grasp of desperation to this most nonsensical
and irrational of all tenets. It is well both to understand
and carefully to observe such distinctions, were it only to
obviate such controversies as the present. Protestant minis-
ters should not unnecessarily affect or parade the peculiar
dialect of “ the Beasts/’
(2.) Having laid down what he avers to be the doc-
trine—“ the teaching” of the Church, and done his best to
prove it in the singular way just elucidated, the Dr. proceeds
to explain the assumed mystery. And, if his statement of
the “ teaching of the Church,” and the mode of ratiocina-
tion—the dialectical process—by which he arrived at his
conclusions as to that teaching marvellous, and startling,
his explanation is incomparably more marvellous and start-
ling still. It is pre-eminently a darkening of counsel by
words without understanding, one of the very happiest
specimens of that method of disposing of questions that has
ever fallen under my notice. The text may be obscure;
but the commentary is solid, impenetrable darkness. His
first statement, in explanation is, that it is the living flesh of
Christ, not his dead flesh that we, are invited to eat! ! !
Could the Dr. have had any distinct conception of what he
was about, when he penned this sentence—The dead flesh
of Jesus Christ ? What can this possibly mean? Where
is the dead flesh of Jesus Christ ? Does the Dr. not know,
or, rather, does he not remember, that it was by his death—


his dead flesh—if he must have it—that Jesus Christ
redeemed the world ? that it is the symbols of the body
broken and of the blood shed; as you and I understand it;
or the very body broken and the very blood shed, stored up
on high for the purpose, as he and Mr. Storie other-where
insist on expressing it, that we are invited to partake of—
eat according to their chosen phrase—in the communion ?
The body —the flesh and blood—of the Saviour remained
under the power of death only three days : Where is His dead
flesh now to be eaten or not eaten ? This language is
surely most unadvised—verges, I fear, on blasphemy. The
reference to vi. John is entirely misplaced, and foreign to
the subject. The Saviour’s address, given in that chapter,
was delivered one, at least, if not two years, before the
sacrament of the Supper was instituted : moreover, appealed
to, interpreted and applied as the Dr. and Mr. Storie have
done, it would prove quite as decisively that the human
nature of Christ—his flesh, blood, and soul—came down
from heaven, as that believers must literally eat His body
and drink His blood in order to their salvation; but it is
not intended as a description of what is transacted in the
Supper at all. The Westminster divines understood this
well; for, neither in the proofs annexed to the Confession or
Catechisms, do they ever make the slightest reference
to it.
(3.) Dr. Turnbull charges Mr. Campbell with ignorance
concerning the person of Christ: what may be the extent of
Mr. Campbell’s knowledge, as regards this very important
point of faith, I do not know : but, if one were permitted to
form an opinion of the Dr’s, own acquaintance with the
subject from what he has written in his letter to you, Mr.
Campbell’s knowledge must be sadly defective indeed, and
his views fearfully erroneous, if in both respects, he has not
greatly the advantage of the Dr. “It is the person of
Christ ” (says the Dr.) “as now existing, that is, it is him-
self as he now liveth and reigneth in glory, and as possess-
ing no longer a natural body, but a spiritual, that we eat in
the Supper !!!”—I would defy all human ingenuity to cram
more heterodoxy—or call it, if you will, unintelligible mys-
ticism, nonsense —taking our Confession as the standard of
orthodoxy into equal compass—than is squeezed into this
brief sentence. We have here—construing the words accord-
ing to their natural and obvious import—transubstantiation,
consubstantiation, and something else—altogether new—


which we may well call non-substantiation —,all jumbled in
one. The person of Christ—and on this fundamental Article
cd Christian belief, Romanist and Greek, Lutheran and
Reformed, Calvinistic and Arminian, are at one —is defined
in the Bth Chapter of the Confession. That Chapter, inclu-
ding as it does, the substance of all the ancient Creeds on
this head, is much too long to be quoted at full. It will be
surficienu to observe that it describes the person of Christ
as inseparably combining in itself perfect Godhead and perfect
manhood , and this, “without conversion, composition or con-
fusion. As to his body, the statement is, “He arose from
the dead with the same body in which he suffered; with which
also he ascended into heaven, and there sitteth at the right
hand of the Father. Can the utmost power of metaphysical
perversity even venture to attempt to reconcile this plain,
honest, very intelligible doctriner with the self-contradictory,
incoherent, unintelligible, impossible description of the per-
son of Christ by the Dr. with the non-natural spiritual body
(can he mean immaterial ?), which, according to him, he
now alone possesses, and which we are invited to eat—to feed
upon ? I really cannot trust myself to remark further on
this most humiliating jargon, lest I should be led to indulge
in language which I should afterwards deeply regret.
(4.) When our Lord said “This is my body broken for
y° u ; —this is my blood shed for you,” will Dr Turnbull and
Mr, Storie affirm that he gave the disciples his very body and
blood —that body which stood before them and was speaking
to them ? Can they not see that it involves a contradiction
in terms, seeing that that could not be given which did not
yet exist, for Christ’s body was not yet broken nor his blood
shed: that body and blood still remained untouched, uninjured
in the Man Jesus. Does Dr. Turnbull believe, or will he,
on deliberately weighing the matter, assert that the disciples'
then, received something quite different from what believers ?
now,' receive in the communion ? since the disciples could not
possibly have received that spiritual body of which he writes
the matter of Christ’s body being not yet, at all events'
evaporated or metamorphosed into Spirit, whatever such a
transformation, assuming it as fact, may mean. What then
did the Saviour give, and what did the disciples receive ?
Just what the apostle Paul and the evangelists tell us— bread
and wine neither more nor less typical—of the great sac-
rifice about to be offered. But, it is, indeed, superfluous,
useless, to argue with people who run away with such


crotchets : contradictions, impossibilities, the most measure-
less absurdities, never shock them ; nay, serve rather to rivet
them—the faster to the cherished conceit, to endear the
senseless hobby to them the more.
There is neither mystery nor miracle, taking Scripture
for our guide, nothing marvellous or incomprehensible, or
unintelligible in the ordinance of the Supper. Only
dreamers and mystics—men who would be wise beyond
what is written—for whom the incredible and the impossi-
ble have an irresistible attraction—discover in it secrets
and prodigies to be fathomed and grasped only by the In-
finite Mind. It is, as our Confession describes it, simply a
commemorative ordinance —commemorative of the Redeemer,
and of what he has done and suffered for human redemption,
accompanied with a “ spiritual oblation of all possible praise
unto God for the same.”
But, I fear, I have greatly exceeded both the time and the
patience you may feel disposed to bestow upon the subject ;
for, on looking over my work, I find I have already written
not a letter, but what amounts to a rather voluminous pam-
phlet, so must conclude.
I remain.
My dear Sir,
Yours truly,
(Signed) JOHN ROBERTSON.
Thos. Young, Esq.
Copy Letter from Rev. George Clarice to Mr. Young.
Hobart Town, 30th September 1861.
My dear Sir,
I return you the accompanying letters with
many thanks. I have read them with much surprise ; for
I had no notion that such views, on both the Sacraments,
were entertained by clergymen who have subscribed to the
Westminster Confession. Mr. Robertson has, I think,
very fairly and effectually disposed of the matter, so far as
regards the Lord’s Supper and its meaning • but may I,
without being obtrusive, add a few words respecting Bap-
tism. Mr. S tone’s view seems to me to go far beyond the


representations of Cardinal Wiseman or Dr. Pusey, if wer
are to take it as logic and not as rhetoric. It has often
struck me that the common speculations of divines on the
subject of “ original sin/’ and its relation to baptism, rest
upon the narrowest possible basis of Scriptural truth; they
are, in short, an inverted pyramid. And, whatever may be'
their supposed value, it is well that we should mark the con-
trast between the prominence we give to the doctrine in
our Theological Systems, and the very different place it
occupies in the Bible. Certainly “the Book'’ does not
leave the impression on our minds that we cannot
stand our relation to Christ until we have first mastered our
relation to Adam. Now, it is maintained that the tiue
effect of baptism (in the case of infants at least) is to wash
away “ original sin,” and then the inference is drawn that
without baptism the guilt of original sin (whatever. that
means) rests upon the unhappy child; so that it has neither
part nor lot in Christ; is consigned to “the uncovenanted
mercies of Gfodand, m plain prose, suffers the pains of
eternal death. You know that this is actually held by
many clergymen in the Church of England, and that it is
the ground of excluding unbaptized infants from Christian
burial; and that it has so strong a hold upon the feelings
of the mass of Christian people that the death of a child
before baptism is a thing to be thought of by parents only
with a shudder. Such is the actual issue of this terrible
dogma. Now I have two answers to the doctrine, which
I think may be regarded as conclusive.
First. That, whether true or not, there is not a word in
the Bible that can be made to support it, except by a mass
of assumptions and inferences, which would make the Bible
mean anything we chose.
Secondly. That the doctrine, if true, shuts us up to this
terrible alternative : — either the unbaptized child deserves
to be sent to hell (pardon me for putting it in Saxon-English)
or it does not. If we maintain that it does —we do so at
the expense of overturning all our moral instincts —those
instincts on the truth and reality of which th q possibility of
religion rests.
If, on the other hand, we say that the child does not
deserve it—then of what an awful misrepresentation of the
good and just God are we guilty? Can such a Being be
revered, trusted, loved, as being Himself the All-perfect,
and Eternal Love ? Erom one or other of these conclusions


there is, I think, no escape for those who hold the doctrine
in question, and therefore I reject it with the utmost
abhorrence; for it is not a mere barren speculation, that has
lived and died in the cloister of the school-man; but it is
piegnant with practical evils to society. God only knows
how many a Rachel’s heart it has broken, so that “ she
refuseth to be comforted! ”
I hope you will not misunderstand me, as if I attributed
all this to Mr. Storie, or indeed to those who hold the doc-
trine of baptismal regeneration. I don’t think it right to
charge upon men the conscious holding of all that is involved
in their position, or the logical conclusions to which that
position leads. The fact is, they have never put the case
fairly before their own minds.
Pray excuse this hastily written letter;
and believe me, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) GEORGE CLARKE.
Thomas Young, Esq.




APPENDIX.
PRESBYTERY OF TASMANIA.
The following are the reported Proceedings of the Presby-
tery, held on the 7th November, 1861, and on the following
day, which were mooted by the Rev. John Storie, in
reference to the complaints made against the doctrines taught
by him, and also as to his conduct in the capacity of Mode-
rator of the Kirk Session of St. Andrew’s Church
EXPLANATION.
The Rev. J. Storie rose and said—Sir, I hold in my
hand a printed paper, of which a copy was sent me through
the post, and which seems to have been printed for the
express end of being put into the hands of members of this
Court. It professes to give the exact matter delivered by
me in a sermon preached in this church on 18th March last.
I have to say that it does not give my exact matter nor exact
words. The paper affirms that it is the copy of some extract
circulated by me. I have to state that I never gave to any
person any extract from that sermon, never authorised or
permitted any person to make an extract from it, and never
put such extract into circulation. This paper affirms that
since Mr. Young was condemned by myself and two elders
of my session, without being permitted to be heard in defence;
such a fact never occurred. This paper contains a certain
declaration at the close, said to have been made by me at the
Lord’s table on the 7th April. The words in that declaration
I never used. Who may be the author of this anonymous
slander I have no knowledge; but it is my duty to give these
statements a public denial here; and to say that such an


extract from any sermon of mine could not have got into
the author’s hands except by such a breach of confidence as
any honorable man ought to be ashamed of.
The Rev. Mr. Mackersey thought the paper just read
should be before the Court, and not have been handed by
Mr. Storie to the Reporter.
Rev. Mr. Storie had been given to understand that this
paper had been circulated broad cast over the island, and he
did not choose, as that had been put into the hands of his
brethren, that it should be unrefuted. It was his duty to
bring before the members of that Court certain things
which he knew were not true.
Rev. Mr. Robertson said there were statements in the
paper which he decidedly objected to.
The Moderator said that he apprehended it was hardly
competent to introduce that matter now.
Rev. Mr. Robertson said, that, supposing they had been
made by Mj\ Storie, he (Mr. Robertson) should have been
grieved and disappointed. They might be explained
away, but they were certainly calculated to lead persons
astray.
Rev. Mr. Storie would ask whether Mr. Robertson was
entitled thus to take up an anonymous document, and—
Rev. Mr. Robertson. —You repudiate the statements
then.
Rev. Mr. Storie. —l repudiate nothing, Sir, I acknow-
ledge nothing.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey thought it desirable that the Pres-
bytery should agree whether they should receive that
document.
Rev. Mr. Storie.— What document? I have never
asked the Presbytery to receive my speech. lam entitled
to make it in my own defence.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey.— The document read to the Court
w ent fortn as part of the proceedings; what w T as the docu-
ment to them, if they were not allowed to make any remarks
about it.
Rev. Mr, Robertson understood that in the document
"which Mr. Storie had handed to the reporter, Mr. Storie
repudiated the statements in the strongest possible manner.
borne confusion here prevailed, one or two members and
the Moderator all speaking at the same time. Mr. Robert-
son then left the Court.
Rev. Mr. Storie said that if this went on he should
eertai rly take some steps against Mr. Robertson.


Eev. Mr. Garrett deprecated the tone the discussion
had taken; he thought that the matter had better be allowed
to drop for the present.
The Presbytery adjourned at 1*45 p.m. until 6 p.m.
(EVENING SITTING.)
The Presbytery resumed at 6 p.m., when the Moderator,
with the rest of the members, with the exception of Messrs.
Garrett and Dove, retired and remained absent until 7 * 20.
The Moderator then entered the Court, and said the
Court must be adjourned.
Rev. Mr. Garrett said that he was very much surprised
at the business of the Court being thus retarded for a full
hour, by what they did not know. He did not blame the
Moderator.
The Minutes of the Session were then read by the Clerk
and sustained.
The Court was then adjourned until to-morrow at 10 a.m.
(FRIDAY, 8TH NOVEMBER.)
CONFESSION OF FAITH.
Eev. J. Mack eese y suggested that a Committee be
appointed to, prepare a distinct setting forth of the doctrines
of the Church, and an exposition of the Confession of Faith
on certain articles now publicly spoken of.
Eev. Mr. Me Clean thought the Suggestion was a good one,
but he hardly thought it was necessary, as he believed, that
all the ministers of the Church were agreed upon the main
points.
The Moderator thought it very probable that in a
short time an exposition would be published from the pen
of Dr. Cunningham of Edinburgh.
Eev. Mr. Mackersey said that at this moment an impres-
sion was abroad that the ministers of this Church did differ.
His belief was, that if the matter were carefully canvassed,
it would be found they were as one.


Rev. Mr. Storie inquired whether it was intended to give
the committee powers to emit such an authoritative exposi-
tion on the present Standard, as shall be entitled to be
regarded as in itself a new Standard of the Church’s faith.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey. —No, certainly not.
Rev. Mr. Storie.— Then I do not know what Mr. Mack-
ersey intends.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey.— What I want is, that the Presby-
tery shall emit their views on particular points, so as to re-
move any impression which may prevail.
Rev. Mr. Storie said that he was not aware of the fact
referred to, that there was a controversy on certain points,
until lately, and then he received certain documents (copies
of which he heard had been for some time in wide circula-
tion) from the other side of the island. The sermons preached
in this church on Raptism and the Lord’s Supper were at
present passing through the press, so that every man would
have an opportunity of ascertaining what his views were on
those points. He would ask whether the effect of Mr. Mack-
ersey’s proposition was that the smallest section of the
Presbyterian Church in the world should emit an authorita-
tive exposition on certain points,—a duty from which the
larger portions of the Church had shrunk.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey said that upon the two points he
had named, there was a portion of their people who thought
that some of the ministers thought one way and some another,
and he thought it better that that should be set at rest.
Rev. Mr. M’ Clean was very sure that Mr. Mackersey was
not present last night.
Rev. Mr. Mackersey— Oh !do not refer to last night.
Rev. Mr. McClean —lf Mr. Mackersey had been present
he would have come to the conclusion that there was much
more harmony than was imagined.
Rev. Mr. Garrett said that it was very desirable that
the Presbyterian community should know what were the
views of the Presbytery on the controverted points.
( ev ; Dr- Turnbull advocated the appointment of the
Committee, contending that if a minister of the gospel was
competent to express his views on any particular point of
doctrine, it was also competent for two or three individuals
on a Committee of Presbytery, to also give expression of
their views on certain points ; and he argued that this might
l-i v w^lcmt adding to the Standards of Faith, to attempt
w icli he thought the highest theologians of the present day
would shrink from. t j


The following resolution, on the motion of Mr. Mackeksey,
was passed:—
“ That whereas it is known to the Presbytery that dis-
cussions have arisen in the community, and particularly the
Presbyterian portion of it, as to the teaching of this. Church
on certain important and essential points of Christian doc-
trine—more especially those having reference to the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper—therefore
it has seemed fitting to this Presbytery to appoint a committee
with instructions to prepare a distinct exposition of the doc-
trine of the Presbyterian Church and those points as the same
is set forth in the Standards of the Church. The Presbytery
name the Rev. Dr. Turnbull, Rev. Mr. Storie, Rev. Mr.
Robertson, Rev. Mr. Mackersey, and John Walker, Esq., to
serve on this committee. Dr. Turnbull to be convener.
The exposition to be ready to be laid before the Presbytery
at a meeting to be called six months from this time. ”
STANDING COMMITTEE.
The Standing Committee for the ensuing year were re-
appointed, Rev. Mr. Storie to be convener.
The next ordinary meeting of the Presbytery having been
fixed for the first Wednesday in November 1862, the Court
rose.


Letter addressed by Mr. Thomas Young to the Members of the
Presbytery of Tasmania, in consequence of the Statements
made by the Rev. John Storie, and published in the Hobart
Town “Mercury” Newspaper, on the 11th of November ,
where the above-mentioned Proceedings were reported on the
8th and 9th of the same month.
TO TILE MEMBERS OE THE PRESBYTERY OF TASMANIA.
Gentlemen,
As a part of the proceedings of the meeting 0 f
Presbytery held by you last week, there is a speech published
in the Mercury, which appears from your proceedings to
have been written and read by the Rev. John Storie, and
then handed by him to the reporter in your presence. That
speech very seriously impugns my character; and, since you
have closed the proceedings of the Presbytery without di-
recting any inquiry being made into its allegations, I must
now protect my honor by addressing you through the public
press.
The extract of the sermon referred to was published by
me. It is headed as follows :
“ Extract from the sermon by the Rev. John Storie, as
declared by him to have been the exact matter delivered by
him from St. Andrew's Church Pulpit, Hobart Town, on
Sunday, the 10th day of March, 1861, and circulated by
him as such, a part of which was complained of by Mr.
Young, one of the members of the Church, as it was heard
by him, and other members, upon its delivery, as being con-
trary to Scripture and the Creed of the Church. And, being
the matter referred to by Mr. Storie and two of the elders
m condemnation of Mr. Young, without permitting him
p in his defence, it is now laid before the members
ox the Presbytery for their information,"


Mr. Storie in his speech declares “ I never gave to any
person any extract from that sermon, never authorised or
permitted any person to make an extract from it, and never
put such extract into circulation.
“ Who may he the author of this anonymous slander I
have no knowledge ” (this reference is also made to another
fact which will be afterwards noticed) “ hut it is my duty
to give these statements a public denial here, and to say, that
such an extract from any sermon of mine could not have
got into the author’s hands except by such a breach of con-
fidence as any honorable man ought to be ashamed of.”
These are certainly “ deliberate” statements, having been
put into writing and delivered in such a place.
On the 22nd of August last I received from the Rev.
R. K. Ewing the extract of the sermon referred to. It was
enclosed in an envelope, addressed to John Walker, Esq., of
Barrack-street, by his brother elder of the Church Mr.
William Paterson, who returned it to Mr. Walker with his
thanks. Mr. Ewing stated to me that he had received it
from Dr. Officer, to whom he understood Mr. Walker
delivered it, hearing that he (Mr. Ewing) was in town, and
with a request that if Dr. Officer should see him that he might
obtain his opinion on the doctrines therein propounded.
Here, therefore, was placed in my hands an extract from the
sermon the doctrines of which I had called in question, and
upon the evidence of which Mr. Storie and Messrs. Walker
and Paterson had condemned me. I naturally was anxious
to obtain a copy, and Mr. Ewing at once procured Dr,
Officer’s authority, granting the request which I made for
this purpose.
Although this implied that I might make whatever use
of the extract I thought proper, I did not do this until I
waited on Dr. Officer and obtained his unqualified authority
for such a use of it. I observed, however, to Dr. Officer,
at the same time, that from what I had already experienced
at Mr. S tone’s hand, I was satisfied that he would deny the
authenticity of the extract if that should suit his purpose,
Dr. Officer at once replied that Mr. Walker could be called
upon to produce the copy, and failing his doing so, that he
(Dr. Officer) held a duplicate copy, and would produce it.
This is the simple history of my possession of the extract
from the sermon. If it has been obtained surreptitiously
and dishonorably, Mr. Walker alone is the man who can
answer this charge. Mr. Walker, however, although he


heard Mr. Storie’s malignant accusations, was satisfied to
remain silent so long as they only referred to me !
The printed sermon is a literal copy of the extract which
X received. In receiving it in the way in which I did, I
was justified in believing that it was put forth by Mr. Storie
in his own and how its publication can he construed
into “ anonymous slander" I cannot make out. The less
Mr. Storie says as to “ anonymous slander " the better for
him. He took advantage of the anonymous signature of
« A Member of St. Andrew's Church " to correct, add to,
and amend four printed pages by way of criticism on the
proceedings of the session against me in reference to this
very matter, which was “ circulated broad, cast oyer the
island." He believed it to be clever, and his vanity induced
him to disclose the fact to Mr. William Murray, one of the
members of the Church, who informed me.
Mr. Storie again states “This paper affirms that Mr.
Young was condemned by myself and two elders of my ses-
sion without being permitted to be heard in defence. Such
a fact never occurred." _ tv
The boldness of this statement is really astounding. lou
know that I printed the whole Session Record of the pro-
ceedings instituted by Mr. Storie against me,, of which
every member of the Presbytery was furnished with a copy;
and you know that this record gives the evidence that I was
condemned without having been permitted to be heard in
my defence; and the reason given for this in the first deli-
verance of the Session is “feeling satisfied that no state-
ment from him (Mr. Young) or other party, m respect of
the doctrines preached on the occasions referred to, could add
to their knowledge or affect their judgment in respect
thereto, decline to hear Mr. Young on the merits. And
the knowledge of the Session is expressed in the deliverance
as follows: — . „ ;1 , ... ■,
“ The Moderator" (Mr. Storie) “ having then submitted
the notes from which his sermon was preached on the morn-
ing of Sabbath last, and the Elders having perused the
portion on which the above correspondence bears, agree,
while their memory is distinct and fresh, to record that m
their judgment this manuscript contains not only the cor-
rect substance of what was preached, but in almost the iden-
tical words employed." < . ,
And, in answer to a remonstrance of mine against such a
decision as this, the second deliverance ol the session declares


that the session “ decline to deal with his ” (Mr. Young’s)
“ argument on the merits as irrelevant .”
You see, gentlemen, from these statements the untruthful
hardihood of Mr. Storie’s declaration, and which indeed you
all well knew at the time Mr. Storie made his speech.
The speech again states “ This paper” (the printed ex-
tract of the sermon) “ contains a certain declaration at the
close, said to have been made by me at the Lord’s Table on
the 7th of April. The words in that declaration I never
used.”
The declaration is as follows :
“ The following declaration was made by Mr. Storie to
the communicants at the Lord’s Supper on the 7th April
1861:
“ ‘ I don’t know how it is, but unless ye eat the very
flesh and drink the very blood of Christ ye communicate in
vain.’ ”
In refutation of Mr. Storie’s statement I will submit to
you the copy of a letter which I received from the Rev.
Mr. Campbell:—
“ Hobart Town, 15th August, 1861.
“ Deae Sir,
“As you have communicated to me that Dr.
Turnbull waited upon you, after his and Mr. Storie’s inter-
view with me, and said that you must have misunderstood
the nature of the statement that I made to you, I beg there-
fore to state exactly the substance of what I said to both
gentlemen, namely, that Mr. Storie, in his address at the
communion table, made use of these words :—•
‘ I don’t know how it is, but unless you eat the very
flesh and drink the very blood of Christ, ve communicate
in vain.’
“ Mr. Storie admitted, in the hearing of Dr. Turnbull, that
he used these words.
“ I am, dear Sir,
“ Yours truly,
“ P. CAMPBELL.
“ Thomas Young, Esq.
“ P.S.—Mr. Storie, I may add, also admitted having so expressed himself
on a previous occasion, in my house, in the presence of Mrs. Campbell. '
/ “ P. C.”


On the subject of this very letter I had a correspondence
with the Rev. Dr. Turnbull, to whom I furnished a copy
before he left town, and when he was residing in Mr. Storied
house. In Dr. Turnbull’s answer to me from Campbell Town
on the 17 th August last, he justifies the language. He
says, “The words contained in Mr. Campbell’s letter to you
as having been spoken by Mr Storie, appear to me to express
the true doctrine of the Church of Scotland.”
How the Rev. Dr. Turnbull, my old friend of 36 years’
standing, a man who on all occasions expresses himself with
much tenderness of feeling, could sit silent, and hear the
repudiation made by Mr. Storie, when he could instantly
have refuted that repudiation, I will not trust my feelings
to descant upon.
I see you have appointed a Committee to settle the lan-
guage to be used in the dispensation of the ordinance of the
Lord’s Supper. lam happy to think that my agitation of
the subject has been attended with this beneficial result.
One word before parting. How could you, gentlemen,
hold your annual meeting of Presbytery without calling on
Mr. Storie, to answer for his conduct, as the Moderator of
the Kirk Session of St. Andrew’s, in joining with the two
Elders above named, in acting as accuser, witness and judge,
and condemning me, the accused, unheard. Surely this was
a scandal which any member was competent to bring before
the Court. I have been told that I should have appealed
to the Presbytery. I would readily have done so, had I not
been persuaded that the Presbytery would have dealt very
tenderly with Mr. Storie, as the result of your proceedings
have too well demonstrated. I felt therefore that my only
remedy, under all the circumstanes, was to leave the Church,
as Mr. Storie’s doctrines and conduct were too obnoxious to
permit me to remain. I felt the hardship of being thus
driven out of a Church where I had been a member for
upwards of 36 years.
I am, Gentlemen,
your obedient servant,
THOMAS YOUNG.
Hobart Town,
11th November, 1861.




