

bZOMiS idE
VIS
No. 6.
TUESDAY EVENING, JULY 30, 1872.
PEICE ONE PENNY.
“ I appeal to every British soul who is
inspired by a love of justice and fair play, and is willing to defend the weak against the strong.”
Sir Roger Tichborne’s Letter from Newgate , March 14, 1872.
DEFENCE FUND. Card No. 1,476, “ The Claimant said he The great principle of the English law is
' jrra.vft vmi a. rlpn rminifir ? NTn Pr> fPnf. an anmiooil noMon 4a 4/-. T-vr.l/1
gave you a golden crucifix ?—No, he that an accused person is not to he held
trustees. gave me a g o id en cro sa,” From Han- guilty before a jury until conclusive
Eight Hon. Lord Livers. A. Atwood, Esq., M.D. ley, Staffordshire 015 0 proof has been submitted to that jury,
Guildford Onslow, Esq., M.F. Hanwell Cuckoos, who hope the next jury per S. W.
won’t be comeatable
0 15 0 Several Gentlemen of Hemel Hemsted who
NINTH LIST OF SUBSCRIPTIONS.
From the Odd Fellows of Peckham, per J. think the Conduct of the A. G. (as
i Eight Hon. the Earl of Stamford and N. Whelan, 117, Eye-lane 0 15 0 shown in the late trial) such as warrants
Warrington (second subscription). .. £lO 0 0 Employes at the Imperial Gas Works, Pul- them in saying it would be an injury
The Eight Hon. the Earl of Stamford and
ham Station, who wish to see justice to the nation should he be elevated to
Northfleet subscription, per Mr. Edwin G.
Knibbs, Hartfield Cottage 7 0 9 done, per T. Baxter 0 13 9 the Bench, and that the L. C. J. of the
Collected by Mr. W. Nicholls, at Eopley, Portsmouth, perE. S., Richmond Arms, in- Common Pleas should, in charity to-
Hampshire, including 10s. each from eluding 2s. 6d. each from E. S., W. S. wards the country and the dignity of
T. Nicholls and Bill Fair Play, ss. from (an unbeliever in the Tattooing), W. our laws, retire
S. Dunk, 2s. 6d. each from O. P., J. H. S., and smaller sums 0 13 0 Anonymous
Smith, C. Ashley, W. Andrews, E. 0., Card No. 1,238, collected by J. E., South- From Six, at the Castle, Regent-street ~
O. C., H. Wylds, B. 8., Eight not ampton 0 12 3 John Tomlinson, Esq., Kimberley
Might, E. Gardiner, with several Card No. 1,027 .. .. .. 012 0 Collected by S. Walking, at the Victoria
smaller sums 6 2 3 Eight against Might, per J. Channon .. 012 0 Tavern and Railway Hotel, Barking-
Durham Arms, Canning Town 0 12 0
An old Australian, Stakeford House, Dum- Durham Arms, Canning Town 0 12 0 road, Essex ,
fries 550 Post-office, Aldershot, per Mr. W. J. Barnitt 011 9 Collected by Mr. H. Coleman, Dolphin Inn,
From a few of Sir Roger’s Friends, at the
Card No. 79, per E. H. Ireland, Express From a few of Sir Roger’s Friends, at the Gloucester, from a few lovers of justice
Inn, Nowcastle-on-Tyne, £1 13s. 6d.; Grey Coat Hospital, who wish him a Cards Nos. 1,688 and 1,689, collected at the
fair and impartial trial 0 11 6
Great Western Railway-works, Read-
card No. 1,104, £1 14s. 6d.; card No.
Card No. 3,647, Haro and Hounds, Conduit- ing, per J. Travis
1,101, 9s. 6d.; and card No. 1,110,
street, Leicester Oil 4
Collected by Mr. D. Barnett, Royal Arms,
9s. Id 5 0 7
ceeds of a Concert given by the "Work- Card No. 3,979, Burton and Cannon-street Silverton, including his own subscrip-
ing Men’s Club, at Greenwalk, Ber- Works, Hanley, per Ambrose Brent.. 010 3 tion of £1
mondsey New-road, per Messrs. Golds J. 8., for a Different Judge and Jury ~ 010 0 Joseph Ingram, Esq., Taunton
and Delve 5 0 0 Card No. 1,155, Recruiting Sergeant, North- From a few Labourers who wish that the
Proceeds of a Concert given by the Work-
Card 1,645, Skoor and Borborus, A. G. .. 5 0 0 ampton, per J. Barker 010 0 language of the Judge, at the Lord
From the Working People of York, per Few Friends at Great Western, 132, Praed- Mayor’s dinner, could be explained
Mr. E. E. Holiday 3 17 6 street, per J. E. T 0 10 0 away, per W. Gibbons, Fletching,
Collected at Alresford, per Guildford Ons- Few Working-Men and Women, per W. B. 010 0 Uckfield
low, Esq., M.P., including £1 10s. from Collected in a Leather Cutter’s Shop, at Few Friends, at Glasbury, Radnorshire ..
H. M. and another, 10s, from “Faith Hartford, per E. Hopkins 0 10 0 Fair Play, sur Esperance .« ~ ~ ~
in him,” A. and G., 5s 2 5 0 Elizabeth Badrick, 14, Montpelier-road, Card 3,999, subscribed at the White Hart,
Brighton 010 0
Cards No. 1,547 and 1,548, Fleece Inn, Brighton 010 0 Berkhampstead, per J. Hoare ~ ~
Louth, Lincolnshire, per Mr. R. Pea- Ten Cabmen, Norfolk Coffee House, Wea- Collected at the Vine Inn, Middlesborough,
ooc t 246 ton-street, Bermondsey, per E. Eohey 010 0 per T. Nott
Captain R. V. Bacon, Eastbourne .. ~ 22 0 Collected at the Wheatsheaf, Hoesell, feur- Begone, brave t;
Begone, brave tattoo marks, per J. Water-
roy, per Mr. E. Dodson 0 9 6
worth, Wovenhoe, Essex
Subscribed by the Employes of Messrs.
Collected by S. Saunders, 59, Dorset- Card No. 2,577, collected by Mr. Friend at
Rylands Brothers, Warrington, who
are anxious to see justice done to one street ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 9 6 the Commercial Hotel, Ventnor, 1.W.:
Collected at 130, St. Mary-street, South- viz., Messrs. R. Beavis, W. Friend, F.
who at present has not had it, per Mr.
F. Dixon 2 1 0 ampton, including Mr. A. Butler, Billings, and G. Thomas, ss. each;
From the Penny Subscriptions, City Arms, 2s. 6d., and Is. each from R. H., J. T., Messrs. A. Webb, R. H. Tolman,
Canterbury, representing 430 sub- C. H. Barber, P. Leatherland, F. Ford, Wheeler, G. Beavis, G. Thomas, &c.,
scribers, per Mr. J. Fox, Treasurer .. 2 0 0 an 4 IV. Church 0 8 0 2s. 6d. each
Employes at the Race Blast Furnaces, Pon- X. Y. Z., Islington 0 8 0 The subscription of the Guildford district
The subscription of the Guildford district
typool, who don’t believe in the tattoo List No. 691, per Mr. G. Garrood, High- of the Eailway Companies' employes.
street, Lower Tooting 0 8 0
per Guildford Onslow, Esq., M.P.
humbug, per Mr. G. H. Jones .. .. 2 0 0
Burton-On-Trcnt, from a few well-wishers, Card No. 12,079, per A. Conely, Bogte, Box No. 458, 125., and List No. 519, per
per. T. Russell 200 Sussex 0 7 0 W. F. Stevenson, Milford Tavern,
List No. 3,492, subscribed by Men employed Card No. 1,792, per Mr. T. Page, Eton .. 0 7 0 Hackney, 16s. 6d
A Sussex Yeoman, G uildford-st, Brighton. 0 6 6 From Few Friends at the Black Moor’s
by Mr. Harrison, on the Chichester
Harbour Embankment 1 19 6 Eair Play, Cobham Park, Surrey, per Head, Rochester, who hope that an im-
List No. 199, Oremome, Carpenters, Joiners, John Moon 0 6 3 partial judge will be selected to try the
and Masons, Thome & Co., including A Coachman and Fellow-Servants who do case, per J. S. Varrall .. j
not believe in the Tattoo Business, per Cards Nos. 9,081 and 9,082, from friends at
9s. per J. E., Old Fish-street .. .. 116 3
G. Jones 0 6 0
the Gate Inn, Smallheath, Birmingham,
Collected in the Bembridge Eeading Room,
Card No. 1,611, per E. Ball, Morden-lano, who believe the Claimant is the right
Isle of Wight, including 10s. from Fiat
Mitcham 0 511
man in the wrong place
Juatitia ruat Coelum, ss. M. Baunson,
Workmen of the N.K.C.Y., all lovers of Employes of the Imperial Gas Light and
2s. 6d. each Mrs. Barnes, the Right
justice 0 5 6
Coke Co., King’s-cross.
Man in the Right Place, and other
smaller sums 1 12 6 Lew Friends from Hanley, per Mr. Chad- Card No. 9,091, per Mr. Tatton and his
dft From Bramshaw House, Lyndhurst, includ- wdek 0 5 0 Workmen, Great Eastern Metropolitan
ing 15s. from Capt. F. D. Rich, E.N., Mr. Lock, Coat and Badge, Woolwich .. 05 0 Extension
10s. from One Who Knows and Be- From One who has been a Great Sufferer hy Collected hy Mr. C. M. Hopper, at the
< lievos in the Claimant, 9s. 6d. from the Late War, or would gladly give as Mytton Tavern, Porter-street, Hull,
Farmer Herbert, and Is. from a Labour- many hundreds .. .. 0 5 0 who believes the Claimant is the light-
ing Man 1 8 6 Card No. 1,059, per Mary Anne F., Burs- ful heir
Few Friends from Hanley, per Mr. Chad-
Card No. 1,059, per Mary Anne F., Burs- ful heir
ing Man 1 8 6
lem; a long and happy life to Lord A small donation, collected at Mr. Deacon’s,
Card No. 1,044, Employes of Huxley and
Rivers and all friends of Sir Roger .. 0 5 0 Builders’ Anns, Merton, Surrey, from a
Co., 12 and 13, Whiteohapel-road, per
One who desires to see the A.G. and the few friends that wish to see fair play..
Mr. Wright 17 0
Justice B. lecturing in America on From the Portmanteau-makers at Silvers
Mr. O. Foster, Yorkshire-streot, Bucking-
ham-gate 1 7 0 English Law Proceedings 0 5 0 and Co., Burdett-road, Limehouse, per
Employes of S. Hudd and Son, Gloucester- Getting Minnow out of the Water hy the C. White (Ist suh.)
lane, Bristol, and a few Friends for mill with the left hand 0 5 0 A Winner of a Derby Sweep, per G. Onslow,
the A.G.’s crocodile tears 16 6 From a Few who think the A.G. unchari- Esq., M.P.
Card No. 1,284, subscribed hy Friends at table and spiteful 050 A Friend to Sir Roger, per G. Onslow, Esq.,
the Dover Castlp, Plumstead, Kent, per A Few -who think the Crown would do M.P ,
Mr. J. Sergeant, including 10s. from better hy looking after murderers and A Few Cabmen on the Eandolph-street
Mr. Barnett, 2s. 6d. from Mr. Douce, drunkards 0 5 0 Cab-stand, Camden Town district, No.
A Fair Trial to the Claimant this time, and 848, per J. W. C. Rees.
and other smaller sums 16 0
no tattoo humbug 050
A Lover of Truth, Honesty, and Fair FUy,
Employes of Messrs. Simpson and Son, 30,
A Dorsetshire Woman 0 5 0
per W. Croft, Albert Park-plaoe,
Baker-stroet 160
One -who will wager the A.G. £2OO to 200 s, Bristol
List 35, from Shipton-under-Whichwood,
that ho will not he able to prove the Subscribed hy the Workpeople of Mr. T.
per A. C. Lamb, jun 15 0
claimant to he Orton 0 5 0
Booth, Britannia Works, High-street,
Four Lovers of Charity, Common Sense,
Mr. Percy 0 5 0 Hanley
Psalm cix. 30 0 5 0 Apprentices employed in the Fitting-shop
and Judgment, Willington Tavern,
Victoria Park 15 0
Mr. Platt’s Forester’s Restaurant .. .. 0 5 0
Snodland, Kent, per Mr. Bumble, including Mi-. Platt’s Forester’s Restaurant .. .. 0 5 0 department of Messrs. G. R. Stephenson
10s. from Mr. Russell (ex-Carabineers), -I disputed bet between R. F. P., Esq., and and Co., Newcastle-on-Tyne, who sym-
Twoßrothers, 45.; 8. S.,aLady, 2s. 6d., W. P 0 4 0 pathiso with the Claimant, and trust he
and other smaller sums 14 0 From one who would resist the Govern- will now have fair play
will now have fair play.
meut bully getting the public money From C. 8. and Friends, Clapharn
A Few Friends for an Unbiassed Judge and
to prosecute 026 Weeks and Sons, Refreshment Rooms,
Jury, Yorkshire Hotel, Doncaster .. 12 0
Card No. 1,084.. .. o 2 4
Cheddar
For the Cruelly Oppressed and Persecuted
The One-sided Chief, to help his favourite. 0 2 0 T. Kendall, Esq., Berkeley-gardens
Sir R. C. D. Tichborne, per P. Brarey,
False Tongues should he tattooed .. .. 0 2 0
Who told him he measured the oak tree
Horsham 1 2 0
The Kind Old Jesuit, who wronged the Card No. 1,588, Employes Carriage Works,
Lovers of Justice, Employes of the firm
mother to spare her feelings .. .. 0 2 0
Oldbury
of F. G. Naylor, Esq., Builders,
Rochester 1 1 6 A Mill Believer .. o 1 0 Mr. F. Tennant, Mother Red Cap, Luton,
Grave Maurice, Whitechapel-road, from a The Honest and Truthful Tattooing Lord .. 0 10 Beds: “May those who have sworn
Few Friends disgusted with the A.G.’s Mr. Strecten begs to announce that whilst continu- falsely against Sir Roger never thrive
foul language 110 ing the office of Trustee, he is with reluctance com- until they speak the truth ”
Employes Albion Tubes Works, lovers of polled to relinquish the post of Secretary to the Bannister and Friends, Sonthsoa Steam
impartial justice 1 1 0 Tichborne Defence Fund. It is requested that for Baw Southsea .. ....
Hertford, first subscription, per J. Smith, the future all subscriptions may ho sent on behalf of Collected hy Mr. Barber, Downham Arms,
Green Dragon Inn, from those who the fund to Mr. J. Osborne, at 376, Strand, W.C., who Downham-road, Islington
wish to see justice done to the will duly acknowledge the same. Mr. J. J. Boddy, Catherine Wheel, Egham
Card No. 3,613, from St. Neot’s, per Mr.
G. Sibley.. ..
Claimant 100
Card No. 1,237, per G. Green, Cuttle Inn,
Long Itchington 100
rjMCHBORNE DEFENCE FUND.
A Few Turners at Messrs. Maudsley and
Sons
A Few Friends at St. John’s, Earlswood,
Redhill, Surrey, who wish to see the
Claimant tried hy an impartial Judge
and Jury 100
TRUSTEES,
From Might not Right (2nd don.)
Right Hon. Lord Rivers. A. Atwood, Esq., M.D.
Guildford Onslow, Esq., M.P.
Secretary—Captain Hunt.
Collected hy B. Carter, Bridge Hotel,
Barking
Joiners at Mr. Freak’s, Old Brompton, per
Mr. II 10 0
Employes of Messrs. Lamberts and Sons,
Short-street, New-out, Lambeth.. .. 019 3
Old Liberals who doubt the honesty of the
Government, from 35, North-street,
Grove-road, Marylehone 0 17 6
List No. 1,086, per Mr. Dudman, including
second subscription from the workmen
of Cuhitt and Co., 11s. 6d., and other
sums 0 16 0
Working-men at Stafford, per Mr. Grim-
shaw.. .. .. .. 0 16 0
List 1,682, per J. Brarey, Horsham .. ~ 016 0
Collected hy C. Williams, Cobom Arms,
Bow, from several lovers of justice ~ 0 15 6
TENTH LIST OP SUBSCRIPTIONS.
Proceeds of Two Meetings held at Bristol,
per H. A. Cross, Esq £B3 0 0
Subscriptions from Swansea, per W. Crook 7 0 0
Per Messrs. Potts and Morris, Sunderland:
Card No. 926, £1 4s. 9d. Card No. 209,
10s.; No. 930, 9s. 6d; No. 934, Bs. 6d;
No. 167, 10s; J. Rain, ss; Card No.
932,55; No. 928, 12s; No. 902, Bs. lOd;
No. 928, ss; J. McMillan and Caste, ss;
J. Dixon, os; and other smaller sums.. 5 10 0
Thos. A. Houghton, Esq., Armsworth-house,
Alresford, Hants, per Guildford Onslow,
Esq., M.P. .. .. .. ...... 500
List No. 925, per Mr. 6. Thorpe, Cocoa-nut
Inn, Kingston, including ss. 6d. from
Mrs. Redcliffo, and smaller sums
Collected hy Mr. Hole, King’s Arms, Brad-
ford, Wilts, from Mr. and Mrs. G. Fry,
65., Mr. G. Cottle, 45,, and smaller
sums
Subscribed hy Twenty Working-Men,
Whitechapel
Employes of Erard’s, 18, Great Maiiborough-
street, London
Subscribed hy Customers frequenting the
House of Mr. J. Beard, Stoke Pogea,
Slough
List No. 519, Mr. W. F. Stevenson, Mitford
Tavern, Hackney ~
2
2
2
1
1
1
«
0
0
6
o
0
0
0
0
0
Card No. 12,038, per Mr. Heslop, The
Grenadier, Church-road, Layton.. .. 016 0
List No. 830, per W. Jackson, Haxey,
Lincolnshire 015 6
Nag’s Head Crew, Worcester, per G. Stokes 015 0
Mr. Newey, 10s. He is the Man and his
Friend, 2s, 6d. each, pgr J. Westwood,
Woodman Inn, Birmingham .. ~ 015 0
Card No. 2,770, per Thomas Simpson,
Grapes Inn, Bolton .. 014 6
Two Lovers of Justice at the Castle Inn,
Hertford, per H. Roberts 0 14 0
From Fitters and Turners, Old Foundry,
Hull, per E. Stronach 013 6
A Few Shopkeepers who would like to
tattoo Lord Bellew, 3 dozen.. .. .. 013 6
From Believers in Fair Play at Mr. A. E.
Tyler’s Luncheon Bar, High-street,
Cowes .. ‘ 0 13 0
Card No. 9,034, per Mr. King, Ryde, I.W, 012 9
Per Mr. J. T. Cutts, Princess Hotel, Shef-
field 0 12 4
Collected by Leah Legge, Turk’s Head,
Ryde, I.W 0 12 0
Card No. 1,037, per Mr, Boddington.. .. 012 0
Card No. 2,048, collected at the Two Oaks
Inn, Chasctown, Walsall, from those
who object to be taxed for the pro-
secution 012 0
Collected at the Malsters’ Arms, Fenny
Stratford, by J. Welsh 0 12 0
From Friends in Council 012 0
Friends at the Hope, Ilford, per Mr. E.
Counter oil 0
Card No. 3,947, 2s. 6d; Card No. 3,946,
Bs. 6d., per G. Barnes, Mr. Chappell’s
Works, Steyning 011 0
List No. 1,229, J. V, Ward, Bromsgrove-
road, Eodditch .. 0 10 9
Card No. —, subscribed at 7, Anchor-terrace,
Portsea, by a few Officers and Friends
in H.M. Convict Service, per Mr. Rem-
shaw 0 10 6
The Britannia, St. Anne’s-road, Stepney ~ 010 6
Mr. William Edgoll, Teddington .. .. 010 0
Employes at Mr. J. Super’s Window Blind
Manufactory, 20, Old Cavendish-street,
London 010 0
A Few Joiners at Messrs. Pargeter’s, Not-
ting-hill 010 0
Card No. 1,482, per Miss Corbett, New-
haven .. .. 010 0
Servants and Employes at Epsom College,
per W. P. Brabazou • 010 0
Card No. 1,996, £1 55., less commission on
account to Miss Herbert, 15s 0 10 0
Card No. 1,651, Mr. Trenchard, 76, Prit-
chard’s-road, Hackney-road .. .. 010 0
Collected at the Hare and Squirrel, Coven-
try, from friends of the Claimant, who
believe in a Mother’s recognition, but
not in the tattoo marks 0 10 0
Card No. 3,633, Tytwich, per Mr. R.
Counter 0 90
Card ho. 9,056, Beaby’s Wharf, Belvidore-
. road 090
Buy your Brushes of the Maker, per J.
Chamberlaine, 131, Newington-cause-
way 090
Collected by Mr. Ocg Mahkcew, Ash,
Surrey 080
Card No. 499, per D. Bartlett, of Grays .. 0 8 0
Friends at 60, Dorset-road, South Lambeth,
perj. W.. .. 0 8 0
Collected hy A. F. Savory, Will Hall, Alton 0 7 6
A few Working-men, Barking Creek .. 0 7 2
Subscribed at the Bakers’ Arms, Crystal,
Yassall-road, N. Brixton, per J. Marsh 0 7 0
J as. Caul and a few other friends, Argyle-
terrace, Leeds 0 70
Card No. 3,924, a few friends, at T. Keeler’s,
Star Inn, Dover, who wish the Claimant
a fair trial 070
Box No. 552, Bannister 0 5 5
Collected at the Mitre Tavern, St. Helen’s-
street, Ipswich, per C. Bullard .. .. 0 5 2
Card No. 1,603, The Lorimer’s donation .. 0 5 0
Subscribed by a Few Tailors of Ryde, who
do not believe the abusive speech of
the A.G q g q
C. Weudcn, Lamb Inn, Romford .. .. 0 5 0
Card No. 5,850, Queen’s Head, Epsom .. 0 5 0
From a few who believe the tale of the
tattoo marks to be a conspiracy, East-
street, Sudbury ~ _ 046
Few friends at Mr. Gallows, Hacknoy-road
per G. B. Pearson 046
Workmen employed in carriage department
Great Western Railway Works, Pad-
dington, third subscription 0 4 1
Who is this that darksneth counsel hy words
without knowledge ? -0 4 0
A Young Lady at Merton, who don’t like
to see the Claimant, R.C.D.T., hunted
to death hy the law’s hull-dogs. Give
him justice 0 26
Card No. 580 _ 020
Oara J\o. 080 020
Card 1,036, per J. Griffiths, Market-street,
Pembroke Dock 030
Abuse won’t do, try another dodge, Mr.
r -n A ’?V . •• 0 2 6
T U A D
J. freed, dairyman, Ealing 0 2 6
A mite from one who would like justice .. 0 2 0
Box 203, Welsh Harp Oil
c°°p er oio
o o ii
ku 0 0 6
B - B 0 0 5
LIST OF SUBSCRIPTIONS
Received at the Office of the Tichboexe
Defence Fund, 376, Strand, W.C,
June 22 to July 24, inclusive .
TRUSTEES.
The Lord Elvers.
Wm. Alban Atwood, Esq., M.D.
Guildford Onslow, Esq., M.P.
Hon. Secretary—Captain Hunt.
Card from Bristol, including Work-
men of Messrs. J. J. Foster, and
Great Western Cotton Works,
per Mr. H. A. Cross .. . .£l3 19 6
Card No. 3,634, collected by Mr. T.
Shettle, Southampton, including
£2 from one who believes no
impostor living could have borne
the cross-examination of the
Attorney-General for 28 days
without a break down .. .. 7 810
Card No. 1,193, collected at the
Black Swan Hotel, Hereford.
Proprietor, Mr. Bryn .. .. 413 0
From Mr. Charles Davcy, Havelock
Hotel, Hastings, List No. 102.. 4 3 6
Contents of 23 boxes 3 13 Of
Durham at Bow Foundry .. .. 3 7 7
From 7 No-Bovilites, at Kettering,
per Guildford Onslow, Esq. ~ 3 7 0
Mr. William Durman, Bctersfield,
Card 12,104 3 4 0
A few Sympathizers with the Claim-
ant, at the Bed Lion Inn, New-
street, Stourbridge, per Dr.
Skidmore 2 7 0
Subscription from Birmingham, per
Mr. Charles Burbidge .. .. 2 5 0
Per D. G., Chipstead : Fair Play, £l,
Old Alresford, 10s; Mr. Bridge,
Four Boys, ss. 6d; Justice (not
Bovill) Is; C. P., Is 2 2 6
Card No. 913, Dover Castle Inn,
Leicester, per Mr. Isaac Davy.. 2 2 0
Mr. John Tucker, Estate Agent,
Southampton, per Guildford
Onslow, Esq 2 2 0
Mr. Armstrong, Contractor, Tyne-
mouth 2 2 0
W. S. Siddall, Esq., Otley, Yorkshire 2 0 0
From a few Friends, in order to ob-
tain a fair trial, per E. Glover,
Dock Arms, Hull 2 0 0
From Mr. W. Callow, Alresford:
collected at the late Alresford
Meeting, per G. Onslow, Esq.,
M.P i 17 0
From Mr. William Ashby, Har-
mondsworth, Slough, Card No.
1,062 1 16 2
From a few lovers of j ustico, per F. J. 114 2
From Mr. Henry Simmonds, 41,
Ossulston-streef, Euston - road,
per Penny Tickets, sold at Mr.
Fox’s, Euston-road 1 14 0
Card No. 5,804, collected by James
Smith, staying at Manor House
Hotel, Leamington 1 14 0
Card No. 3,953, per Mr. James J.
Arnold, 134, Scotland - road,
Liverpool 113 6
Collected by J. T. Wild, Esq., Ousle-
bury, Thirty-three Subscribers,
who wish the Claimant a fair
trial 1 13 0
Twelve Subscribers, per Mr. Joseph
Lambert, 1, Dove-street, York. 1 12 9
Boxes—2s3, 9s. Id.; 600, 2s. Id. ;
587, 14s. 4|d.; 439, 6s. Bd. .. 112 24-
Box 165, Card 487, Mrs. Lucy Sage,
Eodney’s Head Hotel, Eobert-
street, Grosvenor-square .. .. 11l 5
FromW. Earles and friends, Queen’s
Arms, Friar-street, Eeading ~ 110 0
Collected by Mr. W. W. Baigent .. 19 0
Card 2,277, from Eailway Hotel,
Coulville, North Leicester, per
W. Sheffield .. 1 7 0
From Mr. W. Hatfield, Eailway
Hotel, Arundel.. .■ 1 6 8
Third subscription, from White
Horse Dairy, Stepney, per Mrs.
Knight. Card 4,176 .. .. 16 2
Collected on Cigar Floor, St. Cathe-
rines Dock, Those who wish
for nothing hut Fair Play, and
believe the Claimant to be Sir
E. C. D. Tichborne, per E. C.. 1 5 6
Collected by Mr. Campbell, 21, New-
strect, Merthyr Tydvil .. ~ 1 5 0
A friend from Chislehurst, B. H. .. 1 5 0
Collected and forwarded by Miss
Susan Evans, 10, Laird-terrace,
Eyde, from 18 Subscribers .. 1-3 0
Cards—l 72, 11s. 6 Jd. ; 221, Bs. 4|d.;
171,25. 7|d. 1 26J
Erom Messrs. Turner and Co., Oil
Mills 12 0
From tbe Eising Sun, Twickenham,
per Mr. Pennycook 1 1 5
From a few friends of Sir Eoger, in
the Parlour of , West
Ham 1 1 0
Peter Chidle, Jeweller, Bognor .. 10 0
From a Lady-Sympathizer with the
victim of a vile conspiracy .. 10 0
From one who knows that the devil
is mighty, but that God is Al-
mighty, and may Ho confound
his enemies 1 0 0
Contents of Box 651, The Earl of
Zetland, Princess-road, Notting
Hill, per K. Kendall .. .. 019 10
Thomas Eullman, Kentish Tap,
Trowbridge 019 0
Collected over the Counter, at Old
Crown, Highgate Hill .. .. 018 10
Boxes 336, 586, 458, 373 .. .. 015 9|
Boxes 408, 396, 127 . , .. .. 0146 A-
Per Mr. Oxenham, T. N., ss; J. H.
ss; J. C. 5s ... ~ 015 0
Collected at the Eagle, Croydon .. 014 0
Box 179, Mr. Lovejoy, Weams Arms,
Green-street, Victoria Park .. 014 4
Collected at the Bush Tavern, Hamp-
stead 0 14 0
From a few Working-Men who
abominate unjustifiable denun-
ciation where justice ought to
he the sole object sought after,
per W. Mayer 013 0
A trifle from a few friends at Esoott’s,
Millwall Dock Hotel, who would
like to tattoo A. G. and the onc-
sided Judge 013 0
Second Subscription, Lord Nelson,
Windsor, J. S. Sumer .. .. 012 9
A few Eriends in Stewart’s-lane, who
wish they may never get any of
Bovill’s Law ~ 0 12 6
Prom Lovers of Justice, Hayward’s
Heath, per Samuel Coles.. .. 012 6
Boxes 173, 385, 591 0 12
A few Friends at Driffield, Yorkshire,
per W. Y. Sipkins 0 12 0
Mr. Oxenham .. 012 0
Fleece Inn, Dewsbury, Yorkshire ~ 012 0
Bell Inn, Bicester, per C. Gessey,
“ I guess He is the right man ’ 0 11 6
Mr. Lea, New Inn, Goxford-street,
Coventry 011 6
Mr. Geo. Williams and Friends, The
Cellars, Arundel-st., Landport,
Portsmouth Oil 0
A few Friends in Bath, per E. Knee 0 10 6
Mr. H. Poyntef, Printer, Landport.. 010 6
Collected by Geo. Gough, 19 Kailway
Men, Landport ; .. 010 6
From a few Eailway Employes at
Poplar Station. Wishing Sir
Eoger success 0 10 6
Collected at the Adelaide Hotel, Mr.
James Dyer, Proprietor .. .. 010 0
Box, Batten Arms, Commercial-road,
Landport ~ 0 10 0
From a Friend of Eoger Tichborne
in Bristol 010 0
Per Mr. Trendell, Eeading .... 010 0 (
From a few Fitters, Spittlegate Iron
Works, Grantham, for the least
little bit of rope to hang the A.
G.. per H. Upton 0 10 0
Second instalment from a few Friends,
King’s Arms Inn, Margate, per
S. A. Banks 0 10 0
From Mr. C. J. Harrison, Clock
House, Eoyal Mint-street, Who
but a fool or a lunatic would
tattoo a youth of 15 0 10 0
Working-Men, Wootton-undor-Edge,
per C. Donham 0 9 6
From a few Friends who would like
to see the Claimant have a fair
trial, per Geo. Cooper, 31, York-
strect, West Cowes 0 9 6
Caledonian Company, per W. T.
Allen 0 9 6
The Sun, Gate-street, W.C., per
Charles Schuttyser 0 9 2J
John Jones, Wakefield Arms Inn,
Park-road, Leyton 0 8 6
Friends from the Eoyal Champe,
Portland-street, Walworth .. 0 8 6
Card 876, Mr. John Phillips, 11,
John-street, Edgware-road .. 0 8 6
Boxes—2Bs, 566, 442, 167 .. .. 0 83J
Eight Working-men of Sidmouth,
Eight Working-men of Sidmouth,
Devon, Is. each, per F. Stitch-
well 0 8 0
From Mitcham Drug Mills, Card
9,100 0 8 0
M., 65.; F. 8., Is. ; T. 8., 6d.; a
well-wisher, Is 0 7 6
From Johnson, Grange, Bruntisland 0 7 6
Card No. 3,344, per Miss Hebert . . 0 7 0
From SevOn no-Bovilites of Ketter-
ing . . 0 7 0
From the Prince Kegent, Derby, per
W. Woodhouso 0 6 10
From a few who think he is the
right Claimant 0 6 1
Per W. Wheeler, Boar’s Head.. .. 0 6 0
Box, Mortlake Hotel 0 5 7
From one who believes tbe Old Mill
affair, and sincerely hopes that
the A.G. will have to send the
knoll of trees back to Tichborne
Park o 5 0
Card 1,372, from Matthew Watts,
Wolvercote, Oxon 0 5 0
W. W o 5 0
C. F. H. and H. S 0 5 0
Card 1,795, from A. Clayton,
Paulsly Mills, Kent 0 5 0
Card 3,900, per W. Daken ~ 0 4 10
From a few friends at Stepney, per
Mr. E. Merriman 0 4 6
Mr. Digby Willoughby, Hull.. 0 4 0
Six Working-men, believing the
Claimant to he the right man,
per Paul Tuffley, Brinscomhe.. 0 3 0
No dinner or supper for Jury.. 0 2 6
A Captain’s widow, Sir Eoger’s
friend at Leeds, per Guildford
Onslow, Esq., M.P 0 2 6
For Sir Eogcr’s Defence only, per
J. Murgotroyd, Hull .. .. 0 2 0
We thus complete the publication of the
Subscription Lists to the present date.
If any have paid or sent subscriptions which
do not appear in the lists in this and the four
preceding numbers of the Tichborne Gazette, will
they kindly write to
Captaix Hunt, E.A.
Hon. Sec. Tichborne Defence Fund,
376, Strand, W.C.
Stating—
1. What sum they paid or sent.
2. When it was paid or sent, or as near as
possible.
3. In what form—coin, notes, cheque, Post
Office Order, or stamps.
4. To whom and what address it was for-
warded.
5. Whether they had any acknowledgment
of it in writing.
6. Will they kindly send such acknowledg-
ment to Captain Hunt without delay.
Also—
If any have sent cards, lists, or boxes which
do not appear in the foregoing lists, will the
senders of them kindly forward to Captain Hunt
particulars of the same—viz.,
1. The number of the card, or list, or box.
2. The date on which sent, or as near as
possible.
3. To whom and by whom.
4. What the amount entered was.
5. Have they any acknowledgment, and will
they kindly send it to Captain Hunt imme-
diately.
All Cards, Lists, or Boxes of the
Defence Fund, should kindly he sent
immediately to Captain HUNT, Hon.
Sec., 376, Strand, W.C., who only is
authorized to receive them.
0
0
0
many hundreds .. .. 050
who believes the Claimant is the right-
1
1
1


There was between a named and anything about Major Horbury. I know he member in the year 1844. My nephew, Roger been tested at the Law Institution; why was side,” and myjreply was always, “I would come several years before 1854. In August, 1854,
. . . ° ~ , 1,- ,, r ... Tichborne, became a member in 1849, and he that not done?—He had been tested on so over to your side immediately if I thought he I was in Hobson’s Bay, when I saw the Osprev.
surprised expression on them when he raised ° continued a member of the Alfred down to many subjects, that one more or less was not of was the real man; but you know as well as I I was passing on board the New Comet, steamer,
them. The eyebrows in photographs E and C almost everyone. Ine subject ot the conversa- 1852 to the best of my belief. lam not aware [ much consequence. (Laughter.) do that he is an impostor, and I will have to the Lightning, in which I engaged a passage,
are totally different. (Daguerreotype pro- li° n i 1 arG sa J> was R°S er Tichborne and the but that he remained a member till he died. I know what is present in my own mind on nothing to say to him,” (Suppressed ap- I wanted to go to Melbourne, to do some busi-
duoed.) That has not the slightest resemblance old times. I told Mr. Holmes that I recognised The club was broken up subsequently—in 1858 this important matter of the tattoo marks, plause.) .ness, and I got aboard from off Kay’s Wharf,
to anv member of the mess fPhotoeranh Mm at once, but I did not swear to any state- or 1859—twelve or fourteen years ago. How, I ask, can you give me any reason why Mr. Serjeant Ballantine.-This disturbance attention was attracted to the Osprey by
marked Ai produced 1 That does remind me ment till three months afterwards. My ex- . S i r sai f he an opportunity was not given to examine him is not calculated to improve our opinion of the its remarkable bmid and the remarks passed on
marxed aa pioauceci.; inai clogs lemma me J to tlie Army and Navy Club, and was put up while his mother was alive?—l am not sure he auditors who commit it. her. She was a three-masted schooner, and
more of Tichborne. I should be surprised if Ponses were paid by some one. Carter, W ad- the Travellers, but that he did not know the would have allowed his body to be examined. The Attorney-General: It comes from both her foremost mast was the highest, the hinder
the daguerreotype had been deposited as his Kington, and myself dined together that day. Alfred, and had not met Mr, Mansfield there. It did not require his body to be examined, sides. ones being shorter. She was rigged, too, very
own likeness I have seen no documents con- I did not see Mr. Tichborne in the same room The Dowager died very suddenly ?—Yes. His tongue would have served. You know The Lord Chief Justice: It certainly occurs peculiar, and had a foresail, with a ‘clear’
. - tl , A „ Qllso . T ,• T in the evening. I made the affidavit in July She died at Hewlett’s Hotel. 1 heard of her nothing was asked him about these tattoo 0 n both sides. First, there was a round of deck. She was painted green, and on the side
necteci witn tne cause oeioie 1 saw bun. 1 ~ , j , - ~ ~ J death a few hours after it occurred. I heard marks?—Yes. _ applause on one side, and then a suppressed m gold letters, was her name, ‘Osprey.’ She
received a note, I think, from Mr. Holmes, ’ of it at four o’clock in the afternoon. I amine- You say at that time you and his mother round of applause on the other. had no figure-head. There was a friend of
asking me to see Tichborne at the Swan. lam nniform. We did not stay there three or four diately went there. I found the Claimant, Mr. were on affectionate terms, and continued to be Mr. Seijeant Ballantine: lam sorry the mine steering her, a man named Scudamore,
sure a man of the name of Kearns was a da y s - We met a good many persons who had Bloxam, and Mr. Baigent in the room. Ido so up to the day of her death ?—Yes. Attorney-General has suffered. He seems to who came from Birmingham, but whom I have
troop-sergeant-major in the regiment in 1851 'been in the regiment. There was no peculiarity not know what they were doing. Are you aware whether it was not until after have borne it very well. (Laughter.) not heard of since. Seeing him there, I went
t 11 1 •«, K t ft c” , , ‘ about the shape of Mr Tichborne’s head as far Cross-examined by Serjeant Ballantine: Were his mother was dead that any public statement The Lord Chief Justice :If the expression of on board, and took a turn for him at the wheel,
± warned witn mm to tne owan. A pnoto- , T , r you a member of the Alfred ?—I was. was made as to these tattoo marks ?—I am not disapprobation were allowed on one side, it out of friendship, so to say. Some of those on
graph was shown to me, and I was asked if I « - ln Did you ever see your nephew there ?—I aware that any public statement was made in wou ld be manifested on the other; and then board wore dressed rather peculiar, and they
could recognise it. I said there was nothing amdavit that from the shape of his head and cannot say I saw him there. reference to the tattoo marks until Lord Bellew the court would become a bear-garden. bad these worsted caps on. I got talking to my
to recall Tichborne except the eyebrows. When eyebrows I could not be mistaken. Ido not We all know a man may be elected and never made it yesterday in this court. Mr. Serjeant Ballantine: I have nothing to friend, and he told me there were five or six
plaintiff came into the room I did not recomiise recognise the photographs (C and D) as the use a club. Do I understand you to say it was On the reassembling of the Court after do with keeping the court in order; and per- people on board which had been taken off the
him at once the change bein"- so meat • but I portraits of any persons ! have ever seen, q black hair?—Very dark hair. luncheon, haps I ought not to have said a word on the Bella out _at sea, and I.saw them. I noticed
mm ar once, me ueuig so b icau, out, ± r j Is that in the Dowager s handwriting (paper Ihe Jury asked if a list of the members of subject. 0110 man 111 particular, from his curious make,
soon became convinced that he was the man. I cannot recollect any feature by them. My i nc i os i n g a l oc k 0 f hair) ?—lt is. the Alfred Club could be obtained. The Lord Chief Justice : The effect of the He was a bout sft. Sin. or 9in. in height, and
made an affidavit on the same day. illness has very much affected my memory. Look at the hair now, please, Mr. Seymour. Sir George Honyman said that a list was in disturbance is that I have twice been prevented be had a downcast look. He seemed to me
The Solicitor-General read a letter of the Re-examined: I have been ill for some time. Would you say that was the colour of his hair the possession of the defendants, and handed it from taking down the latter portion of the tike a gentleman who had been in some
■nldinHff’o In T irlv Tirbbnmp dpscribino- Hip I was all right when I made my affidavit. I a t_the time you speak of ?—lt is dark brown to the jury for inspection. evidence of the witness. “You know as well trouble. _ He looked like a gentleman
interview and'savin- that Mai or Haywood have memorv enough to say that I believe him h f ir ‘ I should say a small quantity of hair Mr. Seymour’s cross-examination by Mr. as I do—’” (to witness) what is the rest ? (emphatically) He was very thin —in
interview, and sayin 0 that Major Maywood - ° L always looks lighter than a large quantity. Serjeant Ballantine was then continued. Witness; “ You know as well as I do,” I * act > 1 ml ght say a stripling. I have
recognised him at once, and had made an affi- TO De lrle J- 1011001110 J-saw in tne legiment. i You would not like to pledge yourself that Did you see anything of Moore at the Law said, “ that he is an impostor.” never seen the Tichborne Claimant, but I
davit of it. The letter, dated July 2, and have seen some photographs before to-day. that might not have been cut off at the period Institution?—Ho; I don’t know Moore by Mr. Serjeant Ballantine: Did you then, and have seen a portrait. From that I recognise
which has been given in a previous page here, ® ne as been shown to me by Serjeant Kearns, you spoke of?—Ho, I would not. sight. • do you now, mean to imply that the Dowager him to be the man that I saw; I firmly believe
_VL .-bp mtop Iwl but I bave not before seen any of those that have C Tile locli was banded to the jury for Have you ever seen him at all ?—I saw him was supporting and upholding an impostor ? be is the same man. I wrote to Messrs. Baxter,
was characterised by tne same bed spelling, but inspection.] when under cross-examination. Witness : I mean to say that the Dowager, I Rose, and Horton in November last about this,
there weie no small is. Did you see many letters addressed by him But you have had no private communication believe, originally and thoroughly believed that an( l received anacknowledgment thanking me
The Chief Justice called attention to some- ——— to his mother?—Ho, Ido not suppose I did. with him ?—Ho; I never exchanged a word this man, who was discovered in Australia, was f°r the information. I don’t know whether I
thing peculiar about the signature. You do not know whether he addressed with him in my life. her son; but she was, lam sorry to say, a little am to be called as a witness. I went on to
The Solicitor-General- Yes it looks like EYIDEHCE FOE DEFEHDAHTS. her as “Mama?”—He never spoke of her as Have you known anything of him ?—Ho; I insane upon that particular point—a mono- Melbourne by the Lightning after seeing the
<‘T" Tib ” ’ “Mama.” have just heard of him. maniac, in fact. My impression always was Osprey, but I did not return by it to this
xicnDourne. Mb. Alfhed Seymouk, M.P., examined by Whether he spoke to herself in that way or You had some conversation with Lord Bellew that latterly she did not believe in him, but country, as I could not get my business done in
Mr. berjeant Ballantine said it was not so. bir G. Honyman : I believe you are member not you oannot tell Cfmnot telL about this tattooing?—l had a little conversa- was really afraid to say that she did not believe time. I came back by the Ocean Chief, com-
Witness continued: He had a half-intonation f°r Salisbury ? I am. Was he ignorant for his age ?—Ho. tion with him when he first came over. in him any longer. manded by Captain Tobin; first mate, Brown,
with respect to his voice—a half-French way -And the son 0 f the late Mr. Seymour, of Would you call him well informed for his When was that?—l suppose it was in July Then lam to take it that at one period you We were becalmed twenty-eight days on the
of talkin'*. It was the same voice that 1 hoard "AHi " ai A age?—l should not call him highly educated, last; it was before Parliament broke up, I considered her a monomaniac, and afterwards, line, and in consequence were in great distress.
. ~ , rp, . „,, Mon knew Roger Charles Tichborne r —Yes, but he had a great thirst for information, and remember. when she was in her full senses, was helping We brought an action against Messrs. Baines
in c re n imen . ns was one o e ways very well indeed. was very fond of reading. You told him something about the marks? to carry out imposture?—l do not think you a nd Co., of Liverpool, and it was referred to
that I lecognised him. The voice and the He was your nephew ? Yes. What character of literature what sort of —He said, “What do you remember of the have any right whatever to infer that from arbitration. I was aa intermediate passenger,
accent were the same as I had heard in 1851. Your father s country place was at Knoyle ? books ?—-Travels, chiefly, I believe. marks ? ” and I said, “ I remember there was what I have said. What I said was, and what an 4 we £6OO between us. Both the Ocean
The Tichborne of 1861 was never made a butt T 6 ji, • . _ Then you would not take this to be a proper a cross, a heart, and an anchor, and there was I now mean to say is, that upon the question Chief and the Lightning have been burnt since,
of as beino- a fool It is difficult to ssv that bo And hIS 1 ) olls f, 111 k° n( k>a was JNo. 39, Upper description of him at twenty : that he was not R. C. T. done lengthways on the arm; it was of the discovery of this long-lost son, or what tke former at Otago. I tell you all this to show
° Groove nor-street .—Yes. _ fond of reading, and was therefore ignorant of very badly done.” she supposed to be his discovery, she was not it is the truth, and if you want to verify it you
was a man of ordinary education. He certainly Where is Knoyle ?—lt is on the borders of a var i etv of things that he ought to know?—At And that brought the particulars at once to quite in her right senses. Gaa write to Baines and Co. I was in Australia
was not so well informed as some of his brother Wiltshire and Dorsetshire, and about five miles twenty that is a different thing. He was then his mind ?—Yes. He said, “ I have been try- Then when you said, “You know as well three or four years, and knew Morgan, the
officers. He always conducted himself as a fromAVardour Castle, the seat of Lord Arundell. endeavouring to educate himself. ing to recollect how the initials were done, and as I do that he is an impostor,” did you at bushranger, before he was shot. It is absurd
gentleman—perfectly so. The Claimant, I i r . e 7 0u fon f ,° f sn Y?kmg Would that be a good description of him at your description of them brings it accurately that time consider her monomaniacal on that to suppose the Claimant is Morgan ; I could
thouaht snoke English like a French srentle I tlunk your father disliked it ?—Yes. that time ?—Undoubtedly. back to my recollection.” subject?—l did. swear that he isn t. I remember when Morgan
8 P 5 ,.. . , f 4 ;, , W here had you used to smoke?—l had a W as he a person addicted to drinking?— Were there any peculiarities about Roger Why did you say, then, that she knew? was shot. I was in England at the time, but
man. inere was a striking similarity in tne largish room out of the house—it was in the £f e yer when I knew him. I never saw him in Tichborne that you remember?—ln what way ? —Because Ido not think any person who was caused a great deal of talk. When I was at
two men. butlers cottage opposite. It was used by me my life the worse for drink. Any personal peculiarities that you remem- so excessively intimate with Koger Tichborne the Ballarat diggings in 1853,1 knew a man
Ee-examined by Mr. Giffard: I was not con- a bedroom and sitting-room, and Eoger used There was nothing that you knew of him her—in his legs, for instance ?—He had aas I was could possibly for one moment have named Tom Castro, who kept a butcher’s shop
cerned in more than one practical ioke about to^°f ie a ° r ? s £ smoke, play the Erench horn, that would confirm the character given in these little thin pair of legs. mistaken the plaintiff for him. on the Bed Hill flat, near Goldpoint. Castro
TSphhnrnp TTp Vtjpw * i fk it ao , . letters?—Nothing. There was nothing peculiar in their forma- That state of things might imply that she was was rather short—that is to say, about sft. 6in.
* '_ ] l e ]° 6 a Can you tell me what this photograph repre- When did you first see the tattoo marks ?—I tion? They were perfectly straight, so far as labouring under delusion, not that she knew —but very stout. I could swear the Claimant
was engaged in. 1 mean by intonation that he sents (produced) ? It is a picture of the gardens cannot tell you the first occasion. you remember ?—I am not accustomed to look he was an impostor ?—Well, I suppose, if she n °k Castro. I firmly believe the Claimant
spoke English like a Erenchman who had been m house. The rooms covered with j wan t to know whether it was when he at people’s legs very much, (Laughter.) was labouring under a delusion, it was the i s the same man that I saw in the Osprey in
in England for a long time. lv 7 and cr v ee P ers at thc end of the F oUlld floo L was very young?—lt would be in 1847, 1848, There was nothing very remarkable about same thing. If she was labouring under the Hobson’s Bay.”
tc-m / 1, , with no bedrooms over, were built by me in or 1849. them. delusion that a man who is not her son was
eorge ie(w o was accommodated with 18-51- Those rooms were not in existence when Did you over see the marks before he went As to the twitching about the forehead or her son, then I take it she was labouring under
a seat): lam now staying at Sandhurst. I Roger used to frequent the house. _ L, Stonyhurst?—l could not answer the eyebrows. You say positively there was the delusion that this false person was her son. The Cuumant’s Visit to Leeds—•“ J. B.’’ writes
have been ill for a long time. I was the y , Roforo you pass from Knoyfo I will ask if question. nothing of the kind ?—There was nothing at Is that what you call knowing a person to be tllu3 l rom Huddersfield to the Editor of the Leeds
officers’ batman in the 6th Dragoon Guards ? ir “ a “ eSalo^°™ e ~Sir Roger’s father—was Could you give an idea when you saw them ? all remarkable. an impostor? Ido not want, however, to press Express Sir,—On reading the article of the Leeds
when Mr Roa-er mined the revimont fo 1 suo 111 ot S om g to Knoyle ? Sir James —I saw them at Knoyle, but I oannot tell when But will you undertake to say that there was you on that point. I suppose you told me the Mercury on the Claimant’s visit to Leeds, I have come
T , , ° . ' use( it o con ) e regularly every year and spend a the first time was. no nervous twitching?—Decidedly not. truth when you said you knew him to he an to the conclusion that it will not tend to alter the
1 knew him till he left in 1853 m Canterbury, month or six weeks at Knoyle. That continued Can you undertake to say you saw them at About that you speak very positively?— impostor ?—I told her the truth. opinions of those who are in favour of the Claimant
I became servant to Lieutenant Johnson, and a P to the time that he succeeded to his brother Knoyle?—Yes. Decidedly. Why, if you knew at the time that he was nor will it prevent those from seeing him who are
saw a good deal of Mr, Tichborne. Occasionally 111 l you ever ask him how he got them ?—I Was there anything remarkable about his an impostor, were you so constantly pressing neither for or against the Claimant, as any impartial
I attended him in his rooms. I have seen him The Chief Justice : Did his mother ever come suppose so; but I cannot remember. My im- hand or either of his thumbs?—Nothing at her to bring him that you might see him ?—Oh, reader will see at once that the article is one-sided,
on horseback. He could stick a horse verv Rnjjle? —Never, except the time I men- pression and that of the family was, that he got all. _ _ excuse me. That_ was in the early part; prejudiced, and unreasonable. I for one shall coma
.. . ’ tioned in 1833 or 1834, during the lifetime of them some time when he was at the seaside. There was nothing in a letter to his mother whereas lam speaking of the latter part, when sixteen miles specially to the Claimant’s meeting, not
well, itfunk. lie bad a good seat, but not a his sister, who was then a baby in arms. X You mean these marks were known to the about the Brighton card case ?—Whose I told her this. When the man first came over to gratify my curiosity, but for th« sake of justice and
good military posture; his legs were not good, refer to Mabel. , family? Yes, perfectly. mother? to England in December, 1866, I was abroad, freedom.”


THE TICHBOENE GAZETTE.
Tuesday Evening, July 30, 1872,]
TSTOTTCE which have been said and done by each against held in various parts of the country, with the BBSHnBBBa&saHBBaBnBBBBBBBBBnBBBB the mother and the public, the family and the that others who were ell capable to jud a e
the other, stand too painfully in the way of object of expressing sympathy with Sir Roger SUDDEN DEATH Ob' ME. JOS. KNOWLES, °The * Onslow°M.P., commenced by
T rr , Trl!f . „. _ such a consummation. Tiohbome, and of otherwise doing him honour Chairman of the Southampton Defence jp therefore, involves the grand secret —a expressing the great gratification it afforded
ORDERS fob the J Many discrepancies might have been pointed and service in the cruel condition to which their Fund Committee. secret that ha's to he divulged one way or the him to come down from London in order to
should be sent to MESSRS. MARSHALL ou f j n Mr. Alfred Seymour’s evidence, but we action has reduced him. If they dare not put other, whichever way the reality is, and what- speak to such an assembly as the one now
& SOFTS, 125, FLEET STREET, E.C., refrain from entering upon them, or even writing in an appearance on such occasions, let them at A Most melancholy event occurred on Wed- ever squeezing and racking the possessors of it before him,
’ ’ , .’ ~ , ° , , j,, , ~, ~ . nesday evening, the 24th instant, which will may have to Undergo before the truth is got them men who were always ready to sympathise
who will supply the trade at wholesale a line which might tend to widen the breach least read the accounts of the meetings as given be deeply felt by a R the friends of Sir Roger ou t, aad t h e w hole truth, too. At present, the with the oppressed, and such as he had met in
terms and of whom the back numbers can between uncle and nephew. One small matter, on our fourth page from week to week. Tiohbome residing in the town of Southampton mo st that we outsiders can do is to trace up the nearly all other parts of the country. (Loud
’ however, we will refer to. “Lynx” very truly says that “it is only and its vicinity. Mr. Joseph Knowles, Chair- tattoo-story to its incipienoy or ante-birth—even applause.) He believed the majority of those
6a * Huch. stress has been laid on the fact that natural that a man claiming estates from people man Southampton Defence Fund Com- its ante-embryo state ;or to paraphrase Dean present had not come from motiv es o cunosi y,
ci. -r. « -i 'i.i *i. v -P -Q-pi. • i mittee, whose noble exertions in the cause, and Swift in bis theological history of snuffling at but simply to ascertain wnat tne Claimant s
letters to the Biter, 125. Heet-.teet, E.C. S " *•“**** ” “f T5“Tk TTS P ““’. “ h ” the .Bering word „d kmdl, .mile he er» hod “here he",peak, ef the period up le ..ppe,te"c»ld ..yiu reply to the l.ug-winded
recognise Knoyle House, the scat of Mr. Alfred case beyond a doubt before a jury took it away f or a R w hose pleasure it was to he associated w hcre, as he expresses it, “As yet snuffling was speech ofthe Attorney-General. Now, although
Seymour. from the possessors hut wo say it was proved with him in the work, will long he remem- ’ so we may emphatically predicate Us to he was a total stranger to the people in that
ADVERTISEMENTS— How, such have been the alterations or addi- “ beyond a doubt ” by the mother, eighty-six bered, died suddenly while presiding at the any known existence of tattoo-marks up to, and meeting, he was no stranger to an English
2s 6d per inch for one insertion. tions to that mansion since Sir Roger is known witnesses, and by many other evidences, that tin f ° f tke Committee. He was making illusive of the 11th day of February, 1867 constituency, and,
oa. pci inca b , ~ . , q- 7, „ ™ , T . notes at the time; and, the discussion turning r which was within six weeks after the arrival from what he knew of the working-classes oi
2s. Od. „ „ two insertions. to have been at Knoyle, that we ourselves, who the Claimant was Sir Ro D er Charles Doughty U pon t] ic publication of the Tichborno Gazette, 0 f the Claimant in England), ahd when Mr. the country, that he could place in them the
tliree or more insertions knew tke lloUse well in our boyhood, scarcely Tiohbome. was in the act of writing down the name, and R enry Seymour, M.P. for Salisbury, joufneyed utmost confidence, as they were men who would
s ’ ’ ” ” - • reco g n i sed when we saw it again in 1860. When also forged letters, mutilated photo- had reached “ Tichhorne Gaz —’’when his hand to Alresford, taking the known Roger’s valet, always stand by an oppressed man and fight to
Therefore, that Sir Roger should not have graphs, and every other trick was resorted to faltered, and leaning back in his chair he ex- William Burden, with him, “ first class,” for the last for fair-play. (Loud cheers.) The fucnt >s
TO CORRESPONDENTS. recognised it in « photograph twenty years after by the other side, had they not in these evidence m that memorable name of Tich- the express purpose of applying the then of the OkiiUantWert’
, ° , ... . . • ,7 „ . J „ , L „., ~ . borne—the man whose wrongs he had so deeply known host possible test to the claim of identity the people of Shields in order to enlist ttieir
A gentleman residing in the provinces, who takes be had seen it, is to us not in the least sur- beyond a doubt, that he was Lie right man, f e ik, the brother whose distress he had so nobly made by the then supposed personated Roger, sympathy on behalf of such fair-play, and to ask
Treat interest in the cause which the Tich- P risin S- and ought they not, therefore, at once to have striven to relieve—was the last he ever penned. r 0 r, with the known real man’s late valet in them to raise their voices throughout the country
* thrown the case out ? To die so suddenly is very awful; hut it is a the room, the supposed unreal man is not in- in supported the justice to the Claimant which had
Lome Gazette advocates, suggests to us that Moreover, it has to be home in mind in consolation to his friends to know that his last vited to show his wrists, nor are tattoo-marks hitherto been denied. (Loud applause.) It was
manv friends of the cause who desire to see the In another column will bo found the letter of d f these “ nossessnrs ” that nrP act on earth was one of mercy—that when the a subject of, or hinted at in the conversation, for the interests of all parties to try to arrive at tne
ff i ■ i■ 7 r -u “ Lynx ” who seeks to excuse the jury and to 7 , ® , possessors that they are lagt dread summons oame to call him hence he wMo h, as re i ated by Mr . Seymo nr, was of the end of that great case-h case which occupied
Gazette in more general circulation, might se J ® J* said to have had ample notice before they was pleading for justice to a fellow-creature in coldest and most reserved kind on his part, and the attention not only of England, but ofthe
willingly do as himself kindly intends to do ® . ° eutered on possession that in all probability adversity, who is being crushed with the iron ended by his drily observing to the Claimant whole civilised world—and he felt It Was indeed,
, .r n f fi,. ,- r lace trial. rightful Claimant was living, and might heel of oppression. Then let us trust that the that he was “ very sorry he could not recognise a compliment worthy to be paid to the nut c o
nOW la * y J P P He goes so far as to say that he thinks they a d re turn to England • and it is within ® u preme Judge of All, before whom he now him.” But there was a little spice in this and working-classes of the couiltry, whett e
assured—put a brief advertisement of it into have been “ hardly dealt with ”by the friends knowleda-e that after thev were in no,- sta ads, will hearken to his plea—that He from gentleman’s evidence, for he says that Claimant said it was to them that Sir Roger o-icnbo
,7 • ,7- 7 / . , ~ , 7/, m ■ , T > , . w o u - were in pos- w hose tribunal there is no appeal will grant his hpino- nupstioned to ascertain if he knew who was now indebted for the funds with which ne
their respective local papers, at their own of the Claimant. But we, in common with the n„ w „„ heard of at Tichbrn-ne PnrV oem 0 quesiionea ro ascertain nne Knew who was now maeotea 101 tue xuuua . \
, 7, 7 /—i 7* -p ... . w.. session, lie was fleam ot at lichbome iaik prayer. his former valet (aged 36 was ?he answered, hoped to carry on his great trial. (Hear, hear.)
expense!' he most generously added. Of course Butish public generally, clo not tnmk wo f rom tlme to time as being in the land of the “ that’s my uncle Nangle ” (an octogenarian). Nearly all the disinterested persons, in fact,
■we should le most grateful for such a lift, think the jury had ample means for arriving at hying. Of facts like these the jury were duly „ Thus a mistake utterly incompatible with were acknowledging him ; while Ms old_ tenants
77,777 '7,7,7M rrrocrni'p in it the hand of the a ri9U j ud S mellt in the case ’ and that the F put in possession ; and these, in addition to the knowledge of the relationship would be appa- and friends, those who ought to kcaow him best,
and should r co b mse in it the hand of the ftt the wrong one . and therefore wc othm facts in his favour, ought to ' -cept that (so unfortunately for the were most anxious to see Pum«« a
true Samaritan. But he tells us with real hold that all lovers of justice—the friends of , Ipff „„ „ . „ linon their mind tWL THE DECISION OF THE JURY, appearance) the omission to have previously possession of his Tiohbome Park ana esca ,„ e
/ ■ 77 * 77,7,7 Tirp 7n c u m- u. • ,• , ■, have Icit wo doubt upon then mind, that ho p/ v Trr,rnenN-ij fli'/rTTn greeted the supposed uncle as such would be (Loud and continued cheering-) Although
business-like prescience, that we are to suggest Sir Roger Tichhorne in particular-do no more wag the rig h tful in h er itor of the estates and - f f .ff f J T ! CHEO^ B Gazettb ; uite inconsistent with the mistake. Mr. Hop- abandoned by his relatives, and by some of the
the words in which the advertisement is to le than their duty in denouncing that “judgment title> dea™Vithhvthe'friends oZtMClaimant 7 kins> at whose house the mistake is alleged to upper classes, the Claimant, happ.%, backed
inserted. Although we think this scarcely and those who “formed” it. But “Lynx” says that “at the conclusion 2 The iurv express have been made, was, at the giving of the evi- by public opinion—by that public o®lW on which,
~, , . 77 7 That the iury “ did not express any opinion n , ni • n a dence, dead; and serious warnings abound in during aMe which had not been a* lor t one,
nurf wrv u rnnJ ” vet we will do even - Lliau uiu uvi auj of the Claimant s case the iury were in doubt. whatever, although the nudge aid. ~ . •, • , , T^-
necessary y ana very cool, yu we wlu uu tutu , , „ f « f 1 •. n J J Ul * o -nt v 1 j.- j this case against the imprudence or risking an he had himself never known-to be 'vmx -It
7*7 77* whate\ei cannon 101 a moment admit, bn Clpotlv tkov should Imvo kput flipiv donhfs rsor did the action ol the iury warrant the n* < •/•i • , I*l ±.ll-
- to promote the cause; which we believe we ~ , -,7, Liearxy, tney snouia nave kept tneu aoubts to nnnm |,„ oath which may conflict with internal evidence, was not their duty, however, on that on. lasion
mat to ptomo the contrary we affirm that nothing could have themselves, and have let the case go on to the conclusion so genmally come to, that they Qr ig not derated by what cannot he to say whether the Claimant was V-oger
are doing, by increasing the circle of the been more distinctive than the opinion which end _ They wou ] d thou have found witness C ‘T d^t^ C S^ to doubtcd - Indeed, spiciness and present effect Tichborno or not; all that was desired was sm 'pty
Tichhorne Gazette’s usefulness. The they did express, and cause to he acted upon, after witnesg CO n trad i c ting each other (as really imply is that the Claimant had not satisfactorily had be ® n tlie f senoe and aml of tke oross to ensure that a fair and proper trial Mtt be
words, then, might le something to this effect: and have so far stood by. They stopped the was the case with the few who were examined) proved his case. ammation and commentaries; and, as the aUowed him. AtThe late proceedings inChanwiy
_ T j s-rr • o _ o vy ' v cAdimucu;, if , Attorney-General very candidly admitted, his Lane, Lady Tichhorne stood by the side oi the
“ The number of the Tichhorne Gazette case- Is not that a express P • and would not now he in the plight in which o iho Attorney-GencraM oft-reiteriited re- excessively i ngen i ous an d extraordinarily learned Claimant, and said, “ Here I am, examine me,'”
is now ready (or, will he ready on ), And on the memora e 0 aio —least they are in the estimation of every true-thinking hL oas°o on the defensive is friend and rigl:lt kalld ’ Mr ‘ Dawkins, pro- Their opponents refused to examine her, awl
r! h had of Messrs Marshall and Sons day ° f th ° trlal—tllo followm S took P laoe Englishman, if not in their own consciences. not for me to prove who ho is or even that he P ounded questions, the pertinence of which was hence there was only one thing that a foodl
Z 7 It. r “ The of the jUry (after COnSUlting TO bring a case of such importance to such L but it is L him to prove tended to he seen but rather to ho loving mother could do, she put her arms round
125, Fleet Street, E.C.; of whom the pre- with his brothe r jurymen) said, ‘My lord, the d illdeed a most iniquitous thin- that he is Tichhorne.” hldd “’ as , tra P s to P ro P a S a t e topics for after the neck of her son to kiss him, and said s “ I
ceding numbers can also be had. The Tich- j ury dos i re to retire for deliberation.’ “ ™ kid a 6. And it is only natural that a man claiming s P, eech >, and „ ,y a 3 ra f er . th . ere ’ } a PP rehelld ’ will give you this lasting example tint fae »
* J J . On the one hand was a great and powerful , , r j f b where the functions of a judge should act, to my son.” (Applause.) He challenged them y
borne Gazett & advocates the cause of Sir Roger “The jury then retired at twenty-seven f am ii y; having illimitable wealth and resources, gi 0 n Should 1 prove 6 hL" titlTlevond Indoubt h uas b questioning the tendency of which is but they were afraid to examine her for fear it.
Tichhorne, and contains much valuable in- minutes past eleven, and returned into court at comb ined in compact array against a helpless, before a jury took them away from the posses- not a PPf eat 5 otherwise the functions of a might prejudice their case Well time went m
, . twelve o’clock, when the foreman said: -t i J J J jury is to he persuaded and not informed, and the unfortunate mother died: she died m
formation relating to his case. ««I am authorised to state, my lord, that and VTm-y If 7 - At the conclusion of the Claimant’s case Dowever, a moral to he drawn is that such a the act of acknowledging her son. He (Mr
“ A venfc for ” ~ . ~ • .1 • • ana oDvio.usiy just, ana a jury oi ms countiy- . . •, i . mi q i game is a game played with edge-tools, and Onslow) had the honour for many years of
Agents jor the views the jury expressed m their communica- , . v • . i i • -i - the jury were in doubt, ihe beymonrs and ° . 1 J ° ’ , . J T 1 J ~
, J , , men deciding against overwhelming evidence in a two-edge tools, too. knowing Lady Tichhorne, and a more honourable
tlon to tlle court tho day bofore 7 esterda y w ® re favour of the rich and powerful as against the not fail to increase it > ‘ > At any rate, now must date, from and after a more "thorough, and a more straightforward
THF TIfHBORNE GAZETTE based Upon the entire eVlde , nCe ’ aS We laS that poor and helpless! Well might England blush 8. Under these circumstances they felt they le } Uh . February, 1867, the responsibility of woman he never knew, and one more capable
AJIRi UAAmilx. rclatmg to the tattooing.’” for her juries! And well might she tremble for were not sufficiently clear of the title ofthe the legal profession, because at that time the of'judging for herselfnever lived (Applause.)
„ Is not that, wc again ask, the expression tbe future aiiministration of her laws Claimant to give him the estates, although they family acts through one of them- At the funeral, which he attended, he saw Sit
TUESDAY EYEKIL G, JULY 30, 187.. opinion? and how then can “Lynx” futme admimstration of her laws. had beard tbe wbole of h is case and not a selves with their general concurrence, and if Roger Tichhorne at the foot of the coffin
■ 1 ... The least they could have done, if they T>Q . » 7 f •, ~ „ ~ the tattooing were a tact, they suppress the weeping, and he watched the contortions of his
~~ affirm that they “ did not express any opinion . were in do u b t ( was f 0 Rq the case go on to the m -acti(!allv found for the defendants' and saved fact ’ of oourso ’ on the advice and irL thc interest face, knowing that his dearest friend on earth
It will he observed that Mr. Alfred Seymour Moreover, they stood by and assented to the end and not> ag „ Lynx „ sa was the case[ cmgelve y s another one hundred days’’ incarcera- of tbe profession, and in no other interest but had gone. He saw at a glance that they were
_i.„ „ 1 77TTi /I nr\ TirTnoli ic (mren nn fno 1 L. CP Lmno- pr\mmiffn7i -fex OTirfro Frx o a o “ Jl.CrmTIRi. I,loll’ CWTI 1 nr.f'l’PST’,. H.Tlfl OTI LllC COTIT/T’IITV. T» AT. T.PflTfl filiph OQ T.nfiafx OnPn niT i.Ha A T.rOfl’TlAV—
He must have had every opportunity for and manly than that of trying to shift the t 0 ms n S at3 i ana society to a ig or appreoia-
has been guided by the safe principle that the
such interviews; as he affirms that his sister blame of their action to the shoulders of the tlon of rl £ ht as a S amst might. mother ought to know her own child; which !
(Lady Tichbome, Sir Roger’s mother) and him- judge; and as their judgment is, to say the ..... principle had been so incontestibly confirmed
v J ~, ~ ™ ~ . ; , i. -..X x i , , x ‘ i i by tae eviclerices which had satisfied the
self were on thc most “ friendly and affectionate least, a discredit to eleven educated, trusted, q{ be to hear n * ot]ler -yi z ., the brown mark on the side, and
terms” to thc day of her death, and that she and praised Englishmen,, and has destroyed for g R o o- er Tichborne’s visits to several the Brighton card-case, and for the unanswer-
w&s “ always saying to him, ‘ Oh, I think you ever the confidence of the British public in a _ b . „ , , , ~ , , able reason, that if these were not proofs, they
had better come over to our side! ’” jury of their countrymen, the sooner for their glGa awns m e . 1 01 ' llVe een aea e WO uld have been disproofs of the identity
«» ~ j ii xi -I n « .. x x * o with the most triumphant and that winch was the ohioct of* t-hp Claimant to pstab-
Of course, this affectionate entreaty not only own sake, as well as for the administration of , , , 1 . wnicn was ine oojecr oi rne Claimant ro esrao
? ,_ , . , i , xi 2 i xi 2 2i everywhere he has been received with the most hsh. The mother naturally was satisfied with
meant that he would he most gladly received the laws of the land, they take the step, the enthusiastio demonstrations of welcome . I n o ur the reference to the brown mark, because though
at her home, which was also the home of Sir better. But whether they do take it or not senb num b e r we rive some particulars and sbe con f essed sko ddd n°t recollect it, yet the
Roger hut it excludes the possibility of doubt- will not much matter to the Claimant and his ~ , . „, _ , , . ~ ’ referring to it must have been as convincing as
and to the various remedies open to the Claimant, best chess players in England, and yet Sir
I am, Sir, yours, &o. Roger had recently beaten him two games out
W. Cobeeti. of three. (Loud cheers.) Under these circum-
-15, Jury-street, Aid-gate, E.C stances, therefore, ho would not object to back
July 27, 1872. the Claimant against the Attorney-General at
the Claimant against the Attorney-General at
chess for a thousand guineas. (Laughter and
applause.) The Claimant was one of the best
ecarte players he had ever seen, and he could
assure them that notwithstanding the Attorney-
THE CLAIMANT AT SHIELDS.
plaintiff being committed to Newgate as a per- „ ot 0 f another hundred
• .... ... XL „X XL Xh, . U 7 )> A ,1 A A
,, _ v , enu; auu. noi, us uvua buys was case, incmseivesanomer one nunareaaays incarcera- . , x , l . ' . , , n , ° , ~ « , , ~ t ,/
states in his evidence, which is given on the plaintiff being committed to Hewgate as a per- , , {( f f th h 1- ' tion against their own interest, and on the contrary, not tears such as those shed by the Attorney-
preceding page, that he did not remember to juror, on the strength of this “ opinion.” And ™ ilx. 9. On what grounds, then, does Mr. Guild- at thexr great pcril. „ , ~ General when he cried in court at the time
° r _ m- 11 ux ioxn r J , , tx* x- i c u • n mcarcciation nave liacl an atom weight with c , n xu c j-’ • << How, it is too much to affect to believe it when he took £6,000 out of the Tichbome
have seen Eoger Tichbome after 1849 —four what more distinctive mode of “ expressing ~ • ford Onslow accuse them of forming “ a prema- , .. • P xx j i x x A^
nave seen „ , , 1 , b , them. Winfcmmt?” Yours ever possible that parties in possession of property estates, and spoke at the rate of 3s. 4d. a
years before he went abroad and consequently an opinion than that could have been adopted Unhappy day for “free” England when her j ,jL 1872 ' ’ Lynx will conspire to be plucked of that property, minute. It was impious almost for any
he could not have seen him for at least seventeen by them ? ■ f ° Tiersnnnl mn- " Therefore, over goes the whole groundwork of one to say that Lady Tichbome had
years —from the age of twenty to thirty-seven. If “Lynx” is not only their apologist, but has •* . „ , , . , ~ . the non-suit, and of thc Chancellor of the died with a lie in her mouth, and her
Add to this the fact that ho had had no personal been deputed by them to make it known that J. C , , , j imms ra T ETTFR HTO TTTF prime MTNISI’FB Exchequer s calling it the verdict of a jury, affidavit which now remained was worth ten
w bile f 1 \ . . tion of her laws! LEiiERb lO IDE BRiME iMiiNlblEß as bis ust ifi C ation for appropriating public thousand of those produced on the other side,
interview with him had refused to have they now repent them of the opinion they gQ therefore from ioinin-E with “Lynx” ONT THE administeation of the law as ex- money to prosecute an indictment for perjury, It was an insult to common sense, after the
anything to say to him and that he had arrived at and did express, let him tell them to < ’ ’ f vr, 1O 1 hibited the tichboene case. one count for which is for making oath that proofs to which Claimant had been put and the
allowed himself to he prejudiced against him come forth themselvos like men, and make a 111 an J cone omna ion o y x. me ore ns ow deponent was not tattooed, and the whole of trials which he had undergone, for anyone to
as against an impostor, long before he reached clean breast of it by confessing they were in and others for tkeir calling the conduct of the Letter I. which is charged on his falsely deposing that sa y that he was any other than Sir Roger Tich-
England, and it will ho at once seen how error, or that they were bribed ? jury in question, we, in common with tens of Slß _ Tlle great meeting at Millwall, held is Roger Charles Doughty Tichbome, home (Loud applause.) As to the speech of
rnUoTiPu mn ho -nlncod on Mr Sevmour’s We shall be hannv to -publish their recanta- thousands of her Majesty’s subjects, greatly on the 6th July (as to the identity), passed by Baronet, and of which alleged perjuiy i is the Attorney-General, he could, if he were so
1 . n 7-1 ... i ~ 7 f . I j.l t> b b i- -ii honour and admire that conduct and the part acclamation the resolution moved by Messrs. J. intended to convict him by tie oat sowi - disposed, from lino to line prove to them that
evidence on the score of personal identity, and, tion, and we feel suie the BuUsh public will and are takin- in the matter Bowley and G. Cook, “That this meeting is nesses that the rightful person he claims to be the whole of it was the grossest assumptions
therefore, how unfairly Mr. Seymour dealt receive with every consideration such a desire ■> ° ’ uaan iinous that the Claimant is Sir and wrongfully deposes he is, was tattooed. a nd the contrary of truth that ever emanated
with himself in not having availed himself of for justice at length to ho done, and such an and most eamostl J do we trust tllat the X will charles D ougbty Tichbome, Bart.: and is also Having, Sir, devoted this much of pen and from any man at the bar. It had been stated
onnortnnities for personal intercourse with Sir appeal for restoration to the good opinion of not allow all the which can he of opillion tbat the gen tlemen of the bar in if .to resting the main and previous question that while Sir Roger Tichbome could play
~ ■, 7.7 b n f a ;,, fo himself fheir follow countrymen and the world at brought to hoar against them to have the least connection with the late trial have not done of the identity as claimed on the meontrover- chess and ccarte well, the Claimant knew abso-
Roger, and consequently how nnfaai to himself heir fellow-countrymen and the world at infl^ce in cbecki tbeh . noblc efforts to re . their duty.” rible grounds, I now proceed to examine the lutely nothing about these games. Than that
to say he was perfectly ceitain ho (Sir large. store a down trodden and cruellv-ouDressed man That resolution was nothing more than the law-proceedings in and connected with this assertion nothing could be wider of the truth.
Eoger) was not his nephew.” That would be a course much more honest stole a aown tlottaenalltl y PP es 6 m universal verdict of the country at lame which case 111 re S ard to tllclr various irregularities, He was himselt perhaps one of the five or six
He must have had every opportunity for and manly than that of trying to shift the to his rights, and society to a higher appreoia- bas bee n guided by the safe principle°that the and to the various remedies open to the Claimant, best chess players in England, and yet Sir
Of course, this affectionate entrea ynoon j own sake, as we as or tic a minis ration o everywbere be has been received with the most lish. The mother naturally was satisfied with On the invitation of the North Shields General s assertion that he read the music up-
meant that he would he most gladly received the laws of the land, they take the step, the entbusiastic domonatratioils of welco me. In our j the reference to the brown mark, because though Committee, the Tichbome Claimant, accom- d .°' vn 7 ho had heard the Claimant phij on
at her home, which was also the home of Sir better. Dut whether they do take it or not , , . x* i i she confessed she did not recollect it, yet the •i l r\ i x> **x * piano just b#iore leaving JNewcastle that
arnernorne, W f . present number we give some particulars, and sue comesseu sue um nou rccoiieou iu, you me pamed by Mr. Onslow, M.P., visited that town. a f tcmoon (Annlause 1 The whole sneech
Roger hut it excludes the possibility of doubt- will not much matter to the Claimant and his , . „ , , , referring to it must have been as convincing as 1 / . ~ ~ ~ 7 , aiternoon. rne wnoie speecn
tTICi direct invitations and appeals were sunnorters as they have made an appeal to a shdl tope m futm ’ e nUmberS t 0 gIV6 ° tber3 ' if she did. Then what passed on both sides as Th ® P arty arnved at tbe , tlmc a ™° aad of the Attorney-General could be disproved in
0 ..., ~ i 7 7. . t* ,7 j 7 7 w , nno . V pf!Vf iii 6 Thedinner given in honour of him at the to the card-case, of course obliged the absolute after alighting at fee station they were received a similar manner, and yet, had it not been for a
made to hxm to visit ho h. And we repeat jury which seldom finds a wrong verdict, and off witb great faith of the public ; because when the son only wit h cheering. Two cabs were in readiness, fw foendsof the Claimant he might still have
that we regret extiemely that Mi. Alfied has no interests to seive, except the cause of . names the card-case without any word to iudi- and in them they proceeded from the railway been lying in the dingy dungeons ot Newgate.
Seymour did not avail himself of these invita- truth and justice, and against whose judgment ec a > anc S a^e man Y 113 s aunc i suppoi cis c j r cumstanccs, the mother could not station to the Albion Hotel. A large crowd Ibis great question was shaking the Cabinet at
tions or opportunities for seeing his nephew (for all the picked and perfect elevens in the world an exce U en t opportunity for rallying around have replied as she did, indicating her know- followed the cabs to the hotel, from the windows P™ sen jj.? lon * e, j d: ; Ministers might profess
that he most certainly is, as every day is more would not have the weight of a feather-viz., showing at once their respect for ledge of the circumstances, if those circum- of which tire Claimant and Mr Onslow the
J 1 1 i Gina »™<7 -R T, T77,wfo him, and their sympathy with Ins cause. . stances did not belong to a transaction in which acknowledged the cheers with which they were am, ana mat rne case wouia oe neaia oi on ine
and more clearly showing), and thus saving- the British public. . *\ > . , . the two had participated. Consequently the greeted. A private mooting of the Claimant hustings at the next election, for he believed
as would have been the case—all this litigation, We are quite as much at variance, with Immense enthusiasm has been, we hear, Attomey . General > s argume nt, drawn from the and his friends took place in the hotel, Mr. stand by them m trying to
and strife, and persecution, and the breaking up 11 Lynx,” as to tbe action of tbe jury in making excited in and near Lirmingbam, by the in- fact (if it be a fact) that there was no record of Field, tbe manager, having made very complete MmJ. the fiist law oi Christianity, which was to
of a great historical family. the Claimant to he an impostor . As bas been tended visit of Sir Eoger to that town on or tbe Dowager having drawn or raised tbe money arrangements for their reception upon so very do to others as they would that others should
Most certainly we should have expected said a thousand times, the simple question for about the 22nd instant, when he will take up which she must have required for the purpose, short a notice A public meeting was held in £ totiem. on received of aocoTnt
„ ~r a 77 , „ T ~ „ . . -7 7vr r d °es not touch the point; besides which the the adiommg Albion Assembly Rooms, at eight to me apuse wiiica ne naarecejveqon aoconnt
higher and nobler things of Mr. Seymour from them was,_‘ Is the Clamant Sir Roger Tich- his quarters for a few days at Mr. Lovelace s, gQrt of argumcnt ha ‘ no basig; because the o’clock. Notwithstanding the extremely short of his support of the Claimant, who, he was
what we know of him, than that he would fiorne, or is he an impostor ?” And they de- the Eoyal Hotel. Dowager may have had means to raise the sum notice which had been of an intention to convinced, was bu Eoger Charles Tichbome,
have been hood-winked and led by the nose by cided in the most distinctive manner that he was Me rejoice also to hear a meeting is being required without a record; and indeed her own hold such a meeting, the fine hall was better A^r - Onslow said he had no personal interest to
anyone or any number of ones, to think before not Sir Eoger Tichbome, hut that he was an arranged to take place in honour of Sir Roger remark and caution prove she would have than three-parts filled, and the Claimant and S
ho -H. that .hi, stranger coming horn. ... »**,, and „ .nch they him committed at Ex** Hall, in thc Btmnd, London, ct mh.ch ZSSZSZSSZ* to ' and he had hi. .ignatac”..
of necessity an impostor, and then to denounce to prison, and acquiesced in his incarceration we shall give further information in our next be met by suob objections as that lately taken principal members of the Newcastle Committee a guarantee that when he came into his property
him as such, and even to give evidence that he many weeks, and have never taken a step issue. by Dr. Donkin at Sunderland (on the 16th were present, and amongst the North Shields tke amount would be repaid. If he was not
was not his nephew. But even yet we hope it (unless “ Lynx's ” is one) in the direction of July), that on the cross-examination the Claim- gentlemen who also were seated on the plat- repaid he did not care, lor he would always
is not too late, and that he will re-oonsider showing that they did not consider him an ant confounded Latin with Greek, is altogether form were-Mr. Thomas Hudson Mr Horsley, ciffim^tasa 6 fellow-subfoct (A™lausel He
~ , , 7 7 .7, * i 7-7 7. c. . , We are requested to say that a contemporary unreasonable, and of itself only proves that the Mr. Stanley, Mr. Robinson, and Mr. S. Young. Giaimanr as a leuow snoject. (Applause.) ne
what he has done, and will avail hunsdf of lm postor. , was in error in stating that the Treasurer of Doctor himself is not learned in the superlative Mr. Charles Tally, of Tynemouth, was called had neglected his duties m the House of Com-
opportumties for personal intercourse with Sir T o say, as Lynx says, that all their Mm ~ D f Eund Committee handcd degree, as he is opposing that which is inoon- to the chair. . “ ol3 f> but , be was bap P y to . Bay bat be . bad a
Roger, and thus become better satisfied than he decision can he considered to imply is that the . , T ‘ elusive and only matter of opinion, to what is The Chairman, in opening the proceedings, huffi constituency. He would follow Sir Roger
can at present he, with the fact of that gentle. Claimant had not satisfactorily proved his case,” a al A esun } 0 a P am an ’ ° . onmarv Collc j us i ve aad ao t ma tter of opinion. The remarked that what he had heard at the New- ,j l ®, G d ' b o.Bds hestfriend tn the
. i • • x ) i j? 4-L. • it* ,i , . i.ii Secretary of «.he Fima, on tho occasion of thc vprv ssarnp ohipefion wim offprpd to thp hv thp mpplinffs had more fullv rooted, in his ana wouia stand Dy nim asnis Desbiiicncl to tne
man being his sister’s son, and one of the com- i s to say that his mother, and at least eighty-six , t 7.77 , , . 7 oDjeetionwas oiteiea to me Dytne castle meetings iubi rmreiuuy iooluu iub undertake to Drove him to be
b . 7, , 7. . , . , -in I, i late meeting there, no such sum having yet lad serving in a stationer s shop—no doubt, a mind than ever the heliot that the Claimant ouuul imuuwitL yu piove mm to uo
pamons of his youth. reliable, disinterested witnesses, wilfully and been handed to Ca tain Hunt. sharpish lad, and who had not forgotten thc before them that night was the real Sir Roger the man ho represented himself to be—Sir
Wo have such confidence in Mr. Seymour’s corruptly perjured themselves in swearing to his rudiments he had been taught; and I would Tichbome. (Applause.) Under those circum- Roger tichbome. (Applause.) He did not
mialities that we feel sure that if he could be identity, and that their evidence was as nothing offer the same answer to the Doctor that I did stances, ho saw no reason why he should shirk believe tre ttorney-General s case ever con-
fhnt- this p-entleman is Sir Eo"or comnared with the vituneration of the Attorney- • 77 j 71. 7 71. m- m . , to the shop-boy—that tho not knowing the his duty that evening, and more especially when tamed anything about tattoo marks, hut seeing
convinced that this & entleman is bir Ro o er compared withthe vituperation of the Attorney i T 1S B tated that the Tichbome Claimant passed differellce £ ctv / ccn tllo Roman letters and the he was so firmly convinced that they were tak- that they were going to lose the case, they,got up
Tichbome, he would not hesitate for a moment General and the evidence of a few interested, through Gloucester a few nights ago, by mail train, Greek characters, was only a good proof that ing a right course—a course of humanity and t ka t sort of evidence for the purpose of upset-
to acknowledge him as such. Nothing would self-contradicting witnesses on the other side. on his way from Swansea to London. He was tbe Orton charge was unfounded, seeing that justice. ° (Applause.) If the mother of Sir tl! )g tke Claimant. He did not consider that
rive us greater pleasure than to record snob a Every day adds new strength to the evidence “interviewed” by some local admirers, one of no butcher’s hoy in London would make that Roger Tichbome believed in the Claimant as fair play had been done. The case had been
Lt, and to witness its operation in the reunion of the mother and the eighty-six, and oonse- whom, the inventor of a corn-destroying fluid mistake, as they invariably ride up to the play- her son, he thought nobody else had a right to
, 7 „ . , , 77 7, 1 7. 77 ■, seeing that “Sir Eoger” sat in the carriage with hills and monuments, and study the announce- deny his identity; while the very fact of four- that tne aay was not lar distant_ when, on
of two such early friends and near and dear quently every day increases the contempt and gbop> got a bottle o£ bis P ientg and inscri tion but H r . Onslow gave teen influential gentlemen having subscribed account of the public spirit exhibited, the
relations. Unfortunately, however, there is a the execration in which the verdict of the jury golventj and preaented it to the Claimantj with the the Doctor the best answer—that Sir R. ought £lOO each for the Claimant on the very day of Claimant_ would be brought forward in court
will and a spirit on the one hand as well as on is held. If “Lynx” has any doubt about rem ark—“ Sir Eoger, give it what you haven’t had to have said he knew nothing about either. Lady Tichborne’s death was sufficient to show, ancl receive an honourable acquittal. (Loud
the other, and we fear that the hostile things this, let him attend any of the meetings being —a fair trial.” Such having been the proofs which decided if these persons were not all asses and fools, app ause.) a


THE TICHBORNE GAZETTE. [Tuesday Ey™, July SO, 1872.
conspiracy, and that on the part ot the aristocracy, from
whom better things might have been expected. The
opposition to the Claimant was grounded solely on two
things: ignorance and prejudice (cheers). He hadnot
a particle of doubt that the gentleman on his left baud
was Sir Roger Tichborne (loud applause). The vice-
chairman having expressed the opinion that the Claimant
had not had fair play, and declared that he was satisfied
that he was the veritable “ Sir Roger,” asked, “ If he be
mot Sir Roger, who is he?” (loud cheers.) The toast
was then drunk amid much acclamation, followed by
■musical honours. The Claimant then rose to respond,
•■and, after the applause with which he was greeted had
•somewhat subsided, he expressed his deep appreciation
the "' arm reception his Leeds friends had accorded
him. He had not coins to prove his identity ;he would
leave that to the process of law. He had come to ask
them as Englishmen to help him to secure that fair play
to which every Englishman was entitled (cheers). The
expenses of the late trial had been enormous—no less, in
fact, than 280 guineas per day—and he had come to this
country with but three guineas in his pocket. He
t ought an impostor would have hesitated before
attempting the task he had attempted with such small
moans (cheers). He had said he had not come to prove
is identity, but if he had, he did not think a better place
t lan that could be found, for he saw before him some
■w ho had been his con iradcs in the army. He would say,
that he entertained a different opinion of the British
solJier to th at expr .essed by the Attorney-General, who
had s.iid that a sol di e r could be bought for a pot of beer.
He thought that if the Attorney-General were right in
this opinion., the„n England was trusting to a reed for hex-
defence. lie 'concluded by saying that he should feel it
his hound duty to endeavour to answer any question ,
which ir dght Be put to him either this evening or to- 1
morrov r evening in the Town Hall. A gentleman who 1
endea vnured to make some- remarks was ruled out of '
orde r. Mr. Foster then proposed the healths of Mr. 1
On' slow, M.P., and Mr. Whalley, M.P., and these gentle- ]
en having responded, the proceedings shortly afterwards -
t' 3rminated. —Leeds Evening Press . *
EXCITED PROCEEDINGS.
The arrival of the Claimant in Leeds threw the
town into a state of great commotion. From noon until
midnight excited crowds congregated, first in the vicinity
of the Queen’s Hotel, and then in the neighbourhood of
the Town Hall. Indeed, from noon until the Claimant
and his friends left for the Town Hall, the hotel in ques-
tion was surrounded by large crowds anxious to catch a
glimpse of the famous individual temporarily staying
there. Amongst these were many who scout his claims
to the baronetage and estates of Tichborne; but the
great body of the eager multitude appeared to have no
very decided opinions upon the subject, but to think that
at all events fairer and further investigation is called for.
Several hundreds among the crowd appeared even to be
satisfied that the Claimant is in very truth Sir
Tichborne, and the enthusiasm of this section of the pub-
lic was overflowing. . ,
At half-past seven a dense crowd had gathered around
the Queen s Hotel, and the horses having been removed
from the coach standing at the door for the conveyance
of the Tichborne party to the Town Hall, and the
Claimant, Mr. Onslow, M.P., and Mr. Whalley, M.P.
having taken their seats in the coach, the vehicle was
dragged along Boar Lane, up Briggate, up Upperhead
Row, and down Park Lane to the Calverley Street en.
trance of the hall. All along the route an excited multi-
tude accompanied the novel procession, which was pre-
ceded by a brass hand. Cheer after cheer arose from
the surging masses of people, with occasionally a few,
but a very few, hisses. Around the Town Hall thou-
sands had gathered to witness the arrival of the party;
and so great was the crowd that it was with the utmost
difficulty a passage could be forced to the middle of
Calverley Street, and when that was effected, only by
great exertions did the party succeed in making their
way from the coach to the hall door. At length, how-
ever, they succeeded, and entered the corridor of the hall
panting, blowing, and perspiring profusely.
In the Victoria Hallahout;i,soo persons had assembled
and when, a few minutes after eight, “ Sir Roger, ’ Mr.
Onslow, M.P., Mr. Whalley, M.P., and the Leeds Tich-
horne Defence Committee came in to the hall, they were
accorded a most demonstrative welcome. Mr. J. R. Joy
occupied the chair, supported, in addition to the com-
mittee, by the following gentlemenCouncillor Blakey,
Mr. A. K. Dobson, Mr. E. A. Pilling, Mr. J. Greenwood,
Sergeant-Major James Marks, Sergeant-Major Timothy
Marks, Mr. J. T. Dodgson, Mr. William Morley, Mr. R,
Walker, Mr. A. Hombrook, Mr. John Ripley, Mr. Peter
Laycock, Mr. W. Wilkinson, Mr. J. K. Rowbotham.
The Chairman opened the proceedings in a speech
delivered with great vehemence of manner. He re-
marked that he felt very proud to see so many Yorkshire
ladies and gentlemen present, and he felt personally,
after seeing such enormous crowds through the streets’
that it spoke well for the success of Sir Roger Tichborne!
He fiercely denounced the articles which had appeared
in the Leeds Mercury and Yorkshire Post against “ Sir
Roger ” (loud groans for the Mercury and Post). The
conductors of the Mercury believed that its power was
so great that none were “ sufficiently strong enough ”
and daring enough to stand against it. They believed
that the Leeds people had all become “mercuralised”
through its effect and influence; but he would say that
they were not to be so blinded and led by the nose
(cheers). They believed that all Englishmen had a
power and a right to think for themselves spite of all
the threats of the officials of the Government, and spite
of the emissaries they had thought proper to throw
broadcast through the land, to stab in the dark like other
dark assassins. Mr. Joy went on further to condemn
the “ scurrilous remarks which had been introduced in
that infamous paper the Leeds Mercury ,” and charged
the “ upper ten ot the country ” with “arraying them-
selves as a mighty army against Sir Roger Tichborne
and his supporters ” without having read or considered
the facts of the case. He closed by declaring that all
the Leeds Tichborne Defence Committee wished was to
see fair play. They wished to join with the poet, who
said—
’Tis not the voice of vain applause
That we would court. A holier cause—
The cause of freedom, justice, truth—
Shall crown our age, or drain our youth.
(Loud cheering.)
Mr. E. Foster moved the following resolution:—
That this meeting views with disgust and indignation the con-
duct of the Attorney-General, and of a large section of the press
of the country, and especially of this town, in denouncing the
Claimant as an impostor, perjurer, forgerer, &c., without proof,
and in assuming his guilt before trial, as not only unjust but in-
decent, and contrary to the spirit of the British law, which
always assumes a man to be innocent before he is proved to be
guilty.
He also denounced the Mercury and Post in yet more
unmeasured terms than the chairman, declaring the
latter to be in its dotage, and referring to its editor as
“ an old Tory idiot,” while he said that the editor of the
Mercury , being unable to argue, had tried to sneer (hear,
hear, and cheers). A man must have brains to argue,
but any fool could sneer (applause). The editor of the
Mercury had complained that the Claimant was going
about exhibiting himself for money, but that editor
wrote unfair and scurrilous articles, not fit to be read,
for money (hear, hear, and loud cheers). He finished by
expressing his regret that the two papers had become the
feeble, contemptible, and degraded things they saw them
to be (vehement cheering).
venture to say he was not the man, or would question '
the fact that he was the man. Mr. Whalley went on MORE EXCITED PROCEEDINGS,
to assert that never had there been for generations in Similar scenes to those above recorded char
rto assert that never had there been for generations in Similar scenes to those above recorded characterized so > an( t be looked upon the failure as a disgrace to the
» the ancient hall of Tichborne a man more worthy of the holding of another meeting on behalf of the Claimant British bar. (Cheers.) After a severe trial, Sir Roger
l its occupation, in every relation of life — barring acci- on the following evening. came out of the witness-box a better man, and with a
3 dents and incidents respecting which none of them would Long before the time had arrived for the Claimant to stronger case than before. He (Mr. Onslow) again
i throw the first stone—than the Claimant: not one in leave the Queen’s Hotel, a large number of persons had declared his conviction that the Claimant was the real
the memory of living man or in tradition had been gathered in front of the principal entrance for the pur- man - He had been known to his family all his life, and
more heartily welcomed in Hampshire. He proceeded pose of witnessing his departure for the Town Hall. At knew his mother most intimately. She had asked him
to describe how the Claimant had descended from the seven the crowd was both large and boisterous, and but to stand by her son; he promised to do so, and that
higher circles of society to the “ refreshing cold ” of for the exertions of six policemen many pedestrians promise he would fulfil. (Cheers.) They appealed to
the lowest depths, and had come thence braced and would have found it almost impossible to pass in front public opinion and to fair play; and if justice could be
invigorated to assert a right as sacred for Englishmen as of the hotel, either to or from the stations. Vehicles they would gain for Sir Roger an honourable and
that which John Hampden, his (Mr. Whalley’s) ancestor, forced their way through occasionally, and then the triumphant acquittal. (Loud cheers.)
had asserted. But what had the Claimant done in those crushing towards the entrance of the hotel was extreme. After the Chairman had submitted the resolution
lowest depths? What had he done in Australia? Mr. The policemen, however, who performed their somewhat (which was unanimously carried), he stated that com-
Whalley had made it his business to inquire, and he was trying, and certainly warm, duty with considerable Points had been made by the working classes that the
able to declare that there never went forth from Eng- patience, formed an impassable barrier between the crowd prices were too high, and that they had not therefore
land to the wild parts of the Empire a man who did more and the porch of the hotel. Two or three youths in the bad an opportunity of hearing Sir Roger. The Defence
good, promoted more happiness, prevented more misery, front ranks were borne to the ground and trampled upon. Committee had therefore arranged for Sir Roger to appear
or carried into the darkest parts of the Empire the powers but sustained no injury of any moment. At half-past a t the Town Hall on two more evenings. For admission
of civilization in a more benevolent and beneficent system seven a coach and couple of greys were forced into posi- the reserved seats and orchestra, 6d. would be charged ;
of action, than the man before them.” In a still higher tion for the purpose of conveying the Claimant and his an( f the other parts of the hall would be thrown open at
flight of oratory, Mr. Whalley described the Claimant as friends to the place of meeting, and almost immediately a charge of 3d. (Loud cheering.)
having been a good angel among the people of the the party emerged from the hotel and struggled into A Mr. C. Johnson here ascended the platform, and
Australian wilds. The language which the Attorney- their places in the vehicle. Wc ought to say that mean- a §ked how, if the Claimant was the right man, it was
General had used during his twenty-six days’ speech at while the horses had been taken out, and a large number possible for him to have said that Stoneyhurst was in
the trial had degraded and sullied the English bar, and— of sturdy fellows were preparing to draw it through the Wales,
he was sorry to have to say it — had sullied the ermine of streets. A delay of a few minutes took place before a Claimant said he would be most willing to answer
the judge who tried the case. But all this abuse was the start could be effected, and it did not appear at one time question ; but he had yet to learn that he had said
necessity of the Attorney-General’s case. He had no an altogether unlikely thing that the coach and its tha t Stoneyhurst was in Wales.
case except to abuse the Claimant. The tattoo evidence, occupants might experience a “ spill.” Numbers from gentleman who had asked the question said it
according to his (Mr. Whalley’s) information, had been amongst the crowd, climbed to the top of the coach from bad not been answered, and retired amid hooting and
given up, and without the abuse the whole conspiracy— behind, whilst others took possession of the box from hissing.
a gigantic conspiracy, extending more widely and deeply tbe front; and then the band having got into position, -^- r * Clayton asked if the Claimant had made any
than their imaginations could yet realise— could not have a start was made, and although the vehicle was swarm- m ention of the sealed packet before Gosford made his
existed. The speaker next alluded to a remark made by ing with men in the way we have indicated, a good a fiid a vit ?
Sir Andrew Fairbairn to the effect that Lord Rivers had pace had been attained even before the top of Mill Hill Th e Claimant replied that he was not aware that
withdrawn a statement he had made favourable to the had been reached. Thousands accompanied the strange Gosford had yet made an affidavit.
Claimant. At the mention of Sir Andrew’s name, the procession, and hundreds more flocked up the various AD* Clayton said he believed from the evidence that
drunken man who had been previously expelled, but streets leading to Park Lane and the Town Hall. In the sealed packet was mentioned on the 29th July, and
who had returned, pricked up his ears and remarked the vicinity of the latter place a large multitude had that it was not till the 4th August that the Claimant
in stentorian tones—“ The best gentleman in Leeds is gathered, and a hearty cheer burst from the masses when made any mention of it.
Sir Andrew.” Loud cries of u Turn him out,” were the hand and the coach came in sight. As soon as the The Claimant, in reply, stated that, as the question
raised, and after a protracted struggle, during which he Tichborne party had left the coach, the crowd to a large bad been pressed upon him, he would give au explana-
was thrown violently on the floor, he was again re- extent dispersed, but hundreds remained for a consider- tion. He mentioned the sealed packet to Gosford five
moved. Mr. Whalley proceeded to offer a solemn warn- able time in the neighbourhood, discussing the Claimant’s years ago. It was in the Grosvenor Hotel that they
ing to Sir Andrew Fairbairn, and the class to which he claim, and the character of the reception afforded to him met; and afterwards Gosford acknowledged that it had
belongs, that they were making a great mistake in not by Leeds. been sealed at his house. He was induced bv his
joining the movement for securing a fair trial to the On entering the Victoria Hall, “ Sir Roger,” who was solicitor to give him an entry of the contents, on the
Claimant. They were trifling with “ this great question accompanied by Mr. Onslow, M.P., the members of the understanding that it should be considered confidential,
of the Tichborne Claimant,” respecting which there was Defence Committee, and other gentlemen, was greeted and kept in his safe. To his surprise the contents were
a strong feeling amongst the working classes—a “God- with vociferous cheers. Mr. J. R. Joy again occupied subsequently divulged to the counsel in the case, and
inspired movement.” Mr. Whalley, whose remarks the chair, and opened the proceedings by asking for fair when, in the witness-box, he was asked to reveal the
toward the conclusion were repeatedly interrupted by play for the Claimant. contents, he appealed to the judge, who ruled that he
cries of “Time,” closed by adverting to his Parliamentary Mr. W. Wilkinson (one of the Defence Committee) must answer the question, and his counsel threatened to
effort on behalf of the Claimant, and declared that the nioyed the following resolution: “ That this meeting, throw up their briefs if he did not do so. Choosing
language of Mr Lowe, when applied to for the costs of of betWoen P 3nal seivitude with sta " at: °“ hi* children
conducting the defence, had compelled Mr. Onslow and w jq use every lawful endeavour to enable him to recover 011 Hie one hand, and telling the truth on the other, he
himself to join in the appeal that was now being made possession of his estates.” (Cheers.) The speaker, took the latter alternative and divulged the secret. He
to the country. alluding to the abuse which had been showered upon the did it with very great reluctance, and would not have
, “in °TT’ M - P -’ l ddreSSed , the meeUng at great SSTtto 1 be the real Sri Roglr had donc 80 if he llad not beea 80 f™ ll / (Cheers.)
length, devoting his remarks entirely to the circumstances given their time and services with the view of aiding his Wlth thls explanation Mr. Clayton expressed himself
of the trial and the facts of the case. He was very cause. (Renewed cheers.) perfectly satisfied, and a vote of thanks to the Chairman
emphatic in his condemnation of the jury for having ac-
cepted the testimony of half-a-dozen witnesses with
handles to their names in preference to that of the eighty-
six witnesses for the plaintiff. If they could have got
two or three lords, a couple of dukes, and half-a-dozen
bishops to speak for them, they would have carried the
day. The Attorney-General, he remarked, took a fee of
£6,000 out of the Tichborne estate, and then attempted
to make his hearers believe that he -was shedding tears.
Counsel, after they had received £6,000, did not shed
tears. (Laughter.) Mr. Onslow commented on the facts
of the case, citing various circumstances in which evi-
dence was given during the trial, and others that had
since been discovered, as proofs that the Claimant must
he Sir Roger Tichborne. He referred to various marks
about his body, the difference between his legs, his recog-
nition by his mother, whom he described as having been
of a most suspicious turn of mind; his recognition by his
, , , i £ , , ■ , 00. “ ° - lougineuis lo me audience, me lower end ot the Hall
solicitor, and by a large number of persons who had been cheering.) . was more crowded than any other. The balconies were
in constant intercourse with him before he left this The Claimant, who rose amid rounds of cheering, then also well filled, but at the end of the balcony there were
country. He also showed from the bad grammar of the came forward and addressed the meeting. It was, he ew . P® rsons - I n the front seats there were a number of
letters of “ Sir Roger” before he left Europe that he had said, exceedingly gratifying to him to see such a large la<bes > wbo seemed idolatrously fond of the Claimant,
... , , „ , ~ . ”, f , .... 6 and who made many strong remarks m his favour, whilst
never either learnt French or English properly. He also and intelligent meeting; and more gratifying still, to be others were continually crying “ Poor thing!” There
stated that he himself had once gone upon the Continent so enthusiastically received by such a large body of his were a good many of the better class of persons present,
for 17 years, and when he came hack scarcely any one countrymen. He then entered into an explanation of wb ? seemed to listen intently to the statements of the
knew him. In reference to the Claimant's evidence re- his case. He had been in England for six years during Claimant. The stout gentleman is not an effective
. ~ T. £,-££,.£, , . ~ . , . , , g Speaker, though he occasionally makes good points and
garding his cousin, Mrs. Ratcliffe, Mr. Onslow said the which time he had been daily watched by detectives, who expresses himself with much sarcasm at times. Certainly
Claimant had refused to reveal the contents of the sealed had intercepted his correspondence, and injured him in his English is very defective, with a cockney twang,
packet till his counsel threatened to throw up the cause, the estimation of the public. They had, in fact, opened When replying to some strictures passed on him by the
and then, having to choose between penal servitude with and read his correspondence, and in some instances
starvation for ms children on the one hand, and telling had stolen it. (“Shame!”) Even his servant had been forehead and rolled down his cheeks. Before he had
the truth on the other, he took the latter alternative, bribed b y one of the vagabonds, who had given 10s. for got three parts through his address many of the audience
He denied that “Sir Roger” had had anything to do the old blotting-paper he used. They had done this so began to tire, and some left the room. The chairman’s
with the pocket-book containing the famous remark that that they could get his signature. If he were an im- A" Leg^
“some people had brains and no money, and others postor, it was quite time they found him out. But that The platform was occupied by members of the coin-
money and no brains,” &c. they could not do, as his case was a genuine one. m ittec, who, on entering the room with the Claimant,
The Claimant, whom the audience by this time (Cheers.) He required no detectives to prove his case; 4 C^ lld lv. cbe ?s A in °rion was moved and seconded
(10.30) had become impatient to hear, was next called all he wanted were such men as Mr. Barry, with whom Thp • i
.a, ~, , , , , , ~ „ wiiu «uum ine Chairman, in the course of his opening remarks,
upon to speak, which he did with commendable brevity, he had served. Mr. Barry was one who could not be apologised for the absence of Mr. Whalley, M.F., saying
considering the lateness of the hour. He said that bought with a pot of beer; he held a good conduct gentleman had sent word how much he re-
therewere two charges of perjury and one of forgery medal, and had in addition a watch which had been pref 5p ted r ? e c ? uld not attend. Mr. Guildford Onslow,
against him, and he would have to meet them. If he sented to him by his colonel. (Loud cheers.) Further, griim promising toTeffl Notting7m b7Vo“Lck this
uttered any untruth on these boards it would be recorded Mr. Barry was a townsman of theirs, and, therefore, they morning. Mr. Onslow would therefore address the
and brought against him; and, therefore, whatever he had every opportunity of knowing his conduct. After mee^n S 011 Saturday night. A few words would suffice
said they might rely upon as being the fact. He dis- the disgraceful stigma cast upon the British soldier hr J' eBpectln 6 bl! ? B<d L a 1 ® be S| ed to sa 7 that while he
, . , . . .. £ , - ~ ... ~ J nad not sought the honour of occupying the chair, he
claimed any intention of abusing the Attorney-General the Attorney-General (who had dared to say that they yielded to no one in his anxious desire to assist a man
or the judge who tried his case. Of course, they would could he bought for a pot of beer), he (the Claimant) was struggling to gain his rights. He had no interest other
be aware that the Attorney-General’s character and repu- surprised that the whole of them did not throw down their tbau tbat a fellow-feeling and a wish to follow the
tation were at stake. That gentleman had thought arms. (Hear, hear.) But they were too loyal to do that ■ f^ ] 7v lle f v, dom f un J( ootbers ( as h ® would have ■ others
, . • , ~ , , , ? ' , 1 ' do to him (cheers). He asked for the Claimant what
properto call him several names which he was not going theyloved their Queen and country too well to do anything was an Englishman’s right, namely, a fair field and no
to disgust the audience by repeating. If the Attorney- of thatsort. (Loud cheers.) A6anEnglishman,heaskedthe favour, and he asked to “ nothing extenuate, or set down
General could not ; prove what he said, he would be British public to assist him from being crushed by the au Sht * n mal ice.” He read the evidence of the Claim-
“ done ”in the estimation'of the British public. Further, talent, wealth, and might that wmuld be brought to bear 'wr 61 *7 ° f 7 , eigbty wltuo * ses wbo " r . ere
~ , £ ~ „ , ’ . , , , , . examined at the trial, and he came to the conclusion
the reputation of the Government was at stake in this against him. They might depend upon it that no stone there was sufficient to show that the Claimant would
prosecution. He did not wish to introduce politics into would be left unturned; nay, more, all the powers on Lave won his trial if he had had a complete hearing,
this matter, but if there was a general election more this earth would be brought down to crush him, if possi- 7 dbe ' se S™ ll i n S °f the case the Attorney-General said
would be heard of the case yet. The Attorney-General He. The Claimant then proceeded to speak of the trial,
was said to have boasted that he could prove him (the which, as they knew, lasted for 103 days. Although he duties with au ill-balanced mind. Having taken that
Claimant) to be Arthur Orton in twenty minutes. If so, had been under examination for 23 days, they had not step, it was very much to be lamented he had not
what were they to think of his having allowed the case broken him down. (Cheers.)' He next referred to the 7) courage to retrace it (hear, hear). The Claimant
to go on for 103 days, at an expense to him alone of evidence given by his 87 witnesses, all of whom were
280 guineas a day ? He had fourteen or fifteen marks persons of the highest respectability, and some of them there was a strong conspiracy against him, and it
d Mr. George Higgins seconded the resolution. they blamed him, of course he could not help it. He was
!e Sergeant-Major Marks, in supporting the motion, said not going to follow the example of the Attorney-General
e he believed the Claimant was no impostor, but the real ; n rnnkiuo- i ~
e Sir Roger. He served in the regiment in which Sir Roger , f“ § " S f ° f hal ? h or re P eatmg the words
was; he saw him daily, and had to initiate him into his " luc “ nema de use of. They were well known to them,
!r duties. As far as the names of the men and the number and h® '' v ' as heartily sorry himself that a gentleman of
a of their horses were concerned, there was no man better such great eminence as the Attorney-General should
n qualified than himself to say whether the Claimant was kv.mfarfDrmt i.i .. ...
Ll Sir Roger or not, and he had no hesitation whatever in ®° , for g ot hllnsalf aa to become a partizan in the
declaring that ho was. (Cheers.) There were plenty of caBe ’ and a 0 make use of the language that he did.
11 officers who pretended that they did not recognise the (Cheers.) Serjeant-Major Marks alluded just nowin his
n Claimant, but a good many had made up their minds not speech to a person who had come down here
t to know him. He was much surprised at the remarks for the purpose of bribing him, and it would be his nlaee
n made by one of tne learned gentlemen, for they were to , f ° ’ »uuw ue ms place
the effect that a soldier’s evidence could be swept away now t 0 some facts before them. There was a man
e by a pot of beer. He should be alarmed for England’s sen *- ou t t° Australia to get up evidence. This man was
I glory when sixpence would buy a British soldier It formerly a lawyer in Scotland, and he was sent to gather
would be a poor look-out for England, and he hoped the pvhloncp nn j u , , r , . 6
day would never come. (Cheers.) In November, 1870, .... n. He heard from his witnesses
a man came down from London to bribe witness, hut he a ' 10 fathered their evidence, but he never supplied him
refused to listen to the insinuations, and said he would with it. With regard to the question of bribery one of
e walk to London barefooted rather than not give evidence the witnesses had mentioned that £lO was bimluH
e on behalf of that injured, hut he hoped not crushed, man. r;™ , ~ io
(Cheers.) 1 ’ him, and directly afterwards the person w-ho gave it said,
6 Sergeant Marks, brother of the last speaker, said he d was old J * n when I gave you that money.” The
r recollected Sir Roger coining to the regiment, and he witness replied, “ I was only in fun, but I mean to keen
i did not forget to stand a good measure of beer to all it- von shall w/u-Viotss "
; the men. He was confident the Claimant was the I’JZ T -T ! the m °ney returned, but it
j. same man. (Cheers.) He remembered on one occasion e ore a J ud S e an( i jury in court.” (Cheers.)
some of the young officers thought they would have a -“ be Attorney-General and several others had thought
joke, and they therefore brought a donkey and put it proper to say he was Arthur Orton, but there was one
1 into Tichhorne’s bed. The animal’s legs were secured, maTl w bn hmwi r\ t
3 and he was left comfortably covered up! In the meam , ° knew both Arthur Orton and himself in Aus-
( time Tichborne came home, and when he opened the door ra la - Uiton shot him through the arm, and he lent
there was the donkey staring him in the face. He Orton £lO towards giving the man sufficient money not
repeated his conviction that the Claimant was the same to prosecute him on the occasion. The man th ■ f
r man, and said he considered the Claimant was a much wm , ~ , ’ neretore >
I njured person, and had not been fairly dealt with. " a 8 important witness for him, and yet they tried to
(Cheers.) bnbe hlm (“ Shame ”). The man Rouse, w-ho kept the
The Chairman then introduced the Claimant to the Swan at Alresford, w-as a man wdiom he trusted more,
“ meeting, and he w r as received with loud and long-con- probably, than he would his own brother He allowed
tinned cheering. When the applause had, after some him for eighteen months to open all his letters and read
minutes, subsided, , , mutcis ana reaa
The Claimant said ho must be allowed in the first w hole WaS be doin S tbe
i place to return his sincere thanks to them for their tbp fb ’ -I* 3 6n .! Ug ° JO 118 fliend > and supply-
attendance that night, and for the support they were be had of imnnrt 6 1 0 e ' ol y commu nication
: giving him by being there. As they weU knew, he had !™Z “ t } Lord Belle* when
two charges of perjury and one of forgery to meet, and tato B oed b ” d ““’ ° nly P«*«* P»«nt when he
- therefore anything he said on those boards that evening, old and k - , f ®. eagei ; f 1 r ’ Seager was a ver J
should it be an untruth, would be reported and brought « ld V P** “ Eng ’
against him at the trial. They might depend upon it, P lC ston in Lane sb it ! *° IIOUSe at
whatever statements he had to make, they were facts, jq r Sea'eer’s srnost 't* 3 ' lI! n' Cn v?'™ tb ° le and was
and nothing but facts. (Cheers.) He was very sorry L to Te hi^Tld^ Lord Bcdlew did not know he had
to say in the first place it would be his painful duty j louse tt k A ,/ ,1° ° en sta J m S m his
again to allude to the press. He did not think the whe “
usual course that the press of England took was to abuse Woll iq i mvp I°°! . A ' as 1 not P r °bable Mr. Seager
and villify an unfortunate creature who had three charges f cheers Iwi \ ° aV ? , seen tloSe ta too marks?
to meet in a criminal court. He did not wish to follow it lbL ! I T™
an example by abusing the press—far from it; but thumb Th^u' °"° T” , t ‘, at - 110 bad a dcforme(i
there was a leading article in the Daily Guardian of sir ' I * r “ Shed to th<! Da S u ® r reotype of
the 18th instant Chich he really was hound to take iTndt 7 ni 7"’ h “’would
notice of. He should not trouble them very long, but Wortle 1M T CI ; C 01e ru )oc ’’“L Colonel Stuart
he would read certain lines from it. It safd, “What • Mr ’ T f or SWOTe tbat bad b ®®n rubbed
can be the attraction attaching to the person and achieve- d ™ •,! P lcce 0 S as s paper. What would they have
ments of the Claimant ? That he is a • ton of a man ' a 7"77‘ f be had “ tted Buch aa a ®t ? The
. i , . , , 'pi! c ■ t i 3 ud S e saicl the was never out of the possession nf
• huge monster of flesh,’a veritable Sir John Falstaff? *. i ai ■ ! ~ . possession oi
i u . n * die Court, but Ins lordship was wrong. It never ono-hf
People would hardly pay half-a-crown to see such a , ~. 1 h ueterougnt
, , , . , to have been out of the possession of the court but in
creature when bigger men, and women too, can be seen .1 , m-
,7 a 4 f • I ~ ’ ttead of that > lfc never was in its possession» teheed
and handled at-any fan fora pennv. (Hisses') He T 4 . ... ~ , 1 • t cne ers.j
, , . ‘ . K •- ,\ ! ; • tle K was not until after they had examined him that
had no occasion to comment on those few lines, for thev +l.„ -a n • , , ilun tnat
, , , ... ’ 7 th «y said anything about his not beine tatoned
spoke for themselves. 1 hey certainly, like the Attorney- on. ~ , <= latooea.
A „ . ... ~ . t ' Jll ' rolne y The Attorney-General boasted to the Premier that in 90
Generals speech, recoiled upon the writer. (Cheers'! , -u ~ ~ , „ enne. tnat in 20
' v minutes he could prove him ft-hp iw* a 47,
The next part of the article that he should take notice Orton •if h* pmild I a 7 oto be Arthur
, 4i f n • • Ui ton; it he could have done so he was no better than
of was the following The physical attributes of the rnhhpr +n Iltt ~ , tuer tnan a
so-called Sir Roger Tichborne are very remarkable, and R c f crr i n o. to Mr s wp S ° , ° ng * ( A PP lause o
then he is the leading figure of a great historical trial; 7 a 7 d 7 7“°"’ *7’ he COuld
so people flock to see him, and finding themselves part J' o bS ! ' ° W ar ™ S “ order to
, v. , ’ b J discover whether they were tattooed. But his (the Claim-
of a mob, cneer and applaud him from force of habit. A ns (me uiaun-
— , . ~ • , , ~ , ants) mother was then alive, and he could not tell such
That any who think for themselves can espouse the . i... n v i • . bucn
, , . , „ ‘ a base falsehood m her presence. rAnnlanse 7 How-
cause of such a man we cannot believe. Be he who he ~i„„ ~ . „ \ PP la Jse o -How
~ , - , ... • . also had Mr. beymour acted in allowing him to borrow
may, let his wrongs and sufferings be ever so great, he t , , , . b ow
- ~ , , . ~ h ’ thousands of pounds to carry on his case If he rtba
is unworthy of tne least sympathy and esteem. (Hisses.l „„„„i • . , ~r „ X 1 ne ftb o
J j f . speaker) was an impostor, he (Mr S“v7nonrlm,.=i-
The creature who could deliberately walk into a witness- f „„„ ■ ’ y ) nnst be ten
. , , , 1 times worse tor encouraging him. [Cheers! K i;.
box and swear away the honour of a lady he said he had _i,,. his
, , , ~ , power to place 700 witnesses in the box, and whilst on
betrayed, the wife ot a trusting husband, the mother of ~ , on
tins subject he referred to the clause which was introduced
a loving family, is nt only for pnolic execration. Truth „ b;l , ~ , . . . , n™aucea
. f , , ~ „ in a bill late one night last session with regard to the
itself could not extenuate an act so dastardly, an offenceso u rn , ~ icg.ua me
. , . . ... ~ r ai , pi eduction of witnesses. The old routine was that he-
infamous against all the obligations of confidence and man- c nr „ a „„ ~ , ... . , mDe
~ „, e, „ ... ? . ~ „ , fore a man coma be committed he must be taken before
liness. (“Shame audhissmg.) Thiswouldcall on him . nn • , , ~, uelole
, a magistrate, on which occasion he had the power to
to bring up that unfortunate case again, and it now be- ■* , ~ , , p w
~ . , ... B . bring as many witnesses as he liked, and thsv were bmiurl
hoved him to clear away the imputations that had long y ere bound
, , . , , J . .. , „, 8 over to appear at the expense of the Government. This
been on his character in regard to that case. Before 8
. , , i ~ , . clause vas mtrouucsd., however, for giving the nower tn
doing so he might remark that he did not think either „ bld , p „„ “ g P t 0
A, ...» . , , , , . , a Jbog®. ami no doubt it was done on his account
his cousin (Mrs. Ratcliffe) or her husband would thank n c , . , . , . account.
~ , , • ( °kame. ) Speaking on his being sent to Newgate
the press ror having referred to it again in public. ,i h g e >
1 „ , i , .... and of the £7l which ho had in his possession, he said he
(Cheers.) He had no doubt it was in the minds of many F e n®
, . , ~, , ~, .. , A , 3 knew he had-never committed a “misdemeanour” He
ot them who had read the report of the trial that in 1867 , ~, . , , , , , cmeauour. ne
. T ... j- kept the money in his pocket, but he was hardly within
he .was examined at the Law Institution. After his v. „ , , , ’ . ” wllulu
-. .. ~ n , , . , Newgate when an order came for seizing that money and
examination was over, Mr. Gosford was examined, and ,r„ a . - , . , auu
, ... . ~ ~ „ ’. he womd have been left on prison food had not a noble
from-what transpired at that examination Mr. Ssnoant cj,.„„ f , , ~ , , 16
Q „ .. , L ti -a “ 7 lad J comc forward and paid for what he had to eat and
Ballautine and Mr. Hannen, now a indge, sent word to i• i • aa „ . , u
.. i, ... ~ ’,., , J ,.° ’ ' UICI 10 drink in those cells. Was it right to take and send him
him, through his attorney, that if he did not conimum- ~ . , . luu
’ . t , . ... ~ ± tliere ? Tll ey all came down upon him and left him
cate with them m writing the contents of that packet »• , „ rr, ,
” nothmk. The very house in which he lived, and .the
they w-ould tnrow his case up, and have nothing more to a i ai , . ’
A -ii •* m. ,a- ~ b J , sheets m "Inch he lay, belonged to some one else. He
do with it. The attorney assured him, on the word of a ~, ,
, A , . ... , as pleased to meet the charges made against him how-
gentlemau and on his reputation as an attorney, that no , , , , . ° ■
~ • , -i-i A 4 , ~,t J , ev er ; and ho had no more fear of meeting those charges
living eye snonld see the contents of that document i u 1 c ■ , . , . 13 cnarges
4-1- U Q • i n -i-i 4 7it tt than he had of going home to bed that night. (Cheers'!
excepting himself, Serjeant Ballantyne, and Mr. Hannen. T j . , mi
rp. r . , , .. , He would tell them for why. “ The hire of the British
The request was persisted in, and having his wife and 1V , , „ ~ ~ A . -ornisn
~n , * 1 • ’ * . public had rose,” said the Claimant. “It will not do for
children brought before his eyes by the attorney, he gave -i , , ... ~ ,_ uu lur
.. . . V 8 them to tamper with the public. The British public
him nn account in writing of wnnt happened. After- v „ „ , , , . “ ”
, , . .... . _ have rose all over England, and there never would be a
wards, that very evening, sitting in his parlour at Croy- ~ , , ~ . , T DB a
, , . , . , , • ... , . . case agitated as this will be. lam satisfied however
don, a friend came in to smoke a cigar with him, and ... . , ’ However,
~ T ., , , , , , . . that we can win, and win easy.” (Cheers I He then
said, “It s a queer document you left about your cousin , , 1
- , „ commented on the Attorney-General’s, insults to private
Rate. “ What document, he asked, “are you alluding T , ?
~rp, „ , £ ’ ... -rr , , soldiers. In conclusion, he said he had been invited here
to . Th- one yon left with Holmes, the attorney, to- by a committee representing the people of Nottingham
day,” his friend replied. “ You have not seeuit,” ha said and he must look to the people of Nottingham to defend’
“have you?” “ Yes,” answered his friend, “he showed nim from such scurrilous attacks in the press as that to
it to me and to several others.” A great deal had been wb ’c b hj bad a Lsady refeued. (Loud cheers.)
° , ~ , ihe Chairman said they would now give the Claimant
said about his changing his attorneys, but he supposed credit for being au honest man and the rightful heir,
none of them would wonder that Mr. Holmes and him The resolution having been adopted, the proceedings
had never been friends since. (Hear, hear.) He never tenmnuted.
had his confidence more from that day to this, and never
would have it again. (Cheers.) When he was in the
would have it again. (Cheers.) When he was in the Arthur Orion.— lt was stated in several of
witness-box, examined by Sir John Coleridge, Sir John the London papers received by the last mail
tried the whole of the day to get him to answer that that the Melbourne police have in their posses-
questiou. He baffled him the whole day long, very sion a warrant for the apprehension of Arthur
nearly at the cost of his life; and on the Saturday Orton on the charge of “ murder committed
following, there being no sitting of the court on that in the hush near Melbourne.” The police
day, he went to a consultation at Mr. Serjeant Ballan- here, however, know nothing of the matter
tine’s rooms. When ho went in, Mr. Ballautine ad- ad no such warrant has ever come into their
dressed him with these words: “Mr. Giffard, junior hands. — Melbourne YLrgus, May 21.
counsel, and myself have come to the conclusion that —— ...
«*—■ f., a. (tow
nted for the Proprietor by A. Osborne,
29, Farringdou-street, E.C.
General, and X have to tell yon, on behalf of Mr. Giffard
THE CLAIMANT IN LEEDS.
the“ 'reasons T 7 ProVed hIS The judgG wh ° h ° ldmg high rank in the The three letters read reached its in that miserable tattoo business and the other counsel, that if you do not answer that
one was, that’he believed the cause wAs just: and the hea i rd hls case declared some ten or twelve da 7 s after the the Attorney-General on the last day of the trial (cheers) There was a powerful combination against ques tion on Monday morning we will get up and leave
other was, that he was a fellow-countryman, and almost trial had commenced, at a Lord Mayor’s banquet, that he were forgeries ; the judge had denounced them as such, “ d ;^ ( thri'the Tnheri We mav V mws ’’ The the court, and there will he an end of the case.” He (the
thouiw h o wa n s Sl hts n dut 6 v a v’ and therefore Wa 4 the gl ' eateSt lmpoStor that had evereome and 30 had the jury; and the Attorney-General had ad- Attorney-General, not content with doing all he Jild speaker) said, “Very well. You may get up and leave
y s iy im. to England. How could he expect to get justice from nutted that he knew two of them to be fictitious, but he to defeat the Claimant, called him foul names calculated the court; but if you want me to go into the box and
Mr. Whai/let, M.P., next addressed the meeting, and such a judge? (Hear, hear, and cheers.) Then, Lord did not think the third was. What would they have to do him great injury, forgetting that good name in defile the fair name of my cousin who is the mother of
declared that the Mercury was endangering the cause of Chief-Justice Cockhum, who had said four years before done with him if he had produced any forged documents ? woman was the immediate jewel of the soul. If n ; ne children I won’t do it 1 will sooner lose my
the Bible by its sickening, maudlin, miserable pretence that he was a rank impostor, was frequently seen on the He had no occasion to resort to such unfair means, as he ma n’s he would case.” (Loud cheers.) Seeing his determination, what
ot morality, combined with its treatment of the Tichborne bench talking to Chief-Justice Bovill—no doubt to his had plenty of genuine evidence. (Cheers.) He had no epithets which he so ruthlessly hurled at the Claimant’s did this crafty counsel do ? He said, “ Will you write
question. The whole fabric of morality and Christianity, (Claimant’s) detriment. When he had said to the latter, hesitation in saying that the jury had stopped the case head. He that, sowed to the wind reaped to the whirl- ao . a ; n j. be purport of the document "and seal it u and
he repeated, was endangered by Mr. Baines and the “My Lord, it seems to me the other side don’t require because they were tired out, and because he (the Claimant) g ive »to me, so that when °the'" Attorney-General
Mrroary in their attempts to divert the mind of Leeds counsel while they have got you,” he had hoped to be had no more money. His case had thus been lost. But exalted in pos;tion hls opponents might be (cheeks). asks the question you will say, there is my answer? ”
trora this simple question—ought the Claimant to have sent to prison at once, in order that his case might he he was full of hope yet, and believed that justice would Mr. Trios. Legge then proposed the following resolu- He (the speaker) said, “ Who will see that ?” And the
a fair trial or not ? (Hero a drunken man standing near taken up by the public. He concluded by asking how be done him by Lord Penzance, in whose court he in- tion-—“ This meeting is of opinion that in the recent pro- answer was “The At'to G \' d „
the platform shouted out resolutely, “We’ll ha’ no he could possibly defend himself against the persecution tended to appeal next November. (Cheers.) ceedings in the Court of Common Pleas the Claimant has n. v. , . y . ’T ° C | ’ au P r^‘
» arm v , , ~ ~ . + i -, . , n i J . , , not been accorded a fair measure of justice, and it hereby He said ho thought he was right for the sake of his own
Me, cur,, and was after a sharp struggle, ejected from levelled at him, unless assisted by his countrymen. Mr. Onslow, M.P., who was warmly received, spoke resolves to do all in its power to secure for him in any family to do that much, but he would not do it if it was
tne room.) Mr. Mhalley proceeded to avow his deter- (Cheers.) next. After alluding to the large audience, and to the future proceedings an opportunity of establishing his tohe made public. This was how the question was got out
urination to ask his good friend Mr. Baines in the House Sergeant-Major Marks, evidently a shrewd, straight- splendid reception given to the Claimant, he said he felt claims.” (Cheers.) He (Mr. Legge) was quite sure 0 £ y When he referred b • + u
of Commons—which could not bo better occupied than in f° rwa fd, and honest man, next described his first meet- sure that he was the real Sir Roger. (Cheers.) He had Ibere wcreplcnty Britishhearts who would surround a . e paper e e " 1
listening tLo , , , , , , ~ . mg with the Claimant. He knew him in a moment to , ... , , ... A, . ~ , . man aud demand that he should have a fair heanng. on one side and said, Answer me the question. He
listening to the reply-how he dared to use the great be Sir Koger Tichborne) who was forthree ye ars attached been mtllnatel L acquainted with him for the last six The Claimant had been lodged in Newgate, and he ven- appealed to the judge in that moment to aid and assist
power given to him to pervert that simple question. He to the same corps of the Carabineers as himself, and with years, and was willing to take the responsibility upon tured to say no greater act of injustice ever was perpe- him. (“No, no.”) He said “ You are bound to answer
was able to declare, on the most positive evidence, that whom, during the three years, he had close intercourse his shoulders by declaring that he was the man Bv traded upon a human being. (Cheers.) It had its effect tb ,
any man ever received or that could be conceived of, for an hour or two every day. the upper classes they had been abandoned, but they m causing people to say the Claimant hadnot had justice “ e T* t] 777 ’ 7 7
a.i tio 01 • t ~ , , . ~ , ’ The resolution was subsequently adopted, and the ■’ done to him, and it induced them to use their endeavours on v ttnug he could do was to do what he did. He said
that the Claimant was the man he claimed to be. He proceedings terminated about half-past eleven. Crowds had galned tbe and s «PP° rt of the middle and to secure fair play in the future. The mother’s evidence to the Attorney-General, “ Then it must rest on your
would further say that in the-House of Commons, where still surrounded the Town Hall and the Queen’s Hotel, working classes, and this was all they wanted. If the was particularly conclusive as to the Claimant’s identity, head, and not on mine ” He could sur th th
he had brought the matter forward, he believed there and not until after midnight did they clear away from Claimant was the impostor his opponents tried to make and now in the silent tomb she appealed to every British ’* llo ( , assure em
was now scarcely to be found the man who would the latter place. out, why did they not prove it ? Surely, with the best they blamed him. 777 ......
This (Monday) afternoon tho Claimant was en-
tertained by the Leeds Defence Committee to a ban-
•quet at the Queen’s Hotel. About sixty or seventy
persons sat down to an excellent and admirably-served
.repast. Mr. J. R. Joy occupied the chair, and Mr. F. A.
Rilling the vice-chair. After the toast of “ The Queen ”
; iiad been heartily honoured, the chairman proposed
•“ Health and Success to Sir Roger Tichborne ” (vehement
and prolonged apphuse). He (the chairman) stoutly
contended that the Claimant was the victim of a foul
