

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HOME AFFAIRS
MATERNAL AND CHILD WELFARE
QUEENSLAND
THE EXPECTANT MOTHER
A CUIDE DURING PREGNANCY
Issued for general information
at the Maternal and Child
Welfare Centres by Direction of
Hon. A. JONES, M.L.A., Minister
for Health and Home Affairs,
Queensland.


Sisters, Mothers and Babies in the Sun.
St. Paul's Terrace, Brisbane.


DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HOME. AFFAIRS
MATERNAL AND CHILD WELFARE
QUEENSLAND
THE EXPECTANT MOTHER
©yi)©i ©yigw© i?®ii©imm€Y
March, J 948.
Issued for general information
at the Maternal and Child
Welfare Centres by Direction of
Hon. A. JONES, M.L.A., Minister
for Health and Home Affairs,
Queensland.


Foreword
i his book has been prepared for expectant mothers by officers of
the Department of Health and Home Affairs, Queensland.
Originally these particulars were included in ‘The Queensland
Mothers' Book,” but in bringing that volume up to date, the newly added
information was so bulky that permission was requested to separate
this section from the section dealing with the care of the mother and
child.
I am glad to provide this new facility and it is my earnest hope that
every expectant mother will find the book a useful encyclopaedia for
reference on all questions that might otherwise worry her.
It is the aim of the Government to provide for the mothers of
Queensland the most up-to-date maternity hospitals and maternity
service available anywhere. To a large extent this has been already done,
and I trust that this book will be one step further towards that ideal.


Preface
By A. FRYBERG, M.B., B.S., D.P.H., D.T.M., Director-General
of Health and Medical Services.
This book is written for the expectant mother. In these days when
the birth rate is falling all over the civilised world, it is very necessary
that for her own sake as well as for the life of the child, every expectant
mother should receive the very best education and care.
In this little volume she will find the answer to almost, every
problem that arises—there is an answer given, at any rate, to every
problem that has come to the attention of the officers of this Department.
If there are any things about which she is in doubt, the expectant
mother will naturally get in touch with her own medical practitioner,
but if he is not available she will find the ante-natal departments of the
hospitals, and their officers, and also the Maternal and Child Welfare
Centres always at her disposal, and very ready and willing to provide
her with the benefit of the accumulated knowledge collected over many
years by the Maternal and Child Welfare Service.
Any mother who is out of touch with these facilities or who desires
further information or special advice is at liberty to write for it to —
The Director,
Maternal and Child Welfare,
St. Paul’s Terrace,
Brisbane.
GIVE THE BOOK A FAIR CHANCE. SIT DOWN AND BEAD IT
NOW, THEN PUT IT AWAY CAREFULLY WHERE YOU CAN
FIND IT WHEN YOU WANT IT.


Contents
Pass.
Ante-Natal Case 1-18
The Expectant Mother, Health Motherhood. The
Expectant Father. Signs of Pregnancy. The Probable
Date of the Confinement. Signs that Labour has begun.
Hygiene of Pregnancy. Health and Happiness. Fresh
Air. Exercise. Special Exercises during Pregnancy.
Best and Sleep. Care of the Teeth. Bathing. Care
of the Breasts. Clothing. Directions for Making a
Maternity Belt. Diet. Menus for One Day. Care of
the Bowels. Care of the Kidneys. Some Complications
of Pregnancy. Morning Sickness. Varicose Veins and
Files. Cramps. Vaginal Discharges. Miscarriage.
Headache. Danger Signs. Preparation for Confinement
at Home. The Confinement.
Post-Natal Case 18-87
Introduction. Immediate Care of the Baby. Care of
the Mother. Diet. Exercises. Examination and
Supervision. Care of the Baby during the First Month.
Feeding Habite. Clothing. Bathing, Exercise.
Warmth. Prevention of Infection. Mothering. Best
and Sleep. The Father 'e Duty.
Appendix 88-33
Baby Clothing. Important Points to Remember. Baby'e
Outfit. Directions for Baby Patterns. The Binder.
Napkins. Baby ’a Vest. Infant’s Knitted Vest. Petti-
coat, Dress or Nightgown. Dress (alternative).
Jacket. Bonnets. The Shawl.
Notes 34-30
Index 37-10


THE EXPECTANT MOTHER.
Ante-Natal Care.
Healthy Motherhood.
To be the strong, healthy, happy mother of a strong, healthy, happy
child should be the ambition of every woman. There are many such
women living to-day, but there would be many more if .every expectant
mother realised the importance of keeping herself fit. In order to do
this she needs to exercise a little thought and be prepared to take a little
trouble to learn how to care for her own health, and by so doing, the
health of her developing infant.
The care given to the expectant mother is known as ante-natal
care. The want of ante-natal care may lead to a mother being seriously
ill and possibly an invalid after her confinement, just when health and
strength are most needed for the sake of herself and her family. Most
women are never healthier or happier than during pregnancy. For
some it is a time of discomfort, which may be much relieved by ante-
natal care. Even those in apparently good health may develop kidney
disease, which is one of the greatest dangers of maternity and one
that should be carefully looked for and treated in the interests of
mother and child. The expectant mother’s teeth should be carefully
examined. Her food should be carefully regulated, for many neglect
to take the right sort of food for the development of a healthy baby.
The mother should always be examined beforehand to find out whether
the child lies in the right position, and whether she is likely to have
an easy delivery. All these things are most important.
The wisest plan that an expectant mother can adopt is to put
herself at once under the care of a doctor or to pay a visit to the nearest
Ante-natal Clinic. There are at least two reasons why she should do
this. One is for her own comfort, many of the milder ailments of the
expectant mother being easily corrected or prevented by simple medical
or nursing means. The other is for her safety and that of the expected
etiild. One of the great advantages that she will derive from obtaining
skilled advice in good time will be peace of mind. She will know what
she may safely do, and she will be able to do it quietly and without
worry. She will feel that someone who knows is sharing her respon-
sibility, and that she is doing what is best for her unborn infant.


An expectant mother should welcome and not avoid a thorough
medical examination for the prevention of any possible dangers to
herself and her expected baby. In this way she will be doing her best
to insure an easy and safe confinement, to preserve her own health and
the health of her baby. In Brisbane, Ante-natal Clinics are held at the
Woolloongabba Maternal and Child Welfare Centre on Monday evenings,
and at the Valley Maternal and Child Welfare Centre on Thursday
evenings, and also at the Women’s Hospital.
Every woman should realise the importance of having her urine
tested, for by this test early warning of danger to herself and her child
may he given, and steps can be taken by the doctor or nurse so that the
danger may be averted and the pregnancy and delivery brought to a
safe conclusion.
A woman- who has suffered from any form of ill-health in the past
or who is aware of or suspects a tumour or displacement or abnormality
such as that due to spinal or other bone disease should especially have
early medical attention.
If the nxpectant mother avails herself of the facilities of the Ante-
natal Clinic and carries out the simple health rules advised, she does all
she can for her own health and for that of her child.
If any of the following symptoms occur during pregnancy, the
expectant mother should send for her doctor or attend her Ante-natal
Clinic immediately:—
Persistent headaches;
Dimness of vision;
Diminution in quantity of urine;
Scalding when passing urine;
Swelling of the face, hands, feet, or legs;
Pain in the abdomen;
Vomiting which persists after the third month;
A discharge of blood from the vagina at any time during
the pregnancy;
Fits or St. Vitus’ dance;
Giddiness;
Fainting turns.
THE EXPECTANT FATHER.
While this book deals chiefly with the expectant mother, the
expectant father deserves a section to himself. He can do much tn
help his wife during her pregnancy.


First of all, lie must try to realise that, because his wife is going to
have a baby, she must not be treated as an invalid. On the contrary, she
must be treated so as to fit her for the task which lies before her. This
means that she will require to be properly fed, to have regular exercise,
recreation, sleep, fresh air, sunshine and freedom from worry, in fact,
to have everything a normal healthy woman requires. To some women,
the task of having a baby is not an easy one and these require special
care, consideration and understanding. The husband will require to be
sympathetic and tolerant at this time, not to the extent of giving her
the impression that she is an invalid, but sufficiently to encourage and
reassure her. He must cheerfully give up much of his leisure in order
to be in his wife's company, particularly in the later months.
Most women are much better when continuing their usual house-
work, but the husband should see that no heavy lifting is done. In
addition he should see that his wife spends part of the day resting,
preferably in the open air.
Walking is a valuable form of exercise, and he can take her for a walk
in the evenings, but it is necessary to stop short of fatigne. Women who
have previously been accustomed to leading active out-of-door lives
should modify their habits sufficiently to avoid over-exertion. Those
whe have been accustomed to leading quiet indoor lives will find it
wise to begin their open-air exercise gradually. Easy gardening work
is a good form of exercise and diverts the mind agreeably, but it must
be merely recreation and not a task. If there is no garden, the husband,
upon learning the need of fresh vegetables, probably will become
interested in making one. Vegetables such as lettuce, cabbage, Chinese
cabbage, silver beet, beans, tomato, and sweet peppers can bo grown
with little initial cost, and are of great value, particularly when eaten
fresh.
The husband should see that his wife attends her Ante-natal Clinic
or doctor regularly from the earliest months, and that the instructions
given her are carried out. Actual treatment advised is very little, and
generally speaking aims at preventing disease, discomfort and pain, and
keeping her comfortable. For instance, a woman with bad teeth cannot
satisfactorily chew her food, even if the diet includes all the suitable
foods. He should see that her teeth are attended to.
Intercourse should not take place during the last six weeks.
If the expectant mother has been happy and contented throughout
her pregnancy and the expectant father has assisted her in following the
advice given by her doctor or clinic, he has played his part well
G


The husband should see that his wife returns to her doctor or clinic
one month to six weeks after the confinement so that she may be examined
to see that her organs are normal again and in their correct position.
SIGNS OF PREGNANCY.
1. Cessation of the periods. This is usually the first sign, but it is
not always reliable, for other causes may prevent the onset of the period
such as ill-health or a chill. A woman may become pregnant when she
is nursing a baby, when, as a rule, periods do not occur.
2. Morning sickness may be a very early sign. It may vary from a
feeling of nausea on rising to vomiting at any time during the twenty-
four hours. This sign is not always reliable. Many women never suffer
from morning sickness at all.
3. Breast changes. Pains and a feeling of fullness in the breasts may
occur very early. About the third month fluid may be squeezed from
the nipple, which about this time may become more prominent and darker
in colour.
4. Enlargement of the abdomen. This does not become noticeable
until about the fifth month, but from then until delivery this enlarge-
ment is slow and gradual, and is due chiefly to the growth of the child in
the womb.
5. Movements of the baby generally known as “quickening” are
generally recognised between the fourth and fifth month from the last
normal period. This “quickening” has been described as “wind” or
' ‘flutterings” in the lower part of the stomach. These movements become
ranch stronger as the pregnancy goes on.
THE PSOBABLE DATE OF THE CONFINEMENT.
The natural period of pregnancy in women is about 280 days.
The simplest method of arriving at this date is by counting forward
nine calendar -months from the first day of the last menstrual period,
then adding seven days. For instance, if the last menstrual period began
on 30th October, count forward nine months to 30th July, then add
seven days, which brings the expected date of confinement to 6th August.
This date is rarely exact, but the confinement usually takes place within
a few days earlier or later.
The date on which the first faint movements are felt should always
bf= noted. Sometimes a woman becomes pregnant while she is nursing,
and the date of these first movements is of value in estimating the date
of the confinement. In any case it is a help.


SIGNS THAT LABOUR HAS BEGUN.
The onset o£ labour may be recognised by three signs which may
occur in any order—
i. “Show.”
ii. Fains.
iii. Breaking of the waters.
Of these the 1 ‘ show” which is a slightly blood-stained discharge is usually
the first. Shortly after it appears, regular pains begin. These at first
are rather like the pains some women have at the time of the periods,
starting in the back and coming round to the front. They recur at
regular intervals, which get shorter as the labour proceeds. “Pains”
n:ay occur before the “show” makes its appearance.
The “waters” may break —that is to say, there may be a sudden gush
of water from the vaginal passage.
On the appearance of any one of these signs the expectant mother
must realise her labour has begun, and she must notify her nurse or
go to her hospital forthwith.
Sometimes “false pains” occur about a fortnight before delivery is
expected. These are colicky and irregular, and may be relieved as a rule
by taking opening medicine.
HTGIENE OF PREGNANCY.
Health and Happiness.
Much of the baby’s future health and happiness will depend on the
mother’s state of health and her peace of mind during pregnancy. She
should lead her usual healthy life as far as possible. Fresh air, sunshine,
and cheerful surroundings are helpful. She should go out. and visit her
friends. Her spare time may be well spent in reading cheerful books.
Recreation and amusement are as necessaiy during pregnancy as at any
other time.
Fresh Air.
With all persons plenty of fresh air, night and day, is indispensible
to health, and to none more than to the pregnant woman. She should
sleep with open windows or on the veranda at all seasons of the year, but
sheltered from strong westerly winds. Fresh air is also needed in living
rooms. Ventilation means a constant current of fresh air through a room.
Exercise.
Regular exercise in the open air promotes good health, but must be
regulated by the expectant mother’s own feelings and must stop short
of fatigue. Pleasant out-of-door occupations are stimulating to the body
and the mind. Women who are busy with household duties during the
day will benefit from relaxing in the open air. Others not so occupied


may prefer walking, or other forms of exercise. Women who have been
accustomed to some sport should find something to take its place, for the
stretching and reaching movements of golf and tennis are not advisable.
Lifting weights, such as heavy, wet washing on to clothes lines, should
not he done. Riding and cycling are not advisable. Swimming is an
excellent exercise, but should be preferred in the sea rather than in
city baths. Surfing in a rough sea is too strenuous. Otherwise none
of her activities should be curtailed, and she should live a normal life.
In addition, special exercises can be performed regularly which will
increase her muscular tone, her sense of well-being, and make her more
fit for the task which lies before her—namely, giving birth to her baby.
Moreover, backache is common during pregnancy, and a support is
often needed to ease it. The best support any woman can have is a good
set of abdominal muscles. Special exercises, especially Nos. 2 and 5,
are arranged to strengthen these muscles.
Special Exercises During Pregnancy.
These exercises are specially adapted for the later months of
pregnancy, hut should be begun as soon as possible. They are very suit-
able for women who do their own housework, for they may be done in
bed, and this seems to require less effort.
1. Lying fiat on the back without a pillow, raise the arms slowly side-
ways above the head, taking a deep breath and filling the lungs. Hold the
position for a couple of seconds and lower the arras. Repeat four times.
Rest.
2. With the knees slightly bent and the heels resting on the bed
raise the head, hut not the shoulders from the bed as if trying to look at
the toes. Nod the head once and lower to the bed. Do this ten times to
start with, increasing to twenty. If the hands are placed on the abdomen,
the contraction of the muscles will be felt each time the head is raised.
This exercise is particularly strengthening to the abdominal wall.
3. I/ying in the bed with the feet together. Move the right foot about
12 inches to the right and extend the right arm at the shoulder; then
try to draw the right lower ribs towards the top of the hip bone without
moving the shoulders. Then relax. Do this three or four times at first.
Repeat on the left side. If the opposite hand is placed between the ribs
and the hipbone when this exercise is being performed, the contraction of
the muscle may be felt. This may be repeated up to twenty times when
proficiency is attained. The exercise may later be performed when
standing and at any time during the day.


4. Draw in the stomach wall and let it relax—repeat about twenty
times quickly. The easiest way to learn this exercise is to contract as you
breathe out and relax as you breathe in. But as control of the muscles
is improved the movements can become independent of the breathing.
It can be performed lying on the back, then lying on each side, and finally
standing.
5. Lying on the back with the feet about 18 inches apart, stiffen
and contract the muscles of the buttocks, stomach wall, and inner sides
of the thighs so that the whole body is rigid. Relax completely, stiffen,
relax. Repeat four times, increasing to eight. Vary by performing
the exercise lying on the back, first with the knees straight, and then,
as proficiency is gained, with the knees bent,
6. Exercise for the pelvic muscles. Lying in bed in any position
contract the muscles round the back and front passages. This exercise is
difficult to explain, but can be described as contracting the muscles
suddenly as if holding back a loose motion after taking an aperient.
After contracting the muscles firmly, relax.
It is helpful at first to breathe out as the muscles are contracted and
breathe in as they are relaxed. After a time this exercise can be done
independently of breathing. Repeat four times at first.
These and the ordinary exercises of calisthenics are very helpful.
A complete set of ante-natal and post-natal exercises may be obtained
separately on application to the nearest Maternal and Child Welfare
Centre.
Rest and Sleep.
Rest is just as important as exercise, especially during the lattet
half of pregnancy. At least an hour a day should be spent lying in a
quiet room or in the open air. Eight hours sleep each night in a room
with open windows is necessary.
Care of the Teeth.
The teeth should be brushed night and morning, or preferably after
each meal. An expectant mother should visit her dentist and have her
teeth attended to as early as possible. Decayed teeth prevent the
mother from chewing her food properly and may cause indigestion.
Infected root sockets poison the body. Fillings and even extractions
do no harm at all and should be done without delay.
Bathing.
Daily bathing or sponging of the whole body is necessary. This
keeps the pores of the skin acting, and as the skin is one of the means
by which the body gets rid of waste matters, this is very important. Very
hot baths should be avoided during pregnancy. Cold baths should not


be suddenly commenced, but if the woman is in the habit of taking cold
baths regularly, it will not hurt her to continue to do so right up to the
time of delivery. Cool or warm sponging followed by a brisk rub with a
coarse towel is not only cleansing but a tonic for the skin.
Care of the Breasts.
Never wear a tight brassiere. If the breasts are large and heavy,
sx)eclal brassieres can be obtained at a reasonable cost. Gentle massage
for the last three months is helpful when the breasts are acting for the
first time or after a long interval.
No crusts should be allowed to form on the nipples. If present,
lanoline, face cream, or olive oil applied overnight will soften them, and
next day the regular routine treatment of the nipples which aims at
strengthening them so that they will not be painful when the baby sucks,
should be begun.
During the daily bath the nipples should be pulled out between the
finger and thumb and washed gently at first and later more vigorously
with a rough soapy washer. They should be rubbed dry in the same
manner with a rough towel. They should then be gripped between the
second bones of the first two fingers, the pulling out process being
continued. This resembles the action of the baby’s gums when sucking.
If the nipples are soft, they may be hardened during the last month
with equal parts of olive oil and methylated spirit; if hard, they may be
softened with glycerine and water. It is too late to begin preparing the
nipples after delivery, and no woman with cracked nipples can
comfortably suckle a baby.
Clothing.
This should be light and loose. The garments should be suspended
from the shoulders, with no constricting bands at the waist. There should
be nothing that could interfere with deep breathing.
If a woman has been accustomed to wearing corsets, she should not
discard them when she becomes pregnant. After the third month
maternity corsets should be worn.
Stockings should be secured by suspenders attached to a suspender
belt, a maternity belt, or maternity corsets. Garters should never he
worn at any time, as they interfere with the circulation and tend to
cause swelling of tlie legs and varicose veins,
Foot comfort is essential, so shoes must he of the low-heeled variety.
It is not possible for any woman wearing high-heeled, pointed-toed shoes
to take the amount of daily exercise that is necessary for her health.


Directions for Making a Maternity Belt.
Take a strip of strong unbleached calico about 1£ yards long and
10 to 12 inches in width; thinner material can be used double. Pin the
calico round the lower part of the abdomen and fit it to the figure with
darts at the upper and lower edges (see diagram) leaving a good lap-over
for expansion. Do this lying on the bed in a recumbent position. When
you stand up the belt will give the support you need. Now hem or hind
the edges. On to the wrapped-over end sew four or five strips of webbing
or calico bands, and on to the tucked-under side sew a corresponding
number of buckles (the kind used on the sides of men’s tennis trousers are
very cheap). Put the buckles in such a position that, wiien done up,
the belt gives comfortably firm support, but does not cause tight pressure.
The belt should be worn low in front, and have suspenders attached to
its lower edges to keep it down and the stockings up.
A pattern and directions for making another type of maternity
support and suitable for the later months of pregnancy can be obtained
by making application to the nearest Maternal and Child "Welfare Centre.
Both types are recommended, but the one of which the pattern is given
is more suitable for those who do not care to wear stockings when at
home.


This support is sufficient for the filth and even sixth month, but as
soon as the need is felt, shoulder straps should he added for further
support from the shoulders. These can be made of wide bands of
webbing or folded calico. If too narrow they cut the shoulders. Sew
on the straps each side of the midline in front several inches down on to
the belt to prevent tearing; they cross in front, go up over the shoulders,
cross at the back, and are stitched on to the belt at the hack about 2 inches
each side of the midline. Such a support costs hut a couple of shillings,
but gives great support and comfort during the later months of
pregnancy. It is most necessary in the morning when the house-work is
being done, and should be loosened for the afternoon rest and adjusted
again before rising. Varicose veins, cramps, swollen feet, backache,
heaviness, dragging pains, and tiredness are all relieved by the wearing
of such a support.
Diet.
The baby is entirely dependent on his mother for his health and
nourishment during the nine months before he is born, and very largely
for some time after Jh s birth. Therefore, she must eat the foods which
will provide his requirements, and which at the same time will nourish
and agree with her. This does not mean that she must over-cat, or “eat
for two,” but her food must he the right food.
For instance, the baby from a very early stage needs lime and
phosphorus to form bones and teeth. If the mother does not take food
containing sufficient of these minerals, he will draw on the stores of lime
and phosphorus in her bones and teeth. Even so, he may go short, and
the result will be that the baby will be born with soft bones and his teeth
will decay early. The mother will suffer, too, for her teeth will he liable to
decay, and she may complain of cramps.
After birth the baby still needs lime and phosphorus, for he is grow-
ing very quickly, and even in the early months of life the second teeth
are being formed. If he is breast-fed, as he should be, he is still
dependent on his mother for his supply.
To counteract the possible development of anaemia in the expectant
mother, it is necessary to provide foods containing iron, as well as
foods containing iodine which assists in regulating certain bodily
processes. Vitamins or accessory food factors are absolutely necessary
for the preservation of health. If the diet of the expectant mother is
deficient in these substances, she may suffer from chronic ill-health-
lack of energy, depression, anaemia, loss of appetite, constipation,
decayed teeth —and she will offer little resistance to an attack of acute
illness. It will be seen, therefore, that her diet should be of the right
kind, so that both she and her baby may be healthy and well nourished.


The food taken by the expectant mother must (1) be sufficient in
amount, (2) include minerals adequate for the nutrition of herself and
her baby, (3) contain vitamins or accessory food factors in sufficient
quantity.
Lime is present in milk, eggs, cheese, cauliflower, carrots, green
vegetables, oranges, and figs.
Phosphorus is present in milk, cheese, eggs, meat, fish, whole grain
oatmeal, potatoes, and nuts.
Iron is present in meat, liver, oysters, egg yolk, whole grains,
lentils, spinach, green peas, root vegetables, pumpkins (in
skin), strawberries, dried fruits, and prunes.
lodine is present in milk, eggs, oysters, fish, cod liver oil, whole
grains, potatoes (in shin), and leafy vegetables.
There are at least six vitamins, but there are only four which are
likely to be deficient in Australian diets.
Vitamin A is obtained chiefly from cod and other fish liver oils, liver
of other animals, fish roe, butter, carrots, tomatoes, and green vegetables,
such as spinach, lettuce, and the outer leaves of cabbage.
There is some present in milk, egg yolk, cheese, heart, kidney, suet,
dripping, mango, papaw, and pineapple.
It is not present in lard, bacon, or in vegetable oils.
Foods containing vitamin A tend to prevent infections.
Vitamin B is most abundant in wheat germ, marmite, vegemite, bran,
lentils, peanuts, dried peas, beans, nuts, and liver.
It is also present in heart, kidney, egg yolk, fish, fish roe, wholemeal 1 ,
whole grain cereals, such as wheat, maize, oatmeal, barley, and unpolished
rice. A small amount is present in milk, orange, tomato, potato, cabbage,
and artichoke.
Foods containing vitamin B are useful in the correction of
constipation.
Vitamin 0 is present chiefly in uncooked fruits especially in oranges,
lemons, grape fruit, papaw, sweet peppers, pineapples, custard apples,
and tomatoes and in uncooked vegetables, such as freshly-gathered raw
spinach, raw cabbage, watercress, as well as in sprouted beans and peas,
cress, and mustard.
Canned tomatoes and canned pineapple juice contain a good deal
The young leaves of lucerne are rich in Vitamin C, and may be eatei
in a salad or made into an infusion and used as a drink.
It is present in smaller quantities in cooked vegetables and fruits
Foods containing vitamin C fend to prevent dental decay, infections „
anosmia, and the development of scurvy.


Vitamin D is present chiefly in cod and other fish liver oils, in the
liver of other animals, and in tinned salmon and herrings. It is present
in milk, butter, egg yolk, and there is also some in cheese, suet, and
dripping.
Unlike all the other vitamins, it is formed in the human body by
exposing the skin to the sunlight.
Margarine, which does not contain the vitamins present in butter,
should not be used.
Foods containing vitamin D tend to control the laying down of
salts of lime and phosphorus i» the hones and teeth.
Vitamins A, B, and D are not destroyed by drying or cooking unless
soda has been added. Vitamin C is destroyed by prolonged cooking,
Cooking with soda, and drying.
What everyone needs is a balanced diet—that is, one containing
suitable quantities of these various substances. An example of a balanced
diet is given on page lit.
Three meals a day are sufficient, and should include—
Milk—to 3 pints. If fresh milk cannot be obtained full cream
dried milk may be used. It may be flavoured with cocoa. Some will be
taken with porridge or in junket or milk puddings.
One egg.
Cheese —l oz.
Butter—ls to 2 oz. If there is a deficiency of butter, fresh beef
dripping may be used.
Meat should be taken in moderation and should include poultry,
liver, and fish. Liver and fish are valuable and should be eaten once
or twice a week. Tinned salmon and herring should be included.
Vegetables. —A liberal allowance of vegetables, both raw and cooked,
is necessary. Raw vegetables as salads should include lettuce, tomatoes,
celery, scraped carrot, finely cut raw cabbage heart, and sweet peppers.
Many of these can be grown in a small vegetable patch. Sweet pepper
is commonly known as sweet capsicum or chili, and is distinguished by
its mild and pleasant flavour, in contrast to the burning, acrid flavour
of the ordinary chili. The sweet pepper is easily grown, takes up very
little room, and is a valuable food. Potatoes should be cooked in their
jackets and eaten every day. Other wholesome vegetables are spinach,
silver beet, Chinese cabbage, French beans, peas, turnips, turnip tops
(as a green cooked vegetable), swede turnips, and sweet potatoes.
Baking soda should never be used in cooking green vegetables.
In the dry inland districts there are many hardy greens which can
be used in place of the greens of the more fertile areas. No mother
should neglect to use them, when the necessity arises.
New Zealand spinach, known also as Warrigal cabbage, possesses
succulent leaves which are appetising.


Pig-weed, known also as Purslane or Portulaca, is often cooked as
a vegetable. The root as well as the steins can be used.
The young leaves of the Native Hibiscus can be used in a salad.
The leaves of the “fat hen” or wild Amaranth make a useful
vegetable.
The whitish green leaves of the Old Man Saltbush are valuable, and
may be eaten instead of lettuce between bread and butter. When cooked,
the leaves and tender young stems can be used as a vegetable.
Wlien these native plants are eaten for the first time, take very
small quantities.
Fruit.—Take some uncooked fruit daily, it is better than cooked
fruit.
Bread and scones should be made of wheatgerm meal or whole
meal flour. Avoid bread made of white four and coloured dark
artificially and also scones made of white flour. Avoid pastry, boiled
puddings, custard powders, and sweetmeats. -- "i ■ -
a . -
Menus for One Day. f <
Breakfast. —A plate of wholemeal or wheatgerm mejupomdge,
with a liberal allowance of milk. (If oatmeal porridge is
used, add a heaped tablespoonful of cooking bran to each
plateful.) An egg, boiled, poached, or scrambled, or fish.
Wholemeal bread and butter, jam, marmalade, honey, or
marmite. A cup of hot milk with or without cocoa. A
piece of papaw or an apple.
Lunch. —A salad of tomato and sweet pepper, lettuce, and
shredded carrot, cheese, wholemeal bread and butter. Apple,
banana, orange, or sliced pineapple. Glass of milk.
Afternoon Tea. —Tea with plenty of milk, wheatgerm meal bread
and butter, or a wholemeal biscuit.
Dinner.—Any sort of meat, such as liver, tripe, rabbit, poultry,
or fish. Peas or beans, cabbage, or cauliflower, potatoes
(English or sweet cooked in shins). Stewed fruit or baked
apple, with junket or custard. A lemon or orange drink, or
plain water.
If this diet costs more than you can afford, keep as near to it as
you can. Try at least to take the quantity of milk advised, to eat whole-
meal bread, and do not fail to take some uncooked vegetables or fruit
every day.
Care of the Bowels.
Constipation is unfortunately very common. Regular action of the
bowels depends on the tone of the muscles, the diet, and the habit.
In the preceding section on exercise, special exercises have been
given for the muscles of the abdominal wall which are most useful in


promoting muscular tone and regular action of the bowels. The neces-
sity of including in the diet supplies of Vitamin B which arc contained in
such foods as marmite, vegemite, wheatgerm, bran, lentils, dried peas,
beans, layer, kidney, eggs has been dealt with. The formation of a
habit is of the ntmost importance, but straining must be avoided.
If the bowels do not act regularly the following measures are
advised: —
1. Endeavour to form a habit by going to the lavatory at the same
convenient time every day, whether the desire to do so is present or not.
2. Take two or three glasses of hot or cold water before breakfast.
This is the only time the stomach is empty, and the water can pass
quickly into the bowel.
3. Eat wholemeal or wheatgenn meal bread instead of white bread.
4. At breakfast time take two heaped tablespoonfuls of ordinary
clean cooking bran. This may be mixed with porridge or eaten alone
mixed with water. It does not act as well if cooked, or made into scones.
5. Eat fruit and uncooked vegetables in the form of salads made ol
lettuce, tomatoes, celery, finely shredded raw cabbage, grated raw carrot
until the desired effect is obtained.
6. As a temporary measure, one of the following laxatives may be
used: —
(a) Figs, dates, and prunes put twice through a mincer. The
second time add gradually to each pound of the mixed
fruit one ounce of senna powder, and then stir well. Begin
by taking one tablespoonful at night and vary the dose
according to requirements.
(b) Ten drops or less of cascara may be taken after each meal.
Care of 'Hie Kidneys.
This is of the greatest importance, and the following rules must be
most carefully observed; —
1. Drink plenty of water.
2. Never forget to have the urine tested at stated intervals, as
directed by the doctor or nurse.
3. Note the quantity. If this diminishes, report to the doctor or
nurse.
4. Avoid a strongly acid reaction. This may be done by taking
alkaline medicines, which the doctor may order. A better way is to eat
a balanced diet consisting of meat, fish, eggs, wholemeal bread, cereals,
Tmllf, fmit, and vegetables, especially root vegetables, such as potatoes.
Most women live on a diet containing too much meat, eggs, and bread,
and too little milk, vegetables, and fruit. This should be corrected during
pregnancy. Otherwise the kidneys will be overworked, and this extra
strain on them should be avoided.


SOME COMPLICATIONS OF PREGNANCY.
Morning Sickness.
Morning sickness occurs in many eases. There may be a bad taste
in the mouth, a feeling of sickness, vomiting first thing in the morning,
or vomiting at any time during the day or night.
It usually ceases before the fourth month. The following measures
will relieve it in most eases: —
1. Pay more attention to the bowels.
2. Eat a dry biscuit or dry toast before rising.
The sickness may sometimes be relieved by sucking a small piece
of barley sugar, or drinking a little orange, lemon, or pineapple juice.
4. Avoid any food which disagrees with you.
5. Do not drink with meals; drink in between meals instead.
6. Put your frying pan away during pregnancy. This means that
you grill meat instead of frying it and avoid fried potatoes, fried
vegetables, fat bacon, fried eggs, &c.
T. If you are not relieved by these methods, consult your doctor.
Varicose Veins and Files.
Many women who are not pregnant suffer from these complaints.
Pregnancy aggravates both these conditions. The following measures
are recommended;—
1. Pay attention to the bowels. Do not allow yourself to become
constipated and do not strain when the bowels are acting.
2, Best every day for at least an hour with the feet higher than the
head.
3. Never wear garters, rolled stockings, elastic in the legs of the
bloomers, or tight bands round the waist
4, Wear a maternity belt.
If in spite of these measures varieose veins or piles arc troublesome,
jonsnlt your doctor.
Cramps.
These pains may occur in the legs and at the back of the thighs,
and are said to be due to pressure of the child on the large nerves. It is
believed by some that they ore due to insufficient lime in the body. They
are troublesome, but not dangerous. Rubbing and stretching the limbs
relieve them. In order to guard against cramps the diet should consist of
food containing an adequate amount of lime, such as milk, cheese, eggs,
vegetables, and an adequate amount of Vitamin D, such as fish, including
tinned herrings and salmon, liver, eggs, butter, milk, and cod liver oil.
Vitamin D is formed in the body when the skin is exposed to sunlight.


Vaginal Discharges.
The ordinary moisture that is present in the vagina is increased
during pregnancy, and may appear as a slight whitish discharge, which
is normal. Should the discharge bo large in amount and yellow or
yellowish green in colour, medical advice must be sought at once, for the
condition is not normal, and steps must be taken to treat its cause before
the baby is bom.
Miscarriage.
If a pregnant woman complains of a bearing-down sensation, or has
recurring pains, she should go to bed and rest quietly there until the
symptoms have disappeared. If there is any discharge of blood, she
must go to bed at once and send for a doctor.
A woman who has had a miscarriage needs to take special care daring
a subsequent pregnancy, as there may be a tendancy to miscarry again at
the same period. For example, if the miscarriage occurred at the fourth
month, the woman should, in the later pregnancy, be specially careful
at that particular time; and if there are any symptoms, such as backache
or bearing-down sensations, she must go to bed immediately and rest
quietly for about a week, or until all such symptoms have gone. If they
persist, a doctor’s advice must be sought. Neglect of this may lead to
further miscarriage.
Other conditions for which the advice of a doctor must be sought
have already been given, and cannot be stressed 100 strongly.
Headache.
Eye strain may cause headache when sewing or reading. This
headache is relieved by glasses. Headache may be due to constipation,
in which case regulation of the bowels relieves it. Severe and persistent
headaches may be a serious symptom, and should be reported to the
doctor without delay.
Danger Signs.
If any of the following symptoms occur during pregnancy send for
your doctor or attend your ante-natal clinic immediately:—
Persistent headaches;
Dimness of vision;
Diminution in quantity of urine;
Scalding when passing urine;
Swelling of the face, hands, feet, or legs;
Pain in the abdomen;
Vomiting which persists after the third month;
A discharge of blood from the vagina at any time during the
pregnancy;
Pits or St. Vitus’ dance.
Giddiness;
Fainting turns.


PREPARATION FOR CONFINEMENT AT HOME.
A medical attendant and nurse should be engaged as early as possible.
The bedroom should be bright and well ventilated, with as little furni-
ture as possible. Linoleum should be used in preference to carpet. There
should be a separate single bed with firm mattress for the patient and
another for the nurse.
The following articles should be provided:—■
At least two complete changes of bed linen, eight soft turkey
towels, a sheet of mackintosh or American cloth. 4 feet wide
and long enough to go across the bed.
If neither of these is procurable an extremely good
substitute is made by laying eight full sheets of newspaper
one on top of the other, covering the top one with boiled
linen, and tacking all of them together with strong thread.
Three binders yards long and 21 inches wide.
Twelve, diapers of soft material or a quantify of old linen.
(hie pound of sterile absorbent wool.
All these articles should be kept in a clean special box
with a lit! to protect them from dust.
A firm, large nail-brush.
Three or four band or enamel washbasins.
Several pieces of thread or narrow tape 2 feet long.
A scrupulously clean shawl or blanket to receive baby.
All binders, napkins, towels, cloths, thread or tape and
linen likely to come in contact with either the mother or
baby, must be well washed and boiled. When dry they
should be folded, put in bags wrapped in newspaper, and
baked for at least an hour in an oven so slow that the
paper does not turn brown. They can be stored in the
special box in which they are to be kept for the confinement.
Sponges and flannels should not be used for washing the mother
during the confinement.
The Confinement.
The nurse should be sent for when a “show” appears, when regular
recurring pains begin or when the “waters break.” Any one of these
may be the first sign of labour.
At the beginning of labour a large clean jug should be scalded and
filled with boiling water, covered with a clean towel, and put aside to
cool. The patient should have a warm bath and the bowels should bo
well moved by her taking a dose of castor oil. Constipation will delay
labour.


Should no medical attendant or nurse be present when the baby is
born, the attendant should wash her hands well and tie the navel cord
in two places, one being 2 inches from, the baby’s body, the other 2 inches
further along the cord, using the thread or tape already prepared. The
cord should be cut between the ties. If there is any bleeding from the
cut ends the cord should be tied again. The end of the cord attached to
the child should be covered at once with sterilised absorbent wool or a
piece of clean boiled linen.
The baby’s eyes should be washed with clean water, the child
wrapped in a warm shawl and placed in a basket or cot.
The patient should then be placed on her bach, and the afterbirth
allowed to come away naturally. No attempt should be made to get the
afterbirth away by pulling upon the cord. After expulsion the after-
birth should be lifted away from the patient and put aside for inspection
by the medical attendant.
The attendant should wash her hands again with dean water and
soap before washing the patient and drying her with a clean towel. A
diaper should be put on, sheets and nightgown changed, and the binder
which is worn for the first few days only, firmly applied.


Post-Natal Care.
Introduction.
After the baby has arrived there are two persons to be considered,
the mother and the new baby. It is hoped that the mother has followed
the instructions already given, and that she has kept herself fit by carry-
ing out the exercises and by leading an active life. It is hoped also that
she has been under the supervision of her own doctor or of the doctor at
the ante-natal clinic, and that site has looked after her breasts so that.
her nipples are ready for natural feeding. If she has done her part, she
has given her baby the best start in life that she is able. She will want
to continue to do the best she can for him in order that he may be well
and happy.
Convalescence is usually a happy and rather busy time for the
mother, particularly in the ease of the first baby. She and the new
baby are learning about each other.
Immediate care of the Baby.
After the mother has been made comfortable, the baby is washed
and dressed. At first a bandage or binder made of cellular cotton
material rather than flannel is necessary to keep the cord dressing in
place. When the cord has healed, there is no further need for it. The
baby should pass urine within the first twenty-four hours after birth.
For the first few days the motions are dark-green in colour. This is
a normal condition and castor oil shovdd not be given. Some new-born
babies, boys as well as girls, have a thin milky secretion in their breasts.
Occasionally the breasts become swollen. Beyond protecting them from
injury and keeping them clean by applying a little methylated spirit
after his bath, nothing should be done. Consult your doctor if they
become inflamed.


CARE OP THE MOTHER.
The mother should be allowed to rest after the labour is completed
and she has been made comfortable. She should pass her urine about
six hours later. If the bladder cannot be emptied within twelve hours.,
medical assistance should be obtained. Some mild opening medicine
should be given on the th : ;d morning, if the bowels have not acted
naturally.
Diet.
The mother’s diet should be light for-two or three days utter her
confinement.
The diet of the nursing mother is given in detail on page 9 of out
other book, Care of Mother and Child. Her first need is sufficient
water. She should drink a glassful of water before each suckling. She
should take one pint of milk or more each day. In Western districts,
goat’s milk is as good as, or better than, cow’s milk. If she docs not
like the taste of milk she may flavour it with cocoa or with some similar
flavouring agent. She may take milk as junket, in custard, or in milk
pudding. She may add it to soup, pour it over stewed or canned fruit.
Butter and eggs are good, but will not take the place of milk. Cheese
is a valuable food. Meat, including liver, rabbit, and poultry, should
not be taken more than once a day. Fish, such as whiting, bream,
mackerel, tinned salmon, or herring, should be taken once or twice a
week.
The nursing mother should oat vegetables. Of vegetable foods
‘‘greens” are the most valuable. The best is home-grown lettuce
Finely-cut leaves of uncooked silver beet, finely shredded cabbage heart
and grated carrot are also good. French beans and cabbage take next
place, and should not be omitted. They are deprived of their value by
being cooked with baking soda. The water in which they are cooked
contains valuable food material which is often wasted. It should be
used in making soup or gravy. Of the root vegetables the best is potato,
both English and sweet, and this should replace bread at the principal
meal. Carrots, turnips, parsnips, pumpkin, and swede turnips are
valuable if correctly cooked. (See cookery notes in our other book,
Care of Mother and Child, p. 106.) Tomatoes are also valuable. Use
them canned, if fresh tomatoes cannot be obtained.
Fruit should always be taken and is best uncooked. Oranges,
papaws. custard apples, pineapples, mangoes, and apples are the best,
hut all fruit is good, if eaten in reasonable quantity,
A special section regarding the diet in Western Queensland is
included in our other book, Care of Mother and Child, on page 125.
Bread or scones made of wholemeal or wheatgerm meal should be
eaten. Marmite or vegemite which may be taken mixed with milk or
water as a drink or spread on bread and butter is valuable. A mother
cannot increase her supply of breast milk by taking patent medicines.
Avoid alcohol while nursing.


Exercises.
While the mother is in bed, she can help herself to become strong
and fit by doing exercises under the supervision of her doctor or nurse.
This will aid her to regain muscular tone and prevent a sagging stomach,
and help to bring her organs back to a normal condition. She should not
pursue these exercises to the point of fatigue, but should begin with one
or two, doing them once or twice only, gradually increasing the number
of exercises and the number of times each one is done. Begin always
with a deep breathing exercise. It takes a little time to do these exercises,
but if they are begun daring the time she is in bed and persevered with,
the mother will be well rewarded by her increased fitness, by her feeling
of well-being, as well as by her improved appearance.
The following are a few exercises which may be performed in the
first three weeks after the confinement and continued for three to six
months:—
Exercise I. —As early as the day following the confinement, that is,
a normal confinement, while the muscles are still feeling the ache and
strain, the sense of well-being can be enhanced by gentle deep breathing,
filling out the lower as well as the upper part of the chest.
Lying comfortably on the bed with a pillow under the knees breathe
in through the nose while you count four; breathe out through the mouth
while you count four. During the expiration the stomach should be
gently but firmly contracted and held in that position for a moment or
two.
Repeat the deep breathing four times at intervals during the day.
After the first week the arms can be raised from the sides straight above
the head during inspiration and lowered again in expiration.
Exercise ll. —Lying on the back with the knees straight, and the
heels and toes together, hands at the sides, palms down, slowly stretch
the toes straight down, pointing them.
Now raise both feet, toes, and hands as far as possible without moving
legs or arms, till feet are at right angles to legs, and hands at right
angles to arms. Hold the position a moment and lower again. Count
two up, two down.
Exercise 111. —In normal cases, and even in complicated eases, with
the doctor’s permission, the mother should lie face downwards for a
period of half an hour or more twice a day. A low pillow should be
placed under the head turned sideways with the check on the edge of
the pillow to facilitate breathing, and another soft pillow under the
stomach.
This ‘‘prone lying” is of the greatest value in draining the womb
and replacing it in its normal position. As the days go by it can be held
for a longer time, and it is good practice to form the habit of sleeping
in this position.


Exercise IV. —ln normal cases when the breasts have settled down,
and in complicated eases when the doctor allows it, the "knee-chest
position" can be practised, beginning with one to two minutes only and
working up to five minutes at a time morning and evening.
Kneel upright on the bed; bend forward and place the head on tiie
edge of a low pillow and the chest actually touching the bed.
Support the weight to some extent on the elbows so that the body
from the hips forms an angle of about 45 degrees with the bed. (See
diagram.) This is one of the best ways of getting the womb back to its
right position.
Exercise V. —Lying on the bed with the knees bent, lift the buttocks
and straighten the trunk as the patient has to do for the nurse to place
the bed-pan under her. Do it one to four times, increasing to eight
times by the end of the three weeks.
Exercise Vl. —Contract the abdominal wall, making it as hollow
as possible, but do not push the chest out. This will be easier if done
with the breathing at first. Contract on expiration and relax on
inspiration; as control of the muscles is gained, the movements can
become independent of the breathing.
If the fingers are placed lightly above the hips the strong contraction
of the muscles at the sides of the body can be felt.
Exercise Vll. —When there has been no tearing of the muscles and
no stitching required, the following exercise can be performed after the
first three days, otherwise it should not be performed till after the third
week:—
Lying comfortably on the bed in any position contract the muscles
round the back and front passages. This exercise is very difficult to
explain, but can best be described as contracting the muscles round the
back passage suddenly, as if holding back a loose motion after taking an
aperient.
The muscles of the buttocks and stomach should have no share in
the exercise, but should remain completely relaxed. After contracting
firmly, relax. It is helpful at first to breathe out as the muscles are
contracted and breathe in as they are relaxed.
After a time this exercise can be done independently of the breath-
ing. Repeat four times at first, increasing the number of times as
control is acquired. This is one of the most important exercises for
women to learn, as the strengthening of the floor of the pelvis prevents
fatigue, misplacements, and prolapses later on.


Only mothers who have had a normal confinement and are well
enough should perform these exercises during their convalescence in
bed. and permission to start must always he obtained.
When the time comes for getting up, the standing posture of the
body is extremely important. Incorrect posture, as indicated in the
diagrams, is one of the most frequent causes of backache, easy fatigue,
sagging stomach, and sagging internal organs, misplacement of the
womb itself being the most serious. In the correct posture the spine
shows gentle, normal curves, and the weight falls through the centre
of the head, shoulders, hips, knees and feet.
In the hoUm'-back type the spine ia too curved, giving round
shoulders and a hollow back. The buttocks are too prominent at the back
and the chest too prominent in the front, with an exaggerated tilt to
the hipline.
In the flat-hack type there are round, stooping shoulders, flat chest,
and sagging prominent lower abdomen.
There are two simple exercises that will assist, in teaching the correct
posture. One is especially for the hollow-back type—
(l) Stand with the back well pressed against the wall all the way
up, with the heels and toes together, 6 inches to 1 foot away
from the wall. Take a deep breath and hold the correct
posture as previously described, counting four. Next bend
forward, letting both arms and the whole body relax and drop
forward, still keeping the buttocks against the wall and the
legs straight. Straighten up again with inspiration, and try
and flatten out each part of the spine against the wall in
rising. Now breathe out, contracting the lower abdominal
wall, then stretch up, keeping the chin down. It is just
as if you were rolling the back up the wall until Anally the
head and neck are upright. Breathe in and out again to give
the body a rest.


(2) The second exercise is for round-shouldered people—
Lying face downwards, arms by sides, palms down, legs
straight and together, head turned sideways, with left ear
resting on the floor, completely relax, letting out all the breath
and contracting the abdomen. Now take a deep breath, at
the same time slowly raising the head and shoulders from
the floor and turning the palms of the hands forward, while
the legs, buttocks, and back are kept stiff.
Now breathe out and at the same time return the head
to the pillow, this time with the right ear downwards. Repeal
two, four, and six times, beginning at. the third week and
continuing several months. This exercise is particularly good
for a mother who tends to become round-shouldered from
carrying a heavy baby in her arms.
Far from being a period of boredom, the post-natal period, more
particularly while the mother is in bed and has the services of a nurse,
should be a time which she devotes to eliminating and overcoming the
effects of the fatigue and strain through which she has passed. It is a
time when she should devote herself to improving her personal appearance
and muscular tone and to gaining confidence.
As already indicated, any pains that she takes will be amply justi-
fied by her improved appearance, health, and feeling of well-being, and
her greater ability to feed her baby naturally.
Exercise. —During the early months the mother should not engage
in any form of strenuous exercise, such as lifting heavy loads, cycling,
playing tennis, &c.
Examination and Supervision,
The supervision of the mother should not cease with the birth of the
baby.
It usually takes six weeks for her organs to return to normal, and
an examination by a doctor should be made at this time to see that all is
going on normally and that the organs are in their correct position. She
should return for further examination if requested.


CARE OF BABY DURING THE FIRST MONTH.
Feeding.
Most babies when bom know how to sack. Occasionally we find one
who cannot do so, and he will require careful handling and training.
If baby, who is often very sleepy during the first few days of life, is
allowed to lie undisturbed, he may after a day or two refuse to suck.
There is no more difficult child to manage than one who has not been
trained to suck properly. Feeding him from a bottle will result in
farther disinclination to take the breast and make your task to establish
breast-feeding harder. Breast-feeding is safest and best for baby. Do
not allow yourself to be persuaded that you cannot feed your baby.
The child who is breast-fed is stronger and healthier during the second
year than one who is artificially fed. The child who is dependent on his
mother for the food he receives is more likely to be devoted to her than
the child who is fed from a bottle by anyone.
As soon as the mother has rested, the baby should be put to the
breast. After the nipple has been washed with sterile water, he is put
(irst to one, then to the other, leaving him only about two minutes at each.
See that he is sucking and not dozing. It will be sufficient to put him
to the breast every six hours for the first day. On the second day leave
him three or four minutes at each breast and feed him three or four
hourly. Although the milk does not come into the breasts until about
the third day after the birth of the child, there is present in the breasts
from birth a little ereamy-looking fluid which is highly nutritions.
Sucking stimulates the breasts to secrete, and is necessary for baby’s
health. During the early months of baby’s life sucking forms a very
important part of bis daily exercise, for not only does it develop his jaws
hut it improves the circulation of the whole body. When the milk supply
becomes established, which occurs usually about the third day, baby may
be put to the breast every three hours and left there from ten to fifteen
minutes. A strong baby may take all he needs in ten minutes, and may
be satisfied with four hourly feeds beginning at, say, 6 a.m. and finishing
at 10 p.m. Upon whatever intervals you decide, feed him regularly. To
all healthy babies give no night feeds from birth. Baby soon learns to
take all that he needs for his growth and development and to satisfy
his hunger during his feeding period from 6 a.m. to 10 p.m. If training
begins from birth be learns to wake when his feed is due. Plain cool
boiled water should be given between feeds when baby is awake, parti-
cularly in the hot weather. Babies fed on sweetened water may refuse
their natural food. When there is delay in the establishment of the supply
of breast milk beyond the third day, complement the feedings with
expressed breast milk, but on no account give artificial milk mixture
before the child is seven days old, and then only after you have consulted
your doctor or child welfare trained nurse. The breast milk supply may
become less when the mother begins her household duties again. It is
important that she should avoid bustling and worrying. She should have
her regular periods of rest and relaxation during the day.


Habits.
In addition to his training in feeding habits, baby should be trained
also in bowel and bladder habits. This is done by holding him out before
his bath each morning and after a feed several times a day. This training
should begin when he is strong enough to allow of this, usually about the
third week.
Clothing.
Clothing must be light, porous, loose, non-irritating, and suited to
the climatic conditions. It must not be allowed to restrict his natural
movements. In cold climates the aim must be to keep the child comfort-
ably warm; in hot climates to clothe him so that he suffers as little as
possible from the heat. (See Appendix, page 28, for patterns.)
Bathing.
Baby is bathed usually about 10 o’clock in the morning. A worm
bath or sponge in the evening, particularly in hot weather, will help him
to sleep peacefully.
Exercise.
If you want baby to thrive and to be active and strong, allow him
to exercise his muscles and his senses. Crying and vigorous sucking are
forms of exercise for the very young infant. Later, the baby by his
activity in kicking, grasping, &c., gets the exercise he needs. His senses-
also need stimulation. The daily bath is not only for cleanliness, but is a
form of exercise in that it educates his sense of feeling. Sight can be
exercised by placing baby where he can watch the waving branches of a
tree. Sensory stimulation is also provided by such things as fresh air
and sunshine and the daily outing.
In illness an attempt must be made to sustain the tone and activity
of the muscles by such things as change of position, judicious handling,
and good nursing. Even when ill, baby should have the sensory stimulus
of fresh air and sunshine. As he improves, bathing, outings, and Ins
other activities should be resumed as soon as the doctor permits.
Warmth.
The bodily warmth needs to be evenly maintained. In cold climates,
clotbe so that all parts of the body except the face are protected from
chill. If the body is warm, pure cold night air will do no harm. In hot
climates, the aim should be to keep the child cool, but remember that
young children chill quickly. Cold feet or hands may cause colic.
Warmth is a vital necessity for premature infants.
Prevention of Infection.
Avoid exposing a baby, particularly a young baby, to infection.
Even a common cold in an attendant or visitor may lead to serious illness
in a baby. Do not allow visitors suffering from any infection to see him.
Prevent them from coming to the house, if possible. If the mother or
nurse develops a cold, she should wear a piece of gauze over her nose
and mouth while she is attending to baby.


Mothering.
Proper handling and '‘mothering” of a baby are necessary for his
growth and development. Babies who are allowed to lie all day passively
in their cots and are not “mothered” tend to be pale, flabby, and
languid. Every baby should be taken daily for a walk in the fresh air.
He should be “picked up” only now and again. Baby grows and
thrives better if left to kick and amuse himself, but he should not be left
too long unnoticed or in the same position. Turn him from side to side,
or prop him up with pillows. A change of position is a relief and rest
for baby, just as it is for older people, and it also gives the attention
which, with other things, means the “mothering” of the child.
On the other hand, too much attention can do harm. Baby should
not be patted, shaken, or jogged after feeding. Do not play with him
and talk to him until he becomes over-excited. It is tiring to his brain
and a strain on his nervous system. He should be left to amuse himself
while he is happy and contented. His own fingers and toes are, at first,
his best playthings.
Best and Sleep.
If baby is fed, clothed, eared for, and managed properly, he will
sleep well. Therefore, if he does not sleep, look for the cause and try to
remove it.
As soon as you are able, consult a Maternal and Child Welfare
Nurse either personally or by letter. Ask for a copy of the Queensland
Mothers’ Book, The Child’s First Five Years.
The Father’s Duty.
The father of the young baby must learn to realise the value of
breast-feeding in order to encourage his wife to feed their child naturally.
Far too often a child is taken off the breast shortly after the mother
returns home or after the nurse leaves her. Only too frequently is
the mother, particularly the young mother, influenced hy relatives,
neighbours, or others who will tell her that she cannot feed her
baby. The father should encourage his wife to consult the Maternal
and Child Welfare Nurse either personally or by letter as soon as possible
after baby is born. If the father takes an intelligent interest in the
welfare of the child and shares some of the responsibilities associated
with the welfare, he may do much towards reassuring his wife and reliev-
ing her of some of the anxieties connected with this period. He should
do all he can to save his wife from any emotional strain or upset which
may stop or greatly diminish the supply of breast milk. The father
should see that his wife returns to her doctor or Maternal and Child
Welfare Centre a month to six weeks after the confinement, so that she
may be examined to see that her organs are normal again and in their
correct position.


APPENDIX.
Baby Clothing.
IMPORTANT POINTS TO REMEMBER.
1. The first and main object should be comfort for the baby.
2. The patterns should be simple, so that the garments are easy
to put on and take off. They should hang from the shoulders, and
have no tight bands to hinder development.
3. Materials should be porous, non-irritating, and light.
i. The clothing should be loose, and warm, or cool, as the weather
and the child's condition may demand. Under all conditions, too
heavy or too many garments must be avoided.
5. They should be made in such a way as to ensure easy washing,
drying, and ironing. Avoid unnecessary double thicknesses of
material, which arc difficult to air well.
6. No hard-and-fast rule can be made as to the number of garments
required by an individual child. Very young, small, or feeble babies
require warmer clothing than those who are larger and stronger.
Coldness of hands and feet, and blueness of lips, would generally
indicate need for more clothing. Over-clothing, which should be
guarded against in hot weather, may cause restlessness, fretfulness,
and increased perspiration.
BABY'S OUTFIT.
Mothers are sometimes in doubt as to what number of each of the
necessary garments must be provided for the expected baby.
The accompanying list gives the fewest number of each with
which it would be wise to try to manage. An additional number
(especially of napkins) would be an advantage:—
3 binders 3 dresses
4 rests 3 nightgowns
2£ dozen napkins 4 pairs bootees
3 petticoats 1 shawl


Directions for Baby Patterns,
We desire to make acknowledgment for some of these directions
and diagrams to the Royal New Zealand Society for the Health of
Women and Children.
The Binder.
The binder is simply a bandage for keeping the dressing in place
until the navel is healed. After that, it should be discarded. It is
not required for warmth. Some mothers think that its use should be
continued after that, time, to support and strengthen baby’s back. This
is a mistake. Baby’s movements should be as free as possible, so that
by exercise he can strengthen his muscles. A firmly applied binder
tends to limit his movements. One that is loosely applied wriggles up
under his arms, where it must he very uncomfortable, and is quite
useless as a support. Until the navel is healed, the binder is a necessity,
to keep the dressing in place. After that, give baby all possible free-
dom, and the muscles of his hack will be stronger than they would be
if the use of the binder were prolonged.
The binder should be made of soft cellular cotton, 5 inches wide.
Its length should he 27 to 30 inches. Two widths of the material are
sewn together, leaving one end open. The binder is then turned inside
out, the raw edges turned in and over-sewn.
The old-fashioned stiff cotton binder should, of course, never be
used. Not only must it be most uncomfortable for the baby, but by
pressing on delicate structures it can do permanent ham.
Napkins.
These should be made from either towelling or white flannelette
of good quality; the latter is better. They should be 27 to 30 inches
square.
When taking baby out, knitted pilehers should be used over the
napkin, not rubber drawers. The latter are very heating to baby's
delicate skin, and are both uncomfortable and unhealthy.
Baby’s Vest.
The woven siik-and-wool vests which ean be bought at any draper’s
are very suitable for the newborn baby. The mixture of silk and wool
is less likely to irritate the tender skin than pure wool. If knitted
woollen vests are preferred, a vest of either soft muslin or cellular
cotton should be worn under it.
Infant’s Knitted Vest.
Shetland or 2-ply lingering wool. Pine-bone needles No. 10 or 11.
Cast on 60 stitches. Knit first row plain. Knit 2, purl 2, all along the
row.
Continue till singlet is about 9 inches long, then at the beginning
of the next 2 rows cast on 6 stitches for the sleeves. Then knit plain
every row for an inch. Then cast off all but 20 stitches.


Knit plainly backwards and forwards for the shoulder strap till
it measures 4£ inches long; then cast off. This completes one-half of
vest. Knit the other side exactly the same way. Now sew up the
sides as far as the arm-hole—where the 6 stitches were east on—and
sew shoulder strap to opposing top of singlet.
Finish off neck and sleeves with crochet.
Bound neck, crochet loops of 3 chain, putting the double crochet
into every second stitch.
In the next row, one double crochet into one space, 1 chain 3
treble into next space, 1 chain 1 double crochet into next, and repeat
all round.
Finish off sleeves with second row only.
Bun narrow ribbon through holes round neck and tie in bow
in front.
Petticoat.
This takes the place of the long flannel, and is designed to last the
child from birth for at least twelve months. For winter use light-
weight flannel, wincey, or viyella; for summer, British fuji, cotton
crepe, or silk.
Allow yd. of 27 to 80 in. wide material
Pattern represents a quarter of the garment, and is cut twice.
It can be fastened on the shoulders if desired. If this is done the
shoulders must be cut a little longer to allow for overlapping.
The Cutting. —Fold the material to bring selvedges together, and
set pattern twice to the fold, as diagram shows. Cut one portion
higher in the neck, and use this
portion for the back.
The Making.—Run and herring-
bone the shoulder and side seams.
Cut back down centre for placket
from neck to a depth of 7 in. Put
single wrap down left side of placket,
and face right side with strip of
material. Lap one edge over the
other at the termination, and stitch
firmly to strengthen. Turn in neck
and arm holes and bottom edge
about \ in. and herring-bone, then
finish off with soft crochet edging.
Length, when finished, should
Selvedges of 30-in. material.
be 1 in. shorter than the dress ; so if the dress is 22 in. long, the petticoat
should he 21 in.


Dress or Nightgown.
The anmn pattern is used for each of these garments, the only
difference being in length.
Materials. —Nightgown: For summer, British fuji, fine crepe, or
winoeyette. For winter, wincey or viyella.
Drees: For summer, crepe de chine, silk, cotton crepe, British fuji,
cotton voile, or muslin. For winter, radianta, viyella, or cashmere.
The pattern represents a quarter of the garment and is set on
material folded in four.
Allow 1$ yd. of 27-in. material.
The Cutting.—Double the material to bring the cut edges together,
then fold again to bring the selvedges together, so gaining four thick-
nesses. Set the pattern to the fold as diagram shows.
The Making.—Bun the side and sleeve seams and herring-bone
the raw edges dowu. Cut the back down the centre from the neck to a
depth of 6 in. for the placket. Put single wrap down left side of placket
and face right side with strip of material. Lap one side over the other
at the termination and stitch firmly to strengthen.
Face on the neck with f-in. strip of
material and in this easing thread
tape or ribbon to draw up. Turn up
each sleeve edge about i-in.- and
herring-bone, then 1 in. above the base
arrange binding to take a draw tape
or ribbon. Turn up bottom edge and
herring-bone down.
To make sleeve sufficiently close-
fitting, either gather or smock top of
sleeve (where bow is shown on
diagram), or arrange binding 1 in.
from wrist to take a draw tape or
ribbon (as illustrated).
As an alternative to ordinary hems,
a crochet edging can be worked
round neck, sleeves, and bottom of
garment.
Selvedges of 30-in. material.
Length, when finished; Nightgown, 27 in.; dress, 19 to 22 in. as
preferred. A length of 22 in. is sufficient for a big baby.


Dress (Alternative).
Pattern Magyar yoke design, with gathered skirt. Use delaine,
nun’s veiling, cashmere, silk, or cotton crepe. Allow yd. of 27
or 30 in. wide material. Pattern represents half yoke.
The Cutting.—For skirt cut two widths of
material each 184 in. in length. Cut down
centre back of skirt 3 in, for placket. Width
of skirt to be 44 to 46 in.
For the yoke, which should be 3J in. deep,
fold the remainder of the material to bring
cut edges together. Place the pattern to the
folds as shown in diagram. Cut neck lower
in the front, as shown by dotted line. Gut
down centre back from neck to bottom of
yoke.
The Making.—For skirt seam selvedges
together on both sides with French seams.
Turn up hem. For yoke make French
scams up both sides and sleeves. Bind neck
with crosswise strip of material to form easing for ribbon to draw up.
Finish opening at back with extra piece of material down right side
and double wrap down left side, as given' in pattern. Finish sleeves
same as for nightdress.
Gather top of skirt all round and join it to yoke, making seams of
skirt meet under arm scams of yoke, and have placket at centre back,
distributing gathers evenly all round. Face inside of waist with -J-in.
strip of material cut on the straight. Finish outside with feather-
stitching or French knots.
Length, when finished, from shoulder to hem, 22 inches.
Jacket.
This little garment, which is so easily slipped on or taken off, is
a very useful item in baby’s wardrobe.
While in a car or tram, as the weather changes or the cool of
evening comes, it can supply just the little extra warmth which is
necessary for baby's comfort and welfare.


The pattern (one piece) Magyar
design, fastening in front. Use flannel,
viyella, delaine, nun’s veiling, silk, or
crepe de chine. Allow % yd. of 27-in.
wide material. Pattern represents half
garment.
Cutting.—Fold material to bring selv-
edges together, place pattern to fold, as
diagram.
Malang.—Stitch sleeves and side seams,
herring-bone down if of flannel; if other
material, fell or make French scams.
Finish sleeves as previously described. Cut
front down centre from neck to lower edge.
Selvedges of 27-in. material.
Turn in all edges i in., herring-bone if of flannel; if not of flannel, face
in edges, secure with fancy stitch. Border neck, sleeves, edge with soft
lace or crochet edging. Suggested edging: 1 double crochet into material,
3 chain, 1 double crochet into material. Sew ribbons in front to tie in
two places.
Bonnets.
For a young baby, knitted bonnets are very comfortable; for
winter, made of wool; for summer, of silk or cotton. On no account
should a handkerchief be pinned to the front of baby’s bonnet, to
hang down over his face when he is taken out. Mothers do this thinking
it is necessary to protect baby’s eyes in this way. What they do is
to deprive him of fresh air, which he needs. The eyes of a young
baby should be guarded from strong light by the position in which
he is held. Later, when he can sit up, the hat or bonnet worn
should be of a shape which affords protection to the eyes. At this
age he is inclined to suck his bonnet strings. To prevent this, attach
a short ribbon one side, carry under chin, and fasten with a press
stud at the other side.
When baby is old enough to wear a hat, sec that it is sufficiently
large and eyeletted for ventilation.
The Shawl.
In selecting or making a shawl do not choose a large open pattern.
Baby gets his Angers tangled in it, and it irritates him. Do not get
a very fluffy shawl, from which wisps of wool collect on his fingers,
and from there may be carried to his mouth.
A square of radianta, cashmere or krcmlainc, hemstitched, and
embroidered, makes a very nice shawl. The former one better for
summer; the latter for winter.


NOTES.


NOTES


notes.


Index
A Page.
Abdomen, Enlargement of .. ■ ■ 4
Alcohol, Avoidance of, by Nursing Mother 20
Ante-Natal Care . • .. .. • ■ . - . -1-18
Ante-Natal Clinics in Brisbane .. .. .. ■ ■ .. 2
Ante-Natal Clinics and Expectant Mother 3
Appendix .. 28
Apples 20
B
Baby, Care of, during the First Month .. 25
Baby Clothing 26,28
Baby, Feeding of .. ■ • 24,25
Baby, Immediate Care of ■ ■ .. 10
Baby Patterns, Directions for 29
Baby’s Bath 26
Baby’s Drees or Nightgown 31
Baby’s Exercise 26
Baby's Habits 26
Baby’s Outfit 28
Baby's Sleep 27
Baby’s Swollen Breasts .. .. .. ..10
Baking Soda, Avoidance of .. - ■ 20
Bathing by Mother 6,7
Bathing of Baby .. .. .. .. 26
Binder .. .. .. .. .. .. 17, IS, 19,29
Bladder, Baby’s .. .. ■. . • • • • • 19,26
Bladder, Mother’s .. .. ..20
Bonnets, Baty’e 33
Bowels, Baby’s 19,26
Bowels, Mother’s ■ • . ■ 13,14,20
Bran .. .. 13
Bread, White, Avoidance of 13
Bread, Wholemeal and Wheatgerm Meal 13
Breast Changes ■. .. ■. ■ ■ 4
Breast Feeding . ■ • ■ 24, 25
Breasts, Care of Mother’s 8
Better 12
C
Capsicum, Sweet 12
Cabbage, Chinese 3,12
Cara of Baby during the First Month 25
Core of Baby, Immediate 18
Cara of Mother after Confinement .. .. . • 20-24
Care of Expectant Mother .. . • .. • ■ ■ ■ 1-18
Care of Nursing Mother .. .. .. .. • • 20-24
Cheese .. ■ ■ .. .. 12
Chinese Cabbage .. .. • - .. ■ ■ ■ ■ 3,12
Clothing of Baby .. .. .. ■ ■ 26
Clothing of Mother .. .. . ■ .. . ■ . ■ 8


Page.
Cocoa 12
Cod Liver Oil 11
Complications, Some, of Pregnancy 15
Confinement ~ .. .. 17
Confinement, Preparation for 17
Confinement, Probable Date of 4
Constipation in Mother 13,14
Cramps in Pregnancy IS
Costard 13
Custard Apples 11,20
D
Danger Signs in Pregnancy .. .. .. .. 16
Diapers - .. .. .. 17
Diet during Pregnancy .. .. 10-13
Diet of the Nursing Mother SO
Dimness of Vision 2,16
Directions for Baby Patterns .. .. .. .. 28
Discharge of Blood from Vagina .. .. .. .. 8,16
Discharges, Vaginal .. .. .. .. .. .. 16
Dried Milk .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
E
Egg 12
Examination and Supervision of Mother 24
Exercise to be taken by Expectant Mother ' .. .. 5
Exercises, Special, for Mather .. .. .. 6,7,81-24
Expectant Father, The .. .. .. .. .. 2
Expectant Mother, The .. .. 1
F
Fainting Turns 2,16
“Fat Hen” 13
Fatbercraft .. .. .. .. 2,3,27
Father’s Duty 27
Feeding of Baby 25
Fish 12
Fits .. .. 2,16
Fresh Air .. .. ~ .. 6
Fruit 13,20
G
Gardening Exercise .. .. .. .. 3
Germinated Peas, Beans, and Cereals .. .. .. 11
Giddiness . ■ 2,16
H
Habits of Baby .. .. .. .. .. 2-6
Headache .. .. .. .. 2,16
Health Beqnirements of Expectant Mother .. 1,2,5
Healthy Motherhood 1
Herrings, Canned 12
Hibiscus, Native .. 13
Hygiene of Pregnancy 5
I
Immediate Care of the Baby .. ~ .. 19
Infection, Avoid Exposing Baby to .. .. 26
Intercourse during Pregnancy 3
lodine, Food containing 11
Iron, Food containing 11


j Page.
Jacket 32
K
Kidneys, Care of .. .. • • .. .. • • ■ • 14
Knitted Vest for Infant 29
L
Lime, Pood containing 11
Lucerne .. .. H
M
Mangoes .. .. .. .. •. .. .. SO
Margarine .. .. - - ■ • • • ■ • ■ • .. IB
Marmite .. .. .. .. 11, SO
Maternity Belt, Making of ■ - .. • ■ ■ • ■ • 0
Meat .. . - ■ ■ • • • • • ■ • • .. 12
Menus for Ouo Bay .. ■. . • • - ~13
Milk .. .. " 12
Milk, Dried .. .. ■ • .. • • ■ ■ .. 12
Miscarriage 16
Morning Sickness .. .. • • • • • • ■. 4, IS
Mother, Care of, after Confinement 20-24
Mother, Care of Expectant 1-18
Mothering .. .. . - . - - ■ • ■ - - 27
M
Napkins .. .. ■ ■ .. 29
New Zealand Spinach .. • ■ .. • • ■ ■ .. 12
Nightgown .. .. .. . - .. • • • ■ .. 31
Nursing Mother .. .. .. • • 19-84
O
Old Man Saltbush 13
Orange Drink .. .. .. .. .. 13
Oranges .. .. •. 11, SO
Outfit for Baby .. 8S
P
Pain in Abdomen .. • • 2,16
Pains .. .. .. .. . - . - • • - - 5
Pains, False 6
Papaws .. .. .. .. 11,20
Patterns .. .. ■■ ■■ .. «. -■ 29-33
Dress .. .. . ■ .. .. .. .. 31,32
Jacket .. .. .. 32,33
Nightgown .. .. •• ... .. .. ..31
Petticoat .. .. - - .. 30
Vests, Infant’s Knitted .. 89,30
Pepper, Sweet 3,12,13
Pepper, Sweet, Note on 12
Petticoat for Baby .. ■• .. ■. .. .. .. 30
Phosphorus, Pood coitaining 11
Pigweed .. 13
Piles 15
Pineapple Juice, Canned 11
Pineapples .. 80
Portulaea • .. .. 13
Post-Natal Care 19-87
Post-Natal Care of Mother 19-84


/V
Fags.
.Potatoes 13
Poultry 13
Pregnancy, Hygiene of ~ .. 5
Pregnancy, Some Complications of IS
Q
Quickening ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 4
R
Babbit 13
Best for Mother ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
Best for Baby ~ .. .. .. .. ~ ~ 87
5
Salmon, Tinned .. .. ~ .. IS
Shawl for Baby .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 33
"Show” 5
Signs that Labour has begun .. .. .. .. 5
Signs of Pregnancy 4
Sleep for Mother .. ~ .. .. .. .. 7
Sleep for Baby .. .. .. .. 27
Special Exercises for Mother .. .. .. 6,7,81-24
Sprouted Beans, Peas, Cress, and Mustard .. .. 11
St. Vitus’Dance .. .. .. .. .. 8,16
Sweet Pepper 3,18,13
Swelling of Face, Hands, Feet, or Legs 8,16
Swimming by Mother 6
Swollen Breasts of Baby .. .. 19
T
Teeth, Care of 7
Tomatoes 11,80
Tomatoes. Canned .. .. .. .. .. .. 11,50 •
Tripe .. 13
U
Brine, Diminution of, in Expectant Mother .. 2,16
Urine, Frequency of ~ .. 2,16
Urine. when passing .. .. .. 2,16
Urine Tested . .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
V
Vaginal Discharges 2,16
Varicose Veins 15
Vcgemite .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11,20
Vegetables, Fresh ~ .. .. .. .. 3,18
Vegetables, Uncooked fod Grated .. .. 12,14,20
Vest, Baby’s .. 29
Vision. Diminution of .. .. .. .. .. 2,16
Vitamins 11,12
Vomiting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2,16
W
Walking Exercise .. .. .. .. 3
Warmth for Baby ..26
Waters, Breaking of .. .. 5
Western Difficulties regarding Fresh Food .. .. ~ 18
Whratgcrm Meal Bread .. ~ ~ .. .. .. 13
White Bread, Avoidance of 13
Wliulonii'iil Brond .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
A. 11. Tucker, Government Printer, Brisbane.




:::■ ■:■ ...: z.-.y^
M:n^
mmimmmammMmmmmmßm;mmmmi^mm;:mmmmaemmmimmm
; / ; .:*:
■•••• :• ::.•••• •.•• ■••• •v'••• • / ;• ! •• ••' vv- V • ;••• •:• •.: •• • ••«.•.•■•• :;.i' : -: •'.;;'.•••• ..■•.-.- J !:•••• • :■-., : ::• •. : •:• •••v .: / ••.• • ! . •.v:'. •■’•' :• •' '•.•: •' ••■• •'• •;••• : -a- • .;• :.••:• :•...• •'• !»•• v •••:;• V - :'-- - 1*j”;
