





FACTORS IN THE MAKING OF HISTORY
The Admiral Phillip Commemoration
Sermon
Preached in St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney,
f/~lrcLJeacon cS. 'JoLnsione r
( YHIA., £F.<£Jls(.q>.
12th October, 1941


FACTORS IN THE MAKING OF HISTORY.
“Who hath despised the day of small things ?” Zech. IV. 10.
“He went out , not \nowing whither he went." Heb. XL 8.
“This also I saw , that it was from the hand of God.’’ Eccl. 111. 13.
if HE primary object of our Service to-day is to render thanks to the
Almighty for the life and work of a great man who, by divine Providence
and enabling, laid the foundations of Christian civilization in this quarter
of the globe.
The thoughts connected with such a Service inevitably take us back to
the opening Chapters of the History of the British colonization of this
country, to the character of that enterprise, and to the reasons for which
it was undertaken. Thus we find ourselves occupied in the realm of history,
a school in which, as we now recognise, there is much for us to learn to our
profit.
Since we find ourselves thinking in this realm, it may be well for us,
before proceeding to the special topic which holds particular interest for us
at the present moment, to dwell upon historical study in itself; and, taking
a longer and wider range than our present subject covers, dwell upon those
aspects of history which a less comprehensive review might easily cause us
either to overlook altogether or fail to give them the full consideration to
which they are entitled.
Let it first be said that the proper study of history involves something
more than the observance of the mere sequence of events traced in chrono-
logical order. We can congratulate ourselves upon having outgrown that
inadequate conception of the subject. The logical principle of causation, the
scientific method of noting events in the relation of cause and effect must
constantly be applied, Only by this procedure can history furnish us with its
most valuable lessons, especially if we remember the important distinction
between exciting and predisposing causes and the vast range of contributing


i &
'i ST'
causes in the bringing about of any particular result. Let me take an
illustration from another realm with constant reference to which history
should be studied Geography. The mighty flow of a river at its mouth
belongs to many streams, many storms, the vast evaporation of ocean waters,
the prevalent winds, the contour of the land its mountain ranges, valleys
and plains. Ultimately, the fiery heat of the sun has to be taken into account
in producing the volume of the stream. The Sun, that all too long unregarded
agent in effecting the wonderful cycle mentioned nearly 3,000 years ago by
the writer of the book Ecclesiastes, when he said, “Whence the rivers come,
thither they return again”.
Behind all historical events, great and small, there is a long concatena-
tion of conditions. Some of these are immediate, others remote; some have
exerted a greater, others a less influence; some are easily discernible, others
are less apparent; some are entirely material in their nature, others are
spiritual and moral; some arise out of man’s need, others are derived from his
prosperity; some are due to his virtues, others to his vices; some are found in
man’s hope, others in his despair; some belong to the play of his instincts and
emotions, others to the exercise of his reasoning powers; some are the out-
come of human wisdom, others arise from ignorance and folly; some have
their origin in man’s faith, others in his doubt and unbelief; some are.bound
up with the darkness of sorrow and suffering, others with the sunshine of
happiness and joy; some arise from man’s capacity to see a distant goal,
others from the lack of that capacity. He who would attempt faithfully to
trace the course of history, making, as the historian should, the past the pre-
ceptor of the present and of the future has no simple or easy task. Nor will
he be fully successful in his endeavour if he overlooks the hand of Cod, behind,
within and above all, or fails to take it into account. Just as astronomers
were perplexed by the perturbations of the planet Uranus, and found them
incomprehensible until the mathematical researches of Adams and Leverrier
discovered the existence of the planet Neptune, and thereby found a suffi-
cient and comprehensible cause for what could not previously be understood
or explained, so also there are aspects of history which will continue to baffle
us until we see them in relation to the providence exercised by the Great
infinite and Unseen.


History teaches us that great achievements frequently arise from what
appear to be very humble beginnings. So well is this fact known that it
scarcely stands in need of illustration here. But there is another fact in
relation to this upon which just emphasis has not usually been placed. When
the humble foundations were laid, generally speaking there was before the
eyes of the builders no vision, or, at any rate, no very clear vision of the
grandeur of the superstructure which would one day arise to glorify and crown
their toil. They were builders who were not in possession of all the plans.
But all these plans were in the hands of the Great Architect of the universe.
Let us, for a while, study the builders and the Great Architect Himself
at work. The story of Abraham is just as much history as the story of Alfred
the Great or Richard Coeur de Lion. With his father, his wife and his
nephew a small family party Abraham left Ur of the Chaldees and
travelled up the long valley of the Euphrates to go, as we are told, “into the
land of Canaan.” What in the first instance inspired or impelled such a step
by this family we know not, and to assign a reason or reasons would be in-
dulging in something the historian must avoid —• mere conjecture. What,
however, could not possibly enter into the mind of Abraham or his father was
the effect of this step upon the history of the world. Having arrived almost
at the head of the river valley, after a more or less tortuous journey of about
700 miles at least, from that point, under the urge of a great call and the
inspiration of a great promise, Abraham continued his migration, but, as we
are elsewhere told, he did this not knowing, at any rate for the time being,
whither he went. The original objective of the migration might now have to
be abandoned. He now belonged to a plan which was not his own, and for a
while that other objective was not revealed to him. The journey’s end might
be in Canaan, indeed; but it might also be somewhere else. Two things only
were clear to him; he must migrate and trust in Cod. Geographically he
knew not whither he went. Soon, however, there came the vision of a
tremendous destiny. His own life became actuated by a high purpose and
was seen by him to be a life intended to serve a purpose higher still, though
the details of that purpose remained to the day of his death far beyond his
ken. He did not know of the formulated splendour of the Moral Law to be
given centuries later by the hand of his descendant, Moses, from Mount
Sinai; he did not know of the magnificence of the temple one day to be
raised by another of his offspring in Jerusalem; of the mighty messages and


witness of the prophets who traced their ancestry to him; of the consoling
songs of the Psalmist; of the coming of the Christ, the greatest of the seed of
Abraham, and of the countless millions all the world over who would confess
the Christ as Saviour and Lord, finding liberty and joy in His Cross. Yet all
this followed the departure of a little family circle from its original home and
the godliness manifested in one man’s character. Who can despise the small
things in the making of history ? Who can neglect the operation of moral
factors? Who dare omit consideration of the over-ruling purpose of Cod ?
History vindicates the dictum of St. Paul when he wrote to the Corinthians
that Cod had chosen the foolish, the weak, the despised things for the ac-
complishment of His wise, beneficent and triumphant plans.
“Who hath despised the day of small things ?’’ In the sth Century of
our era, the Huns from the north, under the leadership of Attila named by
Christendom the “scourge of Cod’’ invaded, subdued and laid waste the
fertile provinces of Northern Italy. Driven by necessity and inspired by the
love of freedom, many of the oppressed people fled for refuge and subsistance
to a group of small, low-lying, barren islands near the head of the Adriatic
Sea. They were so few comparatively, so entirely poor, and their place of
refuge was so infertile and desolate that the invaders thought them unworthy
of further attention. But, wretched and poor as they were, the fugitives
were determined to survive and even to engage in commerce with the main-
land they had abandoned. This they essayed to do in a territory so forsaken
that apart from the activities of an humble village and its humble little church,
it had hitherto known no sound save the lapping of the waves and the cry
of the sea bird. They employed themselves in the only industries which were
available to them the making of salt from the waters of the sea and the
harvest of fish drawn from the same source. From the mainland, however,
they had taken with them intangible spiritual possessions, one of which was
their religious faith. What is the rest of the story ? Upon those un-
promising architectural foundations eventually arose the loveliest and most
fascinating city of the world Venice. Out of those modest economic
factors arose a commerce and wealth which for centuries were the envy of
surrounding states and nations. From the simple prayers of those unfortunate
fugitives arose in time the beautiful Church of St. Mark, the admiration of


all Christendom. “Who hath despised the day of small things And al-
though these poor refugee pioneers knew geographically whither they were
going knew it in bitterness of soul they knew nothing of the historical
realm into which their little boats were carrying them when they left in pain
and sorrow their former homes and what was undoubtedly to them an infinitely
better country than that which they were now obliged to occupy. In a real
sense they, too, went out, not knowing whither they went, it was to later
generations and later centuries that the goal was revealed. The desolating
hand of the invader was over-ruled by the gracious hand of Cod.
When, after years of disappointed yearning, Christopher Columbus at
length succeeded in persuading a European Monarch to fit him out with ships
to explore the coasts and wealth of Asia, by sailing across the Atlantic, he
little dreamed of the immense continent which barred his way, the vastness
of that Continent’s natural resources and wealth, the radical change which
the success of his voyage would speedily work in the affairs of the world.
Soon the Atlantic, not the Mediterranean, became the world’s high water-
way. As ships go to-day, the ships of Columbus were trifling affairs. The
largest of the three with which he first set out was only of 100 tons burden.
With these, however, Columbus opened up a new world, a new home for
uncounted multitudes, and a new source of contributions, material, intel-
lectual and moral, to the wealth of nations. Shall we overlook any of the
principal causes which contributed to open the way for that wonderful and
increasingly wonderful achievement the motives which actuated the
Monarch in providing the funds, the skilful, courageous and enterprising
spirit of the navigator, the stars of heaven by which the course was set,
the winds of heaven by which the sails were filled r 3 Shall we forget the toil
of the humble seamen, without whose aid neither the King’s gold nor the
navigator’s skill would have been of any avail r 3 Shall we omit from the
category the hand of Cod that blessed all that was good and over-ruled all
that was evil in every motive and every action from the beginning to the end
of that noble achievement? 3
Just as it was with the opening and subsequent achievements of the
history of Israel, Venice and America, so it has been in the case of Australia.


Of these four histories, Australia’s is the shortest. Given a longer period,
what possibilities lie before us ? Phillip set out for what was practically an
unknown country, though imaginative and highly coloured pictures of its
possibilities were not unknown in England at the time. How highly and how
falsely coloured they were can be judged by us, as, doubtless, they were judged
by him when starvation faced the colony he founded at Port Jackson. In a
grim sense he, too, went out not knowing whither he went. But his ignorance
was also real in a happier and better sense. As he contemplated the
colonists of whom he was in charge, as months after the landing he con-
sidered the paucity of his resources compared with the magnitude of his
responsibilities, as he observed the disappointing character of the country —
at any rate to the extent to which he was acquainted with it; as he was
challenged by the incidence of famine, disease, death and other evils, he could
hardly have imagined the kind of country Australia really was and the place it
would one day occupy in the Pacific and, indeed, amongst the nations of the
world. Presented on all sides by hardship, difficulties, disappointments and
anxieties, we could well excuse him had he no vision of a splendid future
to sustain him, or confirm any belief that he was the instrument in the
Divine hands in the founding of a noble Commonwealth which was yet to be.
He had not in those early days the wider outlook, the prophetic insight,
the strong conviction of Marsden that by the providence of Cod the colony
at Port Jackson was called to be, and one day would be, the centre of radiating
blessing to the lands and islands of the Southern Sea.
But Phillip was possessed of a high sense of duty and a character con-
sistently marked by the highest integrity. It is not merely because he was the
Founder and first Governor of the Colony that we honour his memory; we honour
his place in our history because he was in himself a man worthy of honour. For
such men, Australia calls. In the hands of such men lies for us our continuance
as a free, enlightened and worthy people worthy of the noble inheritance
which this country affords us, worthy of all that is best in the institutions
and traditions of the race to which we belong, worthy of the destiny which
Marsden marked out as awaiting us, worthy of our sons and brothers who
in the dread arena of war are to-day, for our sakes, not counting their lives
as dear unto themselves, worthy of Cod who in love and mercy watched
over us though our eyes have not been and are not yet ever turned towards
Him, worthy to play whatever part His secret wisdom has planned for us in


the counsels and labours of the nations and the coming of His Kingdom of
righteousness and peace upon earth. Were it possible for the Spirit of
Australia to become incarnate and give voice to a heart-searching appeal to
the people of this country to-day, I believe that appeal would be expressed
in the following lines: —
“Give us men !
Strong and stalwart ones;
Men whom highest hope inspires,
Men whom purest honour fires,
Men who trample self beneath them,
Men who ma\e their country wreathe them
As her noble sons,
'Worthy of their sires !
Men who never shame their mothers.
Men who never fail their brothers,
True, however false are others:
Give us men, I say again.
Give us men !
“Give us men!
Men who, when the tempest gathers,
Grasp the standard of their fathers
In the thickest fight:
Men who stride for home and altar
(Let the coward cringe and falter ) :
God defend the right!
True as truth, though lorn and lonely,
Tender as the brave are only;
Men who tread where saints have trod,
Men for country and for God:
Give us men! I say again, again,
Give us such men!”
Of such men, Admiral Arthur Phillip was one.
THE SHIP AND MEN THAT FOUNDED AUSTRALIA.
H.M.S. “Supply.” The First Vessel to enter Port jackson and Hoist the British Flag
in Sydney Cove. Governor Phillip going ashore to begin the Foundation of Sydney,
at 8 a.m,, Saturday, 26th January, 1788, accompanied by Lieut. George Johnston,
A.D.C. (of the Marines) and Lieut. Philip Cidley King, R.N,




W. C. PENFOLD & CO. PTY • DTD. , PRINTERS, SYDNEY
