

THE COLONIAL BAKER
BY
T.P. WILLIAMSON


TASS ROLLER FLOUR MILLS,
P. T. CRAGO,
PEOPEIETOE.
The Yass Mills have recently been refitted
throughout with the latest improvements in
Machinery^
Electric Light installed, and every convenience
for fulfilling orders, large or small,
with the utmost dispatch.
The quality of the Flour is guaranteed to be
second to none on the market.
Write for Our Prices,


ENNEVER & APPLETON,
CHOCOLATE
CONFECTIONERY WORKS,
BAY STREET,
SYDNEY.
Manufacturers of every description of Con-
fectionery and Chocolate.
FRESH NOVELTIES
Always doming Out.
Our make of Wrapped, Cream, and Frosted
Caramels have taken the public taste.


JOSEPH BAKER AND SONS
58 CITY SCAD, LONDON, and
345 Flinder s Lane, Melbourne,
SUPPLY ICING PIPES, BAGS, BOWLS, BAKERS’ PANS, BREI
TINS, PEELS, RASPS, PALETTE AND DOUGH KNIVES,
BRUSHES, AND EVERY BAKE-HOUSE REQUISITE.
White for Illustrated Catalogues Free.
PATENTS
Wash Brush.
Patent Bread Tin
Lollie Rollers.
Almond Grinder
Icing- Sugar Mill.
Steam Jam Pan.
VI
-J&t
Currant Cleaner
Table Dough Divider. Almond Blancher.
Baker’s Patent Biscuit


JOSEPH BAKER & SONS
58 CITY ROAD, LONDON, and
345 Flinder’s Lane, Melbourne,
Supply Every Requisite for the Bake-House, Ovens,
Bread, Biscuits, Confectionery, Cake, and
Chocolate Machinery.
Estimates and Illustrated Catalogues Free.
Egg - Whisking
Machine.
Egg Whisking
Machine.
Cake Making Machine. Hodgkinson Kneader.
Peel Cutting Machine
Muffin Stove.
mm
Patent Oven
Light.
■ EZZai
nrrninnnrrnpr.fi.orn
EC
vSj.BAKLR a S Ons
WWJfJ
m- t-i'i' 1 r 7L
LI [
Paten
Baker’s New Patent Oven.
Pyrometer.


30 York Street, Sydney,
AND—-
A. SAN MIGUEL & CO.,
318 LITTLE COLLINS-St, MELBOURNE,
Supply All Requirements for the Baking- and
Confectionery Trades.
SPECIALITIES.
HOPS.— Pinnacle Brand, Par
ticularly selected to suit Bakers.
HAS/ff.—Our Pinnacle Brand
is of the Primest Quality, is supplied whole
or crushed, and is packed in air-tight tins
or in bags, as buyers prefer.
MiLCHIKTERX
For the Baking and Confectionery Trades Indented on the
most favourable terms.
Correspondence is invited by both Houses concerning any
article connected with the above trades.
ADELAIDE ADDRESS : 7 King William Street.
FREEMANTLE ADDRESS : Henry Street.


THE
COLONIAL BAKER
A BOOK CONTAINING
PRACTICAL INFORMATION
AND
TRADE RECIPES.
BY T. P. WILLIAMSON.
1900.
Printed by A. G. Brander and Son, Yass, N.S. Wales.


THE COLONIAL BAKER.
In introducing this work to the Bakers of Australia, I do so
trusting that it will be but the forerunner of other and better
works by more competent writers. In every calling but
Baking, works and information can be procured in abundance,
but the Baking trade seems to be sadly neglected, and with
the exception of a work called, “ A Treatise on Spon-
taneous Yeast, by a Practical Man” —a little work
that has been of great assistance to me in compiling this book
—there is no work on the market suitable for Australian
Bakers.
When I first started this work it was with the intention of
making a Recipe Book only, but, on mature consideration, I
decided to make it w'hat it is—A book suitable for the trade,
right through.
It will be observed on perusal, that this work is intended
for Country Bakers ; Bakers who very often have to work
under difficulties.
I have had Twenty-five years Practical City and Country
experience, and I know very well that in the large City
Bakeries a book is not necessary, for a man, to hold the
position of foreman, must of necessity, be a thoroughly practi-
cal man, with a knowledge of the governing principles of
Fermentation, otherwise he would not be there. But in the
Country it is different. The rank and file must find employ-
ment, and these cannot all be absorbed in secondary positions


in City Bakeries, consequently a great number of bakers —
with only a mechanical knowledge of the trade—are forced
to take single handed positions.
Naturally they soon run against some of the snags or
sunken reefs of the trade, such as disease ferments, or, maybe,
experimenting with some new recipe that they have acquired
—experimenting with it without any controlling or guiding
knowledge. Another thing, Country Bakers have not the
same facilities that their City have. In the
City—in a well appointed Bakery—a proper Yeast Room will
be provided, proper Fermenting Vats, and every convenience
for keeping them pure. An Attemporator will be provided for
cooling the Yeast, or, perhaps, a proper Yeast Making
Machine. Half a dozen different brands of flour will be in
use, so that the Foreman has a choice ; if one flour should be
weak in gluten another and stronger flour will be mixed with
it, and if the gluten in another brand should be hard, that
flour will be used sparingly, or if a few bags of inferior flour
should be amongst the brands, they will be kept for dusting
purposes only.
Another reason why the City Baker does not require to be
as well enlightened in all the little points in connection with
the trade. In large Bakeries, if on a hot night the dough
should be tearing or fretting, there are plenty of hands to run
it through quickly, and make a very passable loaf out of it.
Now, let us place the Country Baker—that is the single
handed Baker—against the above, and it will be seen at a
glance that he —to be a first-class Baker—must have a
thorough guiding knowledge and be up to a lot of little points
that his City brothers do not require to know—the Foreman or
leading hands of course excepted.
I will take the last item first. Say that a batch is fretting
and tearing on a hot night, what show has a single handed
man with it, unless he be a very fast workman, and every
Baker does not possess that qualification, especially if he be


advanced in } r ears, and Bakers grow old just the same as any
other tradesmen. Even if the Baker should be young and smart,
he naturally will not get through his batch with the same
speed that half-a-dozen men in a large Bakery would. Where
then is the remedy—only in a high knowledge of the govern-
ing principles of his profession. For it must be understood
that it is not only the extra heat that will make a batch fret
and tear, but Wild Cells in the Yeast or Fermentation, conse-
quently, if a man possessed a guiding knowledge he would
know at once whether the temperature or the yeast was at
fault.
Again, if a Baker found that his dough was weak—if he
thoroughly understood the Why and Wherefore —he would
know whether it was the flour or the yeast that was weak.
Providing that he understood his profession he would try the
flour by wetting a small quantity up into a dough, then
washing the piece of dough in water and observing how much
gluten was left. If he found that the percentage of gluten
was small he would know that it was the flour and not the
yeast that was weak. If, on the other hand, the percentage
of gluten was up to the standard and the yeast was found to
be alright, then the Baker could come to the conclusion that
the gluten was hard, and he would take precautions accord-
ingly. In that respect he would differ from the City Baker,
for the City Baker, having a choice of brands, would simply
use less of that brand and more of a better quality.
A Baker, after carefully studying this work, should be able
to guard against most of the difficulties that beset the Baking
trade, for, naturally, during my 25 years practical experience I
have met most of them or seen them met by other bakers.
And as I have endeavoured to put my experience into this work,
and make it, as it were, a chart with the sunken reefs plainly
marked, others should be able to profit by my experience and
guard against the difficulties which beset the trade.
There are plenty of little points known to the trade that
arc not mentioned in this book, for I have not written


anything that I have not practically proved, and it would be
hardly possible for one man to acquire all the knowledge that
is applicable to the practical working of Bread and Smallgoods.
Still, I contend that there is sufficient information in this work,
which, if followed out, will enable a Baker to make Bread and
Cakes suitable for any class of trade.
The Recipes are all good, sound Recipes, and very
nearly every Recipe has been written without reference to a
Note Book, consequently I can guarantee every Recipe
correct—not because they were written without notes—but
because the very fact of being able to write the Recipes
without reference to my Recipe Book shows that I must be
very familiar with them, and would at once detect any error—
printer’s or otherwise.
Every Mixture is explained at full length, consequently a
man need not be afraid to make any mixing. There are
certainly a few Mixtures that a Baker will require a certain
amount of practice at before he will be perfect, such as Pastry,
all Cakes of the Shortbread class, Derby Cakes, Milk Drops,
and one or two others. But the balance of the Recipes are
very simple, and a Baker should make them just as well the
first time as afterwards.
A few explanations may not be out of place here. Differ-
ent bakers give different names to some of the ingredients
used in cakes. For instance, Carbonate of Ammonia is known
to the trade under the different names of Vol., Carb. Am-
monia, and simply Ammonia, not to mention pet names, such
as lightening or lightning.
Carbonate of Soda goes under the three names—
Carb. Soda, Baking Soda, and Soda.
Tartaric Acid is usually termed Tart. Acid, or Acid.
Cream of Tartar is known sometimes as Cream, some-
times as Tartar, but mostly under its proper name. In all
cases where milk is mentioned in any of the recipes, sweet
milk must be used, unless otherwise mentioned. The same


with Sugar,—alway use white Sugar (Company’s I.C. for
preference), unless brown Sugar is specified. In that case,
use Company’s No. 3, or any soft brown Sugar.
In every recipe where Essence is mentioned, I have
given the Essence most suitable to the mixture ; but if a baker
chooses to substitute another flavor, well and good.
Bakers should thoroughly grasp the fact that manufactur-
ing cakes is only one part of the profession, for in small
country towns the master is sometimes also the baker, and
on nearly all occasions where a baker essays to start in busi-
ness for himself, with perhaps very little capital, he is both
proprietor and baker, until such time as he can acquire
sufficient trade to warrant him employing a journeyman.
To those, and in fact all master-bakers, I would advise,
to command a good sale of cakes, keep a good supply, for
customers cannot resist buying when they see the case
full. Have air-tight glass cases to keep the cakes in, —then
they will not go stale. If cakes are shown in the window,
keep them under glass globes, or have a glass case in the win-
dow, and sell from the window, for the light will spoil the
cakes just as rapidly as air.
Ihe same care should be taken with bread. Keep all
surplus bread in a proper tin-lined bread-box, then there will
not be any trouble in selling stale bread. In fact, in the
winter time, I suggest that small country bakers, doing only a
couple of sacks a day, should bake all their bread in the day
time, having- the batch so arranged that it would be baked at
six o’clock at night, then leave it on the boards for a couple
of hours to cool, then pack it away in proper bread boxes, or,
for that matter, into the troughs, and cover it up well. Bread
baked on this principle would be fresher and more moist than
bread baked at 12 o’clock at night and left on the boards until
morning. Let any master-baker, who is also his own Baker,
carefully consider the above, and he will see that there is a
lot to be gained by it. In the first place, he has his night’s
rest, which item alone is quite sufficient to warrant giving the


system a trial. In the next place, he is about all day in case
he should be wanted on business matters. And in the third
place, he has his evenings to himself, either to spend with his
family, or in filling offices and positions as a citizen.
The system is worth giving in detail. Well, to begin, a
man should rise in the morning at, say, six or seven o’clock.
His first act would be to set the ferment ; this would have to
be set a bit warm, so that it would be ready by twelve o’clock.
Then, after having partaken of the morning meal, any cakes
that were required could be made. At twelve o’clock, the
dough could be mixed. This would take about one hour,
bringing the time up to one o’clock.
The dough would require to prove for an hour or an hour
and a half, giving ample time for the midday meal. Say that
the dough was ready by half-past tw T o ; it could then be
boarded, and be in the oven by half-past five or six o’clock.
This would come in well for tea time. After tea, the batch
could be withdrawn and allowed to remain on the boards for a
couple of hours before packing away. A man could then re-
tire to rest any time after nine or ten o’clock. Any Baker
who is struggling to run a business, and do his own work, will
see at a glance the many advantages attached to baking bread
on this plan. The main objection to baking bread in the day
time is that it gets too stale before next day ; but if it is al-
lowed to cool, as suggested, and then packed away and
closely covered, this objection is at once overcome.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
It will not be out of place to draw the reader’s attention
to the advertisements on front pages of the book. If you are in
business, always deal with firms of high standing in the com-
mercial world, then you can rest assured that you will be
fairly treated. The firms that I have received advertisements
fr*m, I have been intimately acquainted with for many years,
and I can recommend them to my readers.


PRACTICAL RECIPES.
No, Page.
1 Buns, Currant 59
2 Tea Cakes 60
3 Chelsea Buns 60
4 Bath Buns, Rich 61
5 Bath Buns, Poor 61
6 Bun Loaves 62
7 Milk Ferment for Buns 62
8 Baking Powder 63
9 Milk Cakes 64
10 Cut Scones 65
11 Carlyle Cakes 65
12 Garibaldi Scones 66
13 Dough Cake 66
14 Sultana Cake 67
15 Garibaldi Cake, Rich 68
16 Garibaldi Cake, No. 2 69
17 Canterbury Cakes 70
18 Derby Cakes (Highly recommended) 71
19 Seed Cake 72
20 Brides-cake (Best) 73
21 Brides-cake, No. 2 - 74
22 Icing 75
23 Almond Icing 77
24 Cheap Icing 77
25 Harangues 78
26 Sponge Cake 79
27 Sponge Cakes 80
28 Swiss Roll 80
29 Victoria Sandwich 80
30 Swiss Roll (Best) 81
31 Ladies’ Fingers 82
32 Madeira Sandwich (Extra Choice) 82
33 Madeira Roll 83
34 Napoleon Sandwich (with directions for ornamenting) .. 84
35 Qaeen Cakes 85


36 Cheese Cakes . 85
37 Cheese Card 85
38 Milk Drop, No. 1 (Special) 86
39 Milk Drop, No. 2 (Special) 87
40 Milk Drop, No. 3 88
41 Milk Drop, No. 4 (Original) 89
42 Yankee Buns 89
43 French Buns 90
44 German Buns 90
45 Raspberry Buns 91
46 Victoria Buns (Special) .... 91
47 Rock Cakes 92
48 Bath Cakes 93
49 English Shortbread 94
50 Pavilions 95
51 Scotch Shortbread 95
52 Fuff Pastry, No. 1 96
53 Puff Pastry, No. 2 97
54 Puff Pastry, No. 3 97
55 Fuff Pastry, No. 4 98
56 Short Paste 99
57 Chester Cake 99
58 Raised Pies 100
59 Mutton Pies 100
60 Sausage Pies 101
61 Fruit Pies 101
62 Mince Pies 101
63 Mince Meat 101
64 Sausage Rolls 102
65 Ecoles 102
66 Banburys 102
67 Brandy Snapps, No. 1 102
68 Brandy Snapps, No. 2 103
69 Ginger Nuts (Special) 104
70 Spice Nuts 105
71 Lemon Drops (Rich) 105
72 Lemon Drops (Store quality) 106
73 Derby Biscuits 106


74 Queen Drops (Special) ~ 107
75 Judges’ Biscuits (Special) 107
76 Busks 108
77 Eatifias 108
78 Africans (Kich) 108
79 Africans (Poor) 109
80 Ginger Bread, No. 1 109
81 Ginger Bread, No. 2 110
82 Bice Biscuits 110
83 German Lunch 11l
84 Perkins 11l
85 Hermit Biscuits 112
86 Custard Bolls 112
87 Custard for Bolls 113
88 Cream Cakes 113
89 Digestive Malt Bread, No. 1 114
90 Digestive Malt Bread, No. 2 115


A Few Remarks that may be
Useful.
These instructions are for the benefit of beginners, but many
old hands may find useful information in this chapter.
Some men will do a thing that is wrong, and do it day
after day, until their attention is drawn to it, then they will
mend their ways, and I trust that the few remarks that follow
will be found useful.
Let us start right at the bed-rock of the trade, —Cleanli-
ness next to Godliness ? I should think so in a bakehouse.
When sweeping the bakehouse do not miss the corners, sweep
under the troughs and behind the boxes . Do not leave an
accumulation of old musty, flour, and othe r rubbish, away in
odd corners to breed disease germs, and then wonder what
made the bread bad. It is only during the last few years that
bakers have taken any interest in the Why and Wherefore of
their profession. Until lately, they were satisfied to work in
the old groove that had been handed down to them by their
teacher, never asking themselves why such and such a thing
should be. Consequently, when a bad batch arrived, either


the brewer or the miller had to stand the blame, when, on
many occasions, it was their own neglect and nothing else.
But, I think, that the majority of my fellow Bakers know
at the present day where, and how, the disease germs come.
For the information of those that do not, I will endeavour to
explain in this little work.
To get back to my previous advice, “ When sweeping the
Bake-house sweep it Clean?” If you have a brick floor and
may, perchance, have spilt some water, be sure to sweep that
spot extra, so as not to leave a coating of dust on the bricks.
If you do not sweep well and thoroughly, this coating will
naturally get thicker and thicker each time you repeat the
performance, until at last it will be perhaps an inch or more
thick, especially if it is in a spot where you usually do spill
some water; such as alongside the trough.
When, at last, this rising lump attracts your attention, you
will scrape it up, then you will understand by your sense of
smell that a vile fermentation has been going on, casting
microbes about to get, perhaps, into your fermentation, or,
maybe, laying the foundation for that horror of the trade, ” the
rope.” I think most bakers have heard of ropy bread, the
wonder is that more have not seen it. It is from some such
neglect that the rope first starts.
Next, when scraping your trough do it thoroughly, have
an edge on the scraper ; do not have it blunt so that it will leave
a thin skin of dough on the trough when you have thrown out
the dough. Never dig the corner of the scraper into the
corner of the trough, thereby making a channel right along
the bottom of it. A trough, if properly used from the start,
should wear evenly and last for years. Just the same when
making the dough, push the scraper each time to the bottom
of the trough, otherwise you are liable to cut a cavity in the
side of the trough, and some night you will catch the points of


your fingers in it, then you will bless it, and wonder how the
hole got there, or blame a flaw in the wood for it.
When sharpening scraper sharpen it exactly square, also
look along it and see that it is perfectly true ; if anything, have
it a little full in the centre, for if the scraper is the least bit
hollow the corners must cut the trough or boards. When
cleaning down the boards, always scrape at right angles to the
wood, that is, do not scrape with the grain nor across the
grain.
The best way to use the scraper is upside down, that is,
with the handle of the scraper placed on the boards ; you
thereby use the opposite edge of the scraper, to the edge that
is used in making dough.
Next, we come to the casks, ferment, yeast, or otherwise.
Now that bakers are going in more for manufacturing their
own yeast, the casks want to be particularly looked after;
for the greatest proportion of bad batches can be traced to
the casks. They must be scalded regularly ; not simply with
hot water, but with boiling water. Don’t stint the water: put
a bucketful into each cask, also put a handful of washing soda
into the water. Cover the cask well, and let it stand for half
an hour or so :' then scrub well. Now and again, omit the
soda in the water, and put in instead, a few grains of Perman-
ganate of potash. This latter article, you can procure from
any chemist. It is one of the best microbe killers that you can
use. It is a splendid thing to use at any time, when you are
doing any sluicing or scrubbing.
Another good thing to use is Bi-Sulphite of Lime. Brew-
ers usually use this article to keep their casks pure.
TO USE : Put a small quantity (say, Jpint) in half a dipper
of hot water, and immediately after you have finished scrubbing
a cask with boiling water, pour the water out, and rinse the cask
with the Bi-Sulphate of Lime and water ; then rinse the cask
with clean, cold water, and tilt it to dry.


Another splendid article : Place some hot coals on a piece
of tin. Put a large handful of sulphur on the coals, and put
the cask upside down over the coals and sulphur, and leave it
there until all the fumes are exhausted. This is a sulphur
bath.
Another good idea to purify a cask : Take a small quan-
tity of unslacked lime, place it in the cask and pour a dipper
of water over it. As soon as it boils up, rub it all over the
cask, inside and outside. Allow it to stand on for a day, then
scrub it off clean. By following this plan, you will thoroughly
purify the cask.
Next, we come to the mixing dishes, dippers, strainers,
etc. Keep them clean and bright. What looks better than
bright tinware ? yet, how often do we find these things, not
only not bright, but dirty. I have seen a baker, when setting
a ferment, take the dipper out of the ferment and without
rinsing it, dip it into the yeast.
It is such slovenly habits as the above that I wish to illus-
trate, that others may guard against them. The dipper is one
of the stumbling blocks of bakers. They do not recognise the
fact that it should be always clean. Do not stand a wet dipper
on dusty or floury boards—if you do, the next time you use the
dipper, you will find a layer of dough on the bottom of it,
whereas, if you had placed the dipper upside down, with the
handle on the boards, and the outside edge of the dipper
slightly protruding over the edge of the boards, it would have
drained perfectly dry and clean.
This may seem a very small item, but it is absolutely
necessary for you to understand that the difference between a
first-class baker and a second-class one is made up of small
items. One man will make his dough a bit better than an-
other—he will put it together a bit better when boarding it—he
will mould it a bit better, and so on, through the night’s work.
But what a difference in the morning ! Instead of his


bread being simply a bit better than the other man’s, it is a
lot better, for all the bits have made a whole.
And so on right throughout the trade. It is the small
items that make up, and it is the small items that I intend to
illustrate. I have seen a baker actually leave the empty yeast
cask stand unscalded until such time that it was required
again, which, in his case, meant a week. To show you
the importance of trifles, I will say, for example, that a baker
is about to make a Garibaldi mixture. This is a cake that re-
quires a certain heat to get best results. If the baker has the
oven too hot, he will naturally burn the cake before it will
soak. If, on the other hand, the oven is too cool, he will spoil
the cake. The man that does not attend to trifles is almost
sure to have the oven a little on the wrong side, one way or the
other. Again, in the mixing; the careless man will not cream
the butter and sugar nearly enough. Result; failure.
Or even allowing that everything has gone right, the
oven at the proper heat, the cake properly mixed and in the oven,
it simply requires attention ; if it is withdrawn at the proper
moment, it is a success, but, on the other hand, if it is with-
drawn a few minutes too soon, the cake will be soddened, and
if it is left overtime, it will be dry and hard, in fact, a totally
different cake to what it would have been, had it been drawn
at the proper moment.
Plenty of our readers will say that I am going to ex-
tremes, but lam not. I have been right through the mill—
apprentice, journeyman, foreman, employer. I have worked
under many men, and I have had many men working under me,
and for years I have been an employer, so I am not writing
theory, but practical experience. I have had the same class
of ingredients mixed together day after day by the same man,
but instead of getting exactly the same class of cake, I have
had a variety, some good, some indifferent, some bad, show-
ing conclusively that the man did not give proper attention to
his work. In other words, neglected trifles. And the man


who wants to go to the top of his profession will find that the
first step towards that goal is, attention to trifles. I heard a
very good narrative about trifles which is worth repeating.
“A couple of gentlemen were collecting for a charitable
institution, and one day as they approached a gentleman's
house, they heard the master correcting the servant for wast-
ing some butts of candles. The two collectors paused, and
one of them said to the other, it is useless for us to call here,
this man is too mean, he will not give anything. The other
replied, that as they had come so far, they would call; and
they did so, the result was, the gentleman gave them a sub-
stantial cheque, and the collectors were so gratified that they
could not resist telling the gentleman that his cheque had far
exceeded their expectations, for, said one of them, we heard
what you said about the butts of candles, and we did not
expect much from you. The gentleman replied : If I did not
look after the butts of candles, I would not be in a position to-
day to give you the amount that I have given.”
And my readers will do well to keep in mind the butts of
candles, and the larger the business they do the more they
will want to mind the butts.
You will get an idea of what the butts mean if you watch
some men cleaning the potatoes for the ferment, or yeast. If
they come to a potato that is not sound, they will, with one
cut of the knife, cut away the largest half of the potato,
whereas, had they cut away the unsound part only, they would
have left f of the potato to go in the ferment.
You will understand the above better if you have to buy
the potatoes yourself and pay 10 or 12 shillings per cwt. for
them. So on right through the trade. One man always
spills a small quantity of flour, or sugar, as he takes a hand-
ful from the sack, another man never spills a grain. We know
which man of the two makes the best baker.
Another thing: The lazy man and the careless man give
themselves more work than the man that is thoughtful, yet
their work never shows. An instance : A lazy man will leave


the strainer unwashed after using it, until such time that he
requires it again. The consequence is—the strainer is always
seen dirty, and when he requires to use it, he finds that the
dry ferment on the strainer requires a great deal of scrubbing
to get it off, whereas, had he rinsed it in clean water immedi-
ately after using it (not half-an-hour afterwards), the strainer
would be clean and bright, and a credit to him in the bake-
house. The self same remark applies to all mixing dishes,
etc.
I think that the foregoing few remarks on trifles are quite
sufficient to set careless people thinking. Who the careless
people are, I leave to themselves; for, very few men will admit
that they are careless. They are like the old booser that will
not admit that he drinks to excess, but his nose tells a differ-
ent tale. So, by a man's work, shall you know him.


A. FEW HINTS
ON THE
PRACTICAL WORKING
OF
BREAD, ETC.
I have, I trust, pretty well convinced the average baker of
the absolute necessity for cleanliness and tidiness.
Now, I wish to impress upon his mind that there is just
the same necessity attached to doing his work well and thor-
oughly. It is all very well to knock a dough together and let
it clear itself. That will do right enough if you are running a
cutting trade, and the bakers are each doing two men’s work,
and the bread depends upon its cheapness to sell it, or it may
do right enough if you are in some out-of-the-way town where
there is no opposition. But if you are in the thick of the fight,
and wish to forge ahead—then it will not do.
If you are working half-ferment doughs, or sponge doughs,
you must put them together well. Do not be afraid to work
them—every double will tell. In this respect, they differ from
doughs made off the yeast. A dough made off the yeast may
be made by simply cutting the dough up and down the trough
three or four times, spreading each cut, and cleaning the
trough well.


Not so, a half-fement dough. They must be made exactly
the same as the old sponge doughs were made. That is—
each cut must be punched and doubled up before passing on
to the other end of the troughs. A dough made on this prin-
ciple, will clear in the making. This can easily be under-
stood, because, in the warm weather, the dough will only
stand about an hour, when it must be cut over, or else be well
put together and boarded.
When boarding a dough, clean the trough well and dis-
tribute the scraps through the dough. A great many bakers
have a very slovenly habit of throwing out the dough and leav-
ing the best part of a loaf on the sides of the trough, which
they leave until morning, and then clean the trough and throw
the scraps away, which means so much loss to the employer,
whereas, had they cleaned out the trough as they boarded the
dough, all the scraps should have gone into the dough. Of
course, I do not mean that the trough is to have its final clean
as the dough is boarded. The trough must have the usual
scraping in the morning, just the same ; but the amount of
dough left on the trough must be practically nil.
IN THE SUMMER TIME,
A man doing single-handed work must, to get best results, be
a very quick workman. He must be able to average 300 an
hour: scale, and hand up. And he must not take more than
an hour to re-mould the same quantity. If he can do it
quicker, so much the better, but on no account, must he sacri-
fice good moulding for speed. He must have both speed and
good moulding. Of course, if a man simply rolls his loaves
up, he can make marvellous time ; but that wont do.
Good moulding is just as essential as good dough-mak-
ing ; but a slow man, be he ever such a good moulder, must
“ get left,” on a hot night, with a batch of 280 to 300 loaves ;
and it is not advisable for a single-handed man to tackle more
in a batch than the above. If he has 400 loaves for his night’s
work, it is far better to divide it—say, one batch of 250 and
one of 150 —than to attempt to make it in one batch.


IN THE WINTER TIME,
Be very careful not to let the dough catch cold at any point of
the night’s work. Most bakers seem to be under the impres-
sion that a dough is like a human body—that when they cover
it up, it will get warm. What gives them this idea, is the fact
that they will leave a portion of the dough uncovered, say,
when they are scaling off. This, naturally, gets cold on the
outside, but if it has not been uncovered long, it will still be
warm inside. Then, when covered, the warmth from the in-
side, gradually warms up the rest of the loaf; but, in the pro-
cess, the whole loaf has lost a certain number of degrees of
heat, and as a baker has to uncover and cover the dough seve-
ral times through the night; if, on each occasion, he leaves
the dough uncovered for a short period, he will find that by
the time the loaves are in the moulds the dough has lost
all its heat, and will take a very long time to prove. How
often have I heard a baker remark: “ Oh, the batch took so
long on the boards!” never thinking, for one moment, that it
must be his own fault if a batch takes too long to come
through. And a great number of men will not be convinced,
when reading this, that it is their own fault. The only thing
that will convince them is—when another baker comes along
and runs the batch through in much less time than they took.
For single-handed work, the proper time for summer working
of a batch of 300 loaves is, from time dough is ready, until
batch is in the oven, three hours, thus :—2O minutes to board
the dough, 60 minutes to scale off and hand up, 60 minutes to
remould (if you have, say, 80 turnovers in the batch, and that
is quite enough to handle), 20 minutes to remould turnovers,
and 20 minutes to run the batch, making 3 hours in all. If
you have turnovers in the batch, they will, of course, be re-
moulded with the rest of the batch before being moulded up
into turnovers. If you have no turnovers, it will take almost
as long to do the batch, unless you have some class of bread
that does not want much proof to finish moulding with. This
is the proper time for summer working, and if a man is clever
enough to keep his dough warm, it should not take more than


half an hour longer in the winter time. Great judgment must
be used in filling the moulds so that the loaves that will stand
the most proof will be filled first, and those that will stand the
least, last.
With the half ferment doughs, a man doing, say, 300
loaves a night, should be able to go into the bakehouse at,
say, 10 o’clock at night; to put the flour in the trough, weigh
out the salt, strain in the ferment and water, and mix the
dough, say, 1 hour. In summer time, one hour or less will
suffice to work the dough through. Then, if you do not intend
cutting the dough over, you are up to boat ding time in two
hours from the time you went into the bakehouse. Then 3
hours to get it in, and one hour for it to bake, half an hour to
draw the batch, and you have the batch out of the oven 6J or 7
hours from time of entering bakehouse. Then, if there are
a few small goods to make you can make them, and finish up
with setting the ferment. The whole work should not occupy
more than 8 to 9 hours, so that if you went to work at
10 o’clock at night you should, at latest, be finished
by 7 o’clock next morning, and there would not be any
necessity for you to go near the bake-house until ten
that night, giving you 15 hours off. Don’t be afraid of the
ferment not standing, it will stand all right, 24 hours won’t
hurt it. Ido not know of any other system where a single-
handed baker can have anything like the same time to
himself.
MAKE OF OVEN.
The crown of an oven should be as low as possible. Bread
will rise better, and have a better bloom in a low crowned
oven than in a high crowned one.
An ideal oven should measure inside 10ft, wide and lift,
long; height of wall from floor to crown 9 inches, gradually
rising to 13 inches in the centre of the oven, crown to be
drawn in from both sides apd ends.


All ovens must be very strongly stayed with iron bars,
running under the sole of the oven and over the crown, con-
nected to strong wooden stays outside the oven, iron stays to
be screwed both ends.
A new oven should be left a week after being built before
attempting to heat. Then start with a handful of chips, lit in
the centre of the oven, and take a week to gradually heat the
oven up.
When baking a batch always have a good heat. Never
“ boil” bread. Bread baked in a cool oven does not have the
same flavor as bread baked in a sharp oven.
A small boiler of water placed in the oven, near the fur-
nace, will protect the furnace loaves and put a nice bloom on
the rest of the bread.
In heating the oven keep the furnace full; do not let it
burn half down and then fill up again, but keep it full. As
soon as you can put a few sticks in, put them in, and keep it
full until you consider that with the amount of fire in the fur-
nace, the oven will be hot enough. Then take care and keep
the coals spread so that no cold draught can get into the
oven. Also half-close the damper so that the draught will
not be so severe. When you find that there are not sufficient
coals left to keep the bottom of the furnace covered, rake them
out, and close up the oven for five or ten minutes, then clean
it out and run the batch.
Do not over-heat the oven, thereby wasting wood, and
giving yourself the extra labour of cooling the oven down,
besides spoiling the bottom of the oven with water.
In heating an oven, remember, that if the oven has been
used that day for small goods, it will take less heating than
what it would have done had it been idle all day.
Also, on a Sunday night it will be necessary to give it
plenty of fire to make up for the 48 hours previous cooling. In
fact, use judgement.


SCRAPER.
This is an article that is very hard to procure. The best
scraper you can have is, to get the handle off of a common
small garden hoe, and get a piece of an old cross-cut saw,
about 5x7 inches, file it square, punch holes in it to corres-
pond with the holes in the handle, rivet the handle on, and
you have an ideal scraper.
If a man is handy with tools he can make lots of little
things ; for instance, a kerosene can will make an excellent
bucket. A five gallon oil drum will make a better, but to
make one out of a kerosene can ; Do not cut the top off but
cut it across from corner to corner, both ways, which will
leave the top in four triangular pieces attached to the sides;
start from the point and roll these back towards the sides and
fold them over on the outside of the bucket. You can either
leave these as a roll on the outside of the bucket or you can
flatten them down. In either case, they will strengthen the
bucket and prevent the handle from tearing through.
Ifyouare in the bush and cannot buy peel blades, remem-
ber when you are cutting them out, to make them over-all
three times the length of the width. For instance :—A peel
blade 8 inches wide would be 24 inches in length, the handle
should be let in to the blade 8 inches, and the blade should be
curved off on the handle end the same distance as the handle
goes into the blade. The best plugs to use to plug the handle
on, is the skewers that the butchers buy in bundles. A |-inch
bolt is not a bad thing to hold a peel together. While I am
on peels I would like to give a few hints on the use of the
same.
Some bakers wear the handle of the peel into splinters.
This is caused by allowing the handle of the peel to touch
some part of the oven, when running or drawing a batch. To
avoid: never let the handle touch the bottom of the oven. Do
not press the handle down on the edge of the stock plate.
Do not make a lever out of the handle by pressing it
against the side of the oven door frame.
If the above instructions are followed, which means, that


the handle must not, on any account, be allowed to touch any-
thing but the hands that are using it, the handle will wear
as smooth as glass, and be perfectly free from splinters.
TROUGHS.
These should be made with very stout wood, not less than
inches in thickness. Do not have them made with too much
slope in the sides. A good trough can be made on the fol-
lowing lines:—lnside measurement, length ioft., depth
i ft. Bin., width, top 2ft., bottom ift. 3m.
To make:—Screw the sides on to the ends. Do not
slope the ends, then screw the bottom on ; next stay the sides by
nailing pieces of board across the ends on the outside of the
trough. Make the lids in two sections out of 15 x 1 inch
boards. That will make a foot fid that will over-lap 3or
4 inches on the outside of the trough. Next nail a strip of
wood along back of trough, on the outside, about 3 inches
from the top, of sufficient thickness that the backboard of
trough will be square when screwed on, and not sloping the
same as the back of the trough. Next, screw a 12 x 1 inch
board, same length a& the trough, on to the back of the
trough, to form the backboard. Place the trough in position
oh good solid blocks. Take care that the trough rests evenly
on the blocks, otherwise the bottom will be liable to tear
away from the trough. In making the lids, allow the cross
pieces at the ends of the lids, in the centre of the trough, to
be the full width of the lids. Cut a piece out of the top of the
trough of sufficient width and depth to take the piece.
All tables, troughs, etc., should be higher in front than at
the back. This will stop the loaves from running on top of
one another after being handed up, whereas, if they are out
of level the other way about, the loaves must naturally run on
top of one another.
The above little hint is worth considering. Try it on one
board. Raise it an inch higher in front than what it is at the
back, and see the result.


TINS, MOULDS, Etc.
Every baker has his own particular style of condensed or
married tin, so it would be useless to quote sizes; but take
this advise. Have them made of the strongest tin procurable,
and have them heavily wired. The batch loaves should be baked
on a tin the same size as follows:—Length of tin, 2ft. loin.;
width, ift. i in; height of sides, 2jin.; height of end, i inch.
By making them this size, a 3 x 6ft. sheet of iron will make 4
tins. Be sure the iron is strong. Use wooden sets at each end of
the tin ; place 12 loaves on each tin ; run the tins in the oven,
side by side, and the result is no centre loaves, you know
what they mean on an 18 loaf tin—no hollow loaves, and
every loaf will break true and have a good grain.
CUTTERS.
Round, Scalloped Cutters. —One penny Bath size: Diam-
eter, 4m. ; depth, zin. Bath, Half penny : Diameter, 3Jin.;
depth, zin.
Tarts.— Diameter, 3Jin.; depth, zin.
Oval, Scalloped Cutter for Shortbreads. —length
6in.; width, 3Jin.; depth, iin.
Plain Cutter for Shortbreads. —Same size as fore-
going.
The proper way to have a scalloped cutter made, is to
have a plain cutter made first, then the scalloped part placed
inside. The scalloped part must reach to, and have the cover
of the cutter for a bearing, and not simply soldered oh to the
sides of the cutter. A scalloped cutter, if not perfectly true on
the face, is a source of great annoyance. To get over this diffi-
culty, rub it true on a good, coarse sand-stone, or file it
true.
Ginger-nut Cutters.— Diameter, top, ifin.; diameter,
bottom, 1 Jin.; depth, 3m. Top to be open and heavily wired.
To use this cutter, keep cutting until the cutter is full, then
turn upside down and all the nuts will come out in a row.
(See Ginger-nuts). All cutters to be made of good, strong tin.


IN MAKING SMALL GOODS,
A baker must adopt a system, that is, make the mixtures so
come in that one heat of the oven bakes the lot. Of course
I mean the ordinary baker’s oven, not a continuous or multi-
tubular oven. With, say, an ordinary furnace oven. If this
is heated up to a good solid heat, and there are four or Sve
mixtures to bake, they would be baked on this principle :
Milk Scones
Tarts or Bath Cakes
Milk Drops or Sponge Cakes
Shortbreads or Queen Cakes
Buns or Cheese Cakes
Derby Cake or Sponge Cake
Garibaldi or Brandy Snaps.
And so forth. Always regulating the mixtures so that those that
will take the quickest heat are baked first, and the mixture that
requires a slow oven last. In fact, work with a system.
A FEW HINTS ON CAKES.
An eggcup full of boiling water in a butter mixing, especially
in the winter, is of great assistance ; put it in as soon as you
have the butter and sugar mixed together. If it is put in be-
fore the sugar and butter are put together, you will find the
butter go into small lumps, and it is very difficult to break
them up.
In using essences, especially fruit essence, the fact must
be borne in mind that they are very much weaker than essen-
tial oils. For instance, a good quality oil of lemon would be
eight times as strong as a good quality essence of lemon, and
a fruit essence, such as raspberry, is only about one-sixth the
strength of an ordinary No. x essence of raspberry. Of course,
the fruit essences are the truest to flavor, but are seldom used
in the cake line. It is cheapest to use essential oils, for they
cost the same as an essence per lb. ,* but, as they are eight
times as strong, only an eighth of the quantity is required.
Whether using oils or essences, never use too much. If the
distinct flavor of the oil or essence can be detected in the cake


after it is baked, too much has been used. The best flavor-
ings for cakes are lemon, almonds, rose, vanilla, and ratifia.
Currants must be washed clean, and allowed to dry.
First, rub them in a coarse sieve, then immerse the sieve in a
tub of water and wash the currants clean , then turn the cur-
rants out on a flat tin and pick the stones out. The best way
to find the stones is to place the currants at one end of the tin
and gradually work them back to the other end.
Sultanas —To be cleaned the same way as currants,
and allowed to dry before being used.
Lemon Peel. —Hard dry lemon peel may be softened by
placing it in a cool oven for a few minutes. Always cut lemon
peel long and thin, unless it is to be chopped up the same as
for ginger nuts.
Creaming Butter and Sugar. —Always remember
that sugar and butter should be well creamed before any eggs
are added. It is much harder to cream it after the addition
of the eggs. If at any time the butter is too hard, and you
wish to soften it, place the sugar in a dish and the butter on
top of sugar, stand the dish on the oven stock while you are
getting the balance of the mixture weighed out, but, on no
account, allow the butter to melt.
When eggs are very cheap use more of them, and less
milk, in any mixture containing eggs and milk.
One or two eggs broken into a bun mixing will improve it.
Always allow a bun mixture plenty of proof, and arm it up
well a couple of times, otherwise the grain of the bun will not
be fine.
Ammonia. —Keep ammonia in an air-tight jar or tin.
Have a small pestle and mortar to grind the ammonia in.
Seive through a very fine seive. Do not rub it through, but
gently shake the seive. Re-grind any ammonia that will not
go through the sieve, and sieve again.
Wash all bread with water just before running it into the
oven.


If you like a gloss on the bread, wash it again as you
withdraw it.
If you prefer a bloom without the gloss, brush it with
melted butter as it comes out of the oven.
TO PAPER HOOPS, DISHES, Etc.
A hoop is a very hard thing for an inexperienced hand to
paper.
The bottom paper is cut about two inches wider all round
than the hoop. The hoop is placed on top of the paper and
the paper is folded over and over, round the hoop in such a
way that it will hold on to the hoop. But a baker must see
one done before he would understand how to do it.
However, to paper hoops : fold the paper on the bottom ;
cut strips of good white paper, about half an inch higher than
the sides of the hoop ; line the inside of the hoop with these.
They caa be cut plain or nicked all round the bottom, and the
nicked parts brought in so that they will be under the bottom
of the cake when it is baked. After the sides are lined, cut a
round piece the size of the bottom of the hoop, and place it
inside, on the bottom. Before placing hoops or dishes on to
flat tins, always have plenty of sheets of paper on the tins to
prevent the cakes from burning on the bottom.
TO PAPER DISHES.
Turn the dish that is to be papered bottom up on the table.
Place two or three thicknesses of paper on the bottom of the
dish. With a sharp knife, scrape the paper all round the
outside edge of the dish—the result is, pieces of paper cut the
exact size and shape of the dish. Line round the sides the
same as hoop, then place the round pieces inside on the
bottom of the dish; bake on papered flat tins the same as
hoops.
TO PAPER A TIN.
For a block cake, wooden sets are always used to line the tin.
Put sheets of paper inside the sets large enough to cover the
'bottom of the tin and reach up the sides and ends (the corners


must be well pressed in); then cut strips the same height as
the sides, and line the inside the same as hoops.
YEAST-MAKING MACHINES.
Proper machines are now on the market for making ferments
or yeast. With these machines, the potatoes are mashed,
the hops, malt, bran, potatoes, etc., are all strained out. The
yeast is then pumped to the top of the machine, from thence it
runs down over an attemporator, and in the process, cools
sufficiently to stock straightaway. The machines are a splen-
did idea, but they must be kept scrupulously clean.


YEAST.
It is important to the baker that he should thoroughly under-
stand the action of yeast upon the materials that he employs.
In yeast, there are two active principles, the one a solu-
able ferment known as Invertin or Invertase, the other a small
cellular body which takes its nourishment from the medium in
which it is placed, and which grows by a process of budding,
except in certain cases, when it increases by spores.
Invertase is present in old yeast in greater quantities than
in new. The special office of the Invertase is to convert the
cane sugar into grape sugar. This grape sugar is of two
varieties. One is known as Levulose, the other as Glucose.
Both these sugars have the same composition, though they
differ in certain optical properties.
A small quantity of Invertase is able to do a large
amount of work, for, so far from expending itself, it is able to
convert twenty-two times its weight of cane sugar per minute,
and go on doing this for an indefinite time.
The action of the Invertase is most vigorous at tempera-
tures ranging from 68 to 95 deg. Fah., its action is stopped if
the liquor is rendered alkaline (such as lime, soda, etc.,) and
it is aided by slight acidity. Yeast itself is always acid,
and the requisite acidity is therefore invariably present in
fermenting liquor.


The cane sugar being changed into grape sugar, the
action of the Invertase ceases. It has no effect on starch,
dextrin, or maltose.
In Malt there is a property called diastase.
The action of this diastase on starch is, first to change it
to dextrin, then into dextrin and maltose, then into all maltose.
There is another principle in the yeast termed zymase.
This zymase has properties somewhat similar to the diastase
of malt, but much less active. It has limitedfaction on starch,
converting it into dextrin and grape sugar. This zymase also
completes tne change from maltose to grape sugar.
Bran contains an enzyme, termed cerealin. The proper-
ties of the cerealin are very similar to the diastase of malt, but
not so active.
The solid portions of the yeast : the yeast cells.
The yeast cell has no effect on cane sugar, but as this
latter is changed into grape sugar, the yeast cell is able to
seize hold of it, and take up a small portion of its constituent
parts for its own use, thus causing the atoms of sugar to fall
apart from each other, as it were. This effect has been aptly
illustrated by Professor Huxley under the simile of a house built
of cards, from which one of the lower cards is removed when
the house, of course, falls to pieces, and the remaining cards
fall into completely different positions.
In this simile the house stands for the sugar; the force re-
moving the card represents the yeast, the card removed the
atoms appropriated by the yeast for its own use, and the new
positions of the remaining cards may be supposed to stand for
the alcohol, carbonic acid gas, and other products of fermen-
tation. The yeast cells do not go on converting the sugar in-
definitely. If not supplied with proper nourishment, they live
for a time partly upon themselves, but, ultimately, are starved
and die. If they are supplied with nourishment in the shape
of albuminoids (such as flour), they increase and continue to
convert the sugar into alcohol until their action is stopped by
the excess of alcohol formed. When the growth of the


yeast is arrested by the alcohol, the conditions are present for
acetic fermentation, especially if sugar be present.
With the baker’s yeast, potatoes are used, for there is a
property not defined in potatoes that has the power to resist,
for a certain time, the acetic fermentation.
The yeast cell when examined under a microscope is seen
to be a small globule, filled with an albuminous substance
called protoplasm. In this protoplasm are seen numerous
small specks. These specks are spores or yeast seeds.
When a stock of old yeast is placed into a brew of new,
the old yeast cells burst and liberate the young cells or spq&es
contained within the globule. Each old cell, in dying or burst-
ing* gives birth to, on an average, ten young cells.
These young cells develop very rapidly, and begin to bud,
that is, throw off other cells ; they, in turn, throw off more
cells, each cell throwing off, on an average, 4 cells ; thus,
they multiply very quickly. After the cells have finished bud-
ding, they then become ripe or old yeast cells, and remain so
until they in turn are used to stock a yeast, or ferment, when
they burst as before mentiomed.
Yeast cells will only produce yeast cells, just the same as
a seed of wheat will only produce wheat. But, it can create
the conditions suitable for the growth of disease ferments.
These disease ferments may be lying dormant in the yeast
itself, or may come from outside causes.
As was mentioned before, yeast cells will produce only
yeast cells, but it must be borne in mind that there are a
variety of yeast cells.
No. I.—The true yeast cell is perfectly round, but it would
not be possible for a baker to cultivate a yeast containing true
yeast cells only. On the Continent true yeast cells are culti-
vated, using one true yeast cell to start with.
No. 2.—The next best of the yeasts is an oval or egg-
shaped cell, and it is stated by good authorities that this is the


yeast that takes the most important part in bakers’ yeast,
being easier cultivated than the true yeast.
No. 3. —The next of the class is a wild yeast, and has a pear
shaped cell. a brew of yeast has been stocked, this
yeast usually starts working first, but as soon as Nos. x and 2
get fairly working, No. 3 ceases.
No. 4 is similar to No. 2, but the cell is more elongated.
This is also a weak yeast, easily displaced by Nos. 1 and 2.
(There are several other bad ferments that get into a brew
of .yeast, but they are all more or less long, thin, rod-like cells,
until it comes to the bacterium of the rope. The cells of
this organism are long, rod-like cells, joined together in
chains.)
Now, these cells, or yeasts, are all present in a brew of
baker’s yeast. In a first-class sample of baker’s yeast there
would be about 70 per cent, of No. 2, about 20 per cent of
No. 1, 5 per sent of No. 3, and the same of No. 4.
If the ingredients in a brew of yeast, and the temperature,
are suitable to the healthy growth of Nos. 1 and 2, they will
thrive, and the yeast will be good; but, if the temperature and
the surrounding influences are more suitable to the growth of
Nos. 3 and 4, they will thrive, and in so doing, they will retard
the growth of the good ferments, Nos. 1 and 2.
This can easily be understood, because, if a certain num-
ber of bad yeast cells occupy a certain space, good yeast cells
cannot occupy the same space.
To encourage the growth of the good cells, great precau-
tions must be used; for it stands to reason that, if a brew of
yeast is weak it must contain more weak cells than good, and
if a fresh brew be stocked with this weak yeast, containing a
lot of weak cells, it is more than likely that the weak cells will
predominate in the new brew, and great difficulty will be ex-
perienced in getting the yeast into a healthy condition. The
only plan to follow is, to make rich brews, such as No. 1


recipe, use extra hops and attend carefully to temperatures.
Have everything, brewing casks especially, scrupulously clean.
By clean, you must understand, I do not mean simply
clean to look at, but chemically clean. Treat the fermenting
tubs to a sulphur bath, or treat them with bi-sulphite of lime,
or limewash them with boiling hot lime. Sometimes a cask
will get thoroughly empregnated with wild ferments and it
will be found impossible to clean it by ordinary means. In
that case, get a burning lamp and burn the inside of the cask
a quarter of an inch deep, then scrape off the burnt part, and,
while the cask is still hot, paint the inside with boiling wax,
or paint it with a patent cask varnish that is now on the market.
If the cask is not of much value, chop it up and use it for
firewood, and procure a new one for the yeast.
Be sure that the yeast room is kept perfectly clean. Bad
ferments are very liable to get into the brew from surrounding
•circumstances. For instance : making a general store room of
the yeast room ; keeping potatoes in it, and some of them
most likely decaying ; or keeping a vessel containing sour
milk in the yeast room ; perhaps, an accumulation of dust and
•dirt on the floor.
Again, bad ferments may come from some cause outside
the yeast room altogether. If there should be stables or a
manure heap handy, or a rubbish heap with decaying vege-
table matter, have them looked to. Bad drainage is another
source of trouble. In fact, to make and keep a first quality of
yeast, requires sound judgment. A man must think for him-
self, and remember, that germs of fermentation float through
the atmosphere, and that they may arise from any of the
causes that have been mentioned, and also, from many other
causes.
Brewers have long recognised the fact that the dust from
malt is a source of trouble. The dust that accumulates on
malt is quite capable of starting the ropy ferment, conse-
quently, when crushing malt do it outside the yeast room.


Old hops are another source of trouble. When hops get
too old they lose their properties, and are perfectly useless for
yeast making. Yeast cannot resist the disease ferments
unless the hops be new and sound.
Unsound potatoes are another stumbling block. Always
use the very best potatoes procurable. It is penny wise and
pound foolish to use inferior potatoes.
STOCK YEAST.
Yeast for stocking is at its best when it is about two to three
weeks old. To keep it from deteriorating, take it from the fer-
menting tub after it has worked through, and place it in
bottles; fill the bottles to the cork, cork them air-tight, and
place away in a dark, cool place. It is a wise plan to become
accustomed to the taste of yeast, then if the yeast should go
“oft” it will be noticed at once. Also take particular notice
•of the appearance of yeast, then if any foreign ferments make
their appearance, their presence will be very easily detected.
If at any time the yeast that has been placed aside for stock-
ing purposes show signs of “going off” or weakness, it would
be far better to use a new yeast to stock the next brew.
The reason that stock yeast is allowed to become old is
because the yeast seems to require a rest to spore, or become
dead ripe old cells, before they are at their best to stock a
new brew. Before adding stock to yeast wort, take a small
quantity of the yeast wort and mix it with the stock. Pour
this from a height from one vessel into another several times —
this is done to aerate it (supply it with air), thereby supplying
the yeast with a certain quantity of oxygen. Then, when the
stock is added to the bulk of the wort, stir the whole up well
and vigorously.
COOLING YEAST.
Yeast worts —yeast cooling ready for stocking—should be
cooled as rapidly as possible, to prevent, as far as practicable,
the introduction of foreign ferments from the atmosphere, and
to prevent the formation of lactic acid in the yeast itself, es


pecially if any malt has been used in the manufacture of it.
It is not advisable to cool it in broad, shallow vessels, for, by
so doing, a greater surface is exposed to the constant rain of
particles of ferment life from the atmosphere. The proper way
to cool it is with an attemporator, consisting of a coiled pipe
of tinned copper, through which a continuous stream of cold
water should be kept running, until the wort is cooled to the
proper temperature. If water is not laid on, this can be done
by having an elevated tank. Should water be scarce, it can
be saved after it runs through the attemporator. Where the
attemporator is not practicable, put the wort into buckets and
stand them in cold water, stirring both the water and the wort
occasionally. If cold well water is used, the yeast should cool
down in about fifteen minutes.
ROPINESS.
The study of this disease ferment would take a treatise in
itself ; however, a few facts may be of use. Yeast cells must
be present for the production of ropiness. If a pure culture of
the “ rope” be placed in a sterilised wort, although the organ-
ism will grow and multiply, yet no ropiness will be produced.
If there is any yeast life present, then ropiness will be produced.
The effect of “rope” on beer, yeast, or other fluid mediums is
to thicken them. They assume an oily appearance and a
viscous consistency, so that when slowly poured out of the
containing vessel, instead of descending in a limpid stream or
a quick succession of drops, they fall in long, sticky threads
like a strong solution of gum or dextrin.
The effect of the rope on bread is not noticed until some
hours after it is baked. It will not be until six or twelve hours
after baking that the vile and putrefactive odour and taste
begin to make themselves apparent. When the ropy ferment
is in an active state of reproduction, it drives off millions of
spores from the bread. These spores settle on the boards,
troughs, mixing vats, etc. They are carried into the yeast,
flour, salt; in fact, it is impossible to escape them. They are


not killed by five minutes boiling, nor by a dry heat of 300 deg.
Fah. The spores can withstand the baking heat inside a loaf
of bread. They cannot withstand the fumes of sulphur if kept
within their influence for six hours. The “rope” can usually
be traced to some neglect or dirt about the place.
Some years ago, a case was investigated by Messrs.
Brown and Morris, in which infection with the ropy organism
was traced to direct contamination of beer with air-sown
organisms, the beer of a certain brewery showed, year by year,
an increasing tendency to become ropy. By a long series of
experiments, they arrived at the conclusion that the source of
infection was outside the brewery. Adjoining the fermenting
room were some very unsanitary premises occupied by a pork
butcher, and by means of a careful bacteriological examin-
ation, these were proved to be the source of the infection. On
the complete cleansing of these premises, the disease com-
pletely disappeared.
The medium that is most likely to attract the “ rope” is
unhopped wort, to which a little carbonate of lime has been
added. The remedy then is obvious. Use an increased
quantity of hops, also a little acid in the yeast, say, two
ounces of hydrochloric acid, or four ounces of cream of tarta
to six gallons yeast —added when stocking. Fumigate every-
thing with sulphur, limewash all walls, and observe thorough
cleanliness both inside and outside the bakehouse. The fore-
going information will put many bakers on their guard against
foreign ferments.
In the next chapter will be found instructions for the cul-
tivation of yeast suitable for bakers’ use.


BAKERS’ PATENT YEAST.
To make a first-class quality of yeast, suitable for bakers’ use,
it has been found by practical experience and applied theory,
that the quantities of the various, constituent parts most suit-
able to a healthy growth of yeast are as follows :
i Gallon water
x lb. Sugar
x lb. Malt
i lb. Flour
3 lb. Potatoes
4 o z. Bran
i to i J oz. Hops
x oz. Salt
The hops are to be boiled for fifteen minutes. The bran and
malt are to be scalded at 160 deg. Fah. The flour is to be
scalded at Irom 145 deg, Fah. to 150 deg. Fah., and the sugar
and salt to be simply dissolved. It is necessary that the
baker (in this case, he would be the brewer), should thoroughly
understand why each particular ingredient is used, also, how
to use them.
THE WATER.
The water most suitable for fermentation is a moderately hard
water. A very hard water is not suitable, nor is a very soft
water. The best plan to follow, if there should be a supply of
very hard water, mix it with half rain water, or other soft


water. In the brewing of beer, the greatest attention is given
to this subject, and it is the peculiar adaptability of the
Burton water to brewing purposes that has caused so many
breweries to be established in that neighbourhood. On the
other hand, the majority of bakers take their water as they find
it, without bestowing a thought on its suitability or otherwise.
The following is given in Thorpe’s Dictionary of Applied
Chemistry as the analysis of a typical water, suitable for brew-
ing purposes:—
Calcium Sulphate 40
Magnesium Sulphate 8
Calcium Carbonate 15
Potassium Sulphate 10
Magnesium Chloride 5
Sodium Chloride 30
108
The above analysis may come in useful if at any time it is
necessary to have any water analysed.
MALT.
This article takes a prominent part in the manufacture of
yeast. Malt is rich in diastase. Diastase is an enzyme that
has the property of changing starch into grape sugar.
FLOUR.
Undoubtedly the best flour for yeast is stone flour, ground
under the old style, with the germ ground with the wheat.
The germ of the wheat acts on the gluten, changing it into
soluble albuminoids. It is for the soluble albuminoids and
starch that flour is added to yeast.
POTATOES.
The starch of potatoes is acted upon by the yeast, and changed
into grape sugar much quicker than flour starch. But it is
not for the starch only that potatoes are added to yeast. In
potatoes, there is a property not yet defined, that has the


power of resisting disease ferments for a lengthened period.
So far, a substitute for potatoes for yeast making purposes has
not been discovered, but for bread-making purposes, seve-
ral substitutes are on the market.
BRAN.
Bran is added to yeast, because the cerelean of the bran acts
on the starch the same as the zymase of the yeast, thereby
helping the zymase to change the starch into grape sugar,
besides adding a proportion of soluble mineral salts.
HOPS.
Hops contain three principles—the essential oil, the tannin,
and the bitter principle. A yeast heavily hopped can resist
disease ferments better than a light hopped yeast, and a yeast
made without hops would be attacked very quickly. By add-
ing hops to yeast, the necessary nitrogen is also supplied;
hops also flavor the yeast.
SALT.
The general effect of Salt is antiseptic—delays putrefaction.
The exact effect that salt has upon yeast is not too well known
yet, but this much is known that it acts as a check—retards
fermentation, and allows it to proceed slowly. Too much
must not be used, or fermentation will be checked altogether.
As fermentation proceeds more rapidly in the summer time,
when the yeast never gets under a certain temperature, more
salt must be used in the summer than in the winter.
TEMPERATURE.
True yeast requires a temperature ranging from 68 to 95 deg.
Fah,, according to the temperature of the atmosphere. If the
atmosphere registers 75 deg. Fah., then make the yeast the
same —75 deg, Fah. The sum total of the two makes 150, and
maintain this, thus ;—lf the atmosphere is 80 deg. Fah., make
yeast 70 —total, 150. If atmosphere is 60 deg. Fah., make
yeast go deg. Fah., total 150, Always have the heat that the
yeast is stowed at, and the deg. of temperature come to this


total. That is, as far as practical; of course, in some parts
of the colonies, the temperature sometimes rises to 120 deg.
Fah. In that case, it would be impossible to bring the yeast
down to 30 deg. Fah., but where this occurs, use extra salt,
both before stocking the yeast and after it has worked through.
It is impossible to set down any hard and fast rule. A baker,
to a success of yeast-making, must be able to reason
things out for himself, and adapt himself to circumstances.
Most bakers will be able to make yeast, and make a suc-
cess of it, from the foregoing remarks. But there are others
who will require the recipe for each particular yeast written out
exactly as it is to be used. Anyone, by multiplying the quan-
tities given by six, will find that the recipe reads:
10. 1 YEAST:
6 gallons water
9 oz. Hops
6 oz. Salt
61b. Sugar
61b. Malt
61b. Flour
181 b. Potatoes
ijlb. Bran.
To 4 gallons boiling water, add the hops, and boil 10
minutes. Cool to 160 deg. Fah. Strain on to the crushed
malt and bran. Cover closely for two or three hours. In the
meantime, have the potatoes boiled, also have a couple of gallons
of water boiling. Srain the potatoes, saving the water that they
were boiled in. Mash the potatoes up, and cool them down
with a dipper of cold water. Mix in the salt, sugar, and flour, and
bring the scald up to about 150 deg. Fah., using the potato water,
and a sufficient quantity ®f the water that is boiling, to do so. If
there should be too much boiling water for the purpose, re-
place it with the same amount of cold water, it will help to
cool the scald down.


When the malt has mashed sufficiently, rub it up well,
then strain, squeeze it well to extract as much as possible;
mix everything together and cool to 8o or go ; stock with 4
pints old yeast or cover it up and allow it to work through
without stock. When the yeast is worked through, stir in
Jib. salt in winter, and ilb. in summer time. This is a very
rich yeast, and according to theory, should supply all the
wants of the trade, but practical experience has proved that it
is not advisable to continue on the preceding recipe. For,
as we stated before, the yeast requires a change. Why it
requires a change is too deep a study for this work. But
brewers have recognised the fact long ago, and whenever their
yeast becomes weak they send to another brewery for a stock,
or, as they term it, “ pitching." This change can very often
be effected by allowing the yeast to work through without
stock. But it is not a plan to be recommended, because
when the yeast is allowed to work through without stock, it
depends on the germs of fermentation that have fallen into
it from the atmosphere, or from germs that may have been in
the mixing cask to start it, and they are just as likely to be
weak ferments as good. Practical experiments have proven
that the yeast depends more on the germs that are present in
the wood of the mixing tub than what it does on any germs
that may fall into it from the atmosphere.
If two yeasts should be made (both yeasts exactly the
same) one in a cask that has been used in yeast making, and
one in a cask that has previously contained spirit, such as,
rum or brandy, it will be found that the yeast in the old cask
will work through much quicker than the yeast in the new
cask. Of course, neither of the above yeasts are to be stocked,
but are to be allowed to work, what is erroneously termed,
spontaneously.
The easiest way to change a yeast is to make a brew


containing different quantities and the flour treated differently.
The following recipes will effect the necessary change.
9To. % YJEAST :
6 Gallons Water
Jib. Hops
ijlb. Bran
4lb. Sugar
4lb, Flour
4lb. Malt (crushed)
141 b. Potatoes
40Z. Salt.
Bring the water to a boil; add the hops and boil 10 minutes,
stirring meanwhile; strain into cask and cool to 160 deg. Fah.;
place in the malt and bran ; cover up and let it sta.nd for a
couple of hours. In the meantime, have the potatoes boiled
and mashed in their own liquor, adding a dipper of cold water
to cool, and thin them down. When the malt is sufficiently
mashed (say in two to three hours from time of covering it up)
rub it up well in the liquor to extract as much from it as
possible, then strain it and squeeze it well. Add the mashed
potatoes and liquor to the malt wort. While this is cooling,
rub the flour and sugar together and dry it in the oven, keep
turning it over to get an even heat, until it is too hot to bear
the hand in, then withdraw it and let it cool. When the
liquo r has cooled sufficiently, add the dry flour and sugar and
the salt; stock with four pints of old yeast (No. 3 yeast for
preference); strain the whole and set away. After the yeast
has worked through, stir in Jib. salt in winter and ilb. in
summer.
The above recipe is against hard and fast theoretical
rules, and will, no doubt, give rise to a certain amount of com-
ment and perhaps condemnation. But it must be thoroughly
understood, that at the present day the knowledge of fermen-
tation as applicable to baker’s yeast is very limited. The


best authorities state that flour must be always scalded, that
is, gelatinized.
According to advanced theories the zymase of the yeast
does not generally attack raw starch, but has limited action
on gelatinized starch. Yet, if several brews of yeast be made
in succession, with the flour scalded, and then one brew not so
rich be made, and the flour and sugar dried, the result is, a
better yeast will be obtained than if the scalded flour yeast had
been continued. But do not continue making the dried flour
yeast. If it is made several brews in succession it is liable to
be attacked by undesirable ferments. Use it once only, then
go back to one of the scalded recipes—No. ior No. 3.
Yeast is like a human body. An instance :—lf a person
takes a small quantity of poison and keeps on taking it day
after day, increasing the quantity gradually, they will at last
be able to take in one dose sufficient poison to kill an ordinary
person.
Brewers use a preservative in beer. If the same preser-
vative be used several times in succession the yeast becomes
inured to it just the same as the human body becomes inured
to the poison.
Ordinary yeast will not ferment dextrin until such times as
the diastase of malt, or other enzymes, have converted it into
grape sugar. But there is a yeast recently patented by
Effront that will ferment dextrinous worts. According to the
description given of the process, the yeast is taken through
successive cultivations, the quantity of Potassium Nitrate and
Aldehyde being increased after each cultivation. It is then
cultivated in mashes containing dextrin, cane sugar, yeast
ash, potassium nitrate, and aldehyde. The amount of dextrin
in the culture liquid is gradually increased after each succes-
sive fermentation, whilst that of cane sugar is diminished
until finally the yeast has acquired the property of fermenting
dextrinous worts. This may throw some light upon the theory
that yeast requires a change.


A good change can be effected by using grape sugar for
one brew of yeast, and cane sugar for the next, using the
sugars alternately, as the invertase of the yeast must invert
the cane sugar into grape sugar before the yeast cells can use
it. And if grape sugar be used instead of cane, the invertase
has not this office to perform. It stands to reason that a
change is effected, and as was mentioned before, yeast re-
quires A CHANGE.
The next recipe for yeast will be found a good working
recipe, and a good yeast for a change, having no malt in its
composition. It is a yeast that is very easily made, and is
very suitable for the half ferments, though not so good as the
preceding recipes for doughing off the yeast.
No. 3 YEAST:
6 Gallons Water
£ lb. Hops
i lb. Bran
6 lb. Sugar
6 lb. Flour
15 lb. Potatoes
i lb. Salt
To 4 gallons boiling water, add the Hops, stir well, and boil
for ten or fifteen minutes. Rub the Sugar, Salt, Bran, and
Flour together. Pour a dipper of cold water into a cask, then
put in the mixed Flour, Sugar, etc, and stir well to a smooth
paste. Strain on to this paste, the boiling Hop liquor—stir
well to get an even scald. This scald should not exceed 150
deg. Fah., nor should it be under 145 deg. The Potatoes
should be so arranged that they will be done by this time.
Mash them up, using the liquor that they were boiled in to
thin them down, also a dipper of cold water. Next mix every-
thing together, strain and cool down to 80 or 90 deg. Fah.,
according to the weather; stock with 4 pints yeast. No. 1
yeast will stock No. 1, or No. 2 will stock No. 2, but it is not


advisable to make the same yeast running more than two or
three times—then change it.
No. 3 Yeast will take a little longer to work through than
No. 2, on account of not having any malt in it. It will also
work a little slower in the ferments. In making No. 3 Yeast,
great care must be used that the flour is not scalded too much
or too little. This can easily be regulated by regulating the
quantity of cold water that the flour, sugar, salt, and bran is
mixed with. When worked through, stir in salt, same as in
No. 2 yeast. Any of these yeasts will keep over a week,
but it is best to brew once a week. Friday for preference, be-
cause by brewing on Friday the yeast has at least 48 hours
before it will be required for use. But any of these yeasts
may be used once they begin to drop, if necessary. With
the aid of the above yeasts and the half ferment, a loaf can
be made fit to grace any table in the land.


HALF FERMENTS.
The term half ferments is used in exactly the same sense as
half sponge, that is, half the amount of water necessary for a
batch is used in the ferment. For instance, say a batch of 280
loaves would take about 23 gallons of water, according to the
quality of the flour. Use 11J gallons in making the ferment,
and 11J gallons added when ready to mix the dough. The
ferment will take about six to seven hours in the winter, and
five to six hours in the summer. The Nos. 1 and 2 yeasts will
work the fastest, on account of the malt. In setting the fer-
ment for a batch of 280 2-lb. loaves, use about 14 lb. of pota-
toes, £ lb. grape sugar, 7 lb. flour, 10 pints of yeast, and 11
gallons of water, and the water that the potatoes were boiled
in. Set at 90 deg. Fah. in winter, and cooler in proportion in
summer. If at any time the ferment should not work satis-
factorily, stir it up well with the balm stick. It does not mat-
ter how long the ferment has been working, stirring it up will
not hurt it, but improve it. Stirring up a ferment serates it,
and supplies the yeast with oxygen. The same instructions
apply to the yeast when it is fermenting. In setting a fer-
ment, the yeast must not be put in until the ferment is the
proper temperature. Put the yeast in last, and stir the fer-
ment vigorously. Very hot water should never be poured into
a ferment after it is ready, for fear of scalding the fermenta-
tion. ' A ferment will not hurt if it is let lie after it is ready.
It may be let lie until the baker is ready to take it. In
America, in some of the hotels, the ferment is set only once or


twice a week, and sufficient is taken out each day to do the
batch.
DOUCHING OFF HALF FERMENT.
When ready to mix, strain ferment into trough and add the
balance of the water, wffiich, for 280 loaves, would be about
lij gallons. Use sto si lb. salt, according to the flour, and
| lb. grape sugar, or malt extract. Mix at 75 deg. Fah., when
the temperature of the bakehouse is the same.
In the hot, summer weather, the coldest water procurable
will naturally be used. The half ferment dough requires to be
mixed light and well. It must be put together well in the
making—not simply cut up and down the trough a couple of
times, but each piece must be punched and doubled up before
passing it on to the other end of the trough. The dough will
take about one hour or less in the summer time, and about an
hour and a quarter in the winter. It will then be necessary to
cut it over and let it lie half an hour, or give it a good knead-
ing and board it. The dough must not be allowed to have full
proof. If it will fiz or give off gas upon trying it, it will have
had too much proof. It is necessary to take it just before that
stage. If a baker understands his trade, he will very soon
find out how long the dough will stand. The advantage to be
gained by using the half ferment is, that bread equal to sponge
bread is obtained without the necessity of setting and break-
ing up a sponge. Also, there is no danger of sour bread, if
anything like ordinary care is used. Bread made with the
half ferment will compare favorably with bread made under
any other system. An extra yield of bread per bag is gained.
Under this system, a loaf can be procured—with great regu-
larity —that possesses all the qualities that are necessary in a
loaf of bread—colour, bloom, flavor, they are all there, besides
the extra yield of five or six loaves to the bag of flour. The
bread will not go dry and chaffy when stale, but remain soft
and moist for several days. There is no difficulty experienced
in selling stale bread, and exchanging bread becomes a thing


of the past. These last two items are quite sufficient to recom-
mend the system.
Any of these yeasts or half ferments require a very large
cask. No. 2 yeast does not work so very high, and als gal-
lon cask will hold it, but for the rest a much larger cask is re-
quired, especially if the flour is scalded too much in the No. 3
yeast, thereby making it too thick ; a 36-gallon cask would
not hold it then. The best plan is to have a xs-gallon cask,
and have a large galvanised tin made, a little smaller than the
mouth of the cask at one end, and a good bit larger at the
other end, so that only the point of it will go in the cask.
Have it about two feet long and heavily wired at each end.
Of course the ends will be left open. When this is inserted into
the mouth of the cask, it will give the yeast plenty of room-
to work up in it. As soon as the yeast drops back out of the
tin, remove it (the tin) and wash it at once, otherwise, the acid
in the yeast will rust it. In the making of the abovementioned
tin, instruct the tinsmith to make it out of heavy galvanised’
flat iron. Wire it heavily top and bottom—the top to be
wired on the outside, and the bottom to be wired on the inside.
DOUGHING OFF THE YEAST.
This system of bread making is not recommended unless
bakers are inclined to use some material that will replace the
germ of the wheat. The roller flour of the present day has
the germ of the wheat taken from it, consequently, when the
germless flour is made into bread, there is no hydrolysing
influence to change the gluten into fibrin and make the bread
moist and palatable. If a baker wishes to make a moist,
nutty, loaf, having bloom and colour, some agent must be
employed to replace the germ. There are several articles on
the market at present that are a great help when doughing off
the yeast, Diastic Malt Extract being about the best. This
is a light amber-coloured malt extract and must not be con-
founded with the ordinary dark extract. Dorase is another
article that will replace the loss of the germ. Grape sugar
(solid for preference) will also give good results.


If the above cannot be obtained, use cane sugar. But
came sugar is not recommended because it is liable to fail, but
it is better than not using anything.
Use about |lb. of any of the above mentioned articles to
each ioo loaves. This quantity is simply given as a guide;
iasemore or less until best results are obtained.
A dough made off the yeast should be taken a little on the
green side, then cut over and let lay half an hour. If the
dough should get full proof, it must not be cut over, but be
well armed up and thrown out.
The proper time for a dough to take off the yeast is 8 to 9
&onrs. The heats can be so regulated that it will take that
fine.
A dough made off the yeast should not be made too light.
It should be made a fair tightness to allow for what it will
give in working.
COVERING BOARDS.
Most country bakers now use the flour sacks to cover the
boards before boarding the dough.
Covering the boards with the sacks serves several useful
jjwrposes. In the first place it does not require so much flour
Id dust the boards, it also helps to keep the dough warm in
lie winter. The dough will not stick to the sacks like it does
IS® the boards ; and last but not least, it saves a lot of labour in
cleaning the boards.
Most bakers on trying this method, will find it very
awkward to hand up the loaves, but by standing well over the
Ssfflard and handing straight down on to the bag, this difficulty
5s easily overcome. Once a baker gets used to the sacks he
mS like the system and keep to it.
WEAK YEAST OR WEAK OR HARD FLOUR.
When a baker finds that the dough fails after being mixed, he
©atarally reasons to himself what is the matter.


First of all it is necessary to find out if the fermentation is
alright. If another brand of flour can be obtained, try some.
If the results are the same it will be a sign that the weakness
is in the yeast. If the results obtained should be good, then
it would point to the fault being in the flour.
If a baker has a stock of flour on hand and is getting
good results, when, without warning, the dough works weak—
that would point to the yeast. If the weakness should be
located in the yeast, a fresh brew from a different recipe should
be made. If the results obtained should not be any better,
and the baker is still convinced that the fault lies in the yeast,
then he must look further ahead. Perhaps weak ferments
have got into the fermenting casks, or some outside cause may
be contaminating the brew.
If the baker is satisfied that it is not from any of the
above causes, then he will want to look to the materials that
he uses in the brew.
Perhaps the hops are old, or the potatoes inferior. If the
malt should be old—and malt will deteriorate very quickly—
fresh malt must be procured. Malt and hops should always
be kept in air tight tins, especially if the malt should be
crushed, but it is not advisable to buy it crushed. Crush it as
it is required.
If a baker cannot get his yeast right and cannot procure a
fresh stock, a maiden must be made. This is done by taking
sufficient yeast to stock a brew and placing it in a loosely
covered jar and standing it aside until it is ready. This
maiden stock must be taken from the yeast wort before any
salt or old stock has been added. It will take about a week
to be properly ready to stock a new brew, but may be used
once it falls. So much for the yeast. Now, on the other
hand, if the weakness has ben located in the flour and—as is
the case in most country towns —no other brand of flour is to
be procured, the flour must be tested to see what amount of
gluten it contains. To do this wet up four ounces of flour,
with water, into a stiff dough ; next, wash this dough under a


gentle stream of water, the result will be, all the starch and
casein will be washed away, leaving the insoluble albuminoids
behind. The insoluble albuminoids are not all gluten, but are
composed of about four-fifths of gluten and one-fifth of fibrin.
But the whole of the insoluble albuminoids are termed gluten.
Next, weigh the amount of gluten remaining. This
should weigh fully two ounces while wet. If it is much under
that weight it will be pretty safe to assume that the fiour is
poor in gluten. The plan to adopt then would be to use less
salt and use a little grape sugar in the dough. Take the
doughs short in the trough, have them a little warm and run
the batch through quickly.
On the other hand should there be the average amount of
gluten present in the flour it would point to the fact that the
gluten was hard, in that case work just the opposite, use more
salt and a little grape sugar, keep the dough cool and carry
on fermentation slowly. With bard flour, if doughing off the
ferment, try a dough off the yeast. Sometimes better results
will be obtained by changing the system. In fact bakers have
long recognised the fact that changing the system is the only
way to change the bread, if it should not be giving satisfaction.
But if they got changing and swopping about without any
guiding knowledge, they would be just as likely to try the
wrong way as the right. Of course they would know after the
batch was baked but that would be too late.


PRACTICAL RECIPES.
Every recipe that is given here is a practical recipe, and is
in daily use. There may be better recipes for some of the
mixtures, and there may be poorer ones. Some bakers may
have a recipe that is, perhaps, better than some particular
recipe in this work, but, nevertheless, they will find that every
recipe given here is a good working recipe, meant to suit both
baker and customer. That is, while giving the customer a
good palatable article, it will give the manufacturer a fair
profit.
10. I.—Buns (Currant)
16 lbs. Flour
3 lbs. Sugar
2 lbs. Butter or Lard
21 lbs. Currants
4 ozs. Salt
Essence Lemon
If made off the yeast, use one pint of yeast. Arm it up when
full proof. Let it lay an hour or so longer: then give it a
good double up and put in the currants. Never put the cur-
rants in until the last double. If the currants are put in when
the buns are mixed, they will discolour the dough, and instead
of the buns being nice and white, they will have a dark, dirty
appearance. If made off of the ferment, use a sufficient


quantity of pure ferment to mix the dough. Make the dough
light, and make it well. Flavor the dough with essence of
lemon. Scale at 5 ozs., and break into two, making each bun
ozs. Roll up and place on flat tins to prove. Place the
tins in the trough or prover with plenty of hot bread, or vessel
containing hot water. Bake in a moderate oven. When
baked, wash with a thick syrup of sugar and water, flavoured
with a little essence of lemon, and immediately turn the buns
out of the tins on to a sheet of paper. Let the buns cool be-
fore packing up for the shop. Price, id each.
Mo. 2.~Tea Cakes
Tea Cakes are made from bun dough, without any currants.
Scale at 10 ozs.; break into two; mould up round; pin out
about six inches across ; make a hole in the centre ; give
plenty of room on the tins; prove and bake exactly as for
buns. Price, ad each.
Mo. 3.—Chelsea Buns
8 lbs. Flour
1 1 lbs. Sugar
1 lb. Butter
8 Eggs
2 ozs. Salt
Essence Lemon
Egg Color
These are fermented as No. 1 Recipe. For egg color, use a
little turmeric, or lemon yellow. There are two ways of rolling
these buns—the first is the best, but rather tedious. Pin out


the whole of the dough into a sheet about J-inch or less in
thickness; wash it over with beaten egg or with melted butter;
sprinkle with grated nutmeg —put plenty of nutmeg on; next,
cut the dough into strips about half-an-inch or more wide, and
long enough for the strips to weigh about z\ ozs. Roll the
strips up from one end ; place it on its flat on the tin; prove
and bake the same as ordinary buns. The other way to do
them is to roll up the whole sheet the same as a Swiss Roll;
then with a very sharp, thin knife, cut slices off that will weigh
about 2J ozs. ; place the slices on their flat on the tins to
prove, Keep the buns apart, so that they will not touch when
proved. When baked, wash with milk only. Price, id each.
Ho. 4.-Bath Buns (Rich)
Ingredients same as for Chelsea Buns—weight 3 ozs, each.
Scale and roll up as for ordinary buns, but do not tin them ;
do them up and place them on the boards, the same as hand-
ing up a batch of bread. When they are all handed up, beat
up one or two eggs in a saucer; also, have some large grained
sugar spread on a sheet of paper. Take each bun, one at a
time, by the bottom, and dip the top of the bun into the beaten
egg, then into the sugar; then tin them, sugar side up. In
proving these buns, great care must be exercised, too much
steam must not be used or the egg and sugar will run off the
buns. Bake in a moderately cool oven. These buns are not
when baked. Price, ijd each.
Ho. 5, —Batli Buns (Poor)
The same mixture as Chelsea Buns, less the eggs. That
brings it down to a common bun dough, with colouring in it.
Scale at the same weight as currant buns. Instead of rolling
up round, roll out six or eight inches long, then tie the strip


in a simple knot and place on buttered tins. Place the buns
close together on the tins, so that they will batch and show the
yellow crumb when baked ; prove and bake the same as ordin-
ary buns. When baked, dredge with icing sugar on top.
Price, id.
10, 6.—Bun Loares
These are made with ordinary bun mixture, and weighed to
suit the town that they are sold in. Some bakers give if lbs.,
whilst others give as high as 2 lbs. for sixpence. if to if lbs,
should be sufficient. Round dishes are the best for bun
loaves. Do not give them too much proof ; wash them with
syrup when baked. Some bakers chop up a little lemon peel
and put it in their loaves.
Ho. y.-Mllk Ferment for Buns
1 quart Milk
1 quart Boiling 1 Water
2 lbs. Sugar
i pint Brewer’s Yeast
or 1 pint of No. 1 or 2 Yeast
Set away in a warm place. When worked through it
will wet up about 6 lbs. of flour. Use fib. butter, ifozs.
salt, and a little essence of lemon. This ferment is very handy
if buns are required in a hurry. Both ferment and dough
come through very quickly.
There are many different shapes that buns may be cut
into, but it is useless trying to teach that part of the trade by
book.


Soda, Acid, Cream of Tartar,
Ammonia €arl>, etc.
Before proceeding with the recipe it may not be out of place
to explain the relative properties of, say, Carbonate of Soda to
neutralize an Acid.
i oz. of Carbonate of Soda will neutralize i oz.
of Tartaric Acid,
i oz. of Tartaric Acid is as strong as 4 oz. of
Cream of Tartar.
Consequently it will take 40Z. of Cream of
Tartar to neutralize 1 oz. of Carbonate of
Soda.
These figures, although not correct to the eighth of an
ounce, are near enough for all practical purposes.
For recipes given containing sour milk, it will be observed
that the Cream of Tartar is only 2 oz. to 1 oz. of Soda, but if
fresh |milk be substituted for the sour, then the proportion
would be 1 oz. of Soda and 4 oz. of Cream of Tartar or 1 oz. of
Soda to 1 oz. of Tartaric Acid. But Tartaric Acid is not re-
commended on account of its working too quickly.
No. B.—Baking Powder
2 lb. Carbonate of Soda
3 lb. Cream of Tartar
1 lb. Tartaric Acid
1 lb. Rice Flour or Corn Flour
To be well sieved several times through a very fine sieve.


This powder will be the powder that is mentioned in any
recipe containing powder.
Sometimes there may be a Carbonate of Soda, or one of
the Acids, stronger or weaker than usual. In that case it is
easily rectified. If the powder shows the slightest tinge of
yellow in the Scones, too much Soda is present, and a little
more Acid, or Cream of Tartar, must be added. If, on the
contrary, the Scones should show a glutenous, leathery ap-
pearance, and not rise properly, too much Acid is present, and
Soda must be added. The easiest way to test the powder is
to wet up a handful of flour and half a teaspoonful of powder
with water, mix it up light and bake.
No. 9-Milk Cakes
4 lb. Flour
6oz. Butter
1 oz. Soda, Carb.
2 oz. Cream of Tartar
Sour milk to mix
Mix flour, Soda, and Cream of Tattar ; rub in the butter; make
a bay, and mix into a light dough. Weigh | lb., break into two
and mould round; mould lightly and quickly; re-mould and pin
out same size as tea cakes ; make a hole in the centre, or
dock ; wash on top with egg and milk beaten up ; bake in a
quick oven. Bake on the bottom of the oven, or have a flat
tin made hot in the oven and put them on the hot tin and bake
in a quick part of the oven. Price, 2d each.


No. 10.—Cat Scones
8 lb. Flour
| lb. Butter
i lb. Sugar
1 lb Currants
2 oz. Garb. Soda
4 oz. Cream of Tartar
Sour milk to mix
To mix : sieve the Soda and Cream of Tartar—put it through
several ; then mix it through the flour ; rub the butter in
and make a bay ; put sugar and currants in the bay, and mix
with the milk into a light dough ; scale at 12 oz.; mould up
round ; re-mould and pin out the size of a plate; cut into four
equal parts with the scraper; dock ; wash with egg and milk,
and bake on hot tins; bake in a hot oven, and as soon as the
scones begin to spot, withdraw them and turn them over on
the tin ; re-place them into a cooler part of the oven until
soaked. Price, id each.
No. 11.—Carlyle Cakes
8 lb. Flour
2 lb. Butter
2 lb. Sugar
2 lb. Currants
2 oz. Mixed Spice
4 oz. Cream of Tartar
2 oz. Carbonate of Soda
Sour milk to mix
These cakes are, of course, very poor, being only a shade


richer than a bun loaf, but for those that want a lot for their
money, they suit very well.
They can be mixed with sweet milk, or even with water,
by adding one ounce of Tartaric Acid to proceeding recipe.
Mix them slack and bake in buttered hoops or dishes, or,
they can be mixed a little tighter and baked in loaves. Weigh
at ilb. 2 oz. and sell at 6d each. Cool oven.
In all these mixtures it is necessary to mix quickly and
lightly, otherwise the powder will expend itself before the
cake, or scones, are placed in the oven, the result will be
failure, and perhaps, condemnation of the recipe. How-
ever do not condemn the recipes, they have all been proved.
No. 12—Garibaldi Scones
2 lb. Dough or 3 lb. Sponge
4lb. Flour
fib Butter
1 lb. Sugar
2 oz. Cream of Tartar
1 oz. Carbonate of Soda
Sour milk to mix.
Break the dough, or sponge, up in the milk, and mix and
bake as for cut scones.
No. 13—Dough Cake.
4lb. Proof Dough
Jib. Butter
Jib. Sugar
1 lb. Currants
4 Eggs and a pinch of Spice.
Mix all together and if too slack add a little Flour, but not


much, for the mixture will tighten as it works. After mixing,
it should be placed aside for an hour or two until it gets full
proof, then mould up and tin in a round dish or dishes ; let it
get a fair proof. Bake in a moderate oven.
The price can be made to suit the size. The eggs may
be omitted and that will bring cost of article Isss, but the
eggs greatly improve the cake and when cheap should cer-
tainly be added.
No. 14—Sultana Cake.
4-lb. Flour
1 1 lb. Butter
2 lb. Sugar
-lb. Lemon Peel
3 lb. Sultanas
io Eggs
i oz. Baking Powder
-oz. Spice
Essence Lemon
Milk to mix.
Mix flour, powder, and spice. Beat up butter and sugar to
a cream. Add the eggs—a couple at a time—beating mix-
ture well between. When all the eggs are in, add the
essence of lemon; then about a quarter of the flour; then
put iirthe milk—about a pint. Mix up well. Add the bal-
ance 6f the flour, and the sultanas and peel. Mix lightly.
If too fight, add more milk. This cake is best baked on a
flat tin papered, with wooden sets round it, making the sets
to suit the size of the cake. The cake should be from 3 to 4
inches thick when baked. Bake in moderate oven. Do not


turn it out of tin until cold. Retail at gd per lb. This cake
looks very well cut and shown in the shop.
The next mixture is a richer mixture and one of the best
for a flat cake.
No. 15.—Garibaldi Cake (Rich).
4|lb. Flour
3 lb. Butter
3 lb. Sugar
2lb. Currants
2lb. Sultanas
*lb. Peel
24 Eggs
Turmeric
Essence Almonds
i Pint Milk.
It will be observed that there is no powder whatever in the
mixture. The mixture being rich enough to rise without
powder.
This mixture like the preceding one is to be baked in a
sheet on a flat tin that has been lined with wooden sets. The
sets want to be cut so that the end sets fit inside the side sets,
the side sets being cut the full length of the tin. Either of
the end sets can then be brought up the tin until the proper
sized space is left for the cake. Line the tin well with paper
using two or three thicknesses of paper on the bottom to avoid
burning the cake.
TO MIX THE CAKE
Mix the flour, currants, sultanas, and peel. Break eggs into
a dipper or other vessel. Beat butter, turmeric, and sugar, to
a very light cream. Do not be afraid to beat it, for on the
beating depends the success. Add eggs, two or three at a


time, beating mixture well after each addition. When aH the
eggs are beaten in add the milk and beat it in, then the
essence. Then add the mixed flour, peel, etc., and mix
lightly. Do not beat after the flour is put in. Spread on the
prepared tin, about two inches thick. Bake in a moderate
oven. This cake to be at its best should bake op rj hours.
Price, i/- or 1/3 per lb.
In all cases were turmeric is mentioned, lemon yellow
or any other butter colour may be used. Lemon yellow is the
best of the lot, but the most expensive, turmeric being the
cheapest.
The same mixture can be used with the addition of
one ounce of baking powder. If baking powder is used, beat
the cake a little after the flour has been added. When
tinning the cake it about 3 or 4 inches in thickness.
A cake that thickness will naturally take longer to bake
than the cake without the baking powder.
Try one cake with the powder, then try one without, and
stick to the one that suits best.
No. 16.—Garibaldi Cakes No. 2
7- lb. Flour
7lb. Currants
3 lb. Butter
5 lb. Sugar
18 Eggs
2 oz. Baking Powder
Essence of Lemon
Turmeric
Milk
Mix flour, currants, and powder. Cream butter, sugar,


and turmeric. Beat in the eggs gradually ; add the es-
sence and part of the mixed flour, and beat the mixture well;
then add the milk and beat again. Next add the balance of
the flour and currants, and beat the whole until the cake is
nice and smooth ;do not make the mixture tight—if it should
be a bit tight, add more milk. If the mixture is proper, it
should bake with a nice, smooth skin, and cut a fine, rich
crumb. To be at its best, it should rise a little in the centre.
Bake on flat tin prepared the same as for previous mixture.
Retail at i/- per lb.
No. 17.—Canterbury Cakes
2- lb. Flour
i i lb. Sugar
i lb. Butter
i lb. Sultanas
i oz. Baking Powder
10 Eggs
Essence Almonds
Milk
Cream butter, and sugar, then beat in the eggs; add the es-
sence ; mix in the flour, powder, and fruit, with a little milk.
Weigh in i lb. cakes. These can also be made plain by
omitting the fruit; or seed, by the addition of a few carraway
seeds. Bake in papered hoops or dishes.


No. 18.—Derby Cakes
(Highly recommended).
4j lb. Flour
lb. Sugar
lb. Butter
2 oz. Baking Powder
12 Eggs
Essence Rose
Turmeric.
i£ pints Milk (about)
Cream butter, sugar, and turmeric. Beat in the eggs.
Flavor with essence rose ; have the flour and powder mixed
together, and mix about half of it into the mixture ; then add
the milk, and beat the mixture up until it mixes with it ; then
add the balance of the flour, and beat the whole mixture until
it is smooth. - Bake in rib. cakes. Place a large strip of
citron or lemon peel on top of each cake ; bake in a moderate
oven—the oven should be hot enough to bake tne cakes within
three-quarters of an hour. These are one of the best selling
cakes that can be placed in a baker’s shop, but there are a lot
of points about making them. If they are right, they will rise
with a nice gloss, and break where the peel crosses them—the
crumb will be beautiful and moist, with a rich, yellow bloom.
But if everything is not right, they will not be so good. If too
much milk is used, or the cakes are not beaten enough after
the ingredients are in, they will fall in the centre, and have a
very coarse crumb. On the other hand, if they are beaten too
much, or not enough milk used, they will rise to a point in the
centre, and will be heavy, with a close crumb. However, a little
practice will very soon show the proper tightness—or rather
slackness, for they are a very slack mixture—that is neces


sary, and the proper amount of beating required after all the in-
gredients are in. These are baked in papered hoops or
dishes.
No. 19-Seed Cake
4£ lb. Flour
3 lb. Sugar
3 lb. Butter
£ lb. Carraway Seeds
3° Eggs
Essence Lemon
Turmeric
J pint of Milk
Beat butter, sugar, and turmeric well ; add the eggs gradu-
ally, beating well between each addition. This mixture con-
tains no powder, consequently it relies on the eggs to rise it—
so be sure and cream the butter and eggs well, for, on this
depends success or failure. When all the eggs are in, add
the essence ; then add the milk and beat it in. If the mixture
has been properly beaten, it will not curdle when the milk is
added ; but if it has not. it most likely will—it is then not so
good. After the milk and essence, add the flour and seeds,
mixing lightly, but do not, under any circumstances, beat it
after the flour is put in. This cake is best baked in a sheet
on a flat tin, the same as the Garibaldi Cakes.
The same mixture can be used with i oz. Baking Powder
added, and i pint of milk instead of J-pint. The Powder is
not necessary, and is only given here because some bakers
make a better cake with Powder than without.


No. 20.—Bride’s cake (Best)
6 lb. Flour
5 lb. Butter
5 lb. Sugar
4 lb. Sultanas
4 lb. Currants
2 lb. Lemon Peel
i lb. Orange Peel
- lb. Citron Peel
i lb. Almonds
1 Gill Brandy
2 Gills Sherry Wine
50 Eggs
Essence Rose
This mixture is sufficient for a five-deck Bride’s Cake. To mix:
Pour the brandy and sherry on to the peel and fruit—this must
be done the day before the cake is mixed, so.that the fruit and
peel will absorb all the spirit. It would be just as well to have
the almonds prepared at the same time. Pour boiling water
over the almonds and take the skin off them ; chop up
coarsely and put them with the peel and fruit, so that every-
thing will be together when ready to mix. Next day, when
ready to mix the cake, paper the tins ; put plenty of paper on
the flat tins before the cake tins or hoops are placed on. The
idea is to prevent the cakes from burning on the bottom—a
trifle that is very often overlooked. Have eggs ready broken
into a vessel; sieve the flour and mix the fruit, peel, etc., with
it; have butter and sugar ready*weighed out in suitable mix-
ing dish, unless the cake is to be mixed on the boards, then,
of course, have it weighed on the boards. To mix : Beat butter


and sugar to a very light cream, adding the eggs gradually as
in No. 15 ; but remember that if the mixture is to be a success,
the sugar, butter, and eggs must be creamed well. When
creamed sufficiently, add the essence and give the mixture
another minute’s beating to thoroughly mix the essence.
Then add the mixed flour, fruit, etc., mixing the whole well.
Tin and bake in a slow oven. This mixture, if properly
treated, will make a cake fit for a prince. It is one of the very
best mixtures for this class of cake.
For an ordinary Bride’s Cake, the following will be found
suitable :
No. 21.—Bride’s Cake No. 2
lb. Flour
4 lb. Butter
4 lb. Sugar
4 lb. Currants
4 lb. Sultanas
1 lb. Lemon Peel
2 oz. Mixed Spice
Essence Rose and Essence Almonds
32 Eggs
Mix same as No. 15 recipe. Only, with this mixture, be very
careful not to toughen it too much when mixing in the flour
and fruit. If the odd half pound of flour is left out of the mix-
ture, using 4 lb. only, then it will stand beating up a little
after the flour is added, but if the mixture is used as given
here, then do not beat it after the flour is put in, otherwise,,
the cakes will rise in the centre and not be so good.
In cleaning the sultanas and currants use a coarse sieve
such as plasters use to take the large stones out of sand. The


sieve should be coarse enough to allow all stalks and small
stones to pass through. The sultanas will not want washing,
but the currants must be washed and all the large stones that
would not pass through the sieve taken out. Wash the cur-
rants in a dish of water, then pour the whole through a sieve
which will, of course, catch the currants and allow the water
to escape. Pour a little clean water over the currants to wash
out any dirt that may have been left behind, and place them
on a perforated tin to drain.
In any mixture where currants are given they must be
cleaned either in this manner or some other way that will
clean them perfectly.
As Iceing will be required, it may not be out of place to
give the necessary instructions here.
No. 22.—Icing for Cakes.
It is useless giving so many whites to so many pounds of
sugar, for it will not work out in practice. Take a quantity of
whites and beat them until they will stand up well. Then add
a little sugar and beat again. Keep on doing this until the
Icing is the proper thickness, but mind that the Icing is not
made thick with sugar instead of beating. It is only by
continued and vigorous beating or whipping that a success
can be made of Icing. Therein lies the whole art.
A Griffith’s Egg Beater is of great assistance to beat
up the whites, and even after the addition of some of the
sugar, but after that it will be too stiff for the egg beater and
must be turned out into another vessel and finished, using a
piece of flat board to finish beating it.
The vessel that is used to finish the Icing sugar in must
be delf or earthenware, or even enamelled, but not tin or
copper, because, when the Icing is beaten sufficiently, add a
little Acetic Acid (Glacial). This Acid would affect metal
and that is the reason metal vessels must not be used to hold


the Icing, even the pallet knife must not be left any length of
time in the Icing, for the same reason. If the knife should
happen to be left any time a rust will be observed on the
blade, in such case, be sure and wash the knife before using
again.
When the Acid is added it serves a twofold purpose. In
the first place it makes the sugar stand up well, and in the
second place it gives it a beautiful white appearance. This
whiteness may be intensified by the addition of a little vege-
table blue colour, but usually it is white enough without it.
The quantity of Acid necessary, can be ascertained by tasting
the sugar and putting in just sufficient to taste it and no
more. Then add a little Essence of Roses.
As for the art of ornamenting, that must be learnt from a
teacher. But for those who have never seen a cake iced, the
following instructions may be useful. In the first place it will
be necessary to have a stand for the cake, usually a piece of
nicely planed wood, especially if the cake is to be sent away,
otherwise a silver tray would suit nicely. Next see that all the
cakes fit level on top of one another, of course the bottom cake
will be the largest, each cake being about 2 inches smaller in
diameter, but every cake must be about the same height.
When the cakes have been trimmed so that they will fit
squarely on top of one another, take the largest one and
brush it well, and then wipe it with a damp cloth.
This will take all the crumbs off of it. If this were not done,
the crumbs would be likely to give trouble when Icing the
cake. When the cake is thoroughly brushed, place it fairly on
the centre of the board. Continue on with the rest of the cakes
in the same manner, placing each cake on top of the previous
one, with a spoonful of Icing between each, and also on the
board.
When all the cakes are fastened together, take the pallet
knife and start on top of the cake, smoothing the Icing all
over the top, next round the side of top cake, then the top of


second cake—that is the part that shows, for, of course, the
top cake will cover the second cake all but a rim about an
inch wide. Continue on right down until all the cakes are
covered. This must be allowed to dry before being ornamented.
No, 23.—Almond Icing
5 Whites of Eggs
2lb. Almonds
2lb. Icing Sugar (about)
Rose Water
To Prepare : Blanch the almonds, that is, pour boiling water
over them and take the skins off. Then crush in a wedge-
wood mortar, pouring a little rose water over them to prevent
them going oily, it will also flavor the mixture. When the
almonds are thoroughly crushed, beat the whites of the eggs,
and mix the eggs, sugar, and almonds, together. This will
make a very thick Icing. It is placed as a covering for
Wedding Cakes before they are Iced with the Sugar Icing.
To place it on the cake take a small lump and flatten it
between the hands, using plenty of dry Icing Sugar to prevent
it from sticking. Press it onto the cake with the flat of the
hand or fingers and continue until all the cakes are covered.
The Almond Icing should be put on about a quarter of an inch
in thickness. It is a delicious sweetmeat but expensive, and
is only used on the best bridescakes.
No. 24.—Cheap Icing,
This is made by boiling a couple of pounds of good white
sugar and a little Tartaric Acid. Damp the sugar with water
and boil for about 5 minutes. Take off the fire, let it stand a
few minutes. Whip up the white of one egg, then whip the


warm sugar and the beaten white together. This, if boiled
sufficiently, will set as it cools.
No. 25.—Harangues.
8 Whites of Eggs
i-lb. Icing sugar
Essence Rose
Acetic Acid
Beat the whites to a very stiff froth. Add the sugar gradu-
ally, beating well. This mixture must be beaten until it will
stand up well. Then add a little Acid, but not enough to
taste it. Then add a little Essence of Rose. Place a sheet
of paper on a flat tin and spoon out, using a teaspoonful for
each Marangue. Sprinkle with Nonpariels or other small
lollies. Bake, or rather dry, in a very cold oven. If the oven
colours the Harangues it is too hot, they should come out
white. The usual time to bake them is just before the oven is
lit at night, so as to get the oven at its coldest point. After
they are baked, if they stick to the paper, wet the paper on the
opposite side. They will then come off very easily. The best
way to tin them is to have a bag and a piece of pipe, like the
end of a funnel. The bag will want to be about 12 inches
long and about six inches across at the large end, and large
enough to admit the tin pipe at the small end, say about
J inch, and pipe tapering to J inch. Place the mixture m this
bag and squeeze out any size or shape required.


SPONGE MIXTURES.
No. 26.—Sponge Cake
10 Eggs
i lb. Sugar
i lb. Flour (sieved)
Essence of Lemon
Beat the eggs and sugar to a stiff mixture ; add the essence ;
mix the flour in lightly ; bake in papered hoops or on a
papered flat tin the same as Garibaldi cake ; to take the paper
off the cake after it is baked, wet it.
The whole art of making Sponge cake is in the beating.
An egg-beater should be used for all sponge mixtures, but do
not beat the mixture too much—too much is just as bad as too
little. Plenty of bakehouses do not possess an egg-beater.
In that case, have two vessels, one containing hot water, and
one containing the mixture ; place the one containing the
mixture inside of the one with the hot water in it, so that the
hot water will surround the inner vessel ; beat briskly with a
wire whisk, and the mixture will soon get stiff. The old plan
to tell when the mixture was stiff enough, was to hold the
whisk above the mixture, allowing the mixture to run from the
whisk on to the mixture in the vessel, at the same time mak-
ing the figure eight in the air with the whisk—of course the
mixture running from the whisk makes an eight on top of the
mixture in the vessel. The test is—that if the eight on top


of the mixture remains in sight long enough to be seen dis-
tinctly before sinking into the bulk of the mixture, the eggs
and sugar are beaten sufficiently ; the essence is then
added, and the flour mixed lightly in. These directions apply
to all the sponge mixtures.
No. 27,—Sponge Cakes
The same mixture as the previous one. Bake in buttered
patty tins. Warm oven. Should bake in a few minutes.
No. 28-Swiss Roll
12 Eggs
i lb Sugar
1 lb. Flour (sieved)
Essence Lemon
2 lb. Raspberry Jam
This mixture will make two rolls. Mix the same as sponge
cakes. To bake —have two flat tins with a sheet of paper on
each tin—a page of an ordinary newspaper will do. Pour half
the mixture on to each paper and spread it with the pallet
knife; make it about a quarter of an inch thick; bake in a
sharp oven, and do not over-bake it, or it will not roll. When
baked, turn the rolls on to sheets of paper on the boards,
bottom up ; wet the paper and remove it from the roll; spread
i lb. of jam on each roll and roll up from the end ; roll it tight
for the first turn, and then loosely for the rest; dredge with
Icing sugar on top. Sold at from 1/3 to 1/6 per lb.
No. 29.—Victoria Sandwich
Same mixture as Swiss Roll. There are two ways of baking
these. One is to have sandwich plates, that is, round tins


about 8 inches across and | inch deep. These are but-
tered and then dusted with flour, and half filled with the
mixture. They are baked in a warm oven ; when baked,
turn out of the tins, bottom side up; spread half of them, with
jam, then place those that are not jammed on top of those that
are, putting the two bottom sides together ; dredge thickly
with Icing sugar. Sell at i/- each, or cut into eight and retail
at three-half-pence each.
The other way to do them is to do without the tins and
pour a sufficient quantity on to a sheet of paper and bake; but
it takes experience to do this, and even then it is not as satis-
factory as the hoops or plates.
No* 30*—Swiss 801 l (Best)
(Highly recommended).
24 Eggs
21 oz. Sugar
21 oz. Flour (sieved)
3 oz. Butter
Essence Lemon
3 lb. Raspberry Jam
Beat eggs and sugar same as Sponge Cake ; chop the butter
into the flour—chop it as fine as possible, but do not rub it in,
or it will make the roll heavy ; flavor the beaten eggs and
sugar, and mix the butter and flour in lightly ; bake as in pre-
ceding recipe for Swiss Rolls. This quantity is sufficient for
three rolls of 2 lb. weight each. Retail at 1/6 per lb. Some
bakers do not like butter in the rolls ; in that case, simply
omit the butter.


No. 31.—Ladies’ Fingers.
These may be made from either of the above Swiss Roll reci-
pes—the poorest mixture for preference. These also can be
baked in proper moulds, or on paper. If baked in the
moulds the top will be flat and the bottom round ; if baked on
paper the bottom will be flat and the top round. They are
usually run through a bag the same as marangues,
making them about 4 inches long, thick at each end and thin
in the centre. When baked, jam on the flat side and put two
together. There should not be more than two teaspoofuls of
mixture in each half. id. each.
Sometimes the ladies fingers are covered with coloured
sugar. To do this, wash the top with white of egg after they
are baked, and dredge with coloured sugar. Any coarse
sugar can be coloured by rubbing in a little roseine or
cochineal.
No. 32.—Madeira Sandwich (Extra
Choice).
1 Jib. Flour
1 lb. Butter
1 lb. Sugar
J oz. Carbonate Ammonia (crushed)
10 Eggs
Essence Lemon
Raspberry Jam.
Beat butter and sugar w r ell. Beat in eggs gradually. Have
the flour and ammonia sieved together. Flavor the mixture
and mix in the sieved flour and ammonia. This must be
mixed in lightly, otherwise the mixture will be heavy. Spread


with a pallet knife on sandwich plates. The plates must be
first buttered and then dredged with flour, giving the plates a
tap upside down to knock off any superfluous flour. Bake on
the oven bottom or on a hot flat tin. Hot oven. When
baked, turn upside down on paper or flour sacks. Jam and
dredge the same as Victoria Sandwich.
This sandwich mixture is the best of all. If these sand-
wiches are introduced into a shop that has not made them
before, it will be found that they command a ready and con-
tinuous sale, giving great satisfaction.
The plates for these sandwiches are 8 inches in diameter
and J inch deep. They are not wired, but simply turned up a
J inch round the edge. In filling the plates with the pallet
knife, have the knife long enough to reach right across the
plate, by so doing the mixture must be spread evenly the
height of the plate.
No. 33.—Madeira Roll.
i--lb. Flour
ilb. Butter
ilb. Sugar
14 Eggs
\oz. Vol. (Carbonate Ammonia)
Essence Lemon
Raspberry Jam.
Mix the same as Madeira Sandwich. Spread and bake on a
sheet of paper the same as Swiss Roll. This is a much
superior roll to Swiss Roll, but it will take some experience to
be able to bake this mixture so that it will roll. Bake in a hot
oven and bake lightly. After baking, jam, roll up, dredge
with Icing sugar on top. 1/6 lb.
In the event of the mixture refusing to roll, make Napo-
leon Sandwiches out of it.


No. 34.—Napoleon Sandwich.
To make these, first bake a sheet of Madeira or Victoria
Sandwich; have it about J inch thick when baked. Next
bake two sheets of well docked puff paste the same size.
Jam the two sheets of paste and place the sheet of Madeira
mixture between. Place the whole between two sheets of
paper and lay a flat tin on it. Leave it to set together.
These can be simply cut into strips and sold, or, can be Iced,
and broken almonds placed on top, or, make some Icing sugar,
do not make it too .stiff, make it so that it will run a little.
Next divide it into four equal parts, leave one part white,
, colour one part pink, one part blue, and one part yellow, using
vegetable colours only. Have four bags and pipes or four
paper cones. Run a line (commencing on one side of the
sheet of Napoleon), of one colour, then another line far
enough away from the first one to admit of three more lines
between. Continue until sufficient lines are on, then start
with another colour and run a line alongside of the first lines
drawn, this will then leave room enough for two more lines
in each space. Run the third colour alongside the first two
colours, leaving room for the last colour. Then run in the
last colour. This will fill up the last space, and the sheet of
Napoleon will be Iced all over in alternate colours. This Icing
must not dry quickly but must run a little. This can be done
by the addition of a little cream in the Icing.
Next, take the pallet knife, and using the back of it, start
at one end of the Icing and pull the back of the knife across
the lines of Icing. Do this about every half inch. This will
blend all the colours together and give it a nice wavy appear-
ance, and to the uninitiated it is a mystery how it was done.
Cut the mixture into strips about 4 or 5 inches long and about
1 .1 wide. Price 3d.
Another w'ay to ornament the top is to cover it with
chocolate, and ornament with coloured jelly. To melt the
chocolate place some block chocolate in a basin with some


sugai. Stand the basin over a saucepan of boiling water.
This will melt the chocolate and sugar, which may be spread
■on with a pallet knife. If the chocolate is already sweetened, do
not add any sugar. Almonds blanched and split may also be
placed on top.
Another way. Ice the top of the Napoleon, and while the
icing is still wet, cover thickly with dissicated cocoanut.
No. 36 Queen Cakes (Best)
The same mixture as Madeira Sandwich. Have patty tins well
buttered; place a few currants in the bottom of each tin;
spread the mixture in, but keep it hollow in the centre, other-
wise the tin will be too full, and the mixture will run over the
side.
No. 36—Cheese Cakes
Cut out puff paste with a scalloped cutter a size larger than a
patty tin ; line the patty tin with the paste, and place a spoon-
ful of cheese curd or Queen cake mixture in the centre ; put a
very thin strip of paste on top of the mixture—put it on in the
shape of the figure 8, or any way with a curve in it, but do not
put it on straight—it does not look so well.
No. 37.—Cheese Curd
i lb. Butter
i lb. Sugar
i lb. Potatoes
I lb. Currants
8 Eggs
Essence Lemon
Boil the potatoes, peel them and let them get cold ; they are best


if boiled the night before ; when cold, smash up with the rolling
pin on the boards, and mix the currants with them ; beat up
butter and sugar as usual, adding the eggs ; flavour, and mix
in the potatoes and currants.
No. 38.—Milk Drops, No. 1 (Special).
(H ighly recommended).
4 lb. Flour
2 lb. Sugar
i lb. Butter
12 Eggs
i oz. Garb. Ammonia (Vol.)
i oz. Baking Powder
i pint Milk (about)
Essence Lemon
Cream butter and sugar, adding the eggs as usual; have the
vol, powder, and flour sieved together; mix half of this with
the butter, etc.; flavour ; add the milk —beat it well into the
mixture ; then add the balance of the flour, beating well after
all the ingredients are in. To bake, spoon on to a buttered flat
tin—a dessert spoonful for each cake; place a piece of lemon
peel on top of each cake, and bake in a warm oven ; stir the
mixture up between each tinful. If the cakes run too flat, too
much milk has been used, and if they do not spread enough,
too little milk has been used, and some more must be added.
This mixture differs from most mixtures, inasmuch as it will
stand plenty of beating up after all the ingredients are in.
This is the best milk drop known, bar nothing.


No. 39—Milk Drops, No, 2 (Special)
6 lb. Flour
3 lb. Sugar
lb. Butter
i 5 Eggs
i£ oz. Carb. Ammonia
\ oz. Carb. Soda
Essence Lemon
2- pints Sour Milk
Dissolve the soda in the milk ; crush and sieve the ammonia—
mix it with the flour. Cream the butter and sugar well; add
the eggs gradually, beating the mixture well, meanwhile; add
the essence; when creamed sufficiently, add half of the flour,
and beat well; next add the greatest portion of the milk, and
beat it well in ; then add the balance of t the flour ; now beat
the whole mixture well. It must be beaten until it is very
smooth. If the mixture should not be slack enough, add the
balance of the milk, but the mixture should not take more than
the 2J pints given in the recipe. If any more should be re-
quired, it would be as well to use sweet milk for the balance.
These cakes require to be baked in a quick oven, with not too
much bottom heat. If a furnace oven is used, spring them on
the furnace side, then shift them to soak into a cooler part of the
oven. Tin these the same as No. 1 Milk Drop recipe. Place
peel or currants on top.


No. 40—Milk Drops, No. 3
4 lb. Flour
if lb. Sugar
| lb. Butter
6 Eggs
2 oz. Cream of Tartar
i oz. Carb. Soda
Essence Lemon
Sweet Milk to mix
This recipe is a much poorer recipe than either of the preced-
ing mixtures, but it makes a good looking Milk Drop, and is
easier made than either of the previous two. The main fault in
this mixing, is the fact that there is a slight taste of the car-
bonate of soda in the cakes. On the other hand, the extra
amount of soda gives the cakes a nice yellow tinge. If more
cream of tartar is used, the cakes will not spring on the oven,
and if mixed with sour milk, they are a failure altogether.
However, they are not a bad selling cake, and if sold fresh,
will give satisfaction. Mix the same as No. i recipe, but mix
a little tighter. These cakes may have lemon peel or cur-
rants on top, or they may be washed on top with beaten egg
and some coarse sugar sprinkled on before baking. Tin and
bake the same as in the preceding mixtures.


No. 41.—Milk Drops, No. 4
(Old original mixture).
3 lb. Flour
2 lb. Sugar
i lb. Butter
12 Eggs
i oz. Garb. Ammonia (crushed)
Essence Lemon or Almonds
i pint Milk (about)
Cream butter and sugar; add the eggs, creaming well ; add
the essence ; add the flour and ammonia, and mix ; next add
half of the milk, and mix through lightly ; if the mixture is
slack enough, leave it at that, but if too tight, add more milk.
Tin and bake the same as preceding mixtures. This is the
old original Milk, Drop recipe, and may find favor with a good
many yet. The main objection to the recipe is the fact that
the cakes slide on the tin?, and unless the tins are perfectly
level the cakes will slide together.
No. 42.—Yankee Buns
6 lb. Flour
3 lb. Sugar
lb. Butter
\ oz. Garb. Ammonia
i oz. Cream of Tartar
\ oz. Garb. Soda
2° Eggs
i quart Milk (about)
Essence Almonds
Mix same as special Milk Drop mixture. Tin and bake the
same, putting a few currants on top instead of the peel.


No. 43.—French Buns
6 lb. Flour
2 lb. Sugar
1 lb. Butter
2 lb. Currants
2 oz. Carb. Soda
1 oz. Tart. Acid
6 Eggs
2 quarts Sour Milk
Essence Lemon
Lemon Yellow
Sieve soda and acid into flour ; rub the butter into the flour.
It is best to have it in a dish, but can be mixed on the boards.
Make a bay in the flour; put sugar, lemon yellow, currants,
and essence into the bay ; break the eggs on to the sugar; rub
up a little, then add the milk, and mix the whole lightly.
Spoon on to a buttered flat tin ; wash on top with egg and
milk, or pure egg, beaten up with the brush ; sprinkle a little
sugar on, and bake in a moderate oven.
No. 44—German Buns
5 lb. Flour
- lb. Butter
1 lb. Sugar
2 oz. Baking Powder
- oz. Carb. Ammonia
8 Eggs
Sweet Milk
Essence Vanilla
Mix same as French Buns. Tin and bake the same.


No. 45.—Raspberry Buns
5- lb. Flour
| lb. Butter
i lb Sugar
1 02. Carb. Soda
- oz. Carb. Ammonia
6 Eggs
2 pints Sour Milk (about)
Raspberry Jam
Essence Lemon
Sieve soda and vol very fine, and mix with the flour ; rub the
butter in lightly ; make a bay on the boards ; put sugar and es-
sence in ; break the eggs on to the sugar; mix the whole
with the sour milk—mix tight enough to roll; roll a piece out
about same shape as an ordinary broom handle and a little
thicker ; chop into pieces about oz. each ; stand the pieces
up on end, and work a hole in the centre of top end ; into this
hole put half-a-teaspoonful of raspberry jam, close the end,
and stand upside down on buttered flat tins. Bake in moderate
oven. These buns, if right, will split and show the jam.
No. 46.—Victoria Buns (Special)
5 lb. Flour
3 lb. Sugar
2 lb. Butter
i lb. Currants
i lb. Lemon Peel —chopped very fine
24 Eggs
i oz. Baking Powder
Essence Almonds
Milk


Cream the butter and sugar; cream in the eggs ; add the
essence ; mix in the flour, powder, currants, and peel—mix the
whole lightly. If the mixture should be a bit tight, add a little
sweet milk. These cakes are extra choice and palatable.
Tin these cakes in buttered patty pans ; place a small piece of
lemon peel on top of each one. Bake in a moderate oven.
Price id each.
No. 47.-Rock Cakes
lb. Flour
ij lb. Sugar
| lb. Butter or Lard
\ lb. Currants
4 Eggs
oz. Carb. Ammonia
Essence Lemon
To mix—crush and sieve ammonia ; mix it with the flour ; rub
in the butter, and mix the currants through the flour; make it
into a bay on the boards; put the sugar, with all the lumps
crushed out, into the bay; break the eggs on to the sugar and
rub up ; mix the whole with water or milk, into a dough stiff
enough to handle. This mixture will toughen in the mixing,
but for rocks that does not matter. In fact, if a bath cake or
other stiff mixture should be spoilt, the best thing to do
with it is to work a little more ammonia or a little baking
powder into it and make rocks of it. And it is not advisable
to make a rock mixture unless under the circumstances just
mentioned. When the mixture is mixed up, take a fork and
tear off a bit at a time, about 2\ oz.; place on a buttered tin ;
it is necessary to make them as rough as possible, conse-
quently only tear off small pieces with the fork until there is
sufficient for the rock. They will spread a little, and must not
be placed too close together on the tins. Moderate oven.
Price id each.


No. 48— Bath Cakes
4 lb. Flour
2 lb. Sugar
| lb. Butter or Lard
i oz. Ammonia
i pint Water
Esssence Lemon
Mix water, sugar, and essence. This is best mixed an hour or
more before it is wanted, stirring it occasionally until the
sugar is thoroughly dissolved. Some bakers mix the sugar
with boiling water the night before they want to use it, but it
is not necessary. All that is wanted is to have the sugar well
dissolved, and with a little stirring, that can be done with cold
water. However, when the sugar is dissolved, grind and
sieve the ammonia, mix with the flour, and rub in the butter.
Make a bay on the boards and mix with the sugar and water.
DO NOT TOUGHEN THE MIXTURE.
That’s only five words! “Do not toughen the mixture,” but
they contain the whole art of making Bath Cakes or similar
mixtures such as shortbreads, etc. The mixture must not be
toughened, but at the same time it must be mixed sufficiently,
and therein lies the difficulty for the amateur, for a few turns
more or less will make or mar the mixture. Even the oven
heats must be proper, but, of course, the oven must be right
for any mixture.
This mixture is pinned out less than a \ inch in thickness
and cut with a round scalloped cutter. Wash with milk or
water on top. Bake in a sharp oven. Do not put them too
close together on the tins because they will spread a little.
Sold at two a penny.


No. 49.—English Shortbread.
6lb. Flour
Sugar
Butter
12 Eggs
i oz. Carbonate Ammonia
Essence Lemon
Milk (about j pint).
Crush and sieve ammonia. Mix it through the flour. Rub
the butter well into the flour ; make a bay of it on
the boards. Place the sugar and essence in the bay.
Break the eggs on to the sugar and rub them well up,
taking care not to mix up any of the flour. When the eggs
are well mixed, pour on the milk and mix up the whole, using
the same care as in the Bath Cake mixture. These are
pinned out the same and cut with an oblong or egg shaped
scalloped cutter, or cut with a plain oblong cutter and pinched
round the edges with the thumb and first finger of each hand,
but that is part of a trade that cannot be learnt from a book.
However, the scalloped cutter will do right enough. Place a
large piece of lemon peel length ways in the centre of each cake.
Place the cakes on buttered flat tins giving them plenty of room
to spread. Do not wash them with anything. Bake in a mode-
rate oven. After they are baked, brush them to remove any
flour that might show on them. This is one of the best
selling lines in this class of mixture. Sold at id each.


No. 50.—Pavillions.
Blb. Flour
4lb. Sugar
2 lb. Butter
2 oz. Carbonate Ammonia
8 Eggs
Essence Lemon
Lemon Yellow
Milk (about i pint).
Mix exactly the same as English shortbread. Cut out with a
round scalloped cutter. Wash each cake on top with beaten
egg and milk (i pint milk to one egg, simply beaten until the
egg and milk mix). Have a sheet of paper with some mixed
sugar and currants, turn each cake on to the sugar and cur-
rants and place on flat tins, sugar side up. Bake in mode-
rate oven. id. each. This mixture will also make a good
English shortbread.
No, 51.—Scotch Shortbread
4 lb. Flour
2 lb. Butter
i lb. Sugar
i pz. Carb. Ammonia
Essence Lemon
Mix essence, flour, sugar, and ammonia; gradually work in
the butter; do not rub the butter in, but press it in ; the mix-
ture must not be loosened, but kept together; if the mixture is
hard to manage, break two or three eggs into it—this will
bind it. These can be cut out with the scalloped cutter, the
same as English Shortbreads, or cut with the plain cutter and
pinched. The usual way to make them is to pin out a piece


about the size of a plate, and pinch round the edges. Sprinkle
Scotch comfits or other very small lollies on top, and bake in
a slow oven. Moulds are now made for Scotch Shortbread.
To use the mould, pin out a piece of mixture the size of the
mould. Dust the mould. Press the mixture into the mould,
then give the mould a smart tap on the boards and the cake
will fall out. Make the price to suit the size of the cake.
Usually sold at the rate of i/- per lb.
No. 62.—Puff Pastry, No. 1.
ilb. Butter—best
ilb. Flour
Water or Sour Milk
There is no mixture in the trade that requires the same amount
of skill as puff pastry. The mixture as given above is the
original mixture, and for the best class of pastry has not been
improved on. But nearly every baker has some little plan of
his own for improving the paste. Some break the whites of a
couple of eggs into the flour; others again beat up a couple of
whites of eggs and paint the mixture between the turns.
Some put a little cream of tartar in the flour. Some put a
small piece of bread dough in the paste, and so on. But a
first-class paste can be made with the ingredients given above.
To mix—first squeeze all the milk out of the butter ; next wet
up the flour into a dough that will correspond in stiffness with
the butter ; work it well ; mould it up round, and let it lie for
five minutes or so ; pin it out and place the butter in the
centre of the dough ; spread it a little, and fold up each side ;
roll the pin across it once or twice, and turn up each end ; run
the pin across a couple of times, and let it lie a few minutes to
soften ; this will require pinning out three times more, that is,
pin it out about half an inch in thickness ; fold up the sides ;
roll the pin once or twice across it to flatten it; turn up the
ends ; run the pin lightly across it, and let the paste lie a few


minutes to soften. This is called one turn. Repeat the per-
formance, that is, roll out and double up again, sides and
ends, the same as the previous turn. This is the second turn.
Let it soften. Now give it the third turn the same way.
Then let it lie about a minute ; then pin it out about a
quarter of an inch in thickness ; cut out with a round, scal-
loped cutter —the half-penny Bath cutter will do ; place close
together on a flat tin that has been well wiped, but do not
butter it; make an impression in the centre of the tart about
the size of a shilling, with the end of a round stick; paint
each tart with beaten egg; put half a teaspoonful of raspberry
jam in each tart, and bake in hot oven, taking care that the
bottom heat is good.
Instead of painting the tarts they may be dredged with
Icing sugar, but this is best done before placing them on the
tin. If the Icing sugar is used instead of the wash, do not
have the oven so hot or the tarts will scorch.
No. 53.—Puff Paste, No. 2.
Another way to make Puff Paste.—Take ilb. flour and ilb,
butter. Place the pound of butter in the flour, and with the scra-
per chop the butter into lumps (about an ounce each), then
mix the whole up with water. Mix lightly so that the lumps
of butter do not smash. Pin it out and fold over sides and
ends. Pin it out again, fold up and place aside, same as in
previous mixture. This will take about three more turns.
Here is another way which, while not making such rich
pastry as the two previous recipes, will give good results.
No. 54.—Puff Paste, No. 3.
Flour
ilb. Butter
Water.
Rub about 4 oz. of the butter into the flour, then wet up with


water. Work well and proceed exactly as in first paste recipe,,
using the balance of the pound of butter to place in the centre
of the dough. The same method of mixing can be followed
with the pound for pound recipe, using about 2 oz. to rub
into the flour and the balance for the centre of the paste.
In making puff pastry it must be borne in mind that the
only thing that there is to rise the paste is the butter boiling
between the layers of paste. The steam from the butter, and
the water used in mixing the paste, blows up each layer of
paste, thus causing it to rise. The oven bakes it as it rises,
thus preventing it from falling down again. For that reason
the tarts must not be shifted about until they have set. Also, in
making the paste, the pin must be used very lightly, otherwise
the paste will break, so that instead of the steam blowing the
layers apart it will escape, and the tart will not rise. Again,
if the paste has not had enough turns, the butter will escape
and run out on to the tin. The paste, of course, will not rise,
and will have a hard cracking sort of taste. If, on the other
hand, the paste has had a turn too much, the layers of paste
will be too fine to hold the steam —result, failure.
Nothing but the very best firm butter must be used in
puff pastry. Puff pastry must be kept cool during period of
manufacture. In hot summer weather unless there are means
of keeping it cold, do not try to make it, leastwise, not out of
butter.
No. 85.—Puff Paste, No. 4
The following method will make a good paste when the
mercury is sitting on top of the thermometer to cool itself.
i Jib. Flour
ilb. Suet
£lb Butter.
First, procure some good beef suet. Put it through a small
hand sausage machine; this will thoroughly cut it up and


take out all the skins. Take one pound of this prepared suet,
of butter, and ijlb. flour. Rub the butter into the flour,
mix with water, and work well. Pin out and put the prepared
suet on paste, fold up and continue the same as with butter
paste.
No. 56-—Short Paste
i lb. Flour
Butter.
Rub butter roughly into flour. Mix with water. Pin out.
Fold up and pin out again, and it is ready.
No. 57.—Chester Cake
This is a cake that it is sometimes necessary to make to use
up stale unsaleable cakes. To make : Cover a flat tin with
short paste. Have, any stale cakes or buns, soaked in sufficient
water to soak them down. Make them into a stiff mixture
with bread or bun crumbs. Add a few handfuls of sugar, and
some spice and ginger; make a layer ot this on the short
paste about J inch or more in thickness. Cover all over with
a layer of good paste. Dock it well all over. It is just as
well to stick a sharp pointed knife through the paste every
couple of inches, or so. The object is to prevent the crust
being risen from the mixture with the steam. Wash the
whole of the top crust with egg and milk. Sprinkle with
coarse sugar and bake in a cool oven. When this is baked,
let it cool, and then cut into squares about 2 inches square.
Sell at a penny each. It makes a big pennyworth and uses
up cakes that would be lost. At the same time, it is a very
bad sign to see Chester Cake in a baker’s window; shows
slackness of trade or mismanagement in regulating supply of
cakes.


No. 58.—Raised Pies (Shells)
ilb. Flour
2 oz. Lard—or good dripping
J pint Water
Take pint water and 2 oz. of lard. Bring to a boil. As soon
as it boils take it off the fire and stir in ilb. flour ; stirring well
to get an even paste. As soon as the paste is cool enough to
handle it is ready for the shells. To make these a block is
used—a half pint tin will do for a block. Take about 3 oz.
paste and work it round the bottom and about one inch up the
sides of the block, thus forming, as it were a little cup. These
are the shells. As each one is done, place it aside to dry—in
summer weatherit will not take long, but in winter, or damp wea-
ther, it may take some time. When the shells are dry, fill them
with finely chopped lean mutton with a little pork. Season
well. Put in a little water and cover each pie with a bit of
good puff paste. Bake in a slow oven. Price, 3d. and 6d.
according to size. When selling these, if they are required
warm, make a hole in the top crust and fill with boiling
water and serve, or, if a regular trade is done with them, use
shoulder of mutton for the meat. Boil the bones, season
well, and use the gravy when serving pies. Keep the pies
warm.
No. 59.—Mutton Pies
These are made in patty pans. \ Cut out puff paste with a
scalloped cutter a size larger than the patty pan, the penny
Bath Cake cutter will do. Line the patty pans with these,
then fill with finely chopped mutton (lean). Season well and
fill with water. Cover with a top crust and bake in slow oven.
2d. each.


No. 60—Sausage Pies
Paste and patty pans the same as Mutton Pies. Half boil*
some sausage meat and water—say, enough water to thin it
down. Have it well seasoned. A good pie maker depends a
lot on the seasoning. Stir it up as it boils and as soon as the-
meat is half cooked take it off the fire. Have the patty pans-
lined with the paste and fill up with the sausage meat. Place
the top cover on and bake. These are usually sold hot with
good beef steak gravy well seasoned. Price 3d. each. Hot,.
with gravy and with a cup of hot coffee added, 6d. Cold,
without gravy or any etc., 2d.
No. 61-Fruit Pies
The same, substituting, say, finely chopped apples with a little
sugar and water, for the meat.
No. 62.-Mince Pies
The same, using mince meat for filling. Make the mince-
meat as under.
No. 63.—Mince Meat (Best)
ilb. Apples
ilb. Lemon Peel
ilb. Brown Sugar
1 lb. Beef Suet
i-lb. Lean Beef (parboiled)
3 lb. Currants
ilb. Sultanas
2lb. Raisins
1 oz. Spice
40 Drops Essence Lemon
\ Pint Rum.
Chop up the whole; mix well together and place in a jar ;
pour rum over the top ; cork it up and let it ripen.


No. 64.-Sausage Solis
There are several ways of making these. The easiest way is
to roll out a sheet of Puff Paste and cut into strips about four
or five inches wide ; then roll some strips of sausage meat the
shape of a thick sausage, using a little flour, or mix a little
flour with the sausage meat ; place these sausages in the
centre of the slips of paste, and fold the paste over and around
the sausage ; cut into suitable lengths ; wash on top with
beaten egg. Bake in moderate oven, on flat tins.
No. 65.—Eccles
These are usually made with the cutting that remains from
Puff Paste when making Tarts. Place the cuttings together;
roll out into a sheet; put a layer of currants and sugar on ; fold
over sides; roll out to required thickness, and cut out with
scalloped cutter half-penny Bath-cutter will do. Sell at
two a penny.
No, 66.—Banburys
Are made with the scraps of paste, but are made like Sausage
Rolls, using currants, lemon peel, and sugar for filling, and
sometimes a little pounded biscuit or cake is added.
No. 67.—Brandy Snapps, No. 1
4 lb. Brown Sugar
4 lb. Treacle
4 lb. Flour
f lb. Lard or Butter
Rub the butter into the flour; then rub in the sugar; make
into a bay, and pour the treacle into it ; mix the whole
together, and work it up well ; take a portion of mixture—


mould it up and pin out thin ; cut out with a round cutter, the
top of a i lb. tin will do nicely. Place on a flat tin, leaving
a space of a couple of inches between each cake, for if
properly made, they will spread a lot. Bake in a cool oven
To tell when they are done, withdraw the tin from the oven
and watch the cakes to see if they bubble or boil at all. If
they do, they must be placed back into the oven immediately
When sufficiently baked, they will set. Great care must be
taken not to burn the cakes, either by leaving them in the
oven too long, or by having the oven too hot. After,the cakes
have been taken from the oven, and before they get hard, each
cake must be moved by placing a knife under it. If this
should be forgotten, and the cakes break when trying to move
them, place them in the oven for a minute and they will soften
again. In the shop, these cakes must be kept from the air,
either by placing in a biscuit tin or glass jar, otherwise they
will go soft. Retail at two a penny.
No. 68.—Brandy Snapps, No. 2
3lb. Yellow or Brown Sugar
2lb. Flour
Jib. Lard or Butter
Water to mix
To be mixed and baked the same as No. i, only use water to
mix instead of treacle. Make the dough tight.
In either of these mixtures, if the cakes run too much, add
a little flour, and if they do not spread enough, add a
little sugar. These mixtures may be mixed one day and
baked the next —they will not hurt by keeping. To be proper,
they should spread a good deal, and have a nice, glossy
appearance, ,be covered with bubbles, and be almost
transparent.


No. 69.—Ginger Nuts (Special)
16 lb. Flour
8 lb. brown Sugar
8 lb. Treacle or Golden Syrup
3 lb. Lard or Butter
i lb. Lemon Peel (finely chopped
i oz. Ammonia Garb.
8 oz. Ground Ginger
i oz. Spice (mixed)
6o drops Oil Cinnamon
8 stale Buns or i lb. stale Bread
First soak down the stale Buns with a couple of pints of water.
Next, mix ammonia (ground) and flour; then rub in the lard
or good, clean beef dripping, or (if plentiful) butter. Next
mix in the sugar, ginger, peel, and spice ; make a bay; pour
treacle into this ; add the soaked buns and water; then pour
on the oil of cinnamon ; next mix the whole together—knead
it up well, and place away until next day, or for two or three
days : it does not matter much ; when ready to bake, re-knead
it well, then take a piece, mould up, and pin out about a
quarter-of-an-inch in thickness; cut out with a Ginger Nut
cutter. (See cutters). This cutter may be used to cut about
eight or ten Nuts before taking any Nuts from the cutter ; the
cutter is then turned upside down, and all the Nuts will come
out together ; run the Nuts on to a buttered, flat tin, having
previously sprinkled the tin with water —this is done to make
the Nuts stick to the tin ; when the tin is full, wash the Nuts
on top with water. Bake in a slow oven. Retail i/- per lb.,
or a good trade can be done by selling wholesale to the stores
at nett factory prices, plus carriage.


No. 70.—Spice Nuts
6 lb. Flour
4 lb. Treacle
2 lb. brown Sugar
i lb. Lard or Butter
i oz. mixed Spice
i oz. Ground Ginger
J oz. Ammonia Garb.
Essence Lemon
To be mixed and baked same as Ginger Nuts ; instead of pin-
ning and cutting, a piece may be taken and rolled out round,
and about as thick as a man’s finger ; pinch pieces off this
about an inch in length ; stand them upright on the tins, and
press them down 'with the heel of the hand, which will bring
them into the same shape as if cut out with a cutter, only, of
course, not so perfect.
No. 71.—Lemon Drops (Rich)
4 lb. Flour
2\ lb. white Sugar
i lb. Butter
\ oz. Garb. Ammonia
9 Eggs
Milk
Essence Lemon
Mix ammonia and flour ; rub in butter ; mix with sugar;
make a bay; break eggs into it; pour in sufficient milk ; add
essence ; stir milk, eggs, and essence together, and mix the
whole into a stiff dough. These are tinned and baked the
same as Ginger Nuts. They are a delicious biscuit, and
may be retailed at i/- per lb. Solid oven.


No. 72.—Lemon Drops (Store quality).
io lb. Flour
7- lb. white Sugar
2\ lb. Lard or Butter
- oz. Carb. Ammonia
About 2 pints of Water
Essence Lemon
Mix same as preceding mixture, omitting the eggs and milk,
and substituting the water. This is a good, saleable mixture,
and cheap—may be retailed at gd or lod per lb., or suitable
for wholesale trade. Slow oven.
No. 73.—Derby Biscuits
8 lb. Flour
4 lb. Sugar
i \ lb. Butter or Lard
i oz. Carb. Ammonia
6 Eggs
Turmeric
11 pints Milk (about)
Essence Lemon
Mix flour and ammonia ; rub in the butter ; make a bay;
place the sugar in the bay ; make a hole in the centre of the
sugar ; place in the colour, eggs, and essence ; mix these
with the sugar; then pour on the milk, and mix it with the
eggs and sugar ; next mix the whole into a stiff dough—this
wants to be kneaded a little, but not enough to toughen it;
pin out a piece at a time, and cut with small, fancy-shaped
cutters, such as round (the Ginger Nut cutter would do), heart
shaped, shamrock, diamond, or other shapes. These may be
made currant, seed or plain, or, for a change, they could


sometimes be flavored with vanilla. These are baked on a
fiat tin in a moderate oven, i/- per lb.
No. 74.—Queen Drops (Special)
3 lb. Flour
2 lb. Sugar
2 lb. Butter
18 Eggs
£ lb. Currants
- teaspoonful of Carb. Ammonia
or teaspoonful of Baking Powder
This is a beaten mixture, the same as Madeira Sandwich.
To bake —place sheets of paper on flat tins, and run the mix-
ture through a bag with a tin pipe, the same as piping a cake.
The only difference is, the bag will necessarily want to be
much larger, and the pipe will want to be about a quarter-of-
an-inch across in the opening. These biscuits should be
about the size of a two-shilling piece, after they are baked.
To take them off the paper, turn them out on the boards, paper
side up, and damp the paper, the biscuits will then easily part
from the paper. These are an exceptionally rich biscuit, and
may be retailed at i/6 per lb.
No. 76.—Judge’s Biscuit (Special)
The same mixture as Queen Drops, omitting the currants;
after the biscuits are baked, they are stuck together in twos,
with raspberry jam between ; then wash the top one with white
of egg ; then dip the biscuit on to some coloured, coarse
sugar (color the sugar with some cochineal) or nonpariels
(hundreds and thousands).


No. 76.—Rusks
Rusks are usually made from stale Sponge Cake. A sheet of
stale Sponge Cake is cut into slices about a quarter of an inch
in thickness and about two inches in length. These slices
are placed on a clean flat tin and slowly browned in the oven.
A good Rusk can be made from stale Tea Cakes (bun mix-
ture) split, cut into halves, and browned in the oven.
No. 77.—Ratifias
Sponge Cake mixture flavoured with Ratifia or Essence of
Almonds. Run through a bag the same as Queen Drops and
about same size. 1/6 lb.
No. 78.—Africans (Rich)
7lb. Flour
2lb. Butter
3lb. Sugar
i Quart Milk (about)
Essence Lemon.
Rub butter and flour together. Make a bay. Place in the
sugar and essence. Pour on the milk and mix the whole into
a stiff dough. To bake these it is necessary to have a proper
force tube with the various shapes to fit it. The mixture is
then forced through the tube and cut into lengths, and baked
in a moderate oven. This mixture is hardly suitable for bake
houses, excepting where it is difficult to procure factory-
biscuits.


No. 79—Africans (Poor)
151 b. Flour
2 Jib. Sugar
2J lb. Butter
2 full Quarts Milk
Essence Lemon.
Mixed and baked the same as previous mixture.
No. 80,—Ginger Bread, No. 1
141 b. Treacle
Jib. Carbonate Soda
Jib. Alum
Dissolve the alum in hot water. Mix with the treacle in a
vessel large enough to allow it to rise. Next, dissolve the
carbonate soda in a little water and stir it into the treacle and
alum; this will cause it to rise rapidly. Mix in a small
quantity of flour, sufficient to make a slack sponge of the
mixture. Leave it until next day and then work in Jib. ginger
and Jib. lard with sufficient flour to make a light dough.
Bake in a solid sheet, about two inches thick, on a flat tin
lined with wooden sets. Wash on top with beaten egg.
Bake in a slow oven. When baked and cooled down, cut into
good large squares (id. each) or pin the mixture out and cut
with a scalloped square cutter. Bake on flat tins the same as
Bath Cakes. Cool oven


No. 81—Ginger Bread, No. 2
6lb. Flour
2lb. Treacle
i lb. Sugar (Brown)
i lb. Butter or Lard
5 oz. Ginger (ground)
i oz. Mixed Spice
Carbonate Soda
i oz. Tartaric Acid
Water to Mix.
Mix soda, acid, ginger, and spice, with the flour. Rub in the
butter, then the sugar. Make a bay. Place the treacle in the
bay and mix the whole into a stiff dough with water. Bake
the same as No. i Ginger Bread.
No. 82.—Rice Cakes
81b. Flour
4-lb. Sugar
zlb. Butter
1 lb. Rice Flour
3 oz. Carb. Ammonia
2 full Pints Milk
Essence Lemon.
Mix exactly the same as Bath Cakes, using the milk to
dissolve the sugar. Bake in a warm oven. Cut with id. Bath
Cake cutter. Sell at id. each.


No. 83,—German Lunch
4-lb. Flour
i-lb. Sugar
fib. Butter
2 oz. Carb. Ammonia
Essence Lemon
Water
Mix flour and ammonia. Rub in the butter. Make a bay.
Place sugar and essence in and mix into a light dough with
water. This mixture will toughen at once, but that does not
matter. Weigh into 10-ounce pieces. Mould up round. Pin
out about the size of a dinner plate. Dock them well. Wash
on top with egg and milk. Sprinkle some coarse sugar on.
Bake on buttered flat tins. When baked and cool, cut each
plate into eight. Sell at one penny each. This is a cake
that is easily and quickly made and is a big penny worth.
Use a moderate oven.
No. 84.—Perkins
6lb. Flour
i lb. Oatmeal
4-lb. Treacle
2lb. Sugar (Brown)
i lb. Butter or Lard
1 oz. Ammonia.
Mix ammonia and flour. Rub in butter. Mix in sugar and
oatmeal. Mix the whole with the treacle and sufficient water
to make a stiff dough. Cut with penny Bath Cake cutter.
Put some split almonds on top. Bake on flat tins in a cool
oven.


No. 85.—Hermit Cakes
4-lb. Flour
1 Jib. Sugar
i)b. Butter
2 oz. Carb. Ammonia
Water
Essence Vanilla.
Mix flour and ammonia. Rub in butter. Mix with sugar.
Mix the whole with water to a firm dough. Pin out and cut
with Bath Cake cutter. Wash on top with beaten egg and
milk. Have some hard biscuits smashed into lumps about the
size of small currants. Place this on a sheet of paper and
mix with it an equal quantity of coarse sugar. Into this
mixe crushed biscuit and sugar, dip each cake, so that the
mixture will adhere to the top of the cake. Place the cakes
on buttered flat tins. Bake in a moderate oven.
No. 86,—Custard Bolls
i Quart Water
ilb. Butter
2lb. Flour
28 Eggs
These rolls are a delicious delicacy, and this is about the best
recipe for this class of goods. Place the water and butter on
a fire. Bring to a boil. Stir the whole of the flour rapidly
into the boiling mixture. Remove at once from the fire and
continue stirring until smooth. When cooled sufficiently, stir
in the eggs, a few at a time. When all the eggs are stirred
in and the mixture is nice and smooth, spoon out on to
buttered flat tins, using a dessert-spoonful for each roll. Bake
in a moderate oven. These rolls will swell considerably.
When baked, make an incision in the top of the roll and fill
the space in the centre of the roll with custard. Price 2d. each.


No. 87.—Custard for Holla
i Pint Milk
£lb. Sugar
i oz. Corn Flour
Yolks 4 Eggs.
Essence Vanilla
Pinch Salt.
Place milk and sugar on a fire. Bring to boiling point but
do not let it boil. Have the yolks beaten up with the corn-
flour (or arrowroot). Pour on a little of the hot mixture ; beat
up; then pour back into the hot mixture. Stir well. Place
on the fire and stir until it begins to thicken. On no account
let it come to a boil. When cool, flavour and put in the salt.
If the mixture thickens too much, use less cornflour. The
mixture requires to be of a. certain consistence, otherwise it
will run out of the roll. If the mixture is not thick enough,
add a little wheaten flour and place the mixture on the fire
until it thickens, stirring well.
No. 88.—Cream Cakes
i pint of Water
\ lb. Butter
i lb. Flour
12 Eggs
Mix and bake exactly the same as Custard Rolls; when baked,
open the top where the cake splits, and fill with whipped
cream ; dredge the cakes with Icing sugar. Sell at 2d each.
Whipped cream is made by whipping or beating up cream
until it thickens, but it must not be beaten too much or it will
turn to butter; after it is whipped sufficiently, add sufficient
sugar to sweeten.


No. 89.—Digestive Halt Bread
12 lb. Wheaten Meal
16 lb. Bread Dough
- lb. Lard
2 oz. Salt
6 oz. Cream of Tartar
4 oz. Carbonate of Soda
2 lb. Extract Malt
Dissolve the malt and salt in some warm water ; mix wheaten
meal, soda, and tartar; rub the lard into the dough; mix the
wheaten meal, etc., with the dissolved malt, using sufficient
cold water to make a light mixing ; tear the dough well into
the mixing ; scale off at : lb. 6 oz. ; give about half an hour
proof; bake in a moderate oven, under a mould. The mould
usually used for Digestive Malt Bread is an oval or egg-
shaped one, rather larger than what the loaf will rise. But
the best mould is an ordinary 2 lb. round cake dish. Place
the cake tins on a flat baking tin ; fill them upright, and cover
over with another flat tin. The best time to mix the malt
loaves is while the batch is in the oven ; then, as soon as the
batch is drawn, put the malt loaves in. It is very difficult in
some towns to procure wheaten meal—in that case, mix 40 lb.
white flour, 12 lb. bran, and 8 lb. pollard together, that will
make 60 lb, wheaten meal.


No. 90.—Digestive Malt Bread, No. 2
12 lb. Meal
12 lb. Flour
| lb. Lard
2 lb. Malt Extract
J lb. Carb. of Soda
i lb. Cream of Tartar
or 4 oz. Tartaric Acid
4 oz. Salt
Water, or half Milk to mix
Mix meal, flour, salt, soda, and cream of tartar together ; rub
in the lard; have the malt dissolved in some warm water;
mix the lot up light. Scale, tin, and bake straight off.




