

PETfr PPrwi
2g% g.
©ieeege: ©f Fertfi, llJegt Q^gtrafia
The end of the nineteenth century has seen a marvellous revival of spiritual
energy ; and some of it has expended itself on the foreign missions of the Church,
Yet it cannot be said that the Church in foreign lands has all the prayers, the men,
the help, or the love she needs. One reason why this is so, is simply because
English people are told so Httle, and know so little, of the magnificent work for
God and for the souls of men that is being carried on in other lands. As Dr.
Vaughan has said, speaking of foreign missions, “ Know and you will feel. Know
and you will pray. Know and you will help.
It is with full belief in a latent charity and sympathy that needs only to be
awakened by knowledge, that we endeavour to give an account of one of the
largest and poorest Dioceses in the world. Western Australia, or the Diocese of
Perth, is more than eight times the size of Great Britain and Ireland, and some-
what smaller than the whole of Europe. The white population is estimated at
132,050, and is now widely scattered inland. The number of natives has been
rtturned at 12,849, exclusive of the Wellington, Pinjarrah, and Kimberley
Districts. At the latter place the natives are very numerous.


But in order to give a clear account of this vast Colony of Western Australia,
something must be said of her early history. As early as 153 1 > Australia was
sighted by Europeans. The Dutch explored the western coast; and the Swan
River, on which Perth, the capital, is situated, was discovered by Vlaming in 1697.
It was so named by him, because he found Swans upon it. The first settlement,
however, was destined to be at Port Jackson (New South WalesJ ; where in con-
sequence of Captain Cook’s discoveries and the difficulty of disposing of convicts
after the loss of the American Colonies, 565 male and 192 female convicts, with a
guard of over 200 troops, were established in 1787.
On June Ist, 1829, a Colony was founded near the Swan River. Probably a
threatened occupation by the French (To ward off which a small military settle-
ment had previously been made on King George’s Sound) influenced the British
Government to choose the western coast. Large grants of land were made for a
trifling equivalent, and attracted a large number of emigrants. For several months
after the arrival of the first settlers, not an acre of land was surveyed ; though the
map was parceled out into townships where a white man had never trod. Gentlemen
and their wives lived in tents, possessed of thonsands of acres, after having spent
all their coin ; with provisions at famine prices, and payments made them in more
useless acres, with valuable stock, which they had imported, a prey to the depre-
dations of the natives, and dying for lack of forage ; with implements and much
that would have been valuable on cultivated farms, or in civilised life, but which
was so much costly lumber here, lying exposed to the weather, or buried in the
sand. Many of these first emigrants, too, were unsuited for the hardships and toil
of successful colonization. The system under which the emigration was conducted
had brought too little coin and too much in kind into the colony. Another great
evil was, that the land having been sold at a nominal value, vast tracts were in
the hands of a few proprietors, and an insufficient population had been introduced
for its cultivation. There was, also, nothing left within a great distance for men
not amongst the first arrivals. Labour was not to be had ; and men began to
leave, retaining possession of their land. It is to this unfortunate beginning that
many persons attribute the slow progress which, for a long period, the Colony made.
In 1849, Swan River became a penal settlement; and labour for roads, etc.,
was thus secured; but the connection with convicts gave the Colony a bad name.
In 1868, transportation ceased at the petition of the other colonies.
We must now sketch briefly the history of the Church in Australia . —Mr.
Johnson was appointed chaplain to the convict establishment in 1787. In 1791 the
white population numbered 5,000. In 1793 Mr. Johnson, at his own expense, built
the first church. This church was at Sydney, then known as Botany Bay. In
1794 the loneliness of Mr. Johnson’s position was relieved by the appointment of
the Rev. Samuel Marsden as his colleague. In 1800, when Mr. Johnson returned
to England, Mr. Marsden was for seven years the only clergyman, save that a
Roman Catholic convict priest was set free “to exercise his clerical functions.”
The number of clergy continued to be very inadequate. They were under the
Bishopric of Calcutta. In 1824 Australia was made an Archdeaconry, under
Archdeacon Scott; who seems to have visited the distant parts of his vast Arch-
deaconry, for in 1828 we find him giving Christmas Communion to the people of


the Swan, now Western Australia. Archdeacon Broughton succeeded Archdeacon
Scott, He found only twelve clergy in all Australia ; and in order to bring home
to the minds of his friends the size of his Archdeaconry, he asks them to imagine
an English Archdeaconry with churches at S, Alban’s, Constantinople, and in
Denmark, while his Bishop lived at Calcutta. In 1836 Archdeacon Broughton
was consecrated Bishop of all Australia. The Diocese of Perth was constituted
out of the Diocese of Adelaide in 1857; and Archdeacon Matthew Hale was its
first Bishop, He was succeeded in 1876 by Bishop Parry; whose lamented death
took place in 1893.
The present clerical staff in the Diocese of Perth is whollv inadequate to cope
with the vast distances which have to be travelled, in order to carry the ministra-
tions of the Church to the outlying stations, much less to begin mission work among
the natives. The rector of a parish, the length of which may be represented by
the distance between London and the North of Scotland, said that it would take
him more than eight months to visit the gold mines and all the outlying stations.
Many of the parishes are the size of English counties. The settlers give a kind
welcome to the clergyman. He is pressed “to stay one day more ” ; and is
sometimes told, “It is four years since a clergyman was here,” or, “ This is the
first visit a clergyman has paid us.” His ministrations are gladly received; the
solitariness of the life inclines men to receive religious impressions. But besides
the work in the vast agricultural and pastoral districts, the West Australian clergy
have, of late years, had to face another problem : is the Church to take no thought
for the large migratory population of the gold-fields ? Are the miners to be left to
live and die—perhaps suddenly—without religious helps or religious influences ?
Cannot the Church rather meet the emergency ? Cannot she influence for good
these men that “ follow the diggings,” and make them, as it were, missionaries
wherever their wandering lives shall lead them ?
The small number of clergy, the vast distances, the, in some parts, tropical
heat are difficulties that might be overcome, or mitigated, were it not for the
extreme poverty of the Diocese. It is true, that the prosperity of the Colony has
greatly increased of late years, and that great wealth has come to some persons
through the gold mines. It is probable, that if earnest clergy, with a real vocation
for the work, would offer themselves to the Bishop for work on the goldfields, the
miners would find stipends. But what applies to well-to-do centres of population,
does not apply to all the conditions of life in this vast Colony. It is impossible for
a scattered population, just making a living by their pastoral and agricultural
labours, to provide the whole of the money for religious work : while a drought,
cyclone, flood, or fall in the price of wool, may reduce them to poverty. Again,
many of the new arrivals come with only the bare necessaries of life; while a
fortunate man will leave the Colony, to distribute his money elsewhere. A Colonist
says, “ Our great difficulty is the want of money. The people about here are all
willing to give all they can ; but it is very hard to take money from them, as they
are all small farmers, and have to work hard to maintain their families.”
The sound principle of the S.P.G. in helping foreign missions, cannot be too
strongly insisted upon. That Society “ has been careful to compel Colonial
Churchmen every year to do more and more towards the support of the Church.”


Yet that Society fully recognizes and nobly aids the Diocese of Perth. Let us
contrast the wealth of ancient buildings and endowments in England with the
meagre resources of the Church in Western Australia. The income of the See
of Perth from funded property and donations does not exceed ,£BOO. The capital
of the Diocesan Sustentation and Endowment Fund is besides about 3,000-
acres of glebe. The annual Colonial Government grant has now ceased ; and the
Government has given £20,000 in compensation. The Societies in England give
annually £750, also some occasional grants. After these resources have been eked
out as far as they will go, the settlers must find all that is needed in addition for
clergy stipends, the building and repair of churches and parsonages, &c. Besides
this they contribute to a Home Mission Fund.
It should surely not be a matter of indifference to us that our countrymen,,
perhaps relations, are surrounded by all the temptations of colonial life, yet are left
without the means of grace. That they are allowed to become forgetful of God.
That we have taken the country of the natives and made use of their labours r
yet do not give them the Gospel, which has, in mercy, been given to us. That the
sick and the dying, in these lone parts of the earth, are without the consolations of
religion. The spiritual privileges of the present day in England are very great ;
and we dare not say, only our own souls, or the souls in our own parish or country,,
are precious.
I plead very earnestly that whoever reads these words will, if possible,
contribute a few stamps, a shilling, a pound, or a cheque, or will undertake a
collecting card for the support of additional clergy. Please do not refuse all help
because you can only give a trifle ; “ the power of united littles ”is very great.-
C.O.L. Perth, Bishop.
Bishop’s Commissaries in England, The Rev. J.G. Deed, D.D., The Vicarage,.
Nuneaton. The Rev. W. W. Firth, The Vicarage, Patricroft, Manchester.
Hon. Treasurers, Charles Bethell and Walter Gwyn, Esquires, 22, Billiter St.,.
London, E.C.
Penny collecting cards for 5/-, also copies of The Diocese of Perth Quarterly
Magazine, price 1/2 a year, post free, giving an interesting account of the work,
will be supplied, and contributions gratefully received and acknowledged, by the
Hen. Organizing Secretary, MissJ. E. Maurice, 214, Portsdown Road, London, W.
Cheques should be crossed Parr’s Banking Co. and Alliance Bank.
