

'PIeTW Pfttn
/V-2
I b") 1
THE TITANIC IRON SAND
OF TARANAKI.
The Provincial District of Taranaki, situated on the West Coast of
the Northern Island of New Zealand, is geologically a tufu cone,
the centre of which is Mount Egmont, a symmetrical large based
peak of trachyte, rising to an altitude of 8,270 feet above the level
of the sea. This cone is composed of tufaceous clay, largely inter-
mingled with trachyte bx-eccia, and overlies the maritime tertiary or
cretaceous formation through which apparently it has been erupted.
It extends from the Onaero river on the northern coast to the
Waingongoro river on the south-westei’n coast, a distance of about
65 miles, and to an unknown distance in the unexplored region to
the eastward of the peak of Egmont. Generally the cone may be
said to extend to a distance of 20 miles in every direction from the
peak of Egmont. The tufa is the trachyte of the district in a dis-
integrated and decomposed state, and has apparently been ejected
from the Mountain in the form of porous trachyte and volcanic mud ;
the following analysis of the trachyte will therefore convey a
sufficiently accurate idea of the component parts of the tufa :
Silica, 31 ; alumina, 18 ; magnesia, 4 ; peroxide of iron, 13 ; manga-
nese, 3 ; potash, 7 ; soda, 2'5 ; olivine, 2-5; hornblende, 12 ; lime,
2 ; water of constitution, 1; sulphuric acid, 1 ; titanium, 3—lOO’O.
The titanic iron sand occurs widely disseminated in this rock in the
form of very fine black iron filings, and appears to be a metallic
sublimate. By the erosion of the very numerous streams which
leap from the heights of the Mountain and flow in deeply indented
channels through the tufa cone into the sea, a considerable quantity
of this metallic sand is set free from its matrices and conveyed to the
sea coast in alluvium. Here by the action of the waves a mechanical
separation between it and the earthy particles of the tufa takes place,
the earthy matter being carried out to sea, while the iron sand, in a
state of great purity is left on the beaches. At the mouths of the
rivers of the district the sand is found in the greatest state of purity,
and in such places usually contains 90 per cent, of pure ore. The
analysis of the sand is as follows :—Magnetite, 71-0 ; titanite, B'o ;
quartz and olivine, 2 DO—loo-0. The early attempts to reduce this
ore were made by the means of crucibles, and by this method, when


the propel' fluxes were used, the operation was practicable, although
a very considerable degree of heat was necessary to its success. But
when the sand was tried in a blast-furnace difficulties of a very
serious character presented themselves. One difficulty was that
much of the sand was either burned or driven by the blast out of
the top of the furnace. Another difficulty was that the ore which was
not blown away filtered down through the fire and formed a cake on
the hearth. These impediments have been got rid of by combining the
sand with very finely ground charcoal and the tufaceous clay of the
district, and combining the mass into bricks by the addition of sea
water and the aid of brick making machinery. The clay, with the
addition of lime in a separate state, is found to form a flux sufficient
for reduction and for the carrying off of the unnecessary titanium,
and the charcoal brought as it is in the compound into intimate con-
nection with the ore, is in the best possible position for effecting the
carbonization and fusing of the sand. The excellence of the metal
produced from this ore by a charcoal furnace consists in its absolute
freedom from phosphorus and sulphur, the deteriorating ingredients
which produce in iron the defects known technically as cold shortness
and hot shortness. It is a well known fact that the Special Tool
Steel manufactured by Mr. Mushet, of England, which to-day is
worth in the market from £l4O to £224 per ton, is the product of
an artificial combination of ores in imitation of the titanic iron sand
found on the Taranaki sea shores in a state of nature. The following
is a report on this sand by Mr. Stenson, proprietor of the Northamp-
ton Iron Works, Northampton, England ;—“ I have already satisfied
myself by a repeated series of experiments, not only of the fitness,
but the excellence of the iron sand for the purpose of converting into
steel. The iron I have made from the iron sand bears a close
resemblance to that imported from the North of Europe of the best
brands, for the manufacture of steel, and the Sheffield and other steel
makers would be glad to avail themselves of an abundant supply of
such iron. The best British ores for yielding steel iron (chiefly those
from Yorkshire) fall in quality infinitely below the New Zealand
iron, even after the most careful selection of small from very large
quantities. The New Zealand iron is of excellent quality for all
purposes to which iron is applicable, and I need scarcely add that a
ready market would be found in India, Australia, and other parts
remote from England, or other iron making countries north of the
Equator. I have by me some of the iron sand found on the coast
near Tribond, and some which has been worked about ten miles from
Constantinople ; on comparing this and other rich ores with that of
New Zealand, I find the value of the latter fully borne out by the
comparison; it is also superior to the noted Wootz ore of India,
samples of which I have by me in various stages of its manufacture,
from the crude iron to the finished bar, made under the hammer by
a British Company at Porto Novo. The latter, though a good
sample, does not possess the fine close texture or the rich silvery
beauty of the New Zealand iron.”


The Engineer of the 15th June, 1877, makes the following state-
ment respecting the Taranaki iron :—“ The New Zealand Titanic
Steel and Iron Company have sent over some of their pig-iron made
from the metallic sands which lie along the shores of New Plymouth,
in Taranaki, The Company have two furnaces there, and cast their
pigs 78 lbs. each. The iron, which came consigned to a merchant
firm in Wolverhampton, was tested for puddling purposes at the
Shelton Bar Iron Company’s Works, Stoke-upon-Trent. It was
found that the waste was as much as 20 per cent., since it required
1 ton 3 cwt. 3 qrs. 14 lbs. of pig to produce a ton of puddled bars.
The quality was, however, declared to be excellent in both a cold
and hot state, whilst it bore a tensile test of 1 to 1| above the 22
tons per square inch Admiralty test for best bar iron. At Taranaki,
the price of the pigs is about £3 10s. per ton. At that quotation
the iron ought to secure for itself a market in Australia, where just
now a better business is being done in English pig iron than for
many months past.”
The following satisfactory report on Taranaki iron has also been
received from England :
“ Wolverhampton, England,
“ 7th June, 1877.
■“ Mr. W. W. Taylor, Wellington, N.Z.
“ Bear Sir —We have now the pleasure of handing to you a report
respecting the pigs forwarded by your good self to us. These pigs
•on being broken exhibited a good mottled fracture. In the puddling
furnace they worked well into wrought iron, and as they were
slender—averaging 78 lbs. each against 1 cwt. generally—did not
occupy much time in the working and balling up. The heat was
divided with two balls and rolled into a couple of 4-inch bars | thick.
In the process of puddling much thicker cinder was evolved, which,
taken in conjunction with the smallness of the quantity of the pig
worked, accounts no doubt for the deficient yield. This we find to
be at the x-ate of 1 ton 3 cwts. 3 qrs. 14 lbs. of pig to the ton of
puddled bars produced, or nearly 20 per cent, less, while ordinary
good and sound pigs lose half that per cent. The pig-iron weighed
2 cwt. and 10 lbs., and the puddled bars produced 1 cwt. 3 qrs. The
puddled iron was afterwards drawn in the bar mills in the regular
way into 1-inch round and l|-inch flat, pieces being cutoff for testing
in various ways, thus :—Round, hot, cut down the centre with a
cleft for a certain distance and each half turned outwards; a hole
was then punched farther down 1-14th of an inch larger than the
diameter of the bar; another hole, the same size, was punched in
the opposite direction of the grain a little farther on. Flat, hot—
flattened at one end on edge to a disc 2 * inches in diameter, and on
flat at opposite end in same way ; a hole punched in middle of bai-
l-16th inch in diameter larger than width of bar,
“ From the actual specimens, the iron is perfectly free from red
shortness. The cold tests are ;—Round—one piece doubled over and
fractured. These show freeness from cold shortness. The tensile


tests, as per accompanying report, indicate that the iron is exceed-
ingly ductile, the flat having contracted in area nearly 50 per cent.,
and elongated over 31, or 3| inches in foot. The ultimate stress is
also very good, being respectively 23 and 23| tons per square inch.
You will gather from the foregoing trials, most of them being
the British Admiralty requirements for BB bar iron (whose tensile
is 22 tons per square inch, whereas your iron stands 1 and 11 tons
above this), that the iron is remarkably well adapted for the better
classes of engineering and smith work ; and an inspection of the
specimens, which shall be forwarded to you as soon as possible, will
enable you to see that they have stood the punishment exceedingly
well. We shall be happy to be of any further service to your good
self or the Company, and remain
“T. W. J. Walker.
“P.S.—We should add that, in our opinion, the quality of the
bar made was quite equal to to BBH bars, the present cost of which
is £9 at the works.”
Printed at the Taranaki News Office, New Plymouth.
