

THE
REPORT
OF THE
YARRA FLOOD COMMISSION
ANALYZED BY
ROBERT ADAMS.
December, 1864.
MELBOURNE:
WILSON & MACKINNON, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
1864.
■o •




THE
RBPOET
OF THE
YARRA FLOOD COMMISSION
ANALYZED BY
ROBERT ADAMS.
December, 1864.
MELBOURNE:
WILSON & MACKINNON, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
1864.




REPORT OF THE YARRA FLOOD
COMMISSION ANALYZED.
In the month of December, 1863, a storm burst over the valley
of the River Yarra, which led to the drowning, by floods, of the
low-lying lands in the districts of Hawthorn, Heidelberg, Richmond,
South Yarra, Emerald Hill, and Sandridge, as well as the depressed
levels immediately around Melbourne. Although human foresight
could not possibly have foretold this particular occurrence, we must
not forget that the several floods by which the same districts had
been previously visited, between the period of the first settlement
of Port Phillip and a recent date, ought to have prepared us for the
advent of such a disaster, and to have urged us to an active inquiry
into the causes of these floods. From such an investigation,
earnestly followed up, a practical remedy would necessarily have
been discovered. However, the danger was apparently so distant
that we took no precautions whatever to provide against it. The
flood of last December found us as unprepared as on previous like
occasions. The evidences of the past had left no serious impression
upon our minds. Although what had occurred yesterday might be
repeated to morrow, we had failed to take warning from disasters
whose immediate effects had disappeared. We can no longer afford
to do so. We know now, as we had means of knowing before,
that, at rapidly recurring intervals, floods make their appearance in
the River Yarra, which not only sever the ordinary means of com-
munication between the city and the immediate suburbs, but which
also cause a large destruction of property on the low-lying lands
adjacent to the river. The several inundations which have occurred
since the great flood of last December, prove the necessity of
looking forward to the periodical and frequent drowning of the
lands recently submerged. They demonstrate, that, unless outlets
be constructed for carrying off the flood waters of far greater
capacity than at present exist, similar disasters to those from which
we have latterly suffered may again be shortly expected to visit us.
We have substantial proofs that for many years past, at any rate,


floods have periodically occurred in the Yarra. In the meantime,
continual accessions have been made to the value of property on
the lands liable to this destructive influence. During a recent
period, buildings and manufactories have been allowed to be
established, adjoining the banks of the Yarra below Prince’s Bridge,
on land known to lie below the level of floods, if not indeed below
ordinary freshes. Upon these works, many thousands of pounds
have been expended, and this in the face of the absolute certainty
that they must inevitably be from time to time overwhelmed by the
flood waters. The more numerous these buildings and manufac-
tories become, the more difficult will be the question of providing a
remedy for the Yarra floods. Occupation of the land having been
granted to those desirous of establishing along the banks of the
river industries for which the neighbourhood of that stream appears
to offer advantages unattainable at any other site ; capital has been
expended upon works adapted for those industries. Thus vested
interests have arisen which will tend seriously to embarrass the
Government in arriving at a conclusion as to the most appropriate
means of relieving the city and suburbs from the effects of floods.
It is evident therefore that no time should be lost in deciding,
before this evil extends further, upon the adoption of a scheme for
providing an outlet for the flood-waters, and in permanently
reserving, from sale or occupation, such lands yet unoccupied, as,
from their position, will eventually be required for the construction
of an outlet channel for the flood waters of the Elver Yarra. Even
under present circumstances the question is sufficiently difficult to
grapple with ; if the system which has hitherto obtained, of selling
or leasing the low lands adjoining the Yarra, be continued, the
difficulty of deciding upon a flood channel will be greatly increased.
If the Government be, at the present moment, powerless to enforce
the adoption by Parliament of a scheme for preventing future
devastation to property on the line of the Yarra, they can, at least,
prevent any new vested interests from arising, by occupation for
manufacturing or other purposes, of land liable to be drowned by
those floods to the advent of which we may reasonably look
forward.
It is popularly supposed that the report of the Commission on
the floods of last December is thoroughly exhaustive of this sub-
ject, and that there remains no more to be said from a professional
point of view. Since the publication of the report, no person has
apparently thought it worth his while to investigate the facts on
which the recommendations of the Board were arrived at, or to ques-


tion the justness of its conclusions. The Government evidently
distrust the recommendations of the Commission. The statement
recently made in Parliament by the Chief Secretary shows that the
question has been remitted to the Board for further inquiry. For
my part, I must confess to a feeling of disappointment, after care-
fully reading the report conveying the suggestions of the Board. I
had looked forward to a comprehensive statement of the various
direct and remote causes to which the vast accumulation of the
waters of the River Yarra, in periods of floods, is to be traced. To
this information I think the public were fairly entitled, looking to
the large amount of money that must be expended in preventing
future floods. This evidence might surely have been gathered
together during the seven months over which the inquiry of the
Commission extended, and, if collected, should have accompanied
the report. It would be absurd to suppose that a community such
as ours would obediently swallow the suggestions of any board of
inquiry, unless those suggestions were upheld by strong and suffi-
cient reasons. The report of this Board is supported by no definite
facts. We are told that it is necessary to construct an outlet
channel, below Prince’s Bridge, 300 feet in width. Why the
channel should be 300 feet wide, we are not shown by any evidence
derived from the late floods. Whether 300 feet is wider than re-
quired, or so narrow as to afford no remedy whatever against great
floods, we are absolutely unable to gather from the report of the
Commission. We are also left entirely in the dark as to the extent
and nature of the opposing influence to the ultimate discharge of
the flood-waters, caused by the heaping up of the sea-water on the
north shore of the Bay by the southerly winds which invariably pre-
vail during periods of floods. These points of vital importance are
left untouched in the report of the Commission, although ample
evidence was manifestly within their reach to have enabled them,
without effort, to have shown conclusive reasons for such remedies
as the exigencies of the case demanded. If they neglected to col-
lect these necessary data, it is evident that their duty was less than
half performed. If they placed themselves in possession of all
attainable facts arising out of the floods of last December, it was
incumbent upon them to make those facts the basis of their report.
The suggestions for preventing flooding of the lands by future
storms should then have followed as logical consequences. In
anticipating any charge that might be brought against me of over-
stating the case, I have appended hereto a copy of the report of the
Commission. In it, as I have remarked, there is no information


beyond what we had before. The height of the flood above Prince's
Bridge is marked by a board nailed to a tree, on the east side of
the south approach to the bridge, and has been so marked for many
months. If we had not witnessed the outflow of the flood-waters
for upwards of a week over the St. Kilda road, the level of the
flood, as still exhibited by the piece of board referred to, could
scarcely have escaped our attention. We read this as we run, and
we look in vain for any further enlightenment on the subject of the
floods in the report of the Royal Commission.
After this introduction, it will occasion no surprise when I state
that I, for one, decline to accept the report of the Board as final on
the subject of the Yarra floods, or that in some important respects
I dissent from the conclusions they have arrived at.
The report has been styled by a portion of the Melbourne press as
exhaustive of the subject. I think I have already shown that it is
not so, through its barrenness of facts leading up to its recommen-
dations. Moreover, it is scarcely possible to discover in the report
a single point which, if not borrowed from suggestions previously
discussed in the columns of the Melbourne press, or advanced
through other channels, does not at least coincide with them. The
proposed canal for carrying off the flood-waters of the Yarra from
Prince’s Bridge to Hobson’s Bay is identical in its course with that
which I myself suggested to the Government in 1857. Mr. David
Moore was then in office as President of the Board of Land and
Works. Whether favourable to the scheme or otherwise, lam un-
able to say; but, at any rate, he went so far as to cause the route
to be surveyed, and the centre line of the channel to be pegged out
upon the ground; and the greater portion of the pegs probably
remain there to this day. In the columns of the Argus , in the
early part of this year, appeared a letter from me advocating the
same course for a flood-channel. On the Bth August last I read a
paper before the Royal Society, entitled “ Yarra Floods and their
Remedy,” in which I endeavoured to show, and, I think, success-
fully, that any other channel would prove a failure, and that the
course of channel I had suggested in 1857 was the only one that
could be adopted with any prospect of a successful result. I also
laid before the society a map showing the course of my proposed
channel. That map forms now one of the records of the society, is
beyond my control, and can, I presume, be examined by any person
interested in the subject. On that map, as I have already stated, is
laid down the course of a channel for the flood-waters, identical, in
all respects, with that since suggested by the Flood Commission.


Dr. Crooke, with considerable ability and energy, attacked my
scheme, with a view to establish the superior merits of his own
project for tapping the River Yarra at Dight’s Mills, and bringing
the flood-waters of the river by way of North Melbourne into the
Bay. It is not my purpose here to enter upon a discussion as to the
merits of the respective schemes propounded by Dr. Crooke and
myself. I am satisfied now, as I have been all along, that the
Doctor’s project, though ingenious, would be found to be imprac-
ticable for many reasons which it is unnecessary now to go into. I
refer to the matter simply in illustration of my statement that I
brought before the society a scheme for an outlet channel identical
with that since proposed by the Royal Commission, and that,
whether well or ill-conceived, the line of channel suggested by the
Board is my design.
The course to be adopted for the outlet channel is obviously the
main feature of the Board’s report, and, in fact, must necessarily be
the salient point of any scheme. The raising of the low ground
intersected by the canal is an evident necessity. The earth having
to be disposed of after being excavated, it naturally follows that
the material will be devoted to the raising of the low swampy
ground adjoining. Even if it were not desirable to elevate the
level of these lands, it is obvious that the most economical means of
getting rid of the material excavated from the flood-channel is by
depositing it on the low land adjoining. To dispose of the stuff in
any other manner would be simply absurd. In their suggestions on
this point, the Board have merely trodden in the steps of the real
pioneers of the project—namely, the Provisional Directors of the
Melbourne Ship Canal and Dock Company, formed in 1853. Their
avowed object, although commercial, and therefore mainly selfish,
was the same. They proposed to cut a canal from the Bay to Mel-
bourne; and they held forth as one of the distinctive features of
their project, that the low-lying lands adjacent to the ship canal,
being raised by the deposition of the material excavated, would,
though then useless, attain a position of large commercial value by
the execution of the works they proposed. It is needless to enlarge
upon this point. Let a canal be cut where it may, either with the
object of discharging the flood-waters or of affording access for
shipping to Melbourne—on whatever line this canal may be cut—
whether it be on the best that can be selected or the worst—the
land adjoining the channel, being raised by the material obtained
from the excavation, must be increased in value. On this point,
therefore, the Board have advanced no original proposition.


One of the suggestions of the Commission is, that a weir should
be formed across the river at Jolimont with locks for the passage of
small craft. This, also, is not an original proposition. The same
suggestion was made many months previously in the columns of the
Melbourne press, although I cannot say I think it a good one.
I do not know of any other recommendation made by the Board,
of any positive importance, except that of a weir across the new
outlet channel, at or near its departure from the River Yarra. In
suggesting this impediment to the outflow of the flood waters, I
believe the Board have advanced a strictly original proposition, and
in that alone. That they have, in this respect, by selecting for
themselves a new field of discovery, adopted a dangerous path, I
propose to show further on.
Under ordinary circumstances I might have some hesitation in
dealing with a subject opening up so large an aspect of responsibility
as this. I feel no inclination whatever to halt before entering
upon this discussion. Having, for the past eleven years, given
much consideration as to the best means available for discharging
the flood waters of the Yarra, and, at the same time, affording
passage to deep loaded vessels with ocean borne cargoes between
the Bay and Melbourne, I am fortified with ample justification for
bringing forward suggestions of a definite character, and I am
impressed with a thorough conviction that the views resulting from
so many years study of the subject are founded on a secure basis.
In selecting a course for a flood channel, it must not be lost sight
of that there are two separate and distinct objects to be provided
for. The first of these is the formation of a channel for carrying
off the flood waters ; the second is the adoption of such line as can
be made available as a canal for shipping. The one may be said
to be, to a certain extent, a matter of local interest only; the other
is distinctly national. The flood channel is immediately required ;
the ship canal we can probably wait for without suffering serious
inconvenience. The flood channel ought, however, manifestly to be
capable of conversion hereafter into a highway for shipping. The
Flood Commission, following in the steps of their predecessors in
this investigation, have admitted the expediency of making the
channel a means of accommodating shipping, besides relieving the
flood waters. This position cannot be disputed. The conflict of
opinion will be confined to two simple questions. The first is, as
to the mode in which this double result is to be secured. The
second is, as to whether or not a ship canal is at once required.
The most important point to be decided upon is, undoubtedly,


the selection of the route for a channel adapted for both of these
purposes. It is not for me to quarrel with the choice made by the
Commission on this head. As they have adopted the route designed
by me seven years ago, and advocated by me from that period up
to the present day, I may at once state my conviction that, in this
respect, they have come to a correct conclusion.
In recommending the formation of a channel 300 feet wide and
twelve feet deep at low water, I am decidedly of opinion that the
Board have committed an error of judgment, and have failed to be
guided by the evidence of the December floods. Assuming that
these floods may be regarded as a safe maximum of the extent of
water demanding an outlet, and this assumption is all in favour of
the Board, the most positive and reliable evidence that could be
wished for was within their immediate grasp. The outflowing
waters being dammed back by the approach to Prince’s Bridge,
through the waterway being insufficient for their discharge, an
accidental weir was thus formed, by means of which the exact
amount of water to be provided for could readily be calculated.
The Commission, for anything I know to the contrary, may have
caused this calculation to be made, but if so, their suggestions have
not been governed by the result of the inquiry. It must be clear,
to the meanest apprehension, that, knowing the velocity of the
current running through Prince’s Bridge and over its approach, and
knowing also the height to which the water arose on the upper side
of the bridge, all the materials were at hand for calculating the
exact quantity of water for which an outlet was required. If the
Board possessed themselves of this information they have made no
use of it. In suggesting a channel of only 300 feet wide, they
have utterly ignored the evidence they had before them. To sup-
pose that such a channel would give passage to a flood similar to
that of last December, is to suppose a manifest absurdity. The
thing is no more feasible than to put two gallons of water into a
gallon measure. Without going into detailed calculations, I ask
any man in full possession of his faculties who witnessed the torrent
of water which for several days uninterruptedly poured across the
St. Kilda road, extending nearly over to the Immigration Barracks,
if that body of water could be confined within limits 300 feet
wide 'i
If the experience of the past has taught us anything respecting
floods, it has taught us this : that they invariably occur when the
wind is from one particular quarter. The same wind which brings
forth a deluge in the Yarra, also heaps up the sea-water in the Bay


to oppose the discharge of the flood-waters. Therefore, storms of
this character not only cause an enormous increase in the volume
of upland outflowing waters, but also erect a barrier to their ulti-
mate discharge. Moreover, this barrier is not a mere vis inertias.
The waters of the Bay during these storms are driven up, wave
after wave, meeting the outflowing waters with a real active opposi-
tion. lam not aware if the resisting force of the sea-water has
ever been measured, and reduced to actual figures; but, it must, at
any rate, be of sufficient magnitude to cause a check to the dis-
charge of the flood-waters greatly in excess of the mere difference
of level between the water in the river and that in the Bay.
Any scheme, aiming at finality, should allow for the adverse
influence of the heaped-up waters in the Bay ; and should calculate
upon a certain amount of inward motion in those waters, opposed
to the outward current. To say the least, it would be dangerous to
estimate upon any outflow below the level to which the waters
of the Bay are driven during opposing winds. The depth to
which an outflow channel would act cannot, therefore, be assumed
at anything beyond the difference of level between the water at the
commencement of that channel and the water in the Bay.
To render a scheme theoretically perfect, the outlet channel
should be of such capacity as to carry off the water during floods
without allowing the difference of level between the water at the
Melbourne wharfs and at the Bay to be greater than on ordinary
occasions. It is not possible to prevent the water in the river from
rising to an unusual height during floods on account of the
water in the Bay being heaped up to an elevation considerably
above the normal level by the adverse winds, and through which
the outflow is impeded. It is quite practicable, however, to
provide against the ruling difference of level between the two points
being augmented. That is to say, supposing the waters in the Bay
during a flood to be heaped up three feet above their ordinary
level, the rise of the Yarra above its usual height should not exceed
three feet.
This, in fact, is not only practicable, but necessary. The height
of the Melbourne wharves, above the ordinary level of the river, is
but a few feet; and this height is not susceptible of increase,
unless it be by pulling down and rebuilding a vast extent of pro-
perty ; and, raising the level of the Queen’s Wharf, and the streets
immediately abutting thereon. This would, of course be out of
the question. The Queen’s Wharf and the adjoining property
having been constructed at a low elevation the flood channel must


of necessity be of large area, to provide against tlie water at any
period arising materially above its accustomary level.
In recommending a channel only 300 feet wide, the Commission
would appear to have estimated that the outflow during floods
would occupy its entire depth. That this could not possibly be the
case, under any circumstances, I have already endeavoured to show.
But the Commission have introduced a feature in their scheme,
which reduces the effective discharging power of their flood channel
to a minimum. They propose placing a barrier across the upper
end, in the shape of a w T eir, over which the flood-waters are
to effect their escape. The upper surface of this obstacle
to the steady outflow of the storm-waters is recommended
to be at high water level of Spring tides. The depth of the
flood channel is to be twelve feet below low water mark. The
difference of level between low water mark and high water
during Spring tides cannot be taken at less than three feet.
From the top of the weir to the bottom of the channel would,
therefore, be fifteen feet. Now, this fifteen feet in depth of the
flood channel would obviously contain water in a state of rest, and
could not possibly be of any assistance in providing for the escape
of the outgoing waters. The measure of the flood channel, as a
means of discharge, cannot then be assumed as of greater capacity
than the area represented by 300 feet in width multiplied by such
height above high water Spring tides, as the water may be safely
allowed to reach. Indeed it will be something less, as the check,
which the waters will receive in passing over a weir, will still
further reduce the power of the channel to afford them passage.
Giving the Commission the benefit of all that can be said by the
most sanguine in favour of their scheme, the utmost available out-
fall they can attempt to claim for the proposed flood-channel is
therefore comprised within a figure represented by the width of the
channel, multiplied by the depth between the top of Queen’s Wharf
and the top of their proposed weir. This depth will not exceed
seven feet. It would be manifestly absurd, however, in entering
upon such an outlay as must be incurred in constructing a flood-
channel, to reckon upon the waters being allowed to rise to the very
surface of the Queen’s Wharf. I think four feet below the level of
the wharf is the utmost height to which the water might safely be
calculated to reach, in forming an estimate of the required capacity
of a flood channel. If this view be correct, the available power of
discharge of the Board’s channel will be small indeed. They pro-
pose that the depth of the channel shall be twelve feet below low


water. From low water to the level of Queen’s Wharf is about
nine feet six inches. The total depth will therefore be twenty-one
feet six inches. Of this depth, as I have shown, that portion only,
between the top of the weir and four feet below Queen’s Wharf, can
be safely calculated upon for the discharge of floods. In plain
figures, this available depth will amount to three feet. The pro-
position of the Board therefore amounts to this : they recommend
a flood channel of twenty-one feet six inches in depth, three feet
only of which can be looked forward to as furnishing egress for
floods. This is not an exaggerated view of the case. On the
contrary, I have refrained from debiting the scheme of the Com-
mission with the reduced discharging power of the channel that
would result from the passage of the flood-waters over a weir. It is
difficult to make this reasoning clear to a non-professional reader,
but I will endeavour to do so. The flood-water on arriving at the
weir, and previous to escaping over that obstacle into the sea, is of
a certain volume and has attained a certain velocity. The volume
of the water multiplied by its velocity, constitutes the greatest
amount of discharging power which the outflowing stream is capable
of exercising. After passing over the weir into the outlet channel
below, the stream cannot possibly gain any further power. At the
moment when the water passes over the weir, its utmost dis-
charging power has been reached. The water in the channel below
the weir being open to the sea, can have no outward current. If
any current existed, it would be inwards, in consequence of the
southerly winds driving the waters of the Bay in the direction of
Melbourne. At least, therefore, the storm-water, after running over
the weir, can receive no assistance from the water in the channel in
escaping to the sea. On the contrary, the velocity must be retarded.
The dead water in the channel, as I have shown, is fifteen feet deep.
I have also shown that the flood-water cannot safely be allowed to
attain a greater height than three feet above the weir. The water
above the weir will therefore bear a proportion towards the dead
water below, as one to five. Now, it is manifest, that if you pour
one gallon of water over a weir at a given velocity, that gallon of
water is incapable of urging forward five gallons additional of dead
water at the same velocity. If an outward motion be given to the
entire mass of water below the weir, it can only be at a velocity one-
sixth of that possessed by the stream above the weir; because the
quantity of water in motion poured into the water lying dead in the
channel is only one-sixth of the entire bulk. Assuming then, that
the water before passing over the weir into the proposed outlet


channel, runs at the rate of six miles per hour, the velocity in the
outlet channel must be reduced to one mile per hour. Or, con-
versely, if the rate of outflow above the weir be maintained below
the weir, it can only be because the water in the lower fifteen feet
of the channel is inactive, dead, and without any outward motion.
Having now demonstrated that of the 21 feet 6 inches in depth
of the channel proposed by the Commission, 3 feet only will be
available for the safe passage of floods, or less than one-seventh of
the whole depth of the channel, I think I have proved that, strictly
speaking, it is not a flood channel at all, but something else. The
Board hold forth the inducement that, while relieving Melbourne
*from floods, the flood-channel will also form a dock. If they had
said that, while forming a dock, it would also somewhat tend to
assist in relieving Melbourne from floods, they would have been
much nearer the mark. As I have pointed out, one-seventh only of
the channel is devoted to the Yarra floods. The remaining surplus
of six-sevenths belongs wholly to the accommodation of shipping.
This might not be regarded as so very objectionable, if the problem
which the Commission were appointed to solve had been thoroughly
worked out, and a perfect remedy for future floods had been devised
by them. But they have not proposed an efficient flood-channel;
nor have they suggested a really valuable dock. If it came pro-
perly within the scope of this paper, I could show, from calculations
I have made, that a flood-channel of only 300 feet wide is perfectly
useless as a means of discharging the storm-waters, even under the
most favourable circumstances. With a weir across the upper end,
as suggested by the Commission, the incapacity of the channel
would be made only the more glaring. For a flood-channel, a far
greater width than 300 feet is required. Let us, then, look into
the scheme as one intended primarily for the accommodation of
shipping. From this point of view the project also fails. We do
not require a channel 300 feet wide to bring ships up to Melbourne,
a considerably less width would suffice for this purpose. Again, a
depth of twelve feet below low water, while altogether unnecessary
for a flood channel, as I have shown, is also inadequate for a ship
canal. If it be worth while to construct a canal for shipping, it is
advisable to make the canal deep enough to accommodate the
largest class of vessels that enter the port. A canal, of only twelve
feet in depth, would offer no facilities of any practical consequence
beyond those which exist at present. In fact, in one important
respect, the present river channel has an advantage, inasmuch as
it affords access to the Queen’s Wharf, which the other would be


debarred from doing, because the upper end is to be blocked up by
a weir. True, the report states, that the weir may, if experience
show it to be desirable, have gates to admit of the passage of
ships. But the gates form no part of the scheme ; are at the best
an objectionable and expensive mode of getting over the difficulty ;
and would always be liable to be choked with silt, and to get out
of order.
I cannot see any object the Board could have had in view, in
proposing a weir across the new channel and another weir at
Jolimont. It seems especially curious that they should do so, when
it is seen that they refer, in an early part of their report, to the
artificial obstructions of the present channel as seriously increasing*
its incapacity. To take away the obstruction now known as the
Falls, and to construct two other obstructions in place of it under
the name of weirs, seems a queer mode of clearing the river.
Supposing the new channel to be completed and to be twelve feet
deep, there would then be two channels of the same depth leading
towards the Melbourne wharves ; one, the present course of the
river, a tortuous, narrow channel, five and a quarter miles in length,
difficult and tedious to navigate ; the other, the new route, a broad,
straight, open channel, three and a quarter miles in length, with
every facility for navigation. Would there be sense or justice in
compelling vessels to approach Melbourne by the former course,
when the latter is so infinitely preferable 1 And yet this is what
the Board’s recommendation contemplates. Surely, if it be neces-
sary to block up one of the channels by means of a weir, the
smaller and least useful one should be selected. It would create
but little inconvenience to place a weir across the river below the
gas works, whilst it would materially reduce the usefulness and
efficiency of a new ship channel to separate it from the Melbourne
wharves by a similar obstruction.
I had intended, on commencing this paper, to make a few
observations on other suggestions contained in the report. My
remarks have, however, already extended to such far greater length
than I at first anticipated they would occupy, that I must condense
what I have yet to say into a small compass.
However, I have but little occasion to regret this ; for, after all,
the recommendations of the Board, outside the one point of real
importance, namely, the flood channel, are of comparative insig-
nificance. The improvements contemplated in the river above
Prince’s Bridge will not lower the level of future floods below
Prince’s Bridge. And however much the river may be widened and


deepened, between Prince’s Bridge and the Melbourne Railway
Bridge, the height of the floods in the river, above the latter bridge,
cannot be sensibly affected. The waterway of every one of the
bridges over the Yarra in the neighbourhood of Melbourne, is too
small to admit of the free exit of the floods. But, we may console
ourselves with the reflection, that this is not an unmixed evil; for
the flood-waters are thus checked in their descent to the Queen’s
Wharf. At this latter point the elevation of the land above the
sea is so low, that the rate of outflow thence to the sea is naturally
much slower than above Prince’s Bridge. The check to the descent
of the waters afforded by the numerous bridges, although causing
much damage in their immediate localities, affords the water below
the Queen’s Wharf longer time to get away, and therefore tends to
prevent the floods about Melbourne from rising to so high a level
as they otherwise would. In their effects, in this respect, narrow
waterways are altogether different from the obstructions of solid
dams and weirs.
I may remark, by the way, that while the Board have suggested
the embanking of the north shore of the Yarra, for preventing the
floods from inundating the lower parts of Richmond, they do not
appear to have given attention to the necessity of making provision
for the land water to escape.
There are yet two points in the report which I think require
serious attention. The Board state that a new bridge over the
Yarra, of larger span than the present, is required for the Mel-
bourne and Hobson’s Bay Railway. This is beyond a doubt; and,
from the oblique direction in which the railway crosses the river*
the substituted bridge will have to be much more extensive than
the new viaduct proposed in place of Prince’s Bridge. They state
that the cost of this is not included in their estimate of £675 000.
But, why not ? It is useless to shirk the question. The railway
crosses the proposed flood channel, and, therefore, unless the new
bridge be built, the flood channel will be useless. It is quite
certain the Railway Company will not, in a spirit of patriotism,
voluntarily incur the expense ; and it is not reasonable to suppose
that the Government or Parliament can compel them to lay out
money in erecting works that are not required for the purposes of
the railway. Under any circumstances, in putting before the
public an estimate of the cost of the scheme, an item so large as
this ought not to be entirely ignored.
The second point is this ;—The Board assume that the works
now in progress for deepening and regulating the mouth and outfall


of the river will be vigorously prosecuted ; but they do not carry
their scheme beyond the junction of the new channel with the old,
near the mouth of the Yarra. The Commission may not have felt
themselves entitled, under their instructions, to push their sugges-
tions further in this respect than they have done. I think they
would have been fully justified in doing so; as, amongst other
matters, they were requested to advise as to improving the navi-
gation of the river and other commercial facilities of the river and
Pout, Now, in recommending the construction of a ship canal,
the Commission are giving a definite direction to the whole of the
harbour accommodation which will be required in this port pro-
bably for all time to come. They should, therefore, have shown in
what manner, and to what extent, their scheme was capable of this
future development. It is not improbable that, within a few years’
time, the control of the wharfs and harbours will be vested in a
Harbour Trust; and it is desirable that, before that period arrives,
the public should have decided upon a general scheme for the ulti-
mate extension of the wharfage and other shipping accommodation.
In bringing my scheme for a flood channel and ship canal before
the Government in 1857, I was strongly impressed with this view;
and I delineated on the plan the future extensions, which, although
they would not be required for many years to come, would, if my
plan were adopted, be eventually carried out. I proposed, in the
first instance, to cut an open canal; but my scheme included the
construction of wharfs and jetties on both sides of the canal, from
one end to the other, accordingly as they were required; com-
mencing with the wharfs at the Melbourne end, and working down
towards the lower end, as extensions were called for by the expan-
sion of commerce. The project went further than this. My plan
of the mouth of the canal was so arranged, as to admit of the
wharfs being ultimately extended, until the one wharf reached
the Hobson’s Bay Railway Company’s boundary on the north side
of the Bay, and the other wharf joined the existing harbour works
at Williamstown on the south side of the Bay. Such a scheme,
when completed, would form a harbour which for safety and conve-
nience could scarcely be surpassed. It may, at first sight, seem
needless to look forward so many years ; but, five-and-twenty years
ago, it would probably have been regarded as utterly absurd to look
forward to a ship canal. In laying down a project for harbour
works in a new country, the future extension of those works to their
utmost limits, ought to be contemplated and provided for. And in
proposing a scheme involving an expenditure of £6 1 5,000, it appears


to me that the Board should have explained the development of
which it was susceptible. For anything I absolutely know to the
contrary, the works now in progress at the outlet of the river may
happen to be adapted to meet the extensions of the wharfage, which
the commercial trade of the port will ultimately demand ; but it
would have been far more satisfactory if the Board had shown this
to be the case ; and laid a complete scheme for the development of
the Port before the public.
Works of this magnitude can only be carried on by means of
public loans. We may be able now, without much difficulty, to
borrow money on the credit of the colony, supported as it is by an
immense tract of valuable Crown lands available for sale. But, as
indebtedness increases, we may find the operation gradually
becoming more difficult. The more complete the schemes for our
public works are, and the more capable they may appear of future
development, the more easily we shall be able to procure the money
for carrying them out, and, in fact, the better prospect they will
have of being reproductive.
It would be idle to doubt that a storm-channel is urgently
required for carrying off the flood-waters of the Yarra. It is by
no means so evident, that we have any present necessity for five
and a half miles of additional wharfage for the coasting vessels and
other craft drawing twelve feet water at ordinary low water. It
would be a sorry sight, after these long parallel lines of wharves
were completed, if there were no ships to occupy them. I have
endeavoured to show that no portion of the flood-waters would flow
through this twelve feet of water, or through the three feet between
low water and high water Spring tides—fifteen feet in all, but that
this would be dead water, above which the flood-waters would
escape into the sea. If there were no ships at the wharves of the
new canal, there would, therefore, be no interest coming in on the
outlay incurred upon this fifteen feet in depth of excavation. This
is a commercial aspect of the question, upon the merits of which
any mercantile man of ordinary sagacity and experience is capable
of forming a sound opinion. Other matters which I have dealt
with, such as the proposed area of the channel, and the propriety of
placing a weir across its upper extremity, are, perhaps, questions
for professional men to deal with. At any rate, if 300 feet be
really wide enough for a flood-channel, the fact is susceptible of
proof ; and if any advantage can be gained by introducing the
obstruction of a weir across the channel, good reasons can, I presume,
be advanced in favour of such a course.


Finally, I would throw out as a suggestion, that probably the
better plan would be to make a flood-channel first; and, to deepen it,
or such portion of it as may be required for the use of shipping,
when circumstances show that the additional accommodation is
really necessary.
My task is now ended. There are many points which I had
originally intended to bring out in elucidating this subject, but the
desirability of confining this pamphlet within reasonable limits, has
urged me to omit them. In what I have said, it has been my
endeavour to make my meaning clear, at the expense of being
tedious, to show my reasons for such objections as I have advanced
against the scheme of the Commission, and to deal justly with their
suggestions. In entering upon this discussion, I have no purpose to
serve, beyond a desire that the best possible scheme should be
adopted; and, having studied the subject for many years, I feel
entitled to offer a definite opinion, although my views may clash
in some respects with the suggestions of the Commission. The
only appreciation of the trouble I have taken, in devoting my
leisure time to the preparation of this pamphlet, that will probably
fall to my lot, is the public hostility that individuals usually succeed
in securing to themselves when they deal with a popular question
from an unpopular point of view. Having endeavoured, however,
in honesty of purpose, to place a true statement of this case before
the public, I am indifferent to any censure which the contents of
this paper may occasion ; but I am willing to admit that I shall not
consider my time and labour to have been thrown away if my
criticisms of the report of the Commission lead to a farther and
thoroughly exhaustive inquiry into the subject of the Yarra floods.
In whatever spirit the publication of these pages may be received,
I venture to prophecy they will, at least, have the effect of pre-
venting the abortive scheme of the Commission from being adopted
by Parliament, if not from being definitely proposed by the Govern-
ment. To this result I look forward with tranquil confidence.
EGBERT ADAMS,
Late Resident Engineer , Victorian Railways,
December, 1864.


APPENDIX.
The following is the report of the board appointed to advise the
Government as to the best means of preventing the flooding and
improving the navigation of the River Yarra :
“TO THE HON. THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC WORKS.
“ Sir, —Referring to the instructions conveyed to us by your
memorandum of the Ist February, 1864, ‘to inquire into and as-
certain the causes of the recent overflow of the Yarra in and about
the city of Melbourne and its suburbs, and to specify the principal
impediments to the free egress of the waters,’ and ‘to inquire into
and advise as to the best method of facilitating the discharge of
flood water from the Rivar Yarra, limited as far as practicable to its
natural channel, and such other channel or channels as may be pre-
scribed for it, with a view to preserve and improve the navigation
thereof, and other commercial facilities of the river and port,’
we have now the honour to lay before you the following report.
“We desire to explain, first, the general principles by which we
have been guided, in considering the opinions and plans that have
been brought before us, and the subject generally referred to us ;
and, secondly, the scheme which, designed in accordance with these
principles, appears to us will be the most effectual in relieving Mel-
bourne and its neighbonrhood from the evils caused by the floods in
the River Yarra.
“ The principles we have laid down for our guidance may be very
shortly stated. They are, firstly, that any effective improvement of
the river must commence at or near to its discharge into the sea, and
that such improvement must precede any attempt to make the dis-
charge of the waters of the upper portions of the river more rapid ;
secondly, that it is of the greatest importance to avoid, as far as pos-
sible, any interference with the regimen of the river, and that any
new channel should be used for carrying off the waters of the Yarra
only in times of flood ; and, lastly, that any new channel should
discharge its waters into the mouth of the Yarra ; as, apart from
the injury that the mouth of the Yarra must suffer from the with-
drawal of the scour effected by the flood waters, we do not believe
that it would be possible to keep open the mouth of a channel at
any point on the beach between the mouth of the Yarra and St.


Kilda in the face of southerly and south-westerly gales. We have
given every consideration to suggestions that have been made from
time to time on this subject, and we have had the advantage of
hearing the opinions and examining the plans of several gentlemen
who have given much care and attention to the matter ; but, they
all appear to us to fail when examined by the principles that we
have agreed upon as essential to be observed in the endeavour to
effect the object in view.
“ The great flood of December last was, no doubt, caused by the
incapacity of the river channel to discharge the extraordinary rain-
fall that occurred at that time, the natural incapacity of the channel
being seriously increased by artificial obstructions; and in Mel-
bourne and its neighbourhood the evils were greatly aggravated by
the height to which the water rose in the bay, under the influence
of a gale from the south-west,
“ After a careful consideration of the several surveys and sections
we have caused to be made of the river, with personal examinations
at various places, and assuming that the works now in progress for
deepening and regulating the mouth and outfall of the river will be
vigorously prosecuted—
“We advise that a channel 300 ft. wide, and having for the pre-
sent a depth of water of twelve feet at ordinary low water, to be
increased pari passu with the deepening of the outfall, should be
cut from the south bank of the Yarra, about opposite to the gas-
works, to a point opposite the stone quarries between Stony Creek
and the river’s mouth ; the sectional area of this channel would
provide, after allowing for the reduction of the waterway by the
shipping on each side, for the discharge of the water we have
calculated to be the quantity in the flood of December, 1863,
beyond the capacity of the present river below the gasworks to
discharge. The lower end of this channel should be left open and
the upper end closed by a long oblique weir, which should be
carried to the level of high water spring tides, and only come into
action for the discharge of water in time of floods ; but it should be
provided with sluice-gates, for occasional use in freshes, &c., and
may, if experience show it to be desirable, have gates to admit of
the passage of ships from the new channel to the basin. This
channel, while it will effectually relieve Melbourne from floods, will
form a dock of great extent and perfect security. It would afford
about five and a half miles of wharfage accommodation, and should
be connected with Melbourne and the terminus of the Government
lines of railway by direct communication across the river, and both
banks of the channel should be connected with each other by a
bridge over the weir.
“ Embankments to the necessary levels should be formed along
the north and south sides of the channel, and extended to an
oblique weir, which we propose should be built at Jolimont, in
substitution for the Falls, and other embankments higher up the


river on the north side of the Yarra from the Chapel-street Bridge
to the high ground opposite the Botanic Gardens; by these means
the low laud in Richmond and that opposite the Suburban Railway-
station, the St. Kilda-road, Emerald Hill, Sandridge, and indeed all
the land on both sides of the channel and the river to the Botanic
Gardens, would be protected from flood.
“ The works now in progess in forming the embankment on the
north bank of the river from the gasworks to the Saltwater
junction, and thence along the east bank of the Saltwater River,
should be continued.
“ The lagoon to the eastward should be drained, that the land it
occupies might become available.
“We advise that the waterway of the river from the weir at
Jolimont to about the gasworks, should be deepened and widened
to a sufficient extent to allow, at least, three times the quantity of
water to pass in a given time that is possible at present; this will
involve the building of new bridges of increased waterway.
“We recommend that the new Prince’s Bridge should be of
increased width, and carried across the river in the fine of Swanston-
street, at the level of that street where it crosses Flinders-street,
and that an approach should be formed on the south side byjirches
and an embankment.
“We advise that the Falls should be entirely removed, and an
oblique weir constructed higher up the river, at a point nearly
opposite Jolimont, for the purpose of preserving the summer-level.
The pipes to the engine-house, for occasional water supply to
Melbourne, should be removed to a point above this weir-
“ New bridges, in place of the present Hobson’s Bay Railway
Bridge, and that over the Falls, should be built, with larger spans,
and all the obstructions, natural and artificial, that exist at present
between Prince’s Bridge and the basin should be removed.
“ By reference to the section attached, it will be seen that, next
to the Falls, the most serious of these is the reef under Prince’s
Bridge.
“ We recommend the construction of a lock at the weir opposite
Jolimont, that a passage to boats and small craft up and down the
river may be provided.
“ We estimate the cost of the works we recommend at £675,000.
The works included in this estimate are as follow :
“ The cutting and embanking the new channel \ the widening
and embanking of the river from the gasworks to Jolimont * the
construction of the weirs and the lock ; the embanking of the river
near Richmond \ the removal of Prince’s Bridge and building a
new bridge and approaches ; removing the Falls and other obstruc-
tions ; and the erection of bridges over the weir at the north-east
end of the new channel, and across the river to the terminus of the
Government railways. The new bridge for the use of the Hobson’s
Bay Railway we have not included.


“As a set-off against this expenditure, we estimate that about
2,000 acres of land now useless will become available for occupation
and for business purposes, besides a wharf frontage of about five
and a-half miles on the sides of the new channel for shipping, in
addition to the frontages made available on the Yarra banks.
“We would also recommend the construction of a culvert, of
suitable dimensions, from the bottom of Elizabeth-street through
the railway station to the Yarra, to assist in the discharge of the
storm-water from the city.
“We have confidence that the works we have proposed would
relieve Richmond, and effectually protect Melbourne and the land
to the south of it from any possible injury from the Yarra floods ;
and as river improvements should as a rule commence from the
lower end, if it should be afterwards found necessary to carry out
works higher up the river than we think desirable at present, they
will form an extension and development of those we are now
recommending, and which, we are of opinion, will discharge the
flood-waters without interfering with the regimen of the river in its
ordinary state, or withdrawing any portion of the water which is
required for the preservation of the outfall.
“We attach general plans and sections illustrating this report.
“We beg permission to record our appreciation of the zealous
assistance rendered to us by Mr. S. H. Merrett, of the Department
of Public Works, the gentleman you appointed to act as secretary
to us in this inquiry.
“We have the honour to be, Sir, your most obedient servants,
“ W. W. Wardell, Chairman.
“ T. Higinbotham.
“ R. W. Larritt.
“ Melbourne, August 31,1864.”
Wilson & Mackinnon, Printers, 78, Collins Street East.




