

THE
OF THE
CITY OF SYDNEY.
SYDNEY:
PRRINTED BY J. DEGOTARDI, “SIDNEY PRINTING HOUSE,” ROBINHOOD LANE,
WATER SUPPLY




SENEX.
f IJfIQ
,2o> (■ 3
The late rains having replenished the Botany
Swamp, so as to render the water drinkable, “ Our Water
Supply ” seems now to be quite forgotten. lam therefore
induced to publish three letters on the subject, which ap-
peared in the Herald ; with the hope, that a matter of such
vital importance to the inhabitants of Sydney may be pro-
perly considered, and that the Mayor and Aldermen may
be induced to take some steps for providing our daily in-
creasing City with a more plentiful supply of water.




OUR WATER SUPPLY.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE MAYOR AND
ALDERMEN OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY.
(Per favour of the Herald .)
Gentlemen,
Surely the numerous and alarming complaints that
are being made of the scarcity of water must have reached your eais
ere this. And this dreadful calamity is daily increasing. On board
a ship, making a prolonged voyage, we might submit to be placed
for a time on short allowance, hoping soon to reach a port where all
our wants would be supplied ; but in the city and suburbs of
Sydney, where the population is rapidly increasing, and our sole
dependence is on a bog whose absorbing powers are rapidly decreasing,
our situation is melancholy in the extreme. Not only are we placed
on short allowance, but the quality is positively unwholesome! Of
what use is a Corporation to the citizens, if the Mayor and Aider-
men grossly neglect the functions for which they were elected ? Of
what use is an eminent engineer, such as Mr. Bell, C.E., is known
to be, if you fritter away his time in trivial works which a subor-
dinate could perform, instead of employing him to make a survey of
the country, and report to the Council where water —pure and with-
out limit —can be procured, at the least expense? The opinion of
a professional gentlemen like Mr. Bell would be invaluable. But of
what value can be the opinion of those of your civic body (I speak
with all respect), whose ideas are limited to economising water —
placing the citizens on a short allowance, stinting the Governor,
making no provision for extinguishing fires, and who consider baths
as a waste of water, and a luxury not to be tolerated ? Not only do
men whose views are mean and niggardly injure the health of the
citizens, and endanger the city buildings, but they also tend to
impoverish it; for who would live in a city where the water w»s
both nasty and scarce ? Who would be safe in building, if there
was not water to extinguish fires? Or who would establish a manu-
factory in a city without water? Water ought to be supplied with-


out limit. The mains should be constantly kept full. We know by
experience that nothing tends more to disturb the water, and render
it unfit for domestic purposes, than the intermitted supply, as now
given. The sediment, lodged in the pipes, is constantly stirred, and
will, as a matter of course, get into the service pipes of the city.
Sewers, unless they are flushed, are worse than useless. Choked up
sewers will breed a pestilence. It is merely a question of time.
Already our nostrils have warned us of what may soon follow. The
time will come when water will be as plentiful in Sydney a 3 it is in
Melbourne; but, for the present generation, it may come too lqte.
If, by an ample supply of water, that dreadful scourge, the cholera,
could be averted, and the lives of tens of thousands saved, money,
without limit, could not be better employed than in such an act of
humanity. But if from the want of water, the pestilence should
visit our fair city and decimate its inhabitants, who would be re-
sponsible to God and the country for the sacrifice of so many valuable
lives ? The mayor and the aldermen ! For sanitary purposes we
have elected you; provided you with money; empowered you to
pledge our credit; armed you with legal powers, and if you neglect
your duty in providing us with the first necessary of life, you are
utterly without excuse. Many schemes have been propounded.
“ Caution” has discovered another bog, but surely we have bad
swamp water enough, and even if water impregnated with decayed
vegetable matter were innoxious, which it is not, the bogs, with the
increase of population and cultivation, soon lose their absorbing
power. I believe that there is still common sense enough in our
civic authorities, after the experience you have had, to reject any
more bog suggestions. The Artesian well scheme is not new. Fo.
months, or years, the respectable inhabitants in H.M. mansion a
Woolloomooloo were diligently employed boring for fresh water ii
the the earth, but it was all labour in vain. As the watt
famine increases, the schemes of projectors will increase in propoi
tion. One may suggest distilling the sea water, as the harbour affort
an inexhaustible supply. Another may suggest collecting and storn
all the rain water that falls, which amounts to so many inches p<
annum. But, ridiculous as these notions may seem, they do n<
equal in absurdity one made by “Spec,” in the Herald, of supply!)
all the wants of ten times ten thousand human beings, with thewat
that “ percolates itself through the rocks in the locality of Waverley


The only practicable schemes that have been suggested for
supplying Sydney with water are the Nepean and the George’s River,
which I propose, with the permission of the Editor of the Herald,
reviewing in my next.
Your humble servent,
SENEX.
OUR WATER SUPPLY.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL THE MAYOR AND
ALDERMEN OF THE CITY OF SYDNEY.
Gentlemen,
In Tuesday s Herald I had the honour of addressing
you on “ our water supply.” In the same journal I read some of
your speeches. Happy would it have been for my fellow-citizens,
thought I, if some of you had been born 1800 years ago! The water
question was incomparably better understood in the Roman colonies
in the third century than it is in one of the British colonies in the
nineteenth century. Ignorant, as the ancients were, of iron pipes
and steam-engines, and with a very scanty knowledge of hydraulics,
their ideas of supplying towns with water were as superior to yours
as civilisation is to barbarism. They had no such peddling notions
as that of supplying a large city with water from a swamp, which
rather ought to be drained and made to grow cabbages.
Aldermen Oatley thinks it a commencement “ in the right direc-
tion” to get £5OO voted for “increased excavation, capable of holding
an additional 3,375,000 gallons of water” —not one day’s supply!
He is for sticking to the Botany Swamp, and thinks he is, as he
says, “ doing a greater service to the city in supplying water than in
spending money to convey the water from George’s River or the
Nepean.” I give our worthy Alderman credit for sincerity. It is,
however, impossible to give him credit for nous when he propounds
views to our citizens for which 1800 years ago a Roman Senator
would have been stoned, unless he escaped ex officio, being a member
of a corporation, which has, “neither a body to be kicked nor a soul
to be damned.”


There are some valuable statistics in the speech of Alderman
Woods: —
1. He says' —“ He was of opinion that if they spent £700,000
on the works at Botany they would not be able to supply Sydney,
and its increasing suburbs, with water.”
2. The present consumption was at the rate of 26,000,000
gallons per week.
3. The works at Botany had cost —
For Land £50,000
Machinery 36,000
Excavating and other expenses (without pipes) 35,000
£121,000
4. Total amount expended, including pipes, £309,000.
According to the engineer’s report, another £105,000 or
£200,000 would be required to make the Botany reservoirs service-
able, and this only for a time.
5. The reservoirs were almost dry nine or ten days ago.
6. They were obliged to shut the water of at night, and warn
the inhabitants to be frugal in the use of it by day.
7. Street watering was discontinued.
8. The engine in one hour reduced the water in the reservoir
an inch.
9. The reservoir was overflowing, after a few days rain, and as
rapidly sank.
With facts like these, it appears almost incredible that the sen-
sible motion of Alderman Woods should have been negatived
“ That a sum , not exceeding £2OO, he voted hy this Council for ascer-
taining the best source of supplying water to the city. The £2OO is
saved, or rather, not to be spent! But £5OO is to be spent, or
rather wasted, in excavating decayed vegetable matter, for one day’s
consumption of water.
Assuming that the water of the Nepean is pure and unlimited,
the cost is a question a civil engineer alone can determine, after an
acurate survey. There are some facts, however, well known, by
which we may arrive at a rough estimate.
1. That the nearest point at Penrith is about thirty-five miles
distant from Sydney.


2. That the water at Penrith, except during a flood, is only a
few feet higher than high water mark in Sydney.
3. That the mains alone, Alderman Macintosh tells us, would
cost nearly £500,000.
4. That, in order to bring water from Penrith to Sydney, one
of two courses must be adopted ; either great steam power must be
employed to force the water through the mains, as at Botany, or the
water must be pumped into a gigantic reservoir, which would have
to be constructed at the Nepean above the highest flood level.
From the foregoing, it will be seen we cannot hope to get water
from the Nepean at a less cost than about one million pounds sterling.
Permit me to refer your Worship to the means adopted for
supplying some of the large towns in America.
1. Philadelphia is supplied from the River Schuylkill, across
which there is a dam formed of solid timber framework, filled up.
It is 1,600 feet in length, and, being formed where the water is 25
or 30 feet deep, was a work of some difficulty.
2. Richmond, in Virginia, is supplied with water from the
James River, on a principle analogous to the above,but on a smaller
scale.
3. Pittsburgh, on the Ohio, is similarly supplied, the water
being raised from the river to a height of above 100 feet, and then
distributed.
4. Montreal is supplied by the River St. Lawrence.
5. Cincinnati is supplied by the River Ohio.
6. New York. The supply of water to this city is the most
worthy of notice, as being analogous to what has been done in Sydney.
In 1774, when the city had only 20,000 inhabitants, the want of a
more plentiful supply of water was felt. In 1798, again it became
a matter of discussion, and various plans were suggested, and engi-
neers consulted, but nothing definite was done. In 1822 a little
more was affected. A committee was appointed, surveys and estimates
were made, and then the matter dropped. In 1831, more talking
and suggesting took place. In 1832 the appearance of cholera in
the city gave more earnestness than ever to the wish of having a
plentiful store of good water. Nothwithstanding all this nothing
was done until 1837 —50 difficult is it to rouse a corporate body to
action. One of the plans proposed was to dam the River Hudson so
as to exclude the salt water from the sea, but as a free passage, by


means of locks, must be left for navigation, the plan was not practi-
cable. This river is navigable for sloops and steamboats to the
extent of 145 miles above New York, and it is navigable for the
largest vessels, to the town of Hudson, 118 miles. You will observe
that the only objection to damming the river Hudson was, not be-
cause of the difficulty of getting rid of the salt water, hut on account
of its obstructing the navigation, and thus putting a stop to an im-
portant river trade for a distance of 145 miles, which would be far
greater than our River Hunter.
Now this objection cannot apply to the George’s River, which
has been suggested as the best place for obtaining an unlimited
supply of pure water; the only trade in this river being a few wood
and fishing boats. If the George’s River were dammed, it would
become, probably, one of the finest sheets of fresh water in the world.
Mr John B. Carroll, a respectable and a well-known resident on the
river, points out, very graphically, in a letter which appeared in the
Herald of the 16th ultimo, how easily practicable it is to dam the
river, either at the end of Koggerah Road, the “present crossing-
place, with the punt, on the road to Wollongong, or between Kog-
gerah Point and the Baldfaced Stag. At the latter place the river
is not more than eleven chains wide. Kangaroo Point is a large
point of land, rising to a considerable height near the end, and
divided from the main land by a narrow neck, composed of solid
sandstone rock. The shore on the Sydney side, or as it is called the
Baldfaced Stag, rises almost perpendicularly to a height of 200 or
300 feet. By constructing a dam between these two points, the
water may be raised several feet above its present level, when it could
be conveyed, by means of a stone conduit, to the water-works at
Botany, from which it is distant about miles, or by constructing
a reservoir on the top of the ridge of the Baldfaced Stag, and forcing
the water to that level, it will give all the advantage of having a
perpendicular lift.”
Mr. Carroll’s letter is well worthy your attention. Not on ac-
count of its engineering suggestions, for I should prefer those of your
engineer (Mr Bell, C.E.), although Mr. Carroll’s are worthy of con-
sideration. But Mr. Carroll has told you what nature has done, and
which your own eyes may see, if you were to pay a visit to that
locality. You could examine the crossing at the end of Koggerah
Bay, where the Government punt is; and you also could see Bald-


faced Stag and Kangaroo Point, on the opposite side —the width of
which, says Mr. Carroll, is ouly eleven chains, or about the eighth
part of a mile.
The embankment of the Yan Yean reservoir, which supplies
Melbourne with water, is sixty chains long, and twenty-four miles
from Melbourne. The George’s River, at the Baldfaced Stag, is,
Mr. Carroll tells us, about 4-| miles from the Botany Water Works.
So that, with an addition to our mains of 4-| miles, and with an em-
bankment of forty-nine chains, or three thousand two hundred
and thirty-four feet shorter than that of the Yan Yean, we might
have a supply of fresh water as pure in quality as it would be un-
limited in quantity. I say pure in quality , because there would be
nothing to pollute it.
In the Thames, the sewers of the city and some of the suction-
pipes of the water works companies were not many feet apart. Al-
derman Murphy (who thinks it “not desirable to have river water”)
might well turn up his nose at river water like this—for the idea of
an alderman, above all other men, swallowing some of the diluted
contents of his neighbour’s privy is revolting in the extreme.
The great difficulty of getting rid of the salt water in the George's
River appears to have been the bugbear with Alderman Oatley.
He says, “To construct a dam at George’s River could only be made
available in twenty years, when all the salt water had been cleared
out.” This difficulty, incomparably greater on the Hudson, in
America, than at George’s River in New South Wales, was quite a
secondary consideration with the authorities; nor were doubts ever
expressed as to the difficulty in getting rid of the salt water. Two
or three floods, and possibly one only, would as effectually clear the
George’s River of salt water, after it was dammed, as if a drop of sea
water never entered it. It would be a gigantic reservoir, excavated
by nature, chiefly out of sandstone rock, and capable of holding as
many gallons of fresh water as the sands of the sea shore for number.
Suppose there were an embankment at one of the places pointed
out by Mr. Carroll, and the water were as pure as any alderman
would wish to drink, would any one of your worships think of look-
ing elsewhere for water to supply the city ? lam quite sure you
would not. Then what would it cost to embank eleven chains, with
abundance of stone on both sides, and clay in the immediate neigh-
bourhood ? It would be a bagatelle for one of the railway contrac-


tors. The eleven chains, or 242 yards, might be finished in two or
three months, or less.
If the embankment were properly constructed, by a scientific
engineer, with the sea bevel of one in five, and a sufficient width, it
would become as solid and durable as the rocks against which it was
built. It is said of some of the Roman aqueducts that 4f so excellent
was the plan in which they were conceived and executed, that even
the ruins of them enable modern Rome to be supplied with water
better thau almost any other city on the continent.
What will be said, a century hence, of your having spent so many
years peddling in a swamp to supply a hundred thousand inhabitants
with water? I wish you could live to hear the uncomplimentary
remarks that will be made by posterity on your civic wisdom.
In India, the labour that has been spent in excavating tanks or
artificial lakes is enormous. The Moota Talon, near Seringapatam,
is nearly thirty miles in circumference. Captain Basil Hall says he
counted, at one view, from the top of Nundydroog, considerably more
than a hundred tanks or artificial lakes, the least of which could not
have been less than two or three miles in circuit. Here, nature has
made us a present of a natural tank or lake, which could not be
excavated for a million pounds sterling, but which we decline to
make us of, because it requires a little repair, and a few months to
cleanse and fill itself with fresh water. The very Indians would
laugh at our consummate folly, if they knew it.
A resident on the G-eorge’s River once told me what a great
number of creeks of fresh water there are constantly running into
that river. He said he could count about twenty. Mill Creek, on
the Woronoro—a branch of the George’s River—he said, would
more than supply Sydney with water.
There is one thing must astonish every stranger visiting this
colony, on reading a report of your speeches, which is, that in all
your discussions on matters solely within the province of an engineer,
you invariably ignore the opinion of the Civil Engineer of the city,
by making no reference whatever to him. It would appear as if you
were all so well versed in engineering matters that you required
neither information or professional advice. All that the City En-
gineer has to do is to cany out your orders. There is no scope for
the talents of an engineer, however eminent he may be, when he is
so chained down to orders.


The importance of the subject is my excuse for addressing you
at this length.
Your humble servant,
SENEX.
THE WATER SUPPLY OF SYDNEY.
To the Editor of the Herald.
Under the pressure of a threatened scarcity of water,
some interesting correspondence recently appeared in your paper,
and some faint signs of activity were manifested by our mayor and
aldermen.
No sooner, however, has the emergency been removed for the
time by the recent rains, than this question of vital importance has
been allowed, apparently, to fall asleep. It is, nevertheless, a sub-
ject of such paramount interest to the citizens of Sydney that it
cannot be allowed to rest here, and I venture to remind our worthy
representatives at the Town Hall, that they will be held strictly to
account by their constituents at the next elections, for their neglect
of the one grand question, which should take precedence of all
others—the question which more than any other affects the well
being of the city.
For some years past I have taken a great interest in the subject
of the water supply, and have attentively considered the various
schemes which have been broached in your journal; it seems clear
to me, that there are but two sources on which dependence can be
placed for a really permanent supply, viz., the Nepean and George’s
River.
I exclude the Botany Swamps, because I believe that every year
their absorbing capacity will become less, and that they are even
now incapable of meeting the increased demand upon them.
Of the two remaining sources of supply, I confess that for a long
time I have been strongly in favour of the Nepean, owing chiefly to
the fact that I was more familiar with that river than with the other.
Very recently, however, I have had an oportunity of visiting
George s River in company with a gentleman who has taken a warm
interest in this question, and of forming some idea of the facilities


which it presents for the formation of a magnificent sheet of fresh
water, at a comparatively small expense, and with but slight engi-
neering difficulties.
At a spot dignified with the classic title of “ Tom Ugly’s Point ”
the river narrows to a width of about twenty-two chains, or little
more than'a quarter of a mile, and is at the same time shallower by
many feet than in most other places; it is, in fact, a natural bar in
the river.
Here, then, is the spot pointed out by Nature for the construc-
tion of a dam or embankment to divide the fresh water from the
salt, the sweet from the bitter.
Material in any quantity is at hand on the shores close by, and
in the immediate neighbourhood is an abundant supply of excellent
clay for puddling. The embankment, too, would supersede the
necessity for the punt which now plies at this very spot, and the
traffic over it would be of great service in consolidating the earth-
work of the dam. \
In all such works the construction of a weir or overflow for the
surplus water is a matter far more perplexing to the engineer than
the construction of the dam. Modern science condemns the for-
mation of the weir on the embankment itself, and requires that it
should be made if possible by some side cutting in natural earth.
Here, again, nature has met the difficulty more than half way. Tom
Ugly’s Point is in reality a peninsula,connected with the mainland
by an isthmus not more than fifty or sixty yards in width, by about
two hundred yards in length. This isthmus is a most extraordinary
formation of solid rock, with hardly a break or a crevice from one
end to the other, requiring only to be scarped and levelled to the
proper height to form a weir absolutely indestructible by the most
rapid torrent, and one which cannot be undermined or torn away.
Altogether, the works, necessary for the formation of an inex-
haustible lake of fresh water appear trifling in comparison with
those required for similar purposes elsewhere.
The dam for instance at the Yan Yean, near Melbourne, is no
less than three times the length of that which would be required at
Tom Ugly’s Point. Here, too, we should be in no danger of a cata-
strophe such as happened at the Bradfield Eeservoir, for in the event
of any accident befalling the embankment, the escaping water would
find immediate vent in the expanse of Botany Bay.


Above this point the river widens out into numerous bays, re-
sembling those in our harbour, and is at many points upwards of a
mile in width. A glance at the map of the district shows that a
multitude of creeks and streamlets pour their waters into George’s
River, between Liverpool and the proposed dam. Several of these,
I am informed, have never been known to cease running, and have
a considerable volume of beautifully clear water. One alone, it is
said, would more than supply the wants of a large city.
It is no slight advantage that the tract of country drained by
these streams is but thinly populated, and that any defilement of
the sources of supply could easily be prevented by legislative enact-
ments without interfering with vested interests, nor is there any
navigation on the river to be impeded by the dam.
It has been objected by some writers that the present saltness of
the water of George’s River would affect the supply collected by a
dam for many years to come. I think this is an error, for even now,
in times of flood, or even fresh in the river, the water is sweet and
fit for use far out into Botany Bay. One or two floods would I
believe, thoroughly clear out all the salt water, but even if the pro-
cess did take some time, say even four or five years, surely it would
be something, well worth waiting for. I greatly fear that our aider-
men will consume far more time in debating the subject than it
would require to create a sheet of water unsurpassed by any in
the continent of Australia, vast in its extent and practically inex-
haustible.
I will not trespass further on your space by enlarging on the in-
calculable benefits the city would derive from so liberal a supply of
the cooling element ) there are too palpable to be overlooked, and
have been ably pointed out by other correspondents. My object is
simply to call the attention of the powers that be to a source of
supply that I fear has not received its due share of consideration—
easily formed, at no great expense, not too distant for facility of
supply, and presenting advantages that do not appear to be possessed
by any other scheme that has hitherto been laid before the public.
I shall, shortly be in a position to send you some rough calcula-
tions as to the probable cost of the works that would be required,
and in the meantime, subscribe myself,
Your obedient servant,
G. ALLEN MANSFIELD.


Bi^uo
Ft SSlio
