

” Wine taken in moderation is the healthiest and most hygienic
of beverages.”
LOUIS PASTEUR
THE WINE INDUSTRY IN AUSTRALIA
A SHORT HISTORICAL NARRATIVE OF WINE WITH
THE STORY OF THE HOUSE OF SEPPELT, THE MAKING
OF WINES AND THE FUTURE OF THE INDUSTRY
Captain Arthur Phillip brought vines to Australia with the first
fleet in 1788, and planted them in his garden at Sydney Cove.
Cuttings from these were distributed and planted and showed
such promise that in 1800 two Frenchmen were sent out to try
to improve the winemaking methods. In 1803 Governor King
was very enthusiastic and planted up about 15 acres more.
It was Captain Macarthur, of Merino Sheep fame, however, who
first planted vineyards on a commercial scale. After disputes
with Governor Bligh he was banned from the Colony for some
years, and on his return in 1817, brought with him many vines
from France, Spain and Portugal.
In 1823 a Silver Medal was presented to Mr. Gregory Blaxland
by The London Society of Arts, for wine made from his vine-
yards near Paramatta.
In 1824 Mr. James Busby arrived in Australia and through high
research and hard work and the three books he wrote on wine-
making, came to be known as the Father of the Australian Wine
Industry.
Through his energy, vines were sent to Victoria and South Australia
soon after the founding of these Colonies.
It was the wish of the authorities in England that the Colonies
should build up industries of their own and export their products
in order to build a sound economy, and the early success of
Australian vineyards gave them to believe that Australia might
one day produce all the wine that England requires.
In the 1840’s and 1850’s many vineyards were planted, and some
of the wine industries which started from these small beginnings
have grown into organisations as large as any in the world.
Again, around 1890, many more were started which have become
large industries today.
At this stage Victoria was the largest winemaking State in
Australia and most of that wine was grown in the area of
Rutherglen near the Murray River, though there were many other
prosperous wine areas in Victoria. Perhaps the credit for the
success of the Victorian winemaking to this date should go to
the ability and energy of Mr. Hugh de Castella, father of the
Doyen of the Wine Industry of Australia today, Mr. Francois de
Castella.
In 1899, however, a scourge known as Phylloxera reached Australia
after having laid waste many of the most valuable vineyards in
Europe. The Victorian vineyards suffered most severely, and,
despite the fine work of Mr. Francois de Castella, many of them
were never reconstructed’.
South Australia, which has never suffered from Phylloxera, has
since increased its acreage, so that it now produces about 80 per
cent, of the total production of wine in Australia.
Australia today produces annually about 18,000,000 gallons of
wine of which it normally exports over 4,000,000, thus achieving
one of the early hopes of the founders of Australia.
Also, vinegrowing and winemaking is one of the greatest employers
of labour in any primary industry and it is interesting to note
that wherever the vine is grown the areas are very closely
populated and there are many prosperous towns.
The famous Chateau Tanunda


Facts
ABOUT THE
WINE INDUSTRY
Over £20,000,000 of capital is invested
in the wine industry in Australia.
☆
Over £1,000,000 per annum is spent to
maintain and develop it.
☆
The working costs of the vineyards is
£700,000 per annum.
☆
The operation of the industry gives work
to thousands of Australian workmen.
☆
Wine districts are amongst the most
closely settled areas of Australia.
☆
Many other industries derive benefit by
supplying the manifest needs of the wine
industry, including machinery, casks,
cases, bottles, straw envelopes, fertilisers,
sprays, etc.
☆
The average production of wine in
Australia per annum is 18,000,000 galls.,
about 70 per cent, of which is distilled
for brandy and other wine-making pur-
poses.
☆
Our vineyards cover 120,000 acres of
which about one-half is planted with
special wine grapes.
☆
Normally, about 4,000,000 gallons per
year is exported from Australia, bringing
into Australia £1,000,000 of fresh capital
each year.
☆
£1,450,000 was paid into Government
revenue through Excise Duty in 1945.
☆
With wheat and wool, Wine is one of
Australia’s greatest primary industries.
Seppeltsfield, South Australia
THE HOUSE OF SEPPELT
Historical
In 1849 Mr. J. E. Seppelt arrived in Australia to grow tobacco and produce
tobacco, cigars and snuff. In 1851 he took up land at Seppeltsfield and
commenced operations. The tobacco grown would not mature well enough
for smoking purposes and the venture had to be abandoned. However, some
vines which had been planted came to bearing and, at the harvesting period
the first grapes were processed in Mrs. Seppelt’s dairy, a small underground
cellar under the present Seppeltsfield office where liqueur recipes are now
kept.
With the first successful vintage, further vines were planted and extensions
were made to the dairy, a rough shed was built over the top for bottling and
packing for market and further excavations were made.
Such was the inception of the great House of Seppelt, the largest wine
making organisation of its kind owned by a single family.
In 1867 Mr. J. E. Seppelt died and his son Benno, then just 21 years of
age, assumed control. A man of vision and enormous energy, he built his
industry for a future which he was convinced Australia would have. By the
time he retired, in 1916, he had built an industry known throughout the
civilised world for its size, efficiency and the high quality of its products.
In 1916 Mr. Benno Seppelt handed over the business to his sons, headed
by Mr. Oscar Seppelt, a man in no way lacking his father’s characteristics,
and with the able support of his brothers, the development of the business
continued. The well known Chateau Tanunda Limited was purchased in
1916 and Great Western Champagne Cellars in 1918, with Rutherglen,
Barooga and Wahgunyah to follow and further cellars were built at Dorrien
and Nuriootpa. The influx of the fourth generation from 1931 on, with
the knowledge of many years’ research abroad has stimulated the aims of
higher quality and greater achievements.
It is no exaggeration to say that the achievements of the Australian wine
industry in the past 100 years are nothing short of amazing. Not only are
many of the great names of the industry known throughout the world and
their products exported to all quarters, but, also, the average quality of the
wines produced in Australia is higher than any country in the world.


MANUFACTURE OF WINE
FERMENTATION
The grapes used for wine-making ripen in a normal year about the first week in
March, and during a period lasting about eight weeks the Vintage is conducted. This
is a very busy and anxious time for the growers. The grapes are harvested by all
available hands, young and old, and are conveyed to the cellars in many forms of
transport. On arrival at the cellars the loads are tested for sugar content, weighed,
and the contents passed through a crushing machine. These machines in the Seppelt
Wineries crush 500 tons of grapes each day. The crushed juice separated from the
stalks passes to the fermenting tanks, which hold approximately nine tons of grapes;
to this is added a pure culture of specially cultivated yeast (Saccharomycetes).
This yeast multiplies very rapidly in the juice if the temperature is favourable to
its growth. In the juice it finds all it needs in the way of food. This yeast secretes
an enzyme called " Zymase.” This enzyme is a catalytic agent which splits up the
sugar transforming it into alcohol and carbon dioxide, creating at the same time a
great deal of heat.
If this action is left undisturbed, eventually all the sugar in the " Must,” as the
young wine is called, will be transformed. In the manufacture of Ports and other
Sweet Wines this process is interrupted by the addition of Brandy Spirit, obtained
from the distillation of wine. The yeast cells are rendered dormant, and the wine
is now too strong for the yeast development. This wine, as it is now called, contains
a certain amount of sugar or sweetness. In the manufacture of dry wines, such as
Hock and Claret, the yeast action is not hindered, and it is allowed to continue until
all the sugar in the ” Must ” has been transformed. This wine is now termed " Dry.”
Thus, to sum up, Beverage Wines can be divided into two classes, " Dry and
Sweet.”
The Dry Wines (Hock and Claret) are natural wines containing no sugar, and without
the addition of extra spirit.
The Sweet Wines (Ports, Sherries, Muscats, etc.) are wines which contain varying
amounts of sugar, and to which grape spirit has been added to keep them sweet.
These are, of course, the stronger wines.
CLARIFICATION
After the fermentation process the young wines contain many substances held in
suspension, such as dead yeast cells, albumin, tartar crystals, etc. This foreign matter
is removed by various methods of refining and finally by filtration.
MATURATION
The clear, bright young wine has now reached the stage to start on its long process
of maturation. This maturation process is undertaken to make the spirity, harsh
young wine more palatable and soft to the taste. The harshness of the tannin from
the skins is softened down by age, the surplus tartarates are precipitated, and the
esters are developed. On the whole thg wine becomes much softer and develops a
higher quality.
This period of maturation many vary from, say, two years in the case of light Hock
or Claret, to ten or twelve years in the case of a heavy Sweet Port. Ports and Sherries
are matured in wooden casks in warm situations, usually above the ground, and
Hocks and Clarets preferably in bottles in cool, deep cellars. Many methods have
been tried to accelerate this maturing process, but with varying success. The time-
honoured system of long storage is still maintained by most wineries.
BLENDING AND TESTING
After the stored wines have reached their prime, they are disturbed from their long
rest, and prepared for the market. Each vintage, owing to the different climatic
conditions, differs in varying degree. In some years the grapes are richer in sugar,
other Vintages may be more acid or perhaps may have more colour. It is owing to
their seasonal differences that we must resort to blending.
In the blending process the aim of the blender is first to establish a trade line which
finds public favour, and, secondly, to maintain that line of uniformity, so that the
consumer can depend on the type and quality of each particular grade, and so establish
confidence in the purchase. The blender works in conjuction with the chemical
laboratory, depending on the Chemists for the analysis of each wine, which guides
him and confirms his palate impressions. Chemical analysis alone will not determine
the suitability of each particular wine, this can only be found by the taster’s sense of
taste and smell.
The standards by which wines are judged are as follows:
1. Freedom from any undesirable taint.
2. Conformation to type.
3. Colour and condition.
4. Correct balance of sweetness and acidity.
5. Degree of softness on the palate, i.e., harshness may be due to excessive or
unmatured tannin, etc.
6. Quality—or state of maturity, degree of bouquet.
LABORATORY
An inspection of a well-equipped winery laboratory will immediately impress upon the
visitor that, in the making of Wines, Vinegar, Spirits and Allied Products, the manu-
facturers are using all the latest advances in science to further the excellence of their
products. Here is no grandfather’s rule of thumb, up-to-date scientific methods are
adopted and every advance made in Wine, Spirit and Liqueur manufacture is tried
out and applied.
Crushing Machines in Operation
Fermenting Tanks at Seppeltsfield
The Presses at Seppeltsfield, South Australia.
Below is a view of one of the Brandy Stills.


BOTTLING
The blended wines are filtered, bottled and labelled by many and
various ingenious devices.
MANUFACTURE OF GRAPE VINEGAR
The word " Vinegar ” is derived from the French word, " vin,”
meaning wine, originally the word Vinegar meant " sour wine.”
Vinegar can be purchased which has been made from various
materials.
To ask for Seppelt’s Vinegar is to make sure of obtaining a
delicious grape vinegar, because Seppelt’s Vinegar is made only
from grapes, Seppelt’s Vinegar Factories are situated at Seppelts-
field, South Australia, and also Melbourne, Victoria.
The first step in the manufacture of Vinegar from grapes is to
secure a white wine, made usually from the Doradillo grape grown
in profusion in the Barossa Valley. This wine is fed into large
containers which are packed with shavings. The wine slowly
percolates through the shavings on which the vinegar producing
bacteria are living. These acetic bacteria under the hot, moist
conditions, obtained in these generators, get very busy, and live
on the alcohol of the wine transforming it into vinegar acid.
The whole process of acetification is extremely slow, and it is
necessary to have many generators working day and night through-
out the whole of the year to supply the demand for Seppelt’s
Wine Vinegar.
BRANDY
Brandy is the spirit contained in wine. It is produced by the
distillation of the young wine.
This spirit is matured in oak casks for several years. During this
period it loses its harsh, fiery taste and is mellowed. It is then
reduced in strength by the addition of water, and marketed.
It has a considerable sale as a stimulant. A very heavy excise
duty is paid to the Federal Government, making Brandy a very-
expensive product. The Chateau Tanunda Brandy is perhaps the
best known brand in the Commonwealth. At the Chateau Tanunda
in South Australia one-quarter of the Brandy produced in Australia
is distilled and matured.
BY-PRODUCTS
In the Barossa Valley at Nuriootpa, a factory has been erected for
the purpose of extracting the Cream of Tartar from the waste
grape skins and wine lees. This plant recovers many tons of
tartarates, which were formerly discarded. The grape is the only
fruit with any large amount of tartarates.
THE FUTURE
The future of the Australian wine industry is based on several
factors. The first is, we have been told, that Australia must have
a population of 25 millions, and, no doubt, as these people come
to Australia, the wine industry will have to increase its plantings
of vineyards and storages for maturing wines to cope with the
increased demand. In fact, then, they will have to more than triple
their organisation. Indeed, as we have pointed out that since viti-
culture requires so much labour, the wine industry should be a
great help to absorb some of the new immigrants. Further, the
drinking habits in Australia are very different from those European
countries where light table wines like Hock and Claret are drunk
with meals which is the right time to enjoy drinking wine and
by far the best from the health point of view.
It is therefore felt that if the people of Australia were educated
to drink wines normally with their meals it would not only
eliminate a lot of the abuses of this product but would also
increase consumption. In Australia we drink one gallon of wine
per person every year, whereas in France they drink forty-five
and yet the French are the most temperate people in the world.
Any such education, as you can see, would further require an
increase in the size of the industry. Lastly, many countries close
to Australia have, since the War, started to look to Australia for
their products rather than continue to deal with Europe. These
countries are India, Burma, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, the
Islands of the Pacific and to a lesser extent at present, China.
There is a great opportunity for Australia to build up this trade
and export goods of every variety.
The Wine Industry has, since the cessation of hostilities, received
very many inquiries from these parts and if the customers arc
satisfied, as it is confidently expected that they will be, then again
there must be an increase in the industry to cope with this
demand.
As with the Wine Industry, Australia is looking forward to a
very busy and prosperous future. In the past, there have always
been many research workers working in the vineyards and in the
laboratories endeavouring to improve day by day the products of
the vine knowing that no matter how good a product is, it can
always be improved.
Today this research is being redoubled, so that in the future we
hope not only to produce more wine but also, still better wine.
Wine Storage at Seppeltsfield
MANUFACTURE OF WINE
(Continued)
