

THE LIFE
THE MOST REV. DOCTOR CROLLY,
ARCHBISHOP OF ARMAGH, AND PRIMATE OF IRELAND;
TO WHICH ARE APPENDED
SOME LETTERS,
IN DEFENCE OF HIS CHARACTER.
BY THE
REY. GEOEGE CROLLY,
Professor of Theology in St, Patrick’s College, Maynooth.
“Qui migraturus e vita, cum qnæsissit quot in civitate Neocæsarcnsi reliqui cssent infldeles, respon-
sumque essct tantem esse septemdecim; Deo gratias agens, Totidem inquit erant fideles cum cepi
episcopatum.”— Vita S. Gregorii Thaumaturgi.
DUBLIN:
PUBLISHED BY JAMES DUFFY,
7, WELLINGTON-QUAY.
1851.


Dublin:
PRINTED AT THE STEAM-PRESS OP PUEDON, BROTHERS,
23, bacheloe’s-walk.


DEDICATION.
TO THE
EIGHT EEY. HE. DENVIE,
THE BELOVED FRIEND OF THE LATE PRIMATE,
AND THE VERY REV. AND REV.
THE CATHOLIC CLERGY OF DOWN AND CONNOR,
WITH WHOM
HE WAS SO LONG ASSOCIATED,
AND WHO HAVE GIVEN ME
SUCH PROMPT, KIND, AND ■ ■■"
IN DEFENDING HIS CHARAC ER, MIES’ n Ci
AFTER HIS DEATH,
THIS LITTLE VOLU|k CO. W'c'
IS DEDICATED, " 1
BY THEIR SINCERE AND OBLIGED FRIEND
AND SERVANT,
THE AUTHOE.




LIFE
OF
THE MOST REV. DR. CROLLY.
Dr. Crolly is not the first of the successors of St. Patrick
whose fame I have vindicated, and whose memory I have
endeavoured to rescue from oblivion. In the beginning of
this year I published a memoir of the martyred Primate,
Oliver Plunket, whose life, alas! was sworn away, in a
foreign land, by the perjured tongues of Irish priests. In
the preface to that life I observed, “ that every true Irish
Catholic must highly prize any effort, however feeble, to
preserve the scanty records which still remain of the actions
of those great and holy men who form that unbroken chain
which unites us, through Patrick, with Celestine and with
Peter.”
But, dear as this object is to my heart, and anxious as I
am to contribute my share towards its accomplishment, I
had no intention of writing a word about Dr. Crolly until
I was forced into it by a most ungenerous, indelicate, and
foul attack upon his memory. I would have preferred to
have waited until the acerbity of ephemeral controversy
having passed away, his high' and illustrious qualities ; his
great kindness of heart; his strong, vigorous, and eminently
practical mind; his unwearedexertions ; his disinterested and


burning zeal, would have shone in the eyes of his countrymen
as, I am convinced, they will shine in a few years, without a
single cloud or speck to dim their lustre. I have reason,
however, to hope that this memoir will be received in no
unkindly spirit, although I have been forced to publish it pre-
maturely, and before I could, with propriety, make use of all
the materials which I possess.
I may, perhaps, be permitted to allege, as an additional
excuse for writing this biography, a few of the reasons
adduced by St. Bernard in his preface to the life of St.
Malachy, whose not altogether unworthy successor Dr.
Crolly was, both in Down and Connor, and in the Primacy.
“ It is always useful,” says the illustrious Abbot of Clair-
veaux, “ to write the lives of holy men, that they may serve
as a mirror, an example, and, as it were, a condiment of the
life of man upon earth ; for they thus, in a manner, live
with us, even after their death, and excite and call back to
true life many of those who live in death. Moreover, he
admitted me into the number of his special friends, so that
I was second to none in his regard and esteem.”
After St. Patrick, for whom we shall see hereafter Dr.
Crolly entertained a singular love and veneration, St.
Malachy was the model which he wished to follow in all his
actions. He was not so presumptuous as to hope to rival
those mighty men. He looked up to them from afar, as
stars “ which in distant glory burned,” by whose light he
would be enabled to walk heavenward in the darksome and
perilous journey of human life. He frequently said that,
like them, he would return to die in Down ; but God willed
otherwise, and he had evidently changed his mind himself,
as he mentioned in his will that he wished to be buried in
the new Cathedral in Armagh.
An excellent memoir of Dr. Crolly appeared in the


Belfast Vindicator on the 14th of April, 1849. To this
day I am ignorant of the name of the writer, nor were any
of the facts contained in it supplied by nie, or hy any mem-
ber of the late Primate’s family. I may, therefore, I trust,
without incurring any imputation of indelicacy, extract
from this biography the following brief sketch of Dr. Crolly’s
early history. The Vindicator of the date just mentioned
states, that such was the anxiety of the public to obtain
any authentic record of the life of the late Primate, that
upwards of a thousand extra copies of the impression which
contained it were ordered before its publication :
“ Among the many eminent men,” says the writer in the
Vindicator, “ who have rendered illustrious, by their genius and
virtue, the Primatial chair of Armagh, we find many natives of
the united diocess of Down and Connor. St. Jarlath, in the
sth; the two Aililds, in the 6th ; and St. Malachy, in the 12th cen-
turies, were all natives of these diocesses; while, in more modern
periods, we have the learned Hugh MacCaghwell (known on the
Continent as Cavello), in the 17th; and the late revered Primate,
Dr. Crolly, in our own times, both natives of the county of Down.
“ Dr. Crolly was born at Ballykilbeg, near Downpatrick, the
Bth of June, 1780, and was descended from an eminent Anglo-
Irish family located in that district for the last 300 years, as we
find, by the Ulster inquisitions, that, long prior to 1586, Robert
Swordes, alias Crolly, sen., was seized of the town and lands of
Ballynegallbegge (now Ballykilbeg) and the surrounding lands
of Tobbercorran, Ballyrolly, Lisnamaul, Tulleymurrey, Corbally,
and Ballydonnell. All these lands, with the exception of Bally-
kilbeg, were forfeited early in the 17th century, and granted to
Dr. Theophilus Buckworth, Bishop of Dromore; the latter, how-
ever, remained in the hands of the family until about fifty years
past. He received his early education at a grammar school in
the country, afterwards read classics in the seminary of the Rev.
Dr. Nelson, of Down, from whence he removed to the College of
Maynooth, in his 21st year. So rapid and distinguished was his
progress in college, and so highly appreciated were his talents
and learning by the trustees, that, concurrent with his receiving
the holy order of priesthood, in Pentecost, 1806, from the late
Archbishop Troy, he was appointed Lecturer of Philosophy and
assistant to Dr. Anglade in the chair of Logic, to which chair
ho was subsequently nominated the 29th Jun«, 1809. In the


classes which he professed he was a distinguished and successful
lecturer, owing to the lucid arrangement of his matter, and his
happy exegetical mode of imparting instruction.”
To this brief sketch I beg to add the following authentic
particulars, in relation to Dr. Crolly’s early life.
From a very early age he greatly admired the character
of St. Patrick, and loved his memory. There is, in the
Catholic chapel of Saul, (which is within about two miles
of Downpatrick, and where St. Patrick made his first con-
vert in Ireland,) a very large stone, which is still used as
an altar, and on which St. Patrick is said to have first
celebrated Mass in our country. Dr. Crolly, when a mere
boy, frequently visited this place, as well as the famous
grave near Downpatrick, in which Bridget, Patrick, and
Columbkille are buried, according to the old distich :
In burgo Duno tumluo turaulantur in uno,
Brigida, Patritius atque Columba pius.*
* In Dawn three saints one grave do fill,
Bridget, Patrick, and Columbkille.
This distich is quoted in the Typographia Hibernia (Dist. 111, cap.
18) of Giraldus Cambrensis, as being familiarly known in his time.
St. Columbkille was buried in Hy in 594, according to the annals of
Ulster; but his remains were removed to Downpatrick about 877.
St. Bridget, who died in 523, was buried in Kildare, and her remains
were also removed to Down about 835. The relics of the three saints
were concealed from the fury of the Danes, who burnt Downpatrick,
and pillaged the cathedral six or seven times between 940 and 1111.
In 1177, John De Courcy found the church attached to a house of
secular canons, whom he displaced, and put it under a community
of Benedictine monks from the abbey of St. Werburgh, Chester, to
whom he forced the Bishop of Down, Malachy 11., to transfer a great
part of the temporalities of his See. This bishop was greatly grieved
because he could not discover the relics of SS. Bridget, Patrick, and
Columbkille. And it is related, that one day, as he was praying in the
church, his attention was miraculously directed to an obscure part of
it, or, more probably, as another account says, to a particular spot in
the abbey-yard, where, when the earth was removed, their sacred
relics were found reposing in, as it were, a triple cave—Patrick in the
middle, and one of the others on either side of him. At the request


He had early read a short life of our national apostle,
and had not failed to observe the great spirit of prayer
by which he was eminently distinguished, even among the
saints of God. At an humble distance he resolved to imi-
tate this most holy example ; and when he was almost a
child he not only prayed night and morning with the rest
of the family, but was frequently discovered, before he re-
tired to rest, going round the room in which he slept, on his
bare knees, and with his eyes andhandsraisedtowards heaven.
When he went to school in the country he attracted the
attention of the master by wandering away alone into the
of De Courcy, delegates were sent to Rome to acquaint Pope Urban
111. of the matter, who sent Cardinal Vivian to Ireland, to preside at
the solemn translation of these relics, which took place on the feast of
St. Columba (9th June), 1186. They were placed in the same monu-
ment at the right side of the high altar. In 1583, Lord Grey, who
had marched into Lecale, for the purpose of establishing the spiritual
supremacy of Henry VIII., defaced the statues of the three patron
saints, and burned the cathedral, which remained in this ruinous con-
dition for more than two centuries and a half. The restoration was
commenced in 1790 ; and the great tomb in which Patrick, Bridget,
and Columbkillo were believed to have slept for more than six cen-
turies, was torn open, and the remains which were found in it, flung
out of the church. The people gathered them up, and buried them
nearly in the centre of the old grave-yard, and placed at the head of
the grave the ancient market-cross, which had been sadly mutilated,
one of its arms having been almost entirely broken off, and the image
of Jesus being effaced from it. The lowly grave, however, which
contained the remains of the three patron saints of Ireland, and
which was only distinguished by the rude and broken cross, was held
in as much reverence as if it had been the most costly shrine. The
faithful assembled round it, to ask the prayers and intercession of the
saint, who had been the messenger sent by heaven to shed the light
of faith amongst them. The barbarians, who think that hatred of the
cross and of God’s saints is the best evidence of Christianity, carried
away the old cross from the grave, a few years ago, and attempted to
break it. Since then it has been kept locked up in the church, to
save it from the fury of those zealous Christians!
Those who wish for more information on this subject, will find it
in the Dublin Review for January, 1848. I have transcribed it with
the freedom which an author can use with regard to his own pro-
ductions.


fields during the time which was allowed for play, although
he was not at all of a saturnine or unsocial disposition. He,
therefore, said to him, one day, “ Willie, why do you not
amuse yourself with your companions, instead of stealing
away alone into the fields ?” The boy returned no answer,
and the master, perceiving that the question distressed him,
did not press it, but determined to avail himself of the
earliest opportunity to discover his secret. For a few days
he remained with his companions, probably fearing that he
might be watched, but at the expiration of that time he
resumed his former practice. The master followed him
cautiously, and after having lost sight of him for some time,
at length discovered him, after a very diligent search,
kneeling in a furrow between two ridges of tall corn. He
was so entirely absorbed in prayer that he did not see the
master until he touched him.. He was then obliged to con-
fess that he had been in the habit of resorting to this place
every day, for the same purpose, whenever he could steal
away from his companions. He retained, during his entire
life, this most holy practice of praying long and fervently
every day to Almighty God, to obtain from him that grace
which would enable him to walk in the paths of virtue and
of righteousness, and to discharge faithfully the high and
important duties which were intrusted to him. Of course,
heaven does not mark out every person with equal clear-
ness as its own, but I believe there is no child born of
Christian parents, and who has been taught from his infancy
to fear and to love God, who does not feel himself almost, at
the first dawning of reason, irresistibly attracted towards his
Creator. The soul still retains the angelic purity which
it obtained in baptism; and its insight of that bright and
beautiful world beyond the grave, is not dimmed or dark-
ened by the stormy assaults or the fatal indulgence of
human passion. Who is there that in after life can ever


again feel so vividly that all things under the sun are
vanity, that our souls were made for God, and cannot rest
until they rest in him ? Do not those early glimpses of
futurity appear to the man almost as heaven may be sup-
posed to have appeared to St. Paul after he had been wrapt
into it, as things which we not only believed, but beheld
with our own eyes, but which we can never again behold
in this mortal life ? It should be an object of the most
earnest and constant solicitude to the parent and the pastor to
make these impressions sink deeply into the youthful mind ;
for they will cling to it during the entire of its after life, and
amid the whirlwind of passion and the darkness of tempta-
tion, will shine upon it, like the clear and holy light oY
heaven.
Dr. Crolly was removed, in his fourteenth year, to a most
respectable academy in Downpatrick, the head masters of
which were Dr. Nelson, a Unitarian, and Mr. Doran, a
Catholic. After some time the masters separated, and a
considerable number of the pupils, including the late Pri-
mate, adhered to Mr. Doran, and attended his school until
it was broken up, on account of the principal having been
seized and put into gaol on the charge of being a united
Irishman. Mr. Doran was not only an excellent scholar,
but an accomplished gentleman, and possessed of such win-
ning manners that, even in those bad times, he found favour
in the eyes of his keepers, one of whom gave up his own
room to him, where he daily received and imparted instruc-
tions to a select number of pupils. One of these was the
late Primate; and I have often heard him tell how narrowly
he escaped with his life during the time he attended school
in the gaol.
A pupil who was about to leave the school, invited Dr.
Crolly and some of his companions to dine with him, either
in his lodgings or at a hotel in Downpatrick. The country


was, at this time, under martial law, and no person was
allowed to go out after nine o’clock. The host, in order to
prevent an early breaking up, had caused a clock which
was near their dining room to be put back more than an
hour, and when Dr, Crolly rose to go home he was assured
that it was long after nine o’clock, and that they must all
now remain where they were until morning. He knew,
however, that his absence would cause great anxiety to his
mother especially, on account of the disturbed state of the
country, and that it would most probably get others into
trouble, as she would certainly send some person to look for
him. He, therefore, got his horse ready as quickly as pos-
sible, and set out on his way home, not without consider-
able misgivings lest he might fall in with some of Paxton’s
troopers, who are still remembered as the terror and scourge
of the neighbourhood.
The night was dark and stormy, and just as he turned
an angle of the road, at about half a mile from the town, he
found himself almost in the midst of the party which he so
much dreaded. He was proceeding at a smart trot, and
merely calling out “ good night,” endeavoured to pass on
without slackening his horse’s pace. An authoritative
voice ordered him to stop ; but as he was now nearly clear
of the party, which consisted of six or seven dragoons,
he thought it more prudent not to hear the first summons.
The order was repeated in a peremptory tone ; but having
by this time got a few perches in advance, and being
mounted on a good horse, he determined to run for his
life, rather than trust himself to those bloodhounds.
Instead, therefore, of obeying the summons, he set off at
full gallop. Some of the party fired after him ; but it was
fortunately so dark that they were unable to take aim, and
neither he nor his horse received any injury ; but he per-.
ceived that he was very hotly pursued, and that he would


have a hard run for it. Indeed, one of the party, who had
probably discharged his firearms, was only a few yards
behind him, xvhilst he was still a quarter of a mile from his
father’s house, which, even if he should reach it, could
afford him no protection, if he were seen entering it. At
this moment, when he had given up almost all hope, he
was saved in a very extraordinary manner. An immense
mastiff, which belonged, if I mistake not, to Mr. Henry, of
Cargagh, leaped out upon the road before them, and made
a spring at the dragoon’s horse. He either caught or
tripped him, for both horse and rider fell, and Dr. Crolly
turned into the fields, and thus reached home noiselessly
and in safety. He heard, however, with great alarm, that
his father and a servant had just gone to look for him.
They had, of course, proceeded by the road, and had thus
missed him. There was not a moment to he lost; so he
ordered a man to pursue them as quickly as possible, and
to tell them to conceal themselves until the dragoons should
pass, as he had no doubt they would. All the lights in the
house were extinguished, and every one went to bed, except
the Primate himself, who led his reeking horse out into the
fields, lest the dragoons should search the stable. All this
was done in far less time than I have taken to tell it; and
yet Dr. Crolly had scarcely got to a safe distance from the
highway, when he heard the dragoons approaching. They
stopped at his father’s house, and demanded admission.
They had, in fact, seen the lights from a distance, before
they were extinguished, and would have searched the whole
house, and done great mischief, if they had not happened
to stumble on a large family Bible. Whether they took
this as a sign that the inmates were Protestants or not, I
cannot tell; but one of them observed that it was a good
book ; and another, that the light they had seen was


probably from the fire ; and the Avhole party went out with-
out any further annoyance.
The man who was sent out to warn the Primate’s father
and his companion of their danger, instead of doing what
he was commanded, hid himself in the safest place he could
discover. Fortunately, however, they heard the gingle of
the accoutrements, and were enabled to conceal themselves
until the dragoons passed • and thus the whole party provi-
dentially escaped.
It may be easily imagined, from what I have already
stated, that Dr. Crolly’s own inclinations led him to aspire
to the priesthood. His mother was also most anxious that
he should enroll himself amongst the members of the sacred
ministry ; but his father would have been better pleased if
he had turned his attention to other pursuits. I believe
the matter was ultimately decided by a visit which two or
three of the professors of Maynooth paid to Mr. Cosslett, of
Ballykilbeg. Dr. Crolly met them at this
house, and the result was that he entered Maynooth in the
following November (1801).
■ In the succeeding year he got a severe attack of sick-
ness, in consequence, I think, of a kick which he accidentally
received whilst playing foot-ball. He describes this him-
self in his examination before the Education Commissioners,
during the inquiry into the state of Maynooth College.*
“ I came up to Dublin,” he says, “ on the day after Christ-
mas, to consult a surgeon. I remained in Dublin, I be-
lieve, for sixteen weeks after that, without returning ; and
when I returned to college, I found it necessary to study
with more than ordinary attention, in order to make up for
the time I had lost during my sickness.”
* Appendix to Eighth Report, page 376.


As soon as Dr. Crolly found that he would he obliged
to remain for some time at lodgings in Dublin, he wrote
the following letter to his brother, who was several years
younger than himself:—
Mrs. K ’s Lodging-house, North Ann-street,
Dublin, December 27, 1802.
My Dear John —You will no doubt be astonished to receive
a letter from me, dated from this place. But although only a
few months have elapsed since I was well and happy with you
all at home, it has pleased the Almighty to visit me with a great
affliction. But his holy will be done. I have got a fistula, and
have been obliged to remove to the city for the benefit of the
doctors. I believe this is a disease which is very seldom cured ;
and although I am prepared for the worst, and am perfectly
resigned to the will of heaven, I confess I fear that I shall feel
very lonely, unless I can have some friend near me. I should
feel quite happy if you could get leave from my father to come
and stop with me until I get better, or, if such he the will of God,
until death shall relieve me from my sufferings. But you must
take care not to tell my mother anything that would alarm her.
I shall anxiously expect to hear from you, or to see you. Give
my love to my father and mother; and believe me, my dear
John, &c.,
W. Crolly.
His brother immediately went to Dublin, and found him
in such a state of exhaustion and suffering, that he expected
almost every day that he would be obliged to send home an
account of his death. At length, however, he recovered ;
and after remaining sixteen weeks in Dublin, he was
enabled to return to college, and to prosecute his studies so
successfully, that, notwithstanding this interruption, he
obtained the first honours in logic, metaphysics, and ethics.
Immediately after standing his examination in May,
1803, Dr. Crolly left college, along with one or two other
students, to spend the vacation with his relatives in the
county of Down. Emmett’s rebellion was then on the eve
of breaking out; and he thus describes the alarm through
the country, in the evidence already referred to :—“ When


I arrived at Dundalk,” he says, “ I was told that unless we
proceeded with very great rapidity, we might be apprehended,
not being known in that part of the country. I recol-
lect we hastened on to Newry, as I was acquainted with
some individuals there, who might be able to give an account
of us, in case any person thought proper to call us to an
account. The first thing I heard was, that the French
were supposed to be on the coast, and that there was a great
alarm in the country,” It Avas not true that the French
were on the coast, and Emmett’s rebellion did not break
out until the 23rd of July folloAving.
After Dr. Crolly reached home, his disease returned,
though the attack was not quite so violent as that which
he had experienced in Dublin. He was again obliged to
put himself under the care of surgeons, and he was not able
to return to college until the Lent of 1804. “I remained
at home,” he says in the place already quoted, “ until the
commencement of Lent afterwards, as I was obliged to have
recourse to a medical gentleman Avhen I went home ; and
I continued in an infirm state of health until the follow-
ing Lent, and then returned.”* This Avas the year during
Avhicli he should have read mathematics and natural philo-
sophy, but as the lectures commenced in September, 1803,
and he did not return to college until about the middle of
February, 1804, it Avas, of course, impossible for him to join
that class. It should be mentioned, hoAvever, to prove his
zeal and perseverance in the pursuit of knoAvledge, that he
studied this entire course after he had become professor of
another department. “ I Avas obliged,” he says,f “to return
home to recover my health, and Avhen I returned, the class .
of natural philosophy Avas so far advanced that I could not
join it; but I read that course after I had finished my
♦ Eighth Report of Education Commissioners, page 376.
f Eighth Report, page 374.


course as a student, when I became a junior professor in the
college.”
Dr. Crolly, having completed his collegiate course, was
ordained priest, in Maynooth College, by the Most Rev. Dr.
Troy, at Pentecost, in 1806. On this occasion he wrote a
very beautiful letter to his mother, in which he congratu-
lated her on the fulfilment of an event to which they both
looked forward with such longing anxiety. The letter con-
cludes as follows :
“ And now, my dearest mother, God having restored me to
perfect health, and, by his great mercy, rescued me from a dis-
ease which is commonly fatal, and, by his great love, admitted
me into that holy ministry, in the exercise of which I am bound
to offer up daily to him the unbloody sacrifice of the new law—
to touch Jesus with my hands, and to receive him into my breast;
I have made a firm resolution to keep those hands clean and that
breast pure from all defilement, and to devote myself, singly and
undividedly, to his service during the rest of my life. I have,
however, still greater need than heretofore of your prayers ; for
if I have been raised to a great dignity, I have also undertaken
a burden which even an angel might fear to carry. Alas ! many
sink under this weighty burden, and, instead of being honoured
and loved by men, by the holy angels, and by God himself, they
become a by-word and a reproach upon earth. I entreat you, dear
mother, to pray to the Almighty in mercy to take me out of this
world rather than to permit me to dishonour him, or to scandalize
his Church.”
On the 27th of June, in the same year, he was appointed
Lecturer in the class of Logics, Metaphysics, and Ethics.
When Dr. M‘Mullen, who was then Bishop of Down and
Connor, was informed of Dr. Crolly’s appointment, he called
upon his father, and complained that he had not been con-
sulted upon the matter. He told him, at the same time,
that his son could not remain in college without his per-
mission. As soon as Dr. Crolly heard of the bishop’s dis-
pleasure, he wrote to him that the appointment had been
h


totally unsolicited, and, indeed, quite unexpected by him
—that he was perfectly aware that he could not, and
that, even if he could, he would not remain in college a
single day longer than it -was his lordship’s pleasure to leave
him there, and that he was perfectly ready to go, on a
moment’s notice, to the worst curacy in the diocess. Dr.
M'Mullen was so pleased with the letter, that he at once
brought it to Mr. Crolly, and gave it to him. I have seen
and read it more than once ; but although I have caused
diligent search to be made for it since I have commenced
this memoir, it cannot now be found. The result, however,
was, that Dr. M‘Mullen (who had a great objection to letter-
writing) desired the Primate’s father to inform him that he
would not require his services on the mission, and that he
might, therefore, accept of the appointment which had been
offered him in college.
Dr. Crolly remained in college until he heard, from his
father, that he would not be obliged to leave it permanently,
and then proceeded, as usual, to the county Down, to spend
the vacation with his relatives.
I must beg that the reader will extend his indulgence to
me whilst I relate an event which occurred to the late
Primate at this time, and which I have heard on more than
one occasion from his own lips. Ido not presume, nor did
he, to pronounce anything as to'its nature. I simply relate
it as it has been told to me. And, after all, how few are
there who, in the course of their lives, have not met with
something mysterious, and which appeared to them super-
natural ? Perhaps such things are sometimes delusions,
arising from some transient derangement of the nerves or
of the brain; or may they not far more frequently be glimpses
of that invisible world, in the midst of which we live, and
to which we arc tending, as to the end of our earthly


pilgrimage, graciously vouchsafed to us for some purpose of
mercy or of love ?
Dr. Crolly left Maynooth on the 9th of July, 1806.
During his whole life he was extremely fond of riding, and
as he had just purchased a horse, he determined to make the
journey home on horseback, sending his portmanteau by
coach. On the third day after his departure from college,
he remained to dine with a priest who resided not far from
Castlewellan, and consented to stop in his house all night,
as it was late in the evening when he arrived there. After
some time, however, he began to feel very uneasy, and in
spite of all remonstrances and entreaties, insisted on going
home.
It was a beautiful night, and he was proceeding at a brisk
trot, when he imagined that something like a gust of wind
passed him, and that he heard a voice close to his car, say-
ing, “ Eide on, for God’s sake, or you will be too late.” He
was neither a superstitious nor a timid man, so he pulled
up his horse and looked round in every direction, but could
see nothing. Whether it was in obedience to the warning
he had received, or in consequence of the excitement which
he felt, he could not tell, but he certainly hurried on at a
very rapid pace. In about half an hour he approached a
house in the country, to which his attention was attracted
by seeing several lights in it at that late hour. He, therefore,
stopped when he reached it, and seeing a girl looking anxi-
ously along the road, in the direction opposite to that from
which he had come, he asked her if anything was wrong
in the house ? “ Oh, yes,” she answered, “ a girl who asked
a night’s lodging with us for God’s sake, as she was not able
to reach the town, has become suddenly ill, and she is now
in despair lest she should die before the priest arrives.”
“ I am a priest,” said Dr. Crolly, “ and if the case be as


urgent us you represent, I shall be happy to render all the
assistance in my power.”
He then immediately dismounted, and entered the house.
The poor young creature was lying in a corner of the
kitchen upon some straw, her head resting on her hand, and
her face covered by her long, black hair. She was evidently
in great agony, for she moaned piteously. Dr. Crolly learned
from the mistress of the house, who alone remained with her,
that she-was about to become a mother prematurely. He
desired her to be told that there was a priest by the bed-
side. Nothing could exceed her joy at this intelligence.
She clasped her almost transparent hands, raised her eyes
to heaven, fervently kissed a small gold crucifix which
hung round her neck, and cried out, “ Blessed be the great
God for all his mercies : I shall die like a Christian, and
not like a brute.” When she put back her hair off her
face he perceived that she could not be more than eighteen
years old.
“ TV as this a face
To be exposed against the warring winds ?
To stand against the deep, dread, bolted thunder ?”
Dr. Crolly heard that poor child’s tale, which must have
been a tale of sorrow ; but his lips were sealed upon it for
ever. He reconciled her to God, administered to her the
holy sacrament of penance, baptized the infant to which she
gave birth soon afterwards, prayed with her as long as she
was able to pray, and knelt by her until she expired. No
other priest arrived until after he had left the house, for the
messenger had been sent too late. The child did not survive
its mother more than half an hour, and they were both buried
in the same grave.
This was the first confession the late Primate ever heard;
it was the first exercise, excepting the celebration of Mass,


of the sacred power which he had received in ordination;
and lie always believed that the fervent blessing which the
poor, young, deserted mother poured out upon him with her
dying lips, for saving herself and her child, accompanied
him through life, aiding him in all the difficulties, and con-
soling him in all the trials of his toilsome ministry.
Dr. Crolly entered upon his duties as lecturer in the logic
class in September, 180 G. I have often heard him refer to
the time which he spent at college as the most free from
care, and the happiest of his life. He possessed, as every
one who knew him must acknowledge, one of the sweetest
tempers in the world ; and was blessed with a buoyancy of
spirit, and with an inexhaustible fund of anecdote, which
made him a most delightful companion.
I extract the following passage, which has reference to
Dr. Crolly’s life, from the admirable and eloquent sermon,
which was preached at his month’s memory, to a crowded
and delighted congregation, by the Kev. Dr. Murray, of
Maynooth College :
“ Of his (Dr. Crolly’s) career in college, tradition has pre-
served little beyond the memory of the singular equability and
serenity of temper, the irrepressible buoyancy of spirit which, in
the society of his acquaintance, constantly lit up his face, and
made him then, as ever afterwards, even under the heavy, unre-
laxing weight of the episcopate, a messenger of cheerfulness
wherever he went, dispelling gloom, and discontent, and chagrin,
calling up joyous and kindly sympathies, even in unwilling hearts,
pouring a flood of beaming gaiety even over sharp and arid tem-
peraments. St. Philip Neri hardly surpassed him in that rare
gift of making the circle in which he moved a circle of pure and
calm light, himself the centre of it. Of the many among you
who have known him long and associated with him often, I doubt
if he was ever seen by any with a lowering, discontented brow.
If, at times, a speck was there, it passed soon, and left behind it
a brighter sunshine. Like all whom God loves and predestines,
he had his chalice of bitterness to partake of; but he drank it,
as St. Aloysius used to drink the nauseous draughts prescribed


for him. If the lower man shrank back, the upper man was all
willingness and resignation. He exemplified in an exti’aordinary
degree the character of which the Scriptures speak— ‘ God loveth.
a cheerful giver.’ Whether things went with him or against
him, he was cheerful. He was cheerful with God and with man,
with his friends and with his enemies—if he really had enemies.
He was at peace with all: for he had the peace which surpasseth
all understanding, the peace which the world cannot give, and
cannot take away. For the rest, as to the discharge of the im-
mediate duties of his professorship, this was a silent and hidden
work, and however perfectly accomplished, the public eye could
not see it, and but a small number could duly appreciate it. If,
in after life, he came to occupy so large a space before the world,
it was not that he thrust himself into notoriety; he had no appe-
tite for this thing; he disliked it, was above it, was too much of
a true man and a true Christian for it. But the business he was
put to was, of its own nature, and unavoidably, public; he was
placed on an eminence, and eyes were turned upon him, whether
lie would or not.”
It is quite a mistake to imagine, that a college life either
is or that it ought to be dull, insipid, and sombre. It is a
retired, a studious, and laborious life—a life in which our
books are our most constant and cherished companions.
But for this very reason, those who lead such a life should
be gay and cheerful when they meet together. It is related
that one of the saints replied to a person who found fault
with him for joining in childlike amusements, that he
relaxed his mind by those innocent sports, in order that he
might be able afterwards to give it entirely, and without
distraction, to God. It is for the same reason that the
professor gives up his mind to innocent mirth in his moments
of relaxation—that, being refreshed and invigorated, he
may resume with more success the studies which he had
for a brief space interrupted. Many persons would as soon
think of spending their life in gaol, as of immuring them-
selves within the walls of a college; and yet, I question
Avhether, unless in some similar place, so many youthful


hearts could be found under gray heads. I, of course, speak
of Catholic colleges ; for the man who has a family in the
next street, does not lead a college life at all.
With this brief introduction, by way of apology, I shall
relate a few anecdotes which have reference to the period
which Dr. Crolly spent in Maynooth, and which all regard
either himself or his most intimate friends, although I am
sensible that they lose their chief charm when deprived of
his inimitable way of telling them.
When Dr. Crolly was appointed to a chair in Maynooth,
a great many of the professors Avere Frenchmen, who had
been expatriated at the time of the Revolution, and even the
Irishmen who held offices in the college, were, for the most
part, educated in foreign countries. The result was, that
French was almost the only language spoken at table.
Father Paul O’Brien, whose memory is still green in the
college, was then Professor of Irish. With him the late
Primate, the present Bishop of Achonry, and, indeed, the
whole of the junior lecturers and professors, entered into a
league, offensive and defensive, by which it was stipulated
that those who knew Irish should speak that language alone
at table, that those who did not should immediately com-
mence to learn it under Father Paul’s auspices, who opened
a private school for this purpose, and that in the meantime
they should be at liberty to talk any kind of gibberish they
pleased, provided they could interlard it with as many Irish
words as would make it pass off for genuine Gtelic at the head
of the table. No story or anecdote was told in French with-
out a return of twice its length being made from the foot of
the table in Irish; and whilst the former was listened to with
solemn gravity, the latter was sure to be received with un-
bounded applause. Sometimes a genuine story was told,
which very few understood; but more frequently, one of the


juniors, under the pretence of telling something very amus-
ing, merely treated the company to a piece of oratory in an
unknown tongue, which rather increased than diminished
the fun. This proceeding soon had the desired effect; for
the Gallican party were glad to compromise matters, by mak-
ing English the ordinary medium of communication at table.
The French professors still regarded their own language,
as Father Paul imagined, with undue partiality, and he
never let slip an opportunity of endeavouring, in his own
good-natured way, to remove this erroneous impression from
their minds. Dr. Delahogue, Professor of Dogmatic Theo-
logy, knew English very imperfectly, and he was, conse-
quently, often obliged to supply words from his own language.
Once, in speaking of his mother, he forgot the English word,
and called her his mdre. Father Paul immediately cried
out, “ Do you call that a polite language in which a man
calls his mother a mare? I tell you what it is, Dr. Dela-
hogue, you had better not call an Irishman’s mother a mare,
for if you do he will certainly knock you down.”
Indeed, Dr. Delahogue’s English afforded the professors a
great deal of amusement, although they generally took care
to persuade him that they laughed at his stories, and not at
himself. He once actually declined to go with them to dine
at Poolafooka, on the ground that “he did not know the
shentlemen.” I extract the following out of a great many
anecdotes of this kind, which were related by the late
Pi’imate :
Dr. Delahogue used to tell, very often, a story, or rather
fable, about a contest between a mule and an ass, as to their
relative claims to gentility. The mule made a long oration
on the good qualities of his mother, in which, along with
other things, he declared that the best biodd of France
flowed in her veins, and that she was nearly related to the


first families in the kingdom. The ass waited patiently
until his antagonist had finished, and then drily asked—
“ And your father, what he was ?” This conclusion was
always received with a burst of laughter, in which the
learned and good old Doctor heartily joined, imagin-
ing that it was the effect of his story, whereas it was, in
reality, produced by the absurd way in which he asked the
question.
The Abbe Darre, Professor of Mathematics and Natural
Philosophy, was also a Frenchman. They were both accom-
plished gentlemen, and, I believe, members of noble French
families. Abbe Darre was very much addicted to boasting
about his feats of horsemanship when he was a young man,
and he insinuated that he could still perform prodigies when
mounted on that noble animal. He gloried, perhaps, more
openly in this accomplishment because his two inseparable
companions, Drs. Delahogue and Anglade, were notoriously
very shy horsemen. As an instance of the latter gentle-
man’s ideas of equestrianism, I may mention, that Dr.
Denvir, the present Bishop of Down, having selected a horse
for him at Dycer’s, in Dublin, he went to that establishment
to see the animal, before the purchase should be finally con-
cluded. The groom took the horse out of the stable, mounted
him, and, by way of recommending him to the purchaser,
galloped to a five-feet bar, which he cleared in gallant style.
“Be certain,” said Dr. Anglade, “ but that does dis-
qualify him for me.” In vain he. was assured that the
horse was very quiet and gentle, and that he would not
leap unless he was urged by his rider. To every fresh
remonstrance the old gentleman returned the same answer
“Be certain he is disqualified for me.” Abbe Darre was,
of course, quite safe in boasting of his equestrian feats
before those gentlemen, who were sure never to put it to


the test ; and nothing could induce him to go out with
the other professors, who would, he knew, by some means
or other, contrive to bring him into a scrape. But at last
he was caught. A new horse had been purchased for him
at, I think, Ballinasloe fair ; and he urged his two com-
panions in vain to accompany him for a short distance
across the country, to witness the performance of his new
steed. Some of the juniors, however, persuaded Dr. Dela-
hogue to go out with him to the Duke of Leinster’s demesne,
and,, when there, to ask him to cross a tolerably large
ditch, just that he might observe the action of the horse.
So one dared to follow them, lest he might be discovered,
and thus spoil the whole sport; but their return was
watched with great anxiety. To the astonishment of every
one, they did not appear even at the hour for dinner ; but
just as the cloth was about to be removed, Dr. Delahogue
entered the parlour. Every one asked where was Abbe
Darre, and what had detained them. He stood a moment,
looked round the table, and then pronounced these words
with the utmost gravity: “ There was separation.” The
truth is, the poor Abbe was thrown into the ditch, and was
obliged to get himself scraped, before he could venture
home through the town. From that day to this, if any
gentleman connected with the College of Maynooth, happens
to part company with his horse in a sudden and unpleasant
manner, it is never said that he fell, or was thrown, but
simply that there was separation.
One of Dr. Crolly’s earliest and most attached friends,
was the late President of Maynooth College, the Yery Eev.
Dr. Montague, who held the. office of bursar whilst the
late Primate was a student and professor in that establish-
ment. Like Dr. Crolly, he was a good horseman, and fond
of riding, but could never be induced to venture into the


fields. Once, however, he had occasion to visit a farm
which was eight or ten miles from college; and Dr. Crolly,
whom he had requested to accompany him, induced him to
proceed by a near way across the fields, assuring him, as he
firmly believed at the time, that there was no impediment
in the way. When they had proceeded about three miles,
they came to a small stream, with pretty high banks, which
it was absolutely necessary for them to cross. Dr. Crolly
immediately leaped over; but Dr. Montague, instead of
following him, declared that he would go back. The former
then returned, and asked the latter to dismount, and he
would lead his horse over. This being agreed upon, he
took Dr. Montague’s horse by the bridle, and, taking a long
sweep, came to the stream at full gallop. But the led
horse being totally untrained, planted his fore feet firmly
on the bank ; and when Dr. Crolly got over, he found that
he had taken nothing with him but the bridle. The horse,
finding himself at liberty, gallopped back to the college;
and Dr. Montague, after easing his mind a little, by de-
claring that no one ever would have luck who kept Dr.
Crolly’s company, was obliged to return on foot, and to
submit ever afterwards to the accusation of having got
separation.
Shortly before Dr. Crolly left Maynooth, a gentleman
connected with the establishment became deranged in his
mind. The chief delusion under which he laboured was
that he was dead. One morning, before any person was
aware of the matter, he went into Dr. Crolly’s rooms, and
complained bitterly that he had neither gone to his funeral,
nor employed any person to bury him. “ Why,” said Dr.
Crolly, “the fact is I would have gone to your funeral,
but Father Paul would not come with me ; and I think
you have far greater reason to complain of him than of me.”


lie immediately went to Father Paul’s apartments, and
asked that gentleman, whom he found in bed, what objec-
tion he had to attend his funeral. Father Paul declared
he had no objection whatever ; and that he had not heard
of his death, or he would certainly have been present at
his interment.
“Oh 1 you need not tell me ■ such a story,” said his
visitor ; “ for I know that you not only staid away your-
self, but prevented Mr. Crolly from coming. And now,”
he continued, “ I will be buried here, and nowhere else;
and you must write an epitaph, and put it over me.”
He then lay down under the hearth-rug. Father Paul
had by this time hastily dressed himself, and began to
think in what manner he could get rid of his unwelcome
visitor. Being commanded to prepare the epitaph, he took
a sheet of paper, and wrote upon it the following distich :
“ Your scraggedy snout shall snuff the moon;
Why, d your eyes, did you die so soon ?”
“ I’ll not lie under that epitaph,’.’ cried the dead man.
“ You must,” answered Father Paul.,
“ I’ll not,” said he, starting up, and rushing out of the
room.
Whilst Dr. Crolly was a professor in Maynooth, a stu-
dent from his native diocess, whose name was Dan
M‘Mullan, entered Maynooth. As frequently happened in
these times, he was ordained before he came to college. It
is not often that persons succeed, especially in literary
pursuits, who have not been trained to them from their
youth. Mr. M‘Mullan was, in one department, an excep-
tion to this rule. Whilst still a student, he had become so
famous a preacher in Dublin and its vicinity—a kind of
fame, by the way, which does not always require great


learning—as to excite the jealousy of Father Barnaby
Murphy, who, having published a book of sermons, thought
that it w r as intolerable assurance for a student to preach at
all in the city which was honoured by his eloquence. Dr.
Crolly, who was, on the contrary, a steady patron of Mr.
M'Mullan’s, took care to procure for him abundant oppor-
tunities for the development of his oratorical powers. He
also introduced Mr. M‘Mullan to his friends; and as he
was a delightful singer, his society was greatly sought after.
The late Primate sometimes took him to dine with some
of his Dublin acquaintances, and on one of these occasions
they met Father Barnaby, whom they knew by character
to be sometimes very unceremonious in his manners, but
they were entirely ignorant of his particular antipathy to
Mr. M‘Mullen. Very soon after dinner, he flatly contra-
dicted something which the latter gentleman had asserted.
Mr. M‘Mullan ventured to sustain his opinion, probably
without what Father Barnaby considered becoming deference
to so great a man ; whereupon he became wrathful, and
told Mr. M‘Mullan, amongst other things, that he should
not be allowed to preach without knowing his theology.
The latter attempted to propitiate him, by saying that he
had studied a little theology, and that he might get a good
printed sermon by heart without any risk of heresy. All
this had no effect; for Father Barnaby replied, in John-
sonian style, “ No, sir, you may not, for you might mistake
the substance of the sermon.” “ Indeed,” replied Mr.
M‘Mullan, “ you are quite right; and lest I might make
any mistake of the kind you mention, I shall confine my-
self, for the future, to the sermons published by the Eev.
Barnaby Murphy; and as there is no substance in any of
them, I cannot possibly mistake it.”
Dr. Crolly himself was not always secure against Mr.


M‘Mullan’s sly witticisms. I have mentioned that the
latter was a most enchanting singer—a gift which nature
did not bestow on the late Primate. They frequently
dined at Castle Baggot, where Mr. M‘Mullan delighted
the company with his sweet songs. He made it a point
invariably to call upon Dr. Crolly as soon as he had finished
himself, assuring the company at the same time that he was
a delightful singer. The latter was so much pressed, in
consequence of these repeated calls, that he resolved to give
one specimen, to prove, he said, the truth of his own asser-
tion that he could not sing ; still he seemed determined to
do his best, for ha put himself under Mr. M‘Mullan’s
tuition, from whom he learned the famous old ditty,
“ Cruiskeen Laun.” They that when they next
went to Castle Baggot, Mr. M‘Mullan should sing first,
and Dr. Crolly afterwards. After dinner, Mr. M‘Mullan
was, as usual; called upon for a song, but he positively
declared that he would not sing unless Dr. Crolly promised
to sing after him. The latter readily gave the required
pledge, and the former immediately sung, in his rich and
melodious voice, “ Cruiskeen Laun.” When he had finished
he called upon Dr, Crolly to redeem his promise, and told
the company that they would now, at length, get a speci-
men of his powers. Of course he could not attempt to spoil
a song which had been just sung so delightfully, nor had he
any means of getting out of the difficulty except by can-
didly telling the whole story. “ Cruiskeen Laun,” how-
ever, continued to be his only song during his entire life,
and he sung it, on some rare occasions, amongst his clergy
after he became bishop, and even after he became Primate,
The last time was, I think, in the College of Maynooth,
about four years ago, in the course of a very happy evening
which he spent with the professors. I have mentioned


these anecdotes not merely as bearing on the personal
history of Dr. Crolly, but also as a specimen of those little
pleasantries which diversify the monotony of a college life.
About the month of June, 1812, the Eev. Hugh O’Don-
nell, who had been for forty-one years the administrator of the
immense districts which were comprised in what were then
called the parishes of Hannastown and Belfast, signified to
the Right Rev. Dr. M‘Mullen his desire to resign his charge.
The venerable pastor and Catholic laity of Belfast cast
their eyes upon Dr. Crolly as the person whom they would
most of all desire for their parish priest. To carry out these
views, they appointed a deputation, in the early part of
July, to wait upon Dr. M'Mullen at his residence near
Downpatrick, and if they received a favourable answer from
him, they were instructed to seek an interview with Dr.
Crolly himself, who was then stopping at his father’s house
during the vacation. The bishop, who had, I believe, already
determined on the arrangement, received the deputation very
graciously, and desired them to inform Dr. Crolly that it
was his wish that he should become parish priest of Belfast.
Although his salary as professor was very small, not ex-
ceeding, I believe, £SO or £GO per annum, he would have
preferred the tranquil enjoyment of his college life, to
undertaking the cares, the perils, and the responsibilities
of a missionary priest.
Believing, however, that it was the will of God, he con-
sented to sacrifice his own ease and inclinations, and on the
absolute resignation of the Eev. Hugh O’Donnell, in
August, he consented to become parish priest of Belfast.
When he returned to college to make arrangements for his
departure, his fellow-professors ■ and the present venerable
Archbishop of Dublin, who was then coadjutor to Dr. Troy,
and President of Maynooth, strongly urged him to remain.


Indeed, he was encouraged to believe that, had he stopped, he
would have been very probably appointed to the office of
president, which was then about to be vacated by the resig-
nation of the Most Rev. Dr. Murray. He discovered also, by a
letter which he received from Dr. M‘Mullen, that his appoint-
ment to Belfast had caused some jealousy, although it was
then so far from being a desirable mission for a Catholic
priest, that the late Rev. RichardCuroe, who had been curate
in it for some time, preferred to that parish one in the moun-
tains of Mourne. Under all these circumstances, Dr, Crolly
considered it his duty to write to the bishop that he was
perfectly happy in college, and that, if his appointment
caused the slightest inconvenience to his lordship, or the
least dissatisfaction amongst his seniors in the ministry,
he would be obliged to him to select some other per-
son to take charge of Belfast. The people, however, of that
town would not have been satisfied with any other, and the
bishop himself preferred that he should go there, which he
accordingly did in the month of November, 1812, taking with
him as his curate the very Rev. B. M‘Auley, Y.G. and P.P.,
Downpatrick, who was then just finishing his course of
studies in the College ofMaynooth. His predecessor in the
parishes of Hannastown and Belfast, the Eev. Hugh
O’Donnell, survived until the end of December, 1813,
when he died and was buried in the grave-yard attached to
the old abbey of Glenarm. ,
The parish of which Dr. Crolly took charge, assisted
only by one curate, comprised not only the entire town of
Belfast, but a densely populated district of country more
than thirty miles in length, in which there were nine or
ten important towns and villages. For all this district
there was just one solitary chapel, in a little lane in Bel-
fast, capable of holding about 150 persons. A second


chapel was, indeed, in the course of erection when Dr. Crolly
went to Belfast, which, with his usual zeal and success, he
soon completed.
From the very first day on which he undertook the
duties of parish priest until the very last day of his life,
when he consecrated the holy oils and assisted at the
solemn ceremonies of holy Thursday, in the parochial church
of St. Peter’s, Drogheda, he devoted himself, with the most
unremitting zeal and the most untiring energy, to the
work of the ministry. In 1825, during the inquiry into
the state of the Belfast institution, he declared on his oath,
that he had not been absent from Belfast one month at a
time during the previous thirteen years. During the entire
time he was on the mission as priest, as bishop, and as pri-
mate, he never allowed himself the relaxation of a single
vacation, nor do I think he ever once left his diocess ex-
cept from necessity. He often promised to go to the
Continent, and even to Eome with the Eight Eev. Dr.
Denvir, but he was always kept at home by being con-
stantly engaged in some great work for the promotion of
religion and the advancement of the glory of God. He
no sooner finished one great undertaking than he fearlessly
embarked in another; when he completed a church he sur-
rounded it with a residence for the clergy, with schools and
colleges; and when these were filled with priests, with
pupils, and with masters, he found that more churches
were required; and thus the very works which he accom-
plished, constantly created a necessity for fresh labours and
renewed exertions.
If it be true that the collecting of money for charitable
purposes creates a disposition to avarice, the late Primate
was certainly an exception to the rule; for there never
was a more disinterested, a more generous, or a more
c


charitable man. He never once asked the people for money
for himself; he was never asked for money by others for a
charitable purpose—for ah hospital, a school, or a chapel—
that he was not amongst the highest contributors. How
he managed to get all the money he gave to the poor I
never could discover. They met him in crowds every
morning going to the church, and coming from it ; they
besieged him in his own house; they pursued him when he
went to ride, to drive, or to walk; and I can affirm that I
never saw him escaping on any one of these occasions, with-
out distributing a considerable sum amongst them. He
was frequently remonstrated with, on the ground that
some of the persons to whom he gave money might not be
objects of charity, and, since the introduction of the poor-
laws, that they ought to be sent to the workhouse. To
these objections he always replied, that he knew many of
those to whom he gave charity to be worthy objects, and
that if persons were to be deterred from relieving the poor
lest they might, on a few occasions during their lives, bestow
alms on impostors, the virtuous poor might be left to starve.
He would add, where should the poor seek for alms if they
were not allowed to approach the house of their bishop and
the doors of the church ? This, he would say, was a very
old practice, for we learn from the Scriptures that the
poor begged at the gates of the Temple of Jerusalem.
■ It is quite clear that Dr. Crolly must have laid down for
himself a rule of life when he went on the mission, and
that he strictly and unswervingly followed it. His hour
for rising was a little after six o’clock. In Belfast he
was always in the church soon after seven, and heard
confessions until eight, at which hour he invariably
said Mass. He then resumed the hearing of confessions,
and continued at this duty until his penitents were ex


hausted. During Lent, Advent, and before the great festi-
vals, he often remained in the church a great part of the
day, and even until a late hour at night. After breakfast
he read the hours of the divine office, answered letters, and,
if time permitted, studied for about an hour. He then
called upon such of his people as required his advice, con-
solation, or assistance; visited the charitable institutions,
the schools, and the church school, or seminary, which he
was erecting at the time; for he had always a work of this
kind in progress. After returning home, he invariably
finished his office before dinner.
His table was frugal, but hospitable, as became a bishop;
no priest ever called on him without being invited to dine.
He was himself remarkably temperate, both in eating and
drinking. He always lived in the same house, and used
the same table with his curates. At dinner he was par-
ticularly cheerful; but on ordinary occasions he retired
early to his own apartments, to read matins and lauds and
to study, and seldom left them during the evening.
Dr. Crolly not only lived with his clergy in Belfast, but
he made it a rule never ,to dine out except on very par-
ticular occasions which he could not avoid, unless his
curates were also invited. This prevented any invidious
exceptions from being made, especially by the members of
his own congregation, removed all grounds of jealousy, and
promoted the strictest harmony amongst those who were
bound to labour together on the same mission. The rule
being generally known, produced another most excellent
effect, for it furnished Dr. Crolly himself with a ready
apology for declining the constant invitations which he
received, and enabled him to remain at home and devote
his time to the discharge of his onerous duties, instead of
wasting it at parties. Nor could the clergy frequently
deviate from the excellent example which was thus set


before them, first by the parish priest, and afterwards by
the bishop ; so that they not only all lodged in the same
house, but lived together, like the members of one united
religious community. They thus learned early and
practically those virtues which are absolutely essential to
a Catholic priest—to find happiness and enjoyment almost
exclusively-in his own house, instead of seeking for them in
lay society. When such a rule as Dr. Crolly adopted is
introduced, a few persons may murmur at first, because
they cannot have the clergy at their parties, as usual; but
I am convinced that the priest who follows it will be more
respected and beloved than any other, and what is of
infinitely greater importance, that he will save his own
soul, as well as the souls of those over whom the Almighty
has given him charge.
Dr. Crolly preached or instructed almost every Sunday of
his life, for he was scarcely ever absent from his parish on
that day, during the entire time he remained in Belfast; and
he lectured in the evening during a considerable portion of
Lent.
Whilst he continued to be parish priest of Belfast—a
period of thirteen years—he took a full share of every duty
with his curate or curates, including sick calls. Even after
he became bishop, he frequently attended the sick and dying,
not only in cases of necessity, when none of the priests
happened to be in the house, but even to assist and relieve
his curates when he thought they were oppressed by too
much duty. During the first Visitation of cholera, in 1832,
he frequently attended persons who had been seized by this
fatal malady during the night, in order not to disturb the
rest of the priests, who were wearied with the incessant labours
of the day. He also visited the cholera hospital every day
as a member of the Board of Health, and frequently remained
there four hours at once, attending to the wants of the sick,


and often administering to them, not only spiritual food,
hut also giving them meat and drink with his own
hands.
Although Dr. Crolly went to Belfast not only by the
command of his bishop, but, as I have already stated, on
the earnest entreaty of the lay Catholics of that town; and
although he continued, during the entire twenty-three years
that he discharged amongst them the high and holy functions
of priest and bishop, to be as much beloved as any pastor
ever was by his flock, he had not long exercised the duties of
parish priest until he was opposed by a few refractory per-
sons in his congregation. The Presbyterians, amongst
whom the laity, under the appellation of elders, have a
very large share in the management of their ecclesiastical
affairs, formed, at this time, the vast and overwhelming
majority of the inhabitants of Belfast. It is not at all won-
derful that a few of the leading Catholics should, in such a
community, have conceived rather exalted notions of their
right to meddle with the concerns of the Church, without
intending to interfere in the least with Catholic doctrine or
discipline. Although the transaction which lam about to
relate can scarcely be said to be of the same character, it
certainly proceeded, in a great measure, from the disposition
which I have just mentioned.
On the completion of the new church in Donegal-street,
Dr. Crolly, conceiving that the accommodation was still
inadequate to the wants of the rapidly-increasing congrega-
tion, wished to erect a gallery, on which the more respec-
table portion of the congregation could have pews, whilst the
ground floor should be left exclusively to the poor. This
proposition .was violently opposed by some persons who were,
I believe, known as the elders, and who insisted that they,
should get private pews on the ground floor.


“ Well,” said Dr. Crolly, “ we will, in the first place, leave
off a large space round the altar for the accommodation of
the poor.” To this they entirely objected; and when they
found that he adhered to his original determination, in spite
of all their remonstrances, they declared that they would
never subscribe one farthing towards the erection of the
gallery. But Dr. Crolly was a man of too great courage
ever to allow himself to be put down by mere clamour, when
he thought he had a just and righteous cause to defend.
With his usual determination, therefore, he undertook the
whole responsibility himself, built the gallery, and erected
pews on it at an expense of fifteen hundred pounds. The
only means he had of raising this large sum of money was
by selling the pews by auction to such of the congregation
as were able to purchase them. His opponents 'declared
that they were the only Catholics in Belfast who had money,
and that they would not bid one farthing. However, the great
majority of the congregation being on the side of the parish
priest, and determined to support him, the first pew put up
to auction, which was one of those on the front of the gal-
lery, brought a very high price. The same thing took
place with regard to a second and a third; and then the
refractory party began to perceive that if they did not pur-
chase pews on the gallery, they would be obliged to go to
the ground flour with the poor. They determined, there-
fore, to make an effort to stop the sale, and one of them,
who acted as spokesman, stood up on the gallery, and ad-
dressing Dr. Crolly, who was standing on the altar, said—
“ I cannot, in conscience, avoid telling the people that this
is a most flimsy gallery, and that, if any considerable number
of persons should come upon it, there can be no doubt but that
it will break down.” The clearest proof that the gallery
was perfectly substantial is, that it remains uninjured until


this day, although it has been crowded to excess every
Sunday and holiday for nearly forty years. Dr. Crolly,
knowing how untrue the allegation was, replied that
he would he the last person in the world to expose the lives
of his people, and that he would tear down the gallery on
the spot if any person acquainted with such matters woidd
pronounce it to be in the slightest degree dangerous. Upon
this the gentleman objector started up, and stamping
furiously, declared that he could drive his heel through it.
“Oh, Pat,” said Dr. Crolly, “that proves nothing; for you
know that your gimlet heel would bore through any
timber.” I never saw the gentleman in question, but I
have been told that he had very remarkable heels. The
observation was received first with a titter, and then with
a loud roar of laughter, in which, to his honour be it told,
the gentleman at whose expense it took place, heartily
joined. He also, I believe, purchased the very next seat
that was sold. Harmony was perfectly restored, and the
sale produced more money than was required to discharge
all the responsibilities which Dr. Crolly had incurred.
I have already mentioned, that from the moment Dr.
Crolly undertook the heavy responsibilities of the mission,
he never until his death allowed himself the indulgence of
a single vacation. An occasional ride upon horseback was
his only relaxation, and he was, consequently, always
anxious to have a good saddle-horse. Soon after he became
parish priest, he purchased a very fine-looking gray, called
Grazeer. He turned out, however, not to be so good as he
appeared, and Dr. Crolly determined to part with him.
There happened to be a fair in the town of Saintfield, which
is situated between Belfast and Downpatrick; and as Dr.
Crolly was obliged to go to the latter place, to visit his
father who was unwell, he requested a gentleman of his ac-
quaintance, who was considered a famous judge of a horse, to


sell Grazeer in the fair, and that he would look through it
himself, to see if he could find anything that would suit him.
Being obliged, however, to leave for Downpatrick before he
saw anything that pleased him, he begged of the gentle-
man who had undertaken the sale of Grazeer to buy a horse
for him, if he could find in Saintfield such a one as he re-
quired. Mr, M (this was the gentleman’s name)
sold Grazeer shortly after Dr. Crolly left the fair, for, I
think, thirty guineas, and in about an hour afterwards pur-
chased a horse, for which he paid eight guineas more. Dr.
Crolly finding his father better, returned to Belfast the
same evening, and shortly after his arrival Mr. M , ac-
companied by one or two other gentlemen, called upon him
and requested him to go and see his new steed. As he was
preparing to accompany them, he asked of what colour the
horse was. “ Gray,” replied Mr. M .
“ I’ll bet any money,” cried Dr. Crolly, “ that you have
bought Grazeer back again, for there was not a gray horse
in the fair worth looking at, except himself.”
Mr. M , who justly prided himself on his knowledge
of horses, became indignant, and declared that neither he
nor any priest in Ulster ever mounted such a horse. As
soon, however, as Dr. Crolly saw the new purchase, he
declared that he was no other than Grazeer, with his mane
and tail very nicely clipped and trimmed. This Mr. M
vehemently denied.
“We can easily ascertain the fact,” said Dr. Crolly.
“ You remember that Grazeer had a corn in his off fore
foot, which was pared this morning ; examine the foot, and
I am convinced you will find it.”
This was done accordingly, and the recently-pared corn
discovered. Still Mr. M was incredulous, and insisted
that this was an accidental coincidence.
“To set the matter right,” said Dr. Crolly, “take the


horse to my own stable, and you will find that he will go
at once to his own stall, and if you turn him out without
a halter, that he will find his way to the horse trough, in
the back yard.”
These experiments having succeeded perfectly, Mr. M
was obliged to acknowledge that he had paid thirty-eight
guineas for a horse which he had sold for thirty about an
hour previously; and it was a very long time before he
could venture to mention the word horse at all, without
incurring the risk of having this story told against him.
I possess a considerable number of letters* written by
Dr. Crolly whilst he was parish priest of Belfast, but they
relate, for the most part, to merely private affairs. I
select a few, however, which, although they do not possess
any great interest, are nevertheless important at the present
time, as I think they fully refute the charges which have
been made against the late Primate’s character after his
death. The first of these letters was written to Miss
O’Regan, a Catholic, w r ho was assistant in a ladies’ school in
Ballinderry,kept by Mrs. W ,aProtestant. MissO’Regan,
intending to give up her situation, wrote to Dr. Crolly to
apprize him of the high and honourable character of Mrs.
W , and that she was quite incapable of interfering in
any way with the religion of her Catholic pupils, in order
that he might thus be induced to allow some Catholic
young ladies of Belfast to remain in the school after the
departure of the Catholic mistress. To this communication
he replied in the following letter, in which he clearly, but
courteously intimated his intention of withdrawing any
boarders over whom he had control, unless Miss O’Regan’s
* These letters have been sent to me by the parish priest of Glen-
avy, Dr. M., and some other friends, without any solicitation on my
part. I need not say that lam deeply grateful to them.


successor should be a Catholic, in whom he could repose
equal confidence.
Belfast, Ist July, 1824.
Madam—l have to acknowledge the receipt of your much-
esteemed letter, and to assure you, that the very high .and re-
spectable character which you have given to Mr. and Mrs.
is, lam satisfied, nothing above their merits. 1 regret very much
that you intend to leave their academy, and fear that they will not
he able to find a person to Jill your place in idiom Mr. Dillon and
I can repose the same confidence ivhich you so justly possessed. I
shall provide religious hooks for the children as soon as I shall
see Mr. Dillon ; and if Mrs. can find a proper substitute for
your situation, I shall willingly allow the children to remain with
her for some time.
I am, &c., your obliged, humble servant,
WILLIAM CROLLY.
Miss O’Regan.
It is clear, therefore, that Dr. Crolly would not allow the
children to remain at Mrs. W ’s school, unless she kept
an assistant, and unless that assistant were a Catholic, in
whom he could repose confidence.
Although the next two letters were written after Dr.
Crolly became bishop, I shall insert them here, as they bear
upon the same subject :
Belfast, 6th February, 1826.
Rev. Dear Sir—ln reply to your esteemed letter, I beg to
assure you that I would make every reasonable concession in my
power to satisfy the conscientious scruples of Protestants; but I
cannot admit that Catholics interfere with their conscience when
they refuse to read their Bible. They might say with as much
justice, that they interfere with their conscience when they refuse
to believe the thirty-nine articles. For my own part, I have no
objection that Catholics should read their own Bible, with due
submission to the Church; but I must insist on the rule which I
laid down at the conference of the clergy being strictly adhered
to. The edition of the Douay Bible which 1 have myself got
published is so cheap as to be within the reach of almost every
Catholic family.
I remain, rev. dear sir, yours sincerely,
W. CROLLY.


The next letter was written shortly before he left
Belfast:—
Belfast, 3rd November, 1833.
My dear Alexander —l have to acknowledge the receipt of
your very kind and much-esteemed letter, requesting me to in-
struct you how to act at funerals of your relatives who may die
out of communion with the Catholic Church. In reply, I beg to
advise you to discharge to the persons whom you have described
every duty dictated by natural affection and Christian charity.
With these feelings, you may attend their funerals, follow their
remains to the grave, and show your unfeigned love to your rela-
tives, both living and dead; but as you would not accompany them
to the Protestant or Presbyterian houses of worship when they
were living, it would be unreasonable to expect that you should
enter such places, to join in a form of religious worship which your
conscience does not approve of, when your relatives depart out of
this life. Any worship offered to Almighty God should he per-
formed in the sincerity of our souls, and, therefore, we should not
appear to join any persons in their mode of worship when it is con-
trary to the dictates of our consciences.
Believe me to be, &c.,
W. CROLLY.*
* The gentleman to whose kindness lam indebted for this last let-
ter is the eminent Dublin surgeon to whom I alluded in the defence
of the Primate. Those who have taken the trouble of reading my
letters will remember, that when this gentleman went to school to
Belfast, the Primate sent him to lodge at the house of a Catholic lady
—that there were no prayers said in the schools of the Belfast academy
—and that, if there had been, Dr. Crolly would by no means have per-
mitted him to attend them, as he charged him not to attend prayers
at the houses of Protestant relatives whom he occasionally visited.
I have some other letters of a similar import, but those which I
have quoted are abundantly sufficient to refute the absurd calumny
that Dr. Crolly ever permitted Catholics to attend Protestant prayers,
or to read the Protestant Scriptures. The evidence, indeed, on which
he was convicted of this last charge, was such as would not have been
listened to if it had been preferred, against the vilest miscreant that
walks the streets.
A Mr. Ingham made the tour of Ireland in five weeks, in
the course of which he passed twice through Belfast, and visited
one Protestant schoolmaster, in company with another. This
visit took place in the autumn of 1836, more than a year after Dr,
Crolly had left Belfast altogether. A year after this visit, Ingham


Dr. Crolly’s predecessor in the See of Down and Connor,
the Eight Rev. Dr. M‘Mullen, was a very retiring, but a
very holy man, and an excellent bishop. Although old
and feeble when the Yeto was contemplated, he attended a
meeting of the Irish bishops in Dublin, and strenuously
opposed that insidious measure. When he returned home,
swore before the House of Lords that the master of the school told
him a cock-and-bull story about a visit of Dr. Crolly’s to his school,
in company with the priest, in which that prelate praised him for ex-
pounding the Protestant Bible to Catholics ! In the first place,
if this story had been sworn to be true, it is so absurd in itself—so
utterly opposed to Dr. Crolly’s conduct during his entire life, that
no one would believe it. 2. It was never sworn to be true, for Mr.
Ingham merely heard it from a schoolmaster. He never saw, spoke
to, or had the slightest communication with, Dr. Crolly during his
entire life. St. Paul says (1 Tim. v. 19), “ Against a priest receive not
an accusation but under two or three witnesses but it seems that,
according to the new orthodox gospel, it is lawful to condemn a bishop
without any witness at all. 3. I was in Belfast myself, in 1837, and
neither I, nor the bishop, nor the clergy, knew that there were Catholic
children at the Frederick-street school, much less that the Protestant
Bible was expounded to three hundred of them there. 4. Dr. Crolly
had, many years before Mr. Ingham’s visit (which did not take place
until more than a year before he left Belfast), built Catholic poor schools
just beside, and in opposition to, the Frederick-street school, to which
all the poorer Catholic children of that part of the town, with, perhaps,
three or four exceptions, resorted. 5. On the occasion of a visit of
tfye Education Commissioners to Belfast, which took place, I think, in
1840, only three years after Mr. Ingham swore before the Lords that
he heard there were 850 children attending the Frederick-street school,
300 of whom were Catholics, there were not above twenty children
attending the school altogether. On that occasion, a number of
Catholic children were borrowed, to make a show before the commis-
sioners ; and I have no doubt but that if Mr. Ingham had paid a visit
at this time, he would have received a glowing account of the prosperity
of the school. 6. I suspected some juggle in the business, because
we have sufficient experience of the absurd and ridiculous stories
which Englishmen, who make the tour of Ireland in five weeks, are apt
to publish about us when they get back to their own country; because,
moreover, this Mr. Ingham took care not to visit the splendid Catholic
national schools, although he must have passed close by them; and,
finally, because he said Dr. Crolly visited the Frederick-street school
with the priest, as if there was only one priest in the town at the time.


he related to his parishioners what had been done in Dublin,
and concluded by assuring them that he was as ready to
die for the faith as any of his predecessors.
Dr. Crolly was always a special favourite with this vene-
rated man; and, indeed, he intrusted to him, almost from
the moment of his appointment to Belfast, the entire
management of the diocess of Antrim. However, in the
summer of L 824, he became so feeble that he determined
Dr. Crolly, being dead, cannot, of course, contradict this foul calumny
himself; but I wrote to the present Bishop of Down, who resided with
Dr. Crolly for four or five years before he became Primate, as well as
to almost every priest who was on the mission in Belfast whilst the
late Primate remained in that town, and they have all assured me—
1. That the story which Ingham swore he heard must certainly be false,
no matter who may have invented it. 2. That no priest now living
was in the Frederick-street school with Dr. Crolly whilst any expla-
nation of Scripture was ever given. 3. That it is extremely doubt-
ful, or, rather, that it is all but certain, that Dr. Crolly was never
in the Frederick-street school from the time that the person from
whom Ingham said he heard the story about Dr. Crolly became
master. After a very troublesome inquiry, a kind friend has been
enabled to examine for me the books belonging to the Frederick-
street school. From them it appears that this master’s appointment
did not take place until the Bth of December, 1834, and Dr. Crolly
left Belfast altogether a few months afterwards. Now, if Dr. Crolly
ever visited the Frederick-street school whilst this person was
master, it must have been during these few months, for I know my-
self, and I can prove also, if necessary, that he never visited it after
he became Primate. It is equally certain that he did not visit the
Frederick-street school during these few months ; for, in the first
place, none of the priests who were in Belfast during this time ever
accompanied him to that school; and, in the second place, there is no
entry of any such visit in the boohs ; and if it had taken place, the
master, who thought it of so much importance that he mentioned it
more than a year afterwards to an English member of Parliament,
would not have neglected to have it recorded. But, above all, because a.
certain other person, whom Ido not wish to mention, gave far less
objectionable evidence, but to the same effect as Ingham, into which he
introduced Dr. Crolly’s name. The attention of the latter happened to
be called to this evidence, and he instantly wrote to this gentleman
to know what he meant by it, and to tell him it was not correct—that
it was, in fact, totally opposed to his sentiments. This fact I can prove.


to apply for a coadjutor. He communicated his intention
to his clergy, who, although they had at that time no right
to interfere in the election of their bishops, assembled in
Belfast, and petitioned the Holy Father to appoint Dr.
Crolly coadjutor bishop. The Right Eev. Peter M‘Lough-
lin, Bishop of Derry, presided over this meeting, at the
special request of Dr. M‘Mullen, who signed the petition,
which was sent to the Pope, entreating him to appoint
Dr. Crolly Bishop of Down and Connor. This was either
the first, or, at all events, one of the first, instances in which
an Irish bishop was elected by the clergy ; and the mode
of election thus introduced, seemed so satisfactory, not only
to the priesthood and prelacy of Ireland, but also to the
Supreme Pontiff himself, that, in the year 1829, a rescript
was granted by the Holy See, by which the parish priests
of each diocess were empowered to return the names of three
persons to the court of Rome, one of whom, and generally the
individual who had the largest number of votes, has been
almost always appointed to the vacant bishopric.
Dr. Crolly not only occupied the most conspicuous place,
but he was also, in the estimation of both laity and clergy,
far and away the most distinguished priest in the diocess
of Down and Connor. He made, by his individual exer-
tions, the Catholic religion respectable and formidable in
the town of Belfast, where its very existence was scarcely
acknowledged when he was appointed parish priest. Pro-
testants had been taught there, as elsewhere, to regard the
religion professed by the vast majority of Christians, as
almost as absurd and unreasonable as Paganism itself. Dr.
Crolly removed this erroneous impression, by a series
of lectures which he delivered during the very first Lent
which he spent in Belfast. Large numbers of Protes-
tants attended, out of curiosity, to hear what could be


said in favour of Popery. He commenced by a clear and
succinct exposition of the Catholic faith, and warned his
audience that it was this beautiful and symmetrical body
of doctrine which he was prepared to defend, and not the
monstrous phantom which was conjured up by the enemies
of Catholicity. Those who did not belong to the Catholic
Church were astonished to find her true doctrine so entirely
different from that which was falsely ascribed to her. They
were still more astonished when they discovered that it
was consistent with reason and with the sacred Scriptures;
and many of those “ who came to scoff, remained to pray.”
The ministers took the alarm, and attended themselves
in the Catholic Church, to hear Dr. Crolly, and to take notes
of what he said. Reporters from the public press were
present, and the substance of his lectures were published
in the newspapers. The bigots tried the old argument of
sneering at Catholicity, but it was no longer current; and
when this would not pass, Dr. Crolly was publicly charged
with preaching what was not Catholic doctrine. To this
he replied, that as Protestants were permitted to explain
their own doctrine, the same privilege should be extended
to the Catholics, and that the faith which he preached was
that which was contained in the decrees of Councils, and
in approved Catholic books. The charge being still in-
sisted on, Dr. Crolly challenged his adversary to enter into
the following compact :—That the doctrine should be sub-
mitted to the Holy See, and if it were rejected, he promised
to become a Protestant, provided the latter would become
a Catholic in case it was approved. This offer the gentle-
map very prudently declined, but he did not dare ever
again to repeat his calumny.
The Catholics, not only of Belfast, but of the entire
diocess of Down and Connor, were proud of Dr. Crolly.


Songs, those rude but genuine manifestations of popular
feeling, were composed to celebrate his successful defence
of Catholicity ; and when a new bishop was to be appointed,
it was considered not only to be a matter in which the
interests of religion were deeply involved, but it was made
a point of honour, also, that Dr. Crolly should be appointed
to this high office. The clergy fully participated in these
feelings ; and this was the reason why, without having any
precedent for it, they assembled and elected him. They
were, in fact, determined to have him, and no other, for
their bishop.
Dr. M‘Mullen died before an answer could be received
from Eome, on the 25th of October, 1824. The clergy of
the diocess assembled soon afterwards in Downpatrick, and
elected Dr. Crolly to the office of Vicar Capitular. This
election was confirmed by the Primate, Dr. Curtis, in a
letter in my possession, in which he declares that he alone
had the right of appointing the Vicar Capitular, and that if
any other choice had been made, he would not have ap-
proved of it.
Early in April, 1825, the Pope’s Bull arrived, appointing
him, not coadjutor, but Bishop of Down and Connor. He
was consecrated in St. Patrick’s Chapel, Belfast, on the Ist
of May, in the same year, by the Most Eev. Dr. Curtis,
assisted by the Eight Eev. Dr. M‘Laughlin, Bishop of
Derry, and the Eight Eev. Dr. M'Gettigan, Bishop of
Eaphoe. The Eight Eev. Dr. Denvir, then Professor of
Natural Philosophy in Maynooth College, read the Bull
which appointed him to the vacant diocess, and the conse-
cration sermon was preached by the late Eev. Dr. Kenjiy,
of Clongowes College. He took his text from the 36th,
37th, and 38th verses of the 88th Psalm :—“ Once I have
sworn by my holiness ; I will not lie unto David : his seed


shall endure for ever. And his throne, as the sun before
me : and as the moon, perfect for ever, and a faithful wit-
ness in heaven.” I have always heard that this was one
of the most powerful and convincing sermons ever preached
by that eminent divine, and that it made a deep and lasting
impression on all those who heard it.
Downpatrick had been an episcopal see from the days of
St. Patrick ; and, indeed, even when Dr. Crolly went to Bel-
fast, that town, along with the immense district attached to
it, was not more than a third-rate parish. But after his thir-
teen years’ labour, it had become by far the largest and most
important parish in the diocess. The Catholic laity of Belfast
were most anxious that their beloved pastor should be ele-
vated to the episcopal dignity; but they were still more desi-
rous that he should not leave a parish in which his labours
had been hitherto rewarded with such signal success, and in
which they were still so indispensably necessary. Dr. Crolly,
therefore, in accordance with the opinion of the laity, and
indeed of the clergy also, of the entire diocess, induced the
Pope to transfer the episcopal parish from Downpatrick to
Belfast. On the recommendation of Dr. Crolly, the Right
Rev. Dr. Denvir, then Professor of Natural Philosophy in
Maynooth College, obtained the collation of the parish of
Down, which had been the residence of the Catholic bishops
for upwards of thirteen centuries.
Dr. Crolly now extended to the entire diocess, that zeal
and vigilance which he had hitherto chiefly devoted to the
parish of Belfast. The extent of his own parish was so
enormous, and the Catholics had increased so rapidly, that
he cut off a large district in the county of Down, including
the towns of Comber, Ncwtownards, and Donaghadee, and
erected them into a separate parish. A short time after-
wards, he made another parish out of that part of the town
d


of Belfast which is in the county of Down, along with the
villages of Newtonbreda and Holywood. Nor did he neglect
that portion of his parish which extended into the county of
Antrim ; for although it was too poor to support a priest,
he erected two churches in it—one in the village of White-
house, and the other in Ballyclare.
The spirit of persecution lingered in the north of Ireland
long after it had been exorcised from the Catholic provinces.
The descendants of the “ colonists and undertakers” looked
upon this province as being peculiarly their own; and the
squireens and magistrates, backed by bad laws and an
armed yeomanry, treated the Catholics much more like
African slaves than fellow Christians. This was the case
more especially in Down and Antrim, where the majority
of the population was Protestant. In many extensive dis-
tricts of those counties, if a priest was known to make his
appearance, for the purpose of administering the last con-
solations of religion to a dying Catholic, the whole popula-
tion turned out and chased him for his life, as if he were a
mad dog. I mentioned, in the first of my letters in defence
of the late Primate, a case of this kind which occurred in
Belfast, within the memory of persons who were living
when I resided there. And at about the same time, there
was a gallows in the town of Castlewellan, in the county
of Down, which had been erected for the purpose of hanging
any unfortunate Papist who might chance to be caught in
it.
I hope it is unnecessary for me to declare, that I do not
mention these things for the purpose of reviving or of per-
petuating religious hatred. But it is necessary to advert
to them, in order to comprehend the difficulties with which
Dr. Crolly had to contend, when he entered upon the
mission in Belfast ; and to explain how it happened, that


even when he became bishop, thirteen years afterwards,
there were very few Catholic chapels, deserving of the
name, in the entire diocess. He incited the clergy to erect
churches in which the worship of the living God could be
decently, if not splendidly performed, by his exhortations,
by his glorious example in his own parish, and by contri-
buting liberally—sometimes as much as fifty pounds—to
every one of them. In this, as in all his other undertak-
ings for the good of religion, he was eminently successful;
for during the ten years of his episcopacy, a large and com-
modious Catholic church -was built in almost every parish
of his extensive diocess.* On this subject I take the
liberty of submitting the following extract from the sketch
of his life published in the Vindicator :—
“ Dr. Crolly, from its central situation and influential posi-
tion, immediately adopted Belfast as his raensal parish—a mea-
sure which was no less advantageous to the diocess, than bene-
ficial to the town—he extending to every praiseworthy, charitable
institution, calculated to ameliorate the people, mentally and
physically, the benefit of his practical sympathy, judicious advice,
warm and generous support. In the administration of his diocess
—in the prudent guidance of his subjects and people—in the dis-
semination of the truths of religion—in the extending the charities
of society, his conduct was above all praise. And having studied
with a yearning love, to imbue the faithful with the true fervour
of devotion, he longed to see them worship the God of their
* Of course, all the money necessary for so much building, was not
gathered without hard work. The Very Rev. B. M‘Auley, of Down-
patrick, who, not to speak of parochial houses and schools, built four
chapels as his individual share of the good work, being once collect-
ing in Dublin, was permitted to say Mass in the Jesuit’s Chapel, I
think, on condition that he should not speak about money. There
came on a terrible shower of hail during Mass. At the communion
he turned round, and said, “ Alas ! my poor people are under that, for
they have no place to worship but behind a hedge.” He said not a
word about money ; but within a day or two after he had uttered this
brief ejaculation, he received as much of that useful commodity as
enabled him to build a chapel.


fathers in temples in some degree worthy of that august being
who was there offered up their sacrifice and mediator. Faith-
fully, therefore, did he dedicate himself to the glorious task, like
another William of Wykeham, of erecting new churches to the Most
High ; and during the period of his episcopacy here, he assisted
in rearing up and consecrating thirty-six new temples to the
Lord ; and when translated to the Archdiocess of Armagh, the
same feeling still prevailed; so much so, that, in the first eight
years of his primacy, he had consecrated no less than seventeen,
and perhaps an equal number in the last five years.”
Churches were not the only things which Catholics re-
quired, when Dr. Crolly went on the mission ; for there
was not a single Catholic institution of any kind in Bel-
fast, or in any other part of the diocess. He set to work,
with his usual energy, to remedy this tremendous evil. He
had not, however, the means of doing this at once; and as
children will neither cease to he born, nor to grow up into
men and women, until such times as schools can he
provided for them, he had no alternative, but either to en-
deavour to keep them in brutal ignorance, or to avail him-
self of the only schools in which they could receive a suit-
able education. It would be as reasonable to blame Dr.
Crolly for walking instead of flying, as to censure him for
sending the children intrusted to his care in Belfast, to
Protestant and not to Catholic schools.
Most popular newspaper writers on education, in Ireland,
arc in the habit of' taking for granted two assumptions,
one of which is untrue, and the other unjust. The first is,
that all mixed education is essentially bad ; and the second,
that any person who advocates mixed education, as a lesser
evil, at certain times, and in certain circumstances, there-
fore advocates it as the best possible system at all times,
and in all circumstances.
The first of these assumptions is not only false, but in-
jurious to the Holy See, which has issued express and


formal decisions, permitting Catholics in France, as well as
in Ireland, to avail themselves, in certain circumstances,
and on certain conditions, of the education which is afforded
in mixed schools. Some of the reasons assigned in the
famous rescript on national education, which was issued hy
the authority, and with the approbation of Gregory XYL,
for allowing Catholics to avail themselves of that system,
as well as the safeguards which were required, may be very
usefully mentioned in this place. Amongst the reasons
assigned for allowing Catholics to avail themselves of the
advantages afforded by the national schools, are, “ the
opportunity they give for the instruction of youth—
gratitude to parliament for granting large sums of money
to schools for the Irish people— the fear lest all the money
and influence should pass into the hands of heterodox
teachers—and, especially , the happy intelligence, that
during the ten years in which that system was received,
the Catholic religion had suffered no injury.”* Dr. Crolly
could, if the charges had been publicly and openly pre-
ferred against him whilst he was living, which have been
brought forward to blacken his memory after his death,
have defended himself by this especial reason of the Holy
See, which would, indeed, be stronger in his case, because
the experience which he had, that the Catholic religion
* Nam sacram congregationem magnopere solicitam habere de-
buerunt, cum diu multumque pro sui instituti munere qutestionem
propositam, consideraret, Catholicm religionis tutela, puerilis mtatis
institutendas commoditas, grati animi officium erga Brittanici Imperii
Senatum, qui magnam pecunim summam popularibus Hibernia; scholis
decrevit, concordim inter Episcopos Catholicos retinendm necessitas
quietis public® fovendae debitum metus denique nc ad heterodoxos
forte magistros pecunia tota et octoritas devolvatur.
Omnibus ergo rei periculis et utilitatibus accurate perpensis, auditis
partium disceptantium rationibus, habitaque prassertim feliei notitia
quod per decennium, cx quo id systema studiorum susceptum fuit
religio Catholica nihil detrimenti passa vidcatur, &c.


suffered no injury in the schools to which he allowed the
children committed to his care to resort, extended over a
longer period.
The following are the safeguards required, or recom-
mended by the Holy See;—
“ 1. That all books which contain anything injurious, either
against the canon or purity of the sacred Scriptures, or against
the doctrine or morals of the Catholic Church, ought to be re-
moved.
“ 2. That every exertion should he made that the normal
teacher of the Catholic children in the religious, moral, and his-
torical class, should be a Catholic, or that these things should not
he taught in the school at all; for it is unseemly for a Catholic
to he instructed in the method of teaching religion or sacred his-
tory by one who is not a Catholic.”
Oh! if Dr. Crolly had only said that every exertion
should he used to get a Catholic to teach Catholics religion,
morality, and, as the next sentence proves (sacred), history;
and if he had merely pronounced it to he unseemly for a
Catholic master to learn the method of teaching these things
from a Protestant, what a cry of heresy and infidelity would
have been raised against him ! Exit to proceed with the
safeguards :
“3. That it is much safer that instruction should be imparted
in secular learning alone, in mixed schools, than that the funda-
mental, as they are called, and common articles of religion, should
be taught, whilst instruction in the peculiar tenets of their creed
should be reserved to the sect which professed them ; for to act
in this manner with children seems very dangerous.”
Tsow, this is precisely what Dr. Crolly recommended in
1825, with regard to the Belfast institution—that it should
be made a purely scientific establishment, and that no reli-
gious instruction of any kind should be given in it, either
to Catholics or to Protestants.
“4. That, in general, bishops and parish priests are bound to


take care that, in this system of national education, Catholic youth
receive no injury from any cause whatever; and that it is their
duty to endeavour anxiously to obtain, from day to day, from the
supreme government, a better order of things, and more just con-
ditions.”
After some further remarks, which I omit, because they
do not concern my present purpose, the rescript concludes
thus:—
“Your lordship will also easily understand that the conditions
which I have pointed out above are such as that, whilst they are
diligently observed in a matter of such great moment, religion ,
peace, and the morality of youth are sufficiently provided for.”*
It cannot, therefore, be denied, that it is sometimes law-
ful for Catholics to go to schools, the masters of which are
not Catholics, for the purpose of obtaining a secular educa-
tion. Strange to say, the Pope does not except Arians, but,
* Scilicet 1. Libros omnes qui noxium aliquid sive adversus
sacrorum Bibliorum canonem ant puritatem sine contra Catholic®
Ecclesia; doctrinam vel mores continent, a scholis removeri debere.
2. Dandam esse pro virilius operam ut preceptor normalis poeda-
gogorum Catbolicorum, in classe religiosa, morali et bistorica, vel
Catholicus vel nullus sit. Nan Catbolicum ab Acatholico religionis
tradendoo metbodum vel religiosam bistoriam doceri indecorum est.
3. Tntius multo esse ut literarum tantummiodo humanarum magis-
erium fiat in scholis promiscuis quam ut fundimentales, ut aiunt et
communes religionis Christiana; articuli restricte tradantur, reservata
singulis sectis peculiar! corum eruditione ita enim cum pucris agere
pcriculosum valde videtur.
4. Generatim episcopos et parochos advigilare oportere, ne in hoc
systemate nationals institutionis, pueris Catholieis quamlibet ob
causam labes obveniat; eoromdem etiam esse, enixe curare ut a su-
premis moderatoribus, meliorem, indies rerum ordinem,'et conditiones
aquiores impetrent. . . . Qua; vero superius significavi
talia esse amplitude tua quoque fasile intelliget ut iisdem diligenter ser-
vatis, in ista re tan to; gravitatis, interea satis religioni, satis tranquil-
litati, et juvenilis ®tatis bono consultum esse concludendum sit.
I would transcribe the entire of this rescript, were it not that it
has been published so frequently during the last few months that it is
now in the hands of every one.


on the contrary, uses a word (acatholicus) which certainly
includes them ; nor does he prevent those who may have
received their preliminary education in such schools from
being afterwards admitted into the priesthood.
I now come to the second assumption which I have men-
tioned above. It is really difficult to conceive how any
person who believes in the eighth commandment can be so
unjust as to repeat, day after day, and year after year, that
because a man advocates mixed education as a lesser evil,
and when he has no remedy, that he, therefore, advocates it,
at all times and in all places, as the best possible system
—that because he allows Catholic children to avail them-
selves of it where no perversion ever took place, he, there-
fore, allows them to avail themselves of it even where per-
versions do take place—that because he thinks it better to
let them obtain secular education from a sectary than that
they should grow up in brutal ignorance, he, therefore, pre-
fers a Protestant to a Catholic master. It would be just
as logical to assert that, because the poor children live on
potatoes alone (when they can get them), they, therefore,
prefer them to beef and mutton.
Shortly after Dr. Crolly became Bishop of Down and
Connor, an inquiry took place into the state of the Belfast
institution. He was examined on the 15th October, 1825.
The observations which I have just made will serve as a
useful introduction to the full, conclusive, and unanswer-
able vindication of that evidence which is contained in the
appendix at the end of this volume. It may not be amiss,
however, to insert in this place one or two brief extracts
which I omitted in my letters, in order to prove how utterly
false the allegation is, that he considered the system of edu-
cation which was pursued at that time in the Belfast insti-
tution absolutely perfect:—


“ If,” said Dr. Crolly,* “ the Belfast institution were guarded
against any preponderating influence, I think it would afford
still greater advantages, ... I apprehend that
Protestants and Roman Catholics will not attend this seminary
ivith sufficient confidence, so long as it tcill he regarded more or less
as a sectarian establishment. ... If there was an
adequate provision for them (the Presbyterian clergy), then I
think that this institution might bo made a complete seminary of
science.”
“ You,” the commissioners inquire, “ consider the chair of
moral philosophy as essentially connected with theology ?
“ Dr. Crolly—Perhaps not essentially, hut it is more or less
connected; and, consequently, it is very probable that the Pro-
fessor of Moral Philosophy would inculcate or encourage some
theological principles rather than others; and I apprehend that
the chair of moral philosophy would not be so impartially filled
by a professor belonging to any particular church as to afford
general satisfaction to the students.
“ We understand you as being favourable to the system of
united education, as tending to extinguish partg animosities and
generating kindlg feelings ?
“ That is my opinion.”
And again he says—
“ I think it (united education) must be an effectual means of
suppressing the spirit of party, particularly if proper precaidions
were taken to prevent any undue influence or predominant power on
one side or the other.”
Dr. Crolly, therefore, not only did not think the system
of education pursued in the Belfast institution, in 1825,
absolutely perfect, but, on the contrary, he expressly de-
clared that Catholics could not attend it with sufficient
confidence, until proper precautions should be taken to pre-
vent any undue influence or predominance of power on the
side of any party, and until it should cease to be regarded
more or less as a sectarian establishment. His recommenda-
tion to the commissioners, in 1825, was identically the same
* Appendix to Fourth Report of Irish Education Commissioners,
page 182.


as the instructions given by Gregory XVl.,in 1841, with re-
gard to the national schools—to make the institution a purely
scientific establishment, and to secure proper safeguards for
the integrity of religious principles. He also wished them
to guard the institution against the preponderating influ-
ence of any sect or party, which would have secured to the
Catholics a fair proportion of professors belonging to their
own communion, and a full participation in all its advan-
tages. If this were done, he thought that its endowment
would create a feeling of gratitude and satisfaction in Bel-
fast—that it would tend to extinguish party animosities,
and generate a kindly feeling.
It must be remembered, that this evidence was given
several years before emancipation was granted—when the
sovereign and the government were pledged never to grant
that measure—when bigotry and Orangeism were rampant
throughout the land, and government grants could be ob-
tained only by proselytising societies, who openly applied
them to seduce the people from their faith. Notwithstanding
the heroic attachment of the Irish people to their religion,
the insidious and wicked means of perversion which were
employed at this time were not altogether without effect,
especially as the Catholic poor had scarcely any means of
obtaining gratuitous education for their children, except in
schools which were notoriously established for purposes of
proselytism.
The Catholic hierarchy laboured strenuously and zeal-
ously to put an end to this frightful evil, by endeavouring
to obtain from the government a system of education of
which the Catholic poor might avail themselves without
danger of perversion. To ask a grant for exclusively
Catholic education from a government which was violently
opposed to emancipation, would have been the sheerest folly;


and hence we find that, before Dr. Crolly was a bishop, in
the end of 1824, and in the beginning of 1825, the four
Catholic archbishops*—the Most I’ev. Drs. Curtis, Murray,
Laffan, and Kelly—advocated, under the circumstances in
which they were placed, a system of mixed education, de-
claring that there could be no possible objection to Catho-
lics receiving a scientific education from Protestants. Nay,
in the year 1829, Dr. Doyle wished to have a portion of the
funds of the Catholic Association applied to the establish-
ment of an institution in which the middling classes would
be educated without distinction of creed ; and he thought
the Belfast College might be taken as the model for the for-
mation of this new establishment. Long after emancipa-
tion had been conceded, in the year 1841, the Supreme
Pontiff, Gregory XYL, declared, after accurately weigh-
ing all its dangers and advantages, that Catholics might
attend schools, the masters of which were not Catholics,
provided every exertion was used to have no instruction
given in religion, morality, or sacred history, or that such
instruction should be imparted by a Catholic, as it is un-
seemly to have these things taught by any other. He even
added, that when the safeguards already enumerated were
obtained, and diligently observed, the bishops would easily
understand that it must be inferred that the religion and
virtue of the children were sufficiently provided for.
The evidence, therefore, which Dr. Crolly gave in 1825,
was in strict accordance with that which had been given a
few months previously,in the name of the entire hierarchy,
without a single word of dissent, or the slightest remon-
strance, from any quarter. It did not, by any means, go
* I am obliged to give this summary, not to pass over so important a
matter in the narrative of Dr. Crolly’s life ; but I omit the extracts
and references, as they will be found in the letters in the appendix.


so far as Dr. Doyle went, in 1829, but it exactly foresha-
dowed the principles which were laid down for the guidance
of the Irish bishops by the Sovereign Pontiff, in 1841.
I believe every person who knew the late Primate will
admit that he was an eminently practical man. He had,
indeed, an instinctive aversion to falsehood, delusion, and all
kinds of trickery. His strong common sense led him to
despise all mere visionary schemes, and his unbending
honesty made him scorn to affect to believe in anything
which he considered a delusion. I cannot deny myself the
pleasure of extracting, on this part of his character, the
following beautiful passage from Dr. Murray’s sermon:—
“ When,” says Doctor Murray, “ we come to consider the
missionary life of Dr. Crolly, especially as bishop, both in his
native diocess and in this (Armagh), the eye of the distant ob-
server would be struck by the activity of bis zeal, as exhibited
in the number and magnitude of its fruits, the churches, semi-
naries, and schools which he built, and the many other works
which he executed. But those who saw him more closely and
constantly, beheld in him that which sheds a lustre upon his
memory brighter far than any mere outward work can reflect,
that from which his works derive their true and enduring value—
their value to himself, their value in the eyes of the just Judge
—his perfect disinterestedness, his purity of intention, and the
simplicity of character which they necessarily produce. He
had but one object in view; he considered but one question in
every undertaking—will this serve religion or the public good ?
He was among the most unselfish of human beings; he was like
one who never had a temptation to selfishness; he seemed to
live in some higher region, to which it never penetrated. He
was in all things a thoroughly pure-minded man. Money, ease,
comfort, vanity, ambition, vindictiveness, the love of popular
applause, the dread of popular odium—these things, which lie
at the bottom of so many of the splendid enterprises recorded
in history and admired by the world, never prompted him to
action. The high position which he held he used for the end
ordained by God; housed its authority, its influence, its
emoluments, for the good of religion. Himself he did not
spare, body or mind, in season and out of season, through good


report and evil report. Like the apostle, coveting no man’s
silver or gold, he was not burdensome unto you; for he sought
not the things that are yours, hut you, most gladly spending
and being spent himself for your souls; knowing nothing
among you but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, he did all for
the glory of God. Hence the openness of his character:
there was nothing within that could shame him to avow. His
mind was straight in its attitude, direct in its movements, unre-
served in its aspect. There was nothing low, crooked, masked
in him. He was not a man with two sets of phrases for any-
thing ; what he thought that he uttered. He put before him
the course which he conscientiously believed to be the true one,
and walked into it erect and manful, as you have seen him in
the body walk through your streets. Hence, too, he was an
eminently fair man ; he loved open discussion—open examina-
tion ; he utterly detested the mysteries of intrigue, jobbing,
clandestine management, and was marvellously at fault
in the arts thereof. Hence, too, his generous self-reliance
—his lofty independence of spirit. He stooped not to
low shifts—unworthy expedients ; he put himself into no
man’s hands, sold himself to no man, bound himself by no
sacrament of partisanship, kept himself ever free to act as
his judgment dictated. On the one hand, he did not
court popular applause, or adopt any view because it was
popular, without a clear conviction that it was also just; he was
always ready to take his stand, and maintain it courageously
against popular clamour and popular misrepresentation, in de-
fence of what he believed to be his duty or his right. On the
other hand, while, as we all know, his influence with the several
governments of the day was for many years very powerful, I
have the highest authority for stating that he never, not even
once, solicited from any of these governments a single favour
for himself, for any of his relatives, for any of his friends, for
any one whomsoever. He lived in difficult times; his position
was one of a most trying nature. I pray God that each of us
may leave our own small sphere, and stand before the dread
judgment-scat with hearts and hands as clean from all defilement
of the lucre of self as his were.”
I have said that Dr. Crolly was an eminently practical
man ; and it would indeed be the grossest injustice to in-
terpret his language without taking into account the
circumstances in which he was placed at the time ; for he


never spoke in the abstract, hut always in the concrete (if
I may be allowed so to express myself).
He saw, in 1825, that the public money was granted
exclusively to persons who used it to annoy, to harass, to
bribe, and to pervert the Catholics. He knew that to ask
a grant at that time, for exclusively Catholic purposes,
would be the grossest folly. He knew that the only
means by which the Catholics of Ireland could hope to
remedy this enormous evil, was by demanding such a
modification of the system of education, as would enable
them to avail themselves of it, without endangering
their faith. He knew that if this were done, the bigots
would become so dissatisfied, that they would abandon the
grants altogether to the Catholics. He did not hope that
the government would make the system of education more
favourable to the Catholics, from a pure love of justice ;
and hence he declared, and firmly believed, that such a
proceeding oh the part of the ministry would create a feel-
ing of general satisfaction ; that it would tend to ex-
tinguish party animosities; and that it would produce more
kindly and charitable sentiments, by teaching the Catholics
that they might now at last expect some justice at the
hands of their rulers, and their oppressors that the days
of their domination were numbered.
Subsequent events proved the justice of all these antici-
pations. The bigots rose, almost to a man, against the
system ; and the grant was practically thrown, for a long
time, into the hands of the Catholics alone. The parsons
of the Establishment, the regium donum orthodox Presby-
terians, the bigoted landlords, all cried out that it was a
system specially invented to propagate Popery. And I do
believe that, with all its defects, it has been the means of
preserving Catholicity, at all events in the north of


Ireland, during the terrible ordeal of pestilence and famine
through which the poor people have had to pass. I shall
give one specimen of the way in which it was received
by a man, whose orthodoxy a Catholic priest, in the
excess of his hatred, has preferred to that of him, who, not
two years ago, was the acknowledged and revered head
of the Irish Catholic Church. This orthodox man has not,
of course, let slip the present opportunity of joining in the
fierce no-Popery howl which has been raised in England,
whilst it has been manfully resisted by many of the Unita-
rians.
“ Having been requested by some members of my otfn con-
gregation, residing in county Down, in and about Ballyrnacarret
and Logan villages, to state my opinion of the (so-called)
national system of education, the following charges I am at any
time or place ready to maintain against it, from the evidence
of its own documents:—l. It was invented and imposed, not
at the wish of Protestants, but to please the priests of Rome
in their dislike to Bible reading in schools. 2. During four
hours every day the Bible must be excluded, and to read it
during that time would forfeit all assistance. 3. During four
hours a day neither schoolmaster nor minister dare pray in
the school, under the above penalty. 4. No minister dare ever
preach in the school, under like penalty. 5. The Romish priest
is a visitor of the school, whether the committee will or not, and
can turn out the Protestant children one day every week in the
year, to teach that Protestants are heretics, and cannot as such
be saved, being out of the pale of the Church. 6. The board
publishes books that inculcate Popery, aud authorizes their use
in schools. 7. The board has published, in one of their school-
books, a well-known seditious song, called Erin Go Brayh, and
gives it among their schools.
“ (Signed) H. Cooke.
“4th December, 1844.”
The italics are, of course, Dr. Cooke’s.
So much for the manner in which the Calvinists received
the national system. The parsons of the Establishment
were not less hostile.


The Pev. Mr. Gildea, curate of Kilmain, in Mayo, who
was desired by the Protestant bishop to visit the national
schools of that county, swore before the Lords’ Committee,
that “ the national system of education countenances
and gives encouragement to the propagation of religious
error.”
“ The error,” he is asked, “of any particular class of
religionists ?” and he answers, “ chiefly connected with the
Poman Catholic Church.” Amongst these errors he men-
tions the observance of holidays and services, of which I
think he says, “it is matter of question whether their
absurdity , or their impiety , or their idolatry is the
grossest.”
This man had scriptural schools himself, at which he
swore that large numbers of Catholics attended. The
object of these schools was not to proselytize, but merely to
bring the Catholics out of idolatry into God’s truth ! He
swears that the parish priest not only did not oppose his
schools, but that, when he met him, he always apologized
for any opposition he received. He swears that another
parish priest wrote a petition against him, which he ad-
mitted to be false—that the Catholics would feel more
grateful to their landlords for supporting his proselytizing
scriptural schools than for national schools, and a great
many other things which, according to the mode of attack
adopted against the late Primate after his death, must,
a fortiori, be true, because they were sworn to be facts be-
fore the highest tribunal in the realm, whereas it was the
second-hand story of a Protestant schoolmaster that was -
told about Dr. Crolly.
The late Primate, in common with the other Catholic
bishops, did think, in 1825 and afterwards, that it would
be a great blessing to have government grants withdrawn


from proselytising schools, and applied in such a manner
that the Catholics could avail themselves of it without doing
violence to their consciences, or endangering their faith.
But it does not follow that because he thought that many
and important advantages would flow from it, considering
the times and circumstances, that it is the best in the ab-
stract, and at all times and in all circumstances. He believed
that the meeting together of Catholics and Protestants in
the same schools, for purely secular education, would pro-
duce certain temporal advantages, such as the allaying of
religious strife and party animosities, provided proper safe-
guards were granted for the faith of the pupils, and no
preponderating influence was allowed to any party ; and
these advantages he thought himself bound to put promi-
nently before government, as the only considerations by
which it was likely to be influenced. But he did not think
mixed education was the best or most efficacious way by
which even these temporal results could be obtained. He
knew and always declared, that if the entire country were
governed on the same impartial principles which he
required to be adopted in mixed schools—if equal
advantages and privileges were extended to all, without
allowing any one class to dominate over another, the tem-
poral advantages which might be expected to result from
such institutions would be much more directly, securely,
and speedily obtained. But government being so blind
and unjust as to refuse to adopt these means, Dr. Crollyset
before it the motives most likely to induce it to grant the
least objectionable kind of education, which either he or
the other members of the hierarchy hoped for at the time.
If the choice of the kind of education which he would wish
to see endowed, had been left to himself, he would undoubt-
edly and unhesitatingly have selected one purely Catholic
C


for the Catholics.* Every one who spoke to him or corres-
ponded with him on these subjects, must know that the
endowment of a Catholic diocesan seminary in each
diocess, where the higher branches of science would be
* Dr. Crolly’s enemies have, with their usual unfairness, endea-
voured to disprove this, because he said that he thought the restora-
tion of the bounty of the State to the Belfast institution would be
received with gratitude and satisfaction by all the different parties in
that town. I proved, in my second and third letters, which will be
found in the appendix, that the practical question was not whether
or not the bounty of the State should be restored to the institution—
for on this all parties, including the orthodox Presbyterians, the Pro-
testant bishop, the commissioners, and the government, were agreed—
but whether it should continue to be, or, rather, as Dr. Crolly’s evi-
dence proves, whether it should be made a thoroughly liberal institu-
tion, or should be turned into a Calvinistic den of proselytisra. It
was said to be a horrid crime that Dr. Crolly did not join Leslie
Foster and Glassford, who wished that no person should be admitted
to be a professor who should not produce a testimonial of his ortho-
doxy, signed by four out of the six preceding Moderators of the Synod
of Ulster. I proved that the rejection of the Mass, Transubstantiation,
five out of the seven Sacraments, and such other non-fundamental
trifles, would be amongst the indispensable requisites for obtaining such
a testimonial. As Dr. Cooke’s orthodoxy was favourably contrasted
with the late Primate’s heterodoxy, and the former was praised for
having supported Foster and Glassford, whilst the latter was censured
for having dissented from them, I showed that Dr. Cooke had actually
proposed a test which condemned the Catholics as strongly as the
Arians. As he is undoubtedly the leader of the party which Dr.
Crolly opposed before the commissioners, and as he has more than
once filled the Moderator's chair, his test would certainly have been
adopted by the Synod. It is worth while, therefore, to transcribe it,
in order that the public may see what kind of creed it is, for not sup-
porting which Dr. Crolly is grossly vituperated in his grave. It will
be found in the Appendix to the 4th Report of the Irish Commission-
ers, page 164—“ When you,” Dr. Cooke is asked, “ were last before
the commissioners, you were so good as to undertake to put upon
paper the terms of the test you would yourself deem expedient should
be subscribed by the different professors in the Belfast institution.”
“ I have done so.” “Be so good as to state it?” “ Article 1. Holy
Scriptures . . . These books are from Genesis, &c., to
Malacbi, and Matthew, &c., to Revelations. ... I have
not admitted the Apocrypha, which Roman Catholics hold to be of
canonical authority, as matter of faith or practice. Article 6. Of


taught, not only to the clergy, hut to the laity also, was
one of his most cherished projects. But upon this subject
no doubt whatever can be entertained, for his deeds, which
are the truest and the best interpreters of his practical
mind, show that he preferred schools in which he could
combine Catholic religious with scientific instruction, for of
this kind alone were all the numerous educational estab-
lishments which he erected during his entire life.
So much for the words of the late Primate on education :
let us now examine his actions.
There being no Catholic schools in Belfast when Dr.
Crolly went to that town, and it being physically impos-
sible for him to get up at the time any institutions of the
kind, he had necessarily to make up his mind either to send
the children intrusted to his care to the least dangerous
Repentance—By the Holy Spirit, the soul of a sinner is able to see and
feel the vileness and danger of sin, to grieve for it, to hate it, and
willingly to turn from it unto God with sincere endeavours after new
obedience.” (Penance, confession, absolution, &c., are excluded.)
Article 7- Of Justification—God justifies the believer when he par-
dons his sins and makes him accepted in Christ the Beloved. God
freely justifieth believers in Christ, not for anything wrought in them
or done by them, but for Christ’s sake alone, the believer receiving
and resting on Christ by faith. Faith, thus receiving and resting
on Christ, is the alone instrument of justification before God. Article
8. Religious worship is to be given only to the Father, Word, and
Holy Ghost. ... A Roman Catholic might scruple,
probably, at the words ‘religious worship’ being thus confined, as they
necessarily prohibit all kinds of religious address to saints or angels.
Article 9. Baptism and the Lord’s Supper —Baptism is a washing
with water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which
doth signify and seal our union with Christ, our partaking of the
benefits of the covenant of grace, and an engagement to be the Lord’s
(of course it does not confer grace). The Lord’s Supper is a giving
and receiving of bread and wine in memory of Christ’s death, and in
faith of his coming to judgment, whereby the worthy receiver is by
faith made partaker of his body and blood. .....
A Roman Catholic holding the doctrine of Transubstantiation would
not be satisfied with my definition.”


of the Protestant schools, or to keep them from school
altogether. The evils to be apprehended in a mixed school
are two-fold : first, the absence of religious instruction;
and, second, the danger of perversion. The first of these
evils can be easily remedied by an active, zealous, and in-
telligent priest, who takes care to instruct the children
belonging to his congregation in the principles of religion.
Dr. Crolly most effectually provided against this defect in
the schools to which, for the want of better, he was obliged
to send the Catholic children; for he assembled them every
Saturday morning, and every Sunday after Mass, in his
church, and personally instructed them in the Christian
doctrine, and in the grounds of the Catholic religion.
The second evil, which is infinitely the greater of the two,
may be so remote as scarcely to deserve the name of an
evil, or it may be so great as to make the school a lions’
den and a fiery furnace of perversion. The existence and
the magnitude of this evil is chiefly ascertained by experi-
ence. Thus, it could scarcely be said to exist at all in the
schools frequented by the Catholic children of Belfast, be-
cause not a single individual was ever perverted in them;
whilst it prevailed, and still prevails, to a frightful extent in
Trinity College, where great multitudes have lost the faith.
Dr. Crolly, in sending his children to these schools, when
he could get no better, acted in strict conformity with the
instructions contained in the rescript of Gregory XVI.,
whose chief reason for allowing the bishops to avail them-
selves of the opportunities afforded by the national schools
was, that no perversions had ever taken place in them. If
he had been such an infuriated bigot—if he had been such
an impracticable and narrow-minded zealot—if he had been
so indissolubly wedded to some pet theory as to keep the
youth of his congregation in degrading and brutalizing


ignorance, he would have been guilty of treason against
their immortal souls, against society, against the Church,
and against the God of all knowledge.
Dr. Crolly, however, applied himself with zeal, energy,
and success, to provide schools for the Catholics, in which
he could combine religious with secular instruction; and
he was enabled to complete, at an early period of his episco-
pacy, the Donegal-street national schools, in which fourteen
hundred children can receive daily instruction. In these
schools all the masters and mistresses have always been
Catholics.
The poor were always the object of his most tender soli-
citude, and he took care to provide them, in the first place,
Avith a genuine Catholic education. He had, however, no
sooner effected this, than he set about erecting a diocesan
seminary, Avhere the candidates for the priesthood, and the
children of the middling classes, could receive at once a re-
ligious and scientific education. He also built a house for
the residence of the bishop and clergy.* Nor should I omit
to mention that, when he went to Belfast, the Catholics had
no cemetery of their OAvn—no consecrated place in which
they could bury their dead. There is, in the suburbs of the
town, a beautiful plot of ground beside the Botanic Gardens,
on the banks of the Lagan, which is called Friar’s Bush.
This name was given to it because, in the old days of per-
secution, a friar used sometimes to celebrate Mass there,
under the shelter of a tree. No man had a greater love for
old memories and associations of this kind than Dr. Crolly,
and his heart was set on making this a Catholic cemetery.
This was not easily effected, for the ground was very preci-
ous ; but his indefatigable zeal triumphed over all obstacles.
• I pass these matters over with this brief notice, as they are more
fully detailed in the letters at the end of this volume.


lie made Friar’s Bush the burial-place of the Catholics,
surrounded it with a wall, and built a pretty little chapel
at its entrance. The tree which sheltered the minister of
God of old now grows in hallowed ground ; and in the calm
twilight of the summer evenings, the people kneel round it
by hundreds, to offer up their orisons for the repose of the
souls of those who sleep beneath its shade.
It has been well said of Dr. Crolly, that “ he had faith in
his faith.” He believed in its truth,‘in its divinity, with
all his heart and soul; and hence he was not afraid that it
would lose, but was convinced that it must gain by coming
in contact with other creeds, and by being examined side
by side with them. He entertained a sovereign contempt
for that wretched and transparent sophism which is just
now so popular on the other side of the channel. See,
they roar out with one accord, from the swaddler in his tub
to the bishop in his lawn, what a hideous and deformed
monster Popery is, and with the same breath they declare
that it is so bewitchingly seductive that they, the enlight-
ened people of England, will infallibly embrace it, unless
penal laws be passed to prevent them from looking at it.
Dr. Crolly said, on the contrary, “ The faith which I profess
is God’s eternal truth ; examine it by the light of reason
and of revelation, and you will find it to be so.” He did
not place his confidence in tricks, and schemes, and false-
hoods, but in honesty, straightforwardness, and truth ; and
the result proved that he was right, for within the first seven
years of his ministry in Belfast, he received into the Church,
in that town alone, upwards of A thousand converts.*
This open, manly, and charitable mode of explaining the
Catholic religion, had also the effect of preventing the
* See this fact attested in the postscript to my fourth letter, p. 69,
by the Very Rev. B. M'Auley, who was his curate at that time.


liberal-minded, who held a different creed, from being ex-
cited into hostility, even by those numerous conversions.
On the cffhtrary, they continued to aid Dr. Crolly, by sub-
scribing liberally even to those works which were intended
exclusively for the benefit of the Catholics. As, however,
he did not escape the censure of spiteful factionists in his
own Church, he could not hope that his eminently successful
ministry would not excite the hostility of the Orangemen
and bigots who delight to call the ancient and universal
religion of Christendom idolatrous. The windows of his
house, and of the church contiguous to it, and even of the
poor schools and seminary, were sometimes demolished by
those zealous Christians. The Catholics, however, in a few
years, became too numerous and powerful to allow such
unprovoked aggression to be continued with impunity, and
very serious conflicts took place in consequence of them.
On these occasions Dr. Crolly was invariably called to the
scene of action, and always bravely interposed himself be-
tween the parties, on some occasions not without the risk of
his life. In general, indeed, even the Orangemen have been
reluctant to assault him ; but he has, on more than one occa-
sion, been struck by stones, when attempting to quell a party
riot. On one occasion he was hurt very seriously, but con-
cealed the blow until he got home, knowing that, if it were
discovered, it would infuriate the Catholics.
The course of his ministry sometimes brought him into
collision with more respectable parties. Dr. H., the Cal-
vinistic Professor of Divinity, called upon him during the
cholera, when conversions were very frequent—because he
and his clergy alone were not afraid to breathe the air of
pestilence, in order to pour the prayer of mercy, of
hope, and of forgiveness, into the ear of the dying sinner—
to complain of his baptizing, as if they were not Christians,


persons who passed over to the Catholic Church from his
communion. Dr. Crolly explained to him that this did not
arise from any doubt that baptism could be adhiinistered
validly by Presbyterians, nor even that it was so adminis-
tered in general, but lest, in any one. instance, the rite
should not have been duly performed, which might some-
times happen, as in the Presbyterian Church it was by
no means regarded as being so essential as it was
considered to be by the Catholic Church, in which it was
believed to confer the grace of regeneration. In confir-
mation of this suspicion he observed, that he had heard
that the water was sometimes only philipped at the child, in
which case it might not touch the skin at all, and.that
this was at best but a doubtful baptism. He, moreover,
observed, that the ceremony was performed only condition-
ally, and that, if sutficient evidence could be produced that
it was duly administered at first, its repetition would be
altogether unlawful. I believe these reasons quite satis-
fied the learned professor.
With Dr. E., the other Calvinistic Professor of Divinity,
he had a less amicable, though, to him, a not less satisfactory
encounter. This gentleman, in a speech or sermon, told
one of those stories in which no-Popery orators delight.
He said that a very extraordinary thing had taken place
in Belfast; that a Romish priest had visited a woman who
was possessed, and that he had assured her relatives and
herself that he had taken the devil out of her in the shape
of an eel. Nothing could exceed the horror for Popery
which this tale excited in the pious hearts of the evangelical
ladies of Belfast, and Dr. E. at once rose to the very summit
of saintly popularity. Dr. Crolly, however, cruelly broke
the charm by publishing a short note, in which he
demanded of Dr. Edgar to give him the name of


the priest, by whom this great miracle was wrought, and
that if he did not do so it would be clear to every one that
Dr. E. had invented the whole matter himself. It certainly
was not a handsome proceeding thus to extinguish a gen-
tleman’s popularity when it was at its culminating point;
nevertheless, Dr. Crolly was guilty of it, for from that day to
this unfortunate Dr. E. has been known by the appellation
of the Eel. Indeed, a very unpleasant trick was afterwards
played upon him in the fish-market. On leaving it he was
astonished to find that he was followed by a very large
crowd of idlers, who were cheering and shouting after him.
At length the mystery was explained, for happening to put
his hand to his coat pocket, he found that a large, and I
believe a live eel, was hanging out of it. To increase his
confusion he found that his other coat pocket was-similarly
adorned. For a long time after this—indeed, until after
Dr. Crolly left Belfast—he carefully kept his interesting
anecdotes about Popery out of the newspapers, and re-
served them for the edification of his private friends, or
told them at the strictly moral tea parties of elderly ladies,
from which all scandal was entirely excluded.
A respectable lady, Mrs. B , desired, on her death-
bed, to become a Catholic. This conversion, like many
others, was produced by a sermon, on the invocation of saints,
which she had heard Dr. Crolly preach in the Catholic
chapel. Her son refused to let the priest be sent for at all,
and declared that he would kick out any person of the kind
who would dare to enter his house. In order to justify
himself in this course, he stated truly that one of the phy-
sicians who attended her offered to swear that she was mad.
Fortunately, another Protestant physician, the late Dr.
M‘D , who was by far the most eminent man in town,
was also in attendance. Dr. Crolly asked this gentleman


if it was true that Mrs. B— ; — was mad ? “ She is no more
mad,” said he, “ than you are ; and, if necessary, I will
swear it.”
One of Mrs. B. ’s servants having applied for a priest,
to receive her into the Catholic Church, Dr. Crolly declared
that he would go himself. As soon as he entered the house
Mr. B. met him, and asked him what he wanted.
“ I want,” said he, “ to see your mother.”
“ You cannot,” replied Mr. 8., “ for she is mad.”
“ I desire,” said Dr. Crolly, “ to see her in your own
presence ; and if I find that she is mad, or does not wish
to see me, I pledge you my word and honour that I will in-
stantly leave the house.”
Mrs. 8., who had been informed that Dr. Crolly was in
the house, sent her servant to beg and entreat him, for the
love of God, not to depart without speaking to her ; and he
was at length allowed to proceed to her room, accompanied
by Mr. B. Having thus made his way into the presence
of the sick woman, and not knowing that he would be
ever able to do so again, he resolved that there he would
remain, until he had administered to her the consolations
of the Catholic religion. It required all his firmness and
resolution to effect this, for Mr. B. said that he would not
leave the room whilst there was a priest in it. Dr. Crolly
therefore proceeded, in his presence, to explain the Catholic
religion to his mother, at which Mr. B. became furious, and
declared that, were it not for his coat, he would kick him out.
“ Never mind my coat,” said Dr. Crolly, who was a very
strong and athletic man, “ for every piece of it you tear off
my back, I shall tear a piece of the skin off your bones.”
Mr. B. thought discretion was the better part of valour,
and his mother having reminded him that the house was
hers, and not his, and that he was acting illegally, by


preventing any person she pleased from visiting her, he was
obliged to give up the contest, and to allow Dr. Crolly to
receive the sick woman into the Catholic Church.
A case, somewhat analogous to this, occurred at a later
period to one of his curates. This gentleman was called
upon at night to attend a sick person. On reaching the
house, he found that the individual who had sent for him
had become a Catholic two or three months before this time,
and that her husband, mother, brother, and sisters were all
of a different religion. Her father, who was dead, had also
been a Protestant. She had been married only a very short
time before she became a Catholic, and still resided in her
mother’s house. Her husband, who had gone for the priest
without the knowledge of the family, was quite reconciled
to her change of religion, but all the rest were bitterly
opposed to it. The priest was allowed to enter the room
where the sick woman was without opposition; but when
he desired her mother to leave it, she peremptorily re-
fused, and violently interposed whenever he attempted to
speak to her daughter. All she would permit him to do
would be to make a prayer , in which the whole, household
should join ; and after remaining for more than an hour,
he was actually obliged to leave the house without admi-
nistering any of the sacraments to the sick woman.
The messenger who had gone for the priest accompanied
him home again, and Dr. Crolly happened to hear him
expressing his regret to the clergyman, for the rude treat-
ment he had received. He called the priest into his room,
as he was going up stairs, and inquired what had occurred.
When informed of it, he asked if the woman were in danger
of death before morning, and being answered in the affirma-
tive, he determined to visit her himself. It was about two
o’clock at night; snow was falling thickly, and he was in


a violent perspiration, having taken medicine to produce
that effect, on account of a severe cold under which he was
labouring at the time. The priest tried, in vain, to dis-
suade him from going out, or even to allow him to accom-
pany him : he went alone. He was admitted into the
sick room, as the priest had been, and the mother of the
sick woman was as obstinate on this occasion as on the
former one, in insisting that he should do nothing,
except he wished to make a prayer.
“ Very well,” said Dr. Crolly, “ call up the rest of the
family.”
There being no bell in the room, she was obliged to go
to the lobby to do this. With one bound, Dr. Crolly
reached the door, closed and locked itshe tried to burst
it in, but could not. She then invoked the aid of her sons,
who, however, seemed to be rather ashamed of her violence,
for they did not interfere. Dr. Crolly, in the meantime,
fearing an invasion, proceeded, with all possible expedition,
to prepare the sick woman to meet her Creator. At first
her mother beat the door violently with some instrument
which she had seized upon, but finding that this produced
no effect, she cried out, “Well, you d—Ts limb you, I’ll
keep you out of bed until morning, at all events.”
When Dr. Crolly, having accomplished the object of his
visit, tried to leave the house, he found the street door
locked, and that the lady had kept her promise by retiring
to her bed-room, and taking the key with her. It was in
vain that her sons and daughter, who were really ashamed
of this proceeding, endeavoured to get it from her. She
was deaf to all their entreaties ; and Dr. Crolly, who was
greatly chilled by the cold, and really apprehensive lest he
should get fever, was ultimately obliged to get out through
a window.


About the beginning of the year 1832, when cholera
first appeared in Ireland, before we were yet familiar with
this terrible scourge, and whilst the stoutest hearts quailed
at its approach, Dr. Crolly showed the fearlessness with
which he met every danger, where the good of his people
was concerned. Its first victim in Belfast, and, I think, in
Ireland, was a poor Catholic, belonging to the Primate’s
congregation. That very eminent physician, the late Dr.
Mac Donnell, and several of the first medical men in Bel-
fast, were anxious to make a post mortem examination, in
order, if possible, to discover the cause of this fearful ma-
lady, that thus they might, perhaps, be able to devise some
means of arresting its progress. The relations of the de-
ceased refused to permit this, and an appeal was made to
Dr. Crolly to use his influence, in order to induce them to
give their consent. He did so ; and they agreed, on con-
dition, however, that he would himself remain in the room
during the time of the examination, and watch the doctors,
lest they should take away with them any part of the dead
body. This would have been a difficult enough trial for a
person who had never been present at anything of the
kind before, even if the man had died of an ordinary
malady; but it was greatly increased, because this was the
first evidence that the terrible destroyer had reached Ire-
land, which had carried terror and consternation through all
Europe. Dr. Crolly, believing it to be his duty, accompa-
nied the physicians and surgeons to the house, fearlessly
remained there for more than an hour, and took care that
the conditions imposed by the relations of the deceased
should be scrupulously fulfilled.
The eminent Dublin surgeon to whose kindness I am
indebted for a letter of Dr. Crolly’s, and several important
facts already embodied in this narrative, mentions the


following instance of his zeal and anxiety to afford the
people an opportunity of attending to their religious duties.
After stating that Dr. Crolly warned him never to he pre-
sent at Protestant prayers or worship of any kind, he pro-
ceeds thus:—
“ The bishop was himself my confessor, and I was in the habit
of going to him in the old chapel, where he was to he found
every morning in the year, hearing confessions. As an instance
of his zeal I may mention, that the priest of the parish in which
I resided after leaving Belfast, having died after a short illness,
and there not being any other to officiate in the parish, Dr. Crolly,
rather than allow the parishioners to be deprived of the oppor-
tunity of hearing Mass on the following Sunday, came himself
a distance of forty miles, said Mass in the parish chapel, and on
the evening of the same day (having got a sick call) he went to
visit a poor person on the side of a mountain, five miles off,
whence he did not return until eleven o’clock at night.”
After Dr. Crolly became Bishop of Down and Connor,
he happened to hear, at Maynooth College, where he was
stopping a few days, that the Kev. Matthias Crowley, whom
he had formerly known in that establishment, but who
had since then unfortunately apostatized, was officiating in
the neighbourhood as a Protestant clergyman. He asked
the Eight Eev. Dr. Denvir, then Professor of Natural Philo-
sophy, to ride over with him to see him. Mr. Crowley
received them with the greatest kindness, and even insisted
that they would stop and dine with him. He was a beau-
tiful singer, and, in the course of the evening, he asked the
late Primate if he would like to hear one of his old songs.
He said he woidd be delighted. “ Well,” said Mr. Crowley,
“ what shall I sing ?”
“ I never,” replied Dr. Crolly, “ heard you sing anything
which I liked as well as High Mass.”
Mr. Crowley burst into tears, and said, Perhaps you
will hear me sing that yet.” His wife had evidently been


listening at the door, for she burst into the room, and did
not once go out until Dr. Crolly left the house.
Dr. Crolly exerted himself to the utmost to restore
ecclesiastical discipline, which had been necessarily im-
paired by long persecution, and to promote zeal, piety, and
learning among his clergy. For this purpose he attended
personally at every “ conference” in his extensive diocess,
mixed constantly with his priests, and laboured at once to
stimulate their zeal and to gain their affection. He also
visited every chapel in Down and Connor once, at least, in
three years, on which occasions he inspected the vestments
.and sacred vessels used in divine worship, in order that
nothing unseemly might be employed in the solemn, august,
and holy offices of the Church.
His chief business, however, during the visitation, was
to confirm the children. Before conferring on them the
sacrament of Confirmation, he always examined them
closely on the Christian doctrine, and if he found any one
deficient in this necessary knowledge, he was set aside until
the next visitation. He confirmed, generally, five or six
days each week ; and before administering the sacrament,
he always delivered a solid and instructive discourse to the
people.
A ludicrous incident once occurred to Dr. Crolly, whilst
he was confirming in the parish of Upper Ards, in the
county of Down. Every one knows that a part of the
ceremony of Confirmation consists in the bishop giving the
person confirming a gentle stroke on the cheek, saying, at
the same time, “ Peace be with thee.” A very fine boy, in
the parish I have mentioned, witnessed this proceeding
with great indignation, and, when he was struck'himself,
he cried out to Dr. Crolly—“ You would not do that to
your match so fast ; if I had a stone I would knock that


painted cap (meaning the mitre) off you.” This unex-
pected attack astonished the bishop for the moment, as
much as it amused the clergy, who could, with difficulty,
restrain their laughter.
Dr. Crolly was by no means what is called a rigid
disciplinarian. He mixed with his clergy, as an equal
with his equals, and his presence was so far from acting
as a check on their innocent enjoyment, that it, on the
contrary, greatly stimulated it. There are still living, in
the diocesses of Down and Connor, holy, venerable, and
mortified priests, who, even in the ante-teetotal times,
never tasted spirits unless in his presence. Indeed, Dr.
Crolly’s presence in any district of his diocess was cele-
brated by a real, genuine, and heartfelt festival amongst,
his clergy.
“ There was,” says Dr. Murray, in the sermon already quoted,
“ another inestimable quality in him, which was his great meek-
ness as an ecclesiastical superior, his humility and forbearance
of demeanour; for these three words signify the same thing
under different aspects, and according to its different occasions
of coming into action. He was first Bishop of his native diocess,
then Archbishop of this diocess, and Primate of all Ireland, hold-
ing the highest rank in the Catholic Church of these kingdoms.
But beyond that dignified bearing which his office demanded of
him in the arduous task of governing men, and which it might
have been criminal in him to throw aside, he mixed with his own
or other clergy, or with the laity, as one of themselves. No
one was ever made to feel uneasy or uncomfortable in his society,
who had not something to be censured or admonished for. Ener-
getic he was, undoubtedly, in his manner; by no means timid
or weakly pliant; well prepared with a sharp rebuke when it was
merited, but always ready to listen to fair statement, argument,
expostulation; not silencing opposition by menace, nor punish-
ing dissent in indifferent matters from his own views. He never
treated any man, however humble or however mistaken, with
arrogance or unreasonable harshness. He was utterly incapable
of saying or doing anything cruel or offensive—of playing heart-
lessly with the feelings of those who could not retort upon him—
of leaving a wound to rankle. There was not one drop of gall


in bis heart; if it fell there, it would not have assimilated, it
would have been thrown off. This is not a small thing in men
possessing authority, especially in a Catholic bishop, whose
power is, in many things, so irresponsible. In our admiration
of great abilities and great exploits, we too often forget the
merit of those quiet virtues which make daily social life agreeable,
without which we are a burden to ourselves and a scourge to all
about us; we forget while we share the usefulness of the heart-
fire glowing calmly and constantly, making glad hearts and
bright faces, not considering how cold and comfortless homes
would he without it. We do not always sufficiently bear in mind
that the perfection of the Christian life consists in the faithful
performance of our ordinary daily actions, in the faithful dis-
charge of the numberless little duties, by which our conduct and
the motions of our hearts are regulated in reference to God, our
neighbour, and ourselves ; that this is a difficult work to perse-
vere in to the end, and few there are who persevere in it.”
Amongst the especial favourites of the Primate, whilst he
remained in Down and Connor, was Father Clinton—a
genuine specimen of the kind-hearted, pious, devoted, and
somewhat eccentric priest of the old school. I wish to say, in
limine , that it is not my desire to make any invidious com-
parisons between the priests of the old (as it is called) and
the new school. I believe that the former were good and
holy men, because they kept the faith in Ireland; but I
believe that the latter, as a body, are as good and as holy,
and that they are not inferior to them in any respect. It
is, however, worth while to preserve even a few scattered
reminiscences of a time and of a class which will cease, ere
long, even to he mentioned in Ireland.
Once, whilst Mr. Clinton resided in Downpatrick, he went,
as usual, to the chapel, to say Mass in the morning. After
he had vested in the sacristy, and gone up to the platform of
the altar, he was observed to search his pockets very carefully.
At length he turned round to the people, and said solemnly,
commencing by a soliloquy :—“ Well, Job, you had your
trials, no doubt; hut, on my word, other persons have their


trials, too.” Then, addressing the congregation, he conti-
nued—“ My good people, I forgot my spectacles, and unless
some of you will go down street for them, I cannot say
Mass.”
When the Biblicals (as they were called) were going about
like roaring lions, a deputation of them arrived one evening
in Downpatrick. The following day happened to be a fes-
tival, and the chapel was greatly crowded. Mr. Clinton
turned round to the congregation, after the communion, and
said—“ My good people, the devil’s in Down. He arrived
last night; take care of him, or he’ll catch you. He quoted
the Scripture when he wanted to seduce the Saviour of the
world, and he now wants to read it to you for the same
purpose. Don’t let him into your houses.” No language,
however eloquent, could have made such an impression as
this brief discourse. Bible-readers were paid and sent about,
but no Catholic in the parish would let them into his house;
or, if they got in under false pretences, as soon as their busi-
ness was known they were summarily ejected, Mr. Clinton
was once passing a house in the country, when a young girl
rushed out, quite affrighted, and cried, “ Sir, there’s one of
them here.” He at once knew what she meant, and, stand-
ing on the opposite side of the road, cried out as loud as he
was able, “ Put him out, put him out, put him out!” This
was done at once, and, within one week after Mr. Clinton’s
discourse had been delivered, not a single Bible-reader was
to be found in the parish.
He put an end to any irregularities which he found
amongst the members of his own congregation, by an equally
simple process. He would say: “If I liked, I could say
something—take care of me; lam dangerous.” He never
mentioned the names of any individual, and yet the people
were more afraid of him, and he corrected their faults more


effectually than if he had denounced them every week from
the altar.
He was not only a sober, but a most abstemious man,
and seldom tasted spirits, or even wine. He once consented
to take a glass of punch after dinner, at a respectable far-
mer’s house,-where he had dined. The moment he had
swallowed a small quantity of it he started up and roared
out, “ Son of Moses, you have poisoned me.” This sudden
and vehement declaration created the greatest confusion in
the assembled company, the prevailing impression being,
that he had gone mad. It was ultimately discovered, how-
ever, that there had been turpentine in the glass which
he had used; and when the matter was thus satisfactorily
explained, he enjoyed the laugh which his abrupt and extra-
ordinary exclamation occasioned as much as any of the
company.
This old man was not less a favourite with Dr. Crolly,
because when he thought him wrong he told him so with as
much freedom as if he were the youngest priest in the dio-
cess. Dr. Crolly was always reluctant to believe evil of
any person, especially of an ecclesiastic. He, however,
once wrote a very sharp letter to a priest who was accused
in writing, by one of his own most respectable parishioners,
of invariably refusing to attend night calls, no matter how
sudden or urgent they might be. - The very next time Mr.
Clinton met Dr. Crolly, he said to him, “ I have lost my
opinion of you; you are unjust.” Dr. Crolly asked him
why he said so, and he replied that it was because he be-
lieved a charge against a priest without sufficient evidence.
Dr. Crolly said he could not doubt it, as so respectable a
man had authenticated it with his name. “It is false,
nevertheless,” said Mr. Clinton, “ and you should not have
believed it.” These words made a deep impression on Dr.


Crolly, and the charge having been repeated by the same
individual, he determined to obtain ocular demonstration
of its truth or falsehood. Without mentioning the matter
to any one, he disguised himself in a hat with a narrow leaf,
a muffler, and great coat, and leaving Belfast in the even-
ing, rode twenty miles to the accused priest’s house, where
he arrived at one o’clock in the morning. He rode rapidly
to the door, and rapped loudly. A boy almost immediately
appeared at a window, and demanded what was the matter?
He was told that there was an urgent sick call in a certain
part of the parish, which was about four miles off 1 , and that
the priest must come to it instantly or he would not find the
person alive. After an absence of not more than two minutes,
the boy, who had hastily put on part of his clothes, appeared
at the door, with a saddle, bridle, and lantern in his hand,
and told Dr. Crolly that the priest would go with him as
soon as the horse was ready. The night was dark, and
even if it had been bright, the boy could not have known
the bishop, whom he had never seen in his life. The priest
appeared quickly, perfectly equipped for the journey.
“ How long,” said he, “ has this person been ill who has
sent for me at such an unseasonable hour ?”
Dr. Crolly answered in a feigned voice, “ About a month.’'
“ It is always the way with you,” said the priest, who
was now mounted; “ come, then, now for a smart ride.”
He set off at a rapid pace, without uttering another word.
The messenger, however, stopped him, brought him into the
house, and, to his utter amazement, he found himself in the
presence of the bishop. Dr. Crolly remained until morn-
ing, and being now convinced of the falsehood of the charge
made against him, confronted him with his accuser. It
turned out that the only foundation for the accusation was }
that the clergyman had spoken with some asperity to an idle,


drunken fellow who, if he heard that any one was sick in
the neighbourhood, called at the house towards nightfall, and
asked his relatives if it would not be better for them to send
for the priest ? If they said it would be time enough in
the morning, he would answer that no one knew what might
happen during the night, and that he would go for his reve-
rence at once, if they desired it. Of course, they were very
thankful, and he got a glass or two of whisky before start-
ing, and as much more when he came back, or the price of
it, which was the sole object he had in view in offering his
services. The result was, that the priest was not only con-
stantly taken out of his bed without necessity, but that, in
that part of the country where this Mercury lived, he
scarcely ever got a call except at night. At length, after
he had several times gone at midnight to see persons who
were almost in as good health as he was himself, and found
that they invariably excused themselves by saying that
they did not like to refuse to see the priest when this man
volunteered to go for him, the clergyman, who knew him
well, told his opinion of his character, and declared to the
people that, as his sole object was to get whisky, he would
not attend any future night calls, if this man were the mes-
senger. Of course, his trade was ruined, and, by way
of revenge, he had circulated that the priest would not
attend any more night calls. The gentleman who had
written the complaint to the bishop firmly believed it to be
true, until the matter was investigated, and it was proved
that the false report of the disappointed messenger was the
sole foundation on which it rested.
On the decease of the Most Eev. Dr. Kelly, in 1835, Dr.
Crolly was elected to the Primatial See of Armagh. The
clergy of Down and Connor thought that his presence was
so necessary in his native diocess, and especially in the town


of Belfast, that they petitioned the Pope not to remove him.
This petition, however, had no effect, for he was commanded
by the Holy See to take upon himself the burden of the
Primacy. His translation took place on the Bth of May,
1835.
Nothing could exceed the regret with which this news
was received in Belfast and in the entire diocess. The
Catholic laity of Belfast bought him a carriage and horses;
the clergy of Down and Connor gave him a splendid enter-
tainment in the Royal Hotel; the poor wept around his
door; and nothing was wanting to manifest the affection of
all classes towards their bishop, and the sorrow with which
they regarded his departure from amongst them.
He carried with him to the Primacy all the energy and
zeal which had distinguished him in his native diocess.
He did not find in Armagh, any more than in Down
and Connor, a seminary for the scientific as Avell as for the
religious training of Catholic youth, but especially of those
who were destined for the sacred ministry. He set to work
at once to remedy this evil, and having procured a beauti-
ful, healthful, and convenient site, on a hill beside the town
of Armagh, he erected on it the present large and elegant
diocesan seminary. The actual was nearly double the esti-
mated expense of the building, and to make up the difference,
Dr. Crolly advanced £6OO out of his own pocket, for which
he went in debt to an amount nearly equal to all he was
worth. He afterwards purchased for its accommodation the
tenant-right of some land which lay contiguous to it. The
entire sum which he advanced at different times for this
purpose amounted to £3OO.
“Seated,” says the writer in the Vindicator , “in the metro-
politan city, the first Catholic Primate from the time of Dowdall,
in-the reign of Mary, he felt that the Church of Ireland


required that the spot consecrated by our great Apostle, as its
territorial head, should have a great temple, worthy not alone of
him but of the Christian faith he had so successfully propagated.
On the 17th March, 1840, he laid the foundation of the new
Cathedral of Armagh—an edifice even in its unfinished
state, might vie in majesty of design, and beauty of workman-
ship, with those hallowed fanes which uprose from the fervid de-
votion of the middle ages, and which, even now, in their solitary
ruins, reproach the apathy and indifference of our utilitarian
generation.”
Dr. Crolly was kindly and cordially received by the
priests of the archdiocess of Armagh, and he reciprocated
their feelings. How much he was gratified by his reception
will appear by the following letter:—
“ Armagh, 17th October, 1835.
“ My dear George —Having returned to Armagh, after hold-
ing conferences in the different districts of the archdiocess, I em-
brace the first opportunity of writing to you. I have experienced
great kindness from the clergy during the conferences, and I have
reason to hope that I may restore perfect harmony among them.
The only individual who has attempted to give me any trouble is
Mulholland, who annoyed Dr. Kelly so long; I trust, however, that
his schemes shall not be successful, as he is left alone. I advise
you not to study too closely, lest you might injure your constitu-
tion. Give my respects to Dr. Montague, Mr. Russell, and the
rest of the professors. Dr. Denvir was with me in the beginning
of this week, at Dungannon, and informed me that all friends in
county Down were in good health, a blessing which I also enjoy,
thank God, Write to me after you have received the books,
which I have consigned to the care of Mr. Walsh, the proprie-
tor of the hotel where I usually stop, in Bolton-street, when I go
to Dublin.
“ I write in haste, and remain, my dear George, your affec-
tionate uncle,
W. CROLLY.
“ The Rev. George Crolly, Maynooth College;”
To detail his labours in his new sphere would be merely
to repeat what has been already stated, regarding his exer-
tions in Down and Connor. In both places the spirit which
dwelt within him was the same ; and in both its outward


manifestations were perfectly similar. Tims wefind that
one of his first acts was to get a house in each of his parishes
—Armagh and Drogheda—in which he lived alternately
along with his clergy ; and that, animated by his example,
the clergy of Armagh devoted themselves as zealously to
the erection of churches for the worship of God as the clergy
of Down and Connor. He also attended all the conferences
in the former diocess, as he had before attended them in the
latter, and, by his good-natured affiibility and gaiety, con-
tinued to be the life and soul of every party, especially of
the clergy, at which he was present.
Dr. Murray thus eloquently describes Dr. Crolly’s labours
in the archdiocess, in the sermon preached at his Month’s
Memory :
“As he was in his native diocess, so has he been with you;
only the energy of his zeal became more active as the sphere
of its operation became more enlarged, and its objects more im-
portant. He was ever engaged in erecting or promoting the
erection of churches, schools, seminaries, charitable and pious
institutions. No weariness for him, no fainting, no goal to stop
at, save that which he has reached at last, in the house of his
eternity. But for the terrible series of calamities that fell year
after year upon this unhappy land, he would have, ere this, com-
pleted the cathedral, within whose unfinished walls his body now
lies—one of the most stupendous works of the kind attempted
in modern times. He had no doubt of succeeding; for he set
about the work in his own way—in the way to insure success.
He travelled through a great part of the kingdom, from diocess
to diocess, raising subscriptions, applying personally to the clergy
and laity, exposing himself to the many disagreeable and dis-
heartening circumstances which accompany a mission of this
sort, with a degree of humility and patience that could hardly
be expected from the youngest clergyman under his jurisdiction.
And he was an old man when he did this; old in years, but in
nothing else; with the vivacity and enthusiasm of youth, the
confidence of youth, and more than the energy of youth ; bear-
ing all things, believing all things, hoping all things, enduring all
things, never falling away. His rest from toil was in the variety
of his labours. Action was his life. Sluggish repose would


have been for him a sickness unto death. His soul became, at
last, as a fire, which dies out when no longer fed; and action
was the food of it. It was a constant prayer of his that God
would take him out of this world, when he lost the power of
working and ceased to be useful in that way. For speculation
not tending to practice, indulged in for its own sake, he had
little relish ; he was altogether a man of work. Of his more
observable qualities, those qualities on which men could pro-
nounce with greater confidence, this was unquestionably the most
striking, as it was, I think, the- greatest. It is working men
who are wanted in the high offices of the Church as in the high
offices of the State. Study, contemplation—these are necessary
also. They are essential to fit for action, to direct action, to
impart to action, and preserve therein its true life of prudence,
counsel, wisdom, without which it is a blind, unblessed, profit-
less thing. They move the arm and guide it; but the strong
arm is, after all, the instrument for work. This is a world of
striving; human institutions grow out of the clash of minds, of
swords, of prejudices, of burning words. The men who, in an
exalted office, do great things for their fellow-men have their
course shaped not on placid waters, but on a troubled sea, ever
in commotion over all its surface and through all its depths,
throwing themselves into the storm and braving it undaunted.
These are they who love the roaring of the forge-fire and the
clinking of hammers on the anvil; for there are strong men at
work there whom their work makes stronger. These are they
who raise up mighty bulwarks and gird the loins of an empire
with steel; who are not startled at the battle’s din, and turn not
tbeir backs to the arrow of the enemy. So it is in the Church.
Great things were done through your holy bishop—great things
that shall not be fully known, until Christ comes to judgment,
and the books are opened. Great things were done through
him, because he spared not himself—because he gave himself all,
soul and body, to the business of his ministry. Charged with
this immense diocess, with the care of so many souls, for every
one of whom he has had to render an account; charged with
the duties of his primacy; charged with other duties which he
freely undertook for the good of religion, who can say that he
neglected any one of them ? Who can point to a single day of
his life spent idly or frivolously ? Who of all his flock can
accuse him of inattention to their wants, as far as it was pos-
sible for him to attend ? Where was there a church required for
public worship, or a school for moral education, and he did not
set about to erect one ? Where did vice strike its roots, and he
did not try to pluck it up ? Where was there an opportunity


for extending the empire of religion, and he did not seize it ?
Who was weak, and he was not weak ? who was scandalized, and
he was not on fire ? Oh, it was an awful thing, the responsibility
that lay upon him—the work of a bishop, in this place, in these
evil times. But God was with him. His private devotions were,
of course, chiefly unseen by human eye; but it did not escape
notice that he was a man of prayer; that, to the last, he recited
the best of prayers—the divine office—with unfailing exactness;
that he spent a long time, each day, upon his knees. Every
morning he offered up the holy sacrifice, partaking of the bread
of the elect and the wine springing forth virgins.”
Some time after Dr. Crolly became Primate, a splendid
new organ was bought for St. Patrick’s Chapel, in Belfast.
A grand opening was announced, and the services of
several celebrated singers were provided for the occasion.
Amongst the pieces which were announced, by advertise-
ment, to be performed on the occasion, was the Ave Maria.
Dr. Mant, the late Protestant Bishop of Down, on seeing
this, wrote a letter, warning Protestants that they could
not attend without being guilty of the crime of idolatry.
Dr. Crolly had been engaged to preach on the occasion,
and, on reading this letter, which he had not seen until he
arrived in Belfast, he resolved to preach on the invocation
of saints. The sermon was delivered before a mixed
audience, a great many Protestants being present, and
made a deep and powerful impression on all who heard it.
I can only make room for the following passage, in which,
without mentioning Dr. Mant’s name, he replied to the
charge of idolatry :
“ We are also accused of idolatry, because wc ask the prayers
of the saints of God, who have gone before us to that country
where there is no more sin, or shame, or sorrow—of those who,
in the language of the blessed martyr, Cyprian, being secure of
their own salvation, are only solicitous about ours. It is not
idolatrous—it is not sinful: on the contrary, it is right and proper
that we should ask the prayers of our brethren upon earth. St.
Paul asked the prayers of the churches to which he wrote; and
God himself commanded the friends of Job to get that holy man to


intercede for them. How, then, can it be idolatrous—how can it be
wrong—how can it be injurious to the Almighty to ask the prayers
of the same persons when they are dead ? For when the body is
laid in the grave, they do not all die. They are only freed from
the body of this death, from which the great St. Paul so fervently
prayed to be delivered; their purer and better part, the immor-
tal soul, which is made after God’s own image and likeness, is
delivered from the darkness and the cares of this dim world,
and admitted into the joys and the glory of heaven. That soul
now beholds God face to face, and shineth like a sun in the king-
dom of its father. If, then, it was not idolatrous or sinful, but,
on the contrary, right and good to ask its prayers whilst it
was surrounded with the body of this death, and dwelt
in this world of sin, can it be offensive to God to ask it to inter-
cede for us when it is freed from this body and taken out of the
world, and when it can plead our cause even before the throne of
the eternal God ? I will take a case for illustration. It is related,
in the 27th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, that when St.
Paul, being then a prisoner, was on his voyage to Rome, the
ship was overtaken by a great storm, so that neither sun nor
stars appeared for many days, and all hope of being saved was
taken away. ‘ And after they had fasted a long time, Paul,
standing forth in the midst of them, said, I exhort you to be of
good cheer; for an angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,
stood by me this night, saying—Fear not, Paul, thou must be
brought before Caesar; and, behold, God hath given thee all them
that sail with thee.’ Can any one doubt that the sailors, the cen-
turion, the soldiers, and the many prisoners who were in that ship,
owed their lives to the prayers of St. Paul, or that it would not
he just and right of them to have asked him to intercede for them
with that God whose he was? .Yet, when St. Paul was put to
death by the sword, little more than two years afterwards, he did
not all perish; on the contrary, he thus obtained the deliverance
from the body of this death which he so ardently desired*—his
constant prayer to be dissolved and to be with Christ was ful-
filled ; and am I to be told that the intercession of that blessed
spirit, now that it is with Christ, is less efficacious, or that its
love for its brethren, for whom it wished to be anathema, is less
ardent than when it struggled amid the tempests of human life ?
“ Oh! but we are told the work of the saints is done when they
cease to be mortal—that God’s instruments are only men who
dwell upon the earth—and that the blessed spirits in heaven
neither know nor care anything about us. Does not this very
* Romans vii. 24.


passage, in which the Almighty sends an angel to communicate to
St. Paul his own deliverance, and that of all those who were with
him in the ship, prove that he makes blessed spirits the messengers
of his mercy, in alleviating the cares of his friends upon earth?
Of the glorified inhabitants in heaven does not our Lord himself
say, that there shall be joy before the angels of God upon one
sinner doing penance ?* Consequently, the angels of God know
those who are in sin and those who are not in sin, those who are
converted and those who are not.converted—that is, they know,
at all events, the spiritual wants of their brethren on earth. Nor
let any one imagine that this knowledge is confined to angels,
because they alone are mentioned by our Lord; for heaven was
not opened to the saints until after his resurrection; but that
since then the souls of those who are defiled with no sin enter
immediately into glory is manifest, from the expectation of St.
Paul; nor was this any vain or groundless expectation, that his
soul would fly to Christ as soon as its union with the corruptible
body would be dissolved, ‘ having a desire to be dissolved,’
says he, ‘ and to be with Christ.’ f
“ This doctrine is not injurious to Christ, for we expect nothing
from the saints but what they obtain from Christ and through
Christ. He is the sole mediator; but if we may ask the prayers
of his servants whilst upon earth, surely we are not deprived of
this privilege because he has taken them to himself, and crowned
them in heaven. This doctrine is not injurious to him, but it
is the perfection of his charity and love, because it carries our
best and holiest feelings beyond the grave, unites the living with
the dead by a holy intercommunion, and preserves unbroken and
uninterrupted, even by death, those links of love by which we
hope to be all one day bound together in heaven. This is the
true communion of saints, which makes charity wide as the uni-
verse and high as heaven—which unites all the children of God,
whether militant on earth, suffering in purgatory, or triumphant
in the kingdom of their Father, in one great family, every mem-
ber of which may, by his prayers and good works, draw from the
infinite fountain of redemption, living water, not only sufficient to
slake his own thirst, but of the overflowing of which he may give
those he loves to drink also. Is it not a consoling thing for the
mother whose child has been snatched from her ere its infant lips
could lisp her name, to know that it is not unmindful of her, that
it still loves her, sympathizes with her sorrow, and daily raises
its pure and innocent hands to God, beseeching him to reckon
her amongst the number of the blessed ? Is it not a consoling
* Luke xv. 10. f Philip i. 23.


thought for the friend to know that, although death has separated
him from his friend, their spirits can still hold communion
together—that if his friend be in suffering, he may relieve him by
his prayers —and that if he be in heaven, he is surely beseeching
God to bring him also to the celestial city ? This doctrine is
not idolatrous; it is not injurious to Christ, for it is in accordance
with the purest and best feelings of our nature, with the clearest
dictates of reason, and with the brightest hopes of inspiration.”
The collection which was made upon the occasion on
which this, sermon was preached amounted, if I remember
aright, to upwards of three hundred pounds.
On the 12th of July, 1845, grievous riots took place in
the town of Armagh, which were occasioned by processions
of armed Orangemen, who paraded the streets, displaying
party colours and playing party tunes. Dr. Crolly knew
that if the Orangemen attempted to walk through the city,
the public peace would be disturbed ; and he, therefore, re-
presented strongly to the authorities the necessity of pre-
venting the procession. This, however, was not done, and
the result was, that an inoffensive Catholic was murdered.
The Catholics, who believed that they had been left by the
government at the mercy of a mob of armed ruffians,
attended the funeral in great numbers, to show their indig-
nation against the authorities, and their sympathy with the
afflicted relatives of the murdered man. Dr. Crolly took
the lead in this manifestation, and marched at the head of
his people. On the following Sunday, he alluded to the
murder in the most indignant terms, and wept copiously
whilst he was addressing the congregation. Indeed, lam
convinced that no bishop ever sympathized more deeply with
his people than Dr. Crolly did on such occasions.
There are one or two other points to which I shall allude
very briefly, and so as, I hope, not to give the slightest
offence to anyone. I beg it also to be remembered, that lam
merely the historian of Dr. Crolly’s opinions, and that, in


matters not defined by the Church, I claim for myself that
freedom of thought which I willingly accord to him and
to all others. I maintain that Dr. Crolly never did or said
anything which was inconsistent with his character as a
Catholic bishop. Beyond this I claim for his opinions no
greater consideration than that which is due to the senti-
ments of an honourable, upright, and honest man, who,
however, notwithstanding the purity of his motives, may
err in his judgment, like any other fallible mortal.
Every person knows that the late Primate held the office
of Commissioner of Charitable Bequests. Connected with
this matter there is in existence a very large correspon-
dence which the late Primate carried on with Lord Elliot
(the present Earl of St. Germains), who was then Secretary
for Ireland, and various other distinguished individuals.
This correspondence, although highly honourable to Dr.
Crolly, I do not feel myself justified in publishing at pre-
sent, without obtaining the leave of the persons concerned.
I know, however, that Dr. Crolly believed, at the time he
accepted the office of Commissioner of Charitable Bequests,
that it was the intention of Sir Robert Peel to begin to
govern Ireland more justly, and the proposal of the May-
nooth grant, shortly afterwards, seemed to justify this anti-
cipation. Nothing mean or sordid influenced his conduct.
Whether it was right or wrong, it was, at least, perfectly
sincere and disinterested ; nor did he ever ask, or receive
for himself, or for any of his relations, the slightest favour
from any government during his whole life. When, how-
ever, he was commanded to resign the commissionership,
not by legitimate authority but by violence and clamour,
he declared that, whilst he was ready to show the most
complete and prompt obedience to his lawful superiors,
he would rather trample his mitre in the gutter, and


retire into a convent, than surrender the liberty, and pros-
titute the dignity of his office to what he conceived to be
an insolent and unwarrantable attempt at dictation.
I am convinced that in relation to the Queen’s Colleges,
also, Dr. Crolly was completely misunderstood or misre-
presented. He is frequently quoted, as if he considered
the Queen’s Colleges the most perfect establishments that
could be found. Now, this is a grievous mistake, as his
hearty concurrence with the other bishops, in the petition
for their improvement, clearly proves. He certainly did
think that they were less dangerous than Trinity College,
Dublin, or the Scotch universities, where many Catholics
had, unfortunately, been perverted. He also thought that
if the Ulster college had been built in Armagh, he could,
by his own vigilant care, have guarded the' faith and
morals of the Catholics who might frequent it. But he
at all times declared his perfect readiness to submit to the
decisions of the Holy See, and to be guided in all things by
the wisdom and prudence of the successor of Peter.
I am enabled, through the kindness of the distinguished
individual to whom they were addressed, to insert the two
following letters, which very clearly express the views of
the late Primate regarding the new colleges, after the pass-
ing of the bill for their establishment. I did not knoAV of
the existence of these letters until they were sent to me,
along with the following note :
“ November 29, 1850.
“ Dear Mr. Crolly—l enclose you two letters, written by
my dear and lamented friend, the late Primate. You must return
them to me as soon as you have done with them, for I prize them
very highly. You are at perfect liberty to make what use you
please of them, with the exception of and of
the names, of which I do not permit you to publish more than the
initials.
“ Perhaps you may find amongst your uncle’s papers the letters


which caused him to write them to me ;* but lest you should not, I
shall tell you their substance from memory, for I did not keep
copies of them. A meeting was held in Armagh, towards the
end of the summer of 1845,f for the purpose of petitioning the
government to build one of the new colleges in that town. Dr.
Crolly attended the meeting, and made a speech in support of
the claims of Armagh. He had himself called a meeting of the
prelates not long before this, and had moved one of the resolu-
tions, calling upon the government to make certain changes in the
bill for establishing the new colleges. I wrote to him to say,
that his speech had offended many persons—that the
Drs. S , K , E , &c., who wei'e disinclined to take
part with ... on this question, and who were supporters
of,the national system of education, had become hostile to the
new colleges, chiefly in consequence of it. I added some other
reasons, which I think it better not to repeat at present.
“ I may as well mention, that he did wait on Lord Heytes-
bury, not, however, in company with the person mentioned in his
letter. That individual, in fact, declined to accompany him;
but H went with him. His Excellency received him
very courteously, but combatted his proposition to have the new
college for Ulster built in Armagh, on the express ground that
such a proceeding would offend the Presbyterians. Dr. Crolly
replied, that the Presbyterians had a college in Belfast already
—that the Catholics formed the vast and overwhelming majority
of the population even in Ulster—and that it would not be fair
to sacrifice their interests, as he firmly believed they would be
sacrificed if the new college should be built in Belfast. Lord
Heytesbury seemed to attach a great deal of weight to his argu-
ment, and promised that he would submit them to Sir James
Graham. His representations, as you know, were without
effect.
“‘Armagh, Septembers, 1845.
“ ‘ My dear . —I have received your highly-esteemed
letter, and I trust you are aware that I value your friendship too
much to allow me to mistake your motive in writing it.
“ ‘ I am extremely sorry to learn that some prelates should
have taken offence at my speech, in which I urged the necessity
of having the Ulster college placed in Armagh. I cannot,
* I regret that, although I have found a large bundle of this gen-
tleman’s letters amongst the late Primate’s papers, I have not been
able to discover those which are here alluded to.
| It was held on the 16th of August, 1843.


however, concur in the, opinion that, because I called the prelates
together, on account of the dangers to faith and morals which I
apprehended from the new scheme of education proposed by
government, or because I moved a resolution demanding certain
improvements, that I therefore deprived myself of the liberty of
taking any other step in the matter until their next meeting.
Some very valuable concessions have already been made, and I
have no doubt but that we shall obtain many more. In point of
security to faith and morals, these colleges will be far less objec-
tionable than those which have been hitherto attended by all
Catholics who enter the liberal professions. If I had this col-
lege in Armagh, 1 would have the Catholic youth lodged in a
house selected by myself, in which I could impart religious
instruction to them, and keep them as perfectly under my con-
trol as the students in my own seminary. If, however, it should
unfortunately be built in Belfast, I could repose very little con-
fidence in it. It will be placed in the most Protestant place in
Ireland; and you may depend that, though it may not be a pro-
selytizing, it will infallibly be a sectarian establishment. The
Protestant population preponderates so much in the town of
Belfast, as well as in the adjoining counties of Down and Antrim,
that any public establishment open to all, and situated in that
town, will be more or less sectarian in its management. Every
office in the institution in Belfast, which is also supported by
government grants, is open to Catholics; and yet, not one of
these, with the exception of the insignificant situation of writ-
ing-master, has ever been filled by a Catholic. If the new col-
lege for Ulster be built in Belfast, you will find that almost all
the Catholics will be excluded from office in it, and that it will
be, in fact, a Protestant college. Ido not say that any attempt
will be made to proselytize the Catholics, for I must in justice
declare, that nothing of the kind ever occurred in the institution;
but I do fear that very few Catholics will be promoted to profes-
sorships in the Ulster college, if it should be built in Belfast.
“ ‘ I, therefore, think it a matter of the greatest importance to
the Catholics of Ulster that the new college should be built both
in a more central situation and in a place where, being more
equally balanced with those of other religions, they will be less
likely to be excluded from a fair share of professorships. It is
clear that I could not defer this application until the meeting of
the prelates; for, in the meantime, Belfast would have been
fixed on as the site, and it would then be too late. I shall cer-
tainly wait on Lord Heytesbury, and demand, as matter of com-
mon justice to the Catholics of Ulster, that this college shall be
built in Armagh.
9


' “‘I hope M will accompany me ; and, if so, I trust
I shall succeed.
“ ‘ I remain, my dear ,
W. CROLLY.
“‘Armagh, September 16, 1845.
“ ‘ My dear With regard to what you say, that the
majority of the prelates will oppose my views regarding the new
colleges, you must remember that I strictly confined myself, in
my speech, to the Ulster college. I did not say a word about
the colleges in the south and west. I left that entirely with the
bishops best acquainted with those provinces; but I tbink I know
Ulster as well as any man in Ireland, and also what is likely to
serve or to injure the cause of religion in it. lam not prepared
to surrender my opinion on a matter of this kind to prelates who
know not the true state of the case. They have no right to dic-
tate to me, and I certainly do not desire to interfere with them.
“ ‘ I consider the scheme of giving up the Ulster college ex-
clusively to the Protestants, in order to get the southern and
western colleges for the Catholics, to be not only inadmissible, but
infamous. The Catholics of Ulster would, lam convinced, fre-
quent the Ulster college in spite of the prelates; and, moreover,
I think they have as good a right to have a convenient place in
which they may obtain an academical education as the Presbyte-
rians of the north, or the Catholics of Munster and Connaught.
“ ‘ On the whole, I think the wisest course for the prelates to
pursue is, to get the best terms they can from the government.
If these colleges were built even now, no person could advise a
Catholic to leave them and go to Trinity College;* and I fear
that such advice, even if given, would be disregarded, and would
thereby lessen the influence of the bishops with the people. For
my part, I intend to take the same course, with respect to the
new colleges, I have taken in relation to the national schools;
and if any attempt should be made to interfere unjustly, and
without authority, I shall appeal to the Holy See, to whose de-
cision, whether favourable or unfavourable, I. shall always render
the most prompt and ready obedience.
“ ‘ I remain, &c.,
W. CROLLY.’”
When the matter was subsequently referred to Eome, Dr.
.* I believe no one had as yet broached the project of the Catholic
university.


Crolly heard that the very same false and slanderous asper-
sions had been preferred against him there which have,
since his death, been published in this country. He, con-
sequently, wrote a refutation of them to Cardinal Eransoni,
who declared that no charges had been made against him
to the Sacred Congregation of the Propaganda, and that,
if they had been preferred, they would not have been
believed , so manifest was his zeal for the good of religion.
The following is the Cardinal’s reply :
“ Rome, from the Sacred College of Propaganda,
9th December, 1847.
“ Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord.* —With regard
to those things which you say have been given out to the preju-
dice of your character, you may be certain that nothing of this
kind has been brought before the Sacred Congregation. But
your mode of acting and zeal for the good of religion are so mani-
fest, that you should cast aside all anxiety and fear, which you
have hitherto entertained, that your character could receive any
injury from them.
“ Signed,
“ Cardinal Fransoni, Prefect.
“ Alexander Bahnabo, Secretary.
“To the Most Rev. Dr. Crolly.”
Yet these stories had been clandestinely circulated at
Rome at this very time, for party purposes, and were, I have
reason to know, believed by many. Their authors were
too crafty to prefer them in a place or in a way which
would allow Dr. Crolly an opportunity of refuting them.
I would enter more fully into these matters here, if I had
not already, in the previous part of this memoir, and in
ray letters, fully explained the views of the late Primate
* Quod vero pertinet ad ea, qua; contra tuum decus dictitari refers
pro certo habeas nil hujusmodi ad sac. Congregationem fuisse per-
latum. Ceterum tua agendi ratio ac studium pro religionis bono adeo
patent, ut anxietatem omnem et praeconceptum timorem deponere
debeas, ne tuum decus aliquod detrimentum percipere inde valeat.


regarding mixed education. The zealots of all parties—for
extremes meet—will, I have no doubt, be greatly dis-
appointed that these views were not latitudinarian, but
that his principles were such as did no discredit to the
successor of Patrick, and the Primate of Ireland. He had
no motive in his actions but the advancement of religion
and the prosperity of the Church.
At length the time came when Dr. Crolly, like all the
descendants of Adam, must appear before the judgment-seat,
to answer, as his great predecessor, Oliver Plunket, said,
for his actions before the King of kings, where no false
witnesses can appear against him. His death is thus truly
and graphically described by Dr. Murray :—'
“As he lived so he died. Many graces did he receive during
life, but this was the greatest of all—the crowning grace of a
happy death. Many bright examples of Christian virtue, many
holy instructions did he give; but this example was the brightest,
this instruction was the holiest of all. It was his custom annu-
ally to perform the episcopal functions proper to Holy Week,
and assist at the public offices of religion during that period, in
this city and in Drogheda, alternately. The latter town was,
according to the order of alteration, the place appointed for the
present year. The > terrible pestilence of cholera was raging
there at the time with peculiar malignity. He knew this ; but a
motive of fear was the one of all least likely to move him from
the course of duty he had ruled for himself. It would not have
been in any bishop a cause of just disedification to have departed
from his own rule, in such circumstances, and in a matter so very
indifferent. But he had fixed his standard of exactness: he re-
solved not to deviate from it. He wished not only not to scan-
dalize, but to edify. He foresaw the peril, however, and perhaps
had a presentiment of the result; at least he acted as if he had:
for, after arriving in Drogheda, he arranged all his temporal
affairs, down to the minutest particulars. He then made his first
and surest preparation for eternity, by approaching the sacra-
ment of penance. He assisted at all the solemn offices of the
Church, and on Thursday—the day preceding his death—he
went through the very long and laborious ceremony of the con-
secration of the holy oils. He retired to rest at his usual hour


—not, indeed, in his usual health, for he had been ailing for some
time, but in his usual good spirits. About three o’clock, on the
morning of Good Friday, he was attacked by the fatal distemper.
He had arranged to celebrate the mass of the Pre-sanctified on
that day, which, by the discipline of the Church, required that
he should be fasting. Not thinking the attack to be what it
really was, and being unwilling to forego the happiness of cele-
brating the holy functions, he abstained for nearly three hours
from taking any medicine. At last, after suffering so long in
silence, and becoming seriously alarmed, he awoke the inmates
of the house. His old and dear friend, the Bishop of Down,
was staying with him at the time, and was immediately at his bed-
side, with the clergy of the presbytery. The physician was sent
for, and the dreadful intelligence soon announced to him that it
was too late, and no hope remained. He received the commu-
nication with the most perfect composure and resignation. Oh, it
is a terrible announcement, and who among us could hear it ad-
dressed to him without trembling— ‘ This day thou shalt die I’
Oh, how the strong man becomes weak then, and the brave man
afraid! But he did not tremble, gave no sign of fear—of a
desire to live longer ! He turned his whole heart, at once and
for ever, away from this earth; and it was not hard for him to
do, for his heart had never been fixed on the world—he had no
strong bonds to sever in leaving it. The thought of the eternity
that was soon to open to him, must no doubt have sunk deeply
into his soul, and moved it. But God bestowed upon him the
special grace, which he sometimes gives to his elect at the last
hour, whereby fear is swallowed up in hope. ‘For seventy
years,’ said one of the saints on his death-bed; ‘for seventy
yfears, O my soul, hast thou served the Lord: why dost thoufea 1
to meet him now ?’ He received all the last sacraments, and this,
too, by another special grace, for the holy viaticum of the body
of our Lord can seldom be administered to those who die of
this epidemic. Rarely one hears of a death-bed scene so consol-
ing, so edifying, as the accounts of eye-witnesses represent his
last moments. The good archbishop awaited the hour of his
departure with the sentiments that penetrated Monica after the
conversion of her son, ‘ What delight have I in this life ? why
do I tarry here ?’—with the sentiments of St. Paul, ‘ Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death ? I desire to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ!’ He expired about noon, on the day
set apart by the Church to commemorate the death of the
Redeemer of the world, within the period consecrated by the
devotion of the faithful to the three hours’ agony on the cross.”


The news of Dr. Crolly’s death was received with one
universal burst of sorrow, by persons of all shades of politi-
cal and religious opinions. In Drogheda the shock which
was caused by his death was so great, so sudden, and so
unexpected, that it filled all hearts with consternation and
sorrow. All business was instantly suspended, the shops
were closed, and the deepest grief was depicted on the
countenances of the people, as they hurried to and fro,
eagerly inquiring the particulars of the melancholy catas-
trophe. They neither thought nor spoke of any subject
but that which was uppermost in their hearts. Two brief
communications, which were published in the Freeman's
Journal on the morning after his death, strongly marked
the feelings of the people.
“ There is,” says a correspondent, writing from Drogheda,
just after the Primate’s death, “a universal gloom over the
whole town. The fearful suddenness of death, so remarkably
illustrated on this occasion, the exalted character and position
of the venerable prelate who has been so suddenly stricken down,
and the supposition that cholera, that direct scourge of heaven,
w r as the cause—all these combine to fill every class of the people
with sorrow, consternation, and awe.”
The next communication is stated to have been made by
a gentleman of the highest respectability, who accidentally
passed through Drogheda at the time of the Primate’s
death, and which, therefore, shows the impression that the
scene was calculated to make on the mind of a stranger.
“ I have just,” says this gentleman, “ returned from Drogheda,
through which place I passed early this morning, at four o’clock,
and re-passed on my return, at two o’clock in the afternoon. In
passing through, in the morning, I learned with regret that his
Grace the Primate had been seized with cholera in the course
of the morning ; but I looked on this statement rather in the
light of a vague rumour than as a frightful reality.
“ On my return, at two o’clock, I saw the shipping in the
river with their flags half-mast high, and, on inquiry, I learned,


with feelings of the deepest sorrow (as you may well conceive),
that the rumour of the morning was, unhappily, too true, and
that his grace, after seven or eight hours’ illness, had ceased to
live.
“ The deepest consternation prevails throughout Drogheda,
no less because of the suddenness of the attach, and its fatal
result, than because of the respect and veneration in which the
venerated Primate was held by all classes and sects in his arch-
diocess, and the esteem in which he was held by all who knew
him.”
The sorrow was not long confined to Drogheda ; it spread
as rapidly as the news of his death-through the whole
kingdom, and, indeed, through the entire empire. There
was scarcely a single newspaper published in Ireland, Eng-
land, or Scotland which did not contain an eulogistic notice
of his life and labours. The press, representing every shade
of opinion, did justice to his useful life, and to his honest,
disinterested, and noble character.
On Easter Saturday his remains were conveyed by a
special train to Castleblaney, and thence in a hearse to
Armagh, accompanied by a large number, not only of the
laity, but of the clergy also, although the weather was ex-
ceedingly severe, and the latter were obliged to make a
long journey back to their respective parishes on the same
evening, the following day being Easter Sunday.
I shall never forget the scene which presented itself to
us as we approached the city of Armagh ; although it was
raining heavily, large crowds of people had issued forth to
meet the melancholy procession, which was continually
increased by new accessions, so that when we reached the
town the streets were utterly impassable. At length, after
great delay, we made our way to the chapel, which was not
only instantly crowded to suffocation, but the neighbouring
streets also were filled with a dense mass of human beings,
who stood there quite regardless of the storm which poured


clown upon them ; the chapel was filled with cries of hitter
grief and lamentation, for each one mourned his dead
bishop as if he had been a dear and a beloved member of
his own family. At length Dr. Denvir ascended to the plat-
form of the altar, to address the people, and the whole
multitude was hushed into silence. But he had scarcely
uttered a sentence when he burst into tears, and the pent-
up sorrow of the vast assembly found vent in one pro-
longed scream of anguish. The bishop was obliged to
descend from the altar, for his sorrow, like that of the peo-
ple, was too deep for words—it could only be expressed by
sobs and tears. During that entire night, notwithstand-
ing the fearful malady of which he died, the people re-
mained to pray around the corpse of their beloved bishop,
whom they would never see again in the flesh until the
great day of the Lord.
On the Bth day of April, 1849, being Easter Sunday,
the mortal remains of Dr. Crolly were deposited in the
centre of the choir of the new cathedral in Armagh. He
had left this injunction in his last will; and surely he could
not find a more fitting place of repose, when dead, than
within those magnificent walls, on the erection of which he
had expended so much labour whilst living. To its com-
pletion he had devoted every aspiration of his noble and
generous heart, and all the energy and activity of that
body which he wished to repose within the shelter of its
sanctuary, until the last dread trumpet shall sound, and
the dead shall go forth to judgment.
The funeral was attended by the Bight Eev. Dr. Denvir
and the Bight Eev. Dr. M‘Nally ; the Catholic bishops of
Down and Cloghcr ; by every priest in the archdiocess of
Armagh, who could possibly be present; by a great many
of the clergy of the neighbouring diocesses of Down, Dro


more, and Clogher ; by several dignitaries and ministers
of the Protestant Church; and by a vast concourse of laity,
without any distinction of creed or class. I extract the
following brief account of the funeral from the Armagh
Guardian :—
“On Sunday the funeral obsequies were performed. The
procession was the largest ever witnessed in this part of the
country —perhaps in the north of Ireland. Precisely at three
o’clock the corpse was removed from the chapel, where an
immense concourse of all classes of people had congregated.
In front we observed Doctors Cuming, Colvan, Robinson,
Kidd, and, generally, the medical men of the city. We also
saw many of the Protestant clergy, including the Rev. Dr.
Elrington, Rev. Lord John Beresford, Rev. Messrs. Irwine,
Wade, and Sharkey; Rev. Dr. Edgar, &c., &c. The crowds
were so great as to render it absolutely impossible to report
the order of the procession. As far as we could discern, it
was as follows:
c ‘ The medical gentlemen.
Clergy of various denominations.
Curates of Drogheda and Armagh, in mourning.
Drs. Russell and Crolly.
Right Rev. Drs. M‘Nally and Denvir.
Hearse containing the body.
The seminary students.
“ These were followed by immense numbers of the most re-
spectable citizens, and many others from the neighbouring
.districts. The great majority of those in the procession were
attired with scarfs and hatbands, which gave the mournful
ceremony an imposing appearance. Arrived at the place of
sepulture, the funeral service was chaunted, and the remains
interred in the naive of the new cathedral, in conformity with
the Primate’s last request. No more befitting spot could have
been chosen ; for his heart was in the edifice, and there should
all that remained of him be -placed. The vast concourse then
quietly separated, many a bosom heaving a sigh at the remem-
brance of him who needeth no carved stone to perpetuate his
memory.”
The Month’s Memory, which calls the relations and friends
of the deceased once more together, to beseech God, with


united voice and prayer, and by the offering up of the Holy
Sacrifice, to relieve him from his sufferings, if he have still
any to endure, and to receive him into that kingdom where
there can be no sorrow, has been always considered one of
the most holy and consoling practices in the Catholic
Church. It is founded on that beautiful doctrine which I
have already illustrated in this memoir, by a brief extract
from one of the late Primate’s sermons—that all the children
of God can assist each other out of the infinite treasure'
purchased for us by Jesus Christ. The number and re-
spectability of those who attend on such occasions, especially
at the Month’s Memory of a priest or a bishop, is the best
and most satisfactory proof of the esteem in which the
deceased was held when living, because it must be perfectly
spontaneous and disinterested, as they can have nothing
more to expect or to fear from him. Never was this spon-
taneous manifestation of respect and love more universally
shown, than at the Month’s Memory of the late Primate.
That I may not be accused or suspected of exaggeration, I
shall extract a brief notice of it from the preface to Dr.
Murray’s sermon, from which I have already drawn so
largely in the course of this narrative.
Dr. Murray assigns as his reason for publishing his ser-
mon, that he believed the portrait which it contains of the
late Primate to be strictly faithful in all its parts, and still
more because his belief of its fidelity has been confirmed
by the judgment of those of his own clergy who were pre-
sent at its delivery.
“ By the clergy of Armagh,” says Dr. Murray, “ Dr. Crolly
was well, by many of them intimately, known. Their opinion,
conveyed to me in the most unequivocal manner, that there was
not one word of exaggeration, as regarded him, in the whole dis-
course, was to me a most gratifying proof that I had fully accom-
plished the end I had proposed to myself—to represent him as he


really was. It is to me a source of the purest happiness that it
has fallen to rny lot to publish, on a subject so dear to ray heart,
a record which, whatever may be its literary defects, possesses
such unquestionable claims to confidence, for its truthfulness, in
every sentence and in every phrase. I only wish that its merits
in other respects were equal to its merit in this, and more worthy
of the beloved and honoured name with which it is connected.
“As no report of the ceremony during which the following dis-
course was delivered , has appeared in any of the metropolitan
papers , I am advised to state that the Month’s Memory of Arch-
bishop Crolly was celebrated in the Catholic Cathedral of
Armagh, on Wednesday, the 23rd of May. The church, though
not of extensive dimensions, is capable of accommodating a very
large number, owing to the extent of the galleries, which, with
the exception of a small space near the altar, reach over the
entire of the ground-floor. It was crowded to excess by'a con-
gregation all evidently and deeply penetrated with the feelings
of the occasion. A large number of Protestants was among
them, whose deportment was throughout most becoming and
respectful. Seven of the eight suffragan bishops of the province
(the See of Derry having been vacant), and upwards of two
hundred priests, about one hundred and twenty in soutans and
surplices, were present. The Bishop of Limerick, who, with the
Very Rev. Dean Coll, had come from a distance of 200 miles,
celebrated the solemn Mass for the Dead. Among the clergy
there were several from Archbishop Crolly’s native diocess of
Down and Connor, and eight professors of Maynooth College,
who made a journey of about ninety miles to mark their esteem
and veneration for the memory of the departed Primate.”
It will, no doubt, appear very strange that none of the
metropolitan journals should have given a report of so im-
portant a ceremony as the Month’s Memory of the Primate
of Ireland, attended as it was by such a large concourse of
priests and bishops, especially when it is remembered that
the removal of,a curate from one parish to another cannot
escape their vigilance. The truth is, that his reputation
had been, for a few years previously, most unscrupulously
assailed in a foreign country. Few persons would have
believed, if the same charge had not been publicly preferred
in this country, that he was accused of being an unsound


Catholic—that he cared nothing whether his people were
taught to believe or to reject even the doctrine of the
divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. I cannot tell the pre-
cise shape and colouring which those accusations always
assumed; but I may mention, by way of specimen, that a
document was sent to Koine, charging him with having
countenanced, at a public dinner, a speech, in which a Pro-
testant minister openly attacked the divinity of the Saviour.
This charge was sworn to be totally and entirely false—to
have not the slightest foundation in fact, by several bishops
and priests who were present. But those charges were not
always preferred in such a tangible manner: it was found
more safe and more effectual to extract from the evidence
of Arian ministers certain answers, in which they state their
belief that our Saviour is a mere creature, and then to cut
out one isolated sentence from Dr. Crolly’s evidence, care-
fully suppressing the context, which would show its true
meaning, and, to represent the whole matter so as to
make it appear that the bishop had no objection to allow
the Arian to teach Catholics to reject the divinity of their
Divine Master. Again I say, that it would not be credited
that this was done in Rome during his life, if it had not
been done in Ireland since his death. I believe in my con-
science that the impression has been made in Rome that the
man was not a sincere Catholic who made more converts,
and did more for the Irish Church than all his calumniators
could effect, if they were to live a thousand years.
As soon as he died the same foul and flagitious calum-
nies were whispered about in Ireland. In order not to mar
the attack which had been already commenced upon him,
it was necessary to suppress, as far as possible, all mention
of the magnificent tribute of affectionate attachment and
esteem which was manifested at his Month’s Memory. The


slanders continued to be circulated in private with great
industry and perseverance, and might have continued to
be 'circulated in the same manner, if one person had not
found it necessary to give vent to his pent-up feelings,
by printing them in the columns of a newspaper. It
was a great mercy that the publication of certain
portions of the late Primate’s evidence furnished him
with a pretext for letting out a portion of his super-
fluous rancour, for he would infallibly have burst if he had
suppressed it much longer. I am convinced that, taking
into account the ferocity and perseverance of that attack ;
considering that it was continued for two months, that it was
supported by the most barefaced perversion of truth, and
the most unscrupulous fictions ; and remembering that it
was made by the uncle of the present Primate, against his
immediate predecessor, there never was anything so out-
rageous perpetrated in a civilized country.
The late Primate was certainly a thoroughly tolerant
man, but at the same time a genuine Catholic, who devoted
himself heart and soul to the advancement of his own
Church. He was not a Catholic of the Beaumont and
Norfolk school, who are now so bepraised by liberal Pro-
testants. If any person, whether friend or foe, imagines
Dr. Crolly to have been such a one, he totally misunder-
stands his character. Eminently conciliatory he was, but
at the same time stern and uncompromising in all that con-
cerned the Catholic faith. As an instance of this I ex-
tract the following anecdote from the memoir published in
the Freeman at the time of his death :
“ Though ever on good terms with his Protestant and Pres-
byterian neighbours, and ready to yield to their prejudices a.,
that principle would permit, none knew better how to be stern
and determined, when duty required him to be so. An instance
of this occurred during the time the former cholera was


spreading devastation in Belfast. Tbe Protestant and Presby-
terian clergymen, fearing to bring infection into the bosoms of
tbeir families, were not so constant in tbeir attendance in the
cholera hospitals as the priests were. The result was, that many
Protestant patients were becoming Catholics at the last hour.
This was rumoured abroad. Some of the more bigoted dissent-
ing clergymen were offended. They eame and posted themselves
at the hospital doors, and expressed their determination not to
permit the priests to ‘ tamper,’ as they called it, with their
flocks. The priests, jaded with arduous labour, were unable to
force. their way, though patients were loudly calling for their aid.
Intelligence of the circumstance was conveyed to Dr. Crolly;
he sallied forth, reached the hospital, and, handing the ministers
aside, told them he would be prepared to reason with them as
soon as he had attended the dying, who were invoking the aid of
a clergyman; and so saying he passed into the pest-room and took
his priests with him, leaving the ministers to ponder over his
determination. Thus, though pre-eminently conciliatory, he was
heroically determined, and by both qualities earned universal
respect and the deep devotion of his own people.”
Of the private life of the late Primate I have already
spoken in this memoir; I shall only add here that he was
a most sincere and affectionate friend. He possessed in
an eminent degree the quality of attaching to him his
domestics and dependents. I believe no one ever resided
in the house with him who did not admire and love him.
Servants he rarely ever changed : to get into his employ-
ment was almost equivalent to a situation for life. His
total freedom from selfishness, his generous and forgiving
nature, his kind and affectionate heart, endeared him to
those who were intimately connected with him during life.
God grant that no more unworthy successor may ever sit
in the chair of Patrick, and preside over the Irish Church.


LETTERS
OF
THE REY. GEORGE CROLLY,
Professor of Theology in St. Patrick’s College, Maynooth,
IN DEFENCE OF
THE LATE MOST REY. ARCHBISHOP CROLLY,
PRIMATE OF IRELAND.
The following letter from Mr. Maher, which was published in
the Evening Post, on the Ist of October, 1850, occasioned the
controversy in which I have been for some time past not, I
hope, altogether unsuccessfully engaged, in defence of the cha-
racter of the late Primate:—
“ TO THE EDITOR OF THE DUBLIN EVENING POST.
“ Sir—The evidence of Doctor Crolly, on the subject of ‘mixed
education,’ to which you exultingly refer in Thursday’s Post, and
which, you fondly anticipate, will produce a great effect on the public
mind, is little calculated, indeed, when rightly understood, to add to
his posthumous fame. The object of putting forward, at this par-
ticular time, the opinion of one bishop—and he no more—is the
forlorn hope of inducing Catholic Ireland to disobey the joint admo-
nition of all her prelates lately assembled in council at Thurles. I
regret very much that your usual prudence did not suggest the pro-
priety of avoiding this subject; but, having touched upon it, there is
no means left to guard our charge against the danger of error, but by
bringing the matter under public consideration fully. Before I state
Dr. Crolly’s peculiar opinions, which you so intensely admire, it is
necessary to describe, somewhat in detail, the circumstances in which
they were delivered, and thereby enable the public to take them at
their just value.
“ Parliamentary commissioners, five in number, nominated and
appointed by a commission under the grand seal, visited Belfast in
1823, for the purpose of inquiring into the state and working of the
academical institution of that town. Having made their researches,
examined a great number of witnesses—amongst whom were the
B


professors and masters of the college, and others from abroad, of
whom Dr. Crolly was one—the commissioners reported on the Arian
character of the establishment as follows, p. 19 :
“‘ We are informed that one of the four vice-presidents, and
several of the gentlemen appointed by the proprietors as managers
and visitors of the institution, professed Arian principles; that, in
addition to these, Mr. Bruce, the Professor of Latin and Greek ; Mr.
Hincks, the Professor of Hebrew and Head Master of the Classical
School; Mr. M'Ewen, the Lecturer on Elocution ; and Mr. Mont-
gomery, the Master of the English School, were also Arians.’
“ What the doctrine of these Arians are, especially touching the
great dogma of Christianity, will be best learned from the testi-
mony of the professors themselves ; and what precautions Dr. Crolly
was disposed to adopt against their avowed errors, we have also to
learn from the bishop in his own words. The Rev. Thomas Hincks
being sworn, was asked :
“‘ Do you consider Jesus Christ to be God ?—I do not.
“ ‘ In any sense of the word ?—ln any sense of the word I would
not apply the term “ God” to him.
“ ‘ You consider him a created being?—Yes.
“ ‘ And that there was a time when he was not ?—Yes.
“ ‘ What meaning do you attach to the expression of the Holy
Spirit?—l have not really clear ideas upon that subject.’—Appendix
to the Fourth Report of the Commissioners of Irish Education Inquiry,
p. 84.
“ The Rev. Mr. Bruce, M‘Ewen, and Montgomery gave similar
answers to the same questions; but, unwilling to repeat what grates
so harshly on the Christian ear, or to occupy too much space in the
Post, I shall content myself with this general reference to their tes-
timony. Those who feel anxious to be more fully informed as to the
doctrines of the professors at that period in the Belfast institution,
will find the case more fully stated in'my'* reply to the address of Mr.
Berwick, President of the Queen’s College, Galway, published by
Mr. Duffy, Dublin.
“ Dr. H. Cooke, formerly Moderator of the Synod of Ulster, being
examined, in reply to the inquiry whether an engagement by the
professor, not to interfere with the religious opinions of his pupils,
would not be considered a sufficient safeguard against all danger from
that quarter, very emphatically observed :
“ ‘ It is also true that the department of a professor may not imme-
diately connect itself with religion ; but the character of the professor
will inculcate his peculiar religious principles more effectually
than any lectures. If the public character of a professor be Arian or
Socinian, it will be vain to bind him not to inculcate his opinions ;
his literary character and influential position will do the work for him
most effectually; and no matter what his department may be, upon
the religious opinions of his 1 pupils his own religious character will
make more or less impression. One of the greatest evils of modern


education lias been, that tlie concerns of religion have been made to
bend to the imaginary interests of literature and science.’
“At length came the examination of Dr. Crolly. The commis-
sioners said— ‘ We should wish particularly for your opinions as to
whether there is any objection on your part to young men, who are
ultimately to be sent to Maynooth, receiving education, in the first in-
stance, in the Belfast institution.’ That is, whether he had any
objection to send to the classes of the impugners of the Divinity of
Christ, Christian youth preparing for the priesthood. His answer
will, I should think, surprise and shock the country. It is this—
‘There is no objection on my part.’ The subject is brought before
him a second time. He is again asked—‘Are we to collect there is
no sort of objection, on your part, to the attendance at the institution
of a young man, even though he should be destined for the Roman
Catholic ministry ?’ Again he answers— ‘ None.’
“ There is not, I fain would hope, in the Church of God, another
bishop who would return, in similar circumstances, the same answer;
and if there be, the only effect his opinion, as to mixed education, will
have on the public mind, is to excite its surprise, regret, and abhor-
rence. Sir, it is this laxity of opinion which the State, by its patron-
age, ever seeks to extend amongst churchmen in the high places—
this breaking down of all the fences of Christianity, or rather total
abandonment of those necessary safeguards—this delivering up,
unprotected, Christian youth into the hands of Arianism, at a season
when the mind is most easily impressed—this spurious charity and
false confidence it is, which have inundated Christian lands with scep-
ticism, and introduced for a time among ourselves dissension and di-
versity of opinion in discipline, when harmony and union, in the.face of
a common enemy, were so desirable.
“ The Government, I am free to admit, have no interest in the
overthrow of religion ; quite the contrary —it desires to support
religion, but a religion according to its own taste. It wants a
priesthood, not to exercise an independent jurisdiction in spirituals,
but in all things to be guided by the excellent wisdom of the State—
to leave dogmas and points of faith in the back-ground, and quietly to
receive the pay and discharge the duties of an ecclesiastical police—
bishops to consider themselves as officers of a splendid church estab-
lishment, but not at all as the shepherds of the people.
“ To this spirit of the world, acting upon churchmen, seeking to unite
things in their nature irreconcilably opposed—faith and expediency—
the spirit of God and the spirit of the Mammon—we are to attribute
all the evils which have lately distracted our councils, and excited so
painfully the solicitude of the common Father of the Faithful.
“ Under the guidance of such a spirit, if heaven had not come to our
aid, what would become of our poor people ? They would, like other
nations, soon lose their faith—the only treasure they have ever pos-
sessed. In a little time they would be unable to tell whether they
ought not, with the learned professors of their children, reject the


Divinity of Jesus Christ; or whether they ought to bow down, as did
their fathers before them,' in profound adoration of the ever-blessed
God, made man.
“ The Commissioners of Education, before whom Dr. Crolly was
examined, were not unanimous in their report. Two out of the five—
namely, Leslie Foster and J. Glassford—proudly withstood the
spurious liberality of their prelate ; and had the good sense to protest,
in a letter addressed to Sir Robert Peel, February 1, 1827, against
the system of the Belfast institution, where Christian faith was so
grievously imperilled. They state—‘AVe are satisfied that as yet
these appointments (of Arian professors) have not led to an extension
ci Arian doctrines amongst the Presbyterian body. But we appre-
hend that professors and masters, in the performance of duties which
are assigned to their offices, must, necessarily, be swayed by their own
views upon so important a subject, and that a powerful, though tacit
influence, must be continually exercised by them upon the young per-
sons in their classes. The pupils must feel a general respect for the
judgment of the able persons by whom they are instructed, whose
principles are no secret, and who, though silent in respect of such
questions, within the hall of the institutions, are not so upon other
occasions.’ —Fourth Report on Education in Ireland , page 27
“It is not necessary, in this stage of the controversy—and I trust it
never will be necessary—to refer further to the opinion of Dr. Crolly,
or the sudden mutations which his opinions underwent. Admiring,
as I sincerely did, the very great worth of the late Primate under
many respects, it is to me most painful to be obliged to combat any of
his opinions, and, now that he is no more, to denounce them as
dangerous.
“ The letter of your correspondent, under the signature of ‘ Arbi-
trator,’ and the accompanying commentary of the Post, taken
together, form rather an ingenious tissue of of misstatements, exag-
gerations, and .sophistry. I shall send you a few observations on these
subjects in another letter, to which, with your permission, Mr,
Editor, I will take the liberty to invite the attention of the readers of
the Dublin Evening Post —l have the honour to be,
“ James Maiiek, P.P., Carlow- Graigue.”
To this letter I replied as follows, on the 4th of the same
month:—
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DUBLIN EVENING POST.
Dear Sir —l believe there was no possible contingency
which I would have considered more improbable, a wed ago,


than that I should he dragged into a newspaper controversy,
especially with a Catholic clergyman. Indeed, I imagined that
no possible amount of provocation could have forced me to
break silence; but then I did not believe that there was one
priest in Ireland capable of casting obloquy on the grave of a
man who, within the last two years, was the living head of the
Catholic Church in Ireland, and who, I fearlessly assert, has
left behind him more numerous and palpable evidences of the
advancement of religion under his rule than any of his contempo-
raries. His great and successful exertions to promote Catholic
education and the Catholic religion, are visible to all men— si
monumentum queeras circumspice.
I, as the nearest surviving relative of the late Primate, cannot
see such an attack upon his spotless reputation, endorsed by a
Catholic priest, without repelling it with indignation, and in the
strongest language. In fact, this slanderer accuses the late
head of the Irish Catholic Church, if not of being himself, in
his heart, an Arian, at least of indifferentism—of caring nothing
whether the children of his congregation were brought up in the
belief or denial of the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. He
“ would fain hope that no prelate in the Church of God would
give the same answer as Dr. Crolly; and if there be, his opinion
should be received with abhorrence. It is this laxity of opinion
amongst churchmen in high places—this breaking down of all
the fences of Christianity, or rather total abandonment of those
necessary safeguards— this delivering up of unprotected Christian
youth into the hands of Arianism —this spurious charity, which
has inundated Christian lands with scepticism. ......
Under the guidance of such a spirit our poor people, if heaven
had not come to our aid, would, in a little time, be unable to
tell whether they ought not, with the learned professors of their
children, reject the Divinity of Jesus Christ; or whether they
might to bow down, as did their fathers before them, in profound
adoration of the ever-blessed God, made man.” Even the
notorious Doctor Cooke, of Exeter-hall notoriety, finds favour
in his eyes, when contrasted with the Catholic Primate; and
as for Leslie Foster and J. Glassford, these orthodox Arca-
dians “proudly withstood the spurious liberality of the prelate.”
He never gives the late head of the Catholic Church the name
of primate, or archbishop, or even of bishop, except once, by
way of contrast, but always contemptuously designates him as
Dr. Crolly, or the prelate. To use his own words, I would
fain hope that there is not another priest in the Church of God
who would be capable of such a slanderous attack upon the
memory of any bishop who died in the peace of the Church.


I do not found this belief on the peculiar indelicacy of his
present assault, nor on its ferocity, nor on his talent for render-
ing himself odious, and creating mischievous dissensions amongst
the clergy; but, above all these, on the peculiar delight which
he takes in attacking archbishops. For Dr. Crolly is not the
only archbishop whose character Father Maher has assailed
with furious vituperation. The quality is much the same, but,
in regard to quantity, there is still a considerable balance on the
side of Dr. Macllalc, the Archbishop of Tuam. Mr. Maher
was, however, the advocate of mixed education when he attacked
Dr. Mac Hale, as will appear by a letter which appeared in the
Evening Post on the 25th of April, 1840, under the signature of
“ A Priest of the United Diocesscs of Kildare and Lcighlin.”
This letter is addressed to the Archbishop of Tuam :
“ Your Grace,” says Mr. Maher, “ I am sorry to learn from the
public papers, is, at the present moment, warmly engaged in a cru-
sade against the Board (of National Education). The arguments
whereby you assail it have wrought in my mind the conviction that
the board has worked admirably well There,
my lord, in your first great charge—the very best you had to make—
the great discovery of your last visitation. How satisfactory—how
specific ! What a wonder the country is not in
arms against the board ! You do, indeed, my lord, mock the under-
standing of your readers Whilst you have been
thus engaged in contending with evils which existed only in your
own excited imagination, the wolf, against whom you have not
raised your warning voice, has been literally devastating the fold.
The real and the avowed object of the London Hibernian Society is
proselytism. They come not to educate, but to subvert the faith of
the people. Read, my lord, what they publish in the last report of
their triumphs in Connaught. ‘ln this province (they write) the
labours of the London Hibernian Society still continue to prosper.
Here the Lord of the harvest has given the increase. Many a poor
sinner has, by the instrumentality of the society, been called out of
darhness into the marvellous light of the Gospel. The number of
schools in Connaught this year is 174, and the scholars 13,220, of
whom 4,062 are Protestants, and 9,158 Roman Catholics. This fact
(they add) is both remarkable and satisfactory.’ What does your
Grace think of the remarkable and satisfactory progress of proselytism
through the kingdom of Connaught? Have you been too busily
engaged in searching for any correspondence from any quarter with
any of your clergymen to hear that 9,158 Roman Catholics of Con-
naught are in the schools of proselytism ?”
Nay, Mr. Maher was quite satisfied with Dr. Crolly’s views
on education in 1840, although that prelate must have been at


this time fifteen years in league with the Arians, for the evidence
on which he is now condemned was given as early as 1825.
“ Your Grace’s letters,” Mr. Maher says, still addressing the
Archbishop of Tuam, “show, though the proofs have escaped you,
how deeply you ought to distrust yourself in this warfare which most
engages your attention. Speaking of the Most Rev. Dr. Crolly and
of the Right Rev. Doctors Kinsella and Ryan, you say, in your first
letter— ‘ They conducted the important business, the proposed modi-
fication of the board, with a spirit worthy of bishops, and that
breathed a love of unanimity.’ In your next you say— ‘ His Grace
of Armagh may entertain the opinion that there was as little
unanimity at the end as at the commencement of the meeting.’
How remarkably the laudatory passage of the
first letter contrasts with the curt and haughty notice of the
same prelates in your subsequent epistle. What change came over
your Grace’s feelings in the interim ? Why is the respectful term
altered ? Ah ! they ventured to testify that Dr. Murray’s account of
the proceedings of the meeting of the bishops were true and satisfac-
tory. As long as they agree with your Grace, or, not agreeing,
remain silent, they act with the spirit worthy of bishops
You have come to an open rupture with only one of your brother
prelates as yet; but who cannot see what your Grace is capable of,
if the prelates interfere with your high privilege of stating their
opinions as you please ?”
I shall now proceed to collect a few flowers from this epistle,
although I do so with great reluctance, and simply because they
are absolutely necessary for my purpose. lam sure it is unne-
cessary for me to say that I look with utter abhorrence on the
sentiments contained in the letter to the Archbishop of Tuam,
and that I would not apply them to any gentleman, much less
to a prelate of the Catholic Church. The attacks upon the
living and the dead archbishops are equally violent, with this
difference, however, that when Mr. Maher attacks a live arch-
bishop, he prudently conceals himself behind an anonymous sig-
nature ; whereas, when he assails a dead one, he valiantly puts
his name to the production.
[Here follows a long extract from Mr. Maher’s letter, in which
he attacks Dr. Mac Hale; but I have omitted it in this plan, as it
will be found in double columns, along with his attack upon the late
Primate, in my second letter, p. 25.]
It is not very wonderful that a person who could write thus
anonymously of a living archbishop, should find no difficulty in
assailing a dead one openly, without any concealment of his name.
After quoting the evidence of the Rev. Thomas Hincks, to prove


what every person knows, that the Arians do not believe in the
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, he thus proceeds :
“At length came the examination of Dr. Crolly. The commis-
sioners said— ‘ We would wish particularly for your opinion as to
whether there is any objection on your part to young men who are
ultimately to be sent to Maynooth, receiving education, in the first
instance, in the Belfast institution.’ That is (quoth Father Maher)
whether he had any objection to send to the classes of the impugners
of the Divinity of Christ, Christian youth preparing for the priest-
hood. His answer will, I should think, surprise and shock the
country. It is this— ‘ There is no objection on my part.’ The
subject is brought before him a second time. He is again asked—
* Are we to collect there is no sort of objection, on your part, to the
attendance at the institution of a young man, even though he should
be destined for the Roman Catholic ministry ?’ Again he answers—
‘ None.’ There is not, I fain would hope, in the Church of God
another bishop who would return, in similar circumstances, the same
answer ; and if there be, the only effect his opinion, as to mixed edu-
cation, will have on the public mind, is to excite its surprise, regret,
and abhorrence. Sir, it is this laxity of opinion which the State, by
its patronage (national education included ?) ever seeks to extend
amongst churchmen in the high places—this breaking down of all
the fences of Christianity, or rather total abandonment of those
necessary safeguards—this delivering up, unprotected, Christian
youth into the hands of Arianism, at a season when the mind is most
easily impressed—this spurious charity and false confidence it is
which have inundated Christian lands with scepticism, and introduced
for a time, amongst ourselves, dissension and diversity of Opinion
in discipline, when harmony and union in the face of a common
enemy were so desirable.”
Mr. Maher, of course, includes the education controversy,
which he has so ably handled in his letter to the Archbishop of
Tuam.
“ Under the guidance,” proceeds Mr. Maher, “of such a spirit,
if heaven had not come to our aid, what would become of our
poor people ? They would, like other nations, soon lose their
faith—the only treasure they have ever possessed. In a little time
they would be unable to tell whether they ought not, with the learned
professors of their children, reject the Divinity of Jesus Christ, or
whether they ought to bow down, as did their fathers before them,
in profound adoration of the ever-blessed God, made man.”
You will observe, sir, that the only charge brought forward
by Mr. Maher is, that the professors were Arians. He
mentions, indeed, amongst the oratorical flourishes, the total
abandonment of the necessary safeguards ; but he does not


attempt to prove that the faith of the Catholics was ever tam-
pered with in the slightest degree, or that it w r as not faithfully
and jealously guarded. In fact, no perversion took place in the
institution; and I shall hereafter show that at the time Doctor
Crolly’s evidence was given, there were few places in Ireland
where there were such safeguards for the faith, even of the can-
didates for the priesthood. Premising thus much, I hope you
will not consider me tedious if I repeat Father Maher’s rhetoric,
with some slight substitutions, I must, however, again assure
those archbishops and bishops whose names I am obliged to
introduce into this defence, that I entertain for them the highest
respect, and that I would not mention them if it were not abso-
lutely necessary. The late Primate states, in his evidence during
the inquiry into the state of Maynooth, that he was educated
at a mixed school, the masters of which were Catholics; but it
has been publicly stated, and never contradicted, that the present
Primate was educated in a Quaker seminary at Ballitore, and
the Archbishop of Cashel in Trinity College, Dublin. I will
suppose, therefore, that the question which was put to Doctor
Crolly has been put to the Archbishops of Dublin and of Cashel,
when Primate Cullen and Archbishop Slattery were candidates
for the priesthood. “We should wish particularly for your
opinion as to whether there is any objection on your part to young
men, who arq ultimately to be sent to Maynooth, receiving edu-
cation, in the first instance, in the Quaker’s seminary at Balli-
tore, or in Trinity College.” That is (according to Father
Maher’s gloss), “ whether they had any objection to send to the
classes of the impugners of all exterior baptism—and who, con-
sequently, are not even Christians—to the schools of those who
reject all priests, pastors, and ministers, as well as the holy sacra-
ments ; or, to Trinity College, Dublin, the heads of which swear
that prayers to the blessed and immaculate Mother of God, and
the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, are damnable and idolatrous—
Christian youth preparing for the priesthood.” If they should
answer in the affirmative, it would “ surprise and shock the
country.” And yet, there can be no doubt but that each of the
archbishops would have answered, as Doctor Crolly did, “there
is no objection on my part.” For, if it be a shocking crime for
a Catholic bishop to say that he has no objection that the can-
didates for the priesthood should be taught classics by an Arian,
it is, certainly, not a less henious crime knowingly to allow them
to go through their preparatory studies at schools conducted by
bigoted Protestant ministers, by Arians, and even by Quakers,
without ever making the slightest objection. If there is such
danger that a candidate for the priesthood, who learns his Latin


and Greek from an Arian, will imbibe Arianism, there is, cer-
tainly, equal danger that, if he were educated by a Protestant or
a Quaker, he would imbibe Protestantism or Quakerism ; and I
really do not know which of the three it would be most dangerous
to admit into the ministry. And yet, I venture to assert that
the Archbishops of Dublin and Cashel, after ascertaining those
two lamentable cases of candidates for the priesthood being edu-
cated at Trinity College and Ballitore, did not make the slightest
objection to these young men on account of the places where
they had been educated, nor even warn future aspirants not to
imitate their example.
The truth is, that in those times the bishops merely required
that the young men who wished to enter an ecclesiastical college
should have a good character, and a sufficient knowledge of
classics—no matter whether this knowledge had been acquired
from Church of England men, Arians, or Quakers. Indeed,
Father Maher’s gloss on Doctor Crolly’s evidence, and the hys-
terics into which he works himself, are the most miserable clap-
traps ; for in 1825 almost every bishop in Ireland knew that the
young men whom he sent to college were educated by Pro-
testants, and, for the most part, by ministers of one denomina-
tion or another. I find, by the Appendix to the Bth Report of the
Commissioners of Irish Education, that Doctor Higgins, the
Bishop of Ardagh, studied Latin and Greek at a school con-
ducted by a Protestant minister; and several of the other bishops
were, I know, educated at Protestant schools, one of which, at
least, was conducted by an Arian clergyman. Three of the
present professors of Maynooth College got the entire, or a
part, of their preliminary education in academies conducted by
Arian ministers, and some of the others in schools conducted by
Protestants or by Protestant clergymen. If their bishops did not
say they had no objection to this, it was because the question
was never put to them ; for the candidates for, the priesthood
publicly attended those schools with their full knowledge and
concurrence. Father Maher would have infallibly damned St.
Jerome for studying Hebrew under the Rabbis, who not only
rejected the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, but even treated
him as an impostor.
Doctor Crolly could, indeed, have given no other answer than
that which he did give, without making a most grievous charge
against the four Catholic archbishops of Ireland, as well as
against his own predecessors. In the appendix to the 9th Re-
port of the Commissioners of the Irish Education Inquiry, there
is recorded the minutes of a conversation which took place with
the Most Rev. Doctor Murray, on the 16th of December, 1824,


in which that distinguished prelate stated, “that there could he
no possible objection to Roman Catholics receiving literary in-
struction from a Protestant;” and, on the 7th of January, 1825,
the Most Rev. Doctors Curtis, Kelly, and Laffan, “ expressed
their concurrence in the views already expressed by Doctor
Murray.” This occurred nearly a year before Doctor Crolly
was examined in Belfast, and, indeed, before he was a bishop.
Nor did the archbishops make any especial exception against
Arians; on the contrary, a minister of that persuasion kept a
school at Dundalk, at which some of Doctor Curtis’s clergy re-
ceived their classical education. Indeed, even at the time that
Father Maher declared the system of national education to be
excellent, Arians not only might be, but actually were, teachers
in some schools in which there were Catholics.
Had Dr. Crolly given any other evidence than that which he
did give, he would have been as much opposed to his own pre-
decessors as to the actual Catholic archbishops of Ireland. He
was at this time little more than three months a bishop, and I
am certain that there were not then in the united diocess
of Down and Connor, five priests who had not received their
preliminary education at schools conducted by Arian ministers.
And yet, I venture to say, that not one of these could declare
that his faith was even tampered with ; and, moreover, that they
were as firm believers, and attended as faithfully and constantly
to their flocks, as Father Maher himself. The young candi-
dates for the priesthood went from these schools, conducted by
Arian ministers, to the Continent, to Maynooth, Carlow, and
Kilkenny, and yet I am sure that not one of them ever discovered
the slightest disinclination to adore our Lord Jesus Christ.
I do hope that it is not necessary for me to disclaim on the
part of Dr. Crolly and his predecessors, as well as on the part
of those archbishops and bishops who attended themselves, or
who allowed their subjects to attend schools conducted by Pro-
testants, Arians, or Quakers, all predilection for the creeds of
those sectaries. But their classical schools, and especially those
conducted by Arians, were perfectly free from all bigotry or
interference in religious matters. Very few priests got their
classical education in the Belfast institution, simply because
few candidates for the ministry were natives of the town pre-
vious to the period at which Dr. Crolly established the Catholic
seminary. It is, however, most false to state, as Father Maher
has not been ashamed to say, that “the necessary safeguards were
totally abandoned in the institution, and Christian youth delivered
up unprotected into the hands of Arianism.” On the contrary, I
am convinced that there were no such safeguards at any other


Protestant school in Ireland, and I have already proved that the
clergy at this period were almost all educated at such schools. I
know not what safeguards may have existed in the schools con-
ducted by the Quakers, but I do know that in Trinity College, and
in most of the schools conducted by ministers of the Established
Church, the only safeguards were the principles of the young
men themselves, and the vigilance of their parents. Indeed,
the attack upon Dr. Crolly is so barefaced and reckless, that I
would be most anxious to publish his evidence entire; and I
would defy his very enemies to find fault with it, considering
the times and circumstances. I cannot do this, at all events, in
the present letter; but I shall give a few extracts, which Father
Maher, in his candour, has omitted, and which, I think, will
materially help .any one who desires to arrive at an impartial
conclusion. The following questions and answers are taken
from Dr. Crolly’s evidence:—
“Do you think it likely that any danger can accrue to young men
of Roman Catholic sentiments from mixing daily with those of other
sentiments ?—I do not think any danger of that sort occurs as long as
they are under the inspection of their masters. It is probable that
boys might insult one another on account of their religious diffe-
rences, in going to or returning from school; hut while they were in
the institution, I am. convinced that there never was the slightest
reason to apprehend any danger from their mixture.
“ Have you ever heard it made a subject of complaint from any
Roman Catholic that the attendance of Roman Catholics in the in-
stitution was attended with any danger to their faith ?—I never
heard of any complaint of the kind s if I had, I should have imme-
diately interfered and investigated the business, because I cannot
conscientiously suffer anything of the hind ; but I never had any
reason to apprehend anything of the sort.
“ We are to collect there is no sort of objection on your part to the
attendance at the institution of a young man, even though he should
be destined for the Roman Catholic ministry ?—None.
“ And a fortiori there is no objection to any person who intends
himself for lay pursuits ?—Not any objection ; I might find it, per-
haps, desirable to establish a diocesan seminary; and in that case
1 would, in all probability, give the preference to it, but until that
time I would not make any objection to their going to the institu-
tion ; on the contrary, I think it is very correctly conducted.
“ Could you expect to establish a diocesan seminary wdiich could be
so useful, either in the extent of education, or the number that could
be received in it ?—I do not think I could : but it might be perfectly
adequate to all my purposes, and I could then combine religious
instruction with other points of knowledge, so that it might be, upon
the satisfactory ; but as far as preparatory hnowledge is


the object, the candidates for the ministry could obtain it in the
institution as well as in the diocesan seminary.
“ Will you state in what manner, and to what extent, the young
men in the institution, of the Homan Catholic persuasion, receive reli-
gious instruction?—The only religious instruction they receive is to
attend at the explanation of the catechism and public worship regu-
larly, with others belonging to my congregation. I have a Sunday
school in my chapel, for the purpose of making the younger portion of
my flock acquainted with the doctrines of the Roman Catholic reli-
gion, and the principles of Christian morality. I expect that the
pupils of the institution will receive additional instruction from their
respective pastors when they return home.”
These questions and answers are taken down consecutively as
they occur in the report; but I now regret that I did not insert
the one which immediately precedes the first of those I have
quoted, because it throws some additional light on this last
answer, in which Dr. Crolly speaks of those young men who
attended the institution, but did not belong to his own diocess :
“It is scarcely necessary to inquire from you whether you think
there is no practical danger of their religious principles being inter-
fered with in any way ?— I do not think there is; I have had reasons
calculated to prevent such apprehensions. Some Roman Catholic
gentlemen have sent their children to this institution, and, although
they were not of my parish, nor in my diocess, they were obliged to
attend public worship in ray congregation, and they always punc-
tually attended to their other religious duties. These observations
led me to think that the masters of the institution directed the
Catholic pupils to pay particular regard to their religious and moral
duties, so far from attempting to interfere with them.
“Have you ever heard of any circumstance of offence towards
Roman Catholics having originated from, or been encouraged, or
taken place in the institution ?—I do not recollect any circumstance
of the kind; I rather suppose that there has never been anything of
the kind, except what I have stated, among the boys themselves ;
that might happen anywhere.
“ And which you do not conceive to have proceeded to any extent ?
—No; I have not been out of Belfast one month at a time these
thirteen years: so that it would be almost impossible that anything of
this hind could be carried on without my knowledge.”
Dr. Crolly, in answer to another question, says—
“ The chair of moral philosophy is more or less connected with,
and may be regarded as the entrance to theology: so that it also
belongs to religion more than to science.”
And he distinctly states that he would only allow the Catholics
to attend there for a scientific education. He also says—


“ I might have become one of the managers (of this institution), if
I had availed myself of the liberality of the proprietors ; but this
appointment would be attended with duties which my other avocations
would not allow me time to perform; I was, therefore, obliged to
decline the honour, although I wished the institution to prosper,
and am persuaded that, as long as it shall be properly managed , it
must be productive of the best effects.”
The heinous crime, therefore, committed by Dr. Crolly was,
that he had no objection that the candidates for the priesthood
should learn Latin and Greek, and, perhaps, a little mathematics,
in a school in which no perversion had ever taken place—in
which the Catholic bishop swears publicly, in the very town in
which it is situated, that he never heard any Catholic say “ that
the attendance of Catholic pupils in it was attended with any
danger to their faith”—in which he swears that it was scarcely
possible that an offensive word against the faith could be spoken
without his knowledge—of which the proprietors wished to
make him a manager—and from which the masters sent all the
Catholic pupils regularly to Mass, to catechism, and to their
other religious duties. Moreover, he only allowed this until he
should have a seminary of his own, in which he could give
religious as well as scientific instruction. And this was in the
year 1825, when almost all the bishops knew that the candidates
for the priesthood obtained their classical education at schools
conducted by Protestant and Presbyterian ministers, and by
Quakers. Father Maher’s declaration about the peculiar
atrocity of a candidate for the ministry learning classics from
an Arian, is quite worthy of its author; as if it would be a
frightful thing if one of that sect should get into the ministry,
but a mere trifle if a Protestant, who rejects five out of the
seven sacraments, believes confession to be a humbug, and the
Mass idolatrous; or a Quaker, who admits no sacraments at
all, and very little else, should get into the priesthood. But,
indeed, no more sense could be expected from a Catholic priest
who takes Dr. Cooke, Leslie Foster, and J. Glassford for his
guides, philosophers, and friends. Dr. Cooke it was who pro-
claimed the banns between Protestants and Presbyterians, who
were to wed, for the express purpose of extirpating Popery. He
it was, who, by bis letters and harangues, excited the Belfast
mob to attack the Music-hall, because O’Connell was presiding
in it at a soiree, and to wreck the hotel in which he stopped.
He was also the ally of Mortimer O’Sullivan and M‘Gee, at
Exeter-hall, He opposed the institution, because it was not
anti-Popish and proselytizing, and, perhaps, because at that


time he had not got anything in it himself. I had a passage of
arms with him once, so I have no objection that he and Mr.
Maher should fraternize.
Mr. Maher’s other two friends did not, as he poetically ex-
claims, “ proudly withstand the spurious liberality of the
prelate.” They did not say a word in their report about Dr.
Crolly or the Catholics ; their object was to back the No-Popery
bigots; but lam not sorry that Mr. Maher allies himself and
his calumnies with J. Glassford, Leslie Foster, and Dr. Cooke.
The Belfast institution was not, however, the only subject on
which these two gentlemen differed from their fellow-commis-
sioners. They presented a separate report regarding the
education of the poor also, which will be found in the Appendix
at the end of the volume containing the 3rd, 4th, sth, 6th,
7th, Bth, and 9th Reports of the Irish Education Inquiry.
They there opposed all change in the Kildare-place system,
“because, about twenty years ago, as we (Leslie Foster and
Glassford) are led to believe, the (Protestant) Scriptures were
not read in so many as 600 schools in Ireland, while, at present,
as we have ascertained, they have found their way into 6,058
daily schools (some of them, no doubt, in the kingdom of Con-
naught), independent of 1,945 Sunday schools—in all, into
about 8,000 schools. The improvement in other points is not
less striking—l,37o schoolmasters and mistresses, of a very
superior description, have been sent forth by the Kildare-place
Society,” &c. There is nothing so blind as faction.
I shall now give a brief history of Dr. Crolly’s public career,
and then close this long letter. He entered on the duties of
parish priest of Belfast, under very arduous circumstances.
There had been, up to that time, in that large town, only one
small chapel, scarcely capable of containing two hundred persons ;
and even that had not been long built, for the Protestant gentle-
man who granted the site on which it stands, and whom 1 knew
intimately, is only dead a few years. I often heard him say,
that he remembered the time when the only Catholic about the
town was a labouring man, and that he had gone out to look at
him as a curiosity. Within the memory of a person who was
living when I resided in Belfast, a few years ago, the Catholics,
who amounted to about a dozen, used to assemble in a loft in
Mill-street, where the parish priest of Hannastown—a mountain
district in the neighbourhood—used to say Mass for them once
in three weeks. A Catholic clergyman could not even appear
publicly in Belfast without great personal danger; for the parish
priest just mentioned, having been known to be in town attending
a sick call, the house was surrounded, not by Arians, but by


firm believers in the Trinity, who would have taken his life if he
had not, fortunately, escaped through a sewer. The Arians, ou
the contrary, as a body, uniformly insisted that the Catholics
had as good a right to practise their religion as any other per-
sons in the community ; and Dr. Crolly would have been a had,
as well as a foolish man, if he had not gone as far as he could
to conciliate those who stood up for his own rights and those of
his people. If he had commenced his career as a firebrand, he
would not only have contradicted the example of his predecessor,
and acted in opposition to the wishes of his bishop, but would
infallibly have been forced to leave the town. Yet, in the most
difficult circumstances in which he was placed, be did not go so far,
in compliance with the prejudices of Protestants, as the late
illustrious Dr. Doyle, or even as his predecessor in the primacy,
Dr. Curtis. I do not wish to enter into the detail of this part
of the subject just now, lest I should appear to be imitating Mr.
Maher in speaking harshly of deceased bishops ; but if the sub-
ject be forced upon me, of course I shall not shrink from making
good my assertion.
When Dr. Crolly came to Belfast a second chapel, which he
soon completed, was in course of erection. The parish of Bel-
fast then extended from near Ballymena, in the county Antrim,
to beyond Donaghadee, in the county Down, or between thirty
and forty miles in length, and I really cannot tell its breadth.
In this entire district there was only in actual use the little
chapel I have mentioned in Belfast, when Dr. Crolly took pos-
sesssion of the parish, and his only assistant was the Very Rev.
Dr. M'Auley, now P.P. of Downpatrick. Dr. Crolly’s con-
ciliatory spirit never interfered with his fearless assertion of the
doctrines of the Catholic Church; for, shortly after coming to
Belfast, he delivered a course of lectures on Catholic doctrine,
.and, amongst other subjects, on the Divinity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which was always a favourite topic with him. These
lectures were attended not only by a large number of lay Pro-
testants, including Arians, but also by many dissenting ministers,
who took notes of .what he said. Conversions became so fre-
quent, that the new church was soon filled to overflowing. Dr.
Crolly, as we have seen, declares in his evidence that he was
not one month, at a time, out of Belfast for thirteen years; and
I have been often told by persons who were fully acquainted with
the facts, that there were not seven mornings in any one of these
thirteen years, on which he did not say Mass and hear confes-
sions in his church. He lectured in the evenings during Lent,
and preached on every Sunday in the year. I know that he re-
ceived between one and two hundred adult converts into the


Church every year during the time that he remained in Belfast,
independently of those who were received by his assistants, and
who almost all derived the first inspiration from his discourses.
Indeed, when I went myself on the mission in Belfast, shortly
after Dr. Crolly had left it, there was scarcely a pew in the
churches in which there was not one or more converts. I believe
the Catholic population, at the time of his departure from Bel-
fast, must have.exceeded 30,000, for, not very long afterwards,
during the Jubilee which Gregory XVI. proclaimed, on account
of the state of Spain, I, along with the other clergymen then
officiating in that town, administered the blessed Eucharist to
upwards of 20,000 persons.
During the time that Dr. Crolly was parish priest of Belfast,
be enjoyed the entire confidence of the bishop of the diocess, and
at the end of thirteen years’ labour he received a similar testimony
from his fellow-priests. The clergy had no right to vote at the
time Dr. Crolly was appointed Bishop of Down and Connor; never-
theless both parish priests and curates assembled, and almost una-
nimously begged that he would be appointed their bishop. Their
selection was approved by the bishops of the province and by the
Pope. In the episcopal office he acquitted himself with the same
zeal which he displayed whilst he was parish priest. He built
chapels in the remoter districts of his own charge, and erected
them into parishes. He built splendid schools for the education
of the poor, and a seminary for the accommodation of those in
more affluent circumstances, and especially for the candidates for
the priesthood, thus fulfilling the promise which he had made
in his evidence in 1825. He also built a residence for the bishop
and clergy, and a country house, with a small demesne attached
to it, for the accommodation of the boarders at the seminary.
The episcopal residence, St. Patrick’s Church, the seminary, and
poor schools, are all together, and form one of the most complete
establishments in the kingdom. Between thirty and forty new
chapels were built in Down and Connor in the ten years during
which he continued bishop there, and to every one of them he
contributed liberally. In fact, a complete revival of Catholicity
took place during the reign of this Arian bishop !
The evidence to which Mr. Maher.objects was given and pub-
lished in the very commencement of his episcopacy. It could
have been no secret, for the eyes of all men were then turned to
the subject of education. The very same commission which had
inquired into the Belfast institution, in 1825, inquired into the
state of Maynooth in 1826, during which Dr. Crolly was again
c


examined, as were also the Most Rev. Drs. Murray andMacHale,
all the professors, and several of the students of the col-
lege. In 1824-5, the same commissioners had inquired into the
education of the humbler classes, on which occasion Drs. Curtis,
Murray, Kelly, and Lalfan gave the very same evidence, as vve
have seen, as that which was given a few months afterwards by
Dr. Crolly. It is utterly absurd, therefore, to suppose that the
published evidence of the late Primate was not known to the
bishops and clergy of Ireland. Yet, ten years afterwards, he,
although from another diocess, was elected to the primacy by a
great majority of the clergy of Armagh. Again, the bishops of
the province and the Pope concurred with the clergy, and he was
placed at the head of the Irish Church. But it is, perhaps, still
more wonderful, that the clergy of Down and Connor were so
far from wishing to get this favourer of Arianism out of Belfast,
that they unanimously petitioned to have him retained in the
diocess, on the express ground that his removal would be most
injurious to the progress of Catholicity in that town.
In the primacy, Dr. Crolly conducted himself just as he had
done in the simple episcopate. In Armagh, as in Down and
Connor, the candidates for the priesthood had picked up Latin
and Greek wherever they could find them—many of them from
Protestant, and even from Arian, ministers. Dr. Nelson, who
was afterwards one of the Arian professors in the Belfast insti-
tion, kept a classical school in Dundalk; and I find by his evidence
at the education inquiry in 1826, that the present eminent pro-
fessor of mathematics in this college got part of his education at
that school. The first work, however, of the Arian Primate was
to set about building a Catholic seminary, where the candidates
for the priesthood could receive a religious as well as a literary
education. The real expense of erecting the seminary was very
nearly double the estimated expense of the architect; and although
the clergy and laity of the diocess contributed liberally, a Catho-
lic priest of the archdiocess of Armagh, who resided long in the
house with the late Primate, and a Catholic bishop who was
his bosom friend, have assured me that they are ready to
declare upon oath that he had always said that he had spent
£6OO upon it out of his own pocket." A great many chapels were
also erected in the archdiocess whilst he was Primate, to all of
which he contributed liberally. He had nearly completed the
exterior of a magnificent cathedral at Armagh, to which he not
only gave all he had at the commencement, but, as I have been
assured, paid himself each week, during the entire time it was


in progress, a sum equal to that contributed by the whole town
of Armagh. But God took him to himself before he could com-
plete the work which was so dear to his heart—
“ He gave his honours to the world again—
His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.”
GEORGE CROLLY,
Professor of Theology in St. Patrick’s College,
Maynooth.
LETTER II.
To the defence of the late Primate contained in the previous
letter, Mr. Maher made four attempts at a reply, in four sepa-
rate epistles, the publication of which occupied a fortnight. The
first I considered a complete retractation of his charges ; and in
this opinion I was confirmed not only hy private friends, but by
the public declaration of the very newspaper in which both the
attack and recantation were published. The second was a brief
note to the Evening Post, saying that he had repented. The
third was a case of conscience addressed to myself, to which
he appropriately attached the fictitious signature that he had
used when attacking Dr. Mac Hale. The fourth contained the
result of his fortnight’s laborious search through the twenty-five-
year-old evidence of Calvanistic and Arian ministers, in which
he hoped to light upon something which would enable him to re-
new his false accusations against the late Primate. To the
whole of these I replied in the following letter; and if I do not
republish Mr. Maher’s epistles, it is simply to avoid repetitions,
because all his discoveries are faithfully recorded in the annexed
document, and for the most part in his own words.
“ The creature’s at his dirty work again.”
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DUBLIN EVENING POST.
Feast of St. Raphael, Archangel,
October 24, 1850,
Dear Sir —Before replying to Mr. Maher’s renewed at-
tack upon the memory of the late Primate, I think it neces-
sary to dispose of the extraneous topics with which he has.
attempted to embarrass the present controversy.
I. He is quite welcome to think and to say anything he pleases
of ray style, my lectures, and my logic. I even make him a


present of the typographical errors which he has printed in italics.
I would render myself almost as ridiculous as himself, if I were
to quarrel with the harmless vanity which induces him to regard
his letters as models of style. When a man’s compositions are
sure to be laughed at by others, the least that can be expected
of him is that he should admire them himself. It would ill
become so humble a person as I am to compete in rhetoric with
the Demosthenes of Carlow, or in logic with the Aristotle of
Graigue. It is, however, extremely absurd to see him affecting
to treat my answer to his attack upon a dead bishop—who was
as much his superior in virtue and in intellect, as in character
and station—as a silly affair, and at the same time exhibiting
himself constantly for a fortnight, painfully writhing under its
effects—retracting, re-asserting, blustering, wriggling, and, after
all, failing most egregiously; for never did there appear in this
world four more ridiculous mice than those which have been
brought forth, after fourteen days’ labour, by this great moun-
tain of orthodoxy.
The length of my letter appears to have given him mortal
offence. Now, this is unreasonable; for Mr. Maher’s experience
should teach him that a good circumstantial calumny may be
conveyed in a single sentence, and that it will take a whole page
of the clearest evidence to refute it. He knows that a practised
band can condense a vast number of slanders in a single sentence.
Moreover, he should remember that I am replying at once to
his four epistles, and that, as I do not misrepresent but answer
my adversary, and as I wish the public to be able to judge of
this fact, a very considerable portion of my space is, necessarily,
occupied by elegant extracts from himself.
2. I neither have, nor ever had, the slightest intention of
rushing into the education controversy ; and hence Mr. Maher
will find no difficulty in defending his works against me. He
flatters himself enormously, if he imagines that any person out-
side of bis own little coterie ever troubles himself about his letters
or pamphlets. For my own part, sir, I can assure you that I
never read one of them, until the commencement of the present
controversy, and that I never yet met a single individual who
had read them. If he meddles not with me or mine, I promise
him most sincerely not only that I will not reply to any of his
productions, but, great as the sacrifice may be, that I will never
read one of them until the day of my death. Ido not consider
myself called upon to attempt to stop his mischievous and inso-
lent interference, which is so injurious to the cause he advocates.
My object solely is to vindicate the dead Primate from the
calumnies which he dared not to utter, in public , whilst he was
living, and which he now so courageously flings upon his grave.


3. Ido not maintain the infallibility of the late I'rimate. In
matters of opinion Mr. Maher has an undoubted right to differ
from him, as he had an equally undoubted right to differ from
Mr. Maher. Nothing deserves to be treated with more con
tcmptuous scorn than that ridiculous assumption of inerrancy
which characterises certain persons who write in Irish news-
papers. Their opinions are, at least, equal to the decrees of a
general council, and any one who presumes to dissent from them,
in the slightest degree, is at once set down as heterodox. Mr.
Maher has special reason to be tolerant on the subject of mixed
education, as he has written on both sides of the question. But
instead of learning to distrust his own judgment—instead of
acquiring a little moderation, on account of the mutability of his
opinions, he always rushes into extremes, and denounces as
heterodox to-day the opinions which alone were orthodox yester-
day. Of course, I could not expect to escape the shower of
anathemas which he rains down upon every one who pre-
sumes to contradict him in anything; but I do not intend
to seek for absolution until he becomes Grand Inquisitor in
Ireland.
4. A portion of the evidence given by the late Primate, during
the inquiry into the state of the Belfast institution, in 1825,
was quoted in some newspapers to show what were his opinions
on mixed education. Mr. Maher declared that other parts of
this evidence were so monstrous as to deprive Dr. Crolly’s opi-
nions on the subject of education of all weight and authority.
In order, he said, to enable the public to take Dr. Crolly’s
opinions at their just value, it was necessary to state that four
of the professors of the institution were Arians, who, as he
proves very unnecessarily by a quotation from the evidence of
the Rev. Thomas Hincks, did not believe Jesus Christ to be
God. He then quoted Dr. Crolly’s answer, in which he stated
that he had no objection that young men who were to be ulti-
mately sent to Maynooth should receive their education in the
first instance in the Belfast institution. These were the only
facts which Mr. Maher brought forward ; the rest of his letter
was filled with abusive epithets and reckless assertions.
My reply to that letter I shall not repeat here; but it is one
which Mr. Maher is evidently unable to forget or to forgive.
He has attempted to answer it in letters addressed to the editors
of newspapers, and in letters addressed to myself—in anonymous
letters, and in letters signed by his own name; he first retracts,
and then re-asserts his charges, and each of his successive efforts
proves that time has not diminished but increased his rage and
vexation.


In his first reply, which was dated the 6th October, he did not
dare to deny that his language might have conveyed a charge of
Arianism or indifferentism against the head of the Irish Church,
whose gray hairs had been laid in an honoured grave. But to
prefer so heinous a charge appears to him to be such a mere
trifle, that he will not stop, and indeed has not time, to examine
whether his letter countenances it or not. In this letter, however,
he fully retracts it. “ The letter of Mr. Crolly (he says) con-
tains, moreover, a great misapprehension of my meaning. He
supposes that I have charged the late Primate with Arianism, or,
at least, indifferentism. Now, if my letter, or any part of it,
countenances that charge (and I shall not now stop to examine
the point—indeed, I have not time), I do most fully and un-
equivocally retract it. I lose not a moment to do justice to the
late primate on that subject. Whatever my expressions were,
whether well or ill selected to convey my meaning, such an idea
as that attributed to me never entered my mind. Had such a
charge been made, I would not wonder much if it threw Mr.
Crolly for a moment into a towering passion, although he would
act more prudently by not letting it appear in print. From the
high panegyric pronounced on the late Primate, without possessing
accurate knowledge of the facts stated, I have no reason or wish
to dissent—quite the contrary ; the impression that his character
made upon my mind is, that he was a very active, intelligent, zeal-
ous, indefatigable, successful bishop in the vineyard committed to
his charge, and, moreover, a very amiable man.” In that letter
he pretends that the only charge he intended to make against
the late Primate, on the subject of education, is that which is con-
veyed in the following words :—“ The opinion which from first
to last he (Dr. Crolly) held on the subject of mixed education,
I conceive was exceedingly dangerous, and that danger was in-
creased by his otherwise high character and station.” So, then,
the crime on account of which this good and charitable priest—
this man of real and not of spurious charity—applied such
abominable language to Dr. Crolly, after his death, that he will
not, and, indeed, has not time, to inquire whether it counte-
nanced a charge of Arianism or indifferentism or not—is that he,
the Rev. James Maher, P.P. of Carlow-Graigue, always consi-
dered the opinions of the late Primate upon education to be ex-
ceedingly dangerous I If Mr. Maher always thought so, he
took an extremely singular way of showing it in 1840, when he
wrote his attack on Dr. Macllale. If he ahoays thought so,
why did he wait until after his death to attack him ? But let
me ask Mr. Maher does he not consider the opinion which the
four archbishops, acting on behalf of the whole Irish hierarchy,


expressed before Dr. Crolly, in 1825—that there could he no
possible objection to Catholics receiving a scientific education from
Protestants —exceedingly dangerous ? Does he not consider the
opinions on education of many of the Irish bishops, who now
actually govern our Church, exceedingly dangerous ? Does he
not consider his own former opinions exceedingly dangerous?
And if this were his charge against the late Primate, how did
this man dare to accuse him of expressing opinions on mixed
education which would excite abhorrence, shock the coun-
try, and which he hoped no other bishop in the Church of God
would utter? Above all, how dare this man renew his charge of
Arianism against the late Primate, on last Saturday, in language
still more gross and unchristian than that which he used at first?
Mr. Maher’s second reply is too insignificant to be noticed. His
third appeared anonymously, in the shape of a case of conscience,
addressed to myself:—
“If,” says Mr. Maher, “an anonymous writer , in 1840, uttered and
published, as you believe and aver, gross calumnies against a bishop,
is the Rev. G. Crolly justified in republishing them? Is it lawful to
search out amid the rubbish of that journal (the D. E. Post) a docu-
ment which you hold to he of a slanderous nature * * * to
publish it in a hostile paper, which welcomes every attach, old or new,
against the archbishop? Is every weapon legitimate in literary war-
fare ? Is it no evil to republish verbatim et literatim what you con-
sider a long series of calumnies ? . . Further observation for
ten years, of the mixed system of education, at home and abroad, and
watching its workings, have made the writer regret very sincerely
that ever he penned a line of that letter , And so far from mortify-
ing his feelings of self-love, it comes as a relief to the priest of
Kildare and of Leighlin to have the public opportunity afforded
him of retracting most fully every offensive expression in that docu-
ment, . . , Viewing the controversy in 1840, on mixed educa-
tion and the mode of conducting it, the priest of Kildare and Leigh-
lin may have formed a very wrong judgment. But if he held the
opinions then which you hold now, that the argument of that letter
was untrue and calumnious, no earthly consideration could have
induced him to publish it originally, or republish it ten years subse-
quently.”
To all this I answer—
1. That I do not consider every weapon lawful in literary
warfare. 2. That I did not choose the hostile paper, for it was
chosen by Mr. Maher himself in 1840 to circulate his calumnies
against Dr. Mac Hale, as well as in 1850 to circulate his calumnies


against Dr. Crolly. I, of course, necessarily replied in the
journal in which he made the attack. He shows a good deal of
shrewdness in seeking, as the medium for the publication of his
own letters, a journal which receives rubbish and slander into its
columns. 3. That there appears to me to be a considerable
difference, in point of morality, between the person who invents,
prints, and publishes a calumny as a fact, and the person who
republishes it as a calumny, especially when he knows that its
author, having changed sides, must admit it to be false and calum-
nious. Indeed, Mr. Maher should be very much obliged to me
for the republication ; for he says that it comes as a relief to his
feelings to have a public opportunity afforded him of retracting
it. 4. That when a priest, who goes back twenty-five years to
calumniate a dead bishop, can be found to acknowledge that he
falsely and anonymously slandered a living bishop, it is not only
lawful, but a sacred duty, to let the public know what kind of
person he is who thinks himself well employed in heaping insults
on the grave of the Primate of Ireland. I would scorn to write
or publish any fact that was not already notorious. I would not
knowingly injure or needlessly offend any man; but lam con-
vinced that in a just and holy cause I have a perfect right to use
those facts which have already appeared in the newspapers.
The attack which Mr. Maher made on the Archbishop of
Tuam in 1840, for opposing mixed education, is exceeding simi-
lar to that which he is making on the memory of the Primate in
1850, for having supported it. He vituperated Dr. Mac Hale,
anonymously, because he was living; he vituperates Dr. Crolly
in his own name because he is dead. He accused the former of
not opposing the wolf which was devastating the fold in Con-
naught; he accuses the latter of a surrender of Christian youth
into the hands of Arianism. In order to enable the reader to
make the comparison himself, I submit Mr. Maher’s attacks on
the two archbishops in double columns; and the clearest proof that
I do not mean any offence to the living is, that I republish the
attack on the dead also. Notwithstanding Mr. Maher’s renewed
assault on the memory of the Primate, the preponderance of
abuse, in point of quantity, is still greatly on the side of the
Archbishop of Tuam. As, however, in all my future letters I
shall publish these attacks in double columns, I do not yet de-
spair of seeing the preponderance on the side of the Primate.
I believe there was an opinion expressed, as to the character
of Mr. Maher’s slanders, by a very illustrious person : I must
find this out when I shall again have occasion to notice his
attacks:—


What Mr. Maher wrote about
the Archbishop of Tuam in 1840,
and did not retract for ten years,
because that prelate opposed
mixed education:—
“Be mine the task to circum-
scribe the sphere of scandal, and,
by an expose of the wretched
sophistry and folly in which it
has originated, and by which it
has been throughout sustained,
bring its author from that course
in which he has already ventured
too far. , . . One of
the combatants, seeing the weight
of truth against him, endeavours
to encumber it with verbiage and
circumlocution, not being able by
fair argument to rebut it—or, by
indulging the resource of weak
minds, in noisy, angry, personal
invective against the advocates of
truth. That this course has been
pursued in the present contro-
versy, to the prejudice of true re-
ligion, I shall clearly prove to
your Grace. . . You in-
dited a pastoral, and published it
in the newspapers on your return
from a meeting of the prelates, in
which you spoke all manner of
evil of the board.
In a word, to discredit the board,
you used, by implication, the name
and authority of the bishops who
had all along, as your Grace well
knew, consistently sustained it.
Is this mode of carrying your
point, my lord, fair or honour-
able? . . . This erroneous
assumption forms the basis of all
your reasoning against the nation-
al system of education, and of the
angry declamation against a
prelate of your own church, at
the expense of so much of your
time and character.
You assailed the board with
What Mr. Maher writes about
the late Primate in 1860, and
which, judging from analogy, he
will not retract for ten years, be-
cause that prelate advocated
mixed education.
Mr. Maher’s character of Dr.
Crolly, on the 20th of Septem-
ber :
“ At length came the examina-
tion of Dr. Crolly.
That is, whether he (Dr. Crolly)
had any objection to send to the
classes of the impugners of the
Divinity of Christ, Christian youth
preparing for the priesthood. His
answer will, I should think, sur-
prise and shock the country.
. . There is not, I would
fain hope, another bishop in the
Church of God who would return
the same answer, and if there he,
the only effect his opinion, as to
mixed education, icill have on the
public mind is to excite its sur-
prise, regret, and abhorrence. . .
It is this laxity of opinion which
the State by its patronage ever
seeks to extend amongst church-
men in high places—this break-
ing down of all the fences of
Christianity, or rather total
abandonment of those necessary
safeguards—this delivering up,
unprotected,Christian youth into
the hands of Arianism, which
has inundated Christian lands
with scepticism. The Govern-
ment wants a priesthood to leave
dogmas and points of faith in the
bach-ground, and quietly to re-
ceive the pay and discharge the
duties of an ecclesiastical police
—bishops to consider themselves
as officers of a splendid church
establishment, but not at all as
shepherds of the people. Under
the guidance of such a spirit the


redoubled violence, and let your-
self loose against Dr. Murray in
a strain which has deeply afflicted
your best friends. In your pre-
cipitate course of vituperation it
occurred to you to charge the
senior of the episcopal bench, the
beloved and revered Archbishop
of Dublin, with misrepresenting
the opinions of his brother pre-
lates. You had, my lord, unfor-
tunately for your own fame —
nothing else is affected by it—
nerve to prefer such a charge.
You, my lord, prefer this griev-
ous charge; but who has been
guilty of the offence of misrepre-
senting, in this case, the opinions
of the episcopal body ? The
bishops, who are undoubtedly the
best judges of their own opinions,
declared that Dr. Murray ex-
plained their sentiments truly and
accurately. . . . Their
testimony fixes upon you the
charge which, in the most disas-
trous moment of your life, you
ventured to prefer against the
brightest ornament of the episco-
pal bench. It is painful to tell
your lordship, but it is absolutely
necessary that you should know
it, that much of your efficiency
and utility as a public man is for
ever gone. Your angry epistles
would ruin irretrievably a cha-
racter of ten times your worth.
To all your defences of the faith,
the ever ready and overwhelming
reply is, ‘ Pshaw! he reviled the
prelates of his own Church! Will
not your language, my lord, scan-
dalize the faithful, disedify the
rising generation, and abate their
respect for the episcopal office ?
. . . . The scriptural
type of faith without charity is
the sounding brass, which has its
poor people would, in a little
time, be unable to tell whether
they ought not to reject the Divi-
nity of Christ
Dr. Cooke, of Exeter-hall cele-
brity, is favourably contrasted
with Dr. Crolly, and Leslie Fos-
ter and J. Glassford—the two
No-Popery bigots of the commis-
sion—proudly withstood the spu-
rious liberality of the prelate.”
On the 6th of October he re-
tracted this charge, as I have al-
ready shown, but renewed it in
still more offensive language on
the 18th of the same month :
“ The contrary opinion coming
from a bishop (Dr. Crolly) should
excite the public surprise, regret,
and abhorrence.
What greater facilities for the
inculcation of Arian principles
could Mr. Montgomery possibly
desire ? Is not this educational
system a breahing down of the
fences of Christianity—a scan-
dalous surrender of unprotected
youth into the hands of Arian-
ism ? May not the approval of
it be fairly designated a false
charity, a spurious liberality ?
Is it not, to speak the truth
boldly, treason against the King
of Ages, the immortal and in-
visible God, and treachery
aqainst those whom he redeem-
ed ?”
Yet this man had solemnly de-
clared, only a few days previously,
that he never intended to charge
the late Primate with Arianism or
indifferentism, and that, if “ his
letter or any part of it, contained
that charge, he fully and unequi-
vocally retracted it.”


fulfilment in the loud and discordant vapouring of the angry theologue.
Ah, it sickens the heart to see the high
places in the Church of God desecrated by the vanities and jealousies
of weak mortals. . . . The violence and intemperance
of Tuam contrasting so unfavourably with the meekness and forbear-
ance of Dublin. Your chances of success are much greater with an
opponent of another temperament. There, my lord, is Father
O’Malley, an antagonist in every way worthy of you—your equal in
polished and cutting sarcasm—your superior in dialectics. He is
already in the arena. Up, my lord, and at him. Then there will be
no disedifying controversy hetioeen his Grace of Tuam and the Arch-
bishop of Dublin, but a very handsome set-to between General Mae-
Hale and Major O’Malley.
“ In some of your letters, you expressed an opinion that, if the days
of the uncompromising Dr. Doyle were prolonged to the present, he
would have seconded your assault on the national system of education.
You do, indeed, my lord, flatter yourself with vain fancies. The cla-
mour from the watch-tower of Tuam would never have brought him
of Kildare and Leighlin into opposition to the board of which Doctor
Murray is a member. When the signature of ‘John of Tuam,’ in the
newspapers, met his eye, he said, in words which it is not easy to for-
get, ‘ That man has no ballast in him.’ ......
You at length distinctly perceive the scandalous effect of this contro-
versy on the public mind—of the taunts, the ungenerous attacks, the
groundless insinuations of your miscalled pastorals ; the reckless
charges, the imputations, the boiling and bubbling over of a fretted
and perturbed spirit Having disturbed the
harmony of the episcopal bench, what incomparable folly now to ex-
claim, ‘I am not the aggressor!’ The puerility of this protest fur-
nishes lamentable proof of the correctness of Dr. Doyle’s judgment,
formed six years ago Dr. Murray’s statement
contains no suppressio veri or suggestio falsi. .
He can well bear up against all trials, even that which formed the
climax of Paul’s suffering— the periculum a falsis fratribus,”
In the anonymous case of conscience Mr. Maher endeavours
to insinuate that he is not the author of this terrible attack on
the Archbishop of Tuam. Now, I demand to know from him,
in his own name, whether he is or is not the writer of that letter ?
It is not enough for him to say that he has changed his opinions,
and that he regrets having written it. I demand, moreover, to
know whether he still maintains the truth of the statements con-
tained in that document, or whether he now admits that he anony-
mously preferred & false charge against an archbishop ? Is it true
that his Grace neglected his duty during the remarkable and
satisfactory progress of proselytism in the kingdom of Connaught,
and whilst 9,158 Catholics of that province were in schools of
proselytism ? Is it true that Dr. Doyle said he had no ballast


in him, and that this opinion of the illustrious bishop was con-
firmed by Mr. Maher’s own experience ? Is it true that his
Grace wilfully misrepresented the opinions of his fellow-bishops,
and that he published scandalous, groundless, and reckless
charges in miscalled pastorals ? These are questions to each
of which I shall demand an explicit answer from Mr. Maher,
whenever I shall be forced to reply to his renewed attacks upon
the memory of the late Primate.
But, sir, is it not'the very extreme of shamelessness for a man
who could anonymously print in a newspaper such a heap of vile
abuse and acknowledged falsehoods against an archbishop, to find
fault with the language which I used towards himself? I should,
indeed, reply in courtly phrase to the man who picks two isolated
answers out of the evidence of the late Primate to fix a false and
flagitious charge upon him—who carefully suppresses every part
of that evidence which would explain his meaning and refute
the calumny—who labours to make him accountable, after his
death, for the answers of Arian and Calvanistic ministers—and
who thinks it such a trifle to use language which might counte-
nance a charge of Arianism or indifterentism against him, that
he does not stop, and, indeed, has not time, to examine the point.
He is, no doubt, in a very unenviable position; but he has no
more right to complain than the thief who has been caught, con-
victed, and put in the pillory.
I now come to Mr, Maher’s fourth epistle, in which he under-
takes to refute my arguments seriatim. “ Your correspondent’s
first argument,” he says, “may be briefly stated thus:—Three
bishops, whom he names (good taste would have suggested the
propriety of not naming them), three professors of Maynooth,
whom he very properly does not name, and several priests from
the north, have all preserved the faith unsullied, during their
course in Arian, Quaker, and Protestant schools, and have since
been excellent ecclesiastics; therefore, he concludes no danger
to faith exists in such schools, and, consequently, Dr. Crolly was
justified in entertaining no sort of objection against them. * *
I do not, I hope, misrepresent either its force or cogency.” Now,
sir, I appeal to you, who have probably read my letter, if you
have ever before—except, perhaps, from the same author—pub-
lished so unblushing and scandalous a perversion of the truth ?
I did not say that because three bishops, three professors of
Maynooth, and several priests of the north preserved their faith
unsullied, during their course in Arian, Quaker, and Protestant
schools, there was no danger to the faith in these schools. I
never said or thought that there was no danger in Trinity Col-
lege, where so many perversions have unhappily taken place. I


do not say that the danger was not in many instances remote,
and the risk justifiable on account of the necessity of the case.
I simply say that danger existed in that establishment. I dis-
tinctly stated that I knew not what safeguards existed in the
Protestant, Arian, and Quaker schools, at which the bishops
the candidates for the ministry were educated, in Dun-
dalk, Drogheda, Dublin, Ballitore, &c., without ever expressing
the slightest objection to the practice. It was not my business to
prove that there was no danger, or that perversions did not ac-
tually take place, in those establishments. I adduced these ex-
amples to prove, not that no danger existed in those seminaries,
hut that the late Primate was not the only bishop who, in 1825
had no objection that the candidates for the ministry should
receive their preliminary education in Protestant, Arian, and
even Quaker schools, as the very same thing was done at the
same time by other bishops in Ulster, Leinster, and Munster,
and I have no doubt in Connaught also.
But, lest Mr. Maher should again mistake or misrepresent my
argument, I shall recapitulate it briefly. Mr. Maher having
quoted Dr. Crolly’s answer, in which that prelate stated that he
had no objection that the candidates for the priesthood should
receive their classical and scientific education in the institution,
four of the professors of which were Arians, declared that he
would fain hope that no other bishop in the Church of God
would return a similar answer. As I have already had occasion
to mention frequently, and as will he manifest to any one who
will read his first attack upon the Primate, Mr. Maher stated no
fact against him, except that he had no objection to allow young
men, who were ultimately destined for Maynooth, to receive their
preliminary education in a school, four of the professors of which
did not believe in the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ. On
this he rested his entire argument. I replied:—
1. That it was not more unlawful for the candidate for the
priesthood to receive his preliminary education from an Arian
than from an Anglican, a Calvinist, or a Quaker. I said that
the Catholic Church did not admit the distinction between fun-
damentals and non-fundamentals; and that she would be equally
unwilling to receive into her ministry a person who would look
upon confession as a humbug, and the invocation of the immacu-
late Mother of God, and the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass as
idolatrous, as an Arian who rejected the Divinity of our blessed
Lord, or even as a Quaker, who could not be validly ordained,
on account of not being a Christian.
2. That Dr. Crolly’s predecessors in Down and Connor, as
well as in the primacy—the Bishop of Ardagh, Cork, Cloyne,


&c., and the Archbishops of Dublin and Cashel knew that
candidates for the ministry, in their respective diocesses, received
their preliminary education at schools conducted by Protestant
and Arian ministers, and even by Quakers, in 1825; and that
they never expressed the slightest objection to the practice.
Certainly, those prelates practically declared that they had no
objection that the candidates for the ministry should receive
their preparatory education in those schools, considering the
circumstances of the country at that time. If the question
had been put to them in 1825, whether they had any objection
that young men, who were ultimately to be sent to Maynooth,
should receive [education, in the first instance, in schools con-
ducted by Protestants, Arians, or Quakers, they must have
either replied that they had no objection, or have convicted
themselves not only of the grossest negligence during the past,
but of a deliberate intention to betray the Church for the future;
for those bishops did not only never express any objection to the
practice up to 1825, but, with one or two exceptions, never
attempted to remedy it during the remainder of their episcopacy.
Doctor Crolly did far more than any bishop in Ireland to estab-
lish seminaries where the candidates for the ministry could
receive a better and more religious training. He expressly
stated, in his evidence, that he would prefer a seminary with
less science, in which he could combine a religious with a secu-
lar education ; and, accordingly, he did establish such an
institution, for the instruction not only of those who were to be
sent to Maynooth, but of Catholic youth in general. When he
went to Armagh, ten years afterwards—although two Primates
had died since he had become a bishop—he found no Catholic
seminary or academy for the education of youth destined for the
ministry. His first care was to remedy this evil; and since I wrote
my last letter, I have been informed by the priests of the arch-
diocess, that he had not only laid out £6OO of his own money on
the seminary itself, but that he paid £3OO for tenant-right of
thirty acres of land which are attached to it, and that he spent
£4OO on a house for the residence of the clergy. It does not
diminish his generosity and zeal, although the land and house
have lost much of their value since he purchased them.
3. That the four Catholic archbishops had, in the name of
the entire Irish hierarchy, given the identicalymswer in January,
1825, and before Dr.'Crolly was yet a bishop, which that pre-
late afterwards gave at a later period of the same year. The
Most Rev. Drs. Curtis, Murray, Kelly, and Laffan declared,
“ that there could be no possible objection to Roman Catholics
receiving literanj instruction from a Protestant.” They do not


except Arlans, or Quakers, nor do they contradict their own
practice by making any reservation in favour of those who were
ultimately to be sent to Maynooth. According to Mr. Maher’s
impartial mode of dealing wdth the .late Primate’s evidence, the
question put to them should run thus—Have you, the four arch-
bishops of Ireland, acting in the name of the whole body—have
you, to whom the care of the faith of your people is intrusted,
any objection to have youth, at the most tender and susceptible
period of life, educated by the impugners of the Confessional—
by the blasphemers of the Mass—by unbaptized Pagans ? Their
answer will, I should^think, surprise and shock the country. It
is this—There can be no possible objection to Roman Catholics
receiving literary instruction from a Protestant.
This is my unanswered and unanswerable refutation of Mr,
Maher’s assertion, that because the late Primate had declared
that he had no objection that young men, who were ultimately
destined for Maynooth, should receive a literary education in a
seminary, four of the professors of which were Arians, he had
said that which no other bishop in the Church of God would
utter.
Mr. Maher, however, answers it in two ways: first, by con-
structing a similar argument; secondly, by a direct reply. I
shall take them up in his own order:—
“Let us,” says Mr. Maher, “construct a similar argument for the
consideration of your learned correspondent. Daniel escaped unhurt
from the lions’ den; the three Hebrew children from the fiery furnace;
therefore, it would be quite safe to expose all the children of the
country to the same ordeal. The logic is the same in both cases:
the conclusions equally inconsequent.”
Now, this similitude refers not in the least to my argument,
but to Mr. Maher’s perversion of it. I have stated over and over
again that my concern is not with the youths who frequented
Protestant, Arian, and Quaker schools, but with the bishop who
never objected to their going there. My object is to refute his as-
sertion that no bishop in.the Church of God would have given the
same answer as Dr. Crolly, by proving that the Catholic bishops,
in 1825, must have either given the same answer, or have con-
victed themselves of the grossest negligence during the past,
and of intentional treason for the rest of their lives. Certainly
those bishops, if they were now alive, would be highly flattered
by the compliment which Mr. Maher pays them. They know-
ingly allowed the candidates for the priesthood, without ever
making the slightest objection, to go to schools for their prelimi-
nary education, where it was as difficult for them to preserve the


faith as it would be for them to preserve whole bones in a
lion’s den, or to escape unhurt out of a. fiery furnace. That is,
it would require a miraculous interposition of Divine Providence.
I repeat, that it is not my business to say what occurred in any
Protestant school, except the Belfast institution. But I would
remind Mr. Maher that the people of those times kept the faith
through many trials, temptations, and persecutions—that they
sacrificed everything to preserve it—and that it is most absurd
to suppose that they would have sent their children to schools
in which they could not have been saved from perversion except
by a special miracle. It is a gross libel on the great and good
bishops of those times to say that they would have allowed, with-
out a word of remonstrance, the youth committed to their care
to rush into lions’ dens and fiery furnaces of perversion. Sir,
they would have opposed such a practice at the risk of their lives.
But as far as the Belfast institution is concerned, although it
was Frequented by considerable numbers of Catholics, no per-
version ever took place there. The good people of that town
will, no doubt, be greatly astonished to find that so many miracles
were wrought amongst them. Suppose, now, that persons had
been in the habit of descending every day for years into the
same lions’ den into which Daniel was thrown, and of being cast
into the same fiery furnace into which the three youths were
flung, and that none of them ever sustained any injury, the escape
of Daniel and of the youths would not only not have been
miraculous, but it would have been very extraordinary and un-
usual if they had not escaped. May I venture to suggest to
this eminent reasoner, that the conclusion would have been a
little more logical if he had said, that as every one who entered
the lions’ den, save Daniel alone, was instantly devoured, and as
every one who went near the furnace, save the three youths, was
instantly consumed, so, if the Belfast institution had been a
lions’ den and a fiery furnace of perversion, would all those, or
most of those who entered it, have lost the faith. Yet not a
single Catholic was ever perverted there. So much for the
illustration. I now come to the direct answer.
“Take this,” he says, as an answer, “ thousands in the north, as I
shall just now prove, have lost their faith in the Divinity of the
Saviour in the schools of Arians ; therefore, such schools are to be
avoided as infinitely dangerous; and the contrary opinion coming
from a bishop cannot fail to excite the public surprise, regret, and
abhorrence. This argument, I believe, is neither forced nor exag-
gerated. The fact of myriads being perverted by Arian teachers is
stated by the Rev. J. Carlile in his evidence.”—4th Report, p. 130.


“Perversion teas carried on to such an extent,” Carlile observes, “as
to become the fashionable religion of the dag; and those who believed
in the Divinity of Christ were looked upon as men of little science
or talent.’ ”
I have quoted the entire paragraph, and I beg leave to call
especial attention to it, as illustrating most fully what I stated
in the beginning of this letter—that a vast amount of falsifica-
tion may be squeezed into a very narrow space.
1. The thousands who lost the faith had been Catholics,
of course; for I have already had occasion, more than once, to
state that the Catholic Church does not recognise the distinction
between fundamental and non-fundamental articles of faith—that
an individual ceases as effectually to belong to her communion by
becoming a pure Calvinist as by becoming an Arian or a Quaker.
Now, will it be believed that the perversions of which Mr.
Carlile spoke regarded merely the fluctuations between pure
Calvinism and Arianism, which took place amongst the Presby-
terians themselves, and that neither he nor any other witness
either said or insinuated that a single Catholic had been per-
verted into Arianism? A Catholic bishop should have very
little to do in his own congregation, when he would interfere in
such a quarrel. But it is necessary to go into this matter more
minutely.
The witness on whom Mr. Maher relies is the Rev. J. Carlile
of Dublin, who was at the time Moderator of the Synod of Ulster.
It must be remembered that, in 1825, the Divinity of our Lord
Jesus Christ was not a fundamental doctrine with that body.
Mr. Carlile states that the Synod never came to a division on
this point, but that he considered about a fourth of the ministers
were Arians. Mr. Maher adduces this gentleman’s evidence to
prove three assertions. 1. That thousands and myriads were
perverted into Arianism. 2. That perversion to Arianism was
carried to such an extent as to become the fashionable religion
of the day. 3. That these perversions were effected in schools
conducted by Arians, and especially in the Belfast institution.
With regard to the first point, I have already stated that no
perversion took place of a single Catholic into Arianism. But
does Mr. Carlile state that perversions to Arianism were fre-
quent in 1825, even amongst the Presbyterians? He states the
very contrary, as will appear by the following extract from his
evidence :—“ Are we to understand that it is your opinion there
was a time when Arianism was more prevalent in the Synod of
Ulster than now?” Carlile—“Yes, I have always understood
so; and even since I became a member of the Synod, the Arian
i)


party at one time seemed to feel the strength of their numbers
more than they do now.” “ According to your experience, which
is the doctrine most acceptable to the (Presbyterian) people?”
“ The orthodox, without any question; and vacant congregations,
which have been under Arian ministers, almost all look for ortho-
dox ministers.’’ “You mean upon the occasion of a change?”
“Yes.” He adds, that many Arian ministers obtained congre-
gations on account of the neatness of their language; but that
their influence began to decline as soon as their sentiments
became known. Mr. Carlile’s evidence is, therefore, so far
from sustaining Mr. Maher’s assertion, that perversions to
Arianism were taking place by thousands and myriads, that it
distinctly proves the very contrary—that in 1825, and for some
time previously, Arianism had been rapidly declining amongst
the Presbyterians.
Mr. Maber’s second assertion is given by him in inverted
commas, and in Mr. Carlile’s own words—“ Perversion was car-
ried to such an extent,” Carlile observes, “as to become the
fashionable religion of the day; and those who believed in the
Divinity of Christ were looked upon as men of little science
or talent.” It is on this quotation that he relies for the proof
of his other assertions.
Now, I charge Mr. Maher distinctly with having fabricated
this quotation. For Ist, Mr. Carlile’s evidence does not at all
contain these words, “ perversion was carried to such an extent,”
although Mr. Maher puts them in inverted commas, and puts
after them “ Carlile observes.” 2nd, They entirely pervert Mr.
Carlile’s meaning. The following extracts are taken from that
gentleman’s evidence:—
“ Have you observed whether there is any tendency in Arianism to
become more successful among the higher than the lower ranks of
society ?” Carlile—“ Any tendency to advancement has been among
the higher ranks.” “To what do you attribute that very remark-
able circumstance ?—lt was partly an adventitious matter with us.
Arianism, when it was introduced, was the fashionable philosophy of
the day ; it came into Scotland from Dr. Samuel Clarke and his party
in England; and it came from Scotland into Ireland from some of
the professors there : it became fashionable for a time in this country
also, and those who held orthodox sentiments were looked upon as
men of little science or talent; but true religion is, from its nature,
and from the circumstances of the poor, always most acceptable to
them : the rich have many temptations to reject it, which the poor
have not.”
Ist. The extracts which I have quoted prove, ,f that the fact
of mi/riads being perverted by Arian teachers,” is not stated by


the Rev. J. Carlile, but invented by Mr. Maher. 2nd. That
gentleman does not state “perversions took place to such an
extent (even among the Presbyterians), as to become the fashion-
able religion.” On the contrary, he expressly declares that it was
the fashionable philosophy when it was first introduced, and that
it became fashionable in Ireland also: and to this he chiefly as-
cribes the circumstances that any progress Arianism made was
among the higher classes. It was not popular, according to
Mr. Carlile, amongst the Presbyterian poor, nor did it gain
amongst them many proselytes.
But the third of Mr. Maher’s assertions is the most extraor-
dinary of all. He says he will prove that “ thousands in the
north have lost their faith in the Divinity of Christ in the
schools of Arians—that myriads have been perverted by Arian
teachers and then he exclaims—“ With these facts before us
should not our prelates raise their warning voice ?” The only
proof he gives of these facts is the falsified quotation from Mr.
Carlile. The only school that concerns my present purpose is the
Belfast institution, which, according to Mr. Carlile, who was one
of the leaders of the orthodox Presbyterians, did not propagate,
but, on the contrary, checked the progress of Arianism.
The following extract is from Mr. Carlile’s evidence:—
“So far as your experience goes, are you satisfied with the result
in the institution of Belfast, as evidenced in the conduct of the young
men who have gone from it ?’’—“ They have of late much improved.”
“ Have you found them, lately, what you would call orthodox ?”
“They have latterly been more generally so.” “With a view to
orthodoxy alone, and the exclusion of Arianism, which w r ould you
prefer the education of candidates for the ministry at Belfast, under
the existing state of things, or that of the Scotch colleges ?”—“ In
Belfast under the existing state of things ; at the same time there are
several things that may be taken into view as influencing young men
in professing orthodoxy; and how far the whole improvement is to be
attributed to the academy, Ido not know, but I have no doubt a very
large proportion of it is.”
We have, moreover, the emphatic testimony of Foster and
Glassford in the very report which they drew up against the ad-
mission of Arian professors, that the appointment of such per-
sons, although some of them had then filled their chairs for eight
years, had, up to 1825, led to no extension of Arian doctrines,
even amongst the Presbyterians. “We are satisfied,” they say
(Fourth Report, letter, p. 27), “that as yet these appointments
have not led to an extension of Arian doctrines amongst the Pres-
byterian body.”


There is not a single word, either in Mr. Carlile’s evidence or
in any other part of the report, to justify the assertion that a
single perversion to Arianism had ever taken place in the insti-
tution. If any such fact existed, it would undoubtedly have
been brought forward. That gentleman does not once mention
any other Arian school, nor does he say that a single -perversion
ever occurred in any such place. How, then, has Mr. Maher the
brazen effrontery to assert that thousands in the north have lost
their faith in the schools of Arians! But Mr. Carlile does tell
us how Arianism came into Ireland, and how it was spread to
whatever extent it existed, or exists, amongst the Presbyterians
of the north. He says, in an extract which I have already
quoted, that it was imported into Ireland from some of the pro-
fessors in the Scotch universities (which were then, and still
are, frequented by many Catholics) ; and he declares, that, with
a view to orthodoxy alone, he would much prefer the Belfast
institution to the Scotch colleges. The young ministers
brought these doctrines home with them to Ireland, and, having
obtained congregations, sometimes communicated the fashionable
doctrine to a few of the richest of their parishioners. I shall
trouble Mr. Maher, in addition to the work I have already cut
out for him, to justify his falsifications of Mr. Carlile’s evidence
in his next letter.
“The second argument of your correspondent,” says Mr.
Maher, “is an emphatic assertion of the absolute perfection of the
safeguards for the faith in the Belfast College.” I did not make
any emphatic assertion, or any assertion at all, of the absolute
perfection, of the safeguards in the Belfast College. The late
Primate did not consider the Belfast College absolutely perfect, or
he would not have gone to the expense of building a seminary of
his own. On the contrary, I merely said that Mr. Maher’s as-
sertion was most false—that the necessary safeguards were totally
abandoned in the institution, and Christian youth delivered up
unprotected into the hands of Arianism. I added my convic-
tion, after enumerating the safeguards which existed in the insti-
tution in 1825, thatjnone equal to them were to be found, at that
time, in any other Protestant school in Ireland which was fre-
quented by Catholics. I now repeat that assertion, for the truth
of which I beg to refer any one who is sceptical on the point
to my last letter.
Mr. Maher has prudently passed by all the safeguards which
I enumerated, and, by way of reply, quotes the following passage
from Dr. Montgomery’s evidence :
“Mr. Montgomery, who has written and spoken much against the


Divinity of Christ, in his examination, page 45, described minutely
the means he employed of communicating the truths of religion to
his pupils, in the College of Belfast. ‘ All the boarders under my
care receive this kind of religious instruction. You will perceive it
is very difficult to steer clear of party and sect. I endeavour, there-
fore,’ he says, ‘to pursue the course which, I hope, cannot be objected
to. I first require of them to give proof of the attributes of the
Deity: his power, wisdom, goodness, and providence;’ and recollect,
Mr. Editor, that he refuses all these attributes to the Saviour. ‘We
proceed then (Mr. Montgomery continues) to a short outline of the
Old Testament history connected with the Jews. After learning the
Ten Commandments, and giving them a cursory, but as satisfactory
view of their meaning as I can, without offending the Catholics on
the Subject of the Second Commandment, 1 then proceed to the New
Testament: I cause them to give a short account of the evidences of
Christianity from prophecy, miracles, the purity of the Gospel doc-
trines, the character of the Apostles. All my boarders, except those
who are pressed with business, every evening read at least two chap-
ters of the New Testament under my care or that of my assistant.’
“What greater facilities for the inculcation of Arian principles
could Mr. Montgomery possibly desire ? During the entire progress
through history, and prophecy, and miracles, through the Old and New
Testaments, the Divinity of the Saviour must have been cushioned.
The pupils must have been taught to expound every passage in the
Sacred Volume, excluding the fundamental dogma of Christianity.
Is not this educational system, for which Mr. Crolly is ready to do
battle, a breaking down of the fences of Christianity—a scandalous
surrender of unprotected youth into the hands of Arianism? May
not the approval of it be fairly designated, to say the least, as a false
charity—a spurious liberality ? Is it not, to speak the truth boldly,
treason against the King of Ages, the immortal and invisible God,
and treachery against those whom he has redeemed ?- Where, in all
this course, are the boasted safeguards of the faith, for doubting of
which it has been politely said that I stated things most falsely ?”
There, sir, is a piece of declamation against a dead, man,
whom Mr. Maher acknowledges to have been in his lifetime a
zealous and successful bishop. Yet he now declares that he was
guilty of Arianism, or of worse; for he accuses him of treason
against the King of Ages, the immortal and invisible God, and
of treachery against those whom he redeemed. Such a charge
should not he preferred against any man, much less against a dead
man, who cannot reply to it; and least of all against a bishop
who died in the peace of the Church, except upon the most
irresistible and overwhelming evidence. hat is the evidence
upon which, this terrible charge rests ? “ Mr. Montgomery (says
Mr. Maher) describes minutely the means of communicating
the truths of religion to his pupils in the College of Belfast.”


To prove this he quotes the passage which I have already trans-
cribed, in which Dr. Montgomery describes his treatment of his
private boarders. Now, this is calculated to mislead the public
most grossly, for Dr. Montgomery’s relation to his pupils, in the
public school, and to his private hoarders were entirely different.
I shall prove this by his own evidence:—
“ Will you describe the nature of the duties that attach to your
situation as master of the English school ?
“ Dr. Montgomery—The English school may be considered as con-
sisting of two parts, the dap school and the hoarding school ; with
regard to the day school, I consider it my duty to teach in the morning
from a quarter before eight, or eight, till nine, and to be in the school
as much as I conveniently can from ten till three. As to the board-
ing school, I exercise a general and moral superintendence over the
children.”
“ Of what religious persuasion are your boarders principally ?
“ Pretty much as you would expect from the north of Ireland—
about two-thirds of Presbyterians, and about one-third Protestants of
the Established Church ; occasionally a Catholic or two, and occa-
sionally a Quaker.
“ Could you state the proportion of the day scholars ?
“ No ; for I frequently do not know to what religious denomination
they belong.
“ Have you known any interference with the peculiar religious
tenets of the boys, either in the day school or as boarders ?
“ Not the most distant.
“ Is there any religious instruction given to the children ?
“ Not to those attending the day school.”
I shall only add, by way of explanation, that the Presbyterians
had two boarding houses in town, for the candidates for their
ministry, and that Catholic boys who came from a distance, who
applied to Dr. Crolly, were invariably'recoramended to one or
other of two Catholic ladies who took boarders. He never
advised any boarder to go to either Dr. Montgomery or Dr.
Hincks. The latter, who seems certainly not to have interfered
with the religion of his boarders, had four Catholics in his house
in 1825, but there was not one of them from Dr. Crolly’s diocess.
They came with Dr. Hincks from Fermoy, in the diocess of
Cloyne, where he had previously kept an academy, at which
there were a great many Catholics, some,of whom, lam con-
vinced, were candidates for Maynooth. Dr. Hincks was most
anxious to satisfy Dr. Crolly that he did not interfere with the
religion of these boarders ; and they are the persons of whom he
speaks when he says cautiously, merely stating the grounds of
his belief, that, from their attention to their religious duties, he


did not think their religion was interfered with. But, most cer-
tainly, he would not have encouraged them to go there if he had
been consulted on the subject; and if he had known them to
receive any religious instruction (which they do not appear to
have received), he would not only have remonstrated, but have
written to their parents. He never permitted any person
over whom he had control, much less any person intended for
the priesthood, to go there. An eminent barrister (who has not
prevented me from mentioning his name), who was a pupil at the
institution at this time, says—“ lam convinced those boarders
did not come at the instance, or through the recommendation, of
the Primate. The northerns, who were under the permanent
influence of the Primate, were, like myself, day scholars.”
Dr. Montgomery swears in his evidence that, during the eight
preceding years, he had 157 boarders, only three of whom had
been Catholics. At the time he gave his evidence he had 41
boarders, just one of whom, making up the number three from
the commencement, was a Catholic. But did Dr. Crolly approve
of this one, or of any of the three, going to Dr. Montgomery and
receiving his religious instructions ? The late Primate’s evidence
clearly proves the contrary; for it is evident from the commence-
ment of it that he spoke of attendance at the institution of Catholic
day-boys only: “ Can you (he is asked) inform us at present whe-
ther there are any young men of the Homan Catholic persuasion
attending the institution?” Dr. Crolly—“ A considerable num-
ber of young men, belonging to mg congregation in the town of Bel-
fast, attend there at present, and I know there was one a candi-
date for holy orders, whom I have sent to the College of May-
nooth from that institution.” Now, I shall prove that none of
the young men who went to Maynooth from Dr. Crolly’s diocess
were ever private boarders in the institution. Yet Mr. Maher’s
original charge against the Primate was, that he had no objection
to let boys receive their preliminary education in the institution,
who were ultimately to be sent to Maynooth. 2. Dr. Crolly
stated, at the end of his evidence, that he would wish it to be
made a purely scientific institution, which shows that he did not
wish Catholics to receive any religious instruction in it. Dr.
Montgomery states, in his evidence concerning this solitary
Catholic pupil, “ that he considered him quite safe, for his father
knew the lioman Catholic bishop of the diocess.” Now, if
the bishop had known or approved of the boy being one of his
private boarders, he would, of course, have stated this, which
would have been a much stronger proof that there was no danger
of his perversion. But to make myself quite sure upon this point,
I wrote to the distinguished parish priest of Cushendall, who


was, in 1825, a student in the institution, and who, I imagine,
is as orthodox, even on education, as Mr. Maher himself. This
gentleman says—
“ At the time I was at the institution, which is precisely the time
alluded to, as T recollect the commissioners visiting the establishment,
the students from a distance generally resided at lodgings in town.
It is evident that the late Primate’s evidence had reference only to
those who attended the day school, from the fact that the candidates
for Maynooth, at that time in the institution, and to whom he alluded,
were attending the day schools, learning English, classics, §c. What
objection, then, could the Primate have to young men preparing for
college learning their classics at such schools, when there were no
others in the country ? That he preferred a Catholic seminary, when
circumstances enabled him to establish it, is evident. AVith regard to
the one Catholic who boarded with Dr. Montgomery in my time, I
have no hesitation in saying he was sent there without the late Pri-
mate having ever been consulted on the subject. There was not a single
individual of his own parishioners a boarder there.”
It is not improbable that Dr. Crolly discovered that Dr.
Montgomery gave religious instructions, from his evidence in
1825: for another gentleman, who was for a long time a professor
in Dr. Crolly’s seminary, who is now parish priest of Ballymena,
and whom it would be great presumption in me to praise, states
that he was curate in Belfast, and that he resided in the house
with the Primate from April, 1828, to August, 1832, during
which time he never knew that any Catholic resided ivith Dr.
Montgomery as a boarder.
“ The third argument (says Mr. Maher) in defence of the late Pri-
mate rests upon an erroneous assumption. It runs thus : If other
archbishops were asked whether they had any objection to such insti-
tutions as the Belfast College, the professors of which being at the
time avowed Arians, would have answered that they had none what-
soever ; and if they did not return this answer, it was simply because
they were not questioned on the subject.
“ Your correspondent will give me leave to say, that he is most
egregiously mistaken. Have bishops, does he really think, no objec-
tion to an establishment wherein the Divinity of Christ is rejected—
where the whole Scriptures, Old and New, are read and commented
upon, keeping always the Divinity of the Son of God out of view—
where the prophecies regarding him and his miracles are discussed*
whilst he himself is always treated as a mere creature ? Does he fancy
that they have no objection to all this ? Sir, I must inform your
correspondent, although he may take offence at it, that there is not
one true Christian in the country, lay or ecclesiastical, knowing the


character of Arianism, and the mode of teaching it adopted in Belfast,
indifferent on this subject. It is quite impossible. Your learned
correspondent must know that Arianism has inflicted deeper and more
extensive wounds on the Church of God than any other heresy.”
1. Mr. Maher asserts that the professors of the institution
were at the time Arians. Now, this is the ex uno disce omnes
argument with a vengeance; for, in 1825, a very small minority
—in all, just four—of the professors were Arians. Supposing
that Mr. Maher was connected with a college, it would scarcely
be just to designate the whole body with which he might be
associated, by the appellation of slanderers. There are some
people who are utterly incapable of stating facts; they cannot
utter or write a single sentence without gross exaggeration.
2. I have proved that the Belfast institution was simply a day
school, with which Dr. Montgomery’s private pupils had no con-
nection different from the day boys, along with whom they attended
the classes of the professors. I have proved that Dr. Crolly
never approved of any individuals going as private boarders
to the professors who took such persons into their establish-
ments, and, least of all, of candidates for Maynooth, not one of
whom ever attended the institution except as a day scholar. At
this day school, Dr. Montgomery himself swore that no religious
instruction whatever was given. On this point, although it is a
work of supererogation, I add the testimony of the parish priest
of Cushendall, who was then a pupil at the institution:—
“From my experience, therefore, of the school department of the
institution, I would say, that there was no interference whatever with
the religious principles of the pupils, on the part of the teachers”
3. Dr, Crolly swore that he had no objection that those who
were to be ultimately sent to Maynooth should learn classics and
science at this school, until such time as he could get a seminary
of his own in which he could combine a religious with a literary
education. I now assert that there was nothing that could justly
be even cavilled at in this answer; and yet, a priest has been
found, so lost I will not say to all sense of justice, but to every
feeling of shame, as to pronounce it treason against the King
of Ages. I assert that every bishop who knowingly allowed the
candidates for the ministry in his diocess to receive their preli-
minary education at Protestant, Arian, and Quaker schools—
that the whole Irish hierarchy which declared, through the four
archbishops, that there could be no possible objection to Catholics
being instructed in science by Protestants, must, if the same


question had been put to them in 1825, have returned the same
answer, or have convicted themselves of the grossest negligence
during the previous part of their episcopacy, and of a deliberate
intention of betraying the Church during the remaining part of it.
But, then, four of the professors were avowed Arians ! What
stuff this man continues to write ! It is not worse to learn science
from an Arian than from a Calvinist or a Quaker; and if the
pupil should have the misfortune to be perverted, he would as
effectually cease to belong to the Catholic Church, by denying
the real presence of our blessed Lord in the holy Eucharist, and
by believing the adorable sacrifice of the Mass to be idolatrous, as
if he were to deny his Divinity. The Divinity of Christ was not
rejected in the Belfast institution in any other sense, and, indeed,
not even in the sense in which the seven sacraments and all out-
ward ministry were rejected in Ballitore ; .for there, I suppose,
all the masters were Quakers, whereas only a small minority of
the professors of the Belfast institution were Arians. Ido not
know whether Quakerism was taught in Ballitore or not, or
whether the whole Scriptures, Old and New (to use Mr. Maher’s
expression), were read and commented upon there—keeping
always confession, the real presence, the invocation of saints, the
sacrifice of the Mass, the seven sacraments, and such other non-
fundamental points, out of view—but I do know that none of
these things were taught in the Belfast institution.
4. I thank Mr. Maher for the hint about the Scriptures. I
do not know what he thinks of the orthodoxy of the opinion and
of the practice of making poor children read the Scriptures with-
out note or comment, written or oral. This opinion prevailed
very extensively, not only in Ulster but in Leinster, Munster,
and Connaught, before 1825, as will appear from the correspon-
dence between certain priests and the Kildare-place Society,
which will he found to occupy from p. 562 to p. 620 of the first
report of the Education Commissioners. There are letters from
some persons in that correspondence emphatically approving of
the test of the Kildare-street scheme regarding the reading of
the Scriptures, although the connection between them and the
society was broken off for other reasons, which would astonish
the country. I still restrain myself, through respect for the par-
ties concerned, from publishing these and other matters to which
I alluded in my first letter; but I pledge myself that I shall sub-
mit them to the public, if any further aspersion shall be cast on
the memory of the late Primate.
“ On another important point (says Mr. Maker) your correspondent
hazards a contradiction in his usual style. .....


Of the commissioners, three recommended the grant of public money
to the Belfast institution ; the other two, Foster and Glassford, refused
to concur in such a project, on this ground—l abridge the reply—
‘ that the bounty of the State might eventually be employed in diffus-
ing principles which we deem inconsistent with the fundamental
truths of Christianity.’ We have here before us (exclaims Mr. Maher)
the astounding fact of a Catholic voting for, or recommending, the
endowment of an institution wherein Arianism was taught and pro-
pagated, and two Protestant laymen voting on the other side, on the
expressed grounds that the money of a Christian country should not
be employed in uprooting Christianity .”
To prevent misconception, I beg to quote what I did say on
this subject:—
“Mr. Maher’s other two friends did not, as he poetically exclaims,
‘ proudly withstand the spurious liberality of the prelate.’ They did
not say a word in their report about Dr. Crolly or the Catholics—
their object was to back the no-Popery bigots ; but I am not sorry
that Mr. Maher allies himself and his calumnies with J. Glassford,
Leslie Foster, and Dr. Cooke. The Belfast institution was not, how-
ever, the only subject on which these two gentlemen differed from their
fellow-commissioners. They presented a separate report on the sub-
ject of the education of the poor also, which will be found in the
appendix at the end of the volume containing the 3rd, 4th, sth, 6th,
7 th, Bth, and 9th reports of the Irish Education Inquiry. They there
opposed all change in the Kildare-place system, ‘because, about twenty
years ago, as we (Leslie Foster and Glassford) are led to believe, the
(Protestant) Scriptures were not read in so many as 600 schools in
Ireland, while at present, as we have ascertained, they have found
their way into 6,058 daily schools (some of them, no doubt, in the
kingdom of Connaught), independent of 1,945 Sunday schools—in
all, into about 8,000 schools. The improvement in other points is
not less striking—l,37o schoolmasters and mistresses of a very supe-
rior description have been sent forth by the Kildare-place Society,’
&c. There is nothing so blind as faction.”
I certainly neither thought nor said that Dr. Crolly did not
state that the renewal of the bounty of parliament to the insti-
tution would create a feeling of gratitude and satisfaction in all
the different classes of society in Belfast, and I expressly declared
that Foster and Glassford dissented from the other commission-
ers, as the words I have put in italics in the extracts from my
own former letter clearly prove. I confess, however, that I en-
tirely misunderstood Mr. Maher’s meaning, for I did not know
that he was such a stickler for Presbyterian orthodoxy. I, in my
simplicity, thought that it was of the perversion of Catholics,
and not of Calvinists, he was in such terror. Under this im-
pression, I said that Foster and Glassford did not say a word


about Dr. Crolly or the Catholics, and that their object was to
back the no-Popery bigots of the institution. To sustain this
assertion, I mentioned that they presented a separate report on
the education of the poor, as well as on the Belfast institution,
and that they wished to confine the bounty of the State to the
Kildare-place system, the chief, if not the sole object of which
was to pervert Catholics. I understand him now, however, and
he shall have his answer.
1. Foster and Glassford did not report absolutely against the
renewal of the bounty of the State to the institution. On the
contrary, they stated their persuasion that the institution might
be made productive of much good; but they declined to concur in
the recommendation of the other commissioners, “ lest the bounty
of the State might eventually be employed in diffusing principles
which we deem inconsistent with the fundamental truths of Chris-
tianity.” They not only do not bear out Mr. Maher’s assertion,
that “ Arianism was taught and propagated in the institution,”
but they expressly and emphatically contradicted it, even with
regard to Presbyterians. “We are satisfied they declare in
the very report to which he refers for the proof of his assertion,
“ that as yet these appointments (of Arian’professors, in the Bel-
fast institution) have not led to any extension of Arian doctrine
amongst the Presbyterian body.”
2. What safeguards did they require as necessary to obtain
their concurrence in recommending that the bounty of the State
should be extended to the institution? “We conceive,” they
say (I still quote their separate report, to which Mr, Maher re-
fers so triumphantly), “ that it would be a more satisfactory
arrangement that, on every future election (of a professor to the
institution), each candidate should be obliged to procure a certificate
from at least four of the persons who, during the six preceding
years, had held the situation of Moderator either in the Synod of
Ulster or in the Seceding Synod, stating that, after having made
due inquiry and examination, they have no reasonable doubt that
the candidate believes in the Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
It would not only be a great recommendation, but an essential
qualification for any candidate to possess, who could hope to
obtain the recommendation of four Moderators, that he should
reject five out of the seven sacraments, believe confession to be
a human invention, and the invocation of the Mother of God,
and the Mass, to be idolatrous ; but these not bein g fundamental
truths, Mr. Maher thinks it would be quite right that the money
of a Christian country shoidd be employed in uprooting them. And
yet this man has the brazen effrontery to call it an astounding
fact, that the Catholic (Dr. Crolly) voted on the opposite side


to two Protestant laymen (Foster and Glassford). Can it be
possible that he is in earnest in advocating Calvinism, or that he
is a real believer in the doctrine of fundamentals ?
3. In 1825, as on many other occasions, the Government was
exceedingly anxious to obtain the support of the Presbyterians
of the north. All parties amongst the Presbyterians themselves,
and even all the commissioners, were anxious to obtain a grant
for the institution; and it was, therefore, quite certain that it
would be obtained. The real question at issue was, how the
institution should be managed, and especially who should have
the appointment of professors. The professors of divinity who
taught the candidates for the Presbyterian ministry, and who had
merely the accommodation of lecture-rooms in the institution,
were nominated by the Synods; but all the other appointments
rested with the boards, which were at that time thoroughly libe-
ral, and totally opposed to proselytism. The institution had
been got up by subscription, and I really do not know what was
the case at first; but I do know that, at a subsequent period,
there were a few Catholics amongst its proprietors. At all events
the proprietors wished to make Dr. Crolly a manager of the insti-
tution; and long after he opened his seminary in opposition to that
establishment, a Catholic who had been a master in it became
the proprietor of the Belfast Vindicator. The Synods, on the
contrary, were as bigotted then as now, when they are sending
about their Bible readers and Irish teachers to proselytise poor
Catholics in every part of the country. The inquiry into the
state of the institution took place in 1825, several years before
emancipation was conceded, and Dr, Crolly had not the slightest
chance of getting a separate grant for educating the Catholics.
The four Catholic archbishops had already declared, in the
early part of that same year, that there could be no possible objec-
tion to Catholics receiving their literary education from Protes-
tants. This was all that was done in the day school of the insti-
tution, in which there was no religious teaching, and no Catholic
need become a boarder. I have already shown that Dr. Crolly’s
evidence clearly proves Jjiat he did not know that there was one
Catholic with Dr. Montgomery. Certainly, if he had known
that a single Catholic was attending that gentleman’s lectures on
the Scriptures, he would have instantly remonstrated. He, more-
over, swore publicly, in the very town in which the institution is
situated, that he never heard any Catholic complain that the
attendance of Catholics at the institution was attended with
danger to their faith. The situations in the institution were
then open to the Catholics, provided they were sufficiently
qualified.
The Catholic bishops were anxious, at this time, to put an


end to the disastrous and proselytising career of the Kildare-
place Society, and to get a more liberal system of education in-
troduced. The grant to the institution was not sought for the
purpose of propagating any doctrine, but simply to promote
science; and if Dr. Crolly had opposed it, his opposition would
have been totally useless; it would have rendered the whole
Catholic body very odious in Belfast; it would have been in
direct opposition to the sentiments of that body of which he had
very recently become a member; and it would have been an
impediment in the way of obtaining a more liberal system of
education.
Indeed, Mr. Maher does not suggest this course, but he calls
it an astounding fact that he did not join Foster and Glassford
in sustaining the fundamental doctrine of Christianity. I say
that Dr. Crolly would have been a traitor to the Catholic Church,
if at this time, when the Catholics of Belfast had no other school
in which they could obtain a classical and scientific education,
he had handed over to the bigotted control of the Synods an in-
stitution in which, up to that time, no attempt had ever been made
to proselytise a Catholic. Under the management of the Synods,
I have no doubt but that this state of things would have been
quickly changed. Dr. Crolly is most cautious in limiting his
recommendation of the institution to the town of Belfast. He
does not advise strangers to frequent it at all, much less to
board with Dr. Montgomery, and to get religious instruction
from him in his rooms. “Do you think,” the commissioners
ask him, “ it would create a general feeling of gratitude and
satisfaction in all the different classes of society here (to restore
the bounty of the State to the institution) ?” “ Yes; lam per-
suaded that it would create feelings of general satisfaction, at
least in the town of Belfast ; how far it might extend beyond the
town , lam not prepared to say. The institution naturally affords
greater advantages to the town of Belfast than to any other
place.” Ido not know whether Mr. Maher means to impeach him
with perjury or not, but I do think that no other man will accuse
him of having sworn this publicly in# his own town without
believing it to be true.
“ Your correspondent” (says Mr. Maher) “ accuses me of con-
temptuously designating his uncle as Dr. Crolly, and not the Primate,
or Archbishop. Ho little understands my reason. Finding fault
with the opinions of one who is now no more, I left, as far as I could,
the dignity, in the background which I respected, and let the cen-
sure fall rather on the individual. But it is useless to explain ; for
there are men so self-sufficient, and of so coarse a texture of mind,
that they can never understand the propriety of laying aside a title,
even for a while.”


So Mr. Maher, in addition to all his other accomplishments,
turns out to be a modern Chesterfield, and in his character of
professor of politeness, declares it to be a mark of coarse-minded-
ness not to lay aside a title for a time, in order to abuse one’s
neighbours. I presume that the title of General Mac Hale is a
fair specimen of Graigue politeness. To me, however, this
practice of laying aside a man’s title for a while, in order to
accuse him of crimes, after his death, with which you would not
dare to impeach him whilst be was alive, seems strongly cor-
roborative of what has been said by a person famous in modern
story: that Lord Chesterfield was the most polite person that
ever lived, except the devil. *■
Now, sir, I ask any impartial man to say what he thinks of the
conduct of a Catholic priest who declares that he is most reluc-
tant to say a word against the character of the late Primate, and
yet selects an isolated answer from his entire evidence, suppress-
ing every portion of it which could explain his true meaning—who
quotes from his answer the declaration, that he had no objection
to the attendance at the institution of young men who were
destined for the Catholic ministry; concealing, at the same
time, with the dexterity and dishonesty of a special pleader, his
previous answer, that he never heard any complaint from any
Roman Catholic, that the attendance of Catholics at the insti-
tution was attended with any danger to their faith; and his two
subsequent answers, in which he declares that he might find it
desirable to establish a diocesan seminary, which, although the
scientific education that it would afford might be less perfect, he
could on the whole consider more satisfactory, because in it he
could combine religious instruction with other points of knowledge
—who falsifies the evidence of a Presbyterian minister, and attempts
to make Dr. Grolly answerable for the evidence of an Arian, for
the purpose of casting a stigma upon him in his grave. Such is
the rancorous hatred which this priest bears to him, that he ad-
mits having kept his dignity, for which he now entertains a high
veneration, in the background, in order to censure the man. I
only hope that none of his successors may be a less zealous, or a
less efficient bishop than he was. He was a man, however,
whose disinterested, straightforward, and honourable character
his present assailant can no more understand than the savage
can appreciate the precious metals, who exchanges the virgin
gold for a bit of brass, and glories in his bargain.
GEORGE CROLLY,
Professor of Theology in St. Patrick’s College,
Maynootli.


LETTER III.
The very next number of the Evening Post, after that in which
my letter appeared, contained an epistle from Mr. Maher. This
expedition would contrast strangely with his former and subsequent
dilatoriness, if he had even attempted to reply to my arguments.
But he does no such thing. And, in truth, his epistle consists
almost entirely of a rather lugubrious history of the manner in
which he was betrayed by the Northern Whig, into his attack upon
the late Primate, and of a long extract from Dr. Montgomery’s
evidence, both of which he might have had cut and dry for the
occasion. The only one of my arguments which he attempts to
combat, is that in which I charged him with having falsified Mr.
Carlile’s evidence. How he succeeds in this solitary effort will
appear by the sequel.
It will be seen that I had not got much in the way of argu-
ment, but I had received sufficient provocation to induce me to
write the following letter, in which I disposed of everything
he said, with the exception of his just complaint against the
Northern Whig, and his solemn leave-taking of the controversy.
The Whig has, indeed, pleaded guilty to the charge of having
done him a mischief; and, besides, I have nothing to do with this
matter. And as I was obliged briefly to explain tbe origin of
the present controversy,’ in the introductory notice of Dr.
Crolly’s Life, I thought it unnecessary to say anything about it
in this letter.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DUBLIN EVENING POST.
Dear Sir —Mr. Maher says my last letter may be reduced
to two points :
“ First, a charge of fabricating a quotation of Mr. Garble ;
secondly, - that of accusing his uncle with Arianism. My answer
simply is, that I did neither the one thing nor the other. I quoted
the substance of Mr. Carlile’s observation ; I professed to do no more;
and I gave a correct reference to the page. .... The
inverted commas were not mine ; on seeing them in print it occurred
to me to write to the printer, but as the substance was correct, I let
it pass.”
To a man who does not think it worth his while to stop to
inquire whether or not his language might convey a false charge
of Arianism against a dead bishop, this falsification of evidence


may appear a mere trifle; but if I had been convicted of it, I
would never dare to print a line again. “ I gave,” says Mr.
Maher, “ the correct reference to the page.” To what page ?
To a page in which no such words as he quotes are to be found!
But I did not confine him to a page. I defied him to find such
a quotation in any page, and distinctly charged him with having
fabricated it. He now says the inverted commas were not his.
Well, be it so; I shall not doubt his word. But through fear,
I suppose, of committing the horrid crime of writing four or six
columns, Mr. Maher has forgot, on purpose, the gravest part of
my imputation against him. I charged him before, and I now
charge him again, with having not only invented the words of
the quotation from Mr. Carlile, but with having, moreover,
knowingly, deliberately, and entirely falsified his meaning. Mr.
Maher boasted that he would prove that thousands in the north
had lost their faith In the schools of Arians; and that the fact of
myriads being perverted by Arian teachers, was stated by the
Rev. J. Carlile. In proof of all this he produced nothing what-
ever but his own forged quotation. “ Perversion was carried to
such an extent, Carlile observes,” says Mr. Maher, “as to become
the fashionable religion of the day; and those who believed in
the Divinity of Christ were looked upon as men of little science
or talent.”
In my reply I defied him to show, by the evidence of Mr.
Carlile, or of anybody else, that one solitary Catholic had ever
been perverted to Arianism in the north of Ireland. Dr.
Montgomery himself puts this point beyond dispute. He was
asked (4th R., p. 50) —“ Have you known of any Roman
Catholic who has passed over to your communion ?” and he
answers, “ I do not know of one.”
2. I proved by quotations from Carlile’s evidence (which I
did not forge), that it was so far from sustaining Mr. Maher’s
assertion, that perversions to Arianism were taking place by
thousands and myriads in the north, even amongst the Presby-
terians themselves, that it distinctly proved the very contrary—
that in 1825, and for some time previously, Arianism had been
declining amongst the Presbyterians. The same thing was
stated by Dr. Hanna, the Calvinistic professor of divinity in the
institution; and Dr. Cooke declared (4th R., p. 148), that
Arianism was rapidly on the decline, especially since the year
1808—the very year in which the Belfast institution may be
said to have been founded.
3. I proved that Mr. Carlile never said that perversion was
carried to such an extent as to make it (Arianism) the fashion-
able religion of the day; but that he stated, on the very
B


contrary, that it was the fashionable philosophy when it was intro-
duced into Ireland ; and he assigns this as the principal reason
why any progress it made was chiefly among the higher classes.
4. I proved that Mr. Carlile’s evidence was so far from sus-
taining Mr. Maher’s assertions of thousands having been per-
verted in the schools of Arians, that not one solitary instance of
such a perversion having taken place, even amongst the Presby-
terians in these schools, was mentioned in the entire report; and
that Foster and Glassford themselves bore testimony, in the very
letter which they drew up against the admission of Arian pro-
fessors into the institution, that, up to the time of the inquiry
(1825), the appointment of Arian professors had led to no exten-
sion of Arian doctrines amongst the Presbyterians. Mr. Garble
goes further; for he declares that a large proportion of the im-
provement in orthodoxy—that is, in the belief in the Divinity of
our Lord Jesus Christ—which had taken place amongst the can-
didates for the Presbyterian ministry, was to be attributed to the
institution; and that it was in the Scotch universities, which
were then, and still are, frequented by considerable numbers of
Irish Catholics, that the Presbyterian ministers imbibed their
Arian principles. Mr. Maher has not dared to controvert one of
these statements, and, indeed, he could not: and I, therefore,
denounce him as a barefaced and wholesale falsifier of the evi-
dence of a Calvinistic minister, for the purpose of calumniating
the memory of a bishop who died in the peace of the Catholic
Church.
But, then, I am most unreasonable not to be very much obliged
to Mr. Maher for the kind and forbearing manner in which he
treated the memory of the late Primate. He did not accuse Dr.
Crolly of Arianism—
“ Oh ! no, it was something more exquisite still
’Twas of giving an answer which would shock the public, which
should be received with abhorrence, and which no other bishop
in the Church of God would utter—of treason against the King
of Ages, the immortal and invisible God, and of treachery
against those whom he redeemed. Gentle, kind, polite Mr.
Maher, if I were not a young Hotspur, I should fall upon my
knees and thank you for this flattering language, which comes
with such grace from the uncle of the present Primate, when
applied to his immediate predecessor! Mr. Maher is scarcely
less suicidal in his illustrations from Shakspeare, than in those
which he has borrowed from the Bible. Young Hotspur is
almost as infelicitously introduced as the fiery furnace and the
lions’ den; for, if I remember aright, an old man appears in


close connection with the youthful Percy, who thought the better
part of valour was discretion, and never stabbed a man until after
his death.
Mr. Maher had no desire of monopolising the work of abusing
the dead. He had rather it had fallen into other hands. Why,
he said the very same thing when he attacked Dr. Mac Hale
anonymously, ten years ago. During so long a time he has
searched in vain for a partner in his slanders ; and after all that
experience, he seems not to have learned that the occupation
does not suit any one in the Church of God except himself.
But if he has incurred the displeasure, and received the
abuse of a thoughtless young man, he is abundantly compensated
by “ being on the right side—on the side of the chair of St.
Peter, the centre of unity, and of Catholic truth.” Sir, I say
that the continued advocacy of such a man must do incalculable
mischief to every cause, and ruin any cause that can be ruined.
The cause of truth cannot be promoted by falsehood; the cause
of the Church cannot be advanced by the slander of her dead
princes, who laboured zealously, indefatigably, and successfully
for her during their lives. Neither truth nor the Church have
changed within the last ten years; and yet, to promote their
interests, Mr. Maher abused and slandered those who opposed
mixed education in 1840, as violently as he now abuses and
slanders those who support it in 1850. The epithets which the
Archbishop of Tuam applied to him in the former year, are
quite as complimentary as those which I have very reluctantly
found myself constrained to use at present.
“ When,” says the Archbishop, “we raised our voice against that
hateful and pestilential novelty of the National Board, it was natural
to expect that wo should be assailed by unsparing and continuous
effusions of harmless vituperation. Accordingly, we were not only
denounced as the foes of education, because we would not render its
direction to the enemies of our creed, *but we were likewise accused
of letting in worse errors. ... It could scarcely have been
imagined that persons with any pretensions to veracity should rely
for the support of their cause on the notoriously lying reports of the
Hibernian Bible Society (which Mr. Maher had quoted to prove the
progress of proselytism in the kingdom of Connaught). Having now
traversed every district of this extensive diocess, w r e have it in our
power unequivocally to state that never has there been promulgated
a fouler calumny.”
But, of course, Mr, Maher was then as now, “ abundantly
compensated by being on the right side—on the side of the
chair of Peter, the centre of unity, and of Catholic truth.”


I put some very important questions to Mr. Maher, in my
last letter, with reference to his attack on the Archbishop of
Tuam ; and I really cannot understand how he could have the
effrontery to pretend to reply to me, without giving them some
kind of'answer. If he were capable of anonymously preferring
false charges against a living archbishop in 1840, he might put
his own name to false charges against a dead Primate in 1850.
I, therefore, beg to refresh his memory, by proposing to him the
following questions;—ls it true that the Archbishop of Tuam
neglected his duty whilst the wolf was devastating the fold,
during the remarkable and satisfactory progress of proselytism
in the kingdom of Connaught, and whilst 9,158 Catholics of
that province were in schools of proselytism ? Is it true that
Dr. Doyle said he had no ballast in him, and that this opinion
of the illustrious bishop was confirmed by Mr. Maher’s own
experience? Is it true that his Grace wilfully misrepresented
the opinions of his fellow-bishops, and that he published scan-
dalous, groundless, and reckless charges in miscalled pastorals ?
Is it true that he was guilty of the suppressio veri and suggestio
fain, and that he was justly compared to one of those false
brethren, the danger from whom formed the climax of Paul’s
sufferings ? Is it true that, seeing the weight of truth against
him, he endeavoured to encumber the question with verbiage
and circumlocution, and that he indulged in the resource of
weak minds—noisy, angry, personal invective against the advo-
cates of truth ? Is it true that the course he pursued was pre-
judicial to true religion, to his own character, and that his pre-
cipitate career of vituperation afflicted his best friends ? Is it
true that his angry epistles would injure a character of ten
times his worth, that his utility as a public man is for ever gone,
and that his language would scandalise the faithful, disedify the
rising generation, and abate the respect for the episcopal bench ?
Is it true that he fulfilled the scriptural type of faith without
charity, and that he desecrated the high places in the Church
of God by the vanity and jealousy of a weak mortal ? Ido not
want to know from Mr. Maher that he regrets this language.
I know that myself, because he finds it exceedingly embarrassing
at present; but as each of the questions I have put to him con-
tains a grievous charge, which he, in support of truth and of the
chair of Peter, preferred anonymously against an archbishop, I
distinctly require of him to take them up individually, and to
pronounce concerning each of them, whether it is true or false.
Indeed, 1 thought that the object of his last visit to the kingdom
of Connaught (oh ! I beg his pardon), to the west, was to ascer-
tain the truth or falsehood of these tremendous charges; but I


now imagine that it was most probably to arrange the famous
set-to between “ General Mac Hale and Major O’Malley.”
“ The students,” says Mr. Maher, “ in the Belfast academical insti-
tution, under the mixed educational system, were all placed under the
special care of two masters, the Eev. Messrs. Hincks and Montgomery,
both of whom, it is painful to be obliged to state, reject the Divinity
of the blessed Saviour. They, and they alone, at the time, were at
liberty to receive boarders.”
Now, the first part of this statement is utterly untrue. All
the students in the institution were not placed under the special
care of Messrs. Hincks and Montgomery, nor was any one
placed under them except their own private boarders. I have
proved, by the testimony of most respectable Roman Catholics,
lay as well as clerical, who actually attended the institution in
1825, and may, therefore, be supposed to understand the state of
the case a little better than Mr. Maher, that Dr. Crolly never
approved of any Catholic going to board with either Dr. Hincks
or Dr. Montgomery, and that he invariably sent such Catholics
as came from a distance, and over whom he could exercise any
control, to lodge in the house of one or other of two Catholic
ladles. He, moreover, in his evidence, expressly confined the
advantages of the institution to Belfast and its neighbourhood.
The reception of boarders was never a primary object in the
institution. Dr. Cooke swears (Fourth Report, page 148) —
“I understand the primary object of the school department to be
the education of the laity about Belfast, and the object of the philo-
sophical or college department to be almost entirely for the candidates
for the Presbyterian ministry.”
I proved in my last letter, on the authority of the parish priest
of Ballymena, who was a curate in Belfast, and resided in the
house with Dr. Crolly from 1828 to 1832, that he never knew
that any Catholic resided with Dr. Montgomery as a boarder. I
am now enabled to add, on the testimony of the parish priests of
Cushendall and Glenarm, who were Dr. Crolly’s curates from
1832 until he became Primate, that during that time there was
no Catholic boarder with Dr. Montgomery. And yet this
charitable priest, this reluctant witness, has the unblushing
effrontery to renew against a dead bishop a charge which I have
demonstrated to be false by the clearest evidence, one particle of
which he has not dared to controvert. The public will be able
to judge of the amount of belief which his asseverations of mercy
and charity are entitled to, when he puts them forth in epistles
in which he openly violates justice and truth.
But I have had a communication from Dr. Montgomery’s one


Catholic boarder, who is not an Arian, strange to say, but a very
devout and highly respectable Catholic gentleman. If Ido not
use his name, it is not from any unwillingness on his part. In-
deed, those who knew the late Primate most intimately and per-
fectly, have been most kind in furnishing me with information,
and have felt as indignant as I felt myself at the dastardly
attack which has been made upon him in his grave. Now, this
gentleman, whom the late Primate did not recommend to board
with Dr. Montgomery, authorizes me to state that he never
received any religious instruction whatever in the Institution, ex-
cept that he himself was in the habit of reading, on Sunday
evenings, a portion of the Douay Testament, a copy of which
had been procured for him, not by Dr. Crolly, but by a gentle-
man who was then Catholic curate in Belfast, and is now vicar-
general in Antrim. He adds, that he was put under the care of
one of the most pious families in Belfast, to insure his attendance
to his religious duties, and that he never heard a disrespectful
word of the Catholic religion within the walls of the institution.
The priest to whom I have alluded, who lived in the house with
Dr. Crolly, as his curate, from 1821 to 1825, and who is now
vicar-general of the diocess of Antrim, says:—
“ I can, from an intimate knowledge of your deservedly lamented
uncle, affirm, that he never approved of religious instruction being
imparted by other than a Catholic pastor.”
And yet a man from another province, who knows nothing
about the matter, dares to charge him, after his death, with ap-
proving of Catholics receiving religious instruction from Arians.
Dr. Hincks was educated in Trinity College, and resided in the
county of Cork for twenty-five years. He was a member of the
Presbytery of Munster. The great majority of the members of
that presbytery, and Dr. Hincks among the number, were avowed
Arians. Yet in the Catholic town of Fermoy, in the Catholic
diocess of Cloyne, he had a large school, which was attended by
a great number of Catholic day-boys and many Catholic boarders.
The candidates for Maynooth were, I have been assured, allowed
to attend this Arian school in the Catholic province of Munster,
without the least objection having been made by priest or bishop.
“ I was,” says Dr. Hincks, “in a respectable situation in Fermoy,
at the head of a school, which, though I had motives for leaving, cer-
tainly I could not leave at random ; and it was a point of great con-
sideration with me, whether I should offer myself or not for the vacant
professorship in the Belfast institution.”
He went to Belfast in 1821, and many of his boarders,


including some Catholics, went with him. The commissioners
state (Fourth Report, page 14) that “ a great proportion of Dr.
Hincks’s boarders were from the south of Ireland.” I demonstrated
in my former letter, that Dr. Crolly never approved of Catholics
being sent to board in the institution; and I have now the testi-
mony of a clergyman, who was then, and during his whole life,
intimateley acquainted with him, that he was surprised at their
being sent there from the Catholic provinces, although he
never knew, or heard that they received any religious instruction,
or that their faith was in any way interfered with.
At this very time (1825) the bishop made no objection, in the
Catholic city and diocess of Cork, to the attendance of young
men who were destined for the priesthood, not only at Protestant
schools, but at “ the Protestant Diocesan School of Cork”
(Eighth Report, pages4lß and 435); nor in the Catholic diocess
of Cashel, to the attendance of the same persons at Trinity Col-
lege. Even Mr. Maher, who, if he be not a member of the
episcopal bench, cannot, I dare affirm, ascribe this to any
reluctance on his own part to assume the ring and crozier, sent
his own nephew, who was qualifying himself for an ecclesiastical
college, or, at all events, made no sort of objection to his being
sent to a school which was conducted by persons who were not
even Christians.
Yet it is for having said, in the Protestant town of Belfast,
where he had no alternative, that he had no objection to the
candidates for Maynooth attending as day scholars at the insti-
tution, until such times as he could procure a seminary of his
own, in which he could combine religious with secular instruction,
or to their learning Latin and Greek from the very same man
who so long taught the same class of persons in the Catholic
diocess of Cloyne, not only without any objection, but, as far as
I know, without any attempt to remedy the system, that Dr.
Crolly has been denounced, after his death, as having given an
answer which should be received with abhorrence, which would
shock the country, and which no other bishop in the Church of
God would utter.
Mr. Maher can never forget his old cuckoo-note about Drs.
Montgomery and Hincks being Arians. How often must I tell
him that a Catholic will as effectually cease to belong to the
Church by rejecting five out of the seven sacraments, and by believ-
ing the invocation of the immaculate Virgin, and the adorable
sacrifice of the Mass, to be idolatrous, as if he were to deny the
Divinity of the Saviour. It is Mr. Maher’s “painful duty to state,
that both Messrs. Montgomery and Hincks reject the Divinity of
the blessed Saviour.” If they had been orthodox Calvinists or
Quakers, he would have no objection to Catholic boarders living


with them, because they do not, like the Arians, err in funda-
mentals, but only reject such non-fundamental trifles as I have
just mentioned.
Mr. Maher is greatly shocked because extempore prayers
were sometimes said by Arians in the Belfast institution—lst.
No Catholic was obliged or asked to attend these prayers. 2nd.
Dr. Crolly never knew or approved of such attendance; for in
another school in Belfast, where this practice was enforced, he
insisted that it should be given up, by threatening to advise the
Catholics to leave it. 3rd. He disapproved of, and preached
against the bigotry of those Protestants who obliged their
Catholic dependents to attend their prayers. If any Catholics,
therefore, attended such prayers, it was their own fault, or the
fault of their parents, and Dr. Crolly neither knew nor approved
of the practice. 4th. Dr. Montgomery is bad authority as to
the attendance of Catholics, as he swore that he frequently did
not know the religion of the day-boys. sth. These exhibitions (I
avoid the word which suggests itself, not to give offence) were
regarded by Dr. Montgomery himself as so little likely to pro-
mote devotion or Arianism, that he gave them up in the schools
altogether, and only used them on exhibition days, for the benefit
of the public.
But Dr. Crolly, says Mr. Maher, sanctioned the institu-
tion not as a place to which “ Catholic children might resort for
a time, with a knowledge of the risk, in the absence of other
schools.” Dr. Crolly has proved this assertion to be untrue, by
both his words and his actions; for he declared to the commis-
sioners that he might find it desirable to establish a seminary in
which he could combine a religious with a secular education, and
this he did do shortly afterwards. “ No,” proceeds Mr. Maher,
“ he approved of it to the extent of desiring to have it perma-
nently endowed at the public expense.” I proved, in my last
letter, that the question was not whether the bounty of parlia-
ment should be restored to the institution or not. Upon that all
parties were agreed, including Foster, Glassford, and the Pro-
testant bishop; and, as the Government was then very anxious
to conciliate the Presbyterians, it was quite certain that it loonld
be restored. I also showed that the four Catholic archbishops
had, in the beginning of the year (1825) in which the inquiry
into the Belfast institution had taken place, solemnly declared,
in the name of the entire hierarchy, that there could be no pos-
sible objection to Catholics receiving literary instruction from a
Protestant—that they were anxious to get a more liberal system
of education introduced instead of the Kildare-place Society, by
which many Catholics had been unfortunately perverted—that
Dr. Crolly’s opposition to the grant would have been perfectly


useless—that it would have been prejudicial to the objects which
the hierarchy had in view—that it would have destroyed his own
influence, and have impeded the progress of Catholicity in Bel-
fast. He had, in fact, no alternative but to endeavour to keep
the only place in which Catholics could obtain a classical educa-
tion free from bigotry and proselytism, or to join those who
wished to make it a lions’ den and fiery furnace of perversion. In
his last letter, Mr. Maher said it was an astounding fact that Dr.
Crolly did not join Foster and Glassford, who wished that no
one should be eligible to the office of professor in the institution
unless he should bring with him testimonials from four Calvin-
istic Moderators. Dr. Cooke, another of Mr. Maher’s witnesses,
wished to introduce a test which would not only exclude Arian-
ism, but several portions of the Inspired Volume, the invocation
of saints, good works, the real presence, and such other non-
fundamental trifles. Dr. Crolly’s whole crime is, that he did
not desert his own friends and the friends of the Catholics, and
ally himself with the proselytising schemes of the Calvinists.
The late illustrious Dr. Doyle had not so bad an opinion of
the Belfast institution, for, in his letter to Mr. O’Connell on the
formation of a National Literary Institute, for the extension of
science to all classes of Irish youth, he not only contrasts that
establishment with Trinity College, but prefers it to every school
then existing in Ireland—
“ We have (he says) but one university in Ireland, whose religious
tests and exclusions are a libel upon its very name. ’Tis true that,
in addition to the university, we have in Ireland many schools where
young persons are taught the dead, or, what are usually called, the
learned languages, but in which, with few exceptions, the very name
of science or mathematics is not known. But even were science, as
it is desirable it should be, an integral part of education in them all,
of what avail would that be to those whose fortune could not purchase
admission ? Yes, sir, this country is destitute of any institution
(perhaps 1 should except that at Belfast) in which education, properly
so called, is attainable, by the middling, the most virtuous, and most
numerous classes of the Irish people.”—pp. 15, 16.
Nor does the perhaps in the extract regard the absence of re-
ligious tests, but the scientific teaching in the institution, and its
accessibility to the middling classes; for he expressly declares
(p. 21), that the institution which he wished to see founded,
should be “accessible to all the youth of Ireland, without dis-
tinction of creed or class.” This letter was published by Dr.
Doyle in 1829, four years after the inquiry into the Belfast
institution had taken place.


But Mr. Maher’s last charge is the most serious of all—
“ Nay, he (Dr. Crolly) went somewhat further—he has left on
record the opinion that the endowment of such a house would increase
morality in the district. He was asked, ‘ls it your opinion that the
restoration of the bounty of parliament to the institution would be
attended with good moral effects throughout the north of Ireland ?’
He answered, ‘I should suppose so.’ I protest (proceeds Mr. Maher),
with all sincerity, it pains me deeply to be driven to the necessity of
quoting this testimony by the folly, obstinacy, and passion of his un-
wise defender. The record of that unsound opinion will stand; and
no amount of angry letter-writing will efface it or change its
meaning
The perversion of Mr. Carlile’s evidence was scandalous, but
this utter falsification of Dr. Crolly’s evidence is worse, as it
proceeds from a living priest for the purpose of calumniating a
dead bishop.
The professors and managers of the Belfast institution were
for the most part so extremely liberal, and such warm advocates
of Catholic emancipation in 1825, that their loyalty was suspected.
Dr. Crolly, as well as other persons, was examined on this point,
and he stated that he
“ Did not believe there was any considerable degree of dissatisfac-
tion prevailing amongst any order in Belfast.
“ That observation is general as to the counties of Down and
Antrim ?
“ Dr. Crolly—Yes; it is general.
“ Is it your opinion that the restoration of the bounty of parliament
to the institution would be attended with good moral effects through-
out the north of Ireland ?
“ I should suppose so.
“ Do you think it would create a general feeling of gratitude and
satisfaction in all the different classes of society here?
“ Yes; I am persuaded that it would, at least, in the town of Bel-
fast ; how far it might extend beyond the town I am not prepared to
say.”
This, sir, is one complete portion of the late Primate’s evi-
dence, on an isolated extract from which Mr. Maher founds his
charge that Dr. Crolly “ left on record the opinion that the
endowment of the institution would promote morality in the dis-
trict.” Now, it is important to observe, that Dr. Crolly did not
use the word morality , or any other word which would imply that
the duties of a Christian life were taught in the institution. On


the contrary, he expressly states in his evidence that he wishes
to have the institution made a purely scientific establishment, and
declares that his object in establishing a diocesan seminary would
be to combine a religious education with other points of know-
ledge. The words which Dr. Crolly does use are, that the endow-
ment of the institution would be productive of good moral effects,
which I respectfully submit are entirely different from Christian
morality ; a collision between Austria and Prussia would produce
a great moral effect upon the value of money in Ireland, although
I am not aware that it would interfere in the least with Irish
morality. The wording, therefore, of the question proposed to
Dr. Crolly,' as well .as the context, proves that it referred not to
the morality but to the loyalty of the people of the north. What
he means, therefore, is, as the words and the whole context
prove, that he should suppose that the restoration of the bounty
of parliament to the institution “ would be attended with good
moral effects”—that is, that it would preserve and advance the
loyalty of all classes in the north of Ireland. The very next
question proposed to him by the commissioners proves that this
was the sense in which they proposed the previous interrogation,
and in which they understood his answer ; for they ask him im-
mediately afterwards—
“ Do you think it (the renewal of the bounty of parliament) would
create a feeling of gratitude and satisfaction in all the different
classes of society here ?”
Certainly, whatever produces gratitude and satisfaction, poli-
tically speaking, produces an excellent moral effect, but it most
certainly does not follow that it advances the interests of Chris-
tian morality. Yet it is upon this gross and palpable perver-
sion of the late Primate’s evidence, that Mr. Maher, who protests
that he is a reluctant witness, rests this terrible imputation upon
his memory.
“ I protest (he says), and with all sincerity, it pains me deeply to
he driven to the necessity of quoting this testimony
the record of that unsound opinion will stand, and no amount of angry
letter-writing will either efface it or change its meaning.”
Sir, it requires no letter-writing to refute it, for it is a gross
perversion of the truth, and I defy Mr. Maher to defend it.
GEORGE CROLLY,
Professor of Theology in St. Patrick’s College,
Maynooth.


LETTER IV.
After a week’s cogitation, Mr. Maher broke his pledge, and
ushered another epistle into the world. In it his attack upon
the late Primate was virtually abandoned, although he had
neither the justice nor the manliness to retract his charges.
Even his genius for invention deserted him; for instead of sup-
porting his assertions by a new calumny, he was obliged to re-
produce the old one about Arian prayers, after I had already
proved that Dr. Crolly never permitted nor tolerated Catholics
to attend any Protestant prayers, either in the institution or
elsewhere. However, the repetition of the calumny has had the
effect of bringing out from laymen and priests of the highest
respectability, a new and unanswerable refutation. I have
gratefully embodied these in the following letter, without, how-
ever, entirely overlooking the main, or I should rather say, the
sole object of his epistle, which was to abuse me, and praise
himself.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DUBLIN EVENING POST.
Dear Sir —lt is very natural that Mr. Maher should be
deeply mortified by the position in which the exposure of his
slanderous attack upon the late Primate has placed him; and
hence I was not at all surprised when I saw his last letter an-
nounced, notwithstanding the solemn pledge which he had given
never to revert to the subject again. I. was, however, very
much surprised, when I saw the result of his week’s labour; for
it is certainly the most ridiculous of all the mice which have
been brought forth by this great mountain of orthodoxy.
Mr. Maher’s original charge rested entirely on one isolated
answer of the Primate’s, that he had no objection that the can-
didates for Maynooth should receive their preliminary and
scientific education at the Belfast institution, in which Dr.
Hincks, whose evidence he adduces, and three other of the pro-
fessors, did not believe in the Divinity of Christ. I proved to
him that this very Dr, Hincks discharged the same office in a
boarding and day school of his own, in the Catholic diocess of
Cloyne, without the slightest objection having been made by
priest or bishop. I proved that the practice was known to exist,
and not objected to by the bishops, in Leinster and Munster, as


well as in Ulster, and that it had the high and mighty sanction
of Mr. Maher himself, who did not object to his own nephew,
when a candidate for the ministry, receiving his preliminary
education from persons who were not even Christians. I proved
that in the year 1825, and before Dr. Crolly gave his evidence,
the principle had been solemnly approved of by the four arch-
bishops, acting in the name of the entire hierarchy. I proved
that, in quoting Dr. Crolly’s evidence, he suppressed the previous
answer, in which that prelate swore publicly, in the very town of
Belfast, that he never heard a single complaint that the attend-
ance of Catholic pupils at the institution was attended with any
danger to their faith; as well as his two subsequent answers, in
which he announced his intention of establishing a Catholic
seminary, in which he could combine a religious with a scientific
education. I proved that no perversion to Arianism ever took
place in the institution, and that Dr. Montgomery never heard
of such a thing at all, whilst Dr. Crolly, by his zeal, prudence,
and piety, brought back the stray sheep by hundreds and by
thousands to the one fold.
This was the first great original charge against the Primate.
It is the one which is contained in the Yoto ; and because I did
not think it necessary to repeat my unanswered and unanswer-
able refutation of this baseless slander, in my last letter, Mr.
Maher has the unblushing effrontery to say that I have abandoned
my argumqnts.
How did he attempt to prop up his rotten calumny ? By
forging a quotation from Mr, Carlile!
When I detected and denounced this forgery, which he could
not defend, and had not the honesty to retract, he .attempted to
justify his original charge by two new quotations—one from the
evidence of Dr. Montgomery, and the other from that of Dr.
Crolly.
In quoting the evidence of the latter, Mr. Maher said :
“ Nay, lie (Dr. Crolly) went somewhat further; he left on record
the opinion that the endowment of such a house wmuld increase
morality in the district. The record of that unsound opinion will
stand, and no amount of angry letter-writing will efface it.”
I proved that Dr. Crolly did not use the word morality, or
any other word which would imply that the duties of a Christian
life were taught in the institution, and that he merely spoke of
the moral effects which a grant to that establishment would be
likely to produce in preserving and promoting a feeling of
loyalty, especially in the town of Belfast. Mr. Maher declared
that it pained him to quote that testimony; and yet,.although I


have proved it to be an entire falsification of Dr. Crolly’s mean-
ing, he very coolly passes it over in silence, having neither the
power to defend, nor the grace to retract it.
The only one of his numerous assertions which even he has
the hardihood to reiterate, is, that Dr. Crolly “ approved of the
system of which the extempore Arian prayers formed a part.
The attendance was known to all Belfast.”
“ The evidence,” says Mr. Maher, “ upon the subject, is too con-
cise and unmistakeahle to admit of cavil. Here it is de novo :
“ ‘ The common-hall commences with prayer. Mr. Ilincks and
myself, who are clergymen, on alternate Saturdays, commence the
business of the common-hall with a short extempore prayer.
“‘ Is this open to the public ? Yes.
“ ‘ Are the Roman Catholic children present at this time during
prayer? Yes.’
“ There is much more to the same effect, which it is unnecessary
to transcribe. I have quoted it already more fully, and have here
only to remark, that the boys from all the schools, day scholars, of
whom a great many were Catholics, and boarders, all attended these
Saturday meetings.”
I have learned by experience to look with great mistrust upon
Mr. Maher’s quotations and assertions ; and, consequently, I
was not at all surprised when I found that, in his present letter, he
had suppressed a portion of one of Dr. Montgomery’s answers,
which would tell against himself. That gentleman was asked—
“ Are the Roman Catholic children present at this time during
prayer ?” Dr. M “ Yes.” This is Mr. Maher’s version ; but
I find that, in the Report (p. 46), the answer is as follows:
“ Yes, although some of all denominations may escape from us
occasionally, or their parents may require them to go home.” I
find the reason of this suppression in a subsequent part of his
letter, in which he says, in reply to my assertion that no Catholic
was obliged or asked to attend these prayers, non constat. I
have, moreover, been able to ask a Catholic gentleman of the
highest eminence and respectability, who was a pupil at the
institution in 1825, if Catholics were ever asked or obliged to
attend prayers there, and his answer is, “ most unquestionably
not. You are at perfect liberty to use my name in any way you
think right.”
So much for his quotation. Let us now examine his asser-
tion, that a great many of the day scholars were Catholics. It
is stated in pp. 13, 14, of the very Report to which he has
devoted so much of his time, that, in September, 1824, of 186
pupils who attended the English school, just 13 were Catholics;
and out of 118 in the classical school, the Catholics amounted to


no more than 7; so that, of 304 students, only 20 were Catholics.
Not only the students of the institution, but the townspeople
also, had a right to be present at the exhibition on Saturday;
and even if Dr. Montgomery had known to what religious deno-
mination the pupils belonged—which he admits that he frequently
did not, even with regard to his own pupils—l defy him to make
his prayer, and to be able to tell, in such a crowd, whether the
few Catholics were present or not, especially as he does not say
that he paid any particular attention to their attendance,' more
than to that of the Protestants, Presbyterians, and Quakers.
It must be borne in mind that the meeting on Saturdays, in
the common-hall, which was open to the public, was merely for
the purpose of an exhibition. There was nothing whatever taught
there. The Catholic student lost nothing whatever by absenting
himself from it, or, if he wished to attend, there was no reason
on earth why he should enter the hall until the prayer was con-
cluded. He knew, moreover, from the private acts, as well as
from the public admonitions of his clergy and bishop, that if he
did attend he would do what was wrong.
Through the kindness of an eminent Dublin surgeon, formerly
a pupil in tbe Belfast academy, and whose name, of course, I am
at perfect liberty to use, I can, I hope, settle this matter to the
satisfaction even of Mr. Maher himself. The writer of the let-
ter is as good a Catholic as any in Ireland :
“ When,” be says, “ I went to school to Belfast, Dr. Crolly advised
me to enter the Belfast academy as a day scholar, and placed me as a
boarder in the house of a Catholic lady. Prayers were not said in
the schools of the academy ; but if such had been the practice, I know
I could not (with Dr. Crolly’s consent) have attended them, as he
would not, on any account , allow me to attend the prayers of Protes-
tant friends, in whose houses I was sometimes a visitor; and when a
near relative died, who had been a Protestant, Dr. Crolly toolc the
trouble ofivriting me m letter of instruction on the occasion, in which
he cautioned me against going into the church with the funeral.”
Mr. Maher, as usual, places the entire malice of these prayers
in the fact that they were made by Arians. If their authors had
been orthodox Calvinists, it would have been quite an innocent
amusement to have attended them. Dr. Crolly was of a different
opinion. He did not permit Catholics to attend the prayers of
Anglicans, Calvinists, Arians, or Quakers. He insisted on the
practice being abandoned in a school in which Catholics were
obliged to attend a prayer, not made by an Arian, but by a
Trinitarian. He preached against it, opposed it, reprobated it
in public and in private, and at the same time approved of it,


according to his charitable and reluctant assailant, in the Belfast
institution, to the knowledge of the whole town ! Nothing, sir,
can be more unlike Dr. Crolly than this. Mr. Maher has, I
think, the merit of being the very first person who ever accused
the late Primate of being an insincere man, or a trimmer, or who
denies that he was a straightforward, honest man.
Mr. Maher has a very convenient memory, and it has, doubt-
less, entirely escaped him that Dr. Doyle, in 1829—four years
after the inquiry into the state of the Belfast institution had
taken place—considered it the only academy in this country where
the most virtuous and numerous classes of the Irish people could
receive education, properly so called—that he thought the origi-
nal proceedings of those who founded the Belfast institution,
might form an outline of the plan of the National Literary Insti-
tute, to which he wished a portion of the funds of the Catholic
Association to be devoted, and which he wished to be accessible
to all, without distinction of creed or class.
Mr. Maher says that I am deeply mortified because he will not
indulge me in a by-battle about his attack upon Dr. Mac Hale ;
and that I cannot understand how quietly he ignored my elabo-
rate charges.
« Your correspondent,” continues Mr. Maher, “ first identifies me
with the author of an anonymous letter, written ten years since, and,
after exhausting his ingenuity in abusing me, he thinks it quite
proper and becoming, in his second letter, to ask me—nay, he demands
of me, pretty much in the Rob Roy style, to say in my own name
whether lamor am not the author of the aforesaid letter; he wishes
to know my opinion of its merits, and whether I defend the national
system of education, as did the author of that letter. Now, if
these questions were asked by another, I should not hesitate one
moment to answer, nor do I think I should have any difficulty in
defending my opinions, or modifications of opinion, which natu-
rally occur as time and circumstances change; neither would I
hesitate a moment to retract an opinion, nor to repair any injury
which I offered whilst acting under an erroneous judgment, whenever
the cause of charity or truth were to be promoted thereby. But your
correspondent may rest assured that his demand is very little likely
to influence me. The arrogance dictating such questions is absolutely
without parallel. Would not Mr. Crolly laugh outright at me if,
after abusing him until I exhausted a Billingsgate vocabulary, I had
put him similar questions ?”
This is really amusing. lam mortified because he will not
answer my questions about his letter to Dr. Mac Hale! Why,
I knew from the first that he never would, and never could,


answer one of them. I did not need his information as to the
authorship of the anonymous slanders against Dr. Mac Hale. I
was absolutely certain of that before I quoted one word of it; and
notwithstanding his two miserable efforts to deny his own written
words, he is now as notoriously the author of that letter as if he
had appended his name to it. lam not astonished, however,
that he is ashamed to acknowledge it.
Neither did I need his information as to the truth or falsehood
of the charges contained in that letter, for I knew that they were
false—that the slanders which he anonymously preferred against
the archbishop were for the most part utterly untrue. It did
not concern me in the least whether he answered me or not, but
it was of the greatest importance to the public to know that the
only man who could he found in the Church of God to make a
vain, impotent, arid wicked attempt to blacken the character of
the dead Primate, had already endeavoured to ruin the charac-
ter of a living archbishop, by falsehoods published under a ficti-
tious signature. He may ignore them as quietly as he pleases,
but the public will not forget them.
He says I wanted to know his opinions on national education.-
Is not this a piece of brazen effrontery ? I asked him, amongst
other questions, was it true that Dr. Doyle said that Ur.
Mac Hale had no ballast in him, and that his (Mr. Maher’s) own
experience proved the truth of that declaration ? I asked him
was it true that his Grace wilfully misrepresented the opinions
of his fellow-bishop, and that he published scandalous, ground-
less, and reckless charges, in miscalled pastorals ? I asked was
it true that he was a false brother, and that he was guilty of the
suppressio veri and suggestio falsi, &c? But now, it appears that
the reason why he will not give me an answer is, that I demanded
it. He referred to the first part of King Henry IV. in his sixth
letter, and it is now evident that he has been studying it to great
advantage. To stab a dead man was not the only thing he
learned from that play. When Jack Falstaff said that “ whilst
he was engaged with eleven men in buckram in front, three knaves
in Kendal-green came at his back, and let drive at him, for it was
so dark that thou couldst not see thy hand,” Prince Henry re-
plied, “ These lies are like the father that begets them—gross
as a mountain, open, palpable. Why, how couldst thou know
these men in Kendal-green, when it was so dark that thou couldst
not see thy hand ? Come, tell us your reason; what sayest thou
to this ? Pains —Come, your reason, Jack, your reason. Fal. —-
What, upon compulsion ? No —were I at the strappado, or all
the racks in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion ! If
F


reasons were as plenty as blackberries, I would give no man a
reason on compulsion. I!” This is precisely Mr. Maher’s
reason for not answering me when I asked him if his anonymous
slanders against Dr. Mac Hale were true or false. “ What,” he
cries, “ upon compulsion ? No—were lat the strappado, or all
the racks in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give
you a reason on compulsion ! If reasons were as plenty as black-
berries, I would give no man a reason on compulsion. I!”
“ As to the charge,” says Mr. Maher, “ upon which he dashes away
with so much self-satisfaction, of falsifying Mr. Carlile’s testimony, and
other similar charges, what shall I say ? They are unfounded in
fact; but shall 1 argue out the point with your correspondent ? By
no means.”
He will not enter into a by-battle just now. A by-battle !
He forged a quotation from Mr. Garble, to prove that thousands
were perverted in the schools of Arians, and that myriads were
perverted by Arian teachers. He quoted Mr. Garble thus:
“ Perversion was carried to such an extent ( Carllle observes ) as
to become the fashionable religion of the day,” &c. Now, I
proved not only that Mr. Maher forged the words of that quota-
tion, but that he knowingly, deliberately, and entirely falsified
Mr. Carble’s meaning. But he will not give his reason for this
forgery, on compulsion. No; were he at the strappado, or all
the racks in the world, he would not tell it on compulsion. Give
a reason on compulsion 1 If reasons were as plenty as black-
berries, he would give no man a reason upon compulsion. He!
Mr, Maher asks me, how I know that if he be not a bishop, it
does not arise from any reluctance on his part to assume the ring
and crozier ? I know it by his arrogance, by his inflated lauda-
tion of himself, by his insolent assumption of the office of Grand
Inquisitor, or, at all events, of Deputy Primate in the Irish
Church, although he has no legitimate claim to either, at least
that lam aware of. He, although only P.P. of Carlow-Graigue
—although not even a member of that body which her Divine
Head has appointed the judge of controversies in his Church, sets
himself up as the sole standard of orthodoxy, hurls his wicked
and un-Catholic anathemas, in the genuine spirit of a man who
would persecute, if he had the power, not only at myself, but at
the princes of the Church, and strives to rob them, by anonymous
slanders during their lives, and by the most barefaced and perse-
vering falsehoods, even after their deaths, of the spotless reputa-
tion which they carried with them to the grave. It is quite ob


vious that he did not even know of the existence of the miserable
after-clap which he now alleges as the sole cause of his attack
upon the late Primate, until the last few days. When his calum-
nies were refuted, and his falsehoods exposed, he made a despe-
rate effort to find some pretext for his slander, and as a drown-
ing man will catch at straws, he fastened upon this. He is not
the first, and it is greatly to be feared that he will not be the last
man who has given vent to his own spite and hatred, under the
pretence of defending the cause of God and of his Church, Non
tali auxilio.
He says that I have indulged in personalities—the never-fail-
ing resource of weak and passionate minds. I thank the strong-
minded Aristotle of Carlow-Graigue for the compliment, espe-
cially as he said the very same thing about the Archbishop of
Tuam. He tells Dr. Mac Hale that, seeing “ the weight of truth
against him, he endeavours to encumber it with verbiage and
circumlocution, not being able, by fair argument, to rebut it; or
by indulging the resource of weak minds, in noisy, angry, personal
invective against the advocates of truth—of pursuing a precipi-
tate course of vituperation, of desecrating the high places in the
Church of God, and of publishing groundless insinuations and
reckless charges, the imputations, the boiling and bubbling over
of a fretted and perturbed spirit.” I presume, sir, that you keep
those charges stereotyped, as this weather-cock applies them to
every one whom he assails, from the Archbishop of Tuam down
to so humble an individual as I am. I would, indeed, have con-
sidered his assault upon myself as one of the neatest pieces of
Billingsgate I had ever read, were it not that it is completely
eclipsed by his vituperation of Dr. Mac Hale. And yet he com-
plains of personalities—he !
I have only room for one specimen, which I shall not desig-
nate as low, vulgar, or scurrilous; for it is something infinitely
worse than all these.
“ Mr. Crolly,” says Mr. Maher, “ I regret to see, evidently views
this as a small matter ; somewhat like the lady charged with having
given birth to an illegitimate child, who excused herself to the judge
by assuring him emphatically, that it was only a very little one.”
This is the man who sets himself up as the standard of taste>
elegance, and refinement; as the model which should be followed
by all genuine orthodox instructors of youth ; the man who de-
nounced Dr. Mac Hale’s writings on education as scandalous
and false, and who thinks it a sad thing for the Church that I


will not take him for my guide as to the mode of imparting in-
struction to youth. Thank God I have never learned to intro-
duce into my lectures illustrations so gross and disgusting, that
they cannot be read without a blush, nor mentioned in decent
society.
He occupies a considerable portion of his letter by passing a
very high eulogium upon himself. This was very necessary;
but it might have been as well to get somebody else to do it. I
think, however, that it would be a great addition to his character,
if, were it only for the novelty of the thing, he would occasion-
ally tell the truth. It is my own private opinion, also—but this
is in the strictest confidence—that he has no ballast in him.
I neither know, nor do I care, whether this controversy shall
end now, or shall be continued for six months to come. I have
not written, and I never shall write, a word which I do not know
to be true, and which I do not believe to be called for under the
circumstances. If I have, like the Archbishop of Tuara, been
reluctantly forced to call him a slanderer and a falsifier, I did
not do so without giving my reasons; and whenever he shall
prove, I care not whether it be upon compulsion or not, that
these are false, I shall retract the charge. I now repeat, that if
it be a mark of refinement to strip a man of his titles, in order to
abuse him in his grave, it is a refinement which is only worthy
of Lord Chesterfield or the devil. But Mr. Maher should not
forget the good qualities which I admitted that he possessed; for,
when he attacked my weakness of mind, and ignorance of logic,
did I not acknowledge that he was the Demosthenes of Carlow
—the Aristotle of Graigue? And, as I now remember that he
recommended me to read Clio on taste, I have no objection to
add, that I consider him to be the Longinus of Ballitore.
I am firmly convinced, that the prosperity, the honour, and
the glory of the Church require that the memory of her great,
zealous, and successful champions, should be vindicated from
every obliquy which may be attempted to be cast upon it. I
can state, I believe upon the authority of every person who
knew the late Primate as he was, that he possessed all those
qualities in an eminent degree, and that he may be justly called
the Apostle of Catholicity in Belfast—in that very town where
he is accused of having favoured the progress of Arianism. The
success of Dr. Crolly’s labours is an evident proof that he was
aided by the Most High; for he planted, but God gave the
increase. I believe that there was not one among the successors
of St. Patrick who devoted himself more singly, more disinte-
restedly, or more incessantly, to the advancement of religion :


and, with the help of God, I shall never be silent in so just, so
righteous, and so holy a cause, as I consider the defence of his
character to be; nor will I permit any man to rob the dead, the
sainted successor of St. Patrick, of
“ The purest treasure mortal times afford—
His spotless reputation.”
GEORGE CROLLY,
Professor of Theology in St. Patrick’s College,
Maynooth.
November 19, 1850.
I have just received a most important communication, which
I think it necessary to add to my letter. I was enabled, on a
former occasion, to make the following statement on the authority
of the Vicar-General of Connor, who resided in the house with
the late Primate, from 1821 until 1825—the year in which the
inquiry into the state of the Belfast institution took place. “ I
can affirm (that gentleman says), from an intimate knowledge of
your deservedly-lamented uncle, that he never approved of reli-
gious instruction being imparted by other than a Catholic pastor.”
The very Rev. B. M‘Auley, the parish priest of Downpatrick,
and Vicar-General of the diocess of Down—one of the ablest'
priests, and most successful defenders of the faith in Ireland—
now authorizes me to say, that he left Maynooth College with
the late Primate, in 1812, and remained with him, as his curate,
until 1819, when he was appointed by Dr. M‘Mullen to take
charge of the very next parish, in which he remained until 1825.
He says that no man living had better opportunities of knowing
Dr. Crolly than he had, and that he never allowed Catholics to
go as boarders to the Belfast institution, or any Catholic to
receive religious instruction there, either by attending prayers
or lectures. “ During the seven gears,” he says, “that I was
his assistant, I can declare, without fear of contradiction, that we
received into the Catholic Church above a thousand converts.
Alas! that it is necessary to defend such a man against the
calumnies of a Catholic priest. I wish he would compare what
he has done for the advancement of the Catholic faith, with
the exertions of the great prelate who is now the object of his
vituperation.”
POSTSCRIPT.
I omit the last letter, simply to avoid repetition; because I
was obliged to embody the greater part of it in the narrative of
Dr. Crolly’s life, and the rest I have put into a note. I think it


right, however, briefly to notice certain charges which have been
made in consequence of that letter, lest some Protestant
friends, whose good opinion I value, might be misled by them.
I did not hear of these charges until very lately, and then by
the purest accident. Ido not know whether they have been re-
peated or not, but I trust that the reply which I am about to
give will be a sufficient answer to all those which have been pre-
ferred, or which may be preferred hereafter, as far as regards
those whom I either hope or wish to satisfy.
1. Because I said that Dr. Crolly found it necessary to go as
far as possible in the way of conciliating Protestants, in order
that his appeal to their charity might not be unsuccessful, I am
accused of insinuating that Dr. Crolly tricked them. Now,
nothing could be farther from my intention than this, for my ob-
ject throughout has been to prove that Dr. Crolly neither said
nor did anything, in his intercourse with Protestants, which was
inconsistent either with his own convictions or with the genuine
principles of the Catholic religion. When he asked Protestants
for money to build churches, &c., he always candidly told them
the object for which he wanted it; so that there could be no possible
trickery or deception in the matter. Indeed, nothing could be more
abhorrent to Dr. Crolly’s character than such conduct as this,
I remember that, when he was told one time that if he made
a certain declaration, which many persons would conceive to be
innocent, and even justifiable, he would get as much money in a
month as would finish his cathedral, he replied—“ lam very
anxious to complete my cathedral, but I am still more anxious to
preserve my character, and to uphold my principles; and I would
not for all the money in the world do anything which could
in the slightest degree injure the one, or lead any one on earth
to a misconception of the. other.” If my words be, therefore,
susceptible of the meaning which has been put upon them, I beg
to say that it is precisely the opposite of what I intended.
2. It is said that I set aside the evidence of two persons,
simply because they were Protestants. Now, I did no such
thing. I stated in my letter, and the same thing will be
found in a note on Dr. Crolly’s life, that there was no
evidence of the fact at all. A Mr. Ingham paid a visit to
Ireland more than a year after Dr. Crolly had left Belfast alto-
gether, in the course of which he passed twice through Belfast,
and visited the Frederick-street school. In another year he
was examined before the House of Lords, and he then told a
story which the schoolmaster had told him about Dr. Crolly;
and this is what is called the evidence of two Protestants ! Why,
it would not be received in any court in the empire, if it were


brought forward against the most abandoned character that was
ever tried for his crimes. I shall not refer at greater length in
this place to this false and absurd story, which no person in the
slightest degree acquainted with Dr. Crolly would believe of
him, as it will be found fully refuted in the memoir of his life.
I mentioned the fact of the schoolmaster who told the story, and
the five weeks’ tourist who repeated it being Protestants, chiefly
because the person who brought it forward had imputed it as a
horrid crime to a Catholic bishop that he allowed the candidates
for Maynooth to be taught Latin and Greek by an Arian mas-
ter, in the year 1825. God forbid that I should say a man’s
evidence was false because he was a Protestant. I never said or
thought anything of the kind. But Ido say that the story told
by Mr. Ingham is totally false. Fortunately, however, it was
not sworn to be true by any one. Mr. Ingham mentioned
other things which he said he had heard about the Frederick-
street school, such as that there were 300 Catholics at it in the
autumn of 1836, which are ludicrously untrue.
3. There is, however, just this much in the fact of the parties
by whom this story was invented or retailed being Protestants, that
they were on that account more likely to misapprehend matters
connected with the Catholic religion. The most charitable sup-
position would be, that some grievous misapprehension of this
kind occurred on the part of the schoolmaster, or of the tourist,
with regard to the story about Dr. Crolly and the Frederick-
street school. For whilst I admit that conscientious Protestants
are as incapable of perjuring themselves as conscientious
Catholics, I hope I do not offend them by saying, that they
are fallible and peccable, like their neighbours; and that, when I
find an individual, even of that highly-favoured class, retailing at
second-hand a story which I cannot believe, I must explain his
conduct by one or other of these suppositions.
I am willing to award to Protestants precisely the same
privileges, rights, and immunities which are enjoyed by their
neighbours, but not one tittle more. The insolent, patronising
tone of superiority adopted by some of those who condescend to
admit that all Catholics are not necessarily hypocrites and liars,
is far more unendurable than the open denunciations of professed
bigots. All is right with the Protestants—there is no doubt
about that—but let priests and bishops, who being doubtful cha-
racters at best, beware how they lay themselves open to the sus-
picion of trickery. And this is liberal Protestantism. But
this liberal Protestantism is very exacting, for, in order not to
forfeit its protection, you must allow Catholic children to get the
Protestant Bible expounded to them by Protestant schoolmasters:


if you repudiate such a practice, you are a bigot. You must
also believe that a Catholic bishop betrayed his own Church by
approving of this practice, provided a man who ran through
all Ireland in five weeks, who never saw or had the slightest
communication with Dr. Crolly during his entire life, has heard,
or declares that he has heard, such a story from a Protestant
schoolmaster. To doubt it is treason against Protestantism.
And yet, without having read one-tenth of the enormous mass
of evidence in which Mr. Ingham’s is contained, I could point
out many passages in which the witnesses flatly contradicted each
other, not about stories which they heard, hut about facts of
which they swore that they were cognizant of their own know-
ledge. Any person who may wish to see a specimen of this
kind of affair need only read the Fourth Report of the Educa-
tion Commissioners, in which he will find that a vast number of
individuals protested in the strongest terms against the statements
contained in the evidence of Dr. Cooke. And yet this evidence
related to facts connected with an institution in the very town in
which Dr. Cooke lived, and with which he was intimately ac-
quainted. But this was quite fair, as the protesters were Pro-
testants.
4. Then it appears that I am an accomplice in the tricks
played in the Lancasterian school, because 1 did not denounce
them. Now, I did not, as I before stated, know anything about
the borrowing of the school until the whole matter was over. I
had nothing on earth to do with the trick or with the school, and
I did not feel myself called upon in the least to strive to ruin the
master, by bringing this charge against him. Nor would I have
mentioned it now, if I had not ascertained that he had long since
left the school. I need scarcely say that I never accused
the good men who established and supported the Frederick-street
school with having the slightest connection with the absurd
stories of one master or the tricks of another, any more than
with their having made it a rule that the Protestant scriptures
should be expounded to the Catholics by a Protestant school-
master.
I would have pleased some persons exceedingly if I had repre-
sented Dr. Crolly as a latitudinarian who let the Catholics read
the Protestant Bible, and receive scriptural lectures from Protes-
tants ; but my object is not to please any person or any party,
but to exhibit Dr. Crolly as he really was—a thoroughly liberal
man, and at the same time a thoroughly good Catholic. He cer-
tainly was not a Catholic of the Beaumont and Norfolk school,
and I am glad that I have succeeded in pourtraying his charac-
ter in a way which has given offence to those who admire it.


Would any sincere Protestant allow his children to he taught
the Douay Bible, and to have it expounded to them by a Catholic?
I say he would not. This is not liberality, but latitudinarianism;
and those who attempt to affix on a dead bishop the charge of
permitting Catholics to read the Protestant Bible, and to
have it expounded to them by a Protestant master, without one
atom of evidence, not only slander him most grievously, but
greatly injure the cause which he advocated, because it
strengthens the impression, which some who were opposed to his
views attempted to make in certain very important quarters, with
no small success, that the man who made more converts, and who
did more for the advancement of religion and for the Church
than any of his contemporaries, was not even an ortho-
dox catholic. Nor is this the case with regard to Dr. Crolly
alone. Other prelates have been equally calumniated whilst
they were living, and even after their death.
But, then, if the story mentioned by Ingham were not true,
why did not Dr. Crolly contradict it ? This is most generous
after his death. Now, did those very persons who argue thus
ever hear of this evidence until their attention was called to it
at the present time? The reason why Dr. Crolly did not con-
tradict it was, that he never heard of its existence. I have
mentioned a fact in Dr. Crolly’s life which clearly proves this.
A person, whose name I shall not unnecessarily mention, gave
far less objectionable evidence, but to the same effect, into which
he introduced Dr. Crolly’s name. A certain circumstance ac-
cidentally called the attention of the latter to this evidence, and
he instantly wrote to the gentleman to know what he meant by
it, and to tell him that it was entirely untrue. I know, and can
prove, on the testimony of others, that he abstained from publicly
contradicting that evidence, lest by so doing he should injure
the person who gave it, especially as he did not know of its ex-
istence until it was probably forgotten.
THE END.
Printed by Purdon, Brothers, 23, Bachelor’s-walk, Dublin.


Just Published, Post B vo, Fancy Cloth. Price 3s.
THE LIFE AND DEATH OF OLIVER PLUNKET, PRI-
MATE OF IRELAND. The last victim of the Popish plot, and
the last martyr who was put to death, by public authority, for the
Catholic Faith, in. the British Dominions. By the Rev. George
Crolly, Professor of Theology in Maynooth College.
This work is full of interest at the present time, as it shows to
what frightful excesses the English people may be driven by
religious fanaticism.
Also, by the same author, Square IGmo, Cloth. Price 6d.
MARY ANNE O’HALLORAN; OR, THE FAVOURITE
CHILD. Second Edition.
Preparing for Publication.
SELECT SERMONS OF THE LATE MOST REV. DR.
CROLLY, PRIMATE OF IRELAND.
These Sermons delineate, with peculiar eloquence and power, all
the duties of Christian morality, and discuss, in the most masterly
manner, all the leading topics in dispute between the sectaries and
the Catholic Church.
The Volume will be edited by an Eminent Divine.
Also, in the Press.
THE LIFE OF ST. PATRICK, Uniform with the Life of
Oliver Plunket; Edited by the Rev. George Crolly, Professor of
Theology in Maynooth College.
This will be followed by the LIVES OF THE SUCCESSORS
OF ST. PATRICK; so that the Series, when completed, will form
a complete history of the Primates of Ireland.


