

The
Principles of
Gardening
For Australia.
2 /6
Begue-Luffmann.




9
17'
THE
PRINCIPLES OF GARDENING
for
AUSTRALIA.
BY
C. BOGUE-LUFFMANN,
Principal of the School of Horticulture, Melbourne.
COPYRIGHT: ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
Published by " The Book. Lovers’ Library,” Melbourne.
1905


CONTENTS.
Chapter I.— . The Principles of Garden Architecture :
i. Man’s primitive needs and the earliest culti-
vated Plants.—ii. Development of Domestic Ar-
chitecture : need of Ornamental Gardening.—■
iii. Architecture and Climate, the governing
forces in all Garden schemes.—iv. Types of Archi-
tecture chiefly affecting Garden Design—Greek,
Gothic Renaissance. v. Formal Gardens. —
vi. Various domestic dwellings considered Archi-
tecturally.—vii. Demands of the Gothic and
Modem Italian house.—viii. Dutch Gardening,
Its influence on Modem design. Inappropriate-
ness of. —Introduction of French “Landscape”
Gardening.—x. Influence of Landscape on Archi-
tecture.—xi. Distinctive features in Landscape
Gardening.—xii. Demands of Landscape Gardening.
—xiii. Summary of styles and periods of Domestic
Dwellings.—xiv. Summary of conditions, features,
and materials, affecting design.—xv. Subjects for
study—Books, Architecture, History, Landscape
Painting, and Climate, as it affects man, buildings,
and plants 9-21
Chapter ll.—Designing Gardens to Meet Local Con-
ditions :
i. Australian Climate. The Verandah.—ii. The
local garden an open air chamber.—iii. Defects of
local buildings.—iv. Sites for houses, nature, and
extent, of private domains.—v. Types of Australian
houses.—vi. Need for variety in local Garden work.
—vii. Local forces affecting design.—viii. Local
treatment of the Italian House Garden.—ix. Colour
of house as it affects design and planting.—x.
Gothic and gabled houses, heavy roofs, large win-
dows; lines of approach, height and form of


planting affected by these. —xi. Proportion and dis-
tribution of turf in Garden schemes.—xii. Plan-
ning to produce size and variety of scene. — 1
xiii. Treatment of different levels, aspects and
kinds of soil.—xiv. Dividing lines, xv. —Nature
and treatment of boundaries and dividing lines. —
xvi. Proportion, arrangement, and treatment of
Architectural features in the Garden.—xvii. The
importance of varying levels.—xviii. Garden plan
not apparent or easily revealed.—xix. Well de-
signed and executed Gardens admit of effective
alteration. —xx. Plan decided on when all re-
sources known and computed.—xxi. Country house
Garden. Employment of fruiting plants in Gar-
den schemes. —xxii. Seaside Gardens.—xxiii. Gar-
dens for hill residences. —xxiv. Summary of lead-
ing points in design 22-31
Chapter lll.—Materials Available and the Practical
Work of Making Garden:
i. Materials employed in building and forming
Garden foundations.—ii. Preliminary work. —iii.
The employment of elay, stone, or other commonly
discarded material.—iv. Kind and quantity of true
soil desired. —v. Allocation of material according
to character and aspect.—vi. Plotting for various
plants and positions.—vii. The assignment of
Vegetable and Fruit sections, drying grounds,
offices, etc. —viii. Order of working on new Gar-
den sites 32-36
Chapter IV.—The Selection and Arrangement of Per-
manent Plants in Garden Schemes:
i. Nature of permanent plants in Gardens.—ii. Em-
ployment of trees. —iii. The dwarfing effect of trees.
Planting under trees. —iv. Trees provide shape,
colour, “atmosphere.”—v. Planting ever in accord
with plan.—vi. Estimating size, colour, season, and
effect, before planting trees and shrubs.—vii. Plant-
ing big trees or shrubs.—viii. Planting second size
trees or shrubs.—ix. Planting smallest size trees or
shrubs.—x. Hedges, necessity for, and defects of.
—xi. Planning and planting to avoid tradesmen’s


walks and “ back ” premises.—xii. Climbing plants,
and supports for.—xiii. Summary of points in
selecting and arranging permanent plants in Gar-
den schemes 37-43
Chapter V.—Planning, Forming and Maintaining Small
Gardens:
i. Types of small Gardens for Town and Country.—
ii. Planning and Forming.—iii. The order of
making, and essential preliminary work.—iv. "Va-
riety possible in small Gardens—rock, water, and
shady sections.—v. Treatment of wet, dark, sour,
and exposed parts of Garden.—vi. Seasons for
planting, removing, manuring, deep digging, and
re-casting.—vii. Seasons and methods of pruning
trees and shrubs.—viii. Sowing, and treatment of
seedlings and young plants.—ix. Lawn making and
management.—x. Appropriate, and unsuitable
plants, for small Gardens. —xi. Summary of for-
mative and seasonable work 44^54
Chapter VI. —Garden Management ;
i. Employment and direction of skilled and un-
skilled labour.—ii. Epitome of Australian Gar-
dens, and demands of each.—iii. The maintenance
of soil.—iv. Altering of plan according to age,
condition, or resources.—v. The work, and dis-
tinctive features, of the seasons.—vi. The re-mod-
elling of old or neglected Gardens. —vii. Propor-
tion of annual capital outlay to be spent in raw
material.—viii. Water supply and its application,
ix. Open and covered surfaces.—x. Proportion of
hardy and “ common ” plants in Garden schemes.—
xi. The importance of the shade garden, or wilder-
ness.—xii. Natural forces acting against Australian
Garden work.—Extremes of climate, overheated
and badly drained soil, hot drying winds, droughts,
poverty and shallowness of soil, disproportion of
wasting and gathering seasons. —xiii. Books and
other objects of study 55-66


Chapter VII.—A Rose Garden:
i. The rose more than an exhibition flower.—ii. The
creation of Garden Scenes.—iii. The rose garden
idealised.—iv. What may be done with the rose in
Australia.—v. The preparation of sites for the rose
garden.—vi. Devices which assist or detract
from the beauty of the rose. —vii. Treatment of
rose land.—viii. The rose section in public, man-
sion, villa, and cottage Gardens.—ix. The object
to be sought in rose gardening 67-72


INTRODUCTION.
This little work is offered with the object of stimulating public
baste and setting forth a few guiding principles in the making and
management of Australian gardens.
Dwelling in what is in every respect a new land; the forces of
nature; the progress of the seasons; the demands of art, and a
changing mental attitude must materially affect our wants and
aspirations. We have been here more than a hundred years, to
learn little beyond the fact that nature is stronger than we, and
that the average garden space is an unsightly and expensive
nuisance. We have not come to see that our work is weak and
unsuitable to our surroundings, and that we must invent and be
more thorough if we would achieve beautiful and lasting results.
We are so far away from the dignified and finished work of the
old world as to be undisciplined, apathetic, and easily satisfied.
In fact, we have been busy taking possession of the country and
securing ourselves, and have left the fashioning of our gardens to
casual hands. But we are settling down and demanding more of
the arts and graces of life. It is, therefore, incumbent upon us
that we consider the nature of our premises and possessions, and
adopt a system of gardening distinctly in accord with natural con-
ditions.
The growing of violets, roses, daffodils, carnations, or chrysan-
themums is not gardening. These must be regarded as the merest
details in any garden scheme.
It is a painful fact that as plant-growing grows in popularity,
the art of gardening declines.
Those who have means, taste and leisure must apply themselves
to this work or there can be no early improvement. The architect
can render great service to Australian gardening; for, in so far
as he will set himself to understand plants, he will plan and
contrive to accommodate fine living ornament about every house.
There is also a great deal to be done in remodelling the garden
spaces of existing houses, since the vast majority are lacking in
foundation material, and true form.
Gardening is both art and handicraft, and cannot be learned from
the most patient study of books. It is as Emerson says; —“ Thou
must bleed for me ”; but as nothing has previously appeared on
garden design for Australia, it is hoped that in submitting these
few pages a little will be done towards creating a proper mood,
and right attitude of approach to the subject.




CHAPTER I.
THE PRINCIPLES OF GARDEN ARCHITECTURE.
“ The true Gardener is he who arranges common objects with
uncommon grace.”
The need of food and shelter induced primitive man to cul-
tivate ground and make himself a home.
In turning vegetation to various uses he first trained, twisted
and cultivated wood for implements; “ worked ” dressmaking
materials, as fibre, grass and leaves, and fashioned hand
weapons and conveniences such as bows, clubs, spears,
needles, combs, shields, nets and boats. Next he employed
rough, and then dressed wood for making dwellings and monu-
ments.
At a later stage he cultivated vegetables for food, for peace
offerings bo the living and the dead, and for making drinking
and cooking vessels. When still more advanced he undertook
the cultivation of fruits as food, and for such ornaments as
could be made from seeds and husks.
Finally, flower and foliage plants were collected and cared
for as a means of decorating, protecting and refining his per-
manent abode.
Gardening, therefore, goes hand in hand with the progress
and type of civilisation.
In our own old land the moat, the foss, the rampart, the
parapet, the terrace, the fishpond or “ stews,” the mounts, walls,
canals and drawbridges—features which influence our minds
and affect our garden work enormously—are all survivals of
monastic and feudal periods when the inhabitants of castle
and abbey were compelled to secure themselves against outside
enemies.


Different races have invented or adopted different styles of
building, both public and domestic, and these various architec-
tural forms, usually in accord with the demands of climate,
degree of wealth, and kind of religious belief, have led to the
setting up of standards of taste, from which it is not often
easy or wise to depart.
Architecture and climate are the two great governing factors
in all garden schemes.
The climate of any locality may be easily gauged, hence it is
not difficult to plan a garden in accordance with its demands,
but in every centre of population architecture is extremely
varied, though for the purpose of gardening but two or three
styles need be seriously considered.
(i.) The horizontal or Greek classical orders, known as
Doric, lonic, and Corinthian, which are of one type,
excepting in details, are almost entirely employed in
ecclesiastical, public, and commercial buildings.
(ii.) The perpendicular, or Gothic, employed for eccle-
siastical, public, and domestic dwellings.
(iii.) The Renaissance, which is a revival of the Greek in
conjunction with early Roman work. This style pro-
vides a very large percentage of our most beautiful
homes.
Several other styles of dwelling-house exist, but they ap-
proximate to, and for the most part contain analogous features
and proportions. The most marked contrast exists in the
demands of different buildings, as regards sites for, extent and
form of land, and its treatment.
Greek, the first, is so perfectly proportioned, composed of
such fine material, and so excellently finished that it requires no
aid from its surroundings. It is its own adornment; hence we
see it employed with great effect for public buildings, with
nothing more picturesque about it than dingy streets, dull walls,
and smoke-laden air. But as the noble Grecian building is
unsuitable as a domestic dwelling it plays a very small part in
garden design. Small temples, summer-houses, baths, boat


houses, and herbariums or museums in public grounds are the
only uses to which it can be put in garden schemes.
If we except its columns it is all horizontal lines; this de-
mands a peculiar geometrical form of garden—a point to be
brought out later on.
Gothic is all vertical lines and graceful curves. In these, as
in its minor details, it represents nature, and here we discover
the opportunity to make attractive and natural surroundings to
Gothic domestic and ecclesiastical buildings. We may, there-
fore, say that the natural garden is Gothic, or a thing to be
built on perpendicular lines —the varying heights of trees and
shrubs, and different surface levels, helping out this idea.
Gothic domestic architecture is at its best in the country,
where there is room to create or select a landscape in accord
with its needs.
Renaissance architecture, which provides a highly-artistic and
substantial building, is adaptable to both town and country, and
it also admits of varying surroundings; but its heaviness and
strength, as indicated by its massive and spreading base, imply
the need of a sturdy and open platform, heavy masonry steps
and strongly-buttressed retaining walls. It is usually too at-
tractive to admit of climbing plants growing over its walls, or of
trees standing near enough to hide its form, or to break its
main lines.
All important architectural work in Western Europe was,
previous to the Renaissance, designed for religious and public
purposes, as temples to heathen deities, Christian churches and
halls, tombs for kings and other great personages, and as places
of refuge and security, such as monasteries and castles.
The early Roman villas were unpretentious in height and
form, and surrounded by walls and paved courts. In brief,
domestic architecture was quite utilitarian until comparatively
recent times—the Renaissance appearing in the fifteenth cen-
tury, and providing its best examples in Italy, France and
Spain; and the domestic Gothic in the sixteenth century, and
affecting France, England, Germany and Holland.


Previous to the fourteenth century gardens were “ herbyards ”
(orchards), and contained no flowers or decorative plants in set
order.
What we term “ old-fashioned flowers ” were, in almost every
instance, medicinal, pot, or sweet herbs. Violets, primroses,
roses, lavender, thyme, rosemary, juniper, crocus, mints and
“ savouries ” were grown to be eaten, or to effect cures, or
provide “ charms.”
Apart from trees, hedges, and topiary work, little or no purely
decorative gardening existed previous to the sixteenth century.
The evolutionary effects produced by water are most marked.
Great and important buildings employed water as a defence,
hence the moat and the canal. From these grew the domestic
fish-pond, and with the disuse of the moat its employment for
the fish “ stews ” of the monks, walled vegetable and herb gar-
dens, and the privy gardens where breviaries were studied in
the heat of the day. The moat walls furnished heat, and gave
rise to the training of fruit trees. Some moats were extended
into lakes, and also provided waterfalls. Bowling floors found
their first place on sites formerly covered with water. Moats
and pools have also been adapted for skating ponds, and water
has played an important part in garden arch, and bridge
design, and in the heavy, solid, and flying buttresses, with which
the gardener has to deal.
Now it is from the study of the different types of domestic
dwelling, and the countries and social life of the people which
originated them, that we shall obtain a clue to the true signi-
ficance of gardening, and how to design and practise well in
Australia.
In different countries and at different periods, climate, wealth,
intelligence, and aspiration vary; hence different styles of build-
ings and gardens obtain. A Spanish Gothic house with an
English Gothic garden would be in every way unprofitable and
ridiculous.
Houses have been specially designed for particular sites and
situations. Thus, if a house is to be styled and built in the


form of a grange, priory, moat, or abbey, it must be in a glade
or watered valley. Castles are ever on crowns of hills, craggy
projections over water, or on well-defined promontories. Manor
and clergy houses need broad, open lands about them, with an
atmosphere of peace and quiet, and no element of danger and
unrest in the scene. Water and wind-mills exist. One is found
in a hollow, with a reach of calm water above, and a shaggy,
purling stream below, and the other on an open plain, or cone-
like hill. The houses which accompany these two mills are of
necessity quite different, hence their gardens vary too.
Now let us consider the characteristic features and demands
of the various types of domestic buildings.
The Greek building may be left out, as it is highly improb-
able that we shall ever be called upon to garden round a
purely Greek fabric. But Greek architecture is so grand and
inspiring, that no gardener (since the garden is entirely a
scheme of form) can afford to remain ignorant of the Greeks’
conception of art, as set forth in their buildings. It is where
the Greek design is merged in the Renaissance that we
discover the means for noble and effective treatment of the
surroundings.
The Italian style of gardening—in so far as it is associated
with the well-proportioned and handsomely-decorated house —
is known as the “ artistic.” Such gardens are literally designed
and built by the architect, and they form an integral portion
of the house. They are the most expensive of all gardens to
make, and the least expensive to maintain. No truly artistic
and roomy dwelling can do with less land than the Italian. Its
chief demand is, that it be built on a raised platform, with a
strongly-ramped and broad terrace on its main sides. Out from
these are found heavy retaining walls, buttresses, balustrades,
arches, ponds and pools, summer-houses, or alcoves in walls,
seats, pergolas and various flights of steps and subways. All
these features are in solid masonry—marble, stone or brick-
work. The spaces between these heavy and attractive fixtures
call for thoughtful treatment by the gardener, though in truth
tire garden is made already.


Planting will be dealt with later on, but it may be said in
passing, that to plant out these architectural features or to fail
to consider their meaning and value, would be the depth of
ignorance and folly.
In practice the gardener can do very little for the Italian
house, unless he sees further than the architect, and in a mea-
sure supplants him.
Where much and beautiful masonry enters into the scheme,
few trees or heavy masses of shrubs are practicable, as the
masonry is liable to be disturbed and the design broken by
constantly-encroaching vegetation.
Where space permits, a noble cedar or strong bulwark-like
cypress hedge may appear, and on the open horizontal or
terraced plateaux between the house and boundary lines, the
geometric tracery, plaque, cornice, frieze, window, and parapet
designs of the house may be reflected in the path, and bed, and
turf, and flower arrangement; whilst beautiful aquatics occupy
tanks and pools of water. A bower or alcoved wall overlooks
any water pieces. The buttresses of walls, pillars, and pergolas,
carry creeping and climbing plants. Large vases hold stiff,
hardy, upright plants. Sunk paths, overarched here and there,
provide for shadedoving plants, and places of retirement during
the heat of the day. Variations in level may be marked by
stout symmetrical clipped hedges.
The grounds surrounding the ordinary suburban Italian
house of ten or twelve rooms, admit of all these features and
attractions. A well-built and suitably-coloured wall should
enclose such gardens; failing this almost every effect falls short
of perfection.
The garden is to be seen from within, not from without, hence
the architect and gardener should be in no 1 way anxious to show
their handiwork to the passing crowd.
Where the Italian house is built in the country, or is en-
dowed with large and varied natural surroundings, the “ artistic ”
style may be departed from, once the immediate environs are
dealt with. This for economy’s sake and for other reasons.


since variety of interests is necessary in all large gardens and
domains.
We may now go back to the period of the Renaissance to
consider what other nations were doing in house and garden-
making. We are mainly concerned with the English and the
Dutch.
From the Dutch we have derived the “ Formal” garden, and
from the English the free or “ Landscape.”
During the latter part of the Middle Ages the Dutch were
much more advanced than the English. They were adven-
turous, clever, wealthy and artistic, and devoted a great deal
of attention to the making of gardens. Their houses were
mainly castellated, or Gothic, in form ; their land, flat and cold,
so that they were limited in the work of forming gardens, and
in their choice of plants. The dull, grey landscape and short
summer affected both design and colour scheme, and we find
that in point of colour and intricate patterning of beds and
parterres, the Dutch at this time surpassed the most picturesque
of Oriental nations.
The Dutch garden was not in accord with the architecture of
the house, and it has long been regarded as the least dignified,
appropriate, and refined of all European garden work. It held
three striking features:—small canals or ponds; geometric pat-
terns set out in dwarf but durable plants; and topiary work.
The canals, and more fancifully-shaped water pieces provided
fish, and aquatic plants. The small and intricate mazes known as
“knots ” were, in some instances, so closely set, that no space
remained for flowering plants; whilst others were simply beds
surrounded by little trimmed hedges, wherein bulbs of every
variety and colour were grown to great perfection. The
topiary was largely due to the fact that privacy and protection
were sought for house and garden against harsh winds and
frosts.
Topiary work is of very ancient origin. But it was elaborated
by the Dutch, and played a very important part in garden work
from the middle ages down to the beginning of the eighteenth
century, at which period the formal or Dutch garden may be


said to have received a challenge, and begun to decline in
favour.
Topiary in many instances composed the garden or pleas-
aunce, and it is still a living record of the ordinary employments,
aspirations, and games of many bygone generations.
Hedges and individual trees of box, yew, holly, cypress,
myrtle, hornbeam, rosemary, and other subjects were cut and
trained to form ball and bowl, sets of ninepins, falconers,
harts, wrestlers, hunters, chessmen, bears, galleys, giants, vases,
drinking-horns, castles, ramparts, bastions, minarets, birds,
dragons, serpents, swords, griffins, shields, clowns, chariots,
archers, tunnels, and a great many other less easily defined
objects. Curves were not admissible in the Dutch garden, apart
from the topiary work, and the margins of “ knots ” ; and straight
paths, square lawns, and stiff, hard beds and borders were the
rule. The bounds of the garden were decidedly limited, and
there were long periods in each year when nothing save the
quaint and ghostly topiary, and the stiff patterned knots showed
above the cold and saturated, or snow-covered ground.
The Dutch garden was copied in England, and served as a
model for many houses down to the middle of the eighteenth
century.
But the woods, the rolling landscape and exquisite green turf
of England allowed its people to surpass the Dutch, and as
they grew in wealth and security, trees and shrubs were em-
ployed with greater freedom in garden schemes.
The French were the first to increase materially the size, and
establish some sort of relationship between the parts on both
sides of the boundary-wall or hedge; but, as England had the
advantage of climate and vegetation, she made most progress
in bringing about the free or “ Landscape ” style of garden.
Excepting the most conventional Dutch style, the garden
had, up to this period, reflected the form and general expression
of the house, but now the house was to be modified and made
to reflect the face of nature.
Home and garden were to be sensibly related; and ever
since, wherever there has been space and a tangible face on


nature, wise builders have striven to catch and reflect that
expression in their finished work.
The fitness, the absolute sanity of the house and garden must
be considered; failing this, the architect, builder, or gardener,
accomplishes nothing.
About 150 years ago the sunk fence, or “ha ha,” was
invented. This did away with the old limitation line, and al-
lowed a clear view of the attractive points in the surrounding
country.
A little later a gardener named Kent is said “ to have leapt
the fence and discovered that all nature was a garden.” He
was not content to admire at a distance. He brought the grassy
field up to the house, and pushed the trees and shrubs back to
the distant hillsides and winding ways of the park and farm
lands.
The people of all the cool European countries saw the value
of the innovation, and according to their means, landscape gar-
dening has been carried out in France, Germany, Austria, Hol-
land and Russia, as well as maintaining its hold, and proving
the most sane and beautiful style for the British Isles and
North America.
Landscape implies space. It cannot be well done in minia-
ture, for, unless the scene is large enough to conceal the Art
that conceived it, it becomes a false and meretricious thing, diffi-
cult to maintain, and incapable of yielding perennial delight.
Landscape admits of no definite boundaries, no cheap and
obviously artificial devices, no signs of weakness or monotony.
It demands bold and varied surface form, running and still
water; fine trees, standing singly, and in masses; good archi-
tecture in buildings; spacious lawns; heavy walls and en-
closures ; and a master’s eye for grouping effects in form and
colour.
Landscape is distinctly a scheme of form, produced by lines
of elevation, as in the various heights of vegetation above the
ground, surface contour lines, and lines of projection, as seen in
the near or distant prospect of different plantations.


For studies in design, and the apportioning of trees and
shrubs, and such materials as provide the outlines of gardens,
nothing is so worthy of our notice as the clouds, on what may
be termed lazy evenings.
Italian gardens are still built and maintained about Gothic
and castellated houses of the old world, where, owing to their
dryness and extra warmth in winter, they furnish more attrac-
tions than the “ landscape ” can do.
Now, if we take all the well-known types of dwelling, with and
without architectural effect, we get suggestions of their places
of origin, and what they demand in the way of size and treat-
ment of garden.
They are: Castellated of France, Germany, England, tenth
to fifteenth century ; Dutch, fourteenth to seventeenth century ;
Renaissance, fifteenth century (still much employed); Tudor
Gothic, sixteenth and seventeenth century; Queen Anne, seven-
teenth century ; Indian Bungalow (modem) ; Swiss Chalet; Old
English half-timbered house; and, American and Australian
verandahed house, with straight undecorated walls.
Apart from their presence in streets, none of these houses
can go without private reserves, and living ornament, such as a
garden is intended to provide. The principles of garden-making
may therefore be summarised in the following independent
lines :
The garden must be in accord with—
Architecture, form, and size, of estate.
Depth, and quality, of soil.
The capital, and labour, to be spent in maintenance.
The proportion of summer to winter, as this greatly affects
design.
Aspect and nature of surrounding country.
Domestic wants; as fruit, flower, vegetable, and playing
areas.
The following points are also of vital interest:
Strength, and durability, must be evident, in all garden
schemes.


Various levels are to be sought, or created, wherever they
improve effects.
Similarity reduces the size and interest of the garden.
The actual foundation must provide true form, plants of
themselves cannot do this.
Two distinct styles of gardening may not be seen from one
point of view.
Straight lines are a necessity, curves are ever most beau-
tiful.
Broad and steady feet must support all erections in the
gardens.
Planting high objects near to houses tends to dwarf them.
Straight, hard lines in buildings or surrounding country,
are broken by planting.
Paths are of a width in proportion to their length, and size
of house.
Rocks, mounds, and water, must show reason for their
presence.
Boundary lines are defined or are planted out, according
to what lies outside and beyond.
Every 1 inch of ground must be utilised, so as to avoid un-
sightly “ backs ” and profitless quarters.
Each section must be so planned, as to remain attractive
at all seasons^
The plan must have no foreshortening effects, or it will
appear to dwarf the size of the estate.
The proportion of open and shady extents, is in accord
with climate.
The garden must always provide a true setting for, and
increase the actual value of, the house.
Those who would garden well must study architecture, land-
scape painting, history, and climate, as it affects man, build-
ings, and plants. Even romance will help a little, for it is story
and atmosphere which we long to fling around every home.


We stand before great modem and bare buildings, and remain
unmoved. We come into the presence of a moss-grown wall, or
rose-covered cottage, to ba filled with admiration and joyful
contentment.
Australia holds plenty of good raw material, but we have not
yet learned to employ it well.
Now it must be taken for granted that the house and garden
must be brought into as close relationship as possible; and, as
there will be no more fitting opportunity of dealing with the all-
important subject of form, it may be added that we suffer here
from lack of fine natural shapes, and graceful combinations in
nature. There is, indeed, little of a soul-stirring and invigorat-
ing kind. In such circumstances we grow sightless and unim-
aginative. The clouds are our only mainstay. Good living
landscapes which can be caught and reproduced are extremely
rare. We must leam to reverence shade and subdued effects.
Constable is incontestably the painter to whom we should look for
inspiration in treating house surroundings —not that he painted
houses or gardens, but rather because he depicts sites for ideal
“ homes.’’
Some countries famous for their artistic temperaments and
productions have produced no landscape painter. Greece and
Spain are notable examples. The result is significant —abso-
lutely sterile surroundings to the majority of domestic dwellings.
It may here be asserted that your gardening passion must
not be of the “ intense ” order, or you will accomplish nothing.
History can be got in a condensed form and without any
original research on our part; for what is it but story, and a
sweet old-time atmosphere which we desire to preserve?
Oh, for a voice strong and earnest enough to convince
us of the value of simplicity and quiet dignity in our home
surroundings!
Climate we easily realise for ourselves, but we leam much more
slowly of its effect on buildings and plants. The gardener must
understand the influence of climate on all the materials and
subjects he deals with.


Then there are books. But these are—when filled with rules,
and seasonable advice, and lists of names —for those who
already know. Until one has learned a good deal from actual
contact with the subject, he cannot read aright. The books
which require to be read in Australia are those which produce a
right attitude of mind. This we have not. The professional
gardener lacks it as much as the most absolute amateur. It
is still a foreign land; and book rules, and old-world traditions
will not maintain beautiful and appropriate gardens here. We
must invent and modify.
BOOKS FOR WOULD-BE GARDENERS.
“ Garden That I Love,” “ Veronica’s Garden,” Alfred Austin.
“ Wood and Garden,” Gertrude Jekyll.
“ Home and Garden.”
“Wall and Water Gardens.”
“ The Rose Garden,” Jekyll and Mawley.
“ In Praise of Gardens,” Forbes Sieviking.
“ Alpine Garden,” William Robinson.
“ Elizabeth and Her German Garden.”
“ Wright’s Garden Flowers and Plants,” McMillan Co.
“ The Soil,” Hall—Murray.
“ How to Lay Out a Garden,” Kemp (secondhand only).
“ Villa Gardener,” Loudon.
“ Suburban Gardens,” Loudon.
“ Landscape Gardening,” Repton, Longmans (rare and ex-
pensive).
“ English Pleasure Gardens,” Nicholls (MacMillan, London).


CHAPTER II
DESIGNING GARDENS IN ACCORD WITH
AUSTRALIAN CONDITIONS.
A garden, like a fine statue, should be perfect and attractive
from all points of view.
In the preceding chapter, stress was laid on the influence of
climate on garden design. It was also shown that domestic
architecture is usually in accord with the demands of climate.
We find the British stock, dwelling in the mountainous and
low-lying countries of the tropics, in subtropical and temperate
regions, and away in the subarctic climate of Canada, employing
totally different designs and materials in order to make their
domestic surroundings attractive and comforting.
Architecture must frequently yield to climate, and this is
why the verandah plays such a conspicuous part in all local
dwellings. Its effect on gardens is very pronounced. Usually
it detracts from the beauty and form of a good house, whilst
it helps out a plain, square, straight-sided and gaunt structure.
The verandah is ever the most conspicuous feature. It im-
presses itself upon the surrounding garden space, and decrees
in great measure its form and general effect. The verandah
has been instituted, not as an architectural feature, but as a
necessity. Shade—a cool, open air chamber—is provided in
the verandah, or more pretentious stone colonnade. The garden
proper yields most as a cool, shady, and retired spot.
Many local buildings are not honestly built. They are not so
substantial as to be cool in summer, hence the garden must
provide the necessary supply of cool fresh air and shade.
Now we have to recognise that a very large proportion of
good-sized houses, are, as buildings, destitute of real beauty,


or that they are placed in such awkward and cramped posi-
tions, that an accurate, appropriate, and distinctly finished
scheme cannot be carried out around them.
The space alongside any house wall must be at least as wide
as the height of that wall ; otherwise that side is lost as a
decorative feature, unless the boundary be composed of trees,
some handsome facade, or a clear view of attractive country.
The domestic dwellings which call for skilful garden designs,
are in three or four distinct groups ;—■
(r) The mansion and well-built villa of Melbourne, Sydney,
Adelaide and leading provincial towns.
(2) Handsome costly houses on residential estates, such as
exist in the rich pastoral and agricultural districts, and
here and there in high plain country.
(3) Public and private houses of good dimensions, by the
seaside.
(4) Summer, and permanent residences, as at Mount
Macedon, the Lofty ranges and the mountains of New.
South Wales, and other high cool districts.
Australia is sufficiently large and varied in altitude to provide
distinct types of climate, which yield long and short summers
and winters, much wet and cold, and much dry and hot weather.
Mount Macedon yields four months of cool summer, has a
well-marked spring and autumn, and a mild winter.
Melbourne has about eight months of warm as against four of
cold weather.
Two kinds of garden must necessarily exist in these two
places, though they are but 50 miles apart.
We will take the Melbourne garden first.
We have to consider:
1. The climate as it affects vegetation and our wants.
2. The house.
3. The size of the estate.
4. The surroundings.
5. The means and taste (or inclination) of owner.
If an “ Italian ” house, it will be in itself ornamental. It will
be white or grey in colour; it will (or should) be on an


eminence, or at least raised on a good pediment. It will have at
least three sides demanding treatment. It will be on rock or
clay or sand (most probably sand or a shallow soil over clay or
soft rock). Has it a colonnade, or large verandah, then it
will yield to “ artistic ” treatment; but if shade in the open
air is not yielded by masonry, it must be yielded by the
garden; and herein is the plan much affected.
The most private, the most public, the most attractive —the
winter and the summer side discovered—the form of ground
plan will be apparent. The minor attractions lie between.
The position op main entrance. —The difference in levels
between house and boundaries affects the kind of paths and
the gradients. Steps are welcome, as they “ break ” and in-
crease the size and number of scenes.
The Italian garden lies more open and comprehensible than
any other; its beauty must save it from becoming dull and
monotonous. It is to be seen chiefly from the basement of the
house, for it lies below the ground-floor line. It must also yield
good scenes when viewed from windows in all parts of the
house.
Locally, it requires to be shut in more than is usual in colder
climates. To this end a belt or broken line of trees and shrubs
should follow the most open boundaries —usually those towards
the west and north. Regular planting makes a place small, hence
broken lines are to be sought wherever practicable. A stiff
clipped hedge is in distinct accord with this house and garden;
so are “ winged walls,” which will admit of arches wherein
seats and much extra space will be found.
If a wide riband of varied trees forms the boundary, or goes
to shut out an objectionable feature, allowance should be made
for a shade path within. No frail erections should exist near
the house or masonry of an Italian garden.
If the architect has not considered the “ setting ” of his work,
it will be difficult to make the garden space agree with the
house; in which case the climate, situation, taste, and means
for upkeep, will govern the design.


(I.)
The colour—as warm or cold—red or white —goes far to
affect local work. White or grey houses are most appropriate
in a warm climate; but just now the majority are built of dark
red brick, and this, with very dark wood gables, strongly-marked
windows and doorways, and overaweing roofs of red tiles, gives a
sombre and heavy appearance, which it is difficult to reflect in
the garden. Such houses want plenty of space on at least two
adjoining sides. Trees may run close, and practically tower
above one side and a part of the back.
The view points for such houses should be angular, rather
than on straight lines. This gives us a fine, sweeping and im-
pressive entrance, and clear ways to view from different points.
The interspaces will be richly clothed with heavy masses of
trees and shrubs. Paths will be scarce, and never conspicuous
unless the domain is quite large. Breaks in the level will be
well marked by a green ramp, or masonry in harmony with the
house.
Very tall narrow Gothic houses call for borders of irregular
width at their base. To accord with the impression given by
the wall, they should be straight rather than sinuous; but
where breaks occur in the roofing, as by chimney lines or gables,
something giving the impression of a key pattern border proves
effective.
Turf must run up to the house wall here and there, that the
full height and effect of the building may be realised. Size and
variety are to be secured by every reasonable means. Winding
and perpendicular lines and undulations, such as are produced
by the eye traversing the heights and forms of various trees,
shrubs and other objects, all tend to increase the optical dis-
tances enormously.
Apropos of plans, Bacon’s remark is perfect when he says:
“ Let them be not too busy and full of work.” And again, “As
for designs, you may see as good sights many times in tarts.”
Also, “ Men come to build finely, sooner than to garden stately.”
Simplicity is a great help to gardening, but if one is so
simple as to be satisfied with a row of violets against a corru


gated iron fence, or huge exhibition roses grown on unsightly
mounds or squares of soil, he has still to leam everything about
the meaning and uses of a garden.
An intuitive or acquired knowledge of past history we must
have, for unless some definite impression is ours, the work is
without meaning, harmony, or effect.
To find appropriate positions for borders, beds, lawn spaces,
and similar permanent features, the ground must be surveyed
from every point—the front door, the verandah, balcony, all win-
dows, main entrance, and general traverse of the leading walks
have to be considered. Some outside features are to be im-
planted, others to be planted out. Thus there may be un-
sightly objects or others which we shall be glad to employ. Hard
lines may be broken by taking out or adding a single tree or
shrub.
The proportion of grass, path, shrubbery, flower borders and
beds must be very carefully considered. Water supply, charac-
ter of soil, and means for upkeep here claim consideration.
Square lawns waste space, half a square usually appearing as
large (and certainly more effective) than a full square. When-
ever art and judgment are employed the half is usually greater
than the whole.
Climbing and creeping plants play an important part in con-
nection with the class of house under notice. They are allowed
to take vertical lines on all smooth and open walls. Breaks to
show the masonry here and there prove more effective than a
complete covering. Fine architectural features must not be
buried under greenery.
The different seasons will affect growth and appearance in
different parts of the garden; thus there will be the Spring,
Summer, Autumn, and Winter quarters. The foundation work
will anticipate these contingencies, and arrange for each part to
look well at all seasons.
The boundary lines between the vegetable garden, stables,
and other offices, must not neutralise any features, or dwarf the
estate.


Waving lines create no divisions, whereas straight lines do.
Boundaries.- —They should never be realised, but always so
planted as to give the feeling of distance and changing beauties
beyond. Inter-divisions are not to be sought where space is
limited.
Most gardens are fenced and hedged off and subdivided in a
ridiculous manner, leaving a number of poky and isolated little
enclosures without meaning, form, or beauty.
Sombre foliage is needed where dark-coloured and heavily-
built houses are to be dealt with, as these convey the impression
of strength and durability.
Evergreen and deciduous trees are used according to the
seasons at which shade and light are desired.
If handsome and strong boundary walls exist, these should be
allowed to show here and there, as they increase the size, and
add most attractive features to the garden.
(The most ugly blot on Australian gardens is in the wretched
boundary fences. Any man building a house costing ,£iooo and
upwards, and failing to put a wall round it, should be put in gaol
and kept there. No house is finished without a stone or brick
wall, or an artistic iron railing set in brick or stone-work.)
Naturalness must be observed here (in Australia) as far as
possible, where houses are of the Dutch, Gothic, and Queen
Anne styles.
Grottoes, rockeries, pools and arbours are effective only where
really well-conceived and placed in natural positions.
A pergola, pleached walk, and climbers on pillars, suit every
garden; but arches are “ risky ” structures, and cannot be
allowed unless they grow naturally and give access to new
features, or sections of the garden. Decorated stumps, and
mounds, ornamented with roots—to represent a fallen monarch
■ —are more appropriate than rock-work in a warm climate.
Beds should not be regular dr hard in form. As “ splits ”
(to break lines) they call for many shapes and sizes.
Hitherto little has been said of surface form, though you will
remember that the garden is entirely an affair of form, and that
colour is of quite secondary importance.


Now you will observe that a given plan may be applied to any
piece of ground in the universe, but that the effect must vary
according to the levels on which that plan is laid down.
In the Italian or “ Artistic ” garden, the heavy masonry go-
verns the arrangement and quantity of soil. The gardener may
not create any eminences or depressions not sanctioned by the
architect, but, in the free and informal garden there is no limit
to the altering of levels and producing of effect. The danger
lies in altering so far as to make the intention apparent. As
we look up to, down upon, or across a piece of garden, it shows
different scenes. This is right ; and when we consider that an
undulating yields an enormous number of views compared with
a plain surface, and that these undulations are in themselves
pleasing features, it must be evident that the fine art of
garden design is achieved by the most skilful arrangement of
levels and surface form.
In building town houses it becomes necessary to use every
aspect, though we would prefer fronts, or the leading garden
space , towards the east and south. These aspects would ensure
the best summer gardens, which are most to be desired.
The north and west sides of the house—or garden space
having these aspects —requires more protection, and to be more
closely set with high trees or shrubs (in brief, more heavily
clothed) than the cooler sides.
This fact will greatly affect some garden plans, as a greater
depth of soil to ensure free, strong growth, cool vistas under
trees —shade walks —and the erection of terraces, banks or
mounds may be necessary.
The average house has the main entrance drive ridiculously
wide. This foreshortens the garden, and dwarfs everything in
sight.
If a house is modest in size and appearance, we should gladly
preserve this pleasing characteristic, and not plan its garden on
mansion proportions. The plan must be hidden, not intricate.
The plan of the informal garden must be elastic, or it will be
expensive to maintain order, and finished attractions, at all sea-
sons, over many years.


The plan cannot be determined until the exact quantity or
means for obtaining it—of soil, and other garden material is
known; hence a survey and computation precedes all garden
design of a free, or landscape character.
Particular flowers, or families of plants, as roses, bulbs, or
aquatic plants, cannot provide a complete garden for such
houses as we are discussing, but they may fittingly receive a
special area in any part of the scheme.
(II.)
The well-built country house calls for an informal or
landscape garden, or a free extension of such plans and features
as are indicated for the Gothic type of house in our suburbs.
The garden must accord with the demands of climate. This
usually imposes an abundance of shade and refreshing foliage.
The scarcity of water will always limit the extent and character
of country house gardens in Australia.
Trees are here the foundation of all real quality and beauty.
Fruiting plants such as the grape vine, lemon, guava, pome-
granate, persimmon, almond, loquat, olive and fig can be pro-
fitably and effectively employed in country house gardens of any
size, as they furnish variety of colour and form, shade, and a
household supply which justifies the outlay in maintaining them.
Good lawns cannot usually be secured except in the extreme
south, hence the arrangement of park-like surroundings to the
house becomes more appropriate and profitable, as such areas
can be kept neat by grazing, and small fenced reserves admit of
trees yielding the necessary shade and satisfying features to the
scene.
Small and thoroughly well-made gardens prove most satis-
factory in country districts, for it is difficult to obtain all the
materials for upkeep, and still more difficult to obtain gar-
deners to realise and master the situation.
(III.)
Houses by the seaside are usually in the nature of holiday
homes, and call for special treatment. The sea is bare, the


rocks are almost bare, and man, coming to the seaside, wants
few things to remind him of the life and surroundings he has
left behind. Above all, let simplicity dwell in the rest-house
garden by the sea.
The ignorance (and vanity) displayed in local work in this
section is pitiful, and further, it is downright waste, for not one
per cent, of these gaudy, fanciful, cockney gardens will ever
possess any really satisfying features.
Transcripts from the local coast and forelands are most
appropriate for seaside gardens. The varieties of Banksia, tea
tree, and wattle, with a few maritime pines, with simple creepers
over the ground, would yield all the fresh distractions and quiet
needed by the visitor, or casual occupant of a seaside home.
Where the house is to be permanently occupied, its position,
as a very windy and open rocky site, or a well-sheltered and
favoured spot, will greatly affect the plan. Such gardens as
exist on the Mediterranean coast at Malaga, Cartagena, Nice,
Mentone, Monte Carlo, and Genoa, afford the best subjects
for study; and anyone devoting him or herself to gardening
in Australia should not fail to become familiar with the geo-
graphical situation, architectural features, and surface plans of
all the best gardens of the Mediterranean region.
(IV.)
In the high hill districts, the garden is quite distinct from
anything we should strive for in the great cities, or the low, hot,
inland, and coast country.
In the hills the light is subdued, and always bearable; the
heat is not too great, and the air is moist. With a moist, cool
air, the world takes on sombre tones, the clouds are more
abundant and continuous, so that brightness is mainly to be
sought.
Here we banish verandahs, or at least have them short and
narrow. We seek the well-lit point or projection on the hill-
side, and push our house out on to as clear and open a platform
as possible.


We must make easy gradients to the house, and form banks
by putting in retaining walls to prevent the soil from washing
and slipping away. And when we have provided these con-
veniences we find that the garden is practically made. Colour
only is wanting, so that rude, natural-looking beds and borders
and banks are prepared for such flowering and foliage shrubs
and plants as will enjoy the situation.
Dignity may be here, and every comfort, but by all means
nothing of the city or the suburbs. (We are scandalised by the
sight of the suburban house in the hill district, even more than
when we find it by the seaside.)
Finally. —Tennis courts and lawns employed for various
games are often the ruination of gardens in all positions.
Let everything be well considered and planned to accord with
the points which have been raised; it will then be unlikely
that the garden will not keep the house occupied, and the
dwellers therein happy in their surroundings.


CHAPTER III
The preceding chapter brought us down to what may be re-
garded as the necessities of the house and garden in Australia.
We have considered houses, sites, climates, financial resources,
with the object of planning and maintaining in accord with
these.
We have now to consider the materials and the
manner in which the foundation should be laid. The time at
our disposal is so short that we cannot enter into particulars
regarding gardens of every type. Chapters I. and 11. have
already done this. But the demands of mixed vegetation being
much the same in all gardens, it follows that the raw material
in the form of useful soil must in every case be abundant.
Presuming a garden to be made, it will not last. It will require
altering, additions of new soil and material, and the re-employ-
ment of old, so that sooner or later one must know the nature
and value of all crude and dead material affecting a garden,
i.e., if it is to be maintained in order and beauty.
MATERIALS AVAILABLE AND THE PRACTICAL
WORK OF MAKING GARDENS.
Strength in varied shape is the key-note to be struck in
building gardens.
The ordinary natural and prepared materials necessary to
the making of good gardens in either town or country are as
follows:
i. Soil, as distinct from the clayey or rocky mass forming
the sub-layer or foundation.


2. Manure —a load or yard, serves for about eight super-
ficial yards if soil is abundant and good; otherwise
twice the quantity of manure is necessary.
3. Graved is needed for path-making.
4. Sand is required for “ lightening ” stiff soils, and for
“ binding ” paths.
5. Stones are needed for the foundation of roads and
paths, and also for culverts and heavy drains.
6. Rocks may be necessary for creating rockeries, furnish-
ing margins or islands for pools, and for building
walls.
7. Timber, as tree trunks, heavy limbs and roots, may be
required for columns, pergolas or rustic houses, seats,
bridges, and decorating embankments; also for rustic
fences.
8. Water must be available, if not for decorative purposes,
as pools, falls, and fountains, at least in sufficient quan-
tity to ensure the proper maintenance of the plan
adopted.
9. Drain pipes, or stone, or wood, must be forthcoming,
for the carrying out of a drainage system.
The quantity, variety and proportion of materials go far to
effect design.
Before deciding on any exact plan or surface form, the sur-
face must be cleared of all obstructions in the shape of timber
or artificial erections. The various quantities must then be esti-
mated and parcelled.
The levels will be determined by the outside boundaries,
ground floor, and door levels of house, drainage considerations,
and the amount of material existing, or obtainable outside.
The drainage plan must accord with the requirements of the
house, garden, and paths.
The taking of levels will precede the work of moving any
heavy materials, such as rocks or clay.
Apart from sites for masonry, pools, or broad erections within
the garden area, all the surface must be worked at least twenty


inches deep by “ trenching,” subsoiling, or making up with new
material.
Stones, clay, or any other heavy and innutritions material
should be kept under the twenty inches of true soil. Manure
will be worked equally through the soil mass.
If a great deal of sand exists—say three-fourths—it may be
mixed with crumbling clay or any shaley material.
Clay may, with advantage, be exposed to the weather during
the process of trenching or subsoiling, but it must never form
the surface or come near enough to get dry during summer.
The subsurface contour of the clayey or rocky foundation
must be correctly known at time of trenching, otherwise weak
and undrainable spots may occur.
The substratum should form clear, straight runs, and provide
for an even or graduated depth of soil.
The best arrangement of surface and substratum, if we could
make choice, would be about two feet of mellow sandy loam
over a cool sweet clay or broken sandstone, limestone, or
granite.
Much deeper and looser soil is required over stone than over
clay. The cooler the position the less important is depth of
soil. Hence the soil may often be taken from the shady and
placed on the sunny side, if levels permit.
In making banks, terraces, mounds, raised borders, or “ earth-
works ” of any kind, it will be an advantage if their foundations
are of rock material or stiff soil, as the shape is better pre-
served, drainage is assured, and therefore in more favourable
condition for plant growth, and usually, it is much more economi-
cal, good soil being the rarest and dearest material to obtain.
The summer or exposed quarters will require twice the depth
or quality of the winter, or sheltered side. Failing the oppor-
tunity to make the exposed quarters rich enough to support a
strong and attractive vegetation, it should be prepared for dis-
tinctly hardy, drought-resisting plants, or it may be wholly or in
part utilised as a rock garden.
The allotment of groups and divisions must be foreseen, pre-
vious to the handling of the heavy material, that the soil of each


site or division may be specially considered at the time of
preparation.
The kitchen and fruit garden, also drying grounds and other
open spaces necessary to the domestic conveniences, should
always be brought into the scheme, and dealt with as definite
features in the garden.
Straight lines will not be out of place in die kitchen quarters;
but fruit-tree planting and the path arrangement should, as far
as possible, be so arranged that the harmony of curves will not
stop short on the line of the pleasure domain.
THE ORDER OF WORKING.
1. Clear the surface and destroy by burning or rotting all
bad litter.
2. Collect all builders' refuse, as sand, lime, plaster, mor-
tar (burning every shaving and piece of wood), brick-
bats, etc., and reserve these for path-making.
3. On a rough plan, mark out sites and extents for raising
soil, and erections, in stone or woodwork, and put up
same.
4. Trench, manure, and grade the entire area, using soil
where paths and roads are to run for increasing the
levels at points, or the general area.
5. Carry out the drainage system, and have water laid on.
6. Put in the foundation material for roads and paths, not
less than nine inches in any case—six of foundation
and three of capping material.
7. Make up any weak spots by taking from projections,
or slightly decreasing the general level of a section
(providing no new material can be brought in).
8. Dig over the surface of areas to be occupied by lawns,
keeping the boundary levels in close relation to the
borders or paths. Measure, run out levels, and obtain


true grades on all margins, and then roll, grade and
rake into form, ready for sowing or planting with
grass.
9. Cut out borders and beds, and give such finishing
touches to the surface as may be necessary before
planting.
10. Put down capping of roads and paths. The crown of
path or road must be the same height as the turf on
either side. The turf must jun right on to path at
verge.
This work completed, the garden space should reveal a dis-
tinctly pronounced form and variety of expression, as we may
notice in rolling grass country, by the sea, in secluded valleys,
or in the dignified formal surroundings of some noble dwelling.


CHAPTER IV.
THE SELECTION AND ARRANGEMENT OF PER-
MANENT GARDEN PLANTS IN GARDEN
SCHEMES.
Provide abundantly for all your plants, that you may be
abundantly provided for.
Trees, shrubs, hedges and climbing plants of a durable woody
character are the four forms which go to create the permanent
and distinguishing living -features of any garden. Soft-wooded,
short-lived, herbaceous, small, and annual plants, have their
places between the permanent subjects.
Trees are employed not so much in accord with the size, as
the character, of the house and garden, and the nature of the
surroundings.
They serve three important ends: —(i) They shut out un-
sightly surroundings; (2) give privacy and shade; and (3) pro-
duce highly decorative effects.
Trees do not look well in rows or regular order, unless the
lines and area be of considerable length or size.
In large gardens they should form correspondingly large
clumps, belts of irregular width, long and wide avenues, with
from one to five on the crown or slopes of knolls, or such emin-
ences as may call for the relief of some large and pronounced
form of vegetation.
With certain types of houses of large size, trees may be
planted close to their walls with great effect. Different kinds of
cypresses, the magnolia, various pines, poplars, cedars, oaks,
elms, and the Oriental plane, are all capable of being used in
such situations; but the size and efect of any tree on the
house, garden, and surroundings must be clearly foreseen ere
planting out.


Large growing trees cannot be planted in quantity in small
gardens, or they turn the space into a shady bower, which may
or may not be beautiful or desirable.
Trees may be regarded as anything running over 20 feet in
height, and as there are scores of plants ranging between 20 and
30, 30 and 40, 40 and 50, and upwards, it will be seen that under
normal conditions a size is selected according to size of house
and domain.
Unless the space under trees is utilised, they have a decidedly
dwarfing effect, hence they must be used with great care.
A tree may be planted to lengthen a scene or to shorten it;
for instance, a tree placed against a boundary shortens the view,
whereas a tree placed a little out from the boundary, so that some
feature of the latter may be seen, enlarges and improves the
view considerably.
Trees are employed to balance large scenes, but not by regular
planting. Even in the “ Artistic ” garden, tree arrangement must
not be uniform, or it will prove ungraceful, and reduce the size
and interest of the domain.
Quite small trees, even shrubs (as a bower will prove), pro-
vide effective shade, and at the same time serve to break hard
lines, and this last is, after all, the most important function of
trees in garden schemes.
It is not their individual beauty, so much as the beauty they
create, or enable us to see around them, by means of the light
and shade, vistas and peeps, and lines of colour, which their
height and form produce.
Trees are, independent of all other considerations, roughly, of
three forms —columnar, pyriform, and dome-shaped.
The columnar or narrow upright trees can be placed in very
small areas, though they are the least effective and useful
locally; whilst the pyriform or broad-based trees such as
cedars, require the largest domain, as unless there is room for
their branches to spread evenly on all sides, and still more room
from which to view such trees and their surroundings, so much
waste of time and material is the only reward.


The broad-topped tree with finely-grown leafless inside bran-
ches is most desirable where we desire to walk and grow small
vegetation beneath; but for clumps and belts such kinds are
called for as keep themselves well furnished with leaves through-
out the entire diameter of their heads.
The size and form of tree and leaf, the colour of bark and
leaf when young, during summer, and in decay, must be noted:
also the season of flowering, seed-bearing, fall, and such other
features as will affect its appearance, and enable the planter to
decide on a neighbour offering sufficient contrast, or harmony.
Deciduous and evergreen, large and small, spreading and up-
right, light and dark foliage, are best used together; but they
must not be set out to look 'regular, or it will be a plantation ,
not a garden.
The larger the garden, the larger the plants which may be
effectively employed. In small gardens, small trees and large
shrubs have to be relied on to help out the form and effect pro-
duced by the contour of the surface soil.
Our object is ever the same —we want to shut in and shut out
by turns —this quite apart from what hedges are intended to do,
for trees and shrubs are to “ break up,” and at the same time
preserve as great a number of views and prospects as it is pos-
sible to secure without revealing any cheap tricks in design.
Lines waving horizontally and perpendicularly hold twice the
size, and ten times the variety of such borders, belts or clumps
as form a straight-fronted and even-topped mass.
The plan of the garden determines what one should plant,
for one does not plan for annuals or bulbs, and then plant trees
and shrubs.
The spaces to be filled with trees and. shrubs need pegging
off. This gives us the approximate number required. We next
make a selection partly from a catalogue; but in the most part
it should be from our own knowledge. Every plant selected
must have a fair chance of doing well on the site. As the trees
and shrubs vary in size, form, and colour, we divide them into
groups.


We look out spots where the biggest would serve (but in prac-
tice we select according to the ground and position we have).
We put down these plants in their places, always with an eye
to what each will look like when grown, and how each will affect
the others which are near or distant.
We next take the second or middle-sized, and arrange them.
Points. —The outer lines of convex borders and any other
spots which require accentuating and strengthening, should al-
ways be planted with strong and bold shrubs or trees.
Where hollows or bays are to show, the planting must be
light —by two means—more open planting, and short, light plants.
Shape, season, and colour of shrubs call for very careful
consideration.
Place the selected plants over the ground, and imagine them
as they will be of themselves and in relation to others when
established.
The distance apart for these permanent plants cannot be
given, for some, though lasting, will grow narrow, or call for a
cutting over every year or two, or have broad or narrow leaves,
love the light, or need the shade of others; hence they are
planted according to their, as well as our needs, for in spite of
all we have said, plants will generally look well wherever they do
well. Like so many soldiers at regular distances, and at the posi-
tion of attention, they should not be, but rather “ standing
easy,” and more or less wayward in growth.
Finally, the third or smallest group is taken and arranged.
This does not mean that the plants run:
Big, medium, small;
Big, medium, small;
Big, medium, small;
for it may well be that three or four large or medium or small
plants may stand close together in order to produce some definite
effect. There can be no wavy lines, fine sweeps, shutting out,
and taking in of cloud and sky-line or the distant landscape
(should we be so fortunate as to have cme) if the planting is re-
gular. An easy negligence is over all nature, and where so


much art obtains in the garden as to destroy this, the planting
is not well done.
It is an Eastern proverb that “an arch never sleeps.” It is
much the same with hedges. They may be beautiful, but they
are usually hard, awake, and aggressive. “ Repose ”is the word
we take from that Eastern proverb. Hedges bespeak the bad
old times when man had to place a fortress round about him.
Unfortunately they are still necessary; and the larger the centre
in which we live, the more hedge, owing to our need for as much
privacy as possible.
There are also objects to be shut out, and no space for trees
to do the work, so hedges are provided. Locally we have
choice of many plants for hedges, providing we prepare the
ground well. Where placed against a wall, fence of iron or
wood, by a path of hot, dry material, as nearly all boundary
hedges are, the plants have a hard task to gather moisture and
sustenance wherewith to sustain themselves.
In a general way we are almost entirely concerned with boun-
dary hedges, but in large gardens different sections may be
effectively divided with green walls.
The positions for these are our chief concern now.
You may not put a hedge where it is not really wanted.
This should be a superfluous statement, but it is not really
so; most gardens of size having hedges which go far to neu-
tralise space, and give no added privacy or improving effect.
Dignity knows no bounds.
Our general scheme of planting provides all the privacy we
need.
There is no reason why the butcher and baker should not
walk a path bounded with irregular borders of shrubs and trees
instead of between two stiff hedges, or an ugly boundary fence
on one side and a stiff or neglected hedge on the other.
Make the most of the space, even if it is wide as the hori-
zon. Don’t shut your land out, but embrace as much as you
can from outside.
Hedges shut out so much. Against hot winds and fierce sun-
light they are splendid protection. To hide any unsightly


feature they may serve where climbing plants will not. Around
tennis court and playground a hedge is the best screen, but it
must be well kept.
Climbing plants are indispensable to every garden. To have
them in variety and luxuriant beauty some expense must be
incurred in making structures for their support. These structures
naturally go far to determine the actual size, shape and effect
of the plants overgrowing them; hence we see our climber first
through the medium of so much dead material. For example, a
cross, pillar, or tree stump makes the climbers assume their
shape.
Remember what has been said about the arch and places for
it. The more open the support, the more effective, clean and
strong will appear the climber. At the basement of house walls
they work wonders in producing strength and the impress of
age.
The sombre foliage of many climbers is very desirable in
much local work. In fact, there are few climbers which should
be grown for their flowers alone. With rare exceptions they
cannot be mixed and intertwined to advantage, for though it is a
common habit for gardeners to plant several together and leave
the plants “ to fight it out,” they generally do this so thoroughly
as to leave some poor and unsightly specimens which it is diffi-
cult to destroy altogether, or to assist.
Failing trees are admirable supports for climbers, and the
two combine to make a strong old feature of great beauty.
All the foregoing forms of plants make the garden.
The interspaces and irregular depths of borders will carry
the herbaceous plants, small hardwooded plants, roses, bulbous
plants of many kinds, and the crops of annuals and biennials
which prove attractive at different seasons of the year.
Thus we have the following divisions and points to consider
in selecting and arranging the permanent plants in garden
schemes:


SUMMARY.
Grouping permanent shrubs and garden plants—
1. Extent of domain.
2. Climate and prospect.
3. Architecture of house and style of garden.
4. Big trees and small trees.
5. Foliage shrubs.
6. Flowering shrubs.
7. Small permanent plants.
8. Climbing plants.
9. Marginal plants.
10. Hedges as screens, and for effect.
11. Planting for early and for late effect.
12. Shape, colour and season of tree or flower.
13. Natural and trimmed trees.


CHAPTER V.
PLANNING, FORMING AND MAINTAINING SMALL
GARDENS.
In the economy of nature there are no fallows.
Nearly all Australian work falls under the title of villa garden-
ing, since architectural features are rare in the domain. We are
not really engaged in “ encouraging ” horticulture or gardening
purely for the love of doing so. We want neat, attractive and
satisfying home surroundings at the least expenditure of per-
sonal energy and capital. This confines us to purely “ domestic ”
gardening, and what follows on this subject comes as near to
what we may and ought to do as can be conceived.
Small gardens vary greatly in design and requirements, ac-
cording as they surround villas, cottages or country homesteads.
It must ever be accounted wrong to lay out in a stiff and
formal style land which surrounds small houses, or such as are
destitute of architectural beauty.
The money and labour available; the size, shape and posi-
tion; the form of house; nature of surroundings; and the
owner’s special wants in the form of fruits, vegetables and
flowers, will determine the plan. Design the garden as a whole,
be it never so small; it will then be possible to keep it strong
and beautiful in every part at all seasons of the year.
A garden must be clean, orderly, and beautiful. Where these
features are wanting, we know that the plan is wrong; or that
the absence of any plan and solid foundation work provides the
disorder. The garden area is not, as so many imagine, assigned
to houses in order to add to the troubles and responsibilities
of their inmates, but to increase their means, knowledge, health
and happiness. The true gardener considers the house and its


occupants. All else is vanity, since loving and cultivating flowers
never so well may leave the garden a stupid and unsightly thing.
The most difficult task is set the small gardener where the house
is a kind of square bam with windows in it, placed on perfectly
flat land, and destitute of any background or foreground worthy
the name.
The undulating character of the Melbourne and Sydney subur-
ban sites provides for very effective gardening on a small scale;
but in many countiy places the task becomes extremely difficult,
unless plenty of trees are at command.
The universal want is more true soil To its scarcity is
due the rapid decline of most plants and the wasted and
blighted character of the garden during summer. Therefore
we should plan and strive most of all to obtain an abundance
of soil. It is well to spend about ninety per cent, of the money
available in getting and preparing material. Should the soil
be rich and abundant, the principal outlay will be in the direc-
tion of draining and sweetening, and in creating a fine surface
form.
As a guiding principle, make no shapes or lines which are
not more or less common in nature, for where streets, buildings,
and the ding-dong of city life provide so much that is artificial
and discomforting, we should find in our gardens a short cut
back to nature and rest
Architects and builders often put entrance gates in wholly
unsuitable positions from a gardening point of view, and, as
there is no law to prevent one moving his gate, he may some-
times do so with very fine results. For example, if a small
square piece of land fronts a house, a path running through its
centre makes two insignificant and very monotonous little
patches. All privacy is lost, and trumpery borders and cockney
devices become excusable. But if the small garden is lumped
there is room for variety, and far less expense is involved
in both making and maintenance. There is little meaning and
less beauty in the average garden path. It runs where no one
need walk. It wastes space, and wearies the eye with its hard
monotony. It picks up the sun’s heat, and thereby dries out the


adjacent soiL It is, in short, a, stupid, blighting thing, and,
considering that it is a creation of man’s, it says little for his
common sense in local gardening.
Now it must be repeated that we never desire to dwarf a
garden area; hence the small garden must be a correctly
balanced piece of work. The entrance gate should be as far
away from main door as possible, so as to provide for solid
and varied features between these important points. Paths
are needed only to reach various doors, gates, and detached
buildings. By way of confining them to their proper limits, it
may be stated that the extent of paths in a small garden should
not exceed its length and breadth.
The number and courses of the paths decide the plan of the
small garden. The proportion of the surface covered with turf,
shrubs and beds or borders of flowers will be governed chiefly
by aspect and the quality of the soil. With rich, deep soil it will
be possible to have more strength and variety than where the
surface material is thin and the aspect hot and exposed.
Weakness in the soil must always weaken the plan, whereas,
none but a strong and generous little scene and surroundings
will be sufficient
As in large gardens, all the rough, native material has to be
graded and balanced between the various points, so that easy
and graceful surface levels are produced. Adjacent houses,
the surrounding walls or fences, or neighbouring trees, may over-
awe and give protection to or in some measure affect the quality
of part of the small garden, so that it may be most appro-
priately used for a shady section, or for the growing of a group
of plants, which will thrive in a darkened and dank soil.
On the other hand, there may be a quarter containing clay or
rock running near the surface and no means to cover with good
soil, and at the same time preserve good form. Under such
conditions, rocks or stumps may be used, but as a rule only
where a solid background exists, since rocks look painfully
weak and unnatural where they form cones or heaps amidst turf
or artificially-formed beds. As supports for house foundations


or walls, masses at the approach to steps, or any pronounced
alteration of level, rocks and roots may be used with lasting
effect.
Water is too scarce or expensive to be much employed in small
gardens. At the same time, it is possible to create tiny pools—
the merest basins, of two or three feet in diameter —by digging
small holes and puddling their sides with clay. The main point
is to have water only where it will harmonise with and be of
real service to its surroundings. Water requires to be in the
shady quarter,, where a broken light and variation in the levels
will produce a natural looking position for something resembling
a little pool or stream. Quite frequently the ordinary surface
drainage may be conducted to a point by a winding course
which can throughout its length be clothed with more or less
aquatic vegetation, thus producing a beautiful little gully or
glade, and terminating in the basin. If a seat or arbour can
be placed here the scene will be perfect. The defect of sum-
mer houses in ordinary is their uselessness, since they are placed
in such defective positions as to make it impossible for one to
rest and gather refreshment in them. The summer or garden
house, or arbour, or covered way, must be so placed and built
as to provide very pleasant prospects, and it must also help
out the garden when viewed from different windows and ex-
terior points of vantage.
Finally, here, as in larger domains, we wish to create an effec-
tive scene, or series of natural pictures.
With a knowledge of the quantity and value of all the ma-
terials obtainable, the next thing will be to put each in its proper
place. With intelligence, every class of material may be em-
ployed. There is never too much clay, or sand, or stone on
the place, since all such supply food, moisture, or decorative
features, or go to improve levels, a point we should ever keep’
in view.
The position and height of doorways, gates, and boundaries
determine the heights and depths which may exist in the garden
proper. Remember that poor material shifted is good material
made, since the handling and exposing of rough soil, broken


stone, etc., usually tends to convert it into a good rooting
medium -for a variety of plants. Therefore all the surface
material is to be deeply worked as a first necessity, and when
this has been done such knowledge of the depths and values
of the various parts will have been gained as to make it easy
to decide what class of garden had best be laid out. Manure
and new soil of a mellow and turfy character is generally neces-
sary at the time of making a garden, so as to ensure a great
depth of rich and wholesome material for the various plants.
The manure or new soil dressing should be at least equal to
a three-inch covering for the entire surface, including path
spaces. These have also to be trenched like the rest, otherwise
barriers would be left in the subsoil and prevent perfect under-
drainage, without which gardens cannot remain attractive, and
plants healthy at all seasons. When the land has all been thor-
oughly worked, enriched and thrown into proper surface form,
the number, position and depth of drains will be apparent.
Outfalls for drains have to be looked for on the boundaries,
or, as indicated before, where the surface varies in level to any
extent, tributary drains may feed a little glade or depression
which would cany the water on to a pool, and this in turn would
empty its surplus through the boundary. In practice, the land
must be able to get rid of surplus water quickly, but, at the
same time it will be found profitable to keep water locked up
in some quarter where it may be employed as a decorative
feature, and also used over again. Stepping stones here come
in, and may yield no end of interest.
After trenching, manuring, shaping and draining, the path or
paths have to be laid. The nature of the surrounding soil goes
far to determine the depth and character of the foundations of
paths. Where the soil is poor and dry a three or four-inch
foundation of broken stone or brickbats will be sufficient if
covered with two or three inches of gravel or asphalt.
By the way, there is no occasion for the asphalt to be black
and dingy. The top coat should be fully charged with grey
gravel and coarse sand, and when laid and soft more gravel
and sand spread over and promptly beaten in. This will pro


vide a conveniently rough gravelly surface, take away the sombre
and artificial look from the walk, and greatly enhance the
general appearance of the garden and home. Where soil is
rich and deep, or heavy traffic occurs, a foundation of nine or
twelve inches is necessary with a proportionate thickness in the
capping material.
The soil taken out in forming paths will always be accept-
able for improving levels, or providing additional material in
certain quarters. The wide cart entrance to small houses is
unnecessary.
In running outlines, and levels for paths, allowance must
always be made for cumulative or wasting influences being at
work on the margins. It will be noticed that, where paths are
composed of loose material, they wear down, whilst if hard, as
asphalt, and the adjacent soil loose in character banks wear
down, and so produce faults in line.
When forming, the crown of the path should be of the same
height as the turf, or what is intended to be the turf margin
or planted border. If the path is not kept high, it will become
a drain, dampness will cause weeds and mosses to grow, and
it will, apart from being objectionable to traverse, lose its
character.
Depressed paths are very effective, and should be employed
wherever practicable. The ramped turf or stone, or rustic wood-
work, at their sides must be so arranged that no foreign bodies
of water are precipitated on to them.
The small garden plan is liable to be greatly affected by its
boundary lines. Even neat wooden palings are insufficient pro-
tection for many plants; and, further, they yield no actual
privacy, with the result that we are forced to put in hedges
or “ belts ” on the margins, and in doing this the size of the
garden decreases enormously. The hedge is to be avoided as
far as possible, since it is but a monotonous straight line.
Briefly, the nature of outside objects and influences must
determine what kind of planting is necessary on the boundaries.
Monotony must be avoided.


A good wall should never be planted out A neat fence may
show here and there, but a corrugated iron fence should be
blotted out entirely. Raw and hot winds break in at different
seasons, and a hedge, tree, or big shrub, may be well employed
to check such bad forces.
The few necessities in the form of hedges, belts, individual
trees and shrubs, in their proper places, it will be an easy mat-
ter to parcel out the lawn, border, and bed spaces.
Avoid narrow strips for any purpose, as they not only look
weak, but force weakness upon the subjects planted therein.
Fanciful and little beds are for children. Plants) like ourselves,
sometimes suffer from their surroundings. The framework of
a bed should be so natural and easy in its lines that the spot
shall appear as a bit of nature’s rather than man’s handiwork.
Beds and paths and borders must merge into each other, so
as to avoid, as far as possible, the impression that they have
been independently formed. This is done by keeping the mar-
gins as “ full ” as possible. When “ cutting out ”no soil should
be removed. Where the soil and other material to be used is
in a loose condition, the garden may be made in summer, but
under ordinary conditions it can be more economically made in
a cool and damp period of the year, since general planting can
be done only at this season.
Plants of good size and durable character are set out during
autumn, winter or spring, but if grown in pots and well suited
to the situation they may be set out at almost any time, ex-
cepting the extremely hot period of summer and the wettest
and coldest period of winter. Much depends on the class of
soil and its condition, as to the time of planting. Plants should
never be set out at a season when they will be unable to start
at once; hence a season is selected when each subject will be
ready and able to grow at the roots from the day it is placed
in the ground. Planting holes should always be broad enough
to receive the roots without crumpling or doubling up. The
roots must not be placed deeper in the soil than they originally
grew, and water should always be given to settle; and exclude


air from the soil. When gardens and plants are young, there is
little or no pruning to be done, excepting where unshapely and
weakly plants are obtained, which require “ cutting back.”
Flowering plants, shrubs, and ornamental trees, are not
pruned for precisely the same reasons. As shrubs grow ir-
regular, and their branches become attenuated and weak,
so do the leaves and flowers grow smaller, and the beauty
we desire is not forthcoming. Remember that one com-
mon system or season of pruning will not serve for all. If we
take twenty Bouvardias, Ericas, Fuchsias or Roses of different
ages, strength, and variety, a different pruning will be
necessary to each. Our object may be ever the same, but we
must respect the individual capacity of each plant in order to
secure the best it is capable of yielding.
And what is this best? Not simply a very big or beautiful
flower. We want much besides. For these reasons are garden
plants pruned:
i. To keep them within bounds.
t 2. To provide shapely and attractive form.
3. To promote fine foliage and flower in abundance.
4. To quicken or rejuvenate the roots.
5. To take away dead and exhausted wood.
6. To allow of the proper degree of light and air reaching
all parts of the plant and the soil it occupies that it
may remain clean, healthy and attractive in every part.
In pruning shrubs the chief thing is to avoid barbering and
stiffening them into hard and unnatural looking things. “Cut-
ting over ” is usually done where only “ thinning out ” is re-
quired. The more natural and varied the shapes in trees and
shrubs the larger and more varied will the garden appear.
The time to prune.—All plants flowering in spring and early
summer may with advantage be pruned immediately after the
flowering is over. They will then, if well fed, have the summer
in which to make new and useful wood.
All strong-growing, hard-wooded shrubs and trees which yield
little flower of importance should be pruned in winter. It is


always possible to prune trees or shrubs which are carrying
flower buds by thinning out the offending branches, instead of
cutting over the entire head.
Small flowering plants do not as a rule get sufficiently hard
cutting, or where they do it is invariably of such an irregular
character as to produce quite ugly plants with flowers of dif-
ferent shapes, colour and value over different parts. Intelligent
pruning reveals first a gracefully-moulded plant, with its wood
so varied in size and quality as to ensure an even distribution
of fine bloom and foliage. This is not difficult of attainment,
if the pruner knows the ordinary means by which the sap cir-
culates and the value of wood of various sizes and ages in up-
right, spreading, and depending positions.
The raising of seedlings and striking of cuttings should not
absorb much time or space where the garden is small. Our
object is to plan and compound the garden to ensure its being
richly clothed for the most part with -permanent plants, and
where we succeed in this but few new things are required to
maintain attractive order. A few annuals may be sown in
autumn in boxes, pans, or on a little raised platform surrounded
by stones. These will make the soil warm and sweet through
the winter, and help growth. The warmest aspect will serve
best for seeds or cuttings put in in autumn, whilst the shady
and cool side with a deeper, richer and moister soil is needed
for spring-sown seed and cuttings. In selecting cuttings to be
struck in the open air, the wood must be ripe, or it will rot be-
fore a callus and roots can form. The roots of plants should
never be allowed to get dry during removal. This is especially
important in every climate and season. Water before lifting and
again after planting, and pick off some of the leaves and soft
wood where the plant is known to be sensitive to change.
The desire to be like other people, to think, and act, and
possess the same as they, is a common trait in gardening. In
truth, we should first consider what plants will thrive under such
conditions as we have to offer.
Some well-known plants are very unsatisfactory. They
involve us in continual effort to keep them alive. They flower


infrequently; their foliage is not abundant or striking; they
grow very slowly; they are extremely sensitive to parasites and
extremes of climate; they are not comely in habit and general
effect; their beauty is very evanescent; they are very exacting
in all their wants. Of such plants the amateur, or worker on a
small area, should have none. Choose first such subjects as are
somewhat indifferent to soil, climate and position; which are
given to revel in beauty of leaf, or flower, or bark, at all
seasons; which are clean under adverse conditions; which
can in great measure look after themselves, and when the soil
gives out, and water gives out, and the drainage system goes
wrong, will not promptly sicken and die.
In practice, we must select a list for the hottest and poorest,
wettest and coldest, most exposed, most shaded positions. Plant
all the most hardy things in autumn and winter, and the most
delicate and impermanent in spring and early summer.
LAWN-MAKING AND MANAGEMENT.
The essentials for a good lawn are a deep, rich, well-graded
and perfectly drained soil.
English grass will prove permanently attractive only where
the subsoil remains cool and moist throughout the summer.
Further, this grass calls for much more water, manure, cutting
and general attention than do lawns made of Buffalo, Couch,
Cocksfoot and other native and imported grasses. Buffalo should
invariably be used for banks, ramps, thin, hot, exposed and
dry soils, and English grass with an admixture of fine clover in
well-sheltered and glade-like portions and where water is abun-
dant.
Frequent cutting produces a close and even substance and
colour in lawns, which is ever to be desired.
Lawns should never be pushed into such comers under trees
or shrubs, or up against houses, where light, warmth, and air,
are insufficient to support healthy growth. Lawns planted as
with Buffalo or Couch, or sown with seed, should always be
closely set, so as to secure a rapid covering of the ground,


which will most effectively check the spread of weeds, and
prevent coarseness.
Buffalo will choke most weeds, excepting Dock, Flatweed,
Dandelion, Sorrel and Plantain, but English grass yields readily
to almost every kind of weed; it is therefore necessary to
plant in carefully cleaned ground and to afterwards pay regular
attention to the lawn whilst it is in a formative stage.
Once or twice a year the lawn should be systematically dealt
with. In spring, take out all weeds by hand and fill up the
holes with clean soil. Next cut the grass hard down with a
scythe and “ dress up ” any inequalities and poor spots with
manure or soil, according as increased strength or level may be
desired. Never put rich top dressing into lawns which are
healthy and of deep green colour, or they will be coarsened and
made lumpy and irregular in appearance. On the other hand,
a rich mixture of old turfy soil and well-rotted manure would
prove suitable for weak and failing lawns. The dressing should
never be so deep as to completely cover all the grass, or it may
be destroyed. No stiff soils must ever be used for top dressing
lawns. If the soil and grass are loose and springy, frequent
rolling or beating with a spade in early spring will help to
preserve shape and tone in the lawn, but heavy soils and dry
weak grass must never be hard pressed. In autumn, clean,
hardcut, and dress the lawn again, using but a light covering of
the dressing, and when the new growth shows through, put on
more of it by degrees, if it is necessary, avoiding the danger of
having the land too wet, in which case coarse mosses and weeds
will appear and expel the true grass. Now and then seed will
require to be sown in weak places, or it may prove more satis-
factory to skim off weak and weedy sections, and lay down new
turves, plants, or seeds. Kentucky blue grass sown with Buffalo
prevents the lawn having an absolutely rusty and sullen ap-
pearance during the winter. Couch grass will bear with a great
deal of traffic and hot weather, but it must be used with
caution, since it is much more liable to take possession of paths
and borders than is Buffalo or any other creeping grass.


CHAPTER VI.
GARDEN MANAGEMENT
The greatest autocrat you will ever know is your gardener.
All-round gardeners, full of resource and possessed of good
taste, are extremely rare in Australia. The cause is to be found
in the absence of any systematic training grounds, for not one
of our State botanical or other public gardens goes so far as to
train its own employees, much less prepare gardeners for the
benefit of the general public, and those who come from other
lands are so convinced of the merits of what they already know
that they fail to recognise and work in accord with the de-
mands of local climate. Here and there one sees a garden
well managed as the result of an intelligent gardener, but as a
general rule the men employed may be designated garden rob-
bers. This is not said unkindly, but so long as it remains
unsaid we shall be begging and waiting for a more rational and
better garden. We see no attempts to stay the robbing hand
of our summer climate or any intelligent appreciation of the
significance of the Australian garden.
Broom and barrow men they are for the most part, regularly
reducing the garden area to unshapeliness and poverty. Their
principal work is sweeping up and carting off the vital food
stuffs and moisture-holding properties of the soil. To the
eternal employment of the broom and barrow we may attribute
no small loss of our soil and wasted efforts in other directions.
The industrious broom and barrow man is everlastingly looking
for the opportunity to wheel something out of the garden. He
has nothing like a corresponding inclination to bring stuff in
unless it be manure. He calls certain stuff “ litter ” and “ rub-
bish,” as if all loose matter on the earth’s surface were not


manure, or soil dressing, or a moisture-holding property, or a
soil-deepener, or a shape-giver, or something else equally bene-
fiting to our domain. Remember that every soluble and de-
cayable item within your garden area has a perpetual right to
remain there. We must have no actual clearing out; there
may be occasional burning of disease-infected matter, but ill
else must be no more than transferred to a rotting and decom-
posing quarter, whence it may be brought back as soon as it is
fit for use.
We have an extraordinary large proportion of one-man
places, and this is an important reason why real skill and
thoroughness are not more commonly displayed. The single-
handed gardener is expected to be much more, and there will
be no marked improvement in the character of local professional
labour till the gardener is relieved from the multifarious duties
of a domestic, and employed solely in the cultivation of plants
and the beautification of house surroundings.
In brief, the working gardener cannot improve his position
(which really means do better work) until his employer takes a
more intelligent view of the situation, and, in association with
the garden architect, provides a ground plan and body of
material which will preserve fine effects without the employ-
ment of over much thought cm the part of those doing the
manual work.
The situation demands closer contact with the subject, and
more skill in directing on the part of owners.
Where the garden is small and the working strength likewise,
the owner should know as much as will ensure the necessary
attractions at all seasons. Where the gardener is found to be
interested in his work, able to recognise the possibility of every
part, and can produce distinctly graceful and dignified effects,
leave him alone.
Where the domain is too small to fully employ a skilled
gardener, and regular male assistance is required, It may be
found advantageous to keep a youth for general work and bring
in a capable man so many days a week, as the garden demands.


The amateur who desires a neat and pretty garden at the
expense of from tern shillings to thirty shillings per week, should
first of all, through the medium of a garden architect or pro-
fessional gardener, secure a thoroughly appropriate plan, and
then get this carried out. It must be evident that nothing
fanciful or difficult to manage must be attempted where the
labour will be rough and untutored. All the world over we
should be able to say, “ My garden is in accord with my means
and my gardener’s knowledge. It is appropriate to the situation,
we understand all it contains, and therefore manage it well.”
Australian garden work is notoriously lacking in “ finish,”
and it is as often painfully cheap. Hence the employer has
constantly to see that the garden is not vulgarised by the em-
ployment of petty devices, and weak methods of planting and
grouping.
Plants in themselves are never really common, but we may
group or shape them with greatly varying effect. This is the
real difficulty with the untrained mind and hand—that even
where it thinks, it thinks differently. It thinks from out a
cottage or hideous mass of matchboard boxes forming a back
street Genius is sportive; but it is easy to decide whether we
may expect most taste and effect in gardening from those who
are bred amid the refinements of good homes and receive the
general benefits of education, or from those who understand
taste to be a sense confined to the human mouth.
Don’t take your gardener on trust; don’t think him wise
and competent because he knows the name of every plant in
the garden, but rather employ and encourage all you can the
man who has unmistakably an eye and an inborn faculty for
the work.
We have now to consider the ordinary demands of the dif-
ferent styles of garden.
Those architecturally perfect houses of the classical orders
have gardens so precisely and permanently laid as to call for
little more than the preservation of the original form. Special
work in the way of renewing the soil occurs more or less often.


that is, if the annual work does not regularly repair all defi-
ciencies. The routine work in such gardens consists in keeping
them full of soil and plants, and imparting as much additional
“ character ” and dignity as the form and age of the entire estate
admit of.
In managing the gardens assigned to houses of the Gothic,
Dutch, Queen Anne, and many less definite styles of building,
and which call for no severe and rigid style of garden, the
routine work should provide a steady change of form and ex-
pression. It is true that many features may be regarded as
permanently attractive and suitable, and that they will gather
strength and beauty with the years; but there must, from the
very nature of the “ free ” or landscape style of gardening
material (since all is alive), be rapid change of form and value,
necessitating frequent alteration and improvement. There is
always the danger of monotony where the scene does not reveal
grand architectural effects or a variety of new forms and colours.
In brief, as trees alter their shape and size, and as they inter-
fere with views of each other, as they demand more or less
room or soil, as we want new features about them, as they
overawe and spoil grass, or make paths too dark or damp, or
dirty, we must alter and improve them and their surroundings.
Moreover, as we gain experience, we venture more; and again,
our financial resources may be increased or curtailed, or we may
require to use the garden for a slightly different purpose. We
discover wet, sour, thin, and over-exposed soil, badly lighted
and extra rich spots; also plants encroaching, others failing,
turf giving out or growing too rank; or the plan may be
obviously expensive, or call for a less delicate class of plants.
These are conditions which chiefly affect our work in managing
the ordinary private garden composed entirely of vegetation.
■ The garden once established, there is frequently occasion to
remove some tree or shrub, or to re-employ some space for a
totally different class of vegetation. As for example, when a
garden is first planted, soft-wooded and quick-growing flowering
plants are usually set quite close to the permanent trees and
shrubs; but as these spread and shade the ground the others


disappear. After a time the big permanent plants will provide
a set of conditions within their shade suitable to another group
of plants, and if advantage is taken of this fact there need be no
untidy or bare spots in the garden, no matter what its position,
character or size. We must be steadily altering and refurnish-
ing the weak and least effective spots. The garden that is ever
the same is invariably hideous. We should desire and provide
for change in shape and expression, otherwise all the years will
seem the same, and yet not so, since weakness will surely come
upon the garden if our work does not amount to an annual
refreshment.
Humour as much wayward growth as the situation will admit
of, and carefully avoid keeping the garden with a young and
over-precise face; but, on the other hand, always stir and en-
rich its soil, and prune such things as will ensure all being
strong, clean and happy in their surroundings. Never forget
that great waste is always going on wherever plants are growing
freely, or the surface of the ground is exposed to sunlight and
air in motion. Once a garden attains to maturity it wastes soil
very rapidly, and if the waste is not met by bringing in at least
a corresponding amount the plants and general form of the
place soon decline. The garden really loses its shape and
quality through what may be termed natural waste (greatly
assisted by the broom and barrow man). Surfacing from old
pasture lands, road scrapings and farmyard manure, are the most
accessible and appropriate materials for keeping up the quan-
tity and quality of garden soil.
It is always seasonable to repair a fault, but normally, soil
dressings should be given in autumn and winter, and manure
dressings in spring. The latter will then provide a protective
mulch during the summer and be ready for digging during
autumn.
The proportion of capital to be spent in raw material is a
point of vital interest and cannot therefore be over-emphasised.
It is a rich and abundant soil rather than intelligence in the
routine work which secures fine gardens. Whatever the annual
sum to be spent in the garden, see that soil and manure are


obtained, sufficient to keep each part shapely, and rich enough
for the plants grown.
Of course no uniform sum or scale of costs can be given, since
every position and year will bring its own special demands; and
again, in some gardens, soil dressing is secured to certain parts
by taking from others which are over-rich, and where the re-
moval of material will also improve the form and effect of the
area.
Garden management must be considered quite apart from
knowing how plants grow and how to shape and arrange gardens.
Our real skill and success is shown in our ability to “ keep
up ” a garden at all seasons. When a place grows untidy we
have more than our purse, or taste, or industry can support.
Big alterations not only impose considerable extra labour and
expense, but also waste a season or two, and once a garden is
made, it should (when necessary) be altered by such small
degrees that the ordinary routine work of the other portions is
not sacrificed.
Good management implies a knowledge of:
(a) All the varied qualities, aspects, depths and values of
the soil composing the whole domain.
(b) All the ordinary cultural and climatic demands of the
plants composing the garden. This involves a good
knowledge of the influence of the seasons, as they
affect soils and plants, for there will often be found
summer and winter quarters for plants of one kind in
the same garden. •
Unless the gardener knows approximately the sea-
sons and conditions under which roots and wood, and
flower are produced, he cannot shift, dig round,
manure, water, put to rest, prune, or cut down, with
certainty of success.
The heaviest work of the year on garden beds and borders
occurs after the heavy frosts and rains of Midwinter have de-
stroyed the last vestiges of life and beauty in the soft-wooded
and short-lived plants which go to make the garden gay in
Summer. What are termed “ mixed borders ” are invariably


composed of trees and shrubs, roses, soft and hard-wooded
permanent plants of small size, herbaceous plants, bulbs, and a
small number of things of a more or less nondescript character.
Order of working:
1. Cut the adjacent turf hard down with a scythe to pre-
vent its being trodden and rotted by the trampling it
will receive in cleaning and re-arranging the border.
If a path adjoins, weed and clean it first, and avoid
putting heavy dirt or wet litter on it.
2. Pull up or cut down all dead stalks, and remove litter
to a place where it can be deeply dug in, or rotted for
future use.
3. Prune, thin the wood of, or cut down or out such plants
as need it.
4. See that drainage is perfect, and if not, correct it.
5. Provide new soil or manure, or examine and grade exist-
ing material to ensure a nicely-balanced surface.
6. Re-group such shrubs and permanent plants as will im-
prove effect
7. Divide and lay out herbaceous and miscellaneous plants
ready for inserting when digging.
8. Deeply dig to true form the entire surface, filling vacant
sites with many small plants as the work proceeds.
In Spring there will be more pruning of such things as flower
during Winter, clearing off weeds and litter, additional planting,
and digging in accord with the nature and conditions of the
soil. The mulch should not be put on till the Spring sun has
warmed and sweetened the earth.
The remodelling of old or neglected gardens is comparatively
easy work, excepting where a new house has been placed on a
different site and has thrown the trees and other permanencies
out of line and perspective. A very careful survey of the whole
area is necessary so as to get an exact knowledge of the quanti-
ties and values of all the different materials. Respect every fine
tree or shrub, every bit of old wall or strong hedge, or creeper-
covered space, and well-formed lawns. The defects of levels will


be soon apparent, also the indispensable lines for paths, views,
etc.; and these decided upon, material will be moved or re-
composed to bring each part into a proper relationship with the
rest.
Re-trenching of heavy soil and manure dressing are invariably
necessary when an old or neglected garden is taken in hand.
Trees and big shrubs may often be found in distinctly faulty
positions, but it will pay to let them stand until more
plants grow up on more appropriate sites, when the offenders
may be removed. We should never cut down more of the
trees than are absolutely necessary to provide a site for the house
and lines of approach—since privacy and protection are the
very first needs in every home in a hot climate.
The hotter and more exposed the soil in Summer the greater
the necessity for coveting its surface as a means to stop evapora-
tion and waste. Closely-packed beds and borders do not in the
long run lose as much food and moisture as those which are
openly planted and exposed to the wasting influences of sun
and wind. It is true that certain species of plants will not
thrive when closely hedged in by others of a different nature,
but for all such plants as go to form the general stock in beds
and borders —including roses—dwarf-growing annuals, and even
permanent creeping plants, may cover the ground, and whilst
conserving food and moisture, add greatly to the general effect.
There is no real beauty in soil. A bulky and well-worked mass
impresses the gardener because he knows what he may reason-
ably expect from it in the near future; but once see the soil
well prepared, and allow for the sweetening and food-yielding
effects from the exposure to light, heat and air, it is time to
cover its face with something more distinctly alive and beauti-
ful. In close planting the point is to have plants of varying
size and character. Cold, wet soils need plenty of exposure,
but loose and shallow soils need close planting and covering up
in Summer; all wind-swept soils call for very close planting.
Beds containing roses, Azaleas, Bouvardias, Ericas, or simi-
larly cultivated plants should be covered only during the heat


of Summer, as the roots of the permanents are liable to suffer
from sourness in the soil due to want of light.
One should have a packet of mixed seeds, containing convol-
vulus, mignonette, phlox drummondi, dwarf nasturtium, poppies
of sorts, petunias, marigolds, portulacca, and other similar quick-
growing things, and as the Summer advances, and bare or weak
patches show, scatter a few of these seeds. It will be an easy
matter to remove those which are liable to injure stock plants.
Of course when systematic planting is done for the Summer these
casual plants would create wild disorder, but as systematic
planting is, very properly, rare in Australia, we find real beauty
and satisfaction, wherever there is an abundant vegetation over
all the surface.
The water supply is, next to the nature and quantity of the
soil, the most important item in connection with the management
of a garden. All said and done, gardening is entirely governed
by ways and means. Water is distinctly expensive, and even
where one does not object to paying for it, it may not be
forthcoming in sufficient volume at those seasons when it is
most needed. In every case, we must make and manage accord-
ing to the water supply. In this connection water is used in
inverse ratio to quantity of soil. The deeper and richer the soil,
the less water will be needed, and the less work and anxiety
regarding the preservation of the garden; therefore soil and
water are considered together. And remember, that a shallow
and rich soil, with abundant water, will never yield the superior
garden which results from a great depth of well-prepared soil.
We are accustomed to spend money in watering in the Sum-
mer only, when it would often be found much less expensive
and better to water in Autumn, Winter, or early Spring, and
secure a well-saturated subsoil, which, quickly covered with
vegetation, would be conserved and sustain plants at very small
further outlay during Summer. Watering at any season implies
good drainage; it is especially necessary when given during the
cold period of the year. Summer water does not “ get down,’’
since the soil and atmosphere are so hot that all water is quickly
converted into vapour, and thrown off.


In Winter the rains are not sufficient to thoroughly saturate
the subsoil, and even where the rainfall is high, established
gardens are so screened by their own vegetation that the soil
remains dry as dust all the year round, unless artificially re-
freshed. We have, therefore, to be constantly on the alert to
note the effect of all the phenomena of nature, and in a general
way we should do a good deal of work in Winter, of a kind
which, under other skies, would be reserved solely for the Sum-
mer months; finally, it will be found infinitely cheaper to water
in Winter than in Summer all those areas which call for heavy
and quick-growing vegetation during the hot months of the year.
Those who discuss, and are very fond of particular plants,
rarely have gardens.
The gardener cannot afford to make any special choice. It
is as if an artist should say he would paint only in blue or red,
or contend for one shape and size. Our garden is made up of
an infinity of shapes and sizes and colours, and much affected by
a great deal that is not alive or within our grasp (as the outside
world, terrestrial or celestial). These impress themselves upon
our garden and ourselves, and compel us if we are sane to listen
to their united voice.
We must remember that there is a “ trade ” side to plant-grow-
ing, and that “ novelties ” are a necessity to every man’s cata-
logue. But with novelties we shall make no garden. Many
plants are of very short duration, or die off and leave a gap
in the Summer (this is a very serious defect in a flower). We
ought always to know, when we put out a plant, w’hen it will
normally fail in beauty, or die, and if it be in Summer, then we
should anticipate the vacancy by planting something else near.
“ Common ” hardy plants will make a garden, and as we grow
in knowledge, or means to buy knowledge, in the shape of
skilled gardeners; then we may improve our collection.
The shade garden, wilderness, or covered shady walk should
be found in every garden; it need not interfere with the extent
or value of the more open parts, nor will it be difficult to make
or maintain. If the dry, hungry ground under trees and big
shrubs is deeply dug in Winter, then well watered, and if poor


given a top dressing of new soil, a great variety of shade-loving
plants will be found to thrive and yield endless beauty, besides
adding to the size of the garden enormously. Winding, unpre-
tentious paths, such as beaten ways in woodlands, should be
cut through big shrubberies, or such belts of trees and shrubs
as follow boundary lines. The trimming up of the branches of
occasional trees will admit as much light and air as will secure
free growth and charming vistas. The shade garden would
prove a welcome addition throughout the hot regions of Aus-
tralia. This includes all the capital cities, and the oldest and
most neglected gardens hold most material for the skilful re-
modeller. The shade garden means nature, or it means nothing.
All growth must be prodigal and wild. Flowers will not be so
rare, bright foliage so wanting, or the air so still and cold that
the shade garden will in winter prove a dreary affair. Shafts of
light are made to fall where a splash of colour is wanting, and
narrow windings, now opening to the sky, and now leading to
broad carpets and vaults of varied green, keep one interested
and secure.
Even where a few trees or shrubs are placed against a solid
background, the soil at their base may be covered with creeping
and low-growing woodland plants. In brief, we must waste no
space, as (“ in the economy of nature there are no fallows ”):
we are sternly reproved where we essay to improve on nature,
and yet leave the greater part of the ground exposed and un-
attractive.
The natural forces acting against Australian garden work are
to be found in extremes of climate which severely try the con-
stitution of most plants, and render them liable to disease, pests,
and irregular growth. Excessively-heated and badly-drained
soils furnish extremes beneath the surface, and demand such
attention at all seasons as will prevent any wide difference in
soil temperature. Hot, drying winds, droughts, poverty and
shallowness of soil, and the disproportion of the wasting and
gathering seasons, are defects to be met in various ways. By
recognising the causes of each and all of these adverse forces,


we are in a position to give such attention to the soil and plants
as will secure a wholesome abundance at all seasons.
If you would have a good garden, first learn to work, then
work to leam. A superficial and theoretical knowledge is use-
less since real hard work calling for muscle as well as brain, has
to be put into each foot of ground, if it is to yield up anything
worthy the name of beauty.
Of books, those which have most literary charm are most
helpful to the amateur, since they create a mood which is
inspiring and more definite in its aim, than books which are
mere catalogues of plants and directions for managing them.
The general effect of climate on the position you wish to
deal with, should be fully grasped, also the climate and position
as it affects your health and desires.
Well-made public and private gardens, which appeal directly
to the aesthetic taste or imagination, will be worthy of study, and
in some measure of imitation. Every local beauty which has
come into existence unaided by man, will be a clue, which, fol-
lowed, will lead to some appropriate effect in the garden. Make
yourself thoroughly familiar with the characteristics of the local
climate, get the best local calendar of garden operations, and
write in all your experiences and impressions regarding your
own work. This calendar should soon be found in one’s head,
and the possessor should usually be reading a few weeks or
months in advance, so as to anticipate and provide for each
season’s demands.


CHAPTER VII.
A ROSE GARDEN.
A society bent on producing and exhibiting flowers may, of
course, do good work, but any effort made to strengthen and
improve the surroundings of our homes must have a more meri-
torious influence on Australian life. Too many lose sight of the
fact that the rose is more than a mere flower. It is a highly
decorative and infinitely varied plant.
In this climate, we are more in need of gardeners than plant
growers. There is a wide difference between the two, and the
gardener is infinitely the rarer and the better man. A collec-
tion of plants does not make a garden, neither do big flowers
nor fine colours. Their arrangement and the materials they
cling around, or which form their environment, govern their effect
on our senses. In brief, the garden must be architecturally cor-
rect, or the flower is out of place and not truly seen. Now and
then one sees an arrangement productive of some grace, but a
distinctly ordered scene, strong, delicate and expressive, cannot
be found. We find beds, and borders, and clambering masses,
the one stiff and bare, the other too much neglected to maintain
a hold on our admiration for more than a brief period of the
year.
Cut off from that finer atmosphere, which makes all the dif-
ference between the old world and the new, we are lighter and
more trivial in our tastes and ambitions, are not satisfied to
work for love alone, keeping our hearts for our gardens and
our rose petals for the winds. We are all for showing and sell-
ing. Rose growing is a mere craze with the many. Eliminate
human vanity and cupidity, and the rose would be queen to few.
It takes far less skill to produce a good rose than it does to
produce a good cabbage.


Quoting poetry on the rose or dealing in subtleties of its cul-
ture will not help to a better understanding of the subject; nor
will the admiration of big and artificially twisted and curled
blooms.
If poetry is indispensable, “ Come out into the light of day.
Let nature be your teacher.” Beds, and rows, and rings and
arches, and garland hoops have their uses, but they are not all-
sufficient, and if placed in impossible positions they spoil, rather
than create, effects. “ Points and wrinkles ” —short cuts to long
stories—are what most people are after, but those who can
trade on such scraps have still all the subject to leam. Our
work with the rose is one-sided. We have no occasion to grow
flowers as the old world gardeners do. In a warm climate
flowers have but a poor effect on the senses compared with the
relief and gain which come from the contemplation of some
beautiful though miniature scene. If we want an interesting
hobby, and have large or small means, the study and delight of
a garden will prove greater than that of any individual flower.
Do we want ideas for a garden ? Then drop all knowledge of
names and colours and peculiarities, and first of all create a
scene. The rose, above all flowers, must be at home with its
surroundings. Stateliness, privacy and reserve characterise the
home of the rose. The rose must subdue the scene. Bright in
colour, it in no way bespeaks gaiety, and any arrangement which
provides for no more than “ a brave show ” produces less de-
light than where a few plants of varied colour and character
reveal their affection for the spot in which they dwell.
The garden scenes which haunt the memory and become hal-
lowed are never composed of showy sheets of bloom. There was
something overhead or about us which we looked up to, and an
atmosphere which it was good to drink in, and we can remember
but an occasional flower. Would not the reading of a well-
written and well-illustrated book on the rose cause us to hunger
after scenes, not flowers? Time is the master gardener; and
this is one reason why we can show so little.
Would you turn your garden to shape and use for the rose?
Consider a few fine subjects in nature and in art, and see if


they do not help you. Burne-Jones has a picture, “ Love Among
the Ruins.” It is a Romeo and Juliet-like pair, snatching a fear-
ful joy from between the crumbling walls and other masonry of
a ruined garden. The roses have taken possession of it, and
the effect is glorious, even though Burne-Jones makes some of
the flowers come straight out of the old wood. Alma Tadema’s
pictures are full of beauty and ideas for the rose gardener. His
Sappho is especially so, and you may catch the spirit of the
Eastern garden of Gull from his Vintage Festival, which hangs
in the Melbourne Gallery. Imagine the effect of a pergola or
arch spanning or skirting a clear, still pool—flowers above,
around and in the water beneath. What inspirations in an
interior of some great Gothic fane by David Roberts, or a good
painting of some ancient tomb! Call up a picture of a crumbling
and weather-stained wall, and see what could be done with it
and about it. Look out pictures of the wall and parapet of a
terraced garden fashioned in Tudor times —the dismantled draw-
bridge and breast work of some moated grange, or the griffin-
guarded gateway of an old mansion, and see if there is not
something in them which may be turned to account
Are ours cottage gardens? Think of Wordsworth’s, and
Coleridge’s, and Ann Hathaway’s, and Miss Jeykll’s. A domes-
tic landscape by Constable or a rose-crowned fragment of wall
by Ruskin can teach us more of the uses of the garden than
all the millions of solitary rose blooms that have gone to the
decoration of rooms and exhibition stands; and if we content
ourselves with the flower alone we shall miss a great joy, and
give posterity no cause to say that we understood aught about
gardening.
WHAT MAY BE DONE IN AUSTRALIA.
Substantial and mature buildings are rare, though we have
room to do good work. Masonry is the thing we most lack.
Spacious bays, well lighted glades, or the foreground of fine
sweeps of trees, offer fitting sites for the rose section. The
garden scene must change in outline as well as colour from
year to year, or it is liable to become monotonous; hence allow


for wayward growth—let pillars lean, have plants high and low,
broad and narrow, flat topped and conical, close set and openly
arranged, according to their natures and positions and the way
in which as plants they look their best Mere edgings of dwarf
roses, and straight apd curved or winding hedges of more pre-
tentious sorts may have a place in the rose garden. This climate
makes for soil exhaustion, and it can rarely be said—once and
always a garden. An actual and sufficient foundation must be
laid if anything is.to attain to the dignity and beauty of age.
Naturally, for a permanent plant one must provide permanent
quarters. This means depth, rather than quality of soil. Few
in the community are disposed to create a real rose garden,
but where it is attempted some definite and appropriate form
should be adopted. Our Italian, Dutch, Queen Anne, French
villa and conventional Australian verandahed house may all be*
made to look ridiculous—may remain houses or become homes
according to the arrangement of the garden.
The aspect for a rose garden must vary with the altitude and
latitude.
In all our populous centres the cooler but well-lighted positions
serve best. The surface of the rose garden should be irregular.
Various erections will go far to help out a flat surface, but an
undulating and well balanced surface is in itself a satisfying
feature. Grass is desirable where low plants are grown. It be-
comes less- important as they ascend, where the background
should always be solid, and unlike the ordinary toning of the
sky. The average piece of land assigned to the gardener is
painfully formal, and some ingenuity is necessary to make the
most of it! Set patterns, or the frequent repetition of any device
soon becomes fatiguing. Turf paths should be encouraged,
even where space is limited, f6r they conserve a lot of moisture
in summer, and in few private gardens is the traffic so great as
to wear them out Forego tiles, and everything that smacks of
the artificial, the fanciful and the trim. Use stakes and labels
as temporary things. They are the standing eyesore of the
garden, and should be as inconspicuous as possible. In this
climate the rose is weakened more by heat than by cold, and


here we find a clue to sites for strong or weak growers. The
rose may be induced to grow over a much longer period here
than in the old country, hence some sharp distinctions in size
of plant and cultural treatment are possible. Depth of soil,
good drainage, and protection from hot winds ensure, strong and
durable plants. Many short-lived, light rooting- and small flower-
ing and foliage plants may be employed to keep the soil about
roses cool and attractive during the hottest period oLthe year.
Mignonette, pansy,' viola, petunias, asters, Phlox Drummondii,
Dwarf Nasturtiums, Zinnias, Coleus, Marigolds, Begonias, Sweet
Alisum and Dwarf Peas axe a few examoles.
As much light, heat, and air must reach the soil as will keep
it sweet at all seasons. The most important root growth is
made in the autumn and spring. If the temperature of the soil
is above forty it will continue throughout the winter. Only in
young plants do the roots grow throughout the year—that is,
providing the soil is neither too cold nor too hot. Roots should
be feeding only when flower is being made and borne. If they
should be growing also, the flowers will not be so general or so
good in quality.
Rose gardens of four classes are possible—Public, Mansion,
Villa and Cottage. Public gardens should hold sections contain-
ing scenes, which might-be conveniently transferred to smaller
and private domains. In the mansion garden, stone or brick-
work is almost indispensable. Red sandstone is, perhaps, the
most beautiful material foy a wall. Soft red brick is also good,
but bluestode is a hard dull thing, and calls for a lot of skill
in order to make roses look well about it. A main wall with
buttresses forming bays affords good opportunity for effective
work. A rough stone wall marking a division between two levels
can be cheaply made, and endowed with unending interest and
beauty. Heavy timber fences —made of half round wood, such
as may be necessary to divide the kitchen garden or paddock
from the ornamental ground—will add distance and beauty to
a scene. To make a good rose garden for a mansion means a
considerable outlay, as earthworks and erections of various
kinds are needed. Arbors, pergolas, battlements, terraces, stair


ways, walls, pedestals, water pieces, fences and trellis, work, are
only portions of the frame of the picture which is to be filled in
by the rose. Beds and borders are of secondary importance;
as once get the heavy features in order, and the rest will
naturally fall into their proper places. The villa garden may
imitate the mansion garden, but there must be fewer devices
and muoh judgment exercised to ensure that the arrangements
accord well with the house and extent and form of the land..
In the cottage garden there should be no devices. Simplicity is
here the only thing to be. sought. Utilise the natural, raw
materials which provide the boundaries, and encourage no other
beyond an arch or a pillar. Have fewer paths, margins of
violets, or similar-low growing plants, instead of stone or brick,
which dry out the moisture in summer and look dingy and
miserable in winter.
It may be that this does not meet with your conception of
rose growing. In any case, these few suggestions and assertions
will at least give you the opportunity of cbhsidering whether we
have so far employed the flower to its full purpose.
