

j V'etf -7 1
JT-
.. 4
■’• , ’"•; > ■
m
Hk
: V *
m
1.. • V '
r
i t
4 H3355/F^ 3 S
fh f Lf- w
.* M.
The Effect of European Bounties upon the Sugar
Industry of Queensland, New South Wales,
and Fiji.
It is superfluous to dilate upon the
value of the Sugar Industry to Queens-
land, as it has been demonstrated over
and over again that this is the one large
agricultural industry of this country,
as it is also of Fiji, and none of the
subsidiary industries, such as banana,
fibre, or coffee growing, can hope to
come anywhere near it in its enormous
vUlue in the employment of labor, and
in its wide-spread ramifications, such
as the supply of food to its employees,
the manufacture of agricultural imple-
ments, the breeding of draught horses,
and the carrying trade both by rail and
vessel.
Over £1,000,000 is distributed broad-
cast every year throughout the colony
of Queensland alone, and this affords
practically a living to a very large
proportion of the population. In fact,
it runs the mining industry very close
for second place, as one of the three
great producing industries of thej
country —Pastoral, Mining, and Agri-i
cultural. ■ >
I need not go back to the earlji
eighties, when the Australian value of
sugar was over £2O, but will take the*
present day, when only £8 is offered foil
a ton of crude sugar. I need scarcely;
say thac no amount of skill in culti-*
vation or manufacture can profitably
produce sugar from the cane for £8 per
ton, and pay any interest on the capital
employed.
The most modern method of les-
sening the cost of production is by
erecting large factories, working day
and night, of from 5,000 to (>,OOO tons
of sugar capacity in a season, with a
system of tramways ramifying in every
direction to secure that important and
vital point—an ample supply of cane,
without which the full economical
effects of large or amalgamated factories
cannot be developed to their greatest
extent. But while in this direction
economies have been, and can be effect-
ed, there is a still more vital point to be
considered in the matter of the value of
the sugar produced, which has been
lowered lately to such a figure as to
leave no margin whatever in the price
of cane for the farmer to combat the
vicissitudes of seasons. The best
factory extant is in this position, that
in an ordinary season, with the current
price of cane, there is no interest for the
capital* involved, while in a bad or
inferior season, there is not .only no
interest, but there is an inevitable loss.
What then is the cause of this unpre-
cedented low price ? Can other semi-
tropical countries with advantages of
abundant and cheap labor produce it
for less? I unhesitatingly say that
other circumstances equal,


Queensland and Fiji can produce produced in their own countries for
sugar cane as cheaply as it can be
produced in any tropical country, while
our methods of manufacture are
apparently in advance of most countries,
seeing that our best factories can pro-
duce a ton (2,240 lbs.) of crude sugar
from less than 7 tons of cane. In
other words, they get 15% out of the
10% of sugar actually contained in the
cane, or nearly 94% is obtained out of
a possible 100 %
To what then do we owe the probable
extinction of this great industry? for
to extinction it must eventually come
if the cost of production exceeds the
value of the article produced. It is
merely a question of time. Owners of
factories may dislike to close the
mills on which they have spent so
much capital, to discharge all hands,
and to see their lands go to waste, and
to be ruined themselves, after working
steadily for some of the best years of
their lives. They will probably die
hard, but still death must come sooner
or later, as producing at a loss cannot
be kept up for ever, and this great
industry, expending £1,000,000 a year,
will be lost to the country.
Are we to sit still and see our industry
ruined, and our country impoverished,
or shall we try to prevent it from
being undermined ?
What are the causes of these low
prices, unprecedented in the world’s
history ? They are not far to seek.
The main cause of the present depres-
sion is due to the bounties on exports
given by foreign European nations
which make sugar from beet-root. To
these bounties, amounting to over
£0,000,000 a year, is due the low price
of sugar all over the world, and the
ruin which is staring all cane sugar
countries not protected from bounties
in the face.
The great European nations, France,
Germany, Austria, and Russia, levy an
duty on the sugar
their own consumption, besides having
a duty varying from £2O to £BO per
ton, to protect their own industry, and
prevent any importation from outside.
The consequence is that, from the high
price of sugar, the consumption of sugar
in Europe is so checked that the
quantity consumed per head does not
amount to one-fifth of what it is in
England, while its production is
stimulated by excessive bounties.
The continental sugar-growers make
their profit out of their home con-
sumption, and are thereby enabled to
sell their exports below the cost of
production, owing to the receipt of these
enormous bounties.
Already bounty-fed beet-root sugar is
being pouiel into Sydney, Auckland and
Adelaide, aided by subsidised German
shipping, while it may be pointed out
that while one industry is actually
being fought and will most likely be
killed, there is nothing to prevent any
industry from being ruined in the saifte
way, by bonuses, concealed bounties, or
subsidies, and the tendency to apply
this method is already evident in the
shipping and metal trades.
It is time for the people of Australia
to grapple with the whole question of
bounties, and in no one case more than
this is the Federation of all Australasia
to be desired. Are we to be rained by
Germany ? for she is the greatest
offender. That is the question to be
determined. Great Britain seems at
last to be alive to the importance of
preserving our national industries, and
not to allow them to be conquered in
detail, and, by putting an end to the
Belgian and German commercial
treaties, has paved the way for a more
intelligent appreciation of the position,
and has left the colonies unfettered by
treaties, —originally adopted by the
mother country, oblivious of the best
interests of her offspring
Shall we make use of this oppor-


p
Mk
:o saw
tunity,
all we not ? Victoria Reid, last July, said—
long ago saw the pernicious effect of “ There was a time when in the exuberance
bounties on importation, and doubled of our intellectual pride in the discovery of
the duty on bounty-fed sugar. If all free , trade we believed we were the only wise
the other colonies would do the same Efi* f bff now %T*SIS
the importation <ot beet-root sugar were firmly convinced that free trade was the
would soon ceasejfcnd we should be best policy for the old country were inclined
loft to work ou«»ur own destinies, to admit that jt was a P oli °y to be judged on
Similarly should all articles
coming from foreign nations, the
natural values of which are altered by Great Britain stands alone against the
any bonus, bounty, or concealed state world with her free trade theories, but
aid, which has the effect of altering the the note of retaliation against unfair
natural cost of production. free trade through foreign bounties has
Let us have, if we like, free trade now been sounded by the denouncing
amongst ourselves, or an Imperial of the Belgian and German treaties of
Zollverein, but do not let us sit still commerce, and has in fact been forced
while continental nations trample on upon Great Britain,
our prostrate industries one by one. Free trade should be free trade with
The matter of bounties is a direct nations that reciprocate, not a
interference with the most essentialß^ :ia i n f enance °f absolute free trade
doctrine of free-trade, as laid down by single handed against the world, which
R. Cobden 50 years ago, who said, Th savours of blind quixotic pertinacity.
reference more particularly to corn, but Absolute free trade is a high ideal not
inclusive of all other substances ; suited to the expediencies of the world
, , we live in, and the sooner Great Britain
“Whether corn becomes dearer or cheaper ~ , . V • ” “
with Fr e Trade matters not to us, provided and her colonies realise this fact, the
the people of this country have it at its be ter for them all.
z-“ra/ and every source of supply is No f ree trade nation would agree to
SdedTwb"’ re 8 ‘ the bolstering ip of weak industries or
•" private interests by protection, but they
Again, Gladstone in 1879 wrote : might combat the pernicious effect of
“My desire is that the British consumer bounties, (which are in direct opposi-
should have both sugar and every other com- tion to the first principle of free trade
modify at the lowest price at which it can be tj ia t ot obtaining commodities at their
produced, but I cannot regard with favor any , , • \ v , •,
cheapness which is produced by means of P ri ®6S) by prohibiting, or
concealed subsidies of a foreign stale to inputting a heavy duty on, bounty-fed
particular industry.” articles; for if they receive these
We all know that the British nation articles free of duty, they are directly
is supposed to be the principal uphdLler encouraging the protection which they
of unquestioning, absolute free denounce. The receiver is as bad as
sort of fetish which is to be bowed d<JA the thief.
oto in abject deference uncondi'ioriJW Queensland is specially interested in
but there are signs of moving airong this very vital question, seeing that,
the dry bones, and of the British'people under the tjhmar Works Guarantee Act,
beginning to assert their opiniorymainst she has invested half a million
the political theorists nradists. of money in providing sugar factories
Lord Selborne, the Under-secretary for for those farmers and cultivators of
the Colonies, ai the banquet to'the New sugar cane, who otherwise could no
South WalesAcremier, Mr. G. H. have existed; and while the incalculably
M


i
benefits to the colony are unquestion- not immediately extend iu benefits to
able, the principle is approved of, and
is being imitated in various parts of the
world.
Sir Hugh Nelson, during his recent
visit to England, has well fought
the battle of the sugar industry of this
colony and has never ceased to inculcate
in his speeches and discussions, the
iniquitous effect of bounties, which are
ruining all our sugar-producing colonies,
to the advantage and benefit of not
particularly friendly nations, and to our
loss. Are we to sit down quietly and
submit to see ourselves ruined ? That
is the question before us.
We want immediate action ; we want
a Federated Australia. Free-trade, at
any rate amongst ourselves, if we can-
all the brethern of our own race and
language in the four corners of the
earth, and we want prohibition against
all bounty-fed article more particularly
from foreign natiovwJfrho are not of our
kith and kin.
At this particultime, our hands
are no longer bound by foreign treaties:
we are at liberty to establish counter-
vailing duties, to make favorable ar-
rangements with reciprocating colonies;
and we ought, especially at tins moment,
to be prepared to modify some of our
old-time theories to promote the great
cause of Australian Unity in the first
place, and later, perhaps, of Imperial
Unity.
J. EWEN DAVIDSON.
Office, Sydney
