

inis
H W$ZS= -(£S^
THE
SERMON
PREACHED BY THE
REV. A. LOVE,
|
¥
AT THE
OPENING OR 1 THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF VICTORIA,
November 6th, 1862.
S A. J. SMI r T H, BOOKSELLER & STATIONER, jS
30 SWANSTON STREET
gjggjffa ~~ s %^|||




SERMON.




THE
SEH M 0 N
PREACHED BY THE
RET. A. LOYE,
AT THE
OPENING OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE
PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF VICTORIA,
November 6th, 1862.
30 SWANSTON STREET
; A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER & STATIONER,




SERMON.
“ But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbliijg-block, and
unto the Greeks foolishness. But unto them who are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God.”—l Cor. i. 23, 24.
Varied in style, and in seeming importance, as is the narrative of
the Bible, it is just the history, prophetical and progressive, of the
great work of redemption announced in eternity, and accomplished
in the fulness of time on the cross of Calvary. This passage brings
the scheme of redemption fully before us, and we are warranted to
say that nothing connected with the history of any state, ancient or
modern, makes even the most remote approximation to it in real im-
portance. It is a monument of wisdom and beneficence, that towers
far above the mightiest efforts of any, or of every age. Like the
ladder in Jacob’s dream, its foundation is on earth—its pinnacle in
heaven. For who can grasp that mystery of godliness, “ God manifest
in the fleshor fathom that depth of mercy, “ God so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth
in Him should not perish but have everlasting life 1”
Angels, we are told, desire to look into the wonders of redeeming
love, and look, and ponder, and inquire they may, but never will
they get beyond the simple recognition of facts, planned by Infinite
wisdom, and accomplished by Infinite power. We cannot possibly
comprehend the value of the blessings which the sacrifice and
finished work of Christ have secured for sinners; and besides, it is
but a very faint idea that we can form of the advantages of a
preached Gospel. The mercy of providing the means of salvation is
beyond our conception great, and who will measure the additional
mercy that graciously offers that salvation to the reception of every
man that lives —a mercy breathed in the counsels of eternity—
wafted to earth by the great Spirit of eternal love —presented to our
gaze on the cross of Calvary—and offered to be made ours in its
richest consolations through the grace of Christ, as the power of
God, and the wisdom of God, unto salvation. Now, this transcen-
dent privilege comes to us through the merciful doctrines of the
cross, and thus “the day-spring from on high hath visited us, giving
us the knowledge of salvation through the tender mercies of our
God.” Reason, guided by the light of nature, the boa,stjffJjj4^j‘^ , -i
(vo ** NOV 199$


may point with tremulous voice to the faint vestiges of the law
originally impressed upon the soul, now by sin a waste of confusion
and uncertainty—and conscience, palsied in its power and mocked in
its authority, may suggest duties, obligations, and penalties, the first
to be continually neglected, and the last never feared. But while
this is the case with untutored reason, and an unenlightened con-
science, the revelation of the Gospel has communicated light to us,
and set clearly before us the principles of eternal rectitude, and of
eternal mercy, which are intended to stir up the most solemn reflec-
tions in our souls, to lead our steps in the way of peace, and to
make us wise unto salvation.
In the illustration of this important subject I shall endeavour to
direct your thoughts for a brief space to the three following parti-
culars, viz. :
1. We are here shown that the doctrine of atonement, by the
death of Christ, is the grand theme of a preached Gospel.
2. We are here shown how varied, and how opposite, are the
effects of the preaching of salvation on the hearts of men,
3. We learn from the whole the responsibility of the ministers of
Christ.
No man acquainted with his Bible, or his own heart, requires to
be told that the world is lying in wickedness, and under condemna-
tion, as the result of the appalling fact that all have sinned and
come short of the glory of God. This is the universal condition of
our race, and one that was very early recognised in the history of
man, accompanied with a sense of degradation and misery which no
power of language can ever express. And as our first parents must have
sighed in anguish, and shed tears of bitterest remorse, as they were
expelled from the blissful abode of Eden, and their eyes caught the
flashes of the flaming sword which for ever debarred their return to
that scene of primitive and ineffable joys, so we have reason to be
depressed, and to weep, when we contemplate the loss of God’s favour
and image. But as they were cheered by the promise of better
things to come, and the darkness of their heart was lighted up by one
bright and cheering ray of hope, so ought we to be comforted by the
promises of the Gospel, and to rejoice in the mercies and hope of
salvation. Now, it is this salvation which is set before us in the
doctrines of the cross—a salvation that never could have been offered
to the choice of any child of Adam without the sufferings which that
cross represents.
There must be an essential and eternal conformity between the
several attributes of the Divine mind, and therefore the deliverance
of man from the condemnation of sin on the principle of Divine
mercy alone, which many plead, would have been incompatible with
the attributes of Divine justice and holiness. God had declared that
punishment would most certainly follow transgression, and whatever
reason there was to threaten the punishment, the same reason held


good for its infliction wherever in the Divine judgment it was
merited. But why, it may be asked, so great a sacrifice as this, the
Son of God made the substitute for sinful, guilty man 1 The reason
is evident at a single glance. The substitution spoken of involved
the endurance of Divine wrath, which it is certain no creature,
angelic, or human, could ever sustain. But Christ in our stead —our
help found in the mercy of God —endured the weight of a world’s
guilt, endured the pangs of Infinite wrath, and rendered that perfect
obedience to the law which maintained its dignity and magnified its
honour, and at the same time exhibited in loveliest harmony with
this the rectitude of God’s moral government, and the glory of his
eternal perfections.
It was simply his death as a propitiatory sacrifice, and not the
violent manner of it, that procured the redemption of his elect. It
behoved Him, indeed, to be lifted up from the earth, and to die
upon the cross, because it was so typified of Him, and so pro-
phesied of Him, in the Old Testament Scriptures ; and had not
those types and prophecies been fulfilled to the very letter in his
person, it could not have been Messias that suffered, and the Jews
would then have been justified in refusing Him, and denying his
claims. But it was Jesus that died, and in dying as He did—the
just for the unjust—He drank of the brook in the way—that brook
which crosses the path of every pilgrim of earth, and passed through
the swellings of that spiritual Jordan, which must sponer or later be
crossed by every man of woman born.
But the preaching of the Cross, let me observe, comprehends
a vast deal more than merely the assurance of redemption through
the blood of Jesus. It would be inconvenient at present to follow
out all the convergent influences which radiate from this grand and
glorious centre ; but we cannot pass unnoticed the fact, that the
preaching of the Cross is itself a principal means of working out
the blessings of the very salvation which it proclaims to a guilty
world. The declarations of the Gospel respecting Christ, his
sufferings, and his salvation, are the glad tidings on which the
sinner builds his hopes, and rests his faith ; and unless the preach-
ing of the Cross is received in this spirit, it fails in its gracious
design —it fails to bring Christ and sinners together, oft ground
consecrated by his precious blood, and on which God the offended
may consistently, as well as mercifully, meet the guilty offender, and
sustain the character of a just God, and yet the justifier of the
ungodly.
It is not enough that we can say we look to the Cross, or that we
believe the Gospel to be the truth in Jesus. But can we also say
that we discover in it the sentence of our own individual condem-
nation, and ever as we read it do we behold the living and im-
perishable features of our Saviour’s love traced on every page, and
feel that by his Spirit he is sending home to our hearts joy, and


consolation, and hope, in the tidings of a free and full salvation %
The preaching of the Cross, let us remember, points to the effects,
as well as the fact, of a crucified Redeemer ; and, unless we are in
some degree assimilated to the character of Christ, through the
power of Divine grace in the soul, we are none of his. The Cross
has been erected in vain, and Christ has died in vain, in so far as
we are concerned, if we fail to exhibit the fruits of righteousness,
and to experience the earnest of eternal life. And, for this state
of mind we must, by the direction of the Cross, look to Jesus for the
grace that bestows it, the grace that continues it, and the grace
that ultimately brings it to perfection. Now, it is the setting forth
of this, its necessity, its accomplishment, and its blessings, which is
to occupy the attention, and employ the energies of the preachers
of the Cross, in presenting the message of salvation and eternal life
to men dying in sin, and perishing in iniquity. By this we are
directed, and brought to Jesus, who is the way, the truth and the life,
in whom all fulness, and all blessing dwell. He is full of mercy,
compassion and love. He knows what a fearful thing it is to bear
the weight of Divine wrath, and his bosom is moved with tender
sympathy for those who are exposed to the fury of the coming
tempest. His eye takes in the whole range of that vast eternity
full of darkness and despair, to which the reckless sinner is fast
hastening. He hears the awful sentence which must for ever
separate him from all that is happy, from all that is hopeful, and
from all that is blessed ; and He sends his Gospel to warn him of
his danger, and his Spirit to give it effect, that it may prove the
wisdom of God, and the power of God to every one that
believeth.
11. We now proceed to notice, in the second place, how varied
and opposite, are the effects of the preaching of salvation on the
hearts of men.
There is a natural unwillingness in man to receive the Gospel
doctrines of Salvation. . This, we find, was the Apostle’s own
experience, notwithstanding his great success in declaring the
unsearchable riches' of Christ. In the case before us, he tells us
that “The preaching of the Cross was to the Jews a stumbling-
block, and to the Greeks foolishness.” Now when we reflect upon
the views chiefly connected with secular greatness which the Jewish
nation had for ages entertained of Messiah, we see that the doctrine
of Salvation, and the establishment of universal peace in the earth,
through the crucified Nazarene, could not be received with perfect
confidence, nor with that faith which would constitute a belief in
his name. Much they beheld in Him, both in the way of doctrine
and miracles, as well as in the events of his history, which they
could not but admit was suitable to the times, and character, of the
great Prophet and King of Israel, so long expected by the descend-
ants of Jacob.


But much also, on the other hand, they saw in His life and
condition, which stood in the way of his reception. The obscurity
of his birth and family, for example—the poverty and privations
of his whole life—and above all, the ignominious death by which
He was cut off in the very bloom of manhood, were all so many
incontrovertible proofs, as they supposed, against His being received
as the Prince of Judah, and the Governor of Israel. They saw
much in the doctrines of Jesus which was worthy of their belief,
and much in his life which was worthy of their imitation; but
against all such convictions they turned to the law of Moses, and
their own personal righteousness. They could not believe, and
therefore would not admit, that the law by which the conduct, and
faith, and hope of their fathers had been regulated during so many
ages, could all at once be superseded by a dispensation which seemed
to make so little of obedience, and based all its hopes upon a man
their equal, whose claims as the Son of God they could not admit,
and whose merits as a substitute in making atonement for their sins
they could not perceive. Thus we see how the preaching of the
Cross became to them a stumbling-block—a rock of offence —for
much as they might be inclined to admire the virtues of his life,
and the simplicity and beauty of his moral precepts, they could not
agree to receive Him in the character of Messiah, whose greatness,
authority, and power, could not be represented by an individual who
actually disclaimed all princely authority, and amidst the scorn and
revilings of his countrymen, perished the helpless, and the powerless
victim of his own folly.
Widely different from the belief of the Jews were the principles
which pre-occupied the minds of the Greeks on the subject of
religion. Their views, however, were equally adverse to the claims
put forth by the Apostles in favour of Christ, and of salvation
through Him —the victim of the Cross. The Greeks were much
given to reasoning on all material subjects, and as their predecessors
had taught so did they. And thus, for ages, the chief feature in
their mode of investigating truth was making reason the standard
of all truth. But the investigation of Christ’s claims, and most of
the doctrines submitted to them in his name, were of such a nature
as to require something far above the reach of reason—a high, a
holy, and a submissive faith —and therefore they rejected, as the
most extravagant foolishness, the doctrines of the Saviour’s incarna-
tion—of the pardon of sin through the spiritual sprinkling of his
precious blood, and of holiness aiad fitness for eternity through the
operations of his grace and spirit. To them, thus prejudiced, it was
of no consequence that God bore testimony to the commission of the
Apostles, and made it appear by signs and wonders that they were
under the direction and care of a Divine power. It was nothing in
their estimation that the preachers of the Cross could point to the
changed habits, the virtuous conduct, and holy example of those


who had been turned from their idols to serve the true God. From
all these evidences in favor of the Gospel their reason recoiled, and
so what they could not be at the pains to attempt to comprehend,
they proudly stigmatised as the greatest foolishness, and therefore
unworthy of any further concern.
Since the time of the Apostles, many preachers of the Cross have
gone forth as heralds of mercy, declaring the unsearchable riches of
Christ to a perishing world, and still the same spirit of opposition
to the doctrines of the Cross is as obvious, and the features of its
enmity as prominent, as ever they were. Indeed, our wonder at the
opposition of the Jews and Greeks is greatly modified, when we
place the true condition of what is called the Christian world in
juxta-position with theirs. There is a selfishness in the human heart,
where it is untouched by the finger of Divine Love, that rises in
revolting antagonism to the self-denial which the Gospel teaches and
recpiires. Now yielding to this depraved feeling of our nature is
not only the source of bitter enmity to the doctrines of Grace, but
is also the cause of almost all the sufferings and calamities which
men endure at the hands of one another. It is this which arms
might against right—which raises the bloody hand of war, and scat-
ters fire, ruin, desolation, and death over the peaceful homes of
thousands—sends savage men with cruel hearts, and unsparing
hands, to dishonor, and destroy, and to do such deeds as the sun
itself might well refuse to look down upon.
Under the influence of this unregenerated obstinacy to the will of
God we will not look for justification to the righteousness of Christ,
and the mortification of sin we spurn as beneath the nobleness of our
manhood, and as unworthy of the high, the heaven-born and im-
perishable faculties which God has given us. Now, out of this self-
ishness and pride springs, as naturally as the branch from the stock,
and the fruit from the blossom, a fatal prejudice against the truth
and obligations of the Gospel. Religion of some kind is congenial
to the natural instincts of man, but the pure and holy religion of the
Gospel is met in our hearts by an instinctive dislike, which nothing
but the grace of God can ever remove. The purity and strictness of
the Gospel are too severe, too constringent, for the liberty of a soul
that would drink in a world’s pleasures, that would grasp a world’s
honours, and whose bold defiant language, in reference to Christ is,
“We will not have this man to reign over us.” Holiness and the
heart’s prejudices cannot dwell together—religion and the vanities of
life cannot grow together in the same soil —and the fatal shade of
the upas tree is not more to be dreaded as dangerous to physical
life, than the pleasures of the world are to be feared as dangerous to
spiritual life.
But perhaps the greatest hindrance to the work of the ministry is
to be found in the state of listless indifference into which so many
professors of the Gospel settle down, apparently without the slightest


apprehension of danger to their precious and immortal souls. One
of the principal evils of the fall is the fact,.that the mind became
darkened and shut against the light of truth, and the soul barred
against the entrance of grace, and joy, and peace, weighed down to
the dust, and depressed to the utter extinguishing of those heavenly
aspirations, which, in other circumstances, would have raised it above
the thraldom of the world, and carried it upwards, and onwards, to
the presence of God and the glories of eternity.
My brethren, w r hat can be more lamentable than the indifference
which sinks such multitudes of our race into such a state as this !
How lamentable, indeed, that man, born for a higher and a nobler
destiny, should settle himself down in the present, and be contented
in the limited sphere of his present hopes and enjoyments, and all
this while his conscience is daily fretted with its own misgivings,
and the Word and the Spirit are pointing upwards, and the soul
itself is fluttering and panting to be free. True, a remedy —an
ample and efficient remedy —where it is faithfully applied, has been
provided for all this, in the Word of God, and the faithful adminis-
tration of it. But what matters it though the remedy were ten
thousand times more ample and efficient, when its appeals are met
with an indifference, which not only paralyses the energies of the
mind, but banishds the love of God from the affections, and the desire
of immortality from the soul 1
This is a state more to be dreaded than even death itself, for the
conscience, under its influence, gradually becomes hardened and
seared, until there is no longer any compunction or relenting for
sin—no longer any desire for mercy—no longer any love to the
Saviour, but lost, utterly lost, and altogether reckless of his fate, the
infatuated sinner moves on in the way of death until he sleeps with
his fathers, and the things that belong to his peace are for ever hidden
from his eyes. My brethren, could you picture to yourselves the looks
of despair, and the wailings of utter hopelessness, expressed by the only
survivor of a shipwrecked crew, cast away upon some solitary rock
amidst the boundless waste of waters on the great deep; could
you in fancy put- yourselves in the place of the exhausted traveller,
who has for the twentieth time approached the inviting spring in the
desert, and found it but the deceitful mirage, and now no longer able
even to lean upon his staff, or to drag his feeble limbs along in search
of the reviving draught on which his life depends, lies down to die —
Could you, I say, put yourselves in the place of either of these, you
might be able to realise what sorrow is, and what agony is, and what
the heart may be doomed to suffer. But it is all as nothing to the
anguish which must wring the soul of the despiser of the Gospel,
when the last gleam of Gospel light—but not of Gospel hope—
shoots across his dreary path as his feet stumble on the dark moun-
tains, only to show him how terrific is the gloom now turned into
the darkness and the shadow of death.


To this picture, however, we rejoice to think there is a bright
side. In the 24th verse w r e have the assurance of the Apostle that
the preaching of the Cross is, “ Christ, the power, and the wisdom of
God, to them who are called.” The call of the Gospel is made, and
sincerely made, to all who hear it. but no one who has spent his
days among the professors of Christianity will for a moment doubt
the possibility of many perishing amidst the glad sounds of peace,
and the invitations of mercy. Thousands who profess to believe
the Gospel, and express a desire for the blessings which it offers,
and who have, for years, come and gone under the droppings of the
Gospel, and its precious ordinances, and have from time to time
been partially wounded by the sword of the Spirit, nevertheless feel
that under all these advantages their hearts have become more
hardened, and their consciences more dead. The call has reached
them, and they are without excuse. Peace has been proclaimed,
but no peace is theirs—reconciliation has been offered, but in the
deceitfulness of their hearts they have spurned it away —promises
rich in consolation have been set before them, but the gall of
their enmity has embittered all their joys. 0 that they knew and
felt the preciousness of this blessed invitation, “ The Spirit and
the bride say come, and let him that heareth say come, and let him
that is a-thirst come, and whosoever will, let him'take of the waters
of life freely.”
But the call spoken of in the text is that produced by the Holy
Spirit, when the word is brought home to the heart with saving
effect, and the sinner is bowed down in willing submission to the
will of God, and enabled to receive Christ on the terms in which he
is offered in the gospel. In this call the Spirit operates with an
invisible hand, in a manner too delicate for the observation of sense,
and in the great majority of cases it is long before the fruits of such
an influence are seen.
These fruits are the renewed affections and the good works which
spring from faith, and we may affirm that wdierever there is a true
faith, there will be fruits more or less abundant. How, whatever
may be our doubts with regard to the fruits of faith in others, we
can never be deceived as to our own. And as every tender conscience
must naturally desire to know whether the heart be right with God,
something like a satisfactory conclusion on this important point may
be arrived at by putting the question in this form, if I have faith,
then I have an interest in Christ, and will enjoy the benefits of re-
demption. But by what evidences am I satisfied that I have faith ?
Such a question compels a man to grapple with his own conscience,
and unless an answer in the affirmative can be unhesitatingly given,
there is reason to suspect the soundness of the professed faith; and
who that truly desires to share in the salvation of Christ, would for
a moment rest satisfied in a state of doubt, in a matter the most mo-
mentous that can possibly occupy the thoughts of an immortal spirit?


My brethren, we cannot, with the Bible in our hands, doubt the
use and power off divine grace and wisdom, in the calling, and con-
version of the siinner, for without their influence, as God’s instru-
ments, the wholte human race must have remained for ever ignorant
of the blessings (of salvation and the joys, of immortality. On the
knowledge of omr calling and conversion, evidenced by their legiti-
mate fruits, depemds our chief comfort, as followers of the Lamb, for
no true peace (can we ever enjoy until we have ascertained the
assurance of our 1 calling, and on this have founded the certainty of
our election. lit may be long, as already observed, before we expe-
rience full confidence of the reality of the change produced
in conversion, or before we discover the undoubted evidences
that we are iin a justified state, but having once obtained
this, our condlition becomes one of joy unspeakable, and
full of glory. No man can calculate the amount of happiness which
falls to the lot of those who have been enabled to make their
calling and election sure. No one can tell what measure of consola-
tion may be experienced by the soul, that has been fully reconciled to
God through the preciousness of the Redeemer’s blood. The
believer whose confidence is in Jesus, and his hope in heaven, is not
only calm amidst the innumerable troubles that flesh is heir to, but
even rises above the fear of death —that dark spot on the horizon of
life —leaning on the cross, relying upon the promises of the Gospel,
and happy in the assurance of God reconciled to guilty perishing
sinners. Confronted by the king of terrors, and standing upon the
verge of the world unseen, he can say to Death, “ Where is thy
sting?” True, that shaft which thou art about to hurl at this de-
fenceless breast will effect its fatal work, but who will be the
vanquished —who the conqueror ? My frail and wasting body will
be left to show that thou canst stop the current of life, and turn
this mortal frame to dust. But the victory, whose is that ? It is
mine—yes, it is mine—for in that world whence came the immortal
spirit within me, there is a rest glorious beyond all conception
awaiting my soul, and to that in thy ignorance thou art about to
send me. No triumph can be thine, for the soul—which is the man —
is beyond thy reach, and will exist in glory, when thou, the last
enemy, art trampled under foot by Israel’s conqueror, and his
people’s king.
In the third and last place, I observe that we learn from this
subject, as a whole, the responsibility of the ministers of Christ.
The office of the holy ministry is, in any circumstances, an arduous
and a trying work. It is the most solemn and responsible mission
to which any mortal can be appointed. And however unimportant it
may appear in the estimation of the world, it is nevertheless the
highest in its aims—the most honorable in its exercise—and the
most glorious in its results, of all the employments in which man
can be engaged. Now, in the work to which the commission of this


sacred office binds us, there is ample room for the exercise of the
highest talents, combined with the greatest zeal, and the most
devoted piety ; and where these are of a low standard, there is
clearly a lack of fitness for the proper discharge of its sacred duties.
The great aim of all who enter into the office of the ministry should
be to preach Christ, and him* crucified, which includes everything
that is necessary to knowledge, conviction, and faith. Here we have
set before us the Lord Jesus Christ, in the divinity of his person, in
the efficacy of his atonement, in the boundless extent of his grace,
and in the inexhaustible treasures of his love. Here we discover
the responsibility of the preachers of salvation, for their mission
represents life and death, blessing and cursing, as the motives to be
held out and pressed upon the consideration of sinners. And blessed
above all men is he who is instrumental in making the gospel, if but
to one precious soul, the saviour of life unto life. Some, it is to be
feared, enter as labourers into the Lord’s vineyard without an invi-
tation from the Master, and where this is “the case, fruits and
increasing usefulness, are not to be expected. God, we know, can
bring about his own ends, his own merciful and eternal purposes, by
the most unlikely means, and the .most unworthy agents; and if any '
are saved through the preaching of faithless ministers, it is still of
the word, of the wisdom, and the power of God, and his glory will
be manifested in the salvation of these souls; but neither comfort
nor salvation is to be expected as the portion of such faithless hire-
ling men. Nevef, my brethren, seek to reach the hearts of your
people with that which does not reach your own. Never preach a
sermon to others which you do not preach to yourselves. It is in
your own hearts that you must learn the lesson, which will qualify
you to deal faithfully with the hearts and consciences of others. And
if you have not learned in that school, you will be very unfit to search
out, and touch, those secret springs of action which establish the
guilt of the soul, and expose it to the awarded punishment of con-
demnation.
To all indiscriminately the faithful minister preaches Christ and
the doctrines of the cross, showing that his salvation is a salvation
from sin, and the blessing of the gospel the turning away of man
from his iniquity. But to individuals he speaks home to the con-
science by some pointed and awakening truth, or to the understand-
ing and the soul by some passage of divine promise, carrying
assurance and peace to the troubled mind. Now, in meeting all
such cases and conditions, the preachers of salvation have need to
brace up their minds with the strongest resolutions, and the most
disinterested devotedness, that they may be faithful alike to their
Master and the souls of men. They must have Christ constantly
before their eyes, and must continually bring him and his salvation
before the minds of their hearers. Christ and him crucified is the
centre in which all the doctrines of salvation meet and are recon-


ciled, and this must be the foundation of all their addresses, and the
theme that must be ever on their tongue. And he who, as a servant
of Christ, is conscientious and faithful in all these matters, may rest
assured that he will at length receive a servant’s reward—a reward
immeasurable, and ineffable, expressed in these glorious terms, “Well
done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord.”
My brethren, did the office of the holy ministry relate only to the
present life, it would scarcely be worthy of our consideration; but
it reaches-beyond time, and carries its results into the world eternal
and unseen. Place yourselves on the verge of the invisible state,
and look back upon the world, its trials, its successes, its joys, its
sorrows, its hopes, and its fears, and tell me what is its real value
when contrasted, with the- present peace, the hope, and safety for
eternity of the precious souls that are entrusted to your care. It is
for eternity that w r e are chiefly to labour, and it is this reflection
which brings the subject of our responsibility home to our consciences
with ten-fold force. And if it be true that souls lost will not only
suffer for their own guilt, but bring additional guilt upon the souls
of careless ministers, how great must that guilt be? My brethren,
when our hearts are touched with thrilling sorrow as we linger over
the closing grave of some dear departed friend, what an additional
shock it gives us when the question, and perhaps the doubt, arises
in our minds as to the state of the soul gone into the presence of the
Judge. But if that doubt falls upon the heart of a minister of the
gospel, mingled with the further doubt as to his own care over that
soul while under his ministry, will any one attempt to declare what
his feelings are in such a situation, or say by what human standard
his sorrow may be measured ?
The bare apprehension that souls may be lost under our ministry
is a consideration that ought to stir to its de«pest recesses the con-
science, and to rouse to its highest state of anxiety and effort the
mind of every minister of the gospel. If there be a spring of com-
passion in man’s soul, here is an occasion that should cause it to well
forth in abundant streams. If there be any love to Christ, here is
an object on which it may be fully exercised. If there be any desire
for the glory of God, here is an end for which every effort may be put
forth —the saving of a soul from death, and bringing it to the enjoy-
ment of eternal glory.
My brethren, let us think of those souls that have gone down to
the abodes of despair, and of those that have found their place
among the redeemed around the throne on high, and from their cases
reason as to our responsibility, and encouragement, in the work of
the ministry. Let us never forget that eternity and its realities are
at stake for our hearers and ourselves ; and pondering the awful im-
portance of these things, may we be constrained continually to seek
grace to fit us for faithfully feeding the flock, over which the Holy


tmo
fil 753
16
A/ comj
I J Ghost has made us overseers, and which Christ hath purchased with
his own blood.
If successful in this, how great an increase of joy and happiness
shall be ours, when we discover that we have been instrumental in
removing prejudices, errors, and evil habits, to the conviction, and
conversion, and saving of their souls. Together with them we
share in the blessings of the gospel here, and together we shall be
partakers of the inconceivable and imperishable joys of heaven. Let
us lay these important truths deeply and seriously to heart. Let us
carefully study times, seasons, and circumstances in the state and
condition of our people, that we may be qualified to meet every case
with the necessary and suitable treatment, direction in darkness,
comfort in affliction, hope in the misgivings of despondency, and
encouragement in the prospect of death; Let us, in the spirit of
the apostle, become all things to all men, that we may be honored
in gaining and saving some. And, above all, let us never cease to
pray that the Redeemer’s grace in all its power and sufficiency may
be given to them and to us; and that when we take our departure
hence, there may be ministered unto us, and to them, an abundant
entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ,
Yet a little while, my brethren, and our last effort in the work of
the ministry shall have been put forth, and no further opportunity
given us of redeeming the deficiencies of the past. Yet a little while
and our bodies shall mingle in darkness and forgetfulness with their
kindred dust in the lonely grave. Yet a little while and he who
shall come will come, and will not tarry. Now, can we look to the
closing scene with any degree of comfort, or assurance, believing that
our work in the office of the holy ministry has not been altogether
in vain in the Lord 1 Blessed is that servant whom the Lord, when
he cometh, shall find so doing.—Amen,
A. J. SMITH, SWANSTON-STSEEX, MELBOURNE.




NICHOLS’ SERIES OF StTANOARD DIVINES-
FURIT-A-lISr IPBRIOD.
This Series will comprise the Compplete Works of T. GOODWIN,
T. MANTON, R. SIBBES, T. BROOKS, SS. CHAENOCK, Bp. REYNOLDS,
the Practical Works of D. CLARKSON a and T. ADAMS, and the Sermons
of S. WARD and H. SMITH.
This Series will he edited with great care, and be strictly limited to
Subscribers, to whom Six Volumes, deemy octavo, durably bound, and
averaging from 500 to 600 pages each, 'will be delivered for an Annual
Payment, in advance, of 245. The Subscription List will remain open at
245. till further notice.
The entire Series will extend to Sixty Volumes. The Works now
costing upwards of £BO, will be supplied Lor £l2.
In a few months the List of Subscribers will finally close, after which
Copies cannot be supplied.
Detailed Prospectuses may be had, amd sample volumes of the Series
seen, on application to
A. J. SMITH, Bookseller,
30 SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE
AGENT FOR THE PUBLISHERS.
RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY OF VICTORIA
AGENCY,
MELBOURNE SUNDAY SCHOOL DEPOT,
SCOTCH PSALMS & PARAPHRASES, IN ALL STYLES,
BIBLES, WITH PSALMS,
SHORTER CATECHISMS, WITH OR WITHOUT PROOFS,
willison’s mother’s catechisms,
Infants and Initiatory Catechisms, &c.
SCHOOL HYMN BOOKS-TJNION, BATEMAN’S, CURREN’S, &c., &(
A. J. SMITH,
IMPORTED, OF BOOKS & STATIONERY,
30 SWANSTON STREET, MELBOURNE.
