

PRICE, ONE SHILLING.
CjS the i
ORIGIN AND THE DESTINY |
(S?f &
ORIGIN AND THE DESTINY
<&}
C O IV! E T S ; I
§V ®hn»#e in the (Beltytic of the (Smth.
BEING
A CONCISE TREATISE ON THE NATURAL ECONOMY AND THE
TRANSMUTABLE ORDER OF THE PLANETARY SYSTEM.
0
£,
ILLUSTRATED WITH A DIAGRAM,
SHOWING THE OPERATION OP THE EARTH’S MOTION ROUND THE SEN,
C*/o
(St?
k
W
BY
|| JAMES MACDONALD.
g PEAHEAN.
OSMENT AND SON, PRINTERS, CHAPEL STREET.
/i* i 869.
S // 7x>




ORIGIN AND THE DESTINY
COMETS;
gl (JTtnmjc in the Ecliptic of tlic toffo.
BEING
A CONCISE TREATISE ON THE NATURAL ECONOMY AND THE
TRANSMUTABLE ORDER OF THE PLANETARY SYSTEM!
ILLUSTRATED WITH A DIAGRAM,
SHOWING THE OPERATION OP THE EARTH’S MOTION BOUND THE SUN.
JAMES MACDONALD.
PEAH R A N .
OSMENT AND SON, PRINTERS, CHAPEL STREET.
1869.






CAN CER
DECEMBER
fe> i» S 5
5


\ /
/ -K
0 WMw
-T x /
-J E
MARCH
Ju
FI
LI BR*
y Sketch for the Southern
Hemisphere, shewing the Earths
orbit
round the Sun, with the Months and names of the
Zod in eat
Sign s
,. or ranged in their proper order , hg which it map*
at so tic
seen
that the Earth is robbing for ej'er to the /fist
M. G ■?/




ORIGIN AND THE DESTINY
COMETS /
“God who in the immensity of the Heavens doth guide revolving worlds.
—VOLNEY.
TT may probably appear strange that these two singular
phenomena should be in any way connected.
The sciences, however, to which they belong have likewise a
singular connection, by which I will do my endeavour to link
them close together—the sciences to which I allude being that
of Astronomy and Geology, both of a very intricate nature, t o
one in consequence of the immense distance of the objects con-
nected with it from our researches; the other in consequence ot
the very indefinable nature of its secret operations.
The science of Astronomy, notwithstanding its very unattain-
able nature, seems ever to have kept in advance, and is more
reasonably written and conversed about among those who take an
interest in it than that of Geology, although there no doubt
still remains a great deal to be known concerning it, and what
is most likely, a great deal never to be known.
On the other hand, and probably in consequence of the more
approximate position of the objects connected with Geology,
a great many more lay claim to some knowledge concerning the
operations of that science ; which, however, being derived from
what they consider to be reliable sources, together with opinions
of their own, which in either case are generally considerably at
variance with the natural order of the operations of the science.
Thus, for instance, all material to be found in a state of rocky
formation is invariably considered to be in the act of being re-
lieved from an iron bondage to which it has been at some former
period consigned. Also, that all elevations upon the earth’s sur-


face have been thrown up by internal eruptions, and the lay of
the strata of the material, where it is practicable, is invariably
alluded to in support of the assertion.
It is no doubt difficult to remove opinions that have once got
rooted without having ever been doubted; still it might be ob-
vious, by a proper examination, that instead of the elevations
having been thrown up, had the adjacent land which is lower
been made to drop down, the same appearance as regards the lay
of the strata of the material would be presented, and indeed, if
properly examined, more evidence will be found in support of
the latter than of the former opinion. It has also been frequently
asserted that the land is gradually rising, both here and along
the coasts of other countries, and that in consequence it is be-
lieved that harbours at present navigable will ultimately become
unfit for that purpose.
I will certainly prove beyond a doubt that the land has all
grown, and still continues to grow, from a source and by a
cause which, however, it is scarcely ever safe to mention, but
which in the case of this earth must have become so tedious
a process as to be scarcely if at all recognisable; but
with regard to its rising, that is quite a diflerent thing;
however, allowing there to be a semblance of truth in the
assertion, I should like to know what difference it would make,
providing it actually transpired to be the water that was
receding —the probability of which might be proved, and indeed,
according to the statement of the harbours becoming unnavigable,
I should take it to be from the want of water that was meant.
About the beginning of the year 1842 an article in a newspaper
came under my notice, entitled “ A Change in the Ecliptic of the
Earth.” It was from the observations of a gentleman connected
with Tale College, who, without ascribing any probable cause for
such a change, seemed to consider it as being likely to lead to
some derangement in the present system of navigation. Having
read the article with considerable interest, and the fact that
there is no action without a cause having become almost con-
stitutional, xvas of course the first application. Having also
previously become partly acquainted with the ever-changing
nature of the elements of the world —a change that seemed ever
tending to the compression of its material, by which it had
already become rock almost to the vexy surface, either foi’med or
in a state of formation —I had therefore a good cause at hand
for the changing of its position.
It is not, however, necessary at present to enter into any
details concerning the formation of rock, further than to show
the natural consequences of that powerful operation to which the
whole of the material of the globe is for ever being subjected.
But in doing so a great many conflicting circumstances fre-
quently occur —problems somewhat difficult of solutioix—and
which, even to point out, it would be necessary to have recourse
to Nature’s own diagrams. The principle, however, that I


advocate, and which will be found to correspond generally with
the natural order of the formation of the earth, attribute to
all material at and nearest the surface a less solid form than that
which is under it; and although there may be some apparent
exceptions to that rule, they are all attributable to the convulsive
operations of the earthquakes of former ages, by which the whole
of the original economy of the formation of the earth has been
destroyed. Material that naturally belongs to the surface
thrown into enormous caverns and abysses into the very centre.
These immense apertures, the necessary consequences of the
consolidation .of its material. Therefore, at various depths may
be found material that actually belongs to more recent earthy
formation than that which may be found elsewhere nearer the
surface ; also, material of various formations thrown together
into heterogeneous masses, from which strange conglomerate
substances may be formed, and hence the reason of at least some
of the apparent discrepancies that may be found. In accordance
with such a series of investigations and coincidences, it also
became very evident that all the land that is^ lower than the
highest to be found upon the surface of the earth must have
sunk down, and finding it ever under the powerful action of
consolidation, by which, if its approximation to the sun was a
matter of conjecture, it became very evident that it must be
going somewhere ; and when, in accordance with that powerful
operation, it must be going somewhere, the next thing was
equally evident, it must also have come from somewhere.
In reviewing all these phenomena, it became obvious that the
sun must be subject to volcanic eruptions, by which a mass of its
most solid material becomes reduced to a gaseous or flaming
state, and is, in consequence, necessarily repelled to the very
boundary line of its realm. That is, a position all around the sun
where its repulsive influence is met by a similar description ot
influence from off similar orbs to itself, whose powers arc equal
to its own, and where their line of operation is defined, each
being kept in its position by the repulsive influence of each
other. The flaming mass thus repelled from the sun being one
of those luminous nebulae that we see occasionally and know by
the name of a comet. The singular appendage, known by the
appellation of the tail, which a comet must have for a time, is a
part of it not having arrived at its destination. It is the end of
the column of the flowing mass as it was repelled from the sun.
It must be borne in mind that as a comet is an immense
luminous mass occupying a greater space in the heavens than the
orb that repelled it, and therefore maybe seen to as great a distance,
consequently they may not all, nor perhaps any of them that we
have ever seen, belong to our planetary system. It cannot
approach to any body that is of a more solid nature than itself,
neither can it encroach upon the space that is allotted to any other
sun only the one from which it hath emanated, and to which, in
accordance with the compression of its material, it is absolutely


bound to return. Having become reduced to a gaseous or flaming
state, its expulsion from the sun was a necessary act, but as it is
also bound to cool again and consolidate, its ultimate return to
that orb will be equally necessary. In course of time, as it
rolls around the boundary line of the solar realm, a ball com-
mencing in its centre collects all the matter from around it as it
cools and consolidates, and thus a planet becomes formed. That
centre ball or planet, as it acquires magnitude, exercising its
repulsive influence over the mass, breaks it up into eight or ten
smaller centres all around it, which become its satellites. These
revolving round the planet, having their weight concentrated
upon it, kept out from it by its repulsory influence, but
being under the same consolidating process by their own weight
upon the influence, they come all in upon the planet during its
approach do the sun. Thus it is that we have our Saturn with its
seven or eight moons and rings, that have been the theme of
many a strange surmise, but which, like the halo round the
Moon on a hazy night, are caused by the light reflected in its
atmosphere, which is so dense as to actually have the appearance
of a material form, all of which has got to become a portion of
the planet smooth and regularly laid on, by which a ball of enor-
mous magnitude will be formed smooth and regular on its surface ;
but 'j'hile that condensing process, as it may be termed, is pro-
gressing on the surface of the planet, the powerful operation of
consolidation is at work in the interior. From the soft pulpy
mass, earths and clay become formed, which in course of time
is converted into stone and rock of the most endurable descrip-
tion, metallic substances of every kind, and ponderous masses of
crystalisation. But in consequence of all that manufacturing
of rocks and metals, immense cavities become formed, prodigious
apertures into which the water gets collected, these immense
caverns ever increasing both in size and number, until the
planet becomes unable to support the weight of its satellites,
which during eclipses of the sun break down its surface and
come in upon it. The repulsive influence of the sun on such
an occasion, together with the weight of the satellite, falling upon
he same place of the planet that having become scarcely able to
support the weight of the satellite alone.
As a planet in all its positions is ever under the same oper-
ation, namely, that of consolidation, it is unnecessai’y to par-
ticularise every position. It will, however, always be found to
have fewer moons as it approaches the sun. Those planets that
are at a greater distance from the sun than Saturn, must also
have a greater number of moons, but which in either case may
not be all distinguishable, in consequence of their immense dis-
tance and the extreme density of their entire mass. It is well
known that Venus and Mercury have got no satellites, and it is
also in the strictest accordance with the law of gravitation that
they are both covered with water, consistent with circumstances
that take place jmmediately'beforc and on the final approach of


the last remaining satellite. The present species of the inhabi-
tants of this earth never seem to have known positively of any
more than two moons, which were called menus. This earth was
then in the position at present occupied by the planet Mars.
There is, however, a slight mention made of five other menus
that existed previous to that which together with the thick dark-
ness spoken of that at one time brooded over the surface of the
earth and also that it was made from chaos, meaning no doubt the
immense density in which it was at one time enveloped; all of which
goes to prove that a species of intelligence must have existed
upon the earth back to the very position at present occupied by
the planet Saturn, all of which must have been handed down
through the various races that have existed upon its surface
by a system of oral communication. The approach of the last
satellite, or what perhaps may be better known by the coming
of the second menu which takes place in the present position
of this earth and during an eclipse of the sun, and upon which a
somewhat singular construction has been put, will be the cause
of a revolution in the whole planetary system. The planet and
its menu being on that occasion both upon the same column of
the sun’s repulsive influence, which becomes unequal to the
weight of the planet in consequence of its breaking down under
the weight of its menu, it will therefore run the column of
the influence right down towards the sun, meeting its menu,
which will also be coming towards it, when the concussion that
takes place will shake the whole mass under water, thereby mak-
ing the weight of the planet still more superior to the column
of the sun’s repulsive influence, it being necessarily a smaller
column is not able to bear the weight of the planet out so far
from the sun. On that occasion this earth will fall into the
position at present occupied by Venus —Venus will be repelled
into the position of Mercury —and Mercury into the sun. The
planet Mars with the perpetuation of our species, considerably
advanced upon it will fall into this position taking in one of its
satellites on the occasions thereby causing a deluge on that planet
similar to the one of which we have a somewhat interesting ac-
count, known by the name of Noah’s or Nuh’s flood, when the
fountains of the mighty deep were broken open and the waters
under the earth let loose from their caverns, with the rocks and
the mountains falling into the subterranean abysses. All the
other planets will also fall in a stage nearer to the sun, each
taking in one or more of its satellites on the occasion, when .all
Avill go on again as usual until the natural course of events bring
round a similar disaster.
With regal’d to the sun, which can be no other than a ball of
brilliant metal, a diamond shining in the dark, whose surface
must also be covered with water, or more probably ice, it being
always the colder the nearer we approach it, and the dark spots
seen upon its surface are but immense islands that are neces-
sarily thrown up during the occasion of those eruptions to which


it is subject, and of wliicli the Aurora Borealis is a reflection.
It must be clearly enough understood that a planet could not
retain its position without water any longer than its surface re-
mained smooth and regular in the order of its original formation.
Whenever its surface gets broken down by the operations of
earthquakes or the approach of a satellite, the water acting as a
shifting ballast makes its surface somewhat round, establishing
its equilibrium which keeps it in its position. Ihe flaming material
when being repelled from the sun reduces a portion of the water it
has got to pass through to its own state of consistency, and brings
it off along with it holding it in solution, and is by far the
greatest portion of the mass when the material acquires
a sufficiently solid form, the water not giving out any
of that repulsive influence, is consequently not under the
action of compression. The comet rolls on the external surface
of its dense mass, bearing upon the repulsive influence of the sun.
and is ever under the action of compression by its own weight
upon the influence, which keeps it rolling and for ever approach-
ing the sun. Eventually the repulsive influence from off the
planet formed in its centre carries the weight of the whole mass
at a point beyond the circumference of its dense atmosphere,
upon which it then rolls, its satellites, forming a motion for
themselves in accordance with the compression of their material
by their own weight upon the repulsive influence of the planet.
‘ The universal basis of the whole system is repulsion, counter-
acted by weight and density of material.
In answer to the prevailing belief that when a stone or any
material body is thrown up in the air it is drawn down again by
the attraction of the earth, or that otherwise being once
set in motion it would go right away, although the idea is
still being taught, it is nevertheless a very ridiculous one. It is an
immutable law in Nature that material must have a resisting
medium equivalent to its weight to support it or material
will fall. Therefore, a stone when thrown up in the air is neces-
sarily brought back to the earth again by its own weight. The
force or influence applied to throw it away was superior to the
weight of the stone for the time being, but that force becomes
exhausted, and the weight of the stone brings it down to the earth
again.
The loose stone lies upon the surface of the earth in conse-
quence of its weight, but should we reduce it to the simple in-
gredients of its composition, the repulsive influences of the earth
will carry it right away until the power of the influences and
the weight of the material becomes equal, the power of the
influence decreasing with distance; but the weight of the ma-
terial —no matter what form it assumes —is for ever the same,
and being necessarily bound to cool again and consolidate by its
own weight upon the influence, it would ultimately return to
the earth again by its own weight.
As a further proof of the existence of a repulsive not an


attractive influence, —If from the top of a tower we drop an
iron ball simultaneously with a sheet of tin of precisely the same
weight the ball would be found to drop straight down without any
interruption, but the sheet of tin, finding a powerful opposition to
its falling, would have to come down in a zig-zag manner, cutting its
way through the influence similar to the manner in which it would
have to sink through water. From these facts it might also be
evident that if it was attraction that brought the ball down so
rapidly, the sheet of tin from its breadth of surface being exposed
to the greatest amount of it, would necessarily be drawn down
with greatest violence than the ball, and indeed so great would
be the adhesive power over the sheet of tin that we should always
have a difficulty in lifting it from the ground. _
Again, it is frequently stated that there is no such thing as
weight • ’that a pound and ton is all the same, and that a stone and
a feather may be made to fall together, always forgetting to state,
however, that before that can be accomplished the resisting
medium must be removed that otherwise prevents them from
falling together in consequence of the difference of their density.
The Repulsion of the Sun on the Laws of Gravitation ;
being- the Key to the Science of Astronomy.
The repulsion of the sun is the flow of an influence from off
every particle of its material, which, in course of time, would
surely diffuse it throughout space did it not meet with an
opposing influence of the same description from off surrounding
orbs equal in power and magnitude to itself. That is the in-
fluence upon which all material that becomes reduced to a gaseous
or flaming state is bound to ascend, and upon which it is also
bound to consolidate and return again. It is the secret power
that maintained the equilibrium of the universe.
To Explain the Sketch Showing the Operation of the
Earth’s Motion Round the Sun.
The small circle in the centre of the oval is intended to
represent the sun, and the oval the position \vhere the sun s re-
pulsive influence becomes equal to the weight of the earth ;
together with the months and names of the zodiacal signs arranged
in their proper order, by which it may also be seen that the eaith
is rolling for ever to the west.
The circle between the initials represents the earth, and the
half circle over —or,more properly speaking, under it—is intended
to show something of the form that its influence takes when met
by an opposing force sufficient to carry its weight; being a
section of an immense circle or radius of about 260,000 miles by
which the earth is rolled around the sun. Every round the circle
makes being one day, which carries the earth along its course over
1 630 000 miles each revolution. The earth is for ever embedded
in its own repulsive influence, bearing upon the influence of the
sun on which it rolls, and in the centre of its own influence it is


very much like unto the nave of a wheel. The earth is here repre-
sented as being in the sign Libra or month ot March, with the
sun in Aries, and being on its equator, which is its smallest surface,
it is consequently nearest the sun. As it rolls along to the west
the sun and stars come all to us from the east and set in the
west, and the sun is made to enter all the zodiacal signs in rotation
as they are in the heavens, which could not be accomplished in
any other way. Thus, by the earth rolling west through April and
May, it will place the sun in Taurus and Gemini. In June the
sun will be Cancer, and here the earth has its north pole bearing
upon the influence of the sun, with its south in darkness, which
give us our shortest days, and all north of the equator their
longest. In September the earth will be again on its equator,
with the sun in Libra; in rolling along into December it will
place the sun in Capricornus, and here the earth has its south
pole bearing upon the influence of the sun, with its north in
darkness, which gives us our longest days, and all north of the
equator their shortest. It may here be remarked that the earth
in coming from December to March and from J une to September
is bearing in towards the sun, falling on to its equator; but in
going from March to June and from September to December it is
being repelled from it and lifted on to its poles, which are its
largest surfaces, catching the greatest amount of the influence by
which it is repelled to its greatest distance from the sun, and is
the cause of its oval orbit.
The repulsive influence of the earth upon which the moon rolls
is also equal to the weight of the earth at a distance from it of
about 2G0,000 miles ; it therefore ever assumes the form of a
section of an immense circle bearing upon the influence of the
sun on which it rolls, and being ever under the action of com-
pression by its own weight upon the influence of the sun. Its
weight is consequently ever being made superior to the influence,
and is therefore depressing every column of it that it rolls upon
lower than the previous one, it being necessarily a smaller column,
is not able to bear the weight of the earth out so far from the
sun. The east side of the earth rising off the influence is always
lean, being the last that was compressed, while the west side
going down upon the influence is for ever projecting. The earth
therefore in rolling round the sun is ever on an incline, for ever
off its balance, and is consequently bound to roll to where it
came from.
I have already said that the moon is rolling upon the repulsive
influence of the" earth, and in consequence of the density of the
two bodies being precisely similar, the repulsive influence of the
moon by the weight of the satellite bears down the influence of
the earth to a position exactly half way between the two bodies,
at which position its influence rolls, and that is the reason why
the moon rolls round the earth every time it rolls round itself;
the circle formed by its own repulsive influence and that which it
forms of the influence of the earth being equal.


The weight of the moon depressing the water when it is over
the oceans is the cause of the tlowing of the tides, and the ebbing
is the natural result of the water again seeking its level when
the moon is over the land.
It is very evident that the hitherto existing theory of the
Law of Gravitation and the operations of the planetary
system is fast proving itself to be incorrect, and a new system
required. I have, therefore, ventured to bring forward the
system that will eventually prove itself to be at once clear,
simple, and self-evident, hoping the time is not far distant when
it will be fully appreciated. When the law of gravitation —
instead of being an empty sound, an inexplicable theory—
will become the absolute, definable, acknowledged basis of the
operations of Nature, when the planet, instead of flying
through space at the enormous rate of 68,000 miles an hour,
will be rolling along in easy motion by means of the great
expanse of its own repulsive influence bearing upon an equal
amount of the law of gravitation the repulsive influence of the
sun.
They could have had but little idea of motion and its conse-
quences who promulgated the theory of impelling the earth at
the enormous rate of 68,000 miles an hour —over 1,183 miles a
minute.
It is an incontrovertible fact that no material body, however
dense, could either fall or be impelled by any means whatever
at such a rate ; one tithe of the motion would throw the earth all
to pieces in an hour, or if even it could be made to stick together
it would become red hot in a very short time ; and moveover, it
being only about 25,000 miles round, would be whirled round
itself every twenty-two minutes.
M. Tremaux some time ago read a paper before the French
Academy, in which he says it is impossible that the Newtonian
system —which in no way explains the cause of the planetary
movements, and which only establishes an inconstant equilibrium
—can govern the world through a thousand perturbations, of
which the smallest, by constantly increasing, would end by up-
setting the equilibrium of all.
And, again, Professor Gustav Hinrichs, in a paper inserted in
the “ American Journal of Science,” No. 109, considers, in the
first place, the effects of resistance —referring to the evidence of
it in the case of Enche’s comet —and from his calculations de-
duces the following laws : —l. That with advancing age the
nearest secondary planet approaches its primary. 2. The entire
system of its orbitj becomes closer. 3. The regularity and
symmetry disappear more and more. 4. That at corresponding
ages similar systems must represent the same configuration.
From these it may be seen that all I have said, however
strange it may appear, is voluntarily forcing itself upon scientific
research.






