

s
s
s
\
(
t
i
)
J3nE JShILLING
ADVENTURES OF THE NEW GUINEA
PROSPECTING ASSOCIATION,
W. T. FORSTER. *
Jou. o{ ffUlcAUi 'J-w/b' j
H
! \
l \
/
I
t
JSydney
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. READING AND CO.,
BRIDGE STREET.




M& fi




• ' //
f&WML (huo/t * -f *
(fh-s < * . v
WRECK OF THE .
“ MARIA,”
OR ADVENTURES OF THE NEW GUINEA PROSPECTING ASSOCIATION.
CHAPTER I.
On the evening of the 25th of January, 1872, at seven p.m., the
Brig “ Maria” left Port Jackson. The “ Maria” was an American
built brig of one hundred and sixty seven tons register, and had
probably been a clipper in her day ; but being at the time more
than twenty years of age, and having been employed during her
latter years for the carriage of coals between Sydney and New-
castle, it would perhaps have been difficult to find a more
unseaworthy old tub anywhere in the Southern waters. She was
bought by the New Guinea Association, chiefly because she was
the best available vessel that could be obtained, considering the
limited means of the Company ; and also on account of the
majority of the members becoming impatient at the numerous
delays that had occurred, and being anxious to get away on any
terms, many of them having come from considerable distances,
and consequently having been put to great expense.
The New Guinea Prospecting Association was a Company of
seventy persons, formed for the purpose of making a Settlement
in the Island of Papua, and there prospecting for gold, which,
according to report, was plentiful ; it was also intended to make
some profit out of the adventure by trading with the natives, and
laying in a cargo of the usual articles of South Sea Island traffic ;
and some of the Company expressed their intention of per-
manently settling in New Guinea, and establishing a regular
trade with the Australian colonies, and perhaps also with China.
The Island, it is reported, abounds in all the usual productions
common to the islands of the Pacific ; and being of very great


extent, this latter plan appeared a feasible one, supposing it
possible to make a settlement, in spite of the climate, and, most
probably, hostile natives. Though, no doubt, the “ Auri sacra
fames ” was the chief inducement to the majority, there were
many tfl whom this was an entirely secondary consideration,
many who were attracted solely by a love of adventure, and the
field which was offered by so large and entirely unexplored a
region for scientific investigations.
Some delay had been occasioned by the Customs objecting to
clear the “ Maria,” on account of the number of passengers on
board, and after this difficulty had been overcome, we were further
delayed by the sudden defection of the Captain : in the end, we
were obliged to sail without him, taking our chief officer, Mr.
Stratman, as Captain : with a few exceptions, the passengers
appeared satisfied with this arrangement, although entirely
ignorant of the qualifications of the new Captain.
Under these circumstances, on the evening of the twenty-
fifth of January, 1872, we hoisted the signal for a steam tug, and
the “ Goolwa ” taking us in tow, we started down the harbour
with a light South-west breeze ; when just outside the Heads,
the “ Goolwa.” on board of which were a few friends of some of
the passengers, left us, and after hearty cheering from both
vessels, we bid adieu to Sydney harbour, and with all our canvas
spread, started for New Guinea. The breeze was, unfortunately,
very light. We made little more than three knots, keeping well
to the eastward, in order to gain a good offing.* The weather
continued favorable for two or three days, when we encountered
baffling winds from the North and North-east, which lasted,
varied occasionally by a dead calm, until about the fourth of
February: during which time the passengers for the most part
had overcome their sea-sickness, and had become thoroughly
accustomed to their new mode of life. The fare, though plain
and perhaps, rather rough, was wholesome, consisting chiefly of
salt beef, biscuit, and potatoes, with fresh preserved meat and
* Owing to the loss of his diary, the author has been compelled to give
a very cursory and imperfect account of the voyage up to the thirteenth of
February, but has had the use of some notes from that date, made by Mr.
Coyle, and fortunately preserved by him.


“duff” twice, and rice, pork and pea-soap once a week: this
ought to have been good enough to satisfy anyone, but of course,
as might naturally be expected among so large a number of men,
there were a few who grumbled at everything. The men in the
’tween decks—sixty-six in number —were divided into messes of
twelve in each, except mess No. six, in which there were fewer;
the occupants of the Cabin were five in number, consisting of the
Captain, Mr. Stratman; Chief Officer, Mr. Sonnichson ; Second
Officer, Mr. Andrews ; Dr. Tate ; and the storekepper, Mr. Goble
The four sailors paid by the Association, slept in the forecastle.
Thus it will be seen, that the total number on board the “ Maria ”
amounted to seventy-five men, perhaps rather too many for a
vessel of her size, but as there were three large hatch-ways, the
ventilation was very good, and so long as fine weather lasted,
there was nothing to complain of.
On or about the first of February, having sighted the steamer
“ City of Brisbane,” then on her way to Sydney, we signalled
her, and sent a boat on board with letters. We were at this
time off the Solitary Islands, and were much in the same position
three days afterwards, having been becalmed most of the time,
with a strong current setting to the Southward.
About this time a Southerly breeze sprung up, and freshened
to half a gale, which lasted two days, and then gradually moder-
ated. We made a very good run while the wind was strong,
averaging about eight or nine knots; and from this date, we
had Southerly -weather up to the twelfth or thirteenth, when we
were somewhere about 14° South Latitude. We experienced
some little annoyances during the first part of the Southerly
wind, as the weather was squally, with occasionally a good deal
of rain ; and our decks not being the tightest in the world, we
found it sometimes a little moist below ; but it was some conso-
lation to us, that we could get plenty of water without the trouble
of going for it, as it was only necessary to spread a water-proof
coat in some of the berths, and a few gallons could be obtained
in a very short time : some, however, might have objected to
drink it, on account of the decks being covered with tar, and
the quantity of coal-dust collected in the seams. When the
weather cleared, there was ample employment for everyone, in
drying clothes and cleaning fire-arms, most of which had a thick


coating of rust over them. The vessel had much the appearance
of an old-clothes shop for a day or two after the rain, as every
available rope was hung with clothes of all kinds, bedding, and
blankets of every conceivable color.
There seems to be a scarcity of sea-birds on this coast; we
had seen but two or three species during the voyage.
After the wind had moderated, we had very enjoyable
weather for about a week ; the breeze preventing our feeling the
heat, which might otherwise have been disagreeable, as we were
now well within the tropics. The pleasantest time of the day,
however, was after we had finished tea, when a select party of
us would collect on the after-hatch, and, there reclining, would
beguile the time with conversation, and from time to time with
a song from those whom nature had endowed with voices. At
other times I would play on my flute, airs, reminding me of home
and friends, with great pleasure to myself; —but, as I was only
a beginner, to the doubtful amusement of others. Alas ! many
of those with whom I spent such pleasant hours, —hours never
to be forgotten, are now no more, the waves of the Pacific roll
above them, or their whitening bones lie on an inhospitable shore.
They little thought, when they left their homes so full of bright
hopes, that they were leaving them never to return, that they
were leaving a vacant place at their firesides never to be refilled,
that the sorrowing friends they left behind them would see them
no more, till the sea gives up her dead. May God comfort
them!
CHAPTER 11.
On the thirteenth of Pebruary, the Southerly breezes that
had so long accompanied us, came to an end, for on the afternoon
of that day, the wind had shifted round to the North-west, and
we were again doomed to have a week of adverse weather and
contrary winds : indeed this may be considered as the com-
mencement of our misfortunes, for had the fair winds continued,
in another day or two we should have been in sight of the
promised land, on the shores of New Guinea. It was very dis-
heartening no doubt, having so nearly reached the end of our


journey, that we should meet with such unfavorable weather, but
perhaps it was for the best, perhaps some of us who have been
saved from the wreck, might have fallen victims to the miasmatic
influences of a tropical climate, or to the hostility of the savage
races inhabiting the island to which we were bound.
As the evening advanced, the breeze freshened; our course
was about N.N.E. and we scudded along carrying all sail, at the
rate of six knots. The wind during the night increased slowly,
and towards morning the sea rose, and the sky was covered with
dark clouds. About eight a.m. one of the sailors, who had been
at some work on the main-topgallant yard, came down and
reported it quite rotten, and said that he could push his knife into it
up to the handle ; he advised the mate to take the sail in, but this
was not done : about a week previous to this, another of the sailors
had said the yard was unsafe, notwithstanding which nothing
had been done to it. Not many minutes after this, away went
the yard, parting right in the centre ; The Captain rushed out of
the cabin, on hearing the noise, and “ all hands aloft to get in the
sail ” was the cry, this was safely managed after some trouble,
and the broken pieces of the yard lowered. This was our first
casualty, but unfortunately, not the last; it was, however, a most
fortunate thing that it happened when there was no one aloft, as
in that case it would most probably have resulted in the loss of
one or more lives. The wind continued to freshen during the
day, and at eleven p.m. or thereabouts, our fore main shroud was
carried away ; towards evening, as it was blowing almost a gale,
and the sea rising very fast, the Captain took in sail, and we
staggered along under close-reefed top-sails and fore-topmast
staysail, Shortly before twelve o’clock that night we were
startled by a crash, and coming from under the shelter of the
after-hatch, I beheld through the darkness a mass of broken
planks amidships on the port side : it appeared that a heavy
sea had struck her on the weather side, and staved in about
eight or nine feet of the bulwarks ; there was very little damage
done, but in the darkness of the night and amid the howling of
the wind and sea, it looked much worse than it really was. We
at once set to work to clear away the broken pieces and stow
them below, but no attempts were made to repair the damage
till next morning, with the exception of fixing the rail in its


place. The Captain soon after this put the vessel before the
wind, and ran during the remainder of the night.
The morning of the fifteenth broke, but there were no signs
of the gale abating, however, owing to the quantity of rain, the
sea, though very high, was not as rough as it would otherwise
have been. The day was spent chiefly in repairing the broken
gangway, securing the boats more effectually, and mending and
strengthening the rigging, which was in a frightfully rotten state,
many of the shrouds having parted some of their strands, and
pieces of the dead eyes having broken away in various places.
I may as well mention here that Coyle and myself, though
both landsmen, had taken sailors’ duty from within a few days
after we left Sydney, both for the sake of something to do, and
also with a view to learning something about the management
and working of a ship, so that at the time this gale commenced,
we had learnt enough to be occasionally of some little use.
Friday, the sixteenth, was also spent in endeavouring to
repair and strengthen the rigging, &c., as well as the weather
would permit; wondrous to relate, we had some coils of new
rope on board, notwithstanding our general bad outfit. If I
remember rightly, we were hove to, during the greater part of
the day, and from this time, we were alternately running and
laying to during the remainder of the gale, according to the
Captain’s judgment as to which was the best under the circum-
stances. The weather continued much the same, and as night
closed in, it was indeed gloomy: the rain pouring in torrents
during the greater part of the time, the sea running mountains
high, the wind roaring through the rigging, and the night dark
as Erebus. At about one a.m. a heavy sea again struck the old
brig, and this time the damage was of a more serious nature, as
the tiller was carried away from the rudder-head, and with it the
wheel and gear. Fortunate it was, we were hove to, or in all
probability the decks would have been swept fore and aft, and
nothing more would have been heard of the “ Maria ” and her
crew. The carpenters, assisted by Hargrave, at once set to work
to repair our disaster, and by fixing blocks and tackle to the
rudder, the vessel was kept on the wind, while they were em-
ployed in getting the remains of the old tiller out, and adjusting
a new one, which was done by means of one of the handles of the


windlass being fixed in the rudder-head as a tiller, to which a
rope and blocks were fastened. This answered the purpose
tolerably well, but made the steering so much more difficult that
two hands had to be kept at the wheel, or rather “ steering
apparatus.”
Daylight of the seventeenth dawned on a very dreary-looking
scene ; the sea was as high as ever, dark murky clouds being
driven across the sky by the never-ceasing wind, the vessel
rolling tremendously, hove to under the lee clew of the main-
topsail ; and the bulwarks on the port side presenting much the
appearance of a piece of wicker-work, as boards were carried
away here and there along the whole side. Down below, the
scene was perhaps still more miserable; main-deck, tables,
berths, and everything in and under them, simply deluged with
water ; stools upset, water-kegs rolling about, and the passengers
lying about in every imaginable position, on the floor, and under
and on the tables, most of them wet to the skin, trying to get a
little sleep. In fact, there were only two or three dry berths in
the ship, with the exception of those in the forecastle, two of
which last, Coyle and I, being in the port watch, were lucky
enough to occupy when the starboard watch turned out.
During the whole of the day and night the gale still blew;
but on Sunday morning, the fifth day, appeared to abate, though
very slightly, so the Captain set the foresail, and tried to sail on
the wind; however, before very long, the sail split right up to
the yard : on this occasion, two men being at the helm, and the
rest of the sailors otherwise employed, the first mate, Hargrave,
Solomon (assistant cook), Arkley (sailor), and myself, went up
and took it in: this was Ihe only time I had been aloft in rough
weather, as I considered I would only be in the way, when there
were sailors to do it.
Several of the passengers by this time had had enough of the
gale and the “Maria”; and a number of them formed a depu-
tation to the Captain, requesting him to run for the nearest port,
when they would leave the vessel, and give up all share in the
expedition. The Captain submitted the question to the .members,
and after some deliberation, it was decided to run for Moreton
Bay ; there were other reasons also for making some port, which
were, that the “ Maria ” after so much bad weather, required


repairs which could not well be managed at sea; besides which,
more materials were necessary, such as ropes, timber, &c.
Towards evening, the wind had again increased, and was
blowing as strongly as ever. We continued to run with the
wind about a point on the starboard quarter, most of the time
having our fore-topmast staysail set, but sometimes running
under bare poles; the sea was very high, but the old “ Maria ”
proved that she had some weatherly qualities, for had she not
behaved wonderfully well, in fact far better than was expected of
her, she must inevitably have been swamped. During this time
the lee rail was frequently under water, and our port side was
becoming more like a basket than ever, and a great many pieces
of the rail had come away on the starboard side. At about four
o’clock on Tuesday morning, when Wraight (one of the sailors)
and myself were at the helm, the assistant Storekeeper ran aft
with the cry that the tanks had all got loose : this was a very
startling announcement, as if such were the case, they would very
soon knock a hole in the vessel; however, I did not believe it,
knowing that he was a man who was very easily alarmed; and it
proved on examination that two of the tanks had slightly shifted,
but there was no very immediate danger. Soon after this,
it was reported, that the vessel had sprung a leak and was sink-
ing, and when Sanderson and Coyle came to relieve the wheel
(for which I was not sorry), I found that they were baling the
water up in buckets, and passing them up the after hatch, the
pumps being hard at work in the meantime; before very long
the water was got under, and from this time the wind began
gradually to moderate, and to veer round to the southward.
As the wind shifted, so were we obliged to alter our course,
as we had no choice but to run before it, and the Captain
decided to make for Cleveland Bay, which was the nearest port
we could steer for under the circumstances. About seven o’clock,
a glass of grog was served out to all hands, and soon after this,
orders were given to get the large whaleboat on board, as the
weight of the boat on the davits was gradually breaking away
the rail on the port side ; the first mate got up, and began to
undo some of the lashings : meanwhile Wraight was leisurely
walking towards the place, when the Captain sharply ordered him
to get up in the boat at once and help the mate, which Wraight


refused to do, saying it was not safe, the Captain again ordered
him to go in rather strong language, and after some time he
complied. With some difficulty the boat was safely got in and
housed on deck: after which the Captain called Wraight to
account for his conduct, he replied that he considered his life
worth as much as any other man’s, and saw no reason why he
should endanger it, and added that he always did his duty when
he could, and did not require to be bounced into it, whereupon
the Captain struck him in the face, they then grappled with one
another and a fierce struggle ensued. I was standing close
beside them at the time, so caught hold of them and endeavoured
to part them, after some little time they mutually let go their
hold ; Wraight then told the Captain that he would not hit him,
that he had a better remedy than that, but that he should not
forget it, saying also that it would be useless for the Captain to
fight him, as he could hammer a dozen like him, at the same time
shaking his fist in his face : the Captain immediately rushed to
the rail and seized a heavy belaying pin, whereupon Wraight
drew his knife, and a deadly contest seemed imminent; but
fortunately there were several people between them and they
were both persuaded to retire. The Captain, however, on reach-
ing his cabin, sent for the sailor and put him in irons ; this
excited a great deal of indignation among the passengers and a
number of them went aft and demanded his release, which after
some words the Captain consented to do; had he not complied
with this request, it is not unlikely that something approaching
a mutiny would have been the result, as the men looked very
much inclined to take the law into their own hands, and there is
no doubt that the Captain was in the wrong.
The wind continued to moderate, and the sea gradually went
down, to our great relief, as we were able to make things a little
more comfortable below, on this and the following day or two,
the “ Maria ” again had the appearance of an old clothes shop ;
very few had a dry stich either on their backs or off them: there
were one or two only who had watertight boxes, and who were
consequently comparatively well off, my own box fortunately had
very little water in it, and ray ammunition had escaped the
general soaking.
On the 21st I took my firearms on deck to clean them, my


rifle was in a frightful state of rust outside, but the inside was
tolerably free from it, my other 'arms were not much better;
cleaning the rifle alone occupied me the whole day, so its con-
dition may be better imagined than described. We were now
able again to have our meals comfortably, without the danger of
having soup, tea, &c., upset all over the deck, or perhaps into
one’s lap, in fact we were frequently on very short rations during
the gale, as owing to the brig rolling so much, the boilers would
hold little more than half the usual quantity.
The crew were employed during the fine weather in repairing
damages generally, and in bending a spare mainsail, as the one
we had been using required a little mending. At a little after
two p.m. on the twenty-second we sighted rocks on the port bow
at a distance of several miles, a few minutes afterwards, there
was a cry of “ Breakers right ahead ” and “ Hard up helm ” was
the w r ord ; our course at this time was about West, and when the
reefs were sighted, we stood away to the North-west leaving the
rocks to the Southward. The Captain said that this reef was
marked on the Chart as doubtful, which seems rather extra-
ordinary as it is of very large extent, and some of, the rocks very
high ; he also stated that its position was wrongly laid down on
the Chart, or otherwise that his Chronometer was wrong.
Nothing of any importance occurred during the two following
days, but in the middle watch on Saturday night, or rather on the
morning of Sunday the 25th, just as Coyle and I had made
ourselves comfortable in the Cook’s galley, we were again
startled by the cry of “ Breakers ahead ” ; we rushed out and
went aft: Sanderson at once went to the helm to help Wraight, as
it was no easy matter to move it, and Coyle and I began to brail
in the trysail, in this we were assisted by the hands at the pumps,
and the ship was quickly got away before the wind, again leaving
the reefs to the Southward. This was the commencement of the
Barrier Reef. About two hours afterwards breakers were asrain
sighted ahead, and we again stood away to the northward ; some
hours elapsed before any more breakers were seen, but during the
remainder of the day we saw little else but white water, sighting
reef after reef in quick succession, so that I should imagine that
by the evening the ears of every one on board must have been
thoroughly accustomed to the cry of “ Breakers ahead.”


A little before sunset we came in sight of land to the westward,
I went aloft and joined Davis (one of our watch) on the foretop-
gallant yard to have a good*look at it ; as far as the eye could see,
lines of breakers were visible on either side, while immediately
ahead of us appeared to be clear water.
After nightfall, the Captain, instead of anchoring according to
the usual custom when in such a dangerous neighbourhood,
continued sailing, first on one tack, then on the other; mean-
while a good look-out was kept, and reefs were reported from time
to time; and at a quarter past three on the morning of the 26th
we were awakened by a horrible grating sound, followed by a shock,
and a few minutes afterwards by another. We got out of our
berths, Wraight calling out at the same time, “ There she is at
last boys, hard and fast,” we went up, and found every one else
on deck, Coyle, as he afterwards told me, went aft and saw the
Captain, who was making preparations for leaving the Vessel,
and asked him our distance from land, he told him fifteen miles, and
thought with the help of good rafts every one would be saved :
some little time after this, when leaving the Vessel, the Captain
asked Coyle to come with him, Coyle then came below to me,
where I was busy collecting some of our valuables and putting
them in a bag, and asked me if I would come in a boat, as one
was then about to leave the vessel, I answered that I did not
intend going in any boat, upon which he said that he would not
either. I did not know at this time that the Captain was leaving,
but came on deck, and saw the boat, our largest whaleboat, about
a hundred yards away ; it was too dark at the time to see who
was in her, bat I was told it was the Captain and a crew who had
gone to bring assistance. I went below again, and put on a coat
and waistcoat, filling the pockets with various small articles, such
as fishing-lines, knives, Ac., then collecting my arms brought
them and the bag, which was filled with all the most valuable
and useful things belonging to Coyle and myself, on deck. On
going below again I found Goble and Dr. Tate getting the stores
on deck, so I gave them a hand: meanwhile those on deck were
commencing to make rafts, but unfortunately they required some
one who was able to give proper directions ; the first mate, who
ought to have superintended the work, was worse than useless, as
he became almost mad through fear or excitement, and rushed


about the decks, giving orders, it is true, but in a voice so hoarse,
that they were perfectly unintelligble : the remainder of the men,
with a few exceptions, behaved remarkably well, comporting
themselves in an orderly manner, and only waiting to be told what
to do, indeed for the most part, they were as cool and collected as
if nothing whatever had happened. A few of us, among whom
were Coyle, Hargrave, and Crommelin, stole a few moments to
satisfy the inner man, and adjourning to the roof of the Cabin, set
to work on some preserved meat and biscuits : every body could
get as much as they wanted to eat, as all the provisions were on
deck; there were also some cases of brandy opened, and a glass
served out to any one who wanted it, one or two only drank too
much.
While these minor events were taking place the boats had
been got out, and lowered, some provisions put into them, and a
hand or two left in charge ; several others however, among
whom I noticed Dr. Tate, got into the boats soon after, but were
peremptorily ordered out by one of the sailors; Goble also came
forward with the Chronometer and Charts saying, that the mate
had told him to get into the boat with them, but the sailor told
him he could put them in if he liked, but he should not go
himself.
During this time the construction of the first raft had been
proceeded with, the trysail boom and gaff had been got down,
and these, with the broken pieces of the Maintop-gallant yard,
were put over the side, and lashed to the body of the raft, which
was already in the water, and was composed of the two main
deck ladders and some parts of the hatches and galley ; there
was a great deal of rope used in the construction of it, but as
there were landsmen employed as well as the sailors in lashing
the parts together, the knots made by the former would not be
likely to hold very well, which to a great extent, no doubt, will
account for what happened afterwards. The other raft though
smaller, was much more compact, there were no spars in it, but
in place of them, some large planks were nailed firmly together,
of these the framework was composed and across them were
placed parts of the hatches and other boards, and the whole
securely lashed together. The bulwarks were knocked out for
the purpose of launching the rafts. The larger one had on it


eleven persons, among whom was Coyle, who asked me to come,
this I promised to do, hut said I would not leave the vessel till
she went down, as there would then be plenty of time to embark;
both rafts, the smaller one also being full, were then passed astern
and made fast with a hawser.
The vessel meanwhile had been fast sinking, for an hour or so
before, the water had begun to pour into her, in consequence, it is
supposed, of the stern post having been carried away, and when
the second raft was launched, her deck was on a level with the
water’s edge. Some time previously the ship’s boat with two or
three men in her had got loose, and had drifted away some dis-
tance to leeward; when this was observed, the other boat was
manned by some sailors, and sent to her assistance; when about
to start Goble also got in and went with them, while the boats
were away the old brig sank, heeling over to port as she did so ;
a groan of agony, that I shall never forget, arose upon the morn-
ing air, as the waves rushed over her, and I with one or two others
sprang off the stern and made for the rafts, which having been
cut loose at the moment she began to go down, were rapidly
drifting away : according to promise, T swam for the one on which
I had left Coyle, and the Captain’s steward, whose name was
Morris, also joined us, increasing the number of persons on the
larger raft to thirteen, while there were twelve on the other. The
w’haleboat had now reached the other boat, taken her in tow
and made for the wreck, and although we were between it and
them, the boats passed at a distance of fully one hundred yards,
appearing studiously to avoid us ; this however did not trouble us
much, as we were all thinking of the poor fellows, that we could
still see struggling in the water, though unable to render them
any assistance ; we saw the boats pick up some of them on their
way, but they passed by others, and went to the vessel, of which
the topgallant masts, and part of the starboard quarter only were
visible; on all of these places we could see persons clinging ; we
saw the boats then take people from the wreck until they appeared
to be filled, after which they started for the shore, and in little
more than half an hour they passed out of sight and we saw them
no more.


CHAPTER 111.
When the rafts were cut loose from the wreck, they were both
fastened by a hawser, this we were obliged to cut soon afterwards,
as the rafts were bumping against one another, and sometimes
one getting partly under the other, to the imminent danger of
both : however both drifted along at no very great distance apart,
and for some time we were within speaking distance. We had
two oars with us, which Coyle had taken care to provide, one of
these we cut in half, making a hand paddle of the blade, the other
we rigged up for the purpose of steering or attempting to do so ;
there was also an oar on the other raft. I may as well here
enumerate the occupants of the rafts, as I shall have hereafter
frequent occasion to refer to them by name : they are as follows :
Tanner, Taylor, Hazelbrook, Morris, Sanderson, Haydon, Phillips,
Smith, Ingham, Bardon, Siddell, Coyle and myself, on the larger
one ; on the other were, Polin, O’Malley, Hardy, Dalgleish,
Hooker, Angel, Thomson, Heakman, Rowe, Parnell, Williams
and Grant. Sanderson, the only sailor with us, was rather the
worse for liquor when we left the wreck, and was in a sleepy
state for some little time, but as the day wore on began to recover
his senses : with his assistance we endeavoured to hoist a sail,
having wdth us a tent belonging to Coyle and myself, in which
were some blankets and clothes : this we rigged up, making use
of the handle of the oar which we had cut in two, for a mast;
however, we could not manage it very well, as it was with the utmost
difficulty we could prevent it from slipping through the raft, and
Coyle stood supporting it with his shoulder the greater part of the
time. About this time we saw a man in the water, whom we
made out to be Grant, at a distance of more than a hundred yards
to windward of us, he appeared to be trying to reach our raft,
but of course we were utterly unable to help him, and before very
long the poor fellow went down. Owing to some of our passen.
gers saying that the sail was doing more harm than good, we took
it in after some hours, and began to paddle with the blade of the
oar, and a piece of board that we split off the raft: two men were
also paddling on the other raft, they appeared to have more
control over it than we had over ours, in consequence of it being


much lighter. Occasionally we were close enough to speak to
one another, they seemed very desponding, hut we told them to
keep a good heart, as we had seen land right to leeward, which we
must reach, as we then imagined we should, before next morning.
The breeze had been gradually freshening during the day, and
by night had become very squally ; before it grew dark we
several times cheered to the other raft, being then about a quarter
of a mile apart, and waved our hats, they at first responded, but
the last time took no notice of us, and appeared to have lost all
hope ; we lost sight of them at nightfall and never saw them
again alive. Some of our men also despaired, when we lost sight
of land : Morris was the first to show signs of giving up, he said
he was sure that we would never see the morning light, and that
we were drifting right out to sea: Tanner and some others also
looked very dispirited. However, although things wore a very
gloomy aspect, there was no reason for giving up so soon, as
there was really no immediate danger ; we certainly were in a
most uncomfortable position, wet through, with nothing to eat or
drink, but we had the raft under us, and the sea though gradually
rising, was not then very high. One or two of us then began
singing, with the view of keeping up the others and our own
spirits, this we kept up at intervals during the night, occasionally
shouting loudly to the others to keep awake and cheer up ; latterly
we were answered but seldom. Towards morning the squalls
became more frequent and more severe, so we left off paddling
(there were only two of us doing so) and singing, and made some
sort of shelter of the tent, as it was bitterly cold, sitting as we
were up to our waists in water, with the driving rain pelting us
mercilessly, and from time to time the waves washing completely
over us. The sea by this time had begun its work of destruction,
the lashings were slackening, and our raft had already commenced
to come to pieces.
The morning of the 27th broke, and with its cheering rays the
spirits of the most desponding rose for a while; it was still
squally, and a heavy sea running. At the first dawn we saw no
signs of land, but as it became brighter observed some islands to
leeward at a distance of perhaps five miles : these I subsequently
ascertained to be some of the Family Group. We at first imagined
we were going straight towards them, but the current was taking


ns past to the Northward. We began to repair onr raft, and get
everything in order, but we found that lashing planks, spars, &c.,
together in a sea-way is no easy matter, especially when the work
has to be done under water : the tent had been given to Haydon
to make fast till we should require it, but he let it go overboard,
so our sailing was at an end, and the blankets and clothes had
long since been washed away: Haydon had also let a Tomahawk
drop overboard before this. We had still however an axe, so with
this we set to work to make paddles enough for all hands, and
though I thought it useless, we tried to direct the raft towards
the land; and at all events if it had no other, working had the
effect of keeping the blood in circulation, and also of keeping us
awake. Later in the day, many had given up paddling, although
we constantly urged them to stick to it, more for their own sakes
than for any other reason: Coyle worked the whole time like a
horse, and Phillips also worked well: Smith, who was an old man,
was getting rather weak, but did not for a moment give up hope,
and did his very best the whole time. After we had past the
islands we could still see land to leeward, but at a great distance;
Taylor began to lose his senses, and in the course of an hour
or so, became quite insane ; towards evening however he appeared
to be getting better, but never quite recovered: Morris also
became insane the same evening.
This the second night of our voyage on the raft was by far
the worst time we experienced, the sea was much higher, and
the weather more squally than ever ; moreover the raft was in a
very shaky condition, and getting worse every minute, as we
were quite unable to do anything in the way of repairing at
night. Shortly after dark, the raft, which was tossing about
terribly, turned bodily over, and of course every one was thrown
into the water, in some way or another I got right under, and on
reaching it, was seized by some one who was then holding on to
it, and pulled down by him, I straggled hard to get back with
him to the raft, but without avail, and finding that we were both
sinking rapidly to the bottom, began to try and get free, this by
a violent effort I succeeded in doing, and again made for the
surface, reaching the raft safely, but with very little breath to
spare. I sat for a minute or two on the boom to recover myself,
and then got on to the body of the raft where the others were


then sitting: Coyle then told me that he had been calling for
me, and, getting no answer, thought I was gone. On counting
our number, we found that one was missing, which proved to be
Tanner, I believe he could not swim, and he was in a very weak
state: Hazlebrook was apparently lifeless, though on the raft,
we took his shirt off and began to rub him, to try and restore
animation, but at this moment the raft turned over again, and
we were obliged reluctantly to let him go; we never saw him
again; Morris was also missing after the second capsize.
From this time until near morning we lost no more of our fel-
low passengers, though again and again the raft turned over, often
two or more times in succession : when this happened the greater
number of us would follow it round, climbing up after the manner
of a treadmill, while others would swim and wait till it became
steady; this latter plan I generally adopted, after a very
narrow escape I had, on which occasion I owe my life to the
promptness of Coyle in answering my call; it happened in this
way: in climbing round the raft, both my legs from above the
knees downwards got jammed in between the ladders and hatches
of which it was composed, I struggled ineffectually to free myself,
and the edge at which I was caught then going down, just as my
head was the only part above water, I shouted to the others to
come back, thinking that this would perhaps slacken the strain,
Coyle was the only one who did so, but it had the desired effect,
and I got free. Towards morning Taylor was drowned in the
same way as the others had been, and Sanderson became insane,
and not very long afterwards died, partly from exhaustion, and
partly from having swallowed a great quantity of salt water, after
he had lost his senses.
At daybreak on Wednesday the 28th, we saw the islands
which lie off Double Point to leeward of us, and much closer
than the land on the previous morning; Coyle, Phillips and I
began to repair as well as we could, after which we made some
more paddles, as of course we lost them all during the night;
it was rather a difficult operation, as Pardon had dropped the
axe overboard the day before, and we had nothing left in the
shape of tools but a marlinspike, which was twisted up in some
rope, with this and one of Coyle’s boots we managed to split up
part of one of the hatches, we then set to work paddling as


before, and kept at it throughout the day. We were unable to
make the islands, the current carrying us right past them. The
wind and sea moderated greatly during the day, so that we were
rather more comfortable than before, the raft discontinued its
revolutions, and nothing of any importance occurred during the
day, we continued drifting along the shore at a distance of about
two miles; night came on, and the moon rose: and the raft
turned over for the last time about an hour or so before we
reached land: on this occasion we had to assist some of our
comrades on board, as they were quite helpless, in fact, Ingham
had been out of his mind the whole of the day, and we with
great difficulty prevented him from lying down in the water, and
others were rapidly losing their senses. About midnight we
saw that we were getting very close to shore, and drifting
straight on to a white sandy beach ; there was no doubt about it
this time, I gave a loud shout and tided to rouse them from their
lethargy, it seemed to have little effect, most of them not appear-
ing to hear me. As we got into shallow water, we were struck
two or three times very heavily by the breakers, and shortly
afterwards grounded on the beach. I tried to get Ingham to
rouse himself, but could not, so took him in my arms, and rolled
with him into the water ; it cost me much trouble to drag him
out of the surf; I had to get him along by inches, holding his
head above water when the rollers came in, and pulling him
along the sand when they receded. In the meantime a some-
what similar scene was taking place on the other side of the raft,
for Smith, being very little able to help himself, was being
assisted by Coyle in the same way; the others, though some
were very weak, managed to get ashore themselves. We then
dragged Ingham and Smith up above high water mark, and
disposed ourselves to sleep under the shelter of some bushes.
CHAPTER IY.
I awoke at daylight the next morning, and started off into the
bush to look for food, it had rained several times during the
night, so that there was no lack of water, but strange to say I did
not feel either hungry or thirsty, although we had been three days


and nights without food or drink; in fact there were only a few
of our number who had felt any thirst; this I suppose was
attributable to our having been immersed in water the whole
time. I, however, discovered that I was much weaker than I
thought, and also that my feet and legs were covered with cuts
and very much chafed, this would not have interfered with my
movements to any great extent, had there not been two cuts on
the sole of my left foot, which were rather painful, I wandered
about in the bush the greater part of the day, but could find
nothing eatable except a small slug, which I devoured raw. On
returning to where we had passed the night, I found Ingham
alone, shortly afterwards Phillips, Haydon and Smith came up,
bringing with them a fruit of the Pandanus or Screw Palm : this
is an oval shaped fruit, about the size of a large Pineapple, and
yellow when ripe; a little sweetish juice may be obtained by
chewing the seed cases. They told me that Coyle had gone away
with two Blacks, and that they were unable to keep up : Coyle,
however, afterwards informed me, that he asked Haydon and
Phillips to accompany him when going towards the blacks, and
they refused. We passed another night in the same place as the
first, making a shelter of boughs, as the weather still looked
rainy.
The next day we started along the beach southward, and
about midday saw Coyle coming back, accompanied by some
blacks, the latter stopped at some distance from us, and Coyle
came on alone; he told us he had passed a very comfortable
night at their camp and had been fed by them; he gave us one
or two fruit that he had picked up under a tree near the camp.
These were about the size of a small apple, oblong in shape, and
perfectly white; they are I believe the fruit of a kind of myrtle.
Coyle now proposed that we should all go back with them: this
we at once agreed to, but the blacks, on seeing us coming, started
off, and we could not overtake them; Coyle and Phillips,
however, followed them, and stayed away another night, the rest
of us being either too weak or lame to walk so far. I forgot to
mention that Bardon and Siddell had left us on the morning after
landing, without our knowledge, and we saw nothing of them for
eight days: we considered that this was not quite right, but
were not much surprised at such behaviour from them, especially


Siddell, as lie had shewn himself both selfish and lazy while on the
raft, and never would do a stroke of work, or make himself useful
in any way, unless he was absolutely compelled.
I saw this morning a few pigeons, they were a small kind, of
a light brown colour. There were very few birds about here,
black and white Cockatoos being the most common. I also
observed an Osprey, of which the back and wings were a dark
cinnamon colour.
But to return to my story. We slept that night in some
deserted huts built by the blacks, and were more comfortable than
we had hitherto been, as we had a waterproof covering for our
heads. These huts or gunyahs are oval in shape and built of
long pliable twigs, which are stuck in the ground, and tied so as
to form a succession of arches, this framework is then thatched
with palm leaves and tea tree bark, with one, two, and sometimes
three entrances, according to the size.
Coyle and Phillips returned next morning, bringing with
them a few more of the white fruit, when eating them, they told
us, that on reaching the camp they found it deserted, they how-
ever slept there, and in the morning hearing blacks coeying,
they looked out and saw several of them at a distance with arms
in their hands, they therefore judged it better to decamp.
After some deliberation we decided on turning our steps
southward, and trying to reach Cardwell, for we imagined, and
rightly, as we afterwards found, that we were North of that town-
ship. We started then along the beach, and made a short stage
the first day, as the sun was already high, and Ingham and Smith
complained of fatigue, we slept in another deserted hut, of
which there were many along the shore, and next morning made
an early start; after a mile or so we came to a rocky point,
which took us some time to get round in our disabled condition ;
again long stretches of sandy beach, and then we came to the
remains of a fire ; we searched about, thinking that perchance the
blacks had left something eatable; Coyle picked up what -was
apparently the stem of some bulbous or Araceous plant and bit
it, he instantly dropped it, and gasped out “ water.” Picking up a
large shell we were carrying for drinking purposes, I hobbled off
to a small creek, which was fortunately at no great distance and
got some, he met me as I was hurrying back, and began to


rinse his mouth ; for the space of nearly an hour he sat by the
creek and continued rinsing his mouth, the foam running from
his lips; we sent the weakest of the party forward in order to
lose no time, while Phillips and I waited till Coyle was ready to
accompany us. He described the sensation as a most intense
burning, he was apparently in great agony, and could not speak
without difficulty for the remainder of the day. Soon after this
we came to the shore of a pretty little bay, which we found to be
the mouth of a large river, subsequently named Gladys river by
Captain Moresby of the “Basilisk” ; on the shores of this bay we
picked up some small red fruit, about the size of a cherry ; this
I believe to be a species of Eugenia, it bears the fruit on the stem,
these I thought harmless on tasting them, so we collected as
many as we could find. At the head of this bay we discovered
a tree bearing fruit, also red, but smaller than the last mentioned,
it had a pleasant acid flavor, and inside a hard flat stone, resem-
bling a plum stone in shape, we ate a few of these, and took some
with us : further on we picked up a few nuts which are known
as the “ Queensland Hut,” these are pleasant to the taste, and
grow with a green husk, not unlike a walnut, but the shell is
exceedingly hard. We still kept on our way, and had now reached
the river, we agreed to make our way along the bank, to see if
It was possible to cross higher up, so went on through dense
Mangrove Swamps, until we were brought to a halt by a large
tributary; it was getting late, we therefore left the swampy
ground, and turned into the bush, where we fortunately found
another deserted camp, in which we slept.
There were numbers of mosquitoes here, as might have been
expected, in the vicinity of these swamps, indeed it rather sur-
prised me that we had seen none before, there were, however,
numbers of March flies on the coast, but a different variety from
that in the neighbourhood of Sydney. One kind of Mangrove
here, bears fruit as large as a Shaddock, filled with seeds, each
enclosed in a hard pulp.
Before it grew dark, Haydon read a chapter from his Bible,
which he had managed to save, (I lost everything out of my
pockets but two knives) and from this time, one or other of us
read a chapter or two every morning and evening. We rose at
daybreak, after a good night’s rest, had a breakfast of the few


fruit we had brought with us, and agreed that as we could not
cross the river, we would go back to the coast and try and live
there, till found by some vessel, feeling sure that we would never
be given up until a thorough search had been made. We had
not gone far when we heard some blacks cooey, Coyle and I who
were in front, pushed forward through the bushes, and saw two
men and a boy a little way from us, we beckoned and made signs
to them for food, they understood us apparently, and motioned us
to follow them, we did so till we came to a small tributary of the
river, over this they ferried us on a raft made of Banana stems,
and then led us on till we met two other blacks, and handing us
over to them, returned to where we had found them. Our new
friends had fishing lines in their hands, plainly shewing on what
errand they were bent, they started with us in the same direction
we were ourselves travelling, and after going a few miles came
to their fishing ground, they first caught a few shrimps for bait,
they then walked out into the sea up to their waists and began
their work. When the tide rose too high they desisted, having
caught about a dozen fish, some of them nearly a foot in length ;
there were two kinds, one a species of bream.
They gave us about half a fish each, and I think we enjoyed
it more than anything we had ever tasted, at least I can speak
for myself. Our meal concluded, our dark friends got up to go
away, and Coyle and I prepared to follow them, we asked the
others to come as it was our best chance of getting food, but
they declared they could go no further that day, so we started
Avithout them. Our new friends’ names were ISTewyunggor and
Weimah, we tried to get them to repeat ours, but they made a
very poor attempt at it. Weimah started on considerably in
advance of us, and ISTewyunggor, who was an old man and rather
ugly, stayed and escorted us. We did not care much about his
bad looks, however, as we knew he had some cooked fish stowed
away in his basket, and we kept on worrying the old chap till
he “ forked out ”; he evidently did not intend to lose by his
good nature, though, for he immediately began gobbling it down
as fast as he could, handing us small pieces at a time, however
we did not let him alone till his basket was empty. These
baskets are made of split cane, and are very prettily and symme-
trically formed ; they have large funnel shaped ones five or six


feet long made of the same material, for the purpose of catching
shrimps, these look like immense extinguishers. We went on,
after devouring all the old fellow’s fish, till we reached the camp,
where there were several gins and piccanninies; they made us a
fire at a little distance from their own, and we slept soundly till
morning. Mr. Weimah, however, thought fit to relieve me of
my coat, for under a pretext of arranging our pillows more com-
fortably, he abstracted it from under my head, and arranging
Coyle’s as a pillow for both, quietly walked off with mine. I did
not miss it till daylight, so dextrously had he managed it; in
the morning I vehemently accused him of stealing it, but he
would not understand me. However I forgave him his misdeeds,
for he brought us soon after daybreak, a parcel of shrimps nicely
cooked; we ate some and kept the rest for our companions.
While enjoying our breakfast the blacks started away unnoticed
by us, until they had gone a considerable distance, we went after
them, but came to a halt when we reached their fire, for we
observed that it was heaped up, consequently there must be
something cooking, we scraped away the ashes and unearthed
several large parcels made of palm leaves, on opening one we
found it full of shrimps, we tied it up again and carefully covering
them all, sat down at a little distance to await their return.
The blacks came back in the afternoon, and we immediately
began the same game we had practised so successfully the even-
ing before with old Newyunggor. They gave us a parcel of the
shrimps, larger than the previous one ; after eating a few, Coyle
started with the remainder to our mates, while I stayed with
the blacks to superintend their movements, as we did not mean
to lose sight of them any more.
They started soon after to the same fishing ground as before,
and I went with them ; the other four and Coyle were there
waiting for us. The fishermen were not so successful as on the
previous day, however they caught a few, and making a fire by
rubbing together two sticks, they proceeded to cook them. This
time they only gave us two small bream, which had to be divided
among six, so that we had rather a scanty dinner, however
Haydon and Phillips had been back as far as the Bay for some
more of the red berries, they had brought back a few and also
some white fruit.


While we were dining, the two blacks had quietly stolen away
without giving us any warning, evidently intending to give us the
slip, but Coyle and I started after them, although they were a
good distance away. When we came near where they were
camping, we saw a large party of blacks sitting round their fire,
one of them came forward, he proved to be one of those whom
Coyle had first met; as usual we immediately began making signs
for food, he motioned us to follow him, and he led us to where he
had before taken Coyle, a little south of Cooper’s Point. We
found them camping in the open air at some distance from their
huts. There were fifteen or twenty in this lot, including children,
they appeared glad to see us, and welcomed us heartily, inviting
us to sit down and partake of their supper, which consisted of a
moist whitish substance made from the Moreton Bay chestnut.
This bean in its natural state contains a strong purgative, as with
other Leguminosae, this they extract by baking, and soaking in
water, after which it is sliced very fine with a shell, and again
soaked ;it is very tasteless stuff. There are also several nuts and
roots which require to be prepared in a similar manner, and are
all equally tasteless. We slept soundly, notwithstanding that
one or two of the blacks were singing a dreary monotonsus song
the greater part of the night.
These blacks are a very diminutive race of men, and it is
little to be wondered at, considering what they live on: very few
of them attain the height of five feet six, and their limbs are ex-
tremely slight. Their weapons also are very poor, their spears
are made of light wood tipped with hardwood, and roughly poin-
ted, in some there is as much or more hardwood than light; they
point them by charring them in the fire, and then scraping them
with a shell: their most formidable weapon, though a very un-
wieldy one, is a kind of wooden sword; this is generally from
five to six feet long, and about five inches broad, with a small
handle about three inches in length : their shields are about three
feet long, and ten inches or a foot in breadth. There was a very
old man in this camp with white hair and beard.
The next morning we had another meal of Moreton Bay
Chestnut; they gave us plenty of it, but it is very unpalatable.
We shifted down to the beach and reclined under a large spread-
ing tree; none of the blacks went away for food, as they had


plenty of the white stuff with them. Coyle and I this morning
ate a handful each of a kind of bean which grew in large quan-
tities along the shore, we noticed that the blacks did not eat it,
but were not warned by this; however we suffered for our
temerity, for after the space of about two hours, we were both
taken very ill, with violent pains in the stomach, and vomited a
great deal. About midday the blacks drew our attention to a
small vessel sailing to the northward, we made a large fire, and
put green bushes on it to make a thick smoke, but the weather
was very squally, and she passed without seeing us; we after-
wards heard that it was the “ Coquette,” a cutter from Cardwell.
Soon after she had passed out of sight, we were joined by our
four companions, they had also seen the sail, and done every-
thing in their power to attract attention, but without success.
We slept that night in some gunyahs on the beach, the blacks
going to their camp in the bush. In the morning they rejoined
us, and crowded into our huts, as it was raining heavily. They
succeeded in stealing two of Ingham’s shirts (he had three) and
then made off. Later in the day we were surprised to see Bardon
and Siddell approaching us along the beach, the former was
looking very ill. We were very glad to see them alive, for we
had given them up as lost, not having seen them since we landed,
and feeling sure they had not crossed the river which had
barred our southward journey; nevertheless, we censured their
conduct in having left us without telling us of their intentions.
About an hour before sunset, some of the blacks motioned to
Coyle and me to come with them ; we did so, and were followed
by the remainder of our party. Crossing a small river which
empties itself immediately south of Cooper’s Point, we began
climbing that rocky promontory, the blacks went up the rocks
like monkeys, even the gins, with their babies on their shoulders,
seemed to have no difficulty, but we, in our disabled condition
got on very slowly : we shouted to Smith, Ingham, Bardon and
Siddell, who had not yet crossed the river, to go back as we
thought the path was too steep for them ; they did so, and
Hay don, Phillips, Coyle and I, went on with the blacks; they
were soon all out- of sight but one, who stayed to escort us.
This was the worst ground we had been over as yet, the path for
upwards of a mile, being up and down rocks, varied occasionally


by short stretches of sand, but unfortunately for ns, these were
few and far between. The rocks on this coast are all apparently
of volcanic origin, which accounts for the richness of the soil and
the luxuriance of the vegetation, but they were singularly devoid
of shell-fish of any kind, it was only in places that oysters or even
perriwinkles were to be found, and the few that we saw were
extremely small. About sunset we had left the last of the rocks
behind us, and passing a small camp on the beach, were con-
ducted a short distance into the bush to another; this was the
largest we had yet seen, and consisted of about a dozen huts,
some of them very large and comfortable. On reaching it, an
old fellow with a broken nose came out to meet us, he was a
pleasant looking old chap, and seemed very glad to see us ; he
took possession of Coyle and myself, and led us into a hut newly
thatched, and the floor was strewn with fresh grass; we were
not sorry to see such comfortable quarters, as it had rained a
good deal during the day and there was every appearance of a
wet night. When we were seated by the fire they brought us
bananas and yams, and the old man produced some small cockles
and proceeded to roast them. The bananas were in appearance
like the kind known as the Sugar Banana, but they are full of
black seeds : there is another kindg rowing in this district,
like the Plantain, but much smaller, also full of seeds. After we
had eaten these, we were taken out and formally presented to a
number of strange blacks, who were just returning to camp, they
embraced us cordially and appeared pleased to see us. After
this introduction we returned to our hut and spent one of the
most enjoyable nights we had yet experienced.
The next morning it was still showery : after breakfast, Coyle
went with some of the blacks a short distance into the bush to
get fruit; they came back with some of a bright green
color, about the size of a large plum; the flesh is yellow, with
four or five black seeds in the middle : the blacks roast it and
eat it hot, but when perfectly ripe is very good raw : it has a
slight bitter flavor.
The tree which bears this fruit is very handsome, and grows
in dense scrub on the sides of ranges : this scrub is in some
places quite impenetrable, being composed of vines and creepers,
and several kinds of canes, some covered with thorns, these reach


the tops of the highest trees; it is impossible to force your way
through them without cutting them. The trees themselves, were
for the most part, quite unknown to me, some of them are very
beautiful. I noticed but one species of Eucalyptus, very scarce.
Another strange circumstance, was the absence of animal life in
this region, we saw no traces of any large animal but Native dogs,
the foot-prints of which we occasionally saw on the sand, and the
remains of two large rats. There was not even an opossum or
iguana, and we only saw one snake, that the blacks had killed, we
hoped to have some of it for supper, but were disappointed.
In the afternoon we went to the beach with the blacks, it was
then low tide ; they went into the sea, and began groping in the
sand looking for cockles ; when the tide rose, they came out of
the water, and making fires, began to cook their spoil. After
eating a good many, we went back to the camp, had a few more
cockles, and went to bed, but not to sleep, for, one of the blacks
being musically inclined, gave us a song : it was a long one, he
sang the first part in our hut, it occupied him several hours, he
then adjourned to the hut in which Phillips was located, and went
on with it for his edification till daylight; he accompanied his
voice by beating two sticks together. Coyle had had a good deal of
pain in the big toe of his right foot for two or three days before
this, and it now began to show signs of inflammation, and became
so painful that he could scarcely walk.
We were awakened at daylight next morning by a great
commotion in the camp, and a loud shouting and jabbering, on
looking out, we saw some of the blacks rushing wildly about; two
of them had spears in their hands, each of these were struggling
with another, whose intention evidently was to prevent their
fighting. Several spears were broken in their struggles ; and
they afterwards seized their wooden swords and shields, but were
still restrained by the others : after a considerable time they
appeared to be pacified, and returned quietly to their huts, and
the noise subsided. We were now able to ask for our breakfast,
they brought us a few of the green fruit, but very little, as they
seldom keep much food until next day, except in the family
gunyahs, where there is generally some put by for the children in
the morning: the little fellows were very good to us, generally
bringing us half of what they had.


As usual, we were unsatisfied, and on asking for more one of
the blacks motioned me to follow him; I did so, and afterwards
found that some others were bringing Phillips in the same direc-
tion ; they led us to the beach, and along it for about a mile,
when we came to another small river, which we were unable then
to cross, as it was high tide: our escort swam it, and we waited
two or three hours, when one of them returned and led us over ;
the water was up to our waists, and the current pretty strong, but
our friend gave us the end of his spear to hold, and we got over
safely. He led us to where other blacks were cooking some food ;
we fared very well, for they had yams, bananas, fern roots, and
some small crabs. Meanwhile some more of them were employed
fishing for shrimps; they did not get many, but these were a
pleasant addition to our banquet. The blacks then left us, with
the exception of one man and a boy, who remained to take care
of us ; this man had a small palm leaf parcel, which we had been
curiously observing for some time : he now took hold of it, and
led us a short distance to some rocks. He then carefully washed
out a small hollow in the stone, and filling it with fresh water,
opened his parcel: what was our suprise, when we saw that it
contained a nest of ants and ants’ eggs, as they are commonly
called, —they are however really pupae or chrysalides. He
emptied them into a basket, and commenced mashing them with
his hand, letting the juice run through into the pool of water.
When he had expressed all the moisture, he began eating the dry
mass left in the basket, giving us all a share ; when we had finished
this, we began to drink the water, which was as white as milk.
This preparation had a very pleasant flavor, with a slight acid,
somewhat resembling limejuice, and had evidently been reserved
to the last as a great delicacy. These ants are of a pale green
color, about half an inch loug, and stingless, they are I think
found in dead wood. After our repast was concluded, we went
to a large hut near the mouth of the river, and made ourselves
comfortable for the night.
This was a family camp, most of the blacks having gone to
another in the bush; with us there were only two men, two or
three women, and six or seven children. We always found that
we were far better fed under these circumstances ; the gins and
piccaninnies were very kind, giving us plenty to eat.


Soon after breakfast next morning, Hayden appeared on the
opposite bank of the river, accompanied by some blacks. They
left him there till the tide was low enough for him to cross,
when one of them went back for him.
We passed the day in much the same way as the previous
one, faring just as well, but in the evening were conducted to a
hut in the bush, about two hundred yards from the beach ; this
was the largest we had seen, it had three entrances, and was
about seven feet high in the middle. There were three fires in
it, and about twenty occupants ; we were rather crowded, but as
it was a wet night, were very glad of the shelter.
On the following day we decided to leave our good quarters,
and go back to see how Coyle was getting on. We stopped at
our friends’ hut on the beach to wait for low tide ; while there,
the women and children caught some small fish, that had been
left by the tide in a shallow pool : we had a good meal of them,
eating them whole, after roasting them on the coals. In the
evening we crossed the creek escorted by a larger number of
blacks ; we however made signs that we did not want them, and
they went back. When we reached the camp where we had left
Coyle, we found it almost deserted, there being now only a few
blacks and their families there. Our four companions whom we
had left south of Point Cooper, had arrived shortly before we did,
and stated that Smith and Ingham had been maltreated by the
blacks. We were rather puzzled to account for this, as we had
received nothing but kindness at their hands : the only solution
I could arrive at, was that they had failed to understand their
signs, and consequently had done something to displease them.
As soon, however, as they had started in our direction, the blacks
had left them alone. There were thus eight of us depending for
support on a very small party of the natives, a burthen we had
endeavoured to avoid by distributing ourselves among them.
Fortunately however this evening there was no lack of food,
the chief article being the fruit, or rather seeds, of a kind of
ginger ; these have a very pleasant sweet taste. I have been
since informed that there are fifteen species of this plant in this
part of the country.
Coyle’s toe had become much worse during our absence ; he
was suffering great pain in his foot and leg, and was scarcely


able to move ; be had however been well cared for while we were
away.
We were about ten miles north of Gladys River, and five or
six from where we had first landed ; the blacks appeared to be
gradually shifting to the northward, apparently as the food
became scarce.
On reaching the beach next morning,—the morning of the
twelfth of March, 1872, a day ever to be remembered, —I heard
some blacks shouting, and on looking at them, saw them pointing
to the sea; following their direction, I described the masts of
a vessel from six to eight miles to the northward, near the
Frankland Islands. I shouted to Haydon and Phillips, who
were some little distance behind, and we commenced making a
fire to attract attention. Smith and Siddell soon afterwards
joined us, and after sending Siddell with the blacks to look for
food, as he was too lazy to work, three of us went up the hill
and made another fire. When there, we made the vessel out to
be a Man-of-War; we then felt sure it was the “ Basilisk,” as
we knew that she had been up at Cape York. After going
round the Prankland Group, she steamed slowly past at a dis-
tance of three or four miles, and went out of sight round Point
Cooper. We then came down the hill on to the beach where
we had left Smith, Haydon meanwhile bewailing onr hard fate.
After about half an hour, she again appeared in sight, and
anchored immediately opposite us. It was now about midday,
and we anxiously watched her for another hour or so, waving
our shirts and coats ; when to our unspeakable joy, we saw a
small speck a little distance astern of her; this we knew must
be a boat, and as soon as she came near enough to leave no
doubt that she was coming in for us, we fell on our knees on the
sand, and offered up thanks to God for our deliverance. Mean-
while, I had asked Phillips to go back to the camp, and bring
down Coyle, Ingham, and Bardon; they arrived on the beach
just as the boat grounded, and Captain Moresby and his crew
jumped out and welcomed us. I should think that meeting will
never be forgotten by any of us ; never did I feel such pleasure
in grasping an honest English hand as at that moment; although
we had been so kindly treated by our black friends, and although
we had never given up the hope of being rescued, yet now that
we were saved, I was almost unable to realise it. The thought


uppermost in my mind at that niomGnt was, that I would soon
see again those who were most dear to me on earth, and who
perhaps were thinking they would see me no more ; and that in
a short time they would receive intelligence of my safety: in
fact some of us would have cared little about our sojourn among
the blacks, could we only have let our friends know that we
were alive.
CHAPTER Y.
Captain Moresby had brought ashore with him a bottle of
wine ; this proved a great boon to the weaker of our party,
indeed we were all glad enough to get it, though I felt at this
exciting moment equal to any exertions. We tried to get the
blacks to taste the wine, but they would not touch it; we then
accompanied Captain Moresby to the camp, a few blacks coming
with us. These poor ignorant creatures appeared to rejoice in
our joy, though expressing sorrow at our departure ; they had
embraced Coyle most affectionately, when he left them on hearing
of the arrival of the boat, many of them crying bitterly. After
taking leave of them, we embarked on board the Gig, and in
about an hour reached the “ Basilisk ” ; Captain Moresby then
sent back the Gig with a bag of buicuit and some preserved
meat, as a reward to the blacks for their kind behaviour to us.
This mark of kindness they richly deserved, for in all probability
we should have starved but for them. They would always, when
travelling with them, give us a helping hand, or go into the bush
to get a walking-stick, if any of us were without one.
We were heartily welcomed on mounting the deck, then
taken below and clothed in respectable garments, for our own had
suffered considerably from the rough treatment they had under-
gone, and most of us had lost our hats and boots.
When our toilet was completed, we found dinner awaiting us
in the ward-room, and sat down to perhaps the most delightful
meal we had ever tasted, after which we went on deck, and
indulged in asmoke, another luxury we had long been deprived
of. The rest of the evening was spent in recounting our
adventures, and in learning the fate of our fellow-passengers in
the Maria.”
We then heard for the first time to our surprise of the murder


of the Captain and two of his crew by blacks at Tam O’Shanter
Point, not many miles south of where we had been living on such
friendly terms with others. We at first conjectured that this was
because the natives with whom we had been living, had had no in-
tercourse whatever with whites ; but that this was not the only
reason, was proved by the subsequent discovery of the murder of
seven of the poor fellows who had started on the other raft, on
the southern side of the mouth of Gladys River. We had been
on the northern shore of this river on the third day after landing,
but were unable to cross; we had, however, met blacks there,
who treated us in the kindest possible manner ; and these men
were evidently in the habit of crossing, as they had both rafts and
canoes. The only solution, therefore, that I can arrive at, is that
the occupants of the other raft, had made no attempt to conciliate
them, but had endeavoured to live on their own resources : the
blacks, being naturally shy, would then never make any advances,
but would look upon any strangers as intruders, and consequently,
as enemies.
The smaller raft was found by the “ Basilisk’s ” boat, under
command of Lieutenant Smith, the day after we were picked up ;
and lying near it were the bodies, or rather skeletons, of two
men; these had died, apparently, from exhaustion, soon after
being washed ashore. Captain Moresby, meanwhile, not knowing
of this discovery, as the boat had been away the previous night,
had continued his search as far as Fitzroy Island, thinking that
perhaps, the other raft, being lighter, had drifted to the north of
where we were found. Seeing no signs of any white men, he
returned, and steamed as far as Double Point, where he anchored
to await the return of the cutter, which came on board a little
before midnight. The next day, another search was made in the
vicinity of the little raft, but no more discoveries resulted.
Captain Moresby had asked me to go with Lieutenant Smith on
this occasion, to try and get some information from the blacks;
we succeeded in getting hold of an old man in a canoe up the
river, but could make nothing of him.
On this day, the fourteenth, the body of Williams had been
discovered, at the entrance of Mourilyan Harbor, which is
the mouth of a river emptying itself at Double Point. He had
been most cruelly murdered, and his was the only body that
could be identified, and Dr. Goodman of the “ Basilisk ” was


of opinion that he had not been dead more than thirty hours.
The six bodies afterwards found by the “ Governor Blackall,”
were in too advanced a stage of decomposition to be identified.
On Friday, the fifteenth, the “ Basilisk ” left Double Point,
and in the evening reached Cardwell. We were at last enabled
to send the intelligence of our safety to Sydney, and were
informed that the “ Governor Blackall,” under command of
Lieutenant Gowlland, was expected the following day.
On hearing this, Captain Moresby decided to await her arrival
at Cardwell, and to keep us on board till then. His kindness was
fully appreciated by us, as we were in far better quarters than we
could hope to find in the township, and I for one, shall never forget
the old “ Basilisk ” and all that were in her, both for the timely
assistance rendered to us, and the hospitality received on board.
On Saturday, then, we remained in Bockingham Bay, and in
the afternoon, Dr. Goodman and Lieutenant Mourilyau took me
with them on a shooting excursion to Hinchinbrook Island ; but
unfortunately the tide was so low, that we could not get close
enough to the beach, and were compelled te return with only two
Curlews.
The “ Governor Blackall ” was now in sight, and while Cap-
tain Moresby and I were dining, she was reported to have anchored
less than a quarter of a mile further in shore. Shortly after this,
she sent a boat on board : Lieutenant Gowlland was announced
and entered the cabin ; and to my great surprise and pleasure,
just behind him were a number of my relations and friends. I
will not attempt to describe the meeting ; suffice it to say, that
it was a joyous one for all of us. They declared that they were
not going to let me out of their sight again, so took me back with
them to the other steamer.
The next day, being Sunday, Captain Moresby kindly asked
me on board the “Basilisk,” to be present at service; as he intended
returning thanks for our merciful preservation. After this, we
were all shifted to our new quarters on board the “ Governor
Blackall,” and started with some native troopers on board, to re-
new the search for the missing men. It was during this trip that
the six bodies above mentioned were found; and there now only
remained two men unaccounted for, but no traces of them were
discovered. It is quite possible, when we consider that five men
were lost from the larger raft, that at least two of those on the


smaller one did not reach the shore; however this may be, the
exhaustive searches of Captain Moresby and Leiutenant Gowlland,
leave no doubt that there were no living white men in the
neighbourhood.
While in the vicinity of Point Cooper, a few of us went ashore
with some blankets and fish-hooks, presented by Mr. Sheridan,
the Police Magistrate of Cardwell, as a reward to the blacks for
their kind treatment of us ; but unfortunately we could not find
them ; evidently they had been frightened by the black troopers,
who had been there the day before: however we left the articles
at their camp, and have every reason to believe that they received
them eventually, as there were very recent traces of them.
After spending a week in the search, we returned to Cardwell,
and then taking on board the men who had gone in the boats,
started for Sydney. We had a very pleasant trip down, with
beautiful weather the whole way; but some of us began to feel
the effects of our exposure : all being more or less attacked by
fever, and many having bad ulcerated sores. Coyle’s toe was now
healing, but very slowly; it had been an extremely bad case, for
Dr. Goodman told him, that had he been another day without
medical treatment, in all probability he would have lost his toe.
I was struck with the beauty of the Islands, known as the
Whitsunday Group, through which we passed on our southward
journey. We entered the passage shortly before sunset, a time
which greatly enhanced the beauty of the scene. These Islands,
picturesquely clustered, are for the most part very precipitous,
while groves of lofty pines ascend the sides, and cap the summits
of the hills, with here and there gentle declivities clothed with
grass of the richest green.
After leaving these, no objects of peculiar interest presented
themselves ; and the remainder of the voyage passed without any
events of importance occurring ; the time passed very pleasantly,
the kindness of Lieutenant Gowlland, and the gentlemen accom-
panying him, adding much to our enjoyment.
At about nine o’clock on the evening of Thursday, the 28th
of March, we arrived in Sydney, greatly rejoiced to see it again :
and thus ended our adventures, and the .New Guinea Expedition
of 1872.
J. Beading Oo„ Printers, Bridge Street, Sydney.




7'kfp
A / C£tJf
I
*
4
*
I
I
%
r
I
i
