

THE
GREAT WAR
Our Fallen Heroes’ Children
Greater Australia.
1914-1915-1916-1917-1918
NEW SOUTH WALES
“They died; to live imperishably in our hearts, achieving
grandly, sacrificing nobly, their souls are God’s; their
deeds our race’s long inheritance.”—F.W.
[?]
BY
T. G. ADAMSON.
To
Colonel A. G. Farr,
Deputy Comptroller,
Repatriation,
N.S.W.


“Pure religion is to visit the fatherless and widows in
their affliction.”
A.I.F.
Particulars of Two Families whose Fathers
are Fallen Heroes, who were killed
in battle, France, April, 1918,
(a) Soldier’s widow, with seven children.—
Girl 10J years, boy 9$, girl 7£, girl girl 5J,
boy 4, boy 2.
(b) Soldier’s widow, with seven children.—
Girl 15 years, girl 13, girl 12, boy 10, boy 7,
boy 5, boy 3.
Sixteen souls in two families!
Sixteen overwhelming reasons for all Aus-
tralians to unite in the great and noble cause,
in caring for all Soldiers’ Children and being
a Father to the fatherless.
“These are the martyrs, and their blood the seed
Of nobler futures. 'Twas for us they died;
Keep we their memory green.”
L.L






THE
GREAT WAR
Our Fallen Heroes’ Children
Greater Australia.
1914-1915-1916-1917-1918
New South Wales
“They died; to live imperishably■ in our hearts, achieving
grandly, sacrificing nobly, their souls are God’s; their
deeds our race’s long inheritance.”—F.W.
BY
T. G. ADAMSON.
To
Colonel A. G. Farr,
Deputy Comptroller,
Repatriation,
N.S.W.
SYDNEY:
William Brooks & Co., Ltd., 17 Castlereagh Street.
1918. '


FOREWORD
Foreword by HON. W. A. HOLMAN, Barrister-at-Law,
M.L.A., Officer Legion d’Honneur, Premier New South
Wales.
Premier’s Department, Sydney,
13th August, 1918.
Dear Mr. Adamson,
You have invited me to write an Introduction to your
scheme for the future care of “The Nation’s War Chil-
dren.”
Tht first paragraph of your Grand Objective—To see
that not one soldier’s or sailor’s child is neglected or over-
looked, no matter what the conditions are, even unto the
remotest part of Australia—is all the introduction and all
the recommendation which it needs.
The Nation unhesitatingly demands that every possible
recognition and reward shall be given to those who return
to their homes after the fighting is over. But what of
those who can never return?
We honor our fallen dead, and their deeds of valor; but
how empty will be this honor if we fail to watch over and
care for the children they have left behind them. It
should never be possible for one of them to truly say, “My
father gave his life for his country; what has his country
done for those he held most dear?”
Yours very truly,
W. A. HOLMAN.
“Australians! Brothers! Have us in remembrance.
Rear your sons to follow the road we died to keep clear,”
—Helen M. Thompson.
“To the men from the land of wattle and sunshine, who
suffered and died for the World’s Freedom;
.To our sons, brothers, and mates,
Salute!”
“You cannot have the world as it was.”
(Lloyd George, “Times,” London, 24/6/’18.)


DEDICATION.
THE FALLEN HEROES’ CHILDREN.
Lovingly dedicated to the Fallen Heroes’ Children, in the sure hope
that Australia will lovingly care, educate, and train them, by the writer,
who was fatherless at two, and whose mother and five sisters and
brothers were dead before he was 10 years of age, at Edinburgh.
—T. G. ADAMSON.
Nemingha, Tamworth, N.S.W., June-July, 1918.
GRAND OBJECTIVE.
(a) To see tllat not one Soldier’s or Sailor’s Child is neglected or over-
looked, no matter what the conditons are, even unto the remotest part
of Australia.
(b) Need, the" only qualification.
(c) To reach the Australian Public, arouse enthusiasm for the loving
care,, education, and training of these children, through the eye, the
mind, and the imagination. *
(d) As far as it is humanly possible, bring each girl and boy up to the
standard of the matriculation examination of the universities of Australia.
(e) Then let Industrial, Commercial, Technical, and Professional train-
ing follow. No dead-end occupations.
(f) Inculcate the love of Australia, advocate Australian manufactures,
and let us, who believe in these principles, give eifeot to them by pur-
chasing goods made in Australia, and begin now by wearing clothing
manufactured and made up in Australia, even to the thread and button.
Don’t desecrate the graves of our Fallen Heroes by wearing anything
German.
(g) Let Australia give our Nelsons, Burns, Wellingtons, Watts,
Mozarts, Drakes, Melbas, Roberts, Livingstones, Kelvins, Maroonis,
Pasteurs, Gounods, Scott (1911) a chance by educating them—giving them
their opportunity in life. The raw material is at hand; the brains are
asleep, in the persons and lives of the Fallen Heroes’ Children, who are,
in truth, our Sisters and Brothers for evermore.
“The runner falls, but the torch is carried on.”


From CAPTAIN JOHN GLOSSOP, R.N., C.B.
(Sydney-Emden, 1914): —
“I wish you every success in this most laudable object—
educating and training the children of fallen Sailors and
Soldiers.”
“The game is more than the player of the game, and the
ship is more than the crew.”
—Kipling.
“The trend of public opinion.”—Sydney “Daily Tele-
graph,” 28/8/’lB.
Wellington, N.Z., the Minister for Health said: “The
State presently would have to assist parents to rear chil-
dren.”
]O I UOO l
ouid.
J+ocyo 1/lfcM Un*Un&>
JilUistt* tL£j


THE NATION’S WAR CHILDREN
“Don’t chain me to ignorance, and ignorance to poverty,
leading me to a life of misery, and waste for self and
Australia; but uplift me, educate, train, and love me; for
my father died on the Battlefield that you and Australia
might live.”—Australian War Child’s Appeal.
“They gave their all.
Let you who pass, saluting here their names,
See that through you no slur, nor stain, nor shame,
Falls on the land for which they gave their lives—
Australia.”—G. W. Johnston.
1 Red Page, “Bulletin,” 20/11/1917.
“God first made man, then he made woman;
But of all created things children are the most divine.”
“The time to be happy is now,
The place to be happy is here,
And the way to be happy is
To make the warrior’s child happy.”
WAR.
Choose well—the choice is brief but yet endless for
Australia.


3. Finance.—Objective: £200,000, to
be raised by—
Donation of
.. £50,000
Federal Government grant
50,000
State grant
50,000
Public subscription
50,000
£200,000
I.
THE NATION'S WAR CHILDREN
NEW SOUTH WALES
SYNOPSIS —TENTATIVE
A suggested scheme for the education and training of—
(a) the children of fallen heroes;
(b) the children of incapacitated soldiers;
(c) the children of soldiers who have served or are
serving.
1. Appoint a National Day, to be observed annually,
to give the widest publicity to the movement, sustain
public interest, and to raise necessary funds.
2. Ask all clergy, all schools, press, stores, factories,
ships, banks, police, firemen, offices, railway men, civil
servants, and public generally to aid by practical financial
assistance.
4. (a)* Establish, say, twenty hostels at the more impor-
tant towns, where High or Superior Public Schools are
situated, apportion them to the necessities of the situa-
tion in regard to numbers of soldiers’ children and their
sex.
(b) Establish two hostels in Sydney, one for boys,
one for girls, where soldiers’ children can live free where
necessary, when attending schools for higher education or
technical training, or while learning a trade. All dead-end
occupations to be knocked on the head.
(c) Establish two hostels within the University, one
for boys, one for girls, where they would be freely main-
tained and educated.
* Children will only become residents in hostels when and where neces-
sary, Home life will be fully encouraged.


(d)* Appeal for gifts of money sufficient to build and
to endow the hostels, and where such is done by an indi-
vidual, town, or district, give the hostel the name of the
donor or the one chosen by the giver or givers in per-
petuity, as a mark of Australia’s gratitude and a tribute of
honor.
5. I understand if the hostel buildings are placed rent
free on a freehold basis, the Department of Education
of N.S.W. will bear the running expenses, such as staff,
light, etc., etc.
6. Appeal to the well-to-do families who have not given
a son to the war to provide the wherewithal for a fallen
soldier’s child, so as to give him or her a chance in life.
7. Make a special appeal on the grounds of patriotism
to all large wealthy landowners and companies to, as> it
were, adopt a number of these war children, viz., provide
money to educate and train them, as the bush children are
the offspring of pioneers—pioneering has only to be done
once in the history of a nation. The fathers have ren-
dered a double service—pioneers and warriors.
8. Ask each public school, convent school, church school,
private school, to raise funds annually to maintain one or
more children free at these hostels. The school, institu-
tion, or group of persons who provide the means to also
have the right of selection of child and school.
9. Ask the Government of N.S.W., Federal Government,
and Railway Commissioners to provide in regulations
that all soldiers’ children get first preference in regard
to employment.
10. Specially train University graduates, either returned
soldiers or soldiers’ sons, with a special knowledge of the
resources of Australia, such as live-stock, wool, skins,
agricultural, mineral, and manufactured productions, etc.,
and as to the raw material that Australia could advan-
tageously use in her manufactures. When qualified, send
them as residents in other countries, such as Japan, Java,
China, North and South American States, India, etc., etc.,
to acquire the language, seek new markets, and so
“ADVANCE AUSTRALIA.”
11. Make an official list of all fallen soldiers children,
showing name, age, sex. Perhaps have an Honor Roll
for these children at all schools.
12. Have local committees in every centre, to see that
none of the Nation’s children are overlooked, but that
* Children will only become residents in hostels when and where neces-
sary. iHome life will be fully encouraged.


every avenue or aid that at present exists be used to the
utmost for the material and spiritual advancement of these
children.
13. Prevent overlapping in all aspects,
14. Efficiency, economy, and the greater need the greater
assistance.
15. The War Bursaries, N.S.W., Regulations, 30/l/’l7,
herewith make provision for soldiers’ children. Work in
with the Education Department and use all the assistance
given.
16. The soldier’s child comes from the right stock from
which our future population of the best class will come.
We want our children to be strong and fit in time of
peace as well as in war.
17. Every soldier s child has the absolute right to a
sound mind in a sound body, and to be given a sound
education and trade or a profession, according to the
ability and inclination of the child.
18. Develop largely healthy sports among the children.
Teach them the joy of living in a game, not to watch the
other fellow play, but to play themselves.
19. All the sunshine that is possible to be brought into
the lives of the Nation’s children.
20. Make a public announcement against monuments,
etc., as memorials. Put all work and money into the lives
of children, and so make the individual and Nation great.
21. All the clergy of the respective churches to be
urged continually to give special care and love to the
children, especially the girls. Their moral education to
be provided for.
22. Arrange that boys of special ability to be given, if
desired, an opportunity of entering the Imperial Civil
Service and Military Service of Australia.
23. Honorary educational reference boards to be estab-
lished where necesary, to frequently interview these chil-
dren and advise them as to the future life, trade, profes-
sion, education, etc.
24. Use every endeavour to create a warm, enthusiastic,
continuous interest in the Nation’s children, amongst other
means a stream of inspired articles in the press,
25. The guiding principle to be, as it were, to give
practical effect in the lives and beings of these War Chil-
dren to all the gratitude of the Nation as so often re-
peated in Parliament, sermons, and in the press. What
is the use of empty words, if and when the children miss
their chance in life? Deeds, not words. We owe all we
have to the fighting men.
8


26. Western Australia has, I understand, made very
liberal provision for soldiers’ children as to education and
general maintenance.
27. The controlling council to be elected by the Federal
and State Governments, and to be thoroughly represen-
tative of all classes. Humanity to be the keynote of all.
2b The University to be asked to make special favor-
able regulations as to fees for all the children who pro-
ceed to the University.
29. Be it remembered that £20,000,000 per annum is
spent on liquor in Australia. Tobacco, etc., all extra.
30. Be it ever remembered that it costs less, far less,
to make a good citizen and happy one, than it costs to
make and maintain a criminal, or a lunatic, or a useless
person with venereal disease.
31. Let not apathy, gross indifference, of great numbers
of people to the question of child welfare be a damper to
us. but additional reasons why we should go full steam
ahead in the great and glorious cause of rebuilding Aus-
tralia with the children of fallen heroes.
32. Can we hope to concentrate as much public attention
and press notice on this great question as is bestowed on
racing? I think not; but let us try to get half as much
interest, then we will not have lived in vain.
DIVINE IDEAL.
32. (b) Develop the child’s brain power to the fullest
degree by education on great broad principles, cultivating
the spiritual, mental, and physical powers of the child.
Endeavour as far as possible to fit the child into congenial
occupation, with full consideration to the child’s ability,
apparent and potential, remembering when that is
achieved there is a happy, contented, useful citizen in the
making, which is as good for the Nation as for the indi-
vidual. Keep square pegs for square holes, and round
pegs for round holes. Under such a selection, the per-
centage of degenerates would become almost nil.
33. The soldier’s child is the best baby Australia can
get.
34. Australia has all the resources, the necessary wealth,
abundant means of education, technical colleges, univer-
sities, etc., etc., conservatorium of music, railways, facili-
ties generally, generous, kind people—we only want and
lack efficient organisation. Let us get it, and we conquer
this question.
35. While the war is going on, War Children can
be seen suffering and are being neglected. When that is


feo, when war is the topic and of daily interest, how much
more will this indifferent feeling grow, say, five years
after the war?
If even one girl reaches the streets without every effort
being made to save her, we, the people, are unworthy of
the sacrifices made.
Appoint ex-War Nurses as Sisters, who will go round
continually advising and protecting these girls who are
in danger, and so guard and keep them safe.
Do not let girls and war widows become the prey of
bad men.
The task is great, but its nobility and usefulness is ever
so much greater.
This appeal is made on behalf of the children whose
fathers have “Gone West,” and, though now voiceless,
have fought for the freedom of Australia and Australians.
We owe to them the very bed we lie in, the food we eat,
and the possession of all we have. Surely, surely, we
Australians of British stock will not desert the offspring
of our warriors?
About 51,000 Australians have died already that we
might live. We now must count our children as a miser
counts his gold. We not alone must beat Germany at
war, but we must beat her corhercially, or all is in vain.
Encourage Australian manufactures, including clothing
generally. Can we not now start to do so, and open new
avenues of employment for returned men?
Australia’s National Debt will probably be greater at
the conclusion of the war than was Great Britain’s before
the war, therefore the children will be the means of help-
ing Australia in the years to come.
APPROVAL OF SIR WM. CULLEN, CHIEF JUSTICE
AND CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY.
(Copy.)
“Dear Mr. Adamson,
“I heartily agree with the underlying purpose of your
proposal, and am favorably impressed with a number of
ycur tentative suggestions for carrying it into effect. I
would say that you have furnished abundant raw material
from which a careful consideration could select the
groundwork of an excellent scheme.
“Yours faithfuly,
(Sgd.) “W. P. CULLEN.”


11th June, 1918.
“I think the principles underlying the scheme are
admirable.”—CAMPßELL CARMICHAEL, Capt.
Approved also by Y.M.C.A. Secretary, Sydney, and the
R.S. and S.I.L. of Australia.
“ ’Tis our hope doth fashion us
To base use, or glorious.”
—Lowell.
“Sydney, 13th June, 1918.
“The Trustees of the Walter and Eliza Hall Trust Money,
“Sydney.
“Dear Sirs,
“I have the honor to submit for your earnest and sym-
pathetic consideration the attached scheme for the care of
soldiers’ children generally, as specified in the details on
paper referred to.
“There is no organisation in existence in our State for
the care and upbringing of our children whose fathers
have fallen in battle—Fighting for AUSTRALIA and
AUSTRALIANS. The war goes on and on, and the posi-
tion of the children is growing more acute every hour
yet no public steps have been taken to educate, train,
clothe, feed, and love these children with the blood of
warriors flowing full and red in their veins—the stock
worth while building—Australia’s greatness.
“We see even the wounded and returned warriors’
trains made secondary to race and ordinary traffic after
they have travelled 13,000 miles. Indifference prevails,
while races, amusements, and extravagance are seen on
all hands. Yet no voice has been raised for the loving
care of the fallen soldiers’ children, whose fathers lie
voiceless in Gallipoli, France, Egypt, and Palestine, and
in the depths of the mighty ocean. Their children are in-
articulate and missing their chance in life! The war is as
real in its consequences to Australia as if the Germans
were off our coast,
“With a view of making an effort (the writer feels it is
a feeble one compared to the debt of gratitude we owe as
a people to our warriors), to endeavour to draw public
attention, sympathy, and, above all, practical aid to this
most .urgent and important National question—next to
the war the most important.
“If we who know what is right, loyal, and for the
advancement of Australia generally, do not most emphati


cally assert ourselves and train the child of to-day to be
the man of to-morrow, who will rule the destinies of Aus-
tralia, we must realise that we are handing over our land
to the crowd advocating sedition, and disloyalty and
balderdash.
“In conjunction with the scheme outlined on the attached
papers, I have the great honor, on behalf of the children
of warriors of Australia, more especially of the State of
N.S.W., to ask that your Trust will consider the
desirability of helping this great cause and assist in re-
generating Australia, by granting a sum of money for the
erection of a hostel for boys and a hostel for girls, for the
sole benefit of the warriors’ children, to be built within the
grounds of the Sydney University, where these hero chil-
dren could be maintained and educated free—who are and
when fit for a university education. While they were
being built, get a temporary building or camp them in huts
or tents —do anything, but don’t neglect them.
“The Chancellor of the University has approved of the
scheme on general principles in writing, and the Repatria-
tion authorities have taken it into favorable consideration.
The writer respectfully asks that your Trustees will con-
sider the matter, and perhaps be pleased to discuss the
subject with the Repatriation authorities, with a view to
co-ordinated and successful action. The cause is the
noblest—the need is very great and urgent. The cry of
the children can be heard, but hardly anyone listens. If
your Trustees are pleased to make a grant, please make
the most of it by insisting on Federal and State Govern-
ments granting £l for every pound you grant, and the
general public and the race clubs joining in.
“The general guiding principles of governing hostels to
be humanity and gratitude— not CHARITY. We are the
beggars. We have grand examples of education estab-
lishments in Edinburgh, called ‘Hospitals,’ and they are
doing the work for children which I am advocating we
should do.
“In this scheme the child whose brain the Finger of
God has touched with genius, the child of dull compre-
hension, would all be cared for, protected, loved, and
equipped for the battle of life. And it is the least, the
very least we can do, inadequately repay the debt we owe,
and prove ourselves not unworthy of the great sacrifices
made, and being made, and yet to be made by the
‘flower,’ the very ‘flower of Australia’s men.’
[The writer is a pioneer farmer, cleared five hundred
acres of virgin bush land, has two sons at the front, five
irrespective of this from the farm, and one sleeping in


Gallipoli. The elder son absent four years, August, 1918.
The writer has been a worker all his life for hospitals,
children, and in every public National movement for the
good of Australia for thirty years.]
“ADVANCE AUSTRALIA.
“Your faithful servant,
“T. G. ADAMSON.”
“Ngoora,”
Nemingha,
Tamworth, N.S.W.


S.M.H. 14/10/18. Extract from letter. Burgeon General Sir Neville
Howse, f.C. _
n Apparently our citizens are concerned about, a Soldiers memorial
Ho cold stone or brass for me; gather a big lumping sum during the
war and expend it later in assisting in the education of the loved
ones of those who have made the great sacrifice. ”
Extract from letter. Parliament H.S.W. 11/10/18.
n must congratulate you on the thorough ana statesmanlike vay in
which you have grappled with the problem. rf
y ¥
. rt St. George.” W.R.Bagnall, M.L.A.
\
From Capt. Prof; E.Holme, M.A. Sydney University. Chairman Com; Uni:
Students Abroad.
n I am in general agreement with the commendation it has received.”




II.
WAR
NEW SOUTH WALES, 1918
SYNOPSIS
REPATRIATION—REGENERATION—
REPRODUCTIVITY.
SOLDIERS’ CHILDREN
“Sow a thought, reap a word; sow a word, reap a
deed; sow a deed, reap a character; sow a character, reap
a destiny” for Australia.
(a) “Remember that in Southern Brazil, nearly 400,000
Germans are sustained, as I found out, in their devotion
to the Fatherland by the annual grants of money for
educational purposes from the Imperial Treasury in
Berlin.”—Page 144,' “Gerard’s Four Years in Germany.”
Will we do less for our soldiers’ children?
(b) “Some of these companies employing as many as
500 chemists in RESEARCH work.”—Page 198, “Gerard s
Four Years in Germany.”
Why not call the chemist in, in Australia, by specially
training soldiers’ children?
(c) “It is due to efforts of these social workers that
the rate of mortality in Berlin decreased during the war.”
—Page 218, “Gerard’s Four Years in Germany.”
Will we do less for our soldiers’ children?
(d) Briefly: The children of the warriors should not be
placed at any disadvantages for the lack of means in
obtaining education, necessary living, training, trade or
profession—and they should be on as good a wicket as the
children of the professional and well-to-do classes, who by
means of good food, open air, sport, high school, univer-
sity—step out into the battle of life well fitted all round
with a well-developed body and mind, with a profession,
social standing, powerful friends—these great advantages
have been secured to these boys by the warriors—and at
least their children should have the same opportunities.
(e) Develop their minds and bodies; think, think, of
them as future citizens and warriors first, workers after


wards. When they grow to manhood, and some of them
leaders in public life, make them fit to be so—yea, make
them proud of the fact that, while their fathers died fight-
ing for us—no, for Australia—no, for the British Empire-
no, but for the freedom of humanity the wide world over
we did not desert them, but loved, educated, and fitted
them for life worthily.
(f) Don’t waste the coming generation of soldiers’ chil-
dren before they come to maturity, but use the years of
boyhood to make their manhood powerful, instead of
wasting the years of manhood to undo the learning of boy-
hood.
(g) The clear duty of Australia—in gratitude, in patriot-
ism, in self-interest—is first of all to remember to cultivate
the minds of its coming citizens first in the persons of
soldiers’ children especially, and thus aid in making Aus-
tralia powerful in peace and war.
(h) Please read London “Observer,” 15/4/1917, article:
“The Critical Age,” 14 to 17.
(i) Stock report, N.S.W., 1917; Horses, 610,744; cattle,
2,361,152; sheep, 33,713,901. Page 20: Disease rampant;
appalling stock losses. What about the pastoral com-
munity endowing 100 studentships for the study of all
these diseases? It would not be an expenditure but an
investment.
(j) Appeal to the University undergraduates, instead of
playing on Commemoration Day, to run a big day’s sports
and ball, the nett proceeds to be devoted for the endow-
ment of studentships in the University—they to select the
students. They could easily raise £I,OOO a year. Trinity
College, Dublin, has annual sports, and charge.
(k) Every Japanese naval officer must pass an
examination, written and spoken in English, before their
commission issues. The Germans sent their representa-
tives into other countries to learn the language and cus-
toms. We as a people are sadly deficient in the art of
speaking foreign languages. Let us act before the cry is
“too late.” “Muff sed.”
(l) The campaign of the Children’s Year—England and
America, 1918—Mr. Lloyd George says: “I hope that the
new ideas, which are everywhere dawning, will be used to
give such fresh understanding to the children of the
generation as will make them worthy heirs of the freedom
their fathers are now fighting for.”
(m) The human brain.—The great brain medical experts
of the world tell us that the brain, the intellectual side of
it—is the last to develop, requires skilful feeding and de-
veloping, so that it may be master of the physical desires,


ambitions, and degenerate appetites, and the intellect is
the first to dim and go under, and towards the end of our
existence the physical desires are getting into the mastery.
Hence the need, the absolute National need, for well con-
ceived schemes for brain development in our children,
especially their individuality and originality.
LOVING CARE: LET US LEARN FROM NATURE.
BIRD LIFE.
(n) Last breeding season there were a pair of tomtits
on our verandah, with such a wonderfully dainty nest. The
eggs were on the point of hatching; we watched them ever
so carefully. One morning, to our sorrow, we found the
wee cock bird lying dead on the verandah; the hen was in
great distress, and flew in and out of the nest—unhappy—
and now and again hopped down and had a look at her
dead mate. How sad it was! We watched and wondered
what would happen. Then the hen flew away, and in less
than an hour brought back another cock bird, and the
clutch was hatched after all. These wee birds must have
some way of telling of their joy and sorrow and of their
needs. The hen found a mate to feed the young and to
father them.
HEN AND-CHICKENS. .
(o) For yourself, just observe a hen and chickens—how
she feeds them, giving all the titbits to the chickens;
covers them with her wings, feathers, and body from the
rain, storm, cold wind, takes them to the lee of a shed;
how she stands up for them, protecting them against
attacks by dogs or cats; then listen to her calling the
chicks to cover when a hawk hovers in sight; have a look
at her at night, how snugly they are all tucked in, and the
hen now and then gurgling—talking—to them. She feeds
them first always; watch her running after a grasshopper
and dissecting it and giving it to the chickens. Well, we
can't do better than follow her example, and if relatively
we do as well by the poor little kiddies of our warriors,
who have no language but a cry, their very helplessness
being tJ*e most eloquent appeal, perhaps, ever uttered on
earth, we will be doing just a wee bit of what we must do
as a loving act of gratitude because their fathers gave us
Freedom and Australia to live in.


III.
AUSTRALIA’S GREAT OPPORTUNITY
- STAND OR FALL
Mobilise the intellectuality of the Soldiers’ Children for
Australia and Australians.
PREPARING A WAY FOR THE COMING
COMMERCIAL WAR.
“The game is more than the player of the game,
And the ship is more than the crew.”
1. To-day we are deciding the future welfare of Aus-
tralia.
2. Through sheer necessity, perhaps eight children out
of every ten receive no educational training after the age
of, say, 14, whereas their schooling should continue until,
say, 17 years of age.
Their destiny is purely a matter of accident. Thus,
say, 80 per cent, of them become wage-earners before
their minds are enlightened or character formed.
3. Seme parents and guardians may reason that they
cannot afford to lose the wages earned by the children.
The stern reality is that Australia cannot afford to lose
the intelligence dormant in the children.
4. In the future no amount of “hurry up” and energy can
possibly make up for an inefficiency of trained intelligence,
5. The Nation" will be supreme, leading the world in the
work of government and industry, which has, say, 80 per
cent, of the boys and girls trained for efficient citizenship.
6. Australia can no more misuse the minds of its chil-
dren with impunity than a man can starve a milking cow,
or run a motor car without petrol,
7. The victors in war and peace owe their success to
the use of highly-trained intelligence and nerve in a score
of a thousand ways.
8. Australian children have abundance of intelligence,
but it is largely dormant. It must be awakened, trained,
and directed. The dormant mind is, as it were, the raw
material of a good citizen. These minds are in reality
the workshops of the schoolmaster, but remain closed to
him.


9. Australia will stand or fall by the intelligence or
ignorance of its people.
10. Just as a steamship is directed by a highly-trained
man, so the energy and strength of children must be
directed by their trained intelligence.
11. Immediately the war is over, the battle of commerce,
the battle of battles, starts as it were; industrial war will
be declared, so Australia must be wholly equipped to me*t
the new offensive, directed in a thousand secret ways.
12. As it is to-day, future engineers, chemists, inventors,
sea captains, stock men, wool men, builders, and skilled
tradesmen, etc., are in dead-end occupations, driving lifts,
trams, selling newspapers, etc., just because their talents
lie undirected owing to insufficient education. Thus we
are throwing away our opportunities.
13. Education, industrial training, university training,
and so forth, are absolutely essential for our children to
win in the coming battle of commerce.
14. Don’t let Australia throw away the fruits of victory
by indifference, thus allowing Germany to beat us by her
intellect and industrial training.
15. Remember the child has three sides, viz., intellectual,
physical, and spiritual.
Minister Education, House of Commons, 26/6/’18:
“. . . Mobilise the intellectual resources of the Nation
against those arduous times which were in front of the
country.”
Sydney “Daily Telegraph,” 26/8/’lB, Mr. A. G. Alanson,
Headmaster Randwick Superior Public School:—
“There was no one in cur Parliament who realised that, if
this country were going to recover from the dire results of
the present war, it must do so by giving the utmost and
fullest support to education.”


IV.
PUBLICITY AND EDUCATIONAL
PROPAGANDA
SYNOPSIS-EMBRYONIC STAGE, TENTATIVE
JUST A WEE SKELETON SKETCH
OBJECTIVE: (a) So that not one soldier’s child is
neglected or overlooked, no matter what the conditons
are, even in the remotest part of Australia; (b) need, the
only qualification; (c) to reach the Australian public, all
classes, through the eye, mind, and imagination.
1. Colonel P. P. Abbott, C.M.G., M.P. (New England
returned soldier, who served in Egypt, Gallipoli, England,
and France), is urgently and earnestly appealed to, to or-
ganise and address (and to father the scheme generally on
behalf of the soldiers and their children) public meetings
of all classes right throughout all Australia. Especially to
address the following:—The Federal Parliament; the six
State Parliaments; the mothers, fathers, widows, brothers,
sisters, all soldiers’ children; the Senates, professors,
graduates, and undergraduates of all Universities in Aus-
tralia; all schools, organisations, chambers of commerce,
labor unions, patriotic associations, Red Cross, women’s
associations, leagues, etc., and all sporting and racing
clubs.
2. A special pamphlet to be issued, emphasising the
great nobility, necessity, and justice of the cause, and
have one or more handed to every clergyman, professor,
medical man, schoolmaster, bank manager, merchant, and
police constable throughout Australia, beseeching their
loving co-operation in their respective spheres.
3. The clergy and schoolmasters on a stated day
annually to deliver addresses to their various charges,
pointing out the Nation’s sacred duty to these war chil-
dren.
4. When the scope of the scheme is finally determined
on by the Repatriation authorities, then embrace the find-
ings in the “Nation’s War Children’s Charter,” and see
that every soldier and soldier’s child who has served or is
serving has a copy of the “Charter of Rights.” .
5. Tell the story of the soldier’s child, in thousands of
ways: by picture, song, story, films, cartoons, poetry, and


prose. Appeal to the people’s varied senses, in all the
avenues that Nature gives us.
6. Mr. Norman Lindsay is arranging, by a series of war
children’s cartoons, to reach the imagination of the public
through the eye. Others are engaged in the literary and
poetic world. Tell a story every night, and show a picture
on the films at all picture palaces and theatres, also give
the name of the local representative of the War Children’s
Repatriation Branch, so that any child in distress can
make known his or her particular sorrow, difficulty, or re-
quest, and so find quick and loving response and aid of a
permanent character.
7. Arrange for a free two or three-line advertisement or
story, request, or appeal, or educational propaganda (new
every week) to appear in every business, shipping, and
sports advertisement in the city and country press of Aus-
tralia, and all on the “never.”
8. Get in perpetuity, free, two inches of the space in the
brevity or summary column of the morning and Sunday
press in Australia specially reserved for use with reference
to the “Nation’s War Children,” because the work of re-
generating Australia will be going on.
9. Every fallen soldier’s child, or every soldier's child,
as the Government may determine on, to be issued a mili-
tary badge, metal, numbered, artistically designed, and
lettered Australia’s War Child,” and to be worn on the
left shoulder. The badge not to exceed in cost twopence.
10. A guardian’s metal badge to be similarly issued and
worn by these women and men, who may have become guar-
dians at a guinea per annum, life guardians at ten guineas,
State guardains £52 10s., and Federal guardians at £105.'
The badge to be lettered “Guardian, Nation’s War Chil-
dren.” The cost of badge and issue cf same not to exceed
twopence.
11. The Grand Council controlling the Nation’s War
Children, but working under the regulations of the
“Charter of Rights,” to be an honorary body; and to have
the power to appoint a very limited number of honorary
guardians to persons for services rendered, the services to
be rendered first.
12. An official list of State and Federal guardians to be
made annually; or, if too expensive, utilise the electoral
roll, and put a distinguishing mark of honor opposite the
names of all guardians. The fees so raised to go into the
General Fund of the Soldiers’ Children.
13. Arrange for issue of the cartoons, and for poetry,
music, generally to schools, universities, colleges, public
press, ships, trains, trams, workshops, offices and
churches.


14. Call into the assistance of the scheme, artists, music-
ians, musical societies, sports, racing, yachts, golf, tennis,
football, cricket, literary, political leagues, etc.
15. Ask all Government departments, Parliaments, banks,
insurance, shipping, merchants, political, social, and semi-
Government offices, stock and station agents, to have
printed on their envelopes, publicity educational propa-
ganda, two lined or three-lined storeyettes on each en-
velope, fresh, and spicy, and bright, and true, so as to aid
in diseminating the glorious, noble message to all classes
everywhere, and so keep constantly in the public mind the
debt, the big debt, which can never be wholly repaid to
those who fought for us and died.
16. Get lithographic artists to work and evolve an art
for utilising spare space on newspapers, invoices, school
books. Government publications, letters, wrappers, and
circulars, etc., and letters for skeleton ads., or perhaps
cartoons, something after the style of an advertisement,
as on attached invoice from Prescott’s, but more artistic
and effective; perhaps it could be done in water marking,
like banknotes in England. Ask the press and other
issuing centres to donate the spare spaces on the wrappers
of the newspapers, circulars, etc., for the publicity cam-
paign.
17. Let all Australians unite to educate and train these
children; when sick, heal them; turn their sorrow into joy;
bring health and strength to their minds and bodies;
strengthen their limbs; in a word, make them run for
joy; fill their hearts with gladness; give them games,
good books, physical exercises; implant in them the love
for flowers, and of the beautiful in life; make their eyes
sparkle with health and happiness.
18. Have hostels up on the mountains, and down on the
lovely beaches, so that the sick may be restored to health
and strength. The poor children outback with sore eyes
and sandy blight can come to the sea and have their sight
restored, and let joy chase sorrow away. Take the chil-
dren out of the hateful backyards and off the streets and
alleys, and away from vice, and bring them God’s sunshine
and air and clean living, and so Advance Australia and
Australians.
19. Enthusiasm.—Get a third of the interest that is
bestowed on the Melbourne Cup given to these children
and we win without a competitor in sight.
20. Let us raise and expend annually one-tenth of the
money that is spent in liquor in Australia, and peace will
have a victory no less renowned than war.
21


61. When Australia can provide expensive electric
radiators for snakes and crocodiles in the Zoo, to keep
them warm, there is every hope for loving care of the
fallen heroes’ children.
22. So that we who stop at home in “peace and plenty’’
may honor in a most practical, effective manner those who
have fought for the liberty of mankind, saved us, died that
we may live, and show our gratitude by educating, train-
ing, caring, and loving the Nation’s children, making them
good and useful citizens, their bodies healthy, with cul-
tivated brains in the image of the Creator.
23. We will then win in the coming industrial war, and
let us hope and hope, and work and work that the same
principles that are advocated here may yet apply to all
Australia’s children.
24. The Repatriation Department to at once institute
inquiries all over the world for particulars, methods of
working, etc, etc., of the various Child Welfare Associa-
tions.
25. The Home Government to be asked to reserve all
Rhodes Scholarships in Australia for soldiers’ children or
returned soldiers.
26. Advertisement and circulation almost without cost.
Supply freely cards and stickers of publicity and educa-
tional propaganda paragraphs, to all packers, factories,
merchants, canners, etc., to place, for instance, in packets
of oatmeal, starch, peas, tobacco, matches, candles,
drapery, and clothing, etc., and stickers for attachment
to bottles, tins of jam, fruit, and honey, etc. These would
act as constant reminders in every home, every day, in all
classes, all over Australia, and without any cost of post-
age or trainage. A fellow having his “nightcap” going to
bed would read something attractive about the children,
and at breakfast would be “hit” with an appeal on the
sauce bottle.
Mates!
We did our bit.
It’s up to you to carry on—
To prove Australia worthy— not of us,
But of our sacrifice!
So long!
“Bulletin,” 29/11/’l7. —Zip.


V.
REPATRIATION—WELFARE.
TENTATIVE.
(a) Should there be special protection afforded by law
as to age of consent of Soldiers’ Children whose fathers
have fallen in battle? These girls must be cared for
morally by the Nation, and special measures must be taken
to effectively care for them.
(b) Should half of all full-blooded Germans’ property
in Australia be confiscated and handed over for the educa-
tion and training of the fatherless children, whose fathers
have been killed by the Germans?
(b) Napoleon gave the world a code ,Napoleon. Can
Australia not give “A Soldier's Child Code”?
(d) Establish sunshine clubs of women to organise
clubs, so that the wee children of soldiers could be given
outings at the beaches.
(e) Get the ferry-boat companies to grant half fares to
children of soldiers.
(f) Members of Parliament, blind soldiers, incapacitated
soldiers, railway officials, tram officials, police, etc., have
special travelling facilities free, etc. What about some
such concession for soldiers’ children?
(g) Children whose mothers die must not be sent to
public institutions, benevolent societies, etc., but very
special provision must be made for them.
(h) Special provision and arrangements to be made for
them when sick as to free hospital treatment, etc.
(i) What about asking for preference for girls as clerks
in Commonwealth Bank and offices?
(j) Arrangements to be made with the British, French,
Belgian, Greek, Italian, Japanese, South African,
Canadian, New Zealand, United States, and other friendly
Nations to get films taken of all war activities on land,
sea, air, Red Cross work, transports, ships, etc., to be
specially devoted for the purpose of raising money for
soldiers’ children’s education, etc. These films would be
of very great interest and value, and the children should
benefit by them. Australia could in return take films of
Australian activities, and send them in exchange, for the
children of those other Nations.


“To follow unflinchingly the call of duty, to suffer cheer-
fully, fight courageously, and to die without fear, that
is immortal.”—Ouyah.
THE FALLEN
From office and from counting-house, from testing-room
and bench,
Frrm university and school they went to man the trench;
From cricket pitch and tennis lawn, from driving at the
goal,
From where the silken jackets gleam, from where the
breakers roll;
From sweat and dust of drafting yards, from paddocks
wide and free,
Where many days the bit-rings chimed, they joined the
company.
They heard the call, and answered it, as strong men ever
will;
They answered each with ready voice—a voice that now
is still.
The lordly mansion knows its grief, the backyard tene-
ment
Is shedding scalding tears for those whom bravely they
have sent;
The spacious street, the narrow way, the garden, and
the lane.
The open spaces of the west are sisters in their pain.
And we. who watched them march away, who saw our
brothers go,
Are suffering with their kith and kin, and weeping with
their woe.
In sorrow for Australia’s sons, who for Australia died,
In fullest joy of youth and strength and all a strong man’s
pride.
For those whose hands were grasped and held in friend-
ship’s manly grip,
With deep affection in the eye, and laughter on the lip;
For those we often played beside, where rocks the roar-
ing crowd,
The men who never failed to score whenever chance
allowed;
For those who studied through the night to take the best
degree,
And now have laid their learning down on grim Gallipoli;
For those who pulled the strongest oar, where salt the
water flows,
In victory or in defeat; and yet again for those,


The boys who dreamed, as horsemen will, across the sun-
scorched plains,
The saddle loose betwixt their knees, their hands upon
the reins;
The men who saw the sun go down, and watched tihe.;
Queen of Night
Shed glorious o’er the listening gums her still and peace-
ful light,
They’re lying now upon the hills of yon Gallipoli,
Cold hands that could not hold the reins, glazed eyes that
cannot see;
The soft winds still breathe over them, the night winds
that they know,
And gently whisper as they did far off and long ago.
Tvas not for glory that they died; they heard the chil-
dren’s wail,
They heard the maidens’ maddened cries; they heard and
could not fail.
O, Night Winds! Tell those mates of ours, as you alone
can tell.
That we, who still can hold the reins, will fight for those
who fell;
That we, who still may have the strength to tread the
path they trod.
Shall hold the heritage they left as sacred before God;
Shall be as men to shield the weak, with this, our battle
cry:
“For those we love, for those who fell, and for the flag
we’ll die.”
—Lieutenant W. M. Fleming, M.P., Robertson, on Active
Service, A.I.F,


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
I beg to acknowledge gratefully the courtesy and kindly
sympathy extended to me in giving life to this noble cause
to—
Colonel A. G. Farr, Deputy Comptroller Repatriation,
N.S.W.;
Hon. Sir William P. Cullen, Chief Justice and Chancellor
of University;
General H. Finn, C. 8.;
Mrs. S. A. Trim, Tamworth (a fighter among the fighters
behind the lines, for the fighters in the trenches and
their loved ones);
Colonel J. Lamrock, C. 8.;
Mr. Norman Lindsay;
Mr. Wm. Gillanders, 8.A., Y.M.C.A.;
Captain Campbell Carmichael, M.C., M.L.A.;
Mr. Peter Board, M.A.;
Brigadier-General A. Jobson, D. 5.0.;
Lieutenant E. Cortis (Major, Professor David’s
Engineers);
Colonel P. P. Abbott, C.M.G., M.P.;
Sergeant Hamilton, Recruiting Staff, and Lady Typistes,
Sydney;
The R. S. & S. I. L. of Australia;
Mr. J. T. Cooke, Lands Department;
Professor M. W. MacCallum, M.A., LL.D.;
Professor Sir T. P. A. Stuart, M.D., LL.D.;
Hon. Sir Charles K. Mackellar, M.D.;
Captain Glossop, R.N., C.B (Sydney-Emden);
Hon. W. A. Holman, Premier.
T. G. ADAMSON.
Nemingha, Tamworth, N.S.W.,
June-July, 1918.
“The runner falls, but the torch is carried on.”


EDUCATION POLICY.
Leader in London “Telegraph,”
April 10, 1917.
Extracts.
“It is sought, in fact, to provide for the rising genera-
tion from infancy to the beginnings of manhood and
womanhood, something that has never been even approxi-
mately attained by all the organised effort and all, the
money hitherto, a continuous and progressive education,
which shall really direct and develop the minds of those
undergoing it.”
“Our industrial competitors already know how im-
measurably industry is benefited by a bold education
policy, which aims, not at producing more effective human
tools for employers, but better-equipped and more able-
minded men and women.”
“If England is to live, we have to raise our eyes from
all immediate advantage, and give firm support to a states-
manship of long views in education as in all else.”
“Germany has a system of national education which is
not only more thorough in conception than ours, but is a
going concern, which has already yielded to Germany a
rich harvest of social and economic benefit.”
Extract from “Daily Telegraph,” Sydney,
June 13, 1918.
“The root problem of all the after-war problems is the
conservation of the wealth of the Nation of to-morrow
which resides in its boys and girls of to-day. If we are to
survive we must take thought for the morrow.”—Professor
R. J. A. Berry (at Royal Society of N.S.W.), of Mel-
bourne University.
Let us not alone beat Germany, on land, over the land,
on water, under the water, over the water, but in educa-
tion, industrial and technical training, and in commercial
life.
Australia can no more misuse the minds of its children
with impunity than a man can starve a milking cow or
run a motor car without petrol.


German Aspirations and Dreams of Conquest.
The year of King Edward’s coronation, the writer was
on a holiday all round the South Sea Islands. At Samoa,
a high German official came aboard, en route to German
New Guinea. We became friendly, and he presented the
writer with a New Guinea coin, which is still in his pos-
session. He was conceited and arrogant. He Thad a wee
tin cup or frame, which fitted on to his upper lip, and
secured with tapes, in which he put his moustache every
night, so as to keep the points up the same as the
German Emperor. He told the writer he was going to
New Guinea as Governor, and said the day was not far
distant when the Germans would be masters of the Pacific
Islands. We cannot accuse them of not having tried.
“What brave men could do, they did, and took such for-
tune as God gave them.”—Demosthenes..
The Campaign for Soldiers’ Children’s Welfare.
Fifty-one thousand men, the very flower of Australia’s
manhood, mentally and physically, have died on the battle-
field. The loss to Australia is unutterably great, the rami-
fications are a serious calamity of the first magnitude,
overshadowing all questions of purely Australian range.
The loss at present is very great, the potential loss is
immensely greater, comparatively, as a snowflake is to
Mount Kosciusko, and is beyond the ken of man. The
historian (Hume) tells us that the loss to England at
Bannockburn of the nobility, educated, and brave was felt
for hundreds of years, and seriously retarded England’s
progress. Well, Bannockburn is only a mere incident
of a moment compared to the loss of 51.000 men, and the
battle still rages, now in its fifth year. All those warriors in
their prime of life, the picked of the community, and many,
very many, married men among them. The desire to love
and care, educate and train the fatherless children should
be greater than the starving for food, and the parched
lips of people in an open boat in the tropics for water.
Our love and care for these children will be as the helms-
man is to the ship, the driver to th£ engine, the jockey to
the horse. In all our doings we must create, sustain, and
expand a high moral standard of thought and action, in-
destructible character as it were, and that we emerge from
the war greater and better than we entered it. All the
Germans’ hellish actions, murders, rapes, and degeneracy,
inspiring us all to great and noble thought and action, to
be shown forth in the lives of the children of Australia.
The continued safety of Australia demands an intelligent,
educated, industrially-trained community, in peace as well
as in war.


EXTRACTS.
Extract from letter of PROFESSOR MUNGO W.
MacCALLUM, M.A., LL.D., Dean of the Faculty of Arts,
University of Sydney:—
“Now I repeat that with your objects and your idea
that a comprehensive scheme in which all shall co-operate
is necessary, I shall be willing to assist to the utmost of
my means. With best wishes for the realisation of all
your good intentions for Soldiers’ Children.”
Extract from letter of HON. SIR CHARLES
MACKELLAR, M.D.:—
“I have satisfaction in saying that I sympathise with
you in your aspirations . . . the general question of the
care of the children of those who have died in defending
our liberties being the duty of the State is undeniable.”
Extract from letter of PROFESSOR SIR T. A.
STUART, M.D.. LL.D., Dean of the Faculty of Medicine,
University of Sydney:—
“I do not think you have failed at all. You have only
presented it too well. The object is entirely commend-
able.”
Extract from letter from MR. NORMAN LINDSAY,
Artist, Springwood:—
“It is nobly conceived, and I will gladly do what I can
to aid it.”
“Who in stature could reach the pole,
And grasp creation in a span,
He would still be measured by the Soul—
The Soul is the standard of the man.”
W. E. Henley.
“They heard the call, and answered it, as strong men ever
will;
They answered each with ready voice, a voice that now
is still” _ .
Fleming.


“Sydney Morning Herald,” Leader, 12/8/T8: —
“But who, in all wide Australia, could remain indifferent
while these men go from glory on to fresh glory. . . . The
increased productiveness of Australia will assist more than
anything else to pay Australia’s huge war bill.”
Extract from letter of CAPTAIN J. GLOSSOP, R.N.,
C. 8., 9/8/’lB: —
“I have read with interest your proposals for educating
and training the children of fallen Sailors and Soldiers. . . .
I wish you every success in this most laudable object.”
Dr. E. W. Buckley. Tamworth, 8/8/’l8:
“ . . . When a board is appointed to deal with the sub-
ject, one of its members should be a man specially trained
in the welfare of children. If a girl is morally good up to
the age of 21 the chances are that she is good for life; so
that one sees the necessity of looking after the children of
our fallen men,”
“Japanese Memories” (Howard, London, 1918): —
“English is now taught generally in Japan. Even in the
Government schools every child is supposed to learn it.”
“Observer,” London, 2/6/’18:
“The King has congratulated the Senate of the Univer-
sity of London on providing for the development of the
study of foreign languages.”
“But equally it is the duty of the House of Commons to
provide continued training, mental and physical, up to
eighteen, as Mr. Fisher’s measure proposes. Otherwise,
children whose education stops altogether at fourteen will,
in the vast majority of cases, forget most of what they
learned, and the immense sums spent upon their elemen-
tary instruction will be as lamentably wasted as if it had
been thrown into the sea.”
London “Daily Telegraph,” 27/6/TB, Education Bill:
“Imperial Parliament: Education Bill.—The Minister:
‘The effect of the two main provisions was that when the
Act came into full operations, the education of practically
every young person would be certain in one form or
another till he or she reached the age of 18. . . . They
would mobilise the intellectual resources of the nation
against those arduous times which were in front of this
country.’ ”


VIVE LA FRANCE!
“The will to conquer is the first condition to victory,”
Marshal Foch.
THE A.I.F.
“They were the squadrons of the dawn,
They were the vanguard of the day.”
“Bulletin.”
Walter Murdoch.
London “Telegraph,” 10/4/1918: —
“If England is to live, we have to raise our eyes from
all immediate advantage and give firm support to a states-
manship of long views, in education, as in all else. The
war is our training for each sacrifice. It would not be
worth another day’s outpouring of life and wealth if it
were not, besides a fight for momentary security, a fight
for our own and the world s future.”
Imperial Government: Committee’s report, Educational
System of Great Britain, London, 16/4/1918:
Extracts: “. . . We must, by means of scholarships and
maintenance allowances, put a complete course of training
within the reach of every boy or girl of sufficient ability to
profit by it. But this is not sufficient. We must not only
provide the opportunities, we must make our citizens eager
to avail themselves of them, we must strive to make
parents anxious to secure secondary education for thp ;
children. This is the most vital and difficult part of the
whole question. ... If science is to come by its own, the
Nation as a whole must be brought to recognise the fun-
damental importance of the facts and principles of science
to the right ordering of our national life. The war gives
no excuse for the postponement of a start to recover lost
and to win new ground. Such ground, it is true, will never
be surely held unless it is slowly won. But it never will
be won at all unless the present opportunity is seized.”
“We must be free or die, who speak the tongue
That Shakespeare spoke; the faith and morals hold
Which Milton held.”
Wordsworth.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
ADVANCE AUSTRALIA.


SOLDIERS’ CHILDREN.
PROPOSAL TO ESTABLISH HOMES.
The welfare of the children of soldiers who have fought
in the present war, and more especially those who have
fallen, has been the subject of a generous offer by Mr. G.
H. Bosch, of the firm of Bosch, Barthel, & Co. Mr. Bosch
takes the view that the children of soldiers, being the off-
spring of the best of Australia’s manhood, are of vital
importance to the future of the nation, and must, indeed,
be mainly relied upon to fill the gaps in the body of
citizens created by the terrible havoc of the war. It is, he
says, inevitable that there will be many mothers who are
themselves unable to provide for the upbringing and educa-
tion of the whole of their families, which it is supremely
desirable that they should receive. Cases, too, must occur
where children are deprived of both parents. Not merely
the welfare of the children, but the essential interests of
the nation, make it a matter of urgency that some steps
should be taken to safeguard the country’s potential man-
hood and womanhood. His suggestion was that a portion
of the money so readily subscribed by the public for
patriotic purposes should be devoted to the establishment
of homes in different parts of the city and country, each to
accommodate about 20 children—not more, because experi-
enced persons were of opinion that the individual interest
and motherly supervision of the matrons and their assist-
ants, which were so necessary to achieve the good moral
development of the children, could not be brought into
play where there was a greater number in one home. To
this end he personally was prepared to subscribe £5OO a
year for ten years for the upkeep of one such home. This
he would undertake for the present, but in all probability,
if the scheme reached practical form, he would go further.
Already several prominent people had interested them-
selves in it, and he was prepared to fall in with any work-
able proposal that was elaborated.
“Sydney Morning Herald,” 21/6/’18.


“But he who feels the woes and weals
Of all God’s suffering creatures,
He doth good work whose heart can find
The spirit ’neath the letter;
Who makes his kind of happier mind,
Leaves wiser men and better.”
Lowell.
By Australia adopting the principles herein advocated,
the “Sister Bloodhounds, Want and Sin,” will be
vanquished.
