

ftcuts bFt iw iowo ojtf
OFFICE CATHERINES' STRAND
Q bb^
1882
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, & ADELAIDE - GEORGE ROBERTSON


X •JZ2S r “' ICO 3 r -r
rVH Jpl W+» j
'*Jfh PH * 2 r~ o j
V £: _§ 0 U'r-fe'So S
£i
GO K" 1
W
''l
pq"
&s o ug gi 8 a
o- o g
03 w ■• y p w s h
' "sl |
ns§ 3gg«al| a
J<! L jpg
H A •"■< ri (O I H rf)
W 4
i—h ~ Hi
l-H I f J
: \
o x
O °
• C
H-d _i |g
. i
« I Si"
. O D Q
P &
cO 23 is (4 > s ’c3 a
d "a| l-s a 3-2 e 1
A Z -mV O 3 CTi ff
OgfidgoSgfllSa ° t*.
09 & 3 -d
S?t e a|-Sa§B|B
N , ?'S-Sfc 31 x|S &O 3
® i ® -p a
,gg ?
.>> a g a £ q
£© -S ga u . r
og§ « s h .
Hm rt °O > £ : Mr» a
p a m. 3 2 S wO 3
©S H 53 04 W ft_ '-*
c S pss3 ® g~«
O <D I oa ** %i HS J
3a -SSB S|lB|
. <3 2
i 3-3s<2
I a" s e *
.r E ° i_! : 3
:(lr o Hd
Mr w -I
Mu 5 -»«
5 i *
“ cc
§S o 8 ■g" ®so
S £.a|d ||
% o tH
§£§|*
!S ■P SjO
.3 01-Sldl-S.
Iglsa^i
idd 3 d^e;S
■a £ „ u .23 s S
5 j§ a ® 2 £
,3® j a esj
3 2 -p g 2
s „“ <« £ ? |
fi 2d o | ss
a- gp I £ 8
:iltl 33
*s
= §3 a § -
O2 e.s
i•§O O g « s
dofl 3 ” I«
Mlfj*
5 “§li|
5 £ -d ®
3 O ta
} Kill p
'/ !3 o C 3 £ a
« Fslil
5 £ -d a
I . B
I. > S ®
5 PI 2 -P
3 O *rH Ah t/3
J gs^sSf
5 ” fj »g .
t j;
0 S ® A pi
ov ■ ■ ca j> -p o
cc ® r >
S§ R a M
O c 3 Ah -m tea q
.§-2 rj s|« §B|ts
So® S «
•o>u° r .3rss
M W jSsiS
>|2| /—slid
c—< q .fj <g S? £ i—a -1 c a’S
f 1 n h H 0 ?h ? cC 3)


ROWLAND’S ODONTO
Has been celebrated for more than Half a Century as the Best, Purest, and
most Fragrant preparation for the Teeth ever made. It whitens the Teeth,
prevents and arrests decay, strengthens the gums, and gives a pleasing frag-
rance to the brea, • it contains no acid, gritty or mineral substances.
Health depends in a great measure upon the soundness of the Teeth, and
all dentists will allow that neither washes or pastes can possibly be as effica-
cious for polishing the Teeth and keeping them sound and white as a pure
and non-gritty tooth powder ; such Rowland's ODONTO has always
proved itself to be.
Great care must be taken to ask for—
ROWLAND’S ODONTO,
OF 20, HATTON GARDEN, LONDON.
and to see that each box bears the 3d. Government Stamp, without which
no ODONTO is genuine.
ROWLAND’S MACASSAR OIL
Is universally in high repute for its unprecedented success during the last
80 years in promoting the growth, restoring, improving, and beautifying
the human hair. For children it is especially recommended, as forming
the basis of a beautiful head of hair, while its introduction into the
nursery of Royalty is a sufficient proof of its merits. It is prefeotly free
from any lead, mineral, or poisonous ingredients.
Sold by Chemists, Perfumers, and Hairdressers, in usual four sizes.
Avoid spvriom, worthless imitations , and ask for ROWLAND'S Articles,
the only genuine.


CHARLES LANCASTER,
INVENTOR OF THE
SMOOTH OVAL-BORE FOR EXPRESS
( 360, 400, 450, 500 & 577), Prices from £36 to£s6lOs. Nett
ROOK AND RABBIT
(•295, ‘320, -360, and ‘380), Prices from £5 to £lO Nett,
MINIATURE MATCH RIFLES.
GOLD MEDAL AWARDED AT CLEVES, 1881.
See The Field, March 26, April 2, June 11, 18, and 25, July 9, 23, 30, Aug. 6, 20, 1881 ; and
Land and Water, Nov. 29 and Dec. 24. The Field, Feb. 18, 25, May 13, 20, and 27,1882
INVENTOR AND PATENTEE OF
FOUR-BARREL B.L. HAMMERLESS GUN,
WEIGHT 71b. 40z., and
EXPRESS RIFLE,
WEIGHT 101 b.
FOUR-BARREL B.L. PISTOL
Weight 21b. Boz. Price £8 Nett.
TOP LEVER SNAP ACTION
HAMMER OR HAMMERLESS GUN
EJECTING THE EXPLODED GASES.
Prices from £36 to £45 Nett.
-Mt CAE/TRIDGBS 1^
(FOR CASH WITH ORDER ONLY)
10s. per HUNDRED
ELEY’S Best GREEN or KYNOCH’S BRASS CASES, Loaded with three drachms <
Curtis and Harvey’s best Powder, four best Wads, and l£oz. Hard Shot, thin Casi
included. Stout Cases, for rail, Od. first 200, adding 2d. each additional 100.
Schultze Powder, Is. 3d. per 100 Extra.
PRICE LIST ON APPLICATION.
51, NEW BOND STREET, LONDON, W
ESTABLISHED 1826.






THE GREAT MEDICINE.
It gives instant relief in HEADACHE, SEA or BILIOUS
SICKNESS, CONSTIPATION, INDIGESTION, LASSL
TUDE, HEARTBURN, and FEVERISH COLDS; prevents
and quickly relieves or cures the worst form of TYPHUS,
SCARLET, and other FEVERS, SMALLPOX, MEASLES,
and ERUPTIVE or SKIN COMPLAINTS, and various other
altered conditions of the Blood.
'estimony of Medical Gentlemen and the Professional Press has been unqualified in praise of
LAMPLOUGH’S
YRETIC SALINE
assessing most important elements calculated to restore and maintain Health with perfect
Vigour of Body and Mind.
is effervescing and tasteless, and forms a most invigorating,
vitalizing, and refreshing beverage.
, MOR6AW.-“ It furnishes the blood with its lost saline constituents.”
. TURLEY.— “ I found it act as a specific, in my experience and family, in the worst forms of
Fever, no other medicine being required.”
.S. GIBBON - (formerly Physician to the London Hospital).—“l have been in the habit of using
•ivate practice for many years. In hot climates it is of special value.”
. SPARKS (Government Medical Inspectors Emigrants from the port of London) writes-—“ I
eat pleasure in bearing my cordial testimony to its efficacy in the treatment of many of the ordinary
•onio forma of Gastric Complaints and other forms of Febrile Dyspepsia.” J
J. W. DOWSING.- “I used it in the treatment of forty-two cases of Yellow Fever, and am
to state I never lost a single case.”
W. STEVENS.--” Sinceits introduction, the fatal West India Fevers are deprived of their terrors.”
•• ALEX. MILNE. “ In searching for the best combination of Salines we alighted on that of
mplough. Its utility as a remedy in fevers and as a cooling drink in diseases of children, such as
Fever, Measles, &c., has been testified to by the leading members of the profession.” “I prescribe it
my patients frequently.”—l‘Jth May, 1880.
R MAJESTY’S REPRESENTATIVE, the GOVERNOR of SIERRA
ffE, m a letter of request for an additional supply of the Pyretic Saline, states:—“lt is ot urn*
id I shall rejoice to hear it is in the hands of all Europeans visiting the tropics.”
In Patent Glass-stoppered Bottles, as. 6d., 4s, 6d., ns., and 21s. each.
LAMPLOUGH'S
NGENTRATED LIME JUIOE SYRUP
the Fresh Fruit, as imported for the Hospitals ; a perfect luxury ; forms, with the addition of
ic Saline, a most delicious and invigorating beverage, particularly for Total Abstainers, the
ite, and Invalid ; of special service in Scrofula, Fevers , and Rheumatism, and a low or altered
don of the system. Most Chemists sell the above with the Pyretic Saline.
In Patent Glass-stoppered Bottles, 25., and 4s. 6d. each.
. ROWELS BALSAMIC LOZENGES,
For Coughs. Asthmatic, Bronchial and Consumptive Complaints.
excellent Lozenges, prepared only by H. Lamplough, have for many years been found of great
e ; their occasional use often prevents attacks from colds and inflammation. Price is. i \d. perßox.
.ave them in your houses, and forget them not in your travels.”
NOTICE MY TRADE MARK AND NAME,
LAMPLOUGH, 113, HOLBORN HILL. LONDON E.C.


BV PATRONAGE.
GREY STREET
** <r
CANTERBURY.
UNDER * ENTIRELY * NEW 4 MSNiIGEMENT
. is ote * as been tyorougly renoaateb anb refurntsfyeb anb
is replete mitt] enery comfort for ttje reception of anb
? S T t 0 v 5 ' r “**, i 5 situatcb in cmt ™ of ttje City, dose to the
<£attjebrat anb Dane 3ot?n.
H. WARD, Proprietor.


ORME & SONS,
MANCHESTER and GLASGOW.
ESTABLISHED 1845.
BILLIARD TABLE MAKERS
TO
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF WALES.
Sole Makers of the O. S. Cushions, which are guaranteed to
return a Ball Quickly and Noiselessly in the coldest room m
the coldest weather, and to require no heat whatever.
The above Cushions can he attached to any Billiard Table.
Estimates given and suggestions as to furnishing made without charge.
“But not long afterwards an architect showed me a design which he had
made for an armchair, cleverly carved in oak, and very comfortably padded.
It was well executed in the country for five guineas : in London the order
would not have been undertaken for less than ten. —Hints on Household
Taste , page 81, by 0. L. Eastlake, F.R.I.A.
West of England Cloths, Ivory and Ivorine Balls, Cues, Tips, Chalks,
Cements, and every requisite for the completejnrnishing of Billiard Rooms
THE FINEST SHOWROOM IN THE KINGDOM.
ORME & SONS, 53, St. Vincent Street, Glasgow,
AND
11 & 13, ST. ANN STREET, MANCHESTER.


RACKETS. LAIN TENNIS, CRICKET,
AND FOOTBALL.
T. H. PROSSER & SONS
Rackets and Balls, Lawn Tennis, Lawn Tennis
Balls, Fives Bats, Fives Balls, Racket Presses,
Tennis Bats, Balls, Racket Shoes, Archery, Tennis
Shoes, Cricket Bats, Balls, Stumps, &c.
Patronised hi/ the Prince’s Club, Oxford and Cambridge Universities ;
also bit Harrow, Eton, Rugby, Cheltenham, Marlborough, Winchester,
and Uailegburg Schools, <j - e.
TRV
I. H, PROSSER & SON'S LAWN TENNIS SETS,
Complete, £1 10s.
163 & 165, PENTONTHIE EMD, lOSDOS, S’.
WHOLESALE AND FDR EXPORTATION.


AUSTRALIANS IN ENGLAND
COMPLETE RECORD
OF THE
CRICKET TOUR OF 1882,
WITH THE
BATTING AND BOWLING AVERAGES
OF THE
AUSTRALIANS AND THE ENGLISHMEN
WHO PLAYED AGAINST THEM.
REPRINTED, WITH ADDITIONS, FROM “BELL’S LIFE IN LONDON.”
LONDON:
BELL’S LIFE OFFICE, 9, CATHERINE STREET, STRAND.
MANCHESTER :
E. HULTON & CO., MARK LANE, WITHY GROVE.
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, and BRISBANE
GEORGE ROBERTSON.
1882.


PREFACE.
The very favourable reception accorded to this
Record of the Tour of the Australian Eleven, as
it appeared week by week in the columns of Bell’s
Life, has induced the Proprietors of that journal to
republish the articles in Book form.
I am glad of this opportunity of publicly acknow-
ledging the great assistance I received in writing and
preparing these articles from the three principal
members of my reporting staff, Mr. Sydney H.
Pardon, Mr. Edgar S. Pardon, and Mr. C. Stewart
Caine.
Our portrait of the Australian Captain is from an
excellent photograph by Messrs. Stilliard, of Oxford.
I thank the many friends who have wished this
little venture success.
CHARLES F. PARDON.
84, Fleet Street, London,
October 2nd. 1882.


DEC 1992 on
,-V/
[O.
OF APPROVAL.
The Hon. IVO BLIGH,
in Australia, writes:—
Captain of the English Eleven
“I am very glad to hear that you intend
publishing the series of articles in Bell’s Life on
the Australian Tour. They are, undoubtedly, the
best on that subject that I have seen in any paper,
being not only more exhaustive than those of other
papers, but also more correctly estimating the per-
formances and capabilities of the Australians, as they
are estimated among the best judges of the game,
among past and present amateur English cricketers.”
Mr. C. W. BEAL, Manager of the Australian Tour of
1882, writing on the same subject says, he is glad the articles
are to be republished, because—
“In addition to reporting, in what I consider a most
fair and impartial manner, the details of the actual
cricket played by the Australian Eleven during the tour,
they contain a most readable account of the doings of
the Team. I feel certain that your Book will prove
most interesting to all lovers of the game. In Australia,
a record of the visit to England of the Australian Eleven
of 1882, such as you propose to publish, will, I am sure,
be heartily welcomed, and I anticipate a very large
circulation for your Book in the Colonies.”


CONTENTS.
. PAGE
Biographies of the Team v.
The Tour ~ 1
The Tour 1
Australians v. Oxford University 4
v. Sussex 10
v. Orleans Club 15
v. Surrey 20
v. Cambridge University 25
v. Lancashire 31
v. Yorkshire, Bradford 35
v. Nottinghamshire 40
v. Derbyshire 44
v. Yorkshire, Sheffield 48
v. Gentlemen of England 53
v. United Eleven, Chichester 59
v. Leicestershire 64
t’. Northamptonshire 67
v. Middlesex 71
v. M.C.C. and Ground 75
v. Yorkshire, Dewsbury 81
v. Yorkshire, Bradford 84
v. Yorkshire, Middlesborough 89
v. Northumberland 92
v. Gentlemen of Scotland, Edinburgh 94
v. Gentlemen of Scotland, Scratch Match 96
v. Liverpool Club 98
v. Gloucestershire 102
v. Kent 105
“The World” v. Band of Brothers, Scratch Match 109
Australians v. Players of England 110
v. An Eleven of England, Derby 115
v. Cambridge, Past and Present, Portsmouth 120
v. Somersetshire 126
v. Gloucestershire 129
v. England 133
v. United Eleven, Tunbridge Wells 145
v. Nottinghamshire 150
v. I Zingari, Scarborough 155
v. Shaw’s Eleven, Leeds 165
v. North of England, Manchester 167
v. Shaw’s Eleven, Oval 173
v. An Eleven of Scotland, Glasgow 178
„ v. An Eleven of England. Harrogate 181
Summary and Averages, and Table of Results 186
English Batting and Bowling Averages 191


THE AUSTRALIAN TEAM.
William Lloyd Murdoch, the captain of the team, and unquestionably the
most accomplished batsman that Australia has yet produced, was horn at
Sandhurst, Victoria, in 1855, and is consequently 27 years of age, Though a
native of Victoria, however, his cricket career has been exclusively identified
with the sister colony of New South Wales. Murdoch has visited England
with each of the three Australian teams. When ho came over first with
Gregory’s eleven in 1878, his reputation was higher as a wicket-keeper than as a
batsman, but his method of batting was even then superior to that of any of his
colleagues. Indeed it is not too much to say that during that first English
season he laid the foundation of his fame. Of his progress since then it is hardly
necessary to speak. His performances tell their own tale. It must be said,
however, that he shares with W. G. Grace the distinction of being the only
batsman who has played an innings of over 300 in a first-class match. He is not
a great hitter like Massie, but combines a perfect style with splendid defence.
In 1878 and 1880 he was only seen to advantage on hard ground, but at the
present time he is the best bat in the team on all wickets. In 1878 his batting
average in eleven-a-side matches was 13T9, and against odds 15T0. In 1880 he
averaged 25T5 for eleven-a-side contests and 22 - 8 for all matches.
Frederick Robert Spofforth was born in Balmain, near Sydney, on the
9th of September, 1855. The successes of Australian cricketers in England has
been extraordinary, and to that success no one has contributed so much as
Spofforth, In the opinion of many competent judges he is less to be feared than
some of his colleagues on the hard wickets of Melbourne and Sydney, hut judged
by his performances in England he is ahead of any other howler. Certainly no
one has ever inspired English batsmen with so much dread. The peculiarities
of his style are well known, No one can better vary his pace without betraying
the change in his action; no one can get more break on a quick ball than he can
when the ground helps him; no one can bowl a faster “yorker,” and no one can
detect more rapidly the weak points in a batsman’s defence. In the early part
of the tour that is j ust over Spofforth was hardly himself, hut in August he got
thoroughly into form. Like Murdoch, Blackham, Boyle, and Bannerman, he
has visited England with each team. In 1878 he took 107 wickets in eloven-a-side
matches with an average of 11 "64 per wicket. For all matches the bowling
figures were not preserved. His batting average was 12’23 for eleven-a-side
matches and 1'34 for the whole tour. In 1880 he was still more successful. In
eleven-a-side matches he took 46 wickets at a cost of B’2B each, and in all matches
the wonderful number of 391 wickets with an average of 56'3. Owing to an
accident he was unable to howl after the 19th of August, and so had to stand out
of some of the best matches, including the memorable contest with England. In
hatting he averaged 21T for eleven-a-side matches and 13'4 for the tour. The
figures given apply only to matches played in England.
Alexander Chambers Bannerman, who was born in Sydney on the 21st of
March, 1859, has visited England with each of the three teams, and has justly
earned his reputation as the steadiest batsman in Australia and one of the most
brilliant fieldsmen in the world. His career has been one of continued improve-
ment, and he is a better cricketer now than ever he was before. As a batsman
he possesses inexhaustible patience and a remarkable defence. In 1878 he had a


batting average of 11*3 in eleven-a-side matches and 2110 against odds, while in
1880 he averaged 17‘29 for the whole tour, and 17 - 9 for eleven-a-side matches. In
addition to his powers as a bat and field, he is a fair change bowler—medium
pace with a lower delivery than is usually adopted by Australians. He is
engaged in the Government printing office at Sydney.
Henry Frederick Boyle is the oldest member of the team, having been
born at Sydney on the 10th of December, 1847. When only three years old he
removed to Victoria, and with that colony he has ever since been associated.
His cricket career has indeed been a busy one, dating back to 1862. A more
useful man in an eleven it would be hard to name. It is impossible to put him
out of his place, Without being a finished or scientific batsman he is likely to
make runs, while his bowling and fielding are undeniably first-rate. Alfred
Shaw himself has not a more accurate pitch, and on soft wickets he is exceed-
ingly difficult. With each of the three teams in England he has been successful.
In 1878 he took 64 wickets in the eleven-a-side matches at a cost of 9’44 runs per
wicket, and bowled with great effect in the contests against odds. As a batsman
he did not do much, scoring only 317 runs in the whole tour. In 1880 he took 39
wickets in the eleven-a-side matches with an average of 15'31, and 250 wickets in
the whole tour with an average of 7'loo. After Spofforth’s accident he and
Palmer had to do all the work; and very well they did it. In batting he
improved, averaging 15 for eleven-a-side contests and 13'25 for all matches.
John Me. Garthy Blackham, the greatest of living wicket-keepers, is in his
28th year, having been born at Fitzroy, Melbourne, on the 11th of May, 1855. Of
his extraordinary excellence in his special position there is no need to speak.
Since he first came to England with Gregory’s team in 1878, his claim to the first
rank has scarcely been disputed, even by the warmest admirers of the Hon.
Alfred Lyttelton and Pilling. He can probably take the ball closer to the wicket
than anyone else, and is wonderfully safe and brilliant on the leg side. Like all
other famous wicket-keepers he has at times been severely knocked about, but
no accident, up to the present, has had power to shake his nerve. His celebrity
as a wicket-keeper has overshadowed his other qualifications. His style of
batting is too cramped to be attractive to the onlooker, but he has a stubborn
defence, and is seen to advantage when his side is in difficulties. If unable to
keep wicket, he can field superbly at mid-off. In 1878 his batting average was
19‘9 in eleven-a-side matches and 1311 against odds. In 1880 he averaged 1310 in
eleven-a-side contests and 16'33 for the tour.
Thomas William Garrett was born at Wollongorg, near Sydney, New
South Wales, on the 26th of July, 1858, and therefore had not completed his 20th
year when he visited England in 1878. He did not make one of the 1880 team. It
cannot be said that he has ever justified in England the batting reputation he
enjoys at home, but as a bowler he is certainly first-rate, being very straight
with a capital delivery, and at times a formidable break from the off. A special
feature of his bowling is the ease with which he can send down a very fast ball,
his action being singularly deceptive. Like Spofforth and Palmer, he bowls a
splendid “yorker.” In the field he is both safe and brilliant, standing frequently
at cover-point. His bowling average in the eleven-a-side matches in 1878 was
1016 for 38 wickets, and in the whole tour he scored 611 runs. Garrett is in the
Civil Service of New South Wales, and is qualified to practice as a solicitor.
Thomas Horan, the most famous of Victorian batsmen, was born in March,
1855, and is consequently in his 28th year. Since 1876 he has had no rival in his
own colony, and at the present time he is in the prime of his powers. His style
of play is not attractive to the spectator, but he is so patient, and watches the
ball so well that he is an exceptionally difficult man to get rid of. He came to
England with Gregory’s team, but did not sustain his reputation, his average in
eleven-a-side matches being 1312, and against odds 1519. He was not in the best
health, being fatigued by the continual cricket and the long journeys. He did
not join Murdoch’s party in 1880, but was an early choice when the third trip


was decided on. His play this season proved that his home reputation had been
well earned. At one point of the tour he was ahead of Murdoch on the averages,
hut soon fell hack into second place. Horan is not so safe a fieldsman as any of
his companions, but is often brilliant. He is in the Audit Office at Melbourne
and is also connected with the Australasian.
Percy Stanislaus M ‘Donnell is, with the single exception of Jones, the
youngest member of the team. He was born in London on the 13th of November,
1860, but by education and associations he is thoroughly Australian, his parents
having settled in Melbourne when he was quite a child. He was chosen to play
for Victoria against New South Wales when he was only eighteen, and among
the batsmen of his own colony he is now only second to Horan. The peculiarity
of his play is an extraordinary power of driving. He can probably hit as hard as
any batsman in Australia, except Bonnor and Massie. He came to England with
Murdoch’s team in 1880, and in batting was second to his captain. He averaged
23'4 for eleven-a-side matches, and 21T2 for the whole tour. He was dangerously
ill on the voyage from Australia last Spring, and had hardly recovered when he
arrived. This fact will account for some early failures. Like most Australian
cricketers he is a brilliant field.
George Eugene Palmer was born at Albury, New South Wales, on the 22nd
of February, 1860, but as a cricketer he has been solely identified with Victoria.
He first made his name by bowling with great success against Lord Harris’s
team at Melbourne in 1879, and since then he has ranked higher than any other
bowler in Victoria, taking almost the same position that was held for so many
years by Frank Allan. He has a beautifully easy action, and breaks both ways.
It was with Murdoch’s team in 1880 that he first came to England. In eleven-a-
side matches he took 80 wickets with an average of 11T4, and in the whole
tour 268 wickets with an average of 7'227. His batting average was 14 - 3 in
eleven-a-sides and 7’7 in all matches. During the tour of the present year he
bowled wonderfully well, but owing to a severe strain his services were lost to
the team after the 12th of August.
George John Bonnor was born at Bathurst, in New South Wales, on the
25th of February, 1855. Little was known of him in England till he came over
with Murdoch’s team in 1880, but his magnificent physique at once attracted
attention. He stands 6ft. 6in., but is so finely proportioned that his great height
gives no suggestion of awkwardness. At the present time he is the hardest
hitter in the world, and it would have been a nice point between him and C. I.
Thornton at his best. In the 1880 tour he only averaged 9TO for eleven-a-side
matches, but his general average was 16’30. His play this last season was very
uneven, but his great performances at Scarborough, the Oval, and Portsmouth
will not easily be forgotten. Bonnor never represented New South Wales in the
inter-colonial matches, but was in the Victorian eleven last season, having
changed his residence from Sydney to Melbourne.
Hugh Hamon Massie, the most dashing and brilliant batsman in the colonies,
was born in Belfast, Victoria, on the 11th of April, 1854. When he was only
three years old his parents removed to New South Wales, and in that colony he
learnt all his cricket. He did not come into prominence until later than many
of his colleagues, playing his first inter-colonial match in 1878. We believe he
was asked to join Gregory’s team in 1878, and Murdoch’s in 1880, but business
reasons prevented him accepting the invitations, and until this year he has never
been in England. So much had been heard of him, however, that he could
hardly be regarded as a stranger. That he is so sound a batsman as Murdoch,
Horan, or Bannerman, no one will contend, but nevertheless he has fully
justified his reputation. No living player can score so fast, his feat of making
100 runs at Oxford in a minute under an hour being probably without precedent
in a first-class match. In addition to his powers as a batsman, he is one of the
best and safest of out-fields, very rarely missing a catch.


George Giffen, the sole representative of South Australia, is 23 years,
having been born on the 27th of March, 1859. He had never previously visited
England, though there was some talk of bringing him over with Murdoch’s team
in 1880. His splendid innings against Shaw’s team at Adelaide, and his subse-
quent fine play in the_ Combination match at Melbourne determined his
selection—a selection which his all-round cricket has more than justified. To be
seen at his best he wants a very good wicket, but few Australians bat in better
style. The fact that after his phenomenal success against the Gentlemen at the
Oval he bowled so little, would indicate that he owed more on that occasion to
the state of the ground than was generally admitted. All the same he is a very
good bowler —rather uncertain in length, but able to get a lot of work on the
ball. It was generally considered that Murdoch should have put him on more
frequently. He is engaged in the General Post Office at Adelaide.
Samuel Percy Jones is the youngest member of the team, and, like Massie
and Giffen, had never visited England before. He was born in Sydney on the
Ist of August, 1861, and is therefore only 21 years old. As is well known, he
was only selected when it became known for certain that Evans would not risk
the journey, but on his performances during the last Australian season he was
fully entitled to his place. It would be idle to pretend, however, that he has
justified the expectations formed of him. No one who saw him play at Canter-
bury can doubt that he possesses genuine ability as a batsman, but that ability
has seldom been displayed. Had the wickets remained firm and hard as they
were when the team commenced playing, ho would in all probability have done
better, for he has not yet learned to play with much effect on slow wickets.
Such small amount of bowling as he has attempted has been curiously unsuccess-
ful, but he has nearly always shown great smartness and accuracy in the field.
Charles William Beal, the popular manager of the team, was born in 1855.
and though never a prominent cricketer himself, has been closely associated
with the game in Sydney for several years. His genial manner and unvarying
courtesy have gained him golden opinions in all parts of England. It is not too
much to say that Mr. Beal sailed for America with the good wishes of all with
whom he came in contact.


NO STABLE IS COMPLETE WITHOUT
[LLiMAN’S ROYAL
EMBROCATIO
For Sprains of all kinds. Curbs, and Splints
For Overreaches, Chapped Heels, Wind Galls
For Rheumatism in Horses,
For Broken Knees, Bruises, Wounds, Capped
Hock.
For Sore Throats and Influenza.
For Sore Shoulders, Sore Backs.
For Sore Mouths in Sheep and Lambs.
For Foot Rot in Sheep.
For Spra'ns, Cuts, and Bruises in Dogs.
From His Grace the Duke of Rutland, Master ofc Belvoir Hunt.
Belvoir, Grantham, Dec. Ist, 1819.
Sirs, —Elliman’s Royal Embrocation is used in my stables; I think it very useful.
Rutland.
SPECIMEN TESTIMONIALS.
From Lieut.-Col. R. H. Price, Master of Radnorshire Hunt.
Castle Weir. Kingstone, Herefordshir. O 137
Gentlemen, —I use the Royal Embrocation in the Stables and Kennels, and have found
it very serviceable. I have also used the Universal Embrocation for Lumbago and Rheu-
matism for the last two years, and have suffered very little since using it.
R. H. Price, Lieut.-Col,
From Glass Houghton Collieries, near Castleford.
Nov. 22nd, 1880.
Dear Sir,— Enclosed please find an order for 12 dozen 3 6 size Royal Embrocation for
horses as before, which kindly send off at your convenience, to our Colliery sidings near
Pontefract. J. d. Thorp’s Exora,
Of Chemists and Saddlers, in Bottles, 2 5. , 2s. Gd. , and 3s. Gd.
Proprietors: ELLIMAN, SONS, & CO., SLOUGH.


FAMILY AND COMMERCIAL HOTEL.
SAMUEL THOMPSON,
H THE + UNION,
CLAYTON SQUARE.
LIVERPOOL.


he “Sporting Mirror/'
MONTHLY, 6d.; Post Free, Bd.
The Summer Numbers of this interesting and high-class Monthly contain
FULL-PAGE PORTRAITS
And Detailed Biographies of
HE AUSTRALIAN CRICKETERS:
No. 18. (July) contained Portraits, &c., of
W. L. MURDOCH. F. R. SPOFFORTH.
I. P. JONES. G. J. BONNOR. G. GIPFEN.
No. 19. (August) contained Portraits, &c., of
A. C. BANNERMAN. J. M. BL
J. M. BLACKHAM.
T. W. GARRETT. T. HORAN.
No. 20. (September) contained Portraits, &c., of
I. W. BEAL. H. F. BOYLE. P. S. McDONNELL.
No. 21. (October) contained Portraits, Ac., of
H. H. MASSIE. G. E. PALMER.
Each Month contains averages of their Bowling and Batting np to the
honr of going to press, also numerous Articles on all branches of Sport by
well-known writers ; in addition to Portraits and Biographies of other
Sportsmen.
Price 6d.; Post free, 8d
Of all Booksellers, Newsagents, and Bookstalls, or of
TTATtRY ETHERIEGTCW, 152, FLEET STREET, E.C.


Exporters supplied on faoourable Cerms.


THE AUSTRALIAN TOUR.
On March 16 the most powerful team of Colonial cricketers
that ever left the shores of Australia sailed from Melbourne in
the Peninsular and Oriental steamer “Assam.” Their voyage was
long, but fine and pleasant, while they all enjoyed excellent health
except M‘Donnell, who was suffering from an attack of sun-stroke
when he embarked. He, however, had recovered, and the whole
team were in the best of spirits when the “ Assam ” reached
Plymouth, on May 3. Here Murdoch, Bonnor, Garrett, and Mr.
Beal, the manager, disembarked, and came on to London by the
evening train. Before they left Plymouth a curious wager was
decided, which I think worth mentioning. During the voyage a
passenger on board the “ Assam ” offered to bet Bonnor a
considerable sum of money that, on the day the latter landed in
England, he would not, without a preliminary trial, throw a cricket
ball 115 yards. Bonnor accepted the challenge, and on the
afternoon of their arrival won the bet, his throw being 119 yards
5 inches. The four Australians I have mentioned arrived at
Paddington early next morning, and later in the day the rest of
who had come round to London in the ship, reached
their old quarters, the Tavistock Hotel, Covent Garden.
They were fully satisfied with their programme, and had good
reason to be so, for neither of the previous teams had anything
like so good a list of matches before them. The contests, which


were all eleven a-side, had been arranged by Mr. H. Perkins,
secretary of the Marylebone Club, who, except for three days in
June, had made fixtures from May 15 until the middle of Sep-
tember. Thus, there was no fear of the tour being almost spoilt,
like that of 1880, when nearly the whole of the summer was
occupied in matches against local eighteens—matches in which
no possible interest could be felt except as to how many wickets
Spofforth and Palmer had taken, and how many runs Murdoch
and M‘Donnell had made. The team were delighted with their
reception in London, and from the start anticipated a success,
both from a cricket and a social point of view. How well that
expectation was realized the pages of this book will tell.
Murdoch had been elected captain, but the selection of the
cloven for each match was decided by a committee composed of
Murdoch, Blackham, and Bannerman,
In order to get into form the team had several days’ practice
at Mitcham, and here it was soon seen what a powerful side
they formed. The play of those who had been in England before
was recognised as quite as good as in previous years, while Massie,
Giffcn, and Jones all created favourable impressions, Massie’s
brilliant hitting finding many admirers. The practice concluded
on Thursday, May 11, and on the following day the team were
entertained by some Colonists and English cricketers.
The luncheon took place in the city, and by the presence of
Alderman Hadley and Alderman and Sheriff Hanson, as well as by
the fact that the host, Mr. T. J. Thomas, is a common councilman,
the affair was looked upon as, in some sense, a city reception.
The luncheon over several speeches were made. Mr. Thomas, the
head of the firm at 138, Queen Victoria-street, proposed “ The
Lord Mayor and Corporation,” for whom Mr. Alderman and
Sheriff Hanson responded. The “ Health of the Australian


Cricketers ” followed, coupled with the name of Mr. Murdoch,
the captain, who in a neat speech expressed the extreme gratifi-
cation of the team with the genial hospitality with which they
had been everywhere received. He hoped when the tour was
over all Englishmen would have the same good opinion as now of
the Australian cricketers. Alderman Hadley proposed the toast
of “ The Colonies,” and Mr. Stewart, a former member of the
the Queensland Legislative Assembly, responded. “ The City of
London and its Commerce ” was proposed by Mr. Morgan
(Ross, Morgan, and Co., Sydney), and responded to by Mr.
Joyce (Weintraud, Joyce, and Co.) Mr. W. R. Thomas proposed
“The Press,” to which toast Mr. C. F. Pardon and Mr. T.
Horan responded, and the company afterwards separated.


AUSTRALIANS v. OXFORD UNIVERSITY,
Played on the Christ Church Ground, May 15, 16 and 17.
No start could have been more auspicious than that made by the
Australians. Massie placed himself on the highest pinnacle of cricket
fame, and the new team made for themselves a reputation quite as great
as that enjoyed by either of the Old Elevens. Ten of the team left
London for Oxford by the 10 o’clock North Western train on Sunday
morning, arriving at the Clarendon Hotel about half-past 1. After
luncheon, as a matter of course, visits were paid to the cricket grounds.
The afternoon was splendidly line and bright, so that the first impressions
of Oxford were very glowing. The wicket for the morrow’s match was
examined, and the general verdict was that it would be fast and a bit
fiery. The University ground in the Parks was admired. It was perhaps
a pity the Parks ground was not possible for the big match, but by the
strict and positive ruling of the University authorities the ground is
quite open and free to the public, There is no big match in the season
that is altogether independent of a “gate,” and it could not be expected
that this would be an exception to the rule. As it tumod out there was
no real fault to be found with the Christ Church wicket, and the match
was played through without a hitch.
After dinner a few men enjoyed a small Sunday evening college wine,
but the majority of the team had a fire lighted in the smoke room of the
“Clarendon,” and talked cricket till bed time. Spofforth, Massie, and
Bonnor went down from London by the night train, and were not seen
till breakfast on Monday. The day was fine, but with a bitterly cold
east wind. Only a moderately large company was present at the com-
mencement of the game, but in the afternoon a lot more people came up,
and there was a really good ring. Murdoch beat Harrison in the toss for
choice of innings—a big bit of luck for the Australians. It Avould have
been a good thing for the match had Oxford won the toss, and been able
to start the batting. There was some talk before beginning about the
selection made. Of course two of the 13 Australians were forced to
stand out, and Bonnor, who had had a bad finger and had had no practice,
was sure to be one of them. But it was rather a surprise when it was
found that Horan would be the other. The decision was come to after
breakfast on Monday. I heard it whispered that the choice lay between
Boyle, Horan, Jones, and Massie. It seems strange, after the tremendous
preformance of Massie in the match, that there was ever any question of
leaving him out. It goes to show the great strength of the team, that the
best bat, or very nearly the best bat in Victoria, was left out because,
perhaps, he seemed a bit off in practice.


H. H. Massie, c Godfrey, b Harrison 12
would liave been far more pleasant reading for Oxonians, and for many
supporters of English cricket, than the line that now appears on record.
H. H. Massie, c Hamilton b Peake 206
I have said that Murdoch won the toss. He, of course, chose first
innings, and at a few minutes past twelve sent in Bannerman and Massie.
The bowlers were Robinson and Harrison. The former is not so fast as
last year, but he gets more work on the ball, and now and then “ comes
with his arm ”in a puzzling way. Harrison was captain, in the absence
of M'Lachlan, whose injured knee again gave way a month or so before
and was not right yet. Kemp kept wicket, and did well. He let off some
balls, but stood up pluckily to all the bowling, fast and erratic as most
of it was. The throwing in, too, was wild and excited, and considering
the cold wind in addition, the wicket keeper on Monday had no enviable
task. Most of my readers are, I suppose, familiar with the main facts
of the Monday’s play. I shall not, therefore weary them with details.
Still, Massie’s performance was so remarkable, that it would be absurd
to pass it over in silence. He was only just over three hours scoring his
206, he made 200 out of 257, and the score, when he got out—to a really
well-judged catch in the long-field—was only 265. He made 24 fours,
15 threes, and 15 twos. The Australians say he has played faster and
hit harder, but for my part I have, I think, never seen a more free and
dashing innings. He was missed at third man by Godfrey when he had
only made 12. I won’t say anything rough about that. A man gets
plenty of reproaches from his own thoughts and his own friends when he
misses a chance of catching early a batsman who afterwards makes a
long score. Still, if the ball had stuck in Godfrey’s left hand when it
got there, the game would have been a trifle different.
Again, Robinson might, had he been looking out sharp, have caught
him at slip when he was about 97, and if the ball had been well returned
and cleanly taken, Massie might have been run out. These faults, how-
ever, were all in the first half of the innings—the 104 he made before
lunch. Afterwards his hitting and play were magnificently brilliant and
good. Of course the Oxford bowling is by no means deadly on a fast
wicket, and some of the Oxford fielding is only so so ; but for a man
new to English grounds, and who had only landed in the country ten
days before, to make such a score so well and so quickly, stamps him as
a phenomenal batsman. His last 100 only occupied 59 minutes.
There were many people very unhappy about tliis business: they talked
as if England had no chance. We should not however, have been much
surprised if Lancashire or Yorkshire had scored 362 against Oxford on a
fast, dry wicket, and Hornby or Ulyett had, made 200 off his own bat.
Thornton’s England Eleven did quite as well against Cambridge as the
Australians did against Oxford, and, from what I hear, Lucas’s 145 was
a superb batting display. The two men who were at the top of the
averages for the last tour—Murdoch and M‘Donnell—didn’t make a run
between them, and, though Garrett scored 41, he didn’t make them quite
well enough to please me. Jones was in a long, long time for his 39.
Gitfen’s 19 was veiy stylish, and altogether the three new men came off
surprisingly well. Boyle, when he came out with a duck’s egg against


his name, received the cordial sympathy of Murdoch and M‘Donnell,
who were sitting in front of the Pavilion, and who
“in
silence and
sorrow unbroken ” went up and shook hands with him.
The Australians were all out at 25 minutes to 6.
The analysis of
Oxford’s bowling is not very edifying.
The ground
was too good for
Harrison and Shaw, the slow bowlers, while the fast
bowlers were not
cood enough for the batsmen. These are the figures :
Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Robinson 34 ..
13
.. 78 .
2
Harrison 40 .
11
.. 98 .
2
Godfrey 21 ..
3
.. 65 .
2
Peake 40 ..
14
.. 82 .
3
Shaw 13 ..
6
.. 26 .
1
Thornton 9 ..
4
.. 9 .
0
One of the most unsatisfactory things a side can have to do is to go in
for about a quarter of an hour’s batting, after having fagged in the field
all day long. Still, it is one of the chances of cricket, and men have to
put up with it now and again. Because Oxford had to do it on Monday
was, therefore, no sufficient reason for Peake spooning a ball up to mid-
off, and Whiting being bowled by a plain fast ball—the first he had to
play. After these two wickets had gone down Monday’s play ended.
The colonists Avere entertained at dinner in the fine old hall of Corpus
Christi by the Oxford University Cricket Club. M‘Lachlan proposed
“ The Health of the Australian Eleven.” Murdoch, who is by constant
practice becoming quite an orator, responded. The toast of “The
Manager ” Avas replied for by that gentleman, and then Lord Eskdaill’s
health was drunk.
This brings me to the close of the first day of the Australians’ tour, a
day that will be ever memorable for Massie’s superb hitting, and a day
which ensured the cricket, the social, and the financial success of the
trip.
The not-outs, Shaw (2) and Kemp (1), resumed their innings at ten
minutes past twelve on Tuesday, the Australian boAvlers being Spofforth
and Palmer. The field was placed thus—Blackham, Avicket-keeper;
Murdoch, point; Boyle, mid-on ; Bannerman, mid-off; M‘Donnell, slip ;
Massie, sharp leg and long-off; Jones, cover point and long-on; Giffen,
long-on and deep third man ; and Garrett, long off and cover-point.
When not bowling Spofforth stood third man and Palmer long-stop
The pair took the score from five to 44 by some excellent batting.
Kemp made two particularly good hits, an off-drive for four from
Spofforth, and a late cut for four from Palmer. Then Boyle, who had
gone on for the former, clean bowled Kemp Avith a A T ery simple ball.
Leslie, the next batsman, did not play his game, but while he Avas in 34
runs w r ere made, Shaw hitting Boyle three times for four—straight drive,
cut, and leg-hit. Walker batted in beautiful form, and Avas finely
caught at the Avicket when he seemed to be getting set. Previous to
this Garrett and Spofforth had taken the places of Palmer and Boyle.
Then matters Avent badly with the Oxford men —Thornton Avas cleaned
boAvled, Hamilton brilliantly taken at long-off, Harrison caught at long-
on, and Godfrey run out. This made nine for 132, and the innings
looked to be ail over. Robinson became ShaAv’s tenth partner, and
some of the best cricket of the day Avas shoAvn. Without giving any-


Spofforth
29 .
10 ...
... 39 ...
... 2
Palmer
25-3.
9 ...
... 36 ...
... 3
Boyle
25 .
5 ...
... 66 ...
... 2
Garrett
20 .
4 ...
... 35 ...
... 2
Jones
1 .
0 ...
... 1 ...
... 0
Spofforth bowled one no ball.
thing like a chance the pair went on scoring rapidly from all bowlers.
When the score was 187 Shaw returned a ball to Palmer, who failed to
make the catch. This had but little effect upon the total, as in
Palmer’s next over he bowled Robinson for 28, the innings closing for 189.
E. D. Shaw, in first on Monday night, carried out his bat for 78, an
innings of the highest merit and value. He was over three hours
batting —longer, indeed, than Massie took to score his 206—but his
patient care in playing good, strange bowling, and the hard, resolute
manner in which he hit at times do him great credit. But for Shaw
Oxford would have made a very poor show. He hit six fours, four
threes, and four twos. The Australian fielding was very good indeed
for a first appearance. The men were active and dashing as ever, and
except once or twice, backed up exceedingly well. The way in which
the field was altered to suit the different styles of batsmen was admirable.
The bowling analysis shows that Boyle was easy on the good wicket,
and that Spofforth was by no means formidable : —-
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
In a minority of 173 runs on the first innings, the Oxonians were of
course obliged to follow on. The not out, Shaw, began with Peake to
the bowling of Palmer and Jones. Only 16 runs had been made when
Shaw was smartly taken at extra mid-off. Leslie came in, and the score
rose fast. Boyle took the ball from Jones at 42, and Giffen soon after-
wards bowled in Palmer’s place. Still no wicket fell, so at 62 Garrett
went on. From the new man’s second ball Peake was missed at slip by
M‘Donnell—an easy chance. Not much harm was done, however, for at
73 a bailer dismissed Peake for 28. Walker did very little, a ball from
Giffen breaking back, and taking the off stump ; three for 85. Whiting
came next, and Spofforth took the ball from Garrett. Just before time,
a smart catch by Giffen, the bowler, ended Leslie’s innings. The Oxford
crack had scored 56 by a four, seven threes, eight twos, and singles.
The Australians formed a very high opinion of Leslie from this innings.
Thornton came in, and when stumps were drawn for the day the score
was 118 for four wickets, Whiting being 15 (not out) and Thornton 4
(not out). Fifty-four runs were thus required to avert a single-innings
defeat.
On Wednesday the weather was delightful. There was a little wind,
but only enough to moderate the extreme heat of the sun. There were
only a few people at the start of play, but after lunch there must have
been more than 3,000 spectators. These, added to the large attendances
of Monday and Tuesday, brought the receipts up to a very respectable
figure, as the charge for admission was a shilling a head for some parts of
the ground, and half a crown for others. I am told that the Oxford
people never showed up in such numbers before at a cricket match, or,
indeed, any sporting event.
Giffen and Palmer bowled to the not-outs when the game was re-
sumed at ten minutes past 12. Thornton was neatly caught at forward


square-leg at 134, and Kemp got out directly afterwards. Hamilton and
Whiting then made a most useful stand, hitting the score from 135 to 198,
causing several changes of howling, and saving the single-innings defeat.
Then Hamilton was easily caught at cover point for a well-hit 37.
Harrison came next, hut at 219 lost Whiting, who had played in ad-
mirable form, a most useful 55. The chief hits were two fours, three
threes, and eight twos. Godfrey did nothing, and at a quarter past three
Harrison was bowled for a well-hit 25, and the innings was over. Giffen
bowled far the best, as his analysis shows. The others were by no means
effective on the dry, fast, easy wicket:
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Palmer 27-3 12 42 2
Jones 10 3 20 0
UIICO 1U O ZU U
Boyle 28 8 30 1
Giffen 36 14 78 7
Garrett 11 ..' 1 27 0
Spofforth 17 2 28 6
The Colonists had 62 runs to get to win, and this number, thanks to
Massie’s grand hitting, they made in three quarters of an hour. Banner-
man was clean bowled by a fine ball from Robinson before a run had
been made ; then Murdoch joined Massie. The latter was very badly
missed, indeed, by Hamilton at extra-mid off when he had only made 14,
and the total was 28. After that he hit with wonderful power and
rapidity, and won the match hand over hand. His figures were six fours,
two threes, three twos, and 10 singles. But for this mistake, and a very
hard chance to Shaw at third man when the game was nearly over, the
Oxford fielding was good—that of Walker especially so. Bowling
analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wicke
Robinson 11 3 18 1
Harrison 9 5 17 0
J.J.CIJLIXOU.II J U JU U
Peake 4-2 1 19 0
Godfrey 2 1 7 0
Godfrey bowled a wide.
Below is the full score of the match, which the Australians won by nine
wickets :
AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, c Hamilton, b Peake 206
A. C. Bannerman, b Robinson 14
W. L. Murdoch, b Robinson o
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Harrison 0
G. Giffen, b Peake 19
J. M. Blackham, c Godfrey, b Shaw 7
S. P. Jones, c Whiting, b Harrison 39
T. W. Garrett, b Godfrey 41
G. E. Palmer, b Peake 18
H. F. Boyle, b Godfrey 0
F. R. Spofforth, not out 14
B 2, 1 b 2 4
Total ..362
In the second innings, Massie scored (not out) 46, Bannerman (b Robinson)
Murdoch (not out) 15; Ib2, w b I—total 64.


1st inn.
2nd inn.
E. Peake, c Bannerman, b Palmer
2
b Giffen
28
E. I). Shaw, not out
78
c Jones, b Palmer.
9
M. C. Kemp, b Royle
23
b Giffen
0
A. O. Whiting, b Palmer
0
b Boyle
55
C. F. H. Leslie, c Murdoch, b Boyle
13
c and b Giffen ...
56
J. G. Walker, c Blackham, b Garrett
17
b Giffen
1
W. A. Thornton, b Garrett
2
c Jones, b Giffen .
13
W. D. Hamilton, c Gitfen, b Spofforth
5
c Jones b Giffen .
37
G. C. Harrison, c Gitfen, b Spofforth
7
b Palmer
25
C. J. M. Godfrey, run out
,. 2
b Giffen
1
G. C. Robinson, b Palmer
28
not out
0
Byes 9,1 b 2, n b 1
12
Byes 2,1 b 7 ...
9
Total
189
Total
234
UNIVERSITY,
What appeared to he an excellent novelty was exhibited on the
ground during the Oxford match, and that was a patent scoring hoard,
or cricket telegraph. The figures, which are very distinctly painted on
canvas, work on rollers moved hy small handles, in a similar way to that
seen in office date-boxes. By this machine the tedious and slow process
of shifting and hanging the loose iron plates is done away with, and there
is a great saving of time and trouble. The new-fashioned board,
which is the invention of Mr. F. Dening, of Chard, Somerset,
was set up at Oxford beside the old machine, and before I
knew anything about the new idea, I noticed from the Pavilion
how much more quickly and plainly the score was shown on one board
than on the other. Every one who saw it admitted the great improve-
ment, and many wondered no one had thought of the notion before. I
have often been irritated by the delays in putting up the totals, and the
new board can be worked instantaneously. I suppose I shall be charged
with puffing, but when I see a good thing I am not afraid to say so.
The colonists left Oxford by the 7-30 p.m. North Western train after-
dinner at the Clarendon, where, I believe, the team were very comfortable.
Cabinet photographs of the men were taken in the afternoon by Stilliard
and Co., who have been very successful in their portraits of cricketers.
The new colours—red, black, and yellow —were suggested by the colours
of the 96th Regiment, or what used to be the 96th. I havn’t the Army
List by me, and I forget the new name. The Australians during the
Oxford match wore their old colours, some the faded magenta and
black of the 1880 team, and others the older, but better preserved, blue
and black of the 1878, The new uniform was first worn in the Surrey
match.


AUSTRALIANS v SUSSEX.
Played at Brighton, May 18, 19 and 20.
A saloon carriage attached to the 9-30 train from London Bridge
carried the Australians down to Brighton on Thursday Morning. The
Selection Committee choose the team on the way down, and it was
announced on arrival that the two to he left out were Boyle and Bonnor.
Of course neither man was perfectly happy, but two must stand out, and
as a necessary consequence two must he disapointed. There were two
alterations in the Sussex team. M. P. Lucas had hurt himself, and
Harry Phillips’s injured knee had again given way. The vacant places
were filled by W. Humphreys and A. Payne.
Play began at twenty minutes past 12, Sussex having won the toss,
starting the hatting with Ellis and Greenfield, the howlers being Palmer
and Spofforth. The weather was fine and sunny, with a fresh, breeze
blowing up from the sea. The wicket played very fast and true, hut
Sussex altogether hatted shockingly. Ellis and Greenfield played pretty
well, and put on 30 for the first wicket. Whitfield exhibited some of his
usual care for 13. He was howled by the first hall of an over from
Palmer, The second howled Blackman, and the third Lucas. Thus the
famous young Victorian had the honour of performing the hat trick
against a county team on a perfect wicket and in a splendid light. The
bowling of Palmer was certainly far better than that of Spoftbrth, who,
though very fast and fairly straight, was not deadly. The best bit of
cricket before lunch was the catch at forward cover-point with which
Gitfen dismissed Greenfield. It was a hard hit, and Giffen took the ball
at the third attempt. But for this the Sussex total might have been much
better, for the “ Hurst-Johnnian,” as a dear old friend of mine used.to
call him, was well-set, and playing with confidence. The ,score at lunch
was 73 _ for eight wickets. Payne was howled afterwards at 86.
Lillywhite hit Palmer to leg for 3, and was then missed, amid much
laughter, from a skyer by Jones at mid-off. Humphreys was then easily
stumped, and the innings, which had lasted Just over two hours, closed
for 95. Humphreys had hit in fair form. Palmer’s howling performance
was a great one, as the figures show :
_ , Overs. Maidens. Runs Wickets.
Palmer 35.2 14 48 8
Spofforth 35 15 43 2


If anything had been wanted to give the Australians confidence, the
fact of their opponents getting out for under 100 on such a wicket as
Thursday’s ought to have been enough. But the colonists did not want
confidence. They began hatting with Bannerman and Massie, Lillywhite
and Blackman howling. The start was made at 20 minutes to 4, and
when time was called at 6 o’clock 274 runs had been scored for the loss of
only two wickets. The wretched Sussex total was beaten before the first
Australian wicket fell. Then Massie, who had hit with great
freedom at a terrific pace, was caught from a skyer at mid-off, close in.
He broke his bat, and had to use a strange one that he did not like, and
he was not seen to such advantage as at Oxford. Still his hitting
astonished the natives a hit, and he gave no chance till the one he was
caught from. Massie hit eight fours. Murdoch joined Bannerman, who
had been scoring even faster than Massie, and the weak howling was
knocked about again. Runs had all along come at the rate of two per
minute, and no variety of bowling was able to keep down the score. I
ought to say, while talking of variety of howling, that Murdoch formally
protested on the ground in front of the Pavilion to Lucas, the Sussex
captain, against the howling of Blackman. Murdoch declared that
Blackman threw, and on that ground objected to him. No attention was
however paid to the complaint, and Blackman went on as before. Now,
perhaps I am not called upon to give an opinion on the subject of
Blackman’s delivery. I shall, however, say that in my judgment it is
not fair. I don’t suppose the Sussex amateur intentionally and know-
ingly throws, hut I have no doubt in my own mind that he does not howl
fairly. Be that as it may, the act of protest was public, and must he
recorded. To return to the hatting, The score was 100 in 41 minutes,
and just before the hour expired Bannerman was grandly caught at mid-
on by Trevor from a hard drive. The total was 127 when this wicket
fell, and of this number Bannerman had made 60, in which innings were
11 fours. It was amusing to see little Bannerman hitting the prides of
Sussex to the fence once or twice every over. Horan came in, and
though the pace of the run getting slackened, the mastery of the howling
was more complete than before. The fieldsmen could not he placed to
stop the hits, for the bowling was so easy—so had, in fact—that Horan
and Murdoch did pretty well as they liked. At the drawing of stumps
Murdoch was 109 not out, a superb display of cricket; and Horan was 41
not out, a patient and thoroughly sound innings.
On Friday the game was resumed at a quarter-past 12 in fine weather,
and in the presence of a large company. Murdoch (not out 109) and
Horan (not out 41) went on batting to the howling of Lillywhite and
Blackman. The score was hit up to 291 before Horan was caught at
deep-slip for an admirable 51, including seven fours and three twos.
M‘Donnell only scored 11 before being howled by a slow. Blackham
joined Murdoch, who continued to hat in grand form. Several changes
of howling were tried, and Murdoch was twice let off —once from an easy
chance of c and h to Humphreys, and again from a very difficult chance
to Mr. Greenfield at point. J ust before luncheon Blackham was out 1 b w for 27,
the score at that time being 389, Murdoch not out 172. On resuming
Giffen came in, and a very long stand was made. The worn-out howling
was sent all over the field, Giffen hitting with the greatest freedom, and


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Lilly white ■..
95 ..
21 .
128
2
W. Blackman
81 ..
24
.. 159 .
4
Humphreys
40 ..
6
.. 122
2
W. A*. Bettesworth
25 ..
0 .
74
0
F. F. J. Greenfield
23-1..
.... 5 ....
.. 60 .
1
A. H. Trevor
10 ..
.... 4 ....
.. 18 .
0
C. J. Lucas
17 ..
4 ....
36
1
R. T. Ellis
5 ..
.... 1 ....
7 .
0
scoring much faster than his partner. Murdoch completed his 200 at four
o’clock, amidst loud cheering, and the 600 went up at ten minutes past
four. Seven runs later Giffen was caught and bowled for a finely-hit 74,
made up of ten fours, seven twos, and singles. Jones and Garrett did
not give very much trouble, and eight wickets were down for 558.
Palmer came in, and once more the Sussex howling was hit about in all
directions. Amidst loud applause 600 was put up at 20 minutes past five.
Many more howling changes were tried, hut the score was up to 634 be-
fore Palmer missed a straight hall from Blackman, and was howled for
28. Spofforth, the last man in, after being badly missed at long off by
Ellis, was neatly taken at point by Greenfield, and the innings, which
had commenced on Thursday at 20 minutes to four, closed at a quarter
to six for the tremendous score of 643, the largest total ever made in a
first-class match in England. Murdoch carried out his hat for a
magnificent innings of 286, in which he only gave two chances. He was,
of course, enthusiastically cheered. His chief hits were a five, 39 fours,
five threes, and 16 twos.
ANALYSIS OF THE BOWLING.
Australians.—First Innings.
Sussex had about twenty minutes’ hatting, and in that time scored 31
without losing a wicket.
On Saturday Greenfield (not out) 27 and Ellis (not out) 0, went on
with the County batting at 13 minutes after 12. Spofforth and Palmer
began the bowling, and when 13 runs had been added the former
dismissed Greenfield for a useful 31. H. E. Whitfeld came in, and for
a long period the batting was too good for the bowling. Whitfeld
exhibited his accustomed care and patience, playing all the bowling with
finished ease. He gave a difficult chance to Blackham, the wicket-
keeper, when he had made 20 and when the Sussex total was 75.
Garrett had shortly before relieved Palmer, and Giffen was now tried for
a few overs in place of Spofforth, who had been hit by Ellis twice for
four in one over. The 100 went up on the telegraph board at a quarter
past 1, so that the first hour’s play on Saturday produced nearly 70 runs.
Giffen could do nothing, so Palmer, who had previously been bowling
against the wind at the Marine end, was put on at the northern wicket.
Ellis cut Garrett very finely for four, but in the same man’s following
over was bowled—leg stump—for an excellent 52. Some good judges
differ from me, but 1 certainly think this was as sound an innings as
Ellis has played. His off hitting was rather uncertain, but he placed the
ball on the leg side with good judgment. lam told that Ellis himself
said it was the best innings he had ever played. Ellis and Whitfeld


AUSTRALIANS.
H. H, Massic, c Bettesworth, b Blackman 4£
A. C. Bannerman, c Trevor, b Lilly white 60
W. L. Murdoch, not out 286
T. Horan, c Humphreys, b Blackman 51
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Humphreys 11
J. Me. C. Blackham, 1 b w, b Lilly white 27
G Giffen, c and b Blackman : 74
S. P, Jones, c Humphreys, b Lucas 5
T. W. Garrett, b Humphreys 9
G. E. Palmer, b Blackham 28
F. R. Spofforth, c Humphreys, b Greenfield 8
B 17,1 b 22 39
Total 643
Some of the Australians returned to London by the evening train on
Saturday, while others did their best to enjoy the east wind on the pier,
and came up to town by the night train. Sunday was passed very
quietly, and in the evening the team to play at Twickenham was chosen.
Blackham and Bannerman stood out of the match, both feeling unwell.


raised the score from 44 to 121 while they were together, and the former’s
innings included four fours, three threes, and four twos. Whitfeld’s
other partners were not much good. The captain, C. J. Lucas, and the
professional, Humphreys, hit moderately well, hut Trevor, Bettesworth,
Blackman, Charlwood, Payne, and Lillywhite were of no use at all.
Trevor seemed all style, and was an easy victim to Palmer, who, from
the time he changed ends up to luncheon, bowled 10 overs for a run and
three wickets.
After Bettesworth was out Charlwood came in, made two or three
strokes worthy of the Royal Back-garden Cricket Club, and was then
caught at point for nothing. As I said, Humphreys and the Sussex
captain did some hitting, hut the innings was over about 4 o’clock for
193, leaving the Australians victorious in a single innings, with the
enormous number of 355 runs to spare. Whitfeld went in one wicket
down, when the total was 44, and carried out his hat for a stylish,
patient, and well-hit 54, the figures of which innings were five fours,
two threes, five twos, and 18 singles. With a little more power Whit-
feld would he very nearly a first-class hat. He plays correctly, and with
good nerve, and the Australians were very much pleased with the form
he displayed. I append the result of the Colonial howling in the second
innings of the County:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Palmer 48 25 62 6
Spofforth 25 10 37 1
Garrett 41 13 67 3
Giffen 4 1 12 0
Giffen.
Giffen bowled a wide,
This match has been called the easiest victory on record. I certainly
do not remember a match won in such a hollow fashion. Such a thing
may have happened—funny things do happen at cricket—and it may he
that somewhere in the forgotten past some poor fellows received as
awful a thrashing as Sussex did that Saturday. The County can never
hope to win against a strong side until they find at least one really good
howler. Below is the full score of the Brighton match :
SUSSEX.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
R. T. Ellis, st Blackham, b Palmer 10 b Garrett 52
Rev. F. F. J. Greenfield, c Giffen, b Spofforth 23 b Spofforth 31
H. Whitfeld, b Palmer 13 not out 54
A. H. Trevor, b Palmer 2 b Palmer 5
W. A. Bettesworth, c Horan, b Sofforth 10 b Palmer 0
Charlwood, c Bannerman, b Palmer 5 c Murdoch, b Palmer 0
W. Blackman, b Palmer 0 b Garrett 3
C. J. Lucas, b Palmer 0 c and b Palmer 15
W. Humphreys, st Blackham, b Palmer 18 c Jones, b Garrett ~ 13
A. Payne, b Palmer 5 stßlackham.bPalmer 1
A, Jrayne, o jraimer o ouoiaeimaiii, ex'aimer r
J. Lillywhite, not out 5 b Palmer 4
B 2,1 b 2 4 B 9,1 bs,w b 1 .. 15
4 B 9,1 bs,w b 1 .. 15
Total 95 Total 193


AUSTRALIANS v. ORLEANS CLUB.
Played at Twickenham, May 22 and 23.
Sir John Astley, Captain Womhwell, and Mr. C. I. Thornton had
made every preparation for the accommodation of the players, the public,
and the press. Of course they could not make the ground larger, or
prevent the big trees throwing shadows when the Sun got low ; hut they
did all they could, and on the part of Bell’s Life I thank them. A good
wicket had been prepared, which, though it did not play perfectly true,
was yet fairly easy all day on Monday, very easy after the rain on Tuesday
afternoon, and -was a little difficult for the first hour or so on Tuesday
morning. There have been various estimates made as to the number of
spectators present, but I think the real numbers were about 3,500 on
Monday, and 4,000 on Tuesday. The people were rather of the holiday
crowd kind. I don’t mean to say that they misbehaved themselves, but
they were uncommonly quick in seeing the humorous side of any point
that arose, and they were rather more noisy and less discriminating than
the thorough-bred cricket companies I have seen at Nottingham and
Manchester, Lord’s, and the Oval. They were a little partial, too. I
suppose we ought to call it patriotism, but they were certainly very much
happier on Monday evening, when the crack Australian wickets were
going down, than they were on Tuesday, when Murdoch’s superb batting
was saving the match. At this latter time there was a coldness and
a silence among the spectators due to causes other than the wind and the
rain. L don’t know that I blame them much, because I was disappointed
myself, and I did not enjoy Murdoch’s innings with that full, unstinted
appreciation which it no doubt deserved. I could not help admiring it,
but as each hit to the boundary was made, or each good over was well
played, the feeling would come that the chances of an English victory
were getting smaller and smaller. Tuesday was nothing like so fine as
Monday, and the light at times was very bad. There was a good military
band on the ground each day—that of the Duke of Cornwall’s Regiment
(late 32nd Foot), under Bandmaster Goold from Aldershot. The programme
included selections from “ Boccaccio,” “ Orphee aux Enfers,” “ Patience,”
and the “Pirates of Penzance,” and “Waldteufel’s famous waltz
“Je t’Aime. ” The Australians were entertained at dinner at the Orleans
Club on Monday evening, and thoroughly enjoyed themselves. “The
Health of Our Visitors” was proposed by the proprietor of the club—Sir
John Astley. Mr. Murdoch responded with the facility which comes of
long practice, and proposed “The Orleans Club Eleven.” Mr. C. I.
Thornton replied, and, after some other speeches and some music, the
Colonists left Twickenham for the Talbot Hotel, Richmond Bridge, where
they passed the night. I think I have now said all that I wanted to say,
and something besides, about the surrounding circumstances of the match,
and that it is quite time I began to describe the play.


Thornton and Murdoch tossed for choice of innings. Murdoch, who
in the previous week had lost at Brighton and won at Oxford, lost on
this occasion. Thornton, of course, elected to go in, and at about a
quarter-past 12 the innings of the Orleans Club commenced. This
Orleans Club team, by the way, might have been very fairly called an
Eleven of England, so strong was it at all points of the game. There
had been some talk of Bonnor keeping wicket, and I should not have heeii
surprised to have seen him walk out with the pads and gloves on. The
experiment was, however, not tried, and Murdoch took Blackham’s
position. Palmer and Garrett were the howlei’s, and W. G. and E. M.
Grace the batsmen. Before a run had been scored E. M. was tempted to
hit a hall from Garxett, and was easily caught at long-off. Lucas joined
W. G., and commenced his perfect innings of 87. W. G., who did not
seem fully recovexed from his illness, hit several fours. The boundaries
at the Orleans Club are so short that it is difficult to discriminate between
the very good and the pretty good hits. Whenever the hall got past the
fieldsmen it counted four, though in many instances the stroke was barely
worth three. There was not much fault to he found with W. G.’s
hatting, though I have often seen him to much greater advantage. He
gave a difficult chance to the wicket-keeper, and was bowled at 49.
Baxiow did vexy little, and A. G. Steel nothing at all. Both were
caught at slip by Bonnor, Barlow from a vexy easy chance and Steel from
a difficult one, the ball going wide, and the fieldsman only just reaching
it. The fourth Orleans wicket was down for 71, and matters began, as
some of my brother reporters say, “ to assume a critical aspect. ” I don’t
quite know what that means, bxxt guess that it implies that mattex-s are
going wrong with the in-side. Seriously, if Webbe hadn’t stopped and
played the plucky innings he did, the match might have ended very
differently. This is a commonplace remark, and one that might be
applied to any number of innings. Still, it is very true indeed as regards
Webbe’s. He was not particularly steady at first when playing Garrett,
bxxt he soon settled down, and hit with his old power and judgxxxent. He
and Lxxcas raised the score to 148, when Boyle went on and caught Webbe
from an easy return off his first ball. The old Oxford captain would most
probably have been run out just before luncheon had the mid-off returned
the ball to the proper end. So far as my memory sex-ves me, the offend-
ing fieldsman was Garrett. Webbe hit four foxxrs and six twos. Schultz
was Lxxcas’s next partner, and another long and valxxable stand was xxxade,
the score being hit up to 218 before the pair wex - e separated. The last
two wickets had, therefore, put on 147 runs. Schultz made one bad hit,
and a lot of good ones, and Ixis 34 was a better display of batting than
I expected from him. I’m afraid I have done this gentlexxxan a
good deal of injustice at different tixxxes. I axxx not aware that I have
said anything in print that was unfair, but I own to having thoxxght hixxx
to be a cricketer of the “ tea and ice ” school. I shall never think so any
more after the way he knocked about the Axxstralians’ bowling on
Monday. He was out in an unlxxcky way, as he played a ball from
Palmer, that just rolled into his wicket. Vernon, who followed, played
across one of Palmer’s leg-breaks, anti was out at 222. Whexx Thornton
came in the fieldsmen got as far away from the wickets as they could
without climbing the fences. The old Cantab began by pxxtting up a


Palmer
Overs.
58-2..
Maidens.
.... 28
Rims.
99
Wickets.
6
Garrett
53 ..
... 21
72
3
Spofforth
27 ..
12 .
. 30 .
0
Boyle
11 .
0
30
1
Giffen
.... 4 ...
... 15 .
0
ball between point and mid-off, and apparently satisfied with the harm-
less result of this experiment hit np another between long-off and cover-
point. Horan and Palmer between them made a mess of this catch.
Thornton afterwards made some really fine hits, and contributed a very
useful 25, being out at last to a superb running catch by Horan at cover-
point. Rotherham and Pilling didn’t give much trouble, and the
innings closed at a quarter-past five for 271 runs, or 200 since the fall of
the fourth wicket. Lucas has been enthusiastically praised for his 87
(not out), but the 'praise was thoroughly deserved. He scored slowly,
and he gave a possible chance to M‘Donnell at slip, but some of liis
hitting and all his defence were perfection. He was never in any doubt or
or difficulty, but played all the bowling with skilful ease and power.
His innings was undoubtedly the great feature of Monday’s play, and. his
chief hits were eight fours, a three, and eleven twos.. He was in more
than four hours, while the whole of the 271 runs were made.
Spofforth and Palmer each bowled a no ball.
It will be seen that Spofforth was unsuccessful. Up to this time he
had only taken five wickets in England for 177 runs. He was not then
in practice, and his feet were tender and painful. I heard a facetious
young gentleman say at Oxford, with a frank disregard for sex and
sense, that ‘ ‘ Spoff wasn’t going to be the prima donna of this tour. ”
The Australian fielding was unequal, but, taken as a whole, may be
called good.
Murdoch and Massie began the colonial batting at 20 minutes to 6, and,
in the 50 minutes they had to play, the Australians lost four wickets
for 53 runs. Massie was clean bowled for oby a fast yorker in Rother-
ham’s first over, Horan was leg before wicket to Steel directly afterwards,
and Murdoch was grandly caught at point from a hard cut, the three
best wickets on the side being down for 26 runs. M‘Donnell hurt him-
self in playing a fast ball from Rotherham, and Jones who didn’t seem
able to play the slows, was bowled by W. G, Grace. Giffen and Garrett
were the not outs, the former having played good cricket in the puzzling
light. So ended Monday’s play.
On Tuesday the game was resumed within a minute or two of 12.
The spectators witnessed an extraordinary collapse of the Australian
batting. The wicket was not difficult, but still it was not so easy as on
the previous day. M‘Donnell, who had been hurt on Monday evening,
made 21 more runs. Giffen added a single to his overnight total, and
that was all the runs that were made. Steel and W. G. Grace were the
bowlers, and they seemed to be far too good for the Colonists, who
played back at half-volleys, and lost their wickets with scarcely a
struggle. Garrett was out leg before wicket before a run had been
added. Giffen stepped out to pull a slow, and the break beat him.
Bonnor was bowled by a plain, straight ball, and Palmer played on.


Steel'
Overs.
Maidens.
in
Runs.
9ft
Wickets.
4
Rotherham’
i
9.2.
1
W, G. Grace
4 ...
... 25 ..
.... 5
M‘Donnell hit Grace in front of square-leg, but in trying to do so again
got under the hall, and was caught at slip. Boyle was bowled, and at
twenty minutes to one the great Australian Eleven were all out for the
paltry total of 75. The English fielding was particularly good, hut the
credit chiefly belongs to W. G. Grace and Steel, as the analysis shows :
With 196 runs to make to save a single innings defeat, Horan and
Murdoch began the Colonists’ batting. Grace and Steel were, of course,
the bowlers, but, as Horan hit rapidly, Rotherham was tried at 24.
The change worked instantly, as the Uppingham boy’s first ball bowled
Horan off his pads. Giffen came in, and the total at lunch time was 40.
Shortly after the resumption the Englishmen had a chance of getting
rid of the Australian captain. Murdoch hit a ball to mid-off, where
W. G. Grace didn’t field it cleanly. Both men started to run, and were
in the middle of the play, when Grace recovered the ball, and returned
it to the wicket-keeper. To everybody’s surprise Pilling failed to
handle the ball, and Murdoch, who ought to have been run out
by at least four yards got safely home. This mistake saved the
Australians from defeat, for Murdoch afterwards played grand
cricket, taking no liberties with the bowling, but hitting with excep-
tional power and judgment whenever he could do so, and at the call of
time he was not out with 107 runs to his name, and the Australians’
total was 240 for nine wickets. Though the chief credit belongs to
Murdoch, it would be unfair not to praise M‘Donnell for his hard hit 28,
and Jones for his long and patient innings. M‘Donnell, besides several
fours, hit a sixer, driving Steel right out of the ground, and losing the
ball; and Jones, though his style was by no means attractive exhibited
the greatest care, and was in while the total was raised from 100 to 173.
He, too, gave a chance to Pilling, who ought to have stumped him easily
off Lucas. lam sorry to have to say it, but the two mistakes Pilling
made cost the Orleans Club the game, and prevented what English
cricketers would have been delighted to see—the Australians badly
beaten in their third match. Webbe, too, made a mistake which might
have had equally serious consequences, as he missed Massie, from a
tremendously lofty hit, at third man. The great hitter, however, Avas
soon afterwards caught at the Avicket, and thus no disastrous effect
followed upon Webbe’s mistake. The Australians who went in after
Jones played very poor cricket indeed. Bonnor made one hit—the biggest
in the match—a tremendous on-drive over a house in the neighbourlxood
of the ground, but all the others did Avas to run out Murdoch’s hits. It
soon became certain that the Orleans Club would not have time to Avin,
and as most cricketers know, long before this, the Australians Avere 44
runs on, with one wicket to fall, Avhen the stumps and the match Avere
drawn. Murdoch, who, in my humble opinion, is far the best batsman
on the side, if not the best in the Avorld, hit 16 fours, four threes, and
seven twos. I don’t know that I can say anything else in praise of his
batting. It is patent to everybody Avho has read Avhat I have said, or
who looks at the folloAving score, that he saved the match for Australia.


The English howling was repeatedly changed, and Thornton captained
the side with good judgment. The fielding, except for the mistakes I
have mentioned, was decidedly good.
Overs. Maidens. Runs, Wickets.
W. G. Grace 38 18 67 1
Steel 59 24 91 4
Rotherham 26 12 42 1
Barlow 24 14 23 3
Lucas 7 5 4 6
E. M. Grace 3 1 6 0
Full score:—
ORLEANS CLUB.
W. G. Grace, h Palmer 34
E. M. Grace, c Horan, b Garrett 0
A. P. Lucas, not out 87
Barlow, c Bonn or, b Garrett 12
A. G. Steel, cßonnor, b Garrett 0
A. J. Webbe, c and b Boyle'. 45
S. S. Schultz, b Palmer 34
G. F. Vernon, b Palmer 3
C. I. Thornton, c Horan, b Palmer 25
H. Rotherham, b Palmer 6
Pilling, c Boyle, b Palmer 0
Byes 18,1 bs,n b 2 25
Total 271
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
W. L. Murdoch, cE. M. Grace, b Steel 17 not out 107
H. H. Massie, b Rotherham 0 c Pillling, b Barlow.. 14
T. Horan, leg bw, b Steel 1 b Rotherham 20
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Schultz, bW. G. Grace ..25 b Barlow 28
G. Giffen, st Pilling, b Steel 24 b Steel 17
S. P. Jones, b W. G. Grace 4 b Barlow 28
T. W. Garrett, Ibw, bW. G. Grace 4 b Steel 6
G. J. Bonnor, b Steel 0 bW. G. Grace 6
G. E. Palmer, bW. G. Grace 0 c Rotherham, b Steel 5
F. R. Spofforth, not out 0 c Barlow, b Steel 2
0 c Barlow, b Steel 2
H. F. Boyle, bW. G. Grace 0 not out 0
B 6, 1 b 1 7
Total 75 Total 240
The team drove down to Epsom on the Wednesday, and witnessed
the race for the Derby. I don’t know that any of them won large
fortunes, but I heard of one or two who lost a little.


AUSTRALIANS V. SURREY.
Played at Kennington Oval, May 25, 26, and 27.
The second match of the week—against Surrey at the Oval—had been
looked forward to with considerable interest, though few people fancied
the county had much chance of success. Being the first appearance of
the Colonists on a metropolitan ground it would certainly have proved a
great attraction, if only the weather had been favourable. Thursday,
however, was a wretched day. Rain fell for hours with little or no
intermission, and up to lunch time it did not seem likely there would be
any cricket at all. As the afternoon advanced matters improved, and a
start was made before a quarter-past three. Blackham had not sufficiently
recovered to take his place in the team, and it was determined in the
morning that Bonnor should be the other man to stand out. Surrey,
despite the absence of J. J. Parfitt, had got together a very fair side, a
place being found for Dible —one of this year’s colts. A wicket had been
carefully prepared for the match, and covered with tarpaulin for nearly a
week, but Murdoch declined to play on it, for the reason that the side
winning the toss would have an immense advantage. In consequence
of his refusal a fresh wicket had to be chosen, and, as might have
been expected after the heavy rain, the ball kicked about dangerously.
During the afternoon two or three ugly knocks were received, Murdoch
himself being struck on the head by a bumping ball from Spoffbrth.
Shuter won the toss for Surrey, and, of course, chose to take first
innings, there being little chance of the wicket getting better, and a very
great chance of its becoming worse. Lucas and Abel started the batting,
and were opposed by Spoffbrth and Palmer. Abel showed very fair
style, and made 11 out of 13 before Spoffbrth bowled him. Maurice
Read and Lucas scored very freely for three overs, putting on no fewer
than 18 runs. Palmer hurt his hand in stopping a ball sliarply played
back to him at 31, and had to leave off bowling. Boyle replaced him,
and at once dismissed Lucas. Surrey’s crack batsman had only made
12, and his early downfall was a severe disappointment; two wickets for
31. W. W. Read went in next, and from the first played the bowling
with freedom and confidence. In the course of about 10 overs he punished
Spoffbrth for two fours and a three. The fours were a brilliant cut and
a very hard off drive—close to the ground. The County’s prospects were
improving, but at 52 Maurice Read played a ball up to short mid-on, and
was easily caught. Shuter now joined W, W. Read, but for some few
overs he was far from comfortable. This, however, was scarcely to be
wondered at, as it was really dangerous to face Spoffbrth when he sent
down a fast ball. Just about this time Spoffbrth had a hard chance of
catching W. W. Read from his own bowling, but he was not equal to the


Overs.
22 ..
Maidens.
5 ....
Runs.
.. 63 ..
Wickets,
1
22 ..
5 ....
.. 50 ..
1
Boyle
.... 18 ....
.. 52 ..
.... 7
Garrett
4-1..
.... 3 ....
.. 1 ..
.... 1
occasion. Following the chance Read hit very finely. He sent Boyle
twice to leg for four, and drove Spofforth hard to the on for the same
number. Eighty went up, and then Shuter made his first good hit—a
pretty cut for two from Boyle. Read sent Spofforth away to square-leg
for four, and caused Palmer to take the ball at 87. Read hit the new
bowler for a couple of twos, and Shuter, after getting a nasty blow on
the shoulder, cut him very neatly for three. Two overs later Shuter
gave a chance at short mid-on, but though Palmer crossed the ball he
did not hold it. The 100 went up at twenty minutes to 5, but when the
score had steadily reached 109 the batsmen were parted, Read being
caught at slip from a ball that popped up very quickly. Since the fall of
the third wicket no fewer than 57 runs had been put on—a most credit-
able stand, considering how the ball jumped and kicked about. Read
Read’s 49 was a pluckily hit, and—bar the chance of “ c and b” to
Spofforth—a thoroughly good innings. It was, I think, quite equal to
70 on a fast true-playing wicket, and included six fours, a three, and
seven twos. After this came serious disaster for Surrey. At 110
Lindsay was smartly caught at short mid-on, and at 114 Shuter was out
to a catch in the same position. Shuter’s innings was very useful, but
he did not show anything like W. W. Read’s ability to cope with the
bowling. His lack of height was, of course, all against him. Roller and
Jones had put on three runs when rain drove the players to shelter. On
coming out again, in a few minutes, it was only possible to bowl one
over, but Roller made a three to leg, and Jones an off drive for four.
This latter was a chance to Garrett, but the fieldsman w r as not quick
enough in starting. The second interval for rain lasted about a quarter of an
hour. When play was resumed, the Australians had to bowl with a wet ball,
and were, of course, at a disadvantage. Moreover, the wicket played
much easier than before. Jones cut Palmer for four, and Roller made a
couple of lucky twos from Boyle on the leg side. At 140 Spofforth was
tried again in place of Palmer, and from his second over fourteen runs
were scored. Roller made a splendid on-drive for six—the ball pitching
over the reserved seats to the right of the Pavilion—and a leg hit for
three, and Jones made cuts for tAvo and three. The cheering at this
heavy punishment had hardly died away when Roller was very well
caught at short mid-on—always a fatal spot against Australian bowlers
on sloav Avickets. Roller had made 26 ; a very valuable innings. Dible
went in, and as Jones hit Spofforth for two and four, a change Avas tried
at 163, Garrett taking the ball for the first time in the innings. With
one run added, a well judged catch behind the bowler got rid of Jones
for 22. At 170 the innings came to an end, Dible being caught at the
wicket and Pooley at mid-off. The Surrey men played very pluckily,
but they Avere, perhaps, a little fortunate to make such a good score.
Analysis :
It will be seen that Boyle had all the bowling honours of the innings
to himself. Always difficult on a slow wicket, he fully sustained his


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
50-1..
.... 37 ....
.. 31 ..
5
45 ..
.... 20 ....
.. 53 ..
4
Lucas
5 ..
.... 3 ....
.. 5 ..
0
reputation. Spofforth was again ineffective, but Palmer’s ill-success
may partially be accounted for by the blow he received on the finger.
The Australians had less than 10 minutes’ batting, and Murdoch,
wisely saving Massie and himself for the morning, sent in Garrett and
Jones. The latter made two fours and a single and then stumps were
drawn for the day.
On Friday, the match was resumed in charming weather, but on a
wicket which for some time placed batsmen at an immense disadvantage.
Going on with their innings soon after 12 o’clock, the Australians found
run-getting a task of extreme difficulty. Murdoch played fine cricket,
his defence to Jones’s bowling being masterly. No one else, however,
except Horan, could overcome the difficulties of the wicket, and at the
luncheon interval six Australians were down for 78 runs. Massie was
out to a wonderful catch at third man. With the ground to help him
Jones bowled better than I had ever seen him bowl before. He should
look to his fielding, however, if he wishes to be of real value to his side.
At short-slip he was very much at fault, and made more than one blunder.
Horan was soon out after the interval, and the innings closed for 100, or
70 runs behind. The bowling analysis will speak for itself, but I may
mention that at one time Jones sent down ten maidens in succession, and
in the eleventh over took Murdoch’s wicket. Bowling analysis :
Now came the turning point of the game. At a quarter to 4 Surrey
went in for the second time with 70 runs in hand, and at least a reason-
able chance of victory. At five minutes to 5 the innings was over.
Boyle and Garrett took the ball, and the former, by a marvellous catch
from his own bowling, dismissed A. P. Lucas before a run was scored.
He got half-way up the play, and just reached the ball with one hand,
Abel only made three before being caught at point. W. W. Read was
bowled at 28, and Shuter played on at 32. After the fourth wicket fell
Surrey’s failures came thick and fast. At 33 Lindsay was caught at
slip, at 36 Roller was bowled and Jones caught off his hand at point, and
at 40 Dible was caught at slip, and Pooley bowled. Four of these five
wickets had fallen to Garrett’s bowling. Barratt, the last man, made a
hit or two, but at 48 Maurice Read was easily caught and bowled, and
the innings came to an end, after lasting only an hour and ten minutes.
The wicket, of course, was still difficult, and the bowling and fielding of
the Australians wonderfully fine ; but still I think Surrey ought to have
made a much better score. Lucas certainly was out to a catch in a
thousand, but it cannot be said that any other batsman had bad luck.
Maurice Read did not make a false hit till he was caught and bowled,
and, all things considered, his 17 was a capital innings—played with
great pluck at a very critical time. The Australian bowling gives the
following remarkable figures :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Boyle 19 12 16 4
Garrett 18 10 30 6


The Australians had 119 to get to win, and as twenty wickets had
already fallen during the day, the cricket was watched with absorbing
interest. Murdoch and Bannerman were opposed by Jones and Barratt.
The innings opened with a genuine sensation, for in the third over, before
a run had been scored, Murdoch was beaten and bowled by a tremendous
shooter from Jones. Bannerman and Horan then played capital cricket,
and rapidly destroyed any chance Surrey might have had of winning the
match. Bannerman scored freely from Barrett, and at 38 caused Lucas
to take the ball. With 10 runs added, the change got rid of Bannerman,
whose 28 included five fours. M‘Donnell and Horan then defied all the
efforts of the Surrey bowlers. Several changes were tried without any
effect, and at the call of time the score was 98, or only 21 runs to win,
with eight wickets to fall. There was a desire expressed to play beyond
half-past 6, to finish the match, and Murdoch was quite willing. Horan
and M‘Donnell, howev.er declined, as they had a perfect right to do,
saying that the light was very bad. At the drawing of stumps the score
was 98 for two wickets.
The finish of the Surrey match took place on Saturday. It was certain
the Australians would win, and yet several hundreds of people were at
the Oval on Saturday r to see them make the 21 necessary runs, Horan
(not out) 33, and M‘Donnell, also not out 33, resumed their innings at
noon, the Australian score being 98 for two wickets. Only two runs
were added, and then M‘Donnell played a ball into his wicket, and
Horan was bowled off his legs. Massie and Giffen had to play some
splendid bowling from Jones, who twice got the ball past Massie’s bat, but
failed to hit the wicket. The young Surrey man sent down on Saturday
13 overs for a wicket and a four hit. The match was over at 20 minutes
to 1, the Australians winning by six wickets. Analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Jones 28 20 19 2
Barratt 22-3 6 45 1
A. P. Lucas 7 0 35 1
W. E. Roller 4 2 7 0
Bible 5 3 5 0
W. W. Read.
Full score:—
SURREY.
A. P. Lucas, b Boyle
Abel, b Spofforth
M. Read, c Palmer, b Boyle
W. W. Read, c M‘Donnell, b Boyle
J. Shuter, c Palmer, b Boyle
W. Lindsay, c Boyle, b Palmer
W. E. Roller, c Palmer, b Boyle
Jones, c Palmer, b Boyle
Dible, c Murdoch, b Boyle
Pooley, c Jones, b Garrett
Barratt, not out
B 2,1 b 2
Total
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
... 12 c and b Boyle 0
... 11 c Spofforth, b Boyle 3
... 15 c and b Boyle 17
49 b Garrett 10
27 b Garrett 3
0 c M‘Donnell, b Boyle 1
26 b Garrett 2
22 c Spofforth, b Garrett 0
4 c M‘Donnell, b Garrett .. 4
0 b Garrett 0
0 not out 6
4 B 1, 1 b 1 2
170 Total 48


T. W. Garrett, b Barratt
3
S. P. Jones, c Roller, b Barratt
10
W. L. Murdoch, b Jones —
A. C. Bannerman, run out
4
T. Horan, c Barratt. b Jones
4
H. H. Massie, c Lindsay, b Barratt
3
G. Giffen, not out
G. E. Palmer, c Shuter, b Barratt
0
F. R. Spofforth, b Jones
5
H. P, Boyle, b Jones
Byes 6,1 b 5
Total
100
AUSTRALIANS.
In the second innings Murdoch scored (b Jones) 0, Bannerman (b Lucas) 28,
Horan (b Jones) 38, M‘Donnell (b Barratt) 35, Massie (not out) 9, Giffen (not out) 6;
byes B—total 119.
Surrey’s miserable batting on Friday afternoon lost the match. The
men played the tamest and most feeble cricket, and Boyle and Garrett
did as they liked with them. Before leaving the Surrey match, I ought
to say that the new scoring board which was exhibited at Oxford was
also shown at the Oval. Many people expressed their admiration of the
invention, which has only to become known to be generally adopted. It
is immensely quicker in operation and more legible than the present
antiquated system of hanging loose iron plates on hooks.
This brings me to the end of the second week of the tour. Blackham
was unwell, and could play neither against the Orleans Club nor Surrey.
Still, allowing for the effect his absence had upon the team, the second
week did not show the Colonists to such extraordinary advantage as did
the opening week of the tour, when they won both their matches; two
individual innings of over 200 runs each were hit for them, and they
scored 1,069 runs for only 21 wickets, an average of nearly 51 runs each.
In the second Aveek the Australians lost 33 wickets for only 534 inns, an
average of just over 16 runs a Avicket, and besides Murdoch’s 107, not
out, there Avas not a good innings played for them. They found that
Mr. Steel, Mr. Grace and Jones were much more difficult bowlers than
the Oxford and Sussex men, and that runs did not come Avith the same
rapidity and certainty at TAvickenham and Kennington as they had done
on the fast, good Avickets on the Brighton and Christ Church grounds.
It is curious that, Avhile the batting average for the second Aveek was
very nearly one-third, the aggregate runs were exactly half the number
made in the first Aveek. I should not, perhaps, say exactly, because
there is no such thing as half a run.


AUSTRALIANS v. CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY.
Played at Cambridge, May 29, 30, and 31.
The majority of the team left King’s Cross on Sunday afternoon, and
arrived at Cambridge at about half-past 8, taking up their quarters at
the Lion Hotel, in Petty Cury. Spofforth was not seen at Cambridge
until Monday. Before leaving the Hotel, the team for the day was
selected. Blackham was still suffering from a bad cold, and so decided
to stand out, and the other man left out was Bonnor. There was a lot
of interest taken in the meeting of Cambridge and the Australians. The
first day’s play at Cambridge was similar to that at Oxford in one respect,
as the Australians won the toss on both occasions, and went in on a
capital wicket. Against Oxford, however, they scored 362, while against
Cambridge they were out for 139. Cambridge looked a very young team
in the field, but they worked throughout the day with the greatest
energy and spirit. J. R. Watson, of Christ’s, a fast bowler, who had
not, 1 believe, taken part in any of the previous matches, was given a
trial, and a place was found for Paravicini, on the strength of his batting
against the Gentlemen of England in the previous week. The weather
on Monday was all that could be desired, and there was a larger attend-
ance than ever seen before at the University Ground. A little rain had
fallen on the Sunday afternoon, but not enough to injure the wicket,
and when Murdoch won the toss, I heard one or two people say,
“Cambridge are in fora day’s outing.” And so most people thought;
but the University men played up with a pluck and determination that
will not readily be forgotten, and certainly had all the best of the first
day’s play.
Bannerman and Massie began the Australian innings, to the bowling
of C. T. Studd and Ramsay. At starting runs came at a great pace,
Massie scoring so much faster than his partner, that I began to think he
was in for another 206. He drove Studd three times for four, and
Ramsay tAvice for four, and then made t>vo mishits which fell harmless.
Just has he Avas beginning to look dangerous, he failed to get quite hold
of a ball from Studd, and was neatly caught by Paravicini at third man.
Murdoch, after scoring a single, was caught at the wicket, and the two
great New South Wales batsmen Avere out for 48. This good start
seemed to give the Cantabs confidence, and they bowled and fielded very
finely. Bannerman, however, played with remarkable care and skill,
and with Horan as a partner, raised the score to 76, when the latter was
smartly taken at the wicket. Then the game went all against the
Colonists, M‘Donnell was caught at mid-on from a hard drive, Gifien
out to a well-judged catch at long oft’ by J. E. K. Studd, Jones finely
taken high up at slip by Spencer, and Garrett splendidly caught at the


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
C. T. Studd
35-2..
14
.. 64 .
5
Ramsay
.... 15 ....
.. 61 .
5
Watson
2 ..
0
0
Spencer
5 ...
... 1 ....
.. 11 ..
0
wicket at the third or fourth attempt. This catch was most curious,
as Wright dropped the ball on to the bails before finally securing
it. The plucky way in which Wright stuck to the catch gained
him considerable applause. At luncheon time seven wickets
were down for 119, and on resuming Bannerman was clean
bowled by a good length ball from Ramsay. Bannerman had
given one chance at point, but otherwise his batting was excellent,
and he kept up his wicket when matters were going very badly. His
chief hits were five fours, four threes, and six twos. After Bannerman’s
departure the innings came quickly to a close. Spofforth was well
caught at long-off, and Boyle, from a bad hit, was taken at cover-point,
the last wicket falling for 139. Taking all things into consideration, it
was a most creditable performance for a young team like Cambridge to
get rid of such a batting side as the Australians for 139. As I have said
before, the fielding, except in two instances, was smart and even
brilliant, and the side seemed to work well together. Wright kept
wicket splendidly, and the most noticeable fieldsman were G. B. Studd
at cover point, Bather at third man and long-on, and Paravicini at long-
off and third man. I may say that when I was down at Oxford a
fortnight before I thought Cambridge could have but a poor chance
against Oxford at Lord’s, but I found 1 had made a great mistake. The
The bowling analysis in the Australian innings is as follows :
Ramsay bowled a no ball.
The brothers J. E. K. and G. B. Studd began the Cambridge innings,
to the bowling of Palmer and Garrett. The score was quickly hit up to
17, when Garrett bowled down J. E. K’s leg stump. Maynard came
in, and Palmer missed an easy chance of catching G. B. Studd from his own
bowling. Just afterwards G. B. gave a difficult chance to Spofforth at
point. Before the second wicket fell another chance was missed,
Maynard being let off at point by Spofforth, who fell in trying to make
the catch. This last mistake, however, did little harm, as, at 39,
Maynard only half hit a ball from Palmer, and was easily caught
at extra-mid-off. Wright, after scoring eight, was out leg before,
and three wickets were down for 55. C. T. Studd joined
his brother, and commenced a most remarkable innings. The cricket,
while the brothers were together, was admirable, and two changes had
to be tried, Spofforth and Boyle taking the places of Garrett and Palmer.
With the score at 89, Spofforth, with a good ball, clean bowled G. B.
Stiidd, for a brilliant, but somewhat lucky, innings of 42, the chief hits
of which were four fours, three threes, and four twos. Bather now
became C. T. Studd’s partner, and a most determined resistance was
offered to the Australian bowling. C. T. Studd, when he had scored 28,
ought to have been caught at long-on by Garrett, but the ball was badly
judged. This was a most serious mistake for the Australians, as after-
wards neither batsmen made anything like a mistake. The 100 went up
amidst cheers at five minutes past 5, and then Studd made a splendid


. 58 1
.. 30 ...
... 65 ...
... 6
44
.. 13 ...
... 74 ...
... 1
50 ....
.. 11 ...
... 49 ...
... 2
Boyle
14 ....
.. 4 ...
... 22 ...
... 1
. 12
3 ...
... 22 ...
... 0
Jones
1 ....
.. 0 ...
... 2 ...
... 0
on-drive for four from Boyle, the ball almost pitching on to the ring.
Runs were put on very rapidly, and there was a perfect roar of applause
when the Australians’ total was passed. The bowling was several times
changed, but without effect. I must not forget to mention a splendid
piece of fielding by Bannerman at mid off. Studd continued to bat in
grand form, and scored an enormous majority of the runs. Bather played
very steadily, his chief object evidently being to keep up his wicket,
while his partner hit. Although more changes were tried, no parting
had been effected up to the call of time, the score being 187 for four
wickets, or 48 runs on with six wickets to fall. C. T. Studd was not out
85 and Bather 20. Of course Studd’s success was immensely popular,
and he thoroughly deserved the enthusiastic reception which greeted him.
He had never played against either of the previous Australian elevens,
a fact which makes his success even more remarkable. Better and
cleaner off-driving it has seldom been my lot to witness.
Play was resumed on Tuesday under most favourable circumstances. The
weather was again bright and fine, and the attendance, if anything, larger
than on Monday. Excursion trains had been run down from London and
other places, and these brought a lot of people to the match. Studd and
Bather continued batting at five minutes past 12, to the bowling of
Spofforth and Palmer. Bather was missed from a sharp chance at slip,
and then, at 207, was bowled by a fast yorker from Spofforth. Bather’s
24 was a patient and most valuable innings, and gained him loud ap-
plause. While he and C. T. Studd were together 118 runs had been put
on. Spencer failed to score, and Henery joined Studd, who completed his
hundred amidst enthusiastic cheering. The old Etonian then hit
Spofforth twice for four, and caused Garrett to go on at 236. With one
run added, Studd was given out caught at the wicket, and his long and
wonderful innings came to a close. I have always had a high
opinion of C. T. Studd, but I must say that I never thought him capable
of such a great performance. Playing against bowling that was quite
new to him, he never seemed at a loss to know what to do with it, and
was never in any way nervous. Studd was an exceedingly good
cricketer last year, but I do not think he ever showed better form than
in this 118, the first individual innings of over 100 made against the
Australians this season. His chief hits were 11 fours, seven threes, and
13 twos. After Studd’s departure there was not much interest in the
innings. Henery played well for his 21, but was out to rather an easy
ball. The last wicket fell at half-past one for 266. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Palmer was by far the most successful bowler, and it was indeed a good
performance on such a ground to take six wickets for less than 11 runs
each. Garrett and Spottbrth were each very expensive. The Australian
fielding was not up to its usual high standard, but one or two brilliant
things were done.


Although the Australians were 127 runs to the had, very few people
were sanguine enough to believe that they would again he dismissed for
a small score. Their start, however, was not particularly good. Massie,
after scoring 20 out of 22, played a ball hard on to his foot, and it then
went on to his wicket. Bannerman and Murdoch made a stand, and
looked to be getting well set, when the former was finely caught at
cover-point close to the ground. Matters looked very dismal for the
Australians when Ramsay shot down Murdoch’s leg stump, and Studd
howled M‘Donnell with a hall breaking in from the off. With four
wickets down for 72, Giffen joined Horan, and a great change came over
the game. Both men played steadily at first, but after a time obtained a
complete mastery over the bowling. Watson was put on for Eamsay at
100, and Avas severely punished. His boAvling was the poorest stuff, and
I am at a loss to find out why he Avas played in a match of such import-
ance. He has no pretensions to batting; his boAvling I have just said is
not at all up to University form, and his fielding is, to say the least of it,
slovenly. The single-innings defeat was averted at half-past four, and
Horan gave a chance to Henery at mid-off, Avhich was not accepted. The
boAvling was several times changed, but it Avas not until the score had
reached 155 that Horan was bowled in hitting to leg. His 51 was not a
stylish innings, but it was of immense value to his side, and was made
Avlien runs were badly Avanted. He only gave the one chance referred
to. Jones, after scoring a single, Avas given out leg before—a decision
which did not give general satisfaction. Palmer joined Giffen, Avho
continued to play very finely. G. B. Studd was frequently applauded
for his brilliancy at cover-point, but, on the Avhole, the Cambridge field-
ing was not a patch on the form of the previous day. They seemed a
little disheartened at the long stand made by Horan and Giffen, and did
not play nearly so Avell together. Runs Avere put on rapidly, and the 200
Avent up at a quarter to six. Just afterwards Palmer was missed at slip
from an easy chance. At the call of time the score Avas 212 for six
wickets, or 85 on, with four wickets to fall. Giffen, who had not given
anything like a chance, was (not out) 55, and Palmer (not out) 26.
On Tuesday evening the majority of the team dined with the
University Ele\’en in the hall of Peterhouse College, the Vice-Chancellor
taking the chair. The Rev. A. R. Ward proposed the toast of the
evening, “ The Australians,” which Avas responded to by Mr. W. L.
Murdoch. Mr. G. B. Studd replied to the toast of the “Cambridge
Eleven.” Altogether a most enjoyable evening Avas spent.
As there was every prospect of a good and exciting finish, there Avas
another very large attendance on the Wednesday. Fortunately the
weather kept beautifully fine, and the Avicket played as well as on the
first day. Giffen and Palmer went on Avith the batting at a feAV minutes
after 12. C. T. Studd and Ramsay were the boAvlers. The score had only
been increased to 223, when Palmer Avas well caught at point, low down
Avith the left hand. Two runs later Giffen’s long and admirable innings Avas
brought to close by a neat catch by C. T. Studd off his OAvn boAvling.
Giffen’s hits were five fours and nine tAvos. Boyle and Garrett then
made a most serviceable stand, and put on runs rapidly. Boyle, for
Avhose pluck and determination I have the greatest respect, hit out
vigorously. Watson’s very bad fielding gave the Australians a feAV extra


runs ; in fact, this cricketer’s poor exhibition all round made me think
he had played his first and last match for Cambridge University. The
total was quickly hit up to 260, when Garrett was neatly caught at cover-
point. Spofforth joined Boyle, and the Cantabs were given still further
trouble. Boyle hit Studd twice for four, and caused Spencer to go on at
282. With nine runs added Spofforth was stumped, and the innings
closed for 291. Considering the had start that had been made, this was a
most creditable total. Boyle’s 39, not out, was made just when runs
were badly wanted, and, in fact, it seems to me that Boyle s runs are
generally made when things are going wrong. I can well remember his
plucky 36 not out, in the first innings of the Australians in the memorable
match against England in 1880, when few of the others could do anything.
The following analysis goes a long way to show that, after Studd and
Ramsay are knocked off, there is hardly any strength in the Cambridge
bowling :— . ,
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
C. T. Studd 69 30 106 3
Ramsay 71 23 118 7
Watson 6 1 25 0
Spencer 5 1
Paravicini 8 1 16 u
Cambridgeshire were left with 165 to get, and opinions were greatly
divided as to whether or not the runs would be obtained. The brothers
J. E. K. and G. B. Studd Avere the first pair of batsmen, the bowlers
being Palmer and Garrett. Both men played in fine form at starting, and
the score rose rapidly. Spofforth went on for Garrett at 27, and the Cam-
bridge captain made a pretty leg-hit for four. G. B. made a A r ery bad
stroke on the leg side, and McDonnell running from slip tried to secure
the catch, but could not quite reach it. After this neither batsmen made
anything like a mistake. At luncheon time the score was 49 for no
Avicket. When the game Avas resumed Bonnor fielded as a substitute for
Garrett, avlio had hurt his heel. The Brothers Studd continued to play
fine cricket, and there was loud cheering as each 10 appeared on the
telegraph board. When the 100 Avent up there Avas a tumult of applause.
Just previously Giffen had been put on at the Orchard end, and fiom his
bowling G. B. Studd was caught at long-on for a finely-played and
brilliantly-hit innings of 48, including five fours, tAvo threes, and eight
twos. Barring the bad hit on the leg side that I mentioned befoie, theie
Avas no fault to find Avith his batting, which was infinitely superior to the
form shoAvn by him in the first innings, lor these two young cncketeis
to put on 106 run for the first wicket was a great performance, and will
long be remembered by lovers of cricket, as it practically won the match
for Cambridge. Maynard, AA r ho Avas not at all comfortable Avith the
bowling, Avas caught at forward point at 126, and nine runs later a bailer
from Giffen dismissed Henery. C. T. Studd filled the vacancy, but soon
lost the partnership of his brother, avlio was clean boAvled by Giffen at
136. J. E. K. Studd’s innings of 66 can scarcely be too highly praised.
His driving throughout Avas admirable, and he did not make a false
hit. lam afraid, after his poor performances in London last year, I have
rather underrated the eldest of the Studds, and I certainly did not think
him capable of such a fine performance. He hit seven fours, three threes,
and seven twos. Cambridge had now only 29 to get to Avin, Avith six


wickets to fall, so that there was hardly any chance of the Australians
saving the match. Bather joined C. T. Studd, and the score was steadily
increased. When only about five runs were wanted to win, Murdoch
missed stumping C. T. Studd from a very easy chance. This, however,
could have had no effect whatever upon the result of the match. C. T.
Studd made the winning hit, an off drive for four from Palmer, and
Cambridge University were declared the'winners by six wickets, amidst
the greatest enthusiasm. Ido not think for a moment that the better side
won, but, nevertheless, the Cantabs are entitled to every possible credit.
They lost the toss, and succeeded in dismissing their opponents on a bats-
man’s wicket for 139. Their batting in both innings was admirable.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Palmer 34 10 73 1
Garrett 4 1 11 0
Spofforth 17 8 23 0
Boyle 12 4 22 0
Giffen 24 11 29 3
Giffen’s figures are extremely good, and the Australians might have
done well to have put him on before.
Full score :
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn*
H. H. Massie, c Paravicini, bC. T. Studd 37 bC. T. Studd 20
A. C. Bannerman, b Ramsay 50 c Bather, b Ramsay 24
W, L. Murdoch, c Wrierht, b Ramsay 1 b Ramsay 18
T. Horan, c Wright, b Ramsay 8 b Ramsay 51
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Watson, b Ramsay .. 4 bC. T. Studd 4
G. Giffen, cJ. E. K. Studd, bC. T. Studd 3 c and bC. T. Studd 59
S. P. Jones, c Spencer, bC. T. Studd 7 Ibw, b Ramsay 1
G. E. Palmer, not out 12 cC.T. Studd, b Ramsay 35
T. W. Garrett, c Wright, bC. T. Studd.. 0 c Bather, b Ramsay 16
H. F. Boyle, c Maynard, bC. T. Studd .. 14 not out 39
P. R. Spofforth, c Paravicini, b Ramsay.. 0 st Wright, b Ramsay 10
Bl,lbl, n b 1 3 B 11,1 b 3 14
Total 139 Total 291
THE UNIVERSITY.
G. B. Studd, b Spofforth 42
J. E. K. Studd, b Garrett 6
E. A. J. Maynard, c Massie, b Palmer 6
C. W. Wright, 1 b w, b Palmer 8
C. T. Studd, c Murdoch, b Palmer 118
W. H. Bather, b Spofforth 24
P. J. T. Henery, b Boyle 21
R. C. Ramsay, not out 9
R. Spencer, b Palmer 0
P. J. de Paravicini, b Palmer 0
J. R. Watson, b Palmer 1
Byes 26,1 b 5 31
Total 266
In the second innings G. B. Studd scored (c Jones, b Giffen) 48, J. E. K.
Studd (b Giffen) 68, Maynard (c Spofforth, b Palmer) 6, Henery (b Giffen) 6, C. T.
Studd (not out) 17, Bather (not out) 15; byes 7,1 b 3—total 168,


AUSTRALIANS v. LANCASHIRE.
Played at Manchester, June 1,2, and 3.
The whole ot the team left Cambridge by the 7.40 p.m. train on Wed-
nesday, and after a long and tedious journey arrived in Manchester about
half-] >ast two in the morning, taking up their quarters at the Waterloo
Hotel. After a late breakfast the team for the day was selected, and it
was decided to leave out Garrett and Jones, the former suffering from a
had heel. The Old Trafford Ground was seen to great advantage, every
available seat being occupied. The weather was beautifully line, and a
splendid wicket had been prepared. During the day, despite the counter-
attraction of the Manchester Cup, there were between 15,000 and 16,000
persons present. Murdoch beat Hornby in the toss for choice of innings,
and of course decided to go in. Bannerman and Massie commenced the
hatting, to the howling of A. G. Steel and Crossland. At starting runs
were put on at a great pace, Massie, as usual, scoring much faster than
his partner. Massie spooned a hall up to third man, hut no one could get
to it. Barlow and Watson took the places of Steel and Crossland, and
the score was up to 65 before Massie was cleaned howled for a brilliantly
hit of 47, made up of six fours, two threes, four twos, and singles.
Murdoch followed, and the pace of run getting became much slower.
Both men played with great care and judgment, and the 100 went up
amidst cheers. Crossland replaced Watson at 103, and in his first over
Bannerman was out 1b w for a capital 39. Horan stayed with Murdoch
until 128, and was then clean howled by Steel, who had taken the hall
from Barlow. M‘Donnell was caught at point from a skyer at 141, and
eight runs later Giffen was dead out leg before to Steel. When Blackham
joined Murdoch some very fine cricket was shown. Murdoch, when he
had scored 37, gave a sharp chance to Watson off his own howling, which
was not accepted. Change after change was tried without effect, the
batsmen continuing to play in fine form. The 200 went up at 20 minutes
past four. When the score was up to 224, Murdoch was finely caught at
the wicket for a grand innings of 65, the chief hits of which being six
fours, two threes, and nine twos. Two runs later Blackham pulled a hall
on to the wicket, and retired for an excellent innings of 32. After this
the wickets fell rapidly, Bonnor alone offering any serious resistance to
the Lancashire howling. Palmer was cleaned howled, and Boyle and
Spofforth were splendidly caught at point by Barlow, the innings
closing at 5 minutes past 5 for 259. Considering the excellence of the
wicket Crossland and Steel howled extremelyyvvell, as will he seen from
the following analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
A. G. Steel 40 13 96 5
Crossland 33 15 39 4
Barlow 37 21 38 1
Watson 37 18 52 0
37 21 38 1
Watson 37 18 52 0
Briggs 6 1 17 0
Briggs


Hornby and Barlow began the Lancashire innings at half-past 5 to the
bowling of Spofforth and Palmer. Hornby commenced hitting at once,
but was not seen at his best. When he had made 24 out of 33 he
unluckily played a ball on to his wicket. A. G. Steel was in some time
without scoring, and was caught at the wicket. D. Q. Steel and Barlow
played good cricket, and kept up their wickets until the call of time, the
score being 54 for two wickets, Barlow (not out) 14, and D. Q. Steel (not
out) 11.
On Friday, the weather was very dull and cold, but the attendance of
spectators was nevertheless large. Lancashire did very badly indeed, so
badly that by five minutes past 1, or after only 50 minutes play, the
remaining eight wickets were down, and the champion county of 1881
were out for the paltry score of 118. This, too, was on a good wicket.
Spofforth and Palmer bowled excellently, but there was little save bad
play to account for the collapse. Analysis
lOvers. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 31-1 11 48 6
Palmer 31 13 64 3
In a minority of 141 runs, Lancashire had, of course, to follow their
innings. Hornby and Barlow went in, and Spofforth and Palmer bowled
to them. The wicket kicked a little, but there was nothing serious the
matter with it. Hornby rashly jumped in to drive Spofforth, and was
bowled, the first wicket falling for ten. I suppose it is hardly to be
wondered at, but Hornby cannot play Spofforth. A. G. Steel came in,
and at lunch time the total was 20 for one wicket.
Afterwards there was some good batting, though Steel ought to have
been stumped, and aftenvards gave a hard chance of “ c and b” to
Palmer. These faults notwithstanding, the cricket of the Lancashire pair
was excellent, and the Colonial bowling had to be changed several times.
At last, at 98, Steel was splendidly thrown out by Bannerman. His 50
consisted of three fours, two threes, six twos, and singles. D. Q. Steel
rapidly hit up 19, and was then caught at long-off. The single innings
defeat was aA r erted at 20 minutes to 5, and then rain for a time stopped
the game. Play Avas resumed at 10 minutes past 5, having been suspended
for half an hour. The batting was again capital, Boyle hitting and BarloAV
playing Avith extreme care and skill. At 162, however, Boyle Avas “ c
and b ” rather easily. Bobinson Avas bowled by a good ball, but when
Briggs came in the score rose rapidly. The young professional Avas bowled
at 195. O. P. Lancashire did nothing, but Watson and Barlow played out
time, and the home team, Avith three Avickets to fall, were 72 runs on.
The features of the play were the stylish batting of A. G. Steel, the
admirable patience of BarloAV, and the bowling of Spofforth, Avho for the
first time this year shoAved his old form.
In the evening the Colonists were entertained at dinner by Mr. C. G.
Hulton, a Avell-knoAvn Bugby football player, at the Queen’s Hotel.
Several members of the Lancashire Eleven were also present, and a very
pleasant evening was spent. Saturday morning opened very omniously
at Manchester. Bain Avas not actually falling, but a dull leaden sky,
without break of any kind, held out eA T ery prospect of a Avet day, and so
it turned out. At Old Trafford the Aveather Avas rather Avorse, and there
Avas quite a mist over the ground. Despite the depressing nature of the


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets
59-1..
.... 19 .
109
6
42 ..
.... 13 ....
.. 62
1
21 ..
.... 2 ....
44 ..
0
Boyle
22 ..
.... 12 ....
.. 29 ..
.... i
elements and the one-sided nature of the game, the Manchester public
again turned out in great force, the attendance numbering quite 7,000.
It may interest my readers to know that on Thursday some 13,500
persons passed through the turnstiles, and over 14,000 on Friday.
Saturday’s play opened disastrously, for Watson, who in attempting a
fourth run for a very pretty cut off Boyle, lost his wicket. With but 76
runs to the good, and only Pilling and Crossland to come in, matters did
not look hopeful for Lancashire. Pilling, however, batted remarkably
well, and did nearly all the scoring while he was at the wicket. One
four he made—a straight drive off Boyle out of the ring—was a hit any
batsman might be proud to make. Boyle had the pleasure of dismissing
the Lancashire wicket-keeper, and Crossland, after he had made a few
runs, skied the first ball he received from Spoftbrth. So ended the
Lancashire innings for 269—a far bigger total than I imagined they had
any chance of making, and undeniably greater than they could have
made but for the magnificent defence displayed by Barlow. The famous
Lancashire professional was batting for three hours and 40 minutes on
Friday, and more than an hour on Saturday, and during that time never
took a liberty. I think he might have been stumped once, but otherwise
no one could find any error in his careful steady batting. I have pleasure
in mentioning that his achievement of going in first and carrying out his
bat was so thoroughly appreciated by those members in the Pavilion,
that they subscribed nearly £ls for him. Spofforth again took six
wickets, but at a considerable cost. Still to obtain twelve wickets in so
good a match at an average cost of just over 13 runs is a splendid
performance. This was, in fact, the first occasion on which the “demon”
of 1878 and 1880 had bowled up to his reputation. Analysis:—
Palmer bowler two no balls.
Just after the close of the innings the rain, which had been threatening
all the morning, (began to fall, andso heavily diditcomedown, thatthere was
an even chance that the weather would save Lancashire from defeat.
It cleared up to some extent about half-past 2, though the light got no
better, and at a quarter to 3 the Australians went in to get the runs.
Massie and Bannerman were again the first pair of batsmen. Only an
over or two had been bowled, when Massie “ skied ” a ball from Steel in
the slips. Watson tried hard to get to it, and succeeded, but the catch
was an awkward one to make, and he didn’t hold it. This mistake practi-
cally robbed Lancashire of what little chance they had of saving the
match, for before Massie was smartly caught at slip 52 runs had been
scored. Both he and Bannerman played extremely well, hitting when-
ever there was an opportunity. Later on Murdoch batted as well as
ever, and though five wickets fell for 97 runs, the game was too far gone
for the County to retrieve it. The home team, however, fielded and
bowled very pluckily, despite their bad luck in the Australians having a
wet, easy wicket to bat upon. When nine runs were still wanted to
finish the contest, Giffen was given out 1 b w—a decision which I must


admit did not meet with general approval. Bonnor made the winning hit
soon after 5 o’clock, and so the Australians gained a victory by four
wickets over last year’s premier cricketing county. Crossland was by far
the most successful howler. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
A. 6. Steel 30 10 46 1
Watson 25 15 34 1
Barlow 14 7 20 1
Crossland 19-3 6 24 3
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
H. H. Massie, b Barlow 47 cA.G.Steel.bCrossland 31
A. C. Bannerman, Ibw, b Crossland 39 Ibw, b Crossland 20
W. L. Murdoch, c Pilling, bA. G. Steel 65 c Watson, bA. 6. Steel 27
T. Horan, bA. G. Steel 15 1b w, b Watson 12
JL • xIOI dlly U JAi O l/Cvl i-d 1 O VV) U V V CtlbUll ...... j.u
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Barlow, b Crossland 5 b Crossland 1
G. Giffen, Ibw, b A. G. Steel 5 Ibw, b Barlow 9
J. M. Blackham, bA. G. Steel 32 not out 20
32 not out 20
G. J. Bonnor, not out 21 not out 4
G. E. Palmer, b Crossland 1
H. F. Boyle, c Barlow, b Crossland 7
P. R. Spofforth, c Barlow, b A. G. Steel— 5
810, 1 b 7 17 83, lb 2 5
Total 259 Total 129
LANCASHIRE.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
A. N. Hornby, b Palmer 24 b Spofforth 6
Barlow, c Boyle, b Spofforth 23 not out 66
A. G. Steel, c Blackham, b Spofforth 0 run out 50
D. Q. Steel, b Spofforth 19 c Bonnor, b Spofforth 19
Rev. V. F. Royle, c Boyle, b Spofforth .. 14 c and b Spofforth 30
Robinson, b Palmer 0 b Palmer 2
Briggs, b Spofforth 6 b Spofforth 17
O. P. Lancashire, b Palmer 5 b Spofforth 0
Watson, not out 15 run out 18
Pilling, run out 6 c and b Boyle 27
Crossland, b Spofforth 0 c Palmer, b Spofforth 9
84,1b1, n b 1 6 B 19,1 b4,n b 2 25
Total 118 Total 269
The game ended none too soon, for within ten minutes of the finish rain
came down so heavily, that any further play would have been quite
impossible.
Jones, one of the new members of the team, was playing on Saturday
at Littlehorough for the club of that town against the Huddersfield club,
hut as far as 1 know, he did not do anything particularly brilliant.
Sunday was very stormy in Manchester during the greater part of the
day, hut towards the evening it cleared up slightly. The Colonists
travelled by the 7-40 p.m. train from Manchester, hut did not arrive at
their destination (Bradford) until half-past 10 —a very slow journey.


AUSTRALIANS v. YORKSHIRE.
Played at Bradford, June 5,6, and 7.
There had only been a shower or two at Bradford on Sunday, hut on
Monday rain fell incessantly from the morning until about half-past three
in the afternoon. The Horton Park Avenue Grounds, where the Austra-
lians were to oppose the Yorkshire Eleven for the first time since their
arrival, was soon rendered quite unfit for cricket, and by one o’clock it had
been agreed to abandon any attempt at commencing the match on that
day. To my mind this was a wise course to pursue, for had they begun
the game late in the afternoon, as they might have done, the wicket
-would have been quite spoilt for Tuesday and Wednesday ; while, if there
was no cricket on it in its wet state, the ground—not a perfect one at the
best of times—had some chance of recovering itself. The day was spent
by the Colonists as off days generally are by cricketers, some playing
billiards, some writing, and some indulging in other recreations, but all
acting with one end in view—to kill time as effectively as possible. The
Eleven to take part in the match was chosen on Monday morning before
the hour to go up to the ground. There was no great difficulty ex-
perienced in making the selection, as Garrett was still suffering from a
bad heel, and Horan had an ugly-looking thumb, so these two were
naturally omitted from the team. On Tuesday the weather was again
ominous, and a heavy shower about 11 o’clock did not make matters look
any more promising. Still the team rode up to the ground, and the
weather soon cleared up to some extent. The wicket at the Park
Avenue Ground appeared to have borne the rain much better than it did
on the occasion of the last visit of an Australian Eleven, when I
remember numerous resources had to be tried before the game could
be commenced, and after all efforts had been exhausted the wicket was
in a terribly bad state. Murdoch beat Emmett in the toss for choice of
innings, and as there appeared every prospect that the wicket would
deteriorate as the match progressed, he elected to put his side in first.
Bannerman and Massie began batting for the Colonists at half-past 12, the
bowling being entrusted to Peate and Bates. At first neither Bannerman
nor Massie could do much with either bowler, but Massie was the first
to score, driving a ball from Bates right out of the ring, and, later on,
hitting him brilliantly to square-leg for four. The one batsman made
the first 14 runs that were scored, and then retired—caught at the wdcket.
Murdoch, who as usual went in first wicket down, was cheered as he
walked from the Pavilion. The score was raised to 22 when Bates bowled
Bannerman, middle stump. Elated by their good fortune in dismissing
two of the best Australian batsmen, the Yorkshiremen fielded up
remarkably well, and their efforts were attended with signal success.


M‘Donnell hit up the first hall he received tamely into mid-off’s hands,
and off'the very next hall Giffen was caught at forward short-leg from an
equally bad hit. Disasters did not end here, for a few overs later
Blackham’s off stump was bowled, and five wickets were down for 30 runs.
I certainly thought that after this collapse the Australian total had no
chance of reaching 100, hut Murdoch, always to he relied on in an emer-
gency, played up with spirit and skill. Despite the fact that the two
howlers had now a wicket much in their favour, and were making the hall
break a lot, I did not see him make a single really had stroke. Jones, on
the other hand, was most uncomfortable. He shaped very badly at Peate,
and not much better at Bates, and appeared relieved that he was not out
at nearly every ball; yet it must be said to his credit that he stayed with
Murdoch when'others of greater experience proved unable to do so. He was
run out at 54. • Bonnor, except for two uppish hits in playing Peate,
batted freely and well, making runs Just when they were wanted. When
six wickets were down for 75 runs, the two slow bowlers gave way to
Ulyett and Emmett. The latter soon got rid of Murdoch, who cut a ball
hard into Lockwood’s hands at point. The Australian captain had made
41—an invaluable innings, played without anything like a chance, and
including a four, six threes, and three twos. Palmer was quickly out
leg before wicket to Ulyett, and then the players retired for luncheon,
the score standing at 83 for eight wickets. This was at half-past two,
and it was fifty minutes later before the game was resumed. The
two fast bowlers had worked admirably as changes before the interval,
but I do not think the Yorkshire captain displayed his usual good judg-
ment in giving them the bowling afterwards, as the sun had been shining
and the wicket had “caked” considerably. As it turned out, Bonnor
and Boyle added 14 runs before Bates resumed in place of Ulyett, and
the score had reached 105 when Bonnor was bowled off his pads. I was
pleased to see the “ giant ” play so well as he did for his 29. Boyle hit
hard and fast, but when Peate relieved Emmett, Spoffbrth was twice let
off before being splendidly caught by Watmough at long-on. The innings
finished for 128—an excellent total, considering what a bad start had
been made. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets-
Peate 36-2 20 40 3
Bates 35 13 58 4
Ulyett 6 4 9 1
Emmett ; 7 1 17 1
Hill 1 0 1 0
7 1 17 1
Emmett bowled a wide,
Yorkshire made an unfortunate beginning, Ulyett being bowled off his
pad by the first ball of his innings. Bates and Sidgwick then raised the
score to 28, when rain stopped play for 10 minutes. On resuming Palmer,
who with Spoffbrth had started the bowling, gave way to Boyle, Spoffbrth
changing ends. Bates played in very pretty style, but at 41 lifted a ball
from Boyle right into Massie’s hands at long-off. Sidgwick, who made a
promising first appearance for his county in this match, was caught at the
wicket two runs later. There was now another stoppage on account of
rain, but only for 10 minutes. These two showers, however, made the
wicket much easier for the batsmen, and, though Hall was out at 58,
Lockwood and Emmett defied all the efforts of the Australians to


Overs.
.. 43-2..
Maidens.
.... 14 ....
Runs.
.. 78 ..
Wickets.
5
.. 13 ..
.... 5 ....
.. 22 ..
.... 0
’
.. 35 ..
.... 19 ....
.. 30 ..
.... 5
Gitfen
.. 7 ..
.... 2 ....
.. 9 ..
0
part them before the call of time. Lockwood played in his best style,
and those who have seen the famous Yorkshire professional’s batting will
readily understand what I mean. Among his hits were two splendid
drives to the boundary off Spofforth. Gift'en went on to howl, and later
on Palmer resumed, hut without effect, and when stumps were drawn for
the day the score was 100, with four wickets down, Lockwood being not
out 44, and Emmett 12.
Wednesday morning was again wet and dull, hut soon after 11 o’clock
it cleared up, and a start was made at a quarter-past 12. Lockwood and
Emmett continued batting to the howling of Spofforth and Boyle. After
Emmett had hit Spofforth for four, Lockwood gave Murdoch a hot chance
at point which was not accepted. From this point the game went all
against Yorkshire. Emmett was caught high up at slip, Grimshaw and
Watmough wei'e clean howled, and Hill was caught at point from a
ball that kicked up off the shoulder of his hat. Eight wickets were now
down for 114, and it did not seem likely that Yorkshire would pass the
Australian’s total. Peate, however, came up to Lockwood’s assistance,
and with a good deal of luck stayed while 27 runs were put on. About
this time the Australian fielding was anything hut smart. Bonnor
should have caught Peate at slip, and Spofforth should have taken him
at mid-off, both chances being off Boyle’s bowling. At 141 Lockwood
only half got hold of a ball from Boyle, and was easily caught at long-on.
Lockwood’s 66 was a very fine performance—made just at the right time
and in his best form. Barring the one hard chance at point, I never saw
him make a mistake. Some of his cuts behind point were particularly
brilliant. He hit five fours, a three, and twelve twos. There had been
great cheering when Lockwood completed his 50, and also when York-
shire passed the Australians’ total. Very soon after Lockwood’s
departure, Peate was caught at long-off, and the innings closed at
half-past one for 141. Boyle howled extremely well, and was of course
assisted by the slow wicket. From the following analysis it will be seen
that his figures are good :
Bannerman and Massie began the second innings of the Australians, the
Yorkshire howling being, as usual, shared by Bates and Peate. Before a
run had been scored Massie put a hall from Peate tamely into Lockwood’s
hands at point, and the first wicket was down for 0. Murdoch came in
and both he and Bannerman played very steady cricket. Bannerman
skied a hall on the leg side, which fell harmless. Two changes of
bowling were tried, hut no parting was effected up to luncheon time—
half-past two —the score then being 29 for one wicket. When the game
was continued Bates and Peate resumed howling, and in the latter’s
second over Bannerman was easily caught at slip. Boyle, who was put
in second wicket down in consequence of his plucky hitting on the
Tuesday, came next, hut after scoring five, was neatly caught at long-off.
Giffen was smartly stumped at 44, and nine runs later M‘Donnell was
magnificently caught at long-on by Grimshaw, who was almost amongst


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Bates
22-1...
9
.. 35
2
Peate
44 ...
... 17 ....
.. 75 .
5
Lockwood
2 ...
1
2 .
0
Ulyett
1 ..,
1 . ..
0
0
Hill
6 .
5
3
1
Emmett
13 ...
... 7 ....
.. 10 .,
1
the ring of people, and brought off the catch at the third attempt amidst
tremendous Yorkshire cheering. Just previous to this Murdoch might
possibly have been caught high up at point by Lockwood. When
Bonnor joined Murdoch a very different complexion was put on the game,
and the Australians saved all chances of defeat. Bonnor treated the spec*
tutors to some most sensational hitting. He drove Bates twice for four,
the first hit pitching clean into the Pavilion. Hill went on for Bates at
62, and Bonnor got him away to leg for three. Next he let out at Peate
and drove him splendidly over the Stand at the lower end of the ground
for six. In trying to repeat the performance Bonnor skied Peate to long-
off, but Grimshaw dropped the catch. From Hill’s bowling Bonnor was
missed at the wicket. This luck seemed to give Bonnor renewed confi-
dence; for he rushed out to Peate and twice sent him out of the ground
for six, the hits being tremendously applauded. When the score reached
94 both Murdoch and Bonnor were dismissed, the former being out 1 b w,
and the latter neatly caught at long-off The Australian captain had again
played extremely well, while Bonnor’s batting was remarkably free and
spirited. He was, of course, very lucky, but, nevertheless, deserves great
credit. The remainder of the innings does not require much description.
Jones ran himself out at 103, and eight runs later Blackham was caught
at slip at the second attempt. Spoftbrth and Palmer put on 24 runs for
the last wicket, the former making a drive from Peate, which pitched on
to the roof of the Stand. Bowling analysis :
Emmett bowled a wide, and Peate two no-balls.
After all chance of the Australians being defeated was gone the interest,
too, seemed to depart, as in the three-quarters of an hour left for play it
was scarcely possible for Yorkshire to be dismissed, and quite impossible
for the county to hit off the runs. As it turned out the cricket was all in
favour of the Colonists, who got rid of three batsmen—two of them among
the most dangerous run-getters on the side —at a cost of only 30 runs.
Ulyett and Sidgwick went in against the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle.
Ulyett made an uppish hit for two over cover-point’s head, and was then
clean bowled, middle stump, by Spoftbrth, much to the disgust of those
assembled on the ground, who had not expected to see the crack York-
shire batsmen dismissed so speedily a second time. Bates came in, but
with the score at 9 Sidgwick was caught at the wicket. Five runs later a
fast ball from Spoftbrth took Bates’s middle stump out of the ground ;
three wickets for 14. Fortunately for the reputation of the Yorkshire
Eleven no one else was dismissed in the few remaining minutes. Hall
joined Lockwood, and some careful batting was witnessed, the bowling-
being remarkably good. Just before time Palmer relieved Boyle, but
when he had bowled an over the gong was sounded, and the game had to
be left drawn. When the match thus ended, Yorkshire, with seven
wickets to fall, wanted 88 runs to win ; but the wicket was so difficult


that I very much question their ability to have obtained them, especially
after the poor show the •' tail ” made on the first innings.
Spofforth bowled admirably, and had a fine analysis, as will be seen
from the appended figures :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 14 5 10 3
Boyle 13 5 15 0
Palmer 1 0 1 0
Palmer bowled a wide.
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
H. H. Massie, c Hunter, b Bates 14 c Lockwood, b Peate 0
A. C. Bannerman, b Bates 2 c Bates, b Peate 13
W. L. Murdoch, c Lockwood, b Emmett. .41 1b w, b Hill 29
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Emmett, b Peate 0 c Grimshaw, b Bates 5
G. GifFen, c Hill, b Peate 0 st Hunter, b Peate 2
J. M. Blackham, b Bates 0 c Watmough, b Peate .. 9
S. P. Jones, run out 3 run out 3
G. J. Bonnor, b Bates 29 c Grimshaw, bEmmett.. 35
G. E. Palmer, 1 b w, b Ulyett 0 b Bates 11
H. F. Boyle, not out 22 c Watmouth, b Peate 5
22 c Watmouth, b Peate 5
F. R. Spofforth, c Watmough, b Peate .. 9 not out 13
81, Ibl, wl 3 B 4, 1 b 3, w 1, n b 2 10
Total 123 Total 135
YORKSHIRE.
R. Sidgwick, c Blackham, b Boyle 16
Ulyett, b Spofforth 0
Bates, c Massie, b Boyle 21
Lockwood, c M‘Donnell, b Boyle 66
Hall, b Spofforth 2
Emmett, c M‘Donnell, b Spofforth 18
Grimshaw, b Spofforth 4
Watmough, b Boyle 1
Hill, c Murdoch, b Boyle 0
Peate, c Bonnor, b Spofforth 11
Hunter, not out 0
B 3, 1 b 4 7
Total 146
In the second innings, Sidgwick scored (c Blackham, b Spofforth) 2, Ulyett
(b Spofforth) 4, Bates (b Spofforth) 6, Lockwood (not out) 14, Hall (not out) 0;
1 b 3, w I—Total 30.


AUSTRALIANS V. NOTTS.
Played at Nottingham, June 8,9, and 10.
I am sorry to say that some unpleasantness, the first in the tour, occurred
during the visit to Nottingham. This was extremely unfortunate, as the
Nottingham match had been looked forward to by the team with peculiar-
interest, the 1878 and 1880 elevens having both suffered defeat at the Trent
Bridge Ground. I will mention the facts in their proper place. The
team left Bradford soon after nine o’clock, and after a rather slow journey
arrived at Nottingham about one o’clock in the morning. On their arrival
the Colonists found that the rooms ordered and promised at one hotel
could not he obtained, and they were referred to the Flying Horse, where
every attempt was made to satisfy the wants of the team under very
difficult circumstances. It was not, however, until nearly three o’clock that
every one was at rest, and so the Colonists could not expect to be as fit
as usual. This was unlucky on the night previous to an important
contest like Australia v. Nottinghamshire. The morning was dull and
cheerless, hut by noon a large crowd had assembled at the Trent Bridge
Ground, and the number of people increased largely until after the
luncheon interval. The wicket looked perfect, but it was soft and
slow; still, the Australian captain, on winning the toss, determined
to go in. As usual, the Colonists were first represented by
Bannerman and Massie, Shaw and Morley bowling. With only 15 runs
scored Massie lost his wicket in attempting a run for a hit of Bannerman
in the slips. Murdoch come in, but rain stopped play for twenty
minutes, and, on resuming, the game went all against the Australians.
Bannerman, in trying to pull a ball to leg, skied it, and retired for 12,
Giffen played on, Bonnor hit out at Shaw, and was dismissed by a well-
judged catch at long-on by Gunn, close to the ring, while Jones, who
came next, was clean bowled by Morley ; five wickets were thus down
for 35 runs. Blackham joined Murdoch, but only six runs had been
added when the bell rang for luncheon. It was concerning the luncheon
that the unpleasantness I have referred to took place. The Australians,
on proceeding to the refreshment-tent,’found there had been no prepara-
tion made for them, and there was no possibility of obtaining anything
reasonable to eat. They had, consequently, to do without. Though this
matter was, probably, a piece of forgetfulness on the part of the Notting-
ham authorities, it was none the less unfortunate.
When play was continued Murdoch and Blackham stayed together for
a long time. Murdoch batted very finely, but Blackham made his runs
in poor style, and played the bowling of Flowers very indifferently. Two
changes of bowling—Flowers for Morley and Barnes for Shaw—-had to be
made before a fine catch at mid-off got rid of Murdoch, who had been
batting nearly two hours and a half for 28. Forty-three runs had been
added since the fall of the previous wicket. Garrett and Boyle gave no


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets,
43 ..
.... 23 ..
45
2
39 ..
.... 24 ..
;.. 28
2
22 ..
12 ...
29
1
Barnes
15 ..
5 ...
... 27 .
2
trouble, but Palmer, though he had some luck, hit in a very determined
style for his 26. Wright was put on to bowl for the first time for 113,
and obtained the two last wickets. An error of judgment was probably
made in not trying him earlier. Blackham carried out his bat for an
invaluable innings of 56, in which were four fours, six threes, and two twos.
He gave two chances, one easy and one difficult, and his style was not
good, but he nevertheless is entitled to high praise for the way in which
he saved his side from disaster. Analysis :
Wright 10-2 4 15 2
It is worthy of note that there was not a single extra given,
Nottinghamshire started most unfortunately. Scotton, who went in
first with Selby, was clean bowled by the third ball he received from
Spofforth, and Barnes, who followed, was dismissed by the first ball of
Palmer’s second over. The game looked badly for the county with two
wickets down for three runs, but on Shrewsbury joining Selby some
excellent cricket was shown. Spofforth and Palmer gave way to Boyle
and Garrett, but neither Selby nor Shrewsbury had been dismissed when
stumps were drawn for the day, the score standing at 41 for two wickets
—Selby 25, Shrewsbury 13.
I need say very little about Friday’s play. There was nothing but rain
all the morning, and it was three o’clock before a ball was bowled. At
that time Selby and Shrewsbury went on with the Nottingham batting.
The latter hit a couple of fours, and then, after only ten minutes’ cricket,
rain came down more heavily than ever, and stopped the game for the
day. I am sorry for the crowd of people who braved the wind and the
rain in the hope of seeing their countrymen make a good show against
the Australian bowling.
On the Saturday there was little probability of the contest being played
out unless Nottingham could have made a long score, and put the
Australians in on a treacherous wicket. This the county quite failed to
do, and during the afternoon it was soon made evident that Nottingham
would have no time to get the runs even had they had the ability. When
the game was left drawn at half-past 6 Nottinghamshire, with nine
wickets to fall, wanted 127 runs to win. This would usually be a moderate
task, but the wicket at Trent Bridge Ground on Saturday was so slow and
treacherous that the county had nothing the best of the game. About
noon on Saturday the weather appeared more threatening than on Friday,
but the clouds soon cleared off, and the afternoon turned out very
pleasant. Attracted by the hope of seeing some good cricket, and by the
favourable weather, there were quite 10,000 people on the ground. About
a quarter-past 12 Selby and Shrewsbury, who were not out in the first
innings of Nottingham with 26 and 24 respectively, went on batting
against the bowling of Palmer and Boyle. Horan and M‘Donnell
were fielding instead of Boyle and Spofforth, who were both slightly
unwell. Palmer began by sending down three maidens, but Garrett was
cut for two and three by Shrewsbury, who, however, gave a chance
to Murdoch at point, and was afterwards caught at mid-off. Sixty runs


had been added since he joined Selby at the fall of the second wicket.
Indeed, had these two batsmen failed, I don’t see where Nottingham
were to get any runs at all, as the next five wickets fell for 18 runs.
Butler was “ yorked” the second hall he received ; at 76 two more bats-
men were dismissed, Selby being given out caught at slip, low down, and
Flowers caught at point from a very tame stroke, while five runs later
Palmer bowled both Shaw and Wright. A word of praise must be given
to Selby, who batted freely and well for his 38. With eight wickets
down for 81, and only Sherwin and Morley to go in, it appeared as though
the innings would be quickly over. Sherwin, however, hit out very
pluckily, and, with the assistance of Gunn, who was batting very
patiently, the 100 was put up just before a quarter to 2. Nine more runs
were added, and then Palmer bowled Sherwin for a well-played 16.
Morley gave no trouble, and the innings closed for 110, or 32 runs behind.
Gunn, who went in at the fall of the fourth wicket, carried out his bat for
13. As neither Boyle nor Spofforth was in the field, it was fortunate for
the Australians that Palmer and Garrett were so successful in bowling.
Analysis :
Overs, Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 11 .... 4 .... 14 .... 1
Palmer 38 22 38 4
Garrett 32 .... 11 .... 41 .... 5
Boyle 5 .... 1 .... 10 .... 0
Three quarters of an hour after the conclusion of the Nottingham
innings Bannerman and Massie began batting, the bowling being, as usual,
shared by Morley and Shaw, Runs were made with great difficulty, and with
the score at four Massie was easily caught at mid-on from a bad hit.
Murdoch came in but the play was very slow. The only hits of note in
more than twenty overs were a four to leg by Murdoch and a four to
square-leg by Bannerman, both off Morley’s bowling. The total had only
reached 18 when Bannerman was taken at point, and Blackham, who-
followed, rushed out to drive Shaw, and was clean bowled. Three good
wickets were thus down for 20 runs when Bonn or joined Murdoch. The
new comer at once made a straight drive out of the ground for six off
Shaw, who thereupon gave way to Barnes at 34. Morley gave way to
Wright a little later. Murdoch drove Wright to the on for four and two,
but after being quite beaten by that professional was clean bowled by the
next ball from him. The Australian captain had batted in his usual
correct style for 24. Giffen, who had been for a time dead out of luck, was
easily caught at short-leg, but on Jones joining Bonnor 42 runs were
added before the batsmen were separated. Sherwin ought to have
stumped Jones, and Bonnor hit a ball up to long-on. Selby ran hard for
the ball, but dropped it after making a splendid attempt, and getting
it in one hand. After these mistakes the batting was very careful.
Bonnor played more patiently than I have ever seen him, and Jones very
seldom scored, but his style was again awkward ; indeed, it is very
evident that he, like some other members of the team, has something to
learn in playing on a slow wicket. Flowers relieved Barnes at 71, but
though he made Jones very uneasy he could not get a wicket, and at 89
Morley resumed in place of Wright, while Shaw went on again instead
of Flowers. These changes proved very successful. A well-judged catch
deep behind the bowler got rid of Bonnor, who, bar one chance, had


played excellent cricket under very difficult circumstances. The 100 went
up at 25 minutes to six, but three runs later Palmer was well caught at
long-on. An easy catch at point sent back Garrett, and then a ball from
Morley got up and went off Jones’s bat into third man’s hands. Jones
had contributed a useful innings of 17. From the analysis it will be seen
that Shaw has a splendid average. I think he went on too soon.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Morley 31 .... 16 .... 31 .... 3
Shaw 27 .... 19 .... 18 .... 4
Barnes 11 2 18 1
Wright 18 .... 9 .... 16 .... 1
Fiowers 10 2 .... 15 0
There was only 25 minutes left to play when Nottinghamshire went in
for the second time, so that all interest had died out of the match. Selby
had the ill luck to be bowled oft' his glove, and then Scotton and Gunn
played out time. So ended the first match between Nottinghamshire and
the Australians—a match in which it would not be possible to say who
had the best of it, as, although the county had to get more runs than at
their first attempt, it was not to be expected they would again be dis-
missed so easily, and, of course, no one can say how the wicket might
have played. Analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Palmer 7 4 6 1
Garrett 7 4 3 0
Full Score:—
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn..
A. C. Bannerman, c Sherwin, b Shaw .. 12 c Shrewsbury, b Shaw .. 7
H. H. Massie, run out 11 c Barnes, b Morley 1
Xl. lit IVidb&lL, X IXIX UUI. .• i XX L Deli UC&j U IViUi 1C j X
W. L. Murdoch, c Scotton, b Flowers 28 b Wright 24
G. Giffen, b Morley 1 c Morley, b Barnes 0
G. J. Bonnor, c Gunn, b Shaw 1 c Butler, b Morley 39
S. P. Jones, b Morley 0 c Selby, b Morley 17
J. M. Blackham, not out 56 b Shaw 0
T. W. Garrett, c Gunn, b Barnes 0 c Shrewsbury, b Shaw .. 3
H. F. Boyle, c Shrewsbury, b Barnes 0 not out 0
G. E. Palmer, Ibw. b Wright 26 c Selby, b Shaw 7
F. R. Spofforth, b Wright 7 absent 0
Byes 8
Total 140 Total ‘..106
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE. lgt inn>
J. Selby, c Bonnor, b Garrett 38
W. Scotton, b Spofforth 0
W. Barnes, b Palmer 2
VV , X3cXl lICO, U XT ctllilL/i "
A. Shrewsbury, c Bannerman, b Garrett 30
F. Butler, b Garrett 0
W. Flowers, c Murdoch, b Garrett 0
W. Gunn, not out 13
A. Shaw, b Palmer 4
W. Wright, b Palmer 0
M. Sherwin, b Palmer 16
F. Morley, b Garrett 0
B 6, 1 b 1 7
Total HO
In the second innings, Selby scored (b Palmer) 0, Scotton (not out) 4, Gunn (not
out) 5; b>es 3—total 12.


been the only batsman to reach double figures. I thought now the innings
would be very soon over, but when Platts and Hay got together a most
plucky display of cricket was given. At luncheon time the score was
65, and on resuming 12 runs were added before Hay was bowled for a ser-
viceable 20. After this the innings was only remarkable for the plucky
hitting of Platts, whom I have never seen to greater advantage. Evans
and Disney were out like all their predecessors—clean bowled. This
was a most curious fact, and I cannot remember in a good match for some
long time the first nine wickets having been all clean bowled. Mycroft
returned a ball to the bowler, and the innings closed for 106 —a far larger
total than I expected after the inglorious commencement. Platt’s capital
33 included three fours, two threes, and two twos. Spofforth and Palmer
bowled unchanged throughout, and the Australian fielding was extremely
good, Garrett, at short-leg and cover-point, being particularly noticeable.
Analysis ;—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 39.1 19 38 5
Palmer 39 17 59 5
AUSTRALIANS v. DERBYSHIRE.
(Played at Derby, June 12, 13, and 14.
I cannot say that I looked forward to the Derbyshire match with any
great amount of interest. What little I have seen of Derbyshire cricket
has always been disappointing. Sometimes they may do fairly well at
starting, hut it always seems to me they come to grief just when some-
thing is wanted of them. Another thin" is they had just been beaten by
a weaker team of Sussex than that which suffered such an easy defeat at
the hands of the Australians. Under these circumstances the match
between the Australians and Derbyshire seemed almost certain to he
hollow and one-sided. The team stayed in Nottingham until Sunday
evening, when they left by 8-30 p.m. train for Derby. They arrived at
the last-named town after about an hour’s journey, taking up their
quarters at the Midland Hotel.
Monday morning was bright and fine, hut there was a bitterly cold
wind blowing. Before leaving the hotel the team for the day was selected,
it being decided that Horan and M'Donnell should again stand out, the
former’s hand being still bad. Despite the cold and cheerless weather
there was a large attendance on the county ground, when play commenced
at a quarter past 12. The home team won the toss, and began batting
with Sugden and Capt. Johnstone, Spoftbrth and Palmer sharing the
bowling. From the outset it was quite evident that the Derbyshire men
were no match whatever for their powerful opponents. Sugden, Docker,
Johnstone, Maynard, R. P. Smith, and Cropper were all clean bowled,
and six of the best wickets were doAvn for 40. So far R. P. Smith had


Bannerman and Massie began the Australian innings at a quarter-past
four to the bowling of Mycroft and Platts. Massie commenced hitting
in splendid form, and put on runs at a tremendous rate. Some of his
hits to the off were perfect, and reminded me a good deal of A. N.
Hornby on his best days. Change after change was tried, but still Massie
continued to hit. At last L. C. Docker was put on at the Pavilion end,
and at 85 he clean bowled Massie for 66 —a magnificent display of
hitting. In fact, in my humble opinion, this was the best innings that
Massie had up to that time played in England. He was only at the
wickets 55 minutes, and hardly made a bad hit. He received a good
deal of applause, but I think the Derby crowd were a trifle disappointed
at the poor show made by their county. Massie’s chief hits were eight
fours, three threes, and six twos. A shower of rain stopped the game
for ten minutes, and then Murdoch joined Bannerman. After what had
gone before, the scoring now was very slow, and the only important hits-
for some time were two fours to leg by Murdoch. Just after the Derby-
shire total had been passed, Bannerman was caught at the wicket for a
patient and correct innings of 24, which had taken him an hour and 35-
minutes to make, Jones and Murdoch then played out time, the score
being 122 for two wickets, Murdoch (not out) 16, and Jones (not out) 10.
When the game was resumed on Tuesday, the weather was even worse
than on the previous day. Again a bitterly cold wind was blowing, and
rain fell at intervals throughout the day, and finally stopped play at
twenty minutes to four. A fairly numerous company was present, but
there was very little enthusiasm, the people seeming far too cold to think
of applauding. Not that the cricket was very enlivening. The Derby-
shire eleven were completely over-matched, and the Australians simply
did as they liked. At ten minutes past 12 Murdoch and Jones resumed
batting to the bowling of Evans and Mycroft. From the start the wicket
played well, and runs came very freely. Murdoch batted in his usual
fine form, while Jones played in better style than usual. Several changes
of bowling were tried, and when it seemed that a thorough mastery had
been obtained over the Derbyshire bowling, the game took an unexpected
turn in favour of the home team. Platts went on at the Pavilion wicket,
and with two successive balls dismissed Jones and Bonnor, the former
being out 1b w, and the latter clean bowled. This was not the worst, as
from the first ball of the succeeding over Murdoch returned a ball to
Cropper, and was easily caught and bowled. All these three wickets fell
with the score at 164. Giffen and Blackham now got together, and made
a long stand. Both men hit with considerable freedom, and rapidly in-
creased the score. The 200 went up at twenty minutes to two_ amidst
faint cheers. The bowling was frequently changed, but no parting had
been effected up to luncheon time, the score being 228 for five wickets.
There was a good deal of rain during the interval, and when play was
resumed at a quarter-past three, the wicket was, if anything, easier than
before. The Derbyshire fielding, which was quite bad enough before
luncheon, was now extremely loose ; in fact, the Derbyshire men seemed
greatly demoralised. Blackham was twice let off by the wicket-keeper,
and then from Mycroft’s bowling he was very badly missed at point by
R. p. Smith. At twenty minutes to four rain fell heavily, and drove the
players back to the Pavilion. It very soon became evident there could


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets
My croft
56
... 33 ...
. 70
... 3
Platts
32
... 8 ...
. 66
... 2
Hay
9
... 4 ...
. 23
... 0
H. Evans
32
... 7 ...
. 63
... 3
L. C. Docker
12
... 3 ...
. 30
... 1
Cropper
28
... 12 ...
. 32
... 1
be no more play that day, and after waiting over an hour in hopes of it
clearing np, it was decided to adjourn the game until the following morn-
ing, the score being left at 258 for five wickets, Blackham not out 48,
and Giffen 48.
On Wednesday all interest seemed to have died out of the game, for
although the weather was not quite so cold, the attendance was far
smaller than on either of the previous days. The wicket had been con-
siderably affected by Tuesday’s heavy rain, but played better than might
have been expected. Blackham and Giffen continued the Australian
innings at a quarter past 12 to the bowling of Evans and Mycroft. Black-
ham after adding four to his overnight total was clean bowled by Evans.
He had played a capital innings but was decidedly lucky. His figures
were three fours, six threes, and seven twos. Palmer came in but lost
the partnership of Giffen, who was dismissed by a good ball from Mycroft,
which broke in from the leg. Giffien’s admirable 47 inclnded a four, six
threes, and seven twos. Garrett in trying to drive, only half got hold of a
ball from Evans, and returned it straight into his hands. Boyle hit out
with some freedom for a time, but at 290 he was easily caught at third
man from a mis-hit. Spofforth was bowled by a “beauty” from Mycroft,
and the innings closed for 292, the last five wickets on Wednesday morning
having only added 34 runs. During this latter part of the play the Der-
byshire fielding was a trifle smarter than before. The bowling analysis
reads thus :
Derbyshire were 186 runs to the bad, so that there was hardly any pos-
sibility of their saving a single innings defeat. Platts arid Sugden were
the first pair of batsmen, Boyle and Garrett sharing the Australian
bowling. The start was most disastrous. Platts played Boyle’s second
ball on to his wicket, and five runs only had been scored when Sugden
was out. Docker and Maynard now got together, and by far the best
cricket of the innings was shown. I had not seen much of Docker’s
batting, and watched his play with great interest. He hit with a good
deal of confidence on the slow wicket, but would no doubt be seen to far
greater advantage when the grounds are fast and hard. He made a fine
on-drive for four from Garrett, and then hit the same bowler twice for
three. The score at luncheon was 26, and on resuming it was increased
to 36 before Docker, in bitting to leg, was easily caught at cover-slip for
21. After Docker’s departure all the life seemed to go out of the Derby-
shire batting. Maynard was bowled for a patiently-played 18, and the
only remaining feature of the innings was the batting of Cropper, who
should, I think, prove a decided acquisition to the Derbyshire Eleven.
The last wicket fell for 77, and the Australians were left winners by an
innings and 109 runs. A result such as this was only what might have
been expected, as there is no doubt that the Australians would not lose
one match in twenty against Derbyshire. I cannot help feeling a
sort of sympathy with Derbyshire, for every effort is made to find


new talent, but somehow that talent is not to he found. They have worked
hard to maintain their position as a first-class county, but they will have
to greatly improve before they can expect to have any chance against
good teams. Hay’s bowling is nothing like what it used to be, and, of
course, Mycroft cannot be expected to last for ever. Their fielding
through! the match was miserably slack, and certainly not what is
expected from a county eleven. It will be seen that the figures of
Spofforth and Palmer are remarkable, though, of course, the wickets
taken by the latter were two of the weakest batsmen on the side :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Boyle 27 15 24 3
Garrett 16 6 26 0
Spofforth 12-3 5 19 5
Palmer 3 1 4 2
Below is the full score :
DERBYSHIRE.
Ist Inn. 2nd Inn.
Capt. Johnstone, b Palmer 4 b Spofforth 0
H E. Sudden, b Spofforth 9 b Boyle 1
L. C. Docker, b Palmer 1 c Massie, b Boyle 21
E. A. J, Maynard, b Spofforth 3 b Spofforth 18
R. P. Smith, b Spofforth 13 b Spofforth 6
Cropper, b Spofforth 5 c Giffen, b Spofforth 18
Platts, not out 33 b Boyle 0
Hay, b Palmer 20 o Giffen, b Spofforth 5
H. Evans, b Palmer 4 b Palmer 4
Disney, b Palmer 1 b Palmer 0
Mycroft, c and b Spofforth 4 not out 0
4 not out 0
9 Byes 4
Byes 9 Byes 4
Total 106 Total 77
AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, b Docker 66
A. C. Bannerman, c Disney, b Mycroft 24
W. L. Murdoch, c and b Cropper 46
S. P. Jones, 1 b w, b Platts 22
G. J. Bon nor, b Platts ' ‘ 0
J. M. Blackham, b Evans 52
G. Giffen, b Mycroft 47
G. E. Palmer, not out 13
T. W. Garrett, c and b Evans 1
H. F. Boyle, c Maynard, b Evans 13
F. R. Spofforth, b Mycroft 0
B 5, 1 b 3 8
Total 292
The Colonists then had three days’ holiday—the first they had had since
the tour began at Oxford. Some of them did talk about going to Paris, but
1 fancy a little quiet London sight-seeing was all that most of them.
fe\?3evS?3C\


AUSTRALIANS v. YORKSHIRE.
Played at Sheffield, June 19, 20, and 21.
Knowing what keen interest is taken in cricket at Sheffield, I quite ex-
pected to see a large crowd on the Bramall-lane Ground on Monday, but
I certainly was not prepared to see quite such an enormous assemblage.
18,877 persons paid for admission, so that with members and others the
attendance must have been close upon 20,000. Such an attendance has
never been seen before at a cricket match at Sheffield. The occasion was,
of course, the second meeting between the Australians and Yorkshire.
Sheffield is always considered the head-quarters of Yorkshire cricket, and
it is generally thought that the county men play better on that ground
than any other. The Yorkshire eleven was very similar to that which
opposed the Australians at Bradford, the only difference being Lee—a new
man to county cricket —playing in place of Watmough. The Australians
decided to leave out Boyle and Jones, the former suffering from on injury
received to his hand while fielding at mid-on in the Derby match. I may
here state that during all the years that Boyle has fielded so close in at
mid-on, he has never before been sufficiently injured to prevent his taking
part in any match. The wicket on Monday was rather slow, and during
the day only 186 runs were scored. Emmett won the toss from Murdoch
and decided to go in. Ulyett and Lee were the first pair of batsmen, the
Australian bowling being shared by Spofforth and Palmer. In the
“ demon’s ” second over Ulyett played a ball right into M‘Donnell's hands
at slip, but the chance was not taken. After this Ulyett scored rapidly,
but did not play in anything like his best form. Lee was caught at slip
for four, but Hall and Ulyett gave the field considerable trouble. Ulyett
made one or two uppish hits, which were only just out of the way of the
fieldsmen. Garrett replaced Spofforth, and Blackham took up the wicket-
keeping instead of Murdoch, who had been in that position at the start of
the innings. Gitfen took the ball from Palmer at 57, and soon got Ulyett
caught at mid-on for a fluky innings of 38. After Ulyett’s departure the
game went much against the Yorkshiremen. Bates was clean bowled by
a splendid ball from Giffen, Hall was out Ibw, Emmett and Sidgwick were
each clean bowled, Grimshaw Avas caught and bowled, and Hill boAvled,
eight wickets being down for 65. Lockwood and Peate offered a slight
resistance, but both batsmen Avere let off, the former by Horan at slip,
and Peate by the same fieldsman at short leg. LockAveod caused some
applause by hitting Garrett for 10 in one over —a two to the oft, an on-
drive for four, and a leg-hit for four. Peate Avas soon aferwards stumped,
and Hunter boAvled, the innings closed for 92. This, small enough in
itself, would have been even smaller had all the chances been taken that
were offered. Giffen boAvled remarkably well, the wicket seeming to suit


him to a nicety. He got a lot of work on the hall, and was more difficult
to play than any of the other Australian bowlers. It will be seen from
the analysis that his figures are wonderfully good, and also that Garrett
bowled with considerable success :
Overs. Maidens. Anns. Wickets.
Spofforth 25 .... 12 .... 26 .... 1
Palmer 14 8 14 0
Garrett 26 .... 15 27 4
Giffln _ 16-1.... 6 .... 16 .... 5
When the Australians went in it was with great difficulty that the ring
could be kept, as there was really no room for the people. Bannerman
and Massie were, as usual, the first pair of batsmen, while the Yorkshire
bowling was entrusted to Peate and Bates. Eleven runs only had been
scored when Massie rushed out to drive Peate, and, losing his footing,
was easily stumped. Murdoch came next and was loudly cheered as lie
walked to the wicket. Both he and Bannerman played with the greatest
caution, and runs were put on at an extremely slow rate. At one time
20 overs only produced nine runs. Hill went on for Bates at 32, and then
Bannerman would have been easily run out had Hill handled the ball
when returned to him from the field. After this the scoring again became
very slow. Emmett replaced Peate at 43, and the 50 went up after
an hour and a half’s play. Just previous to this Murdoch har a very
narrow escape of being run out. Then the rate of scoring became a trifle
faster. Murdoch cut Emmett twice for four, and Bannerman hit the
same bowler to the off for another four. This, however, proved to be
Bannerman’s last hit, in playing forward at a ball from Hill he was easily
caught at point, and retired for a most patient innings of 34. Horan
joined Murdoch, and Peate and Bates resumed bowling. The Yorkshire
total had just been equalled when Horan was very neatly caught
by Lockwood at point with the left hand. M‘Donnell, after scoring a
single, played a ball tamely back to Peate, and the fourth wicket was
down for 94. M‘Donnell had been a good deal out of luck lately, and I
thought his innings of 82 when playing for the Orleans Club last Satur-
day might perhaps have changed it. Many people tell me that this 82
was one of the soundest innings M‘Donnell has ever played. With the
fall of the Victorian’s wicket stumps were drawn for the day, the
Australians being two runs ahead with six wickets to fall, and Murdoch
being not out 42,
On Tuesday there was again an enormous attendance, but nothing like
the crowd on the previous day. The number that passed through the
turnstiles was 13,484. Play was resumed soon after 12, Murdoch being
joined by Bonnor. The bowling was shared by Peate and Bates. Bonnor
began by making one of his sensational drives for six of Bates, but he
had only scored nine when he was sent back by an easy catch at short-
slip. A good ball from Bates just took the top of Blackham’s leg stump,
and six wickets were down for 113. Gift'en came in, but lost the partner-
ship of Murdoch, who at 126 was caught at slip from a very bad
stroke. Murdoch’s 54 was a wonderful exhibition of patient cricket.
Except that he ought to have been run out he gave no chance whatever,
and he fully deserved the loud cheers that greeted him on his return to
the Pavilion. The figures of his innings were two fours, three threes,
four twos, and no fewer than 29 singles. Palmer was stumped at 130,
and then Spofforth stayed some little time. Hill was tried for a few


overs, but not proving successful, Bates resumed at 145. Three runs later
Spofforth rushed out to drive Bates, and missing him was clean bowled.
Just afterwards Giffen only half got hold of a ball from Peate, and was
caught at extra mid-off, the innings closing for 148. The Yorkshire
fielding was remarkably good on Tuesday morning, the picking up being
generally clean, and the return to the wicket being smart. Hunter,
however, did not keep wicket in his best form. Peate bowled with con-
siderable success, as will be seen from the figures I give below
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Peate 59 31 51 7
Bates 33 !!!!!! 16 50 2
Hih - 28 17 22 1
Emmett 10 5 20 0
Ulyett and Hall began the second innings of Yorkshire to the bowling
of Spofforth and Palmer. Ulyett played much better than in his first
innings, and scored at a great pace. The total was soon up to 27, when
Giffen took the ball from Garrett. From the new bowler’s first ball
Ulyett was badly missed at long-on by Garrett—a mistake that might
have given the Australians serious trouble. Garrett went on for Spofforth,
and at 37 clean bowled Hall, who out of that number had only scored
three. Bates joined Ulyett, but the partnership did not last very long,
as at 50 Ulyett was bowled by a splendid ball from Garrett, ' which
pitched quite a foot outside the off stump and broke in. Ulyett’s 30
was made in much better form than his 38 of the first innings. Lockwood
and Bates gave the field some little trouble, and caused Palmer to go on
instead of Giffen. When the score was up to 81 Bates was smartly caught by
Garrett off his own bowling for a stylish and well-played 30. Then matters
went badly with the Yorkshiremen. Lee was clean bowled, Lockwood
easily caught at long-on, and Sidgwick unluckily taken at the wicket,
the ball being caught off Blackham’s toe. Emmett and Grimshaw were
together some time, but the play was somewhat slow. Emmett made two
very fine leg-hits for four from Garrett, and caused a double change of
bowling, Spofforth and Giffen replacing Garrett and Palmer. In the
South Australian’s first over Grimshaw was grandly caught at square-leg
by JVPDonnell, who fell over in making the catch, but never left hold of
the ball. Hill was caught at mid-on at 133, but on Peate joining Emmett
the bowling had to be again changed. Garrett and Palmer resumed at
their old ends, and the Melbourne man with a good ball dismissed Emmett
for a very creditable 25. Peate was soon afterwards out in the same
manner as his captain, and the innings closed for 153. Palmer and Garrett
bowled extremely well, but the fielding was not nearly so good as usual.
Bowling analysis
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 17 8 22 ' 0
Palmer 29 16 !!!”! 31 !!!!!! 4
Giffen 28 4 i!!”! 50 2
Garrett 35 19 37 ”.’!!! 4
The Australians, with 98 runs set them to win, went in at 10 minutes
before time with Bannerman and Massie to the bowling of Peate and
i_ _ i i i T.*- . . , 9
Bates. Before he had scored a run Massie was missed at the wicket by
HHI i i -r-, 1 . y
Hunter. Then runs came at a great pace. Each batsman hit Bates to
the oft for three, and Bannerman sent Peate round to leg for four. Massie
drove Bates for four, and cut him for the same number. In this way no


fewer than 25 runs had been scored when stumps were drawn for the day,
i that only 73 runs were left to win, with ten wickets to fall.
On Wednesday the match ended in the most dreary fashion, without a
spark of excitement but with any quantity of rain. There were only a
few people on the ground when play commenced at five minutes to 12.
Massie and Bannerman resumed to the bowling of Bates and Peate.
Fourteen runs were rapidly added, and then Hill took Peate’s place.
Still, the score rose very quickly, so at 54 Emmett went on for Bates, and
with his first ball bowled Massie for a good 32. A fall of rain—what in
the good old times was called a pluvial visitation—stopped play for 20
minutes. Then Murdoch came in, and the score mounted up to 66, when
rain again drove the players in. This time the stoppage was for an hour.
Emmett and Hill were the howlers when the game was resumed. They
were, however, soon replaced by Peate and Bates, and there was more
rain. At the cessation for luncheon the score was 89. Afterwards, in
quick succession, Bannerman was caught at the wicket, Murdoch neatly
caught in the same position, and Horan caught at point. M‘Donnell and
Bonnor were then partners, and the runs were made. It is curious that
from the ball which won the match by running for three byes, Hunter
ought to have stumped Bonnor. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Peate 18 7 29 2
Bates 23 14 27 1
-OclUJa 60 61 j.
Hill 11 6 21 0
Emmett 6 2 14 1
Below is the full score of the match, which was won by the Australians
2nd inn.
by six wickets YORKSHIRE,
Ist inn. 2nd ini
Ulyett, c Murdoch, b GifTen 38 b Garrett 30
Lee, c Bonnor, b Spofforth 4 b Palmer 2
Hall. lbw,b Giffen 10 b Garrett 3
Bates, b Giffen 2 c and b Garrett 30
E. Lockwood, not out 20 c Massie, b Garrett 22
Emmett, b Garrett 0 b Palmer 25
R. Sidgwick, b Garrett 0 c Blackham, b Palmer 1
Grimshaw, c and b Garrett 3 c M‘Donnell, b Giffen 8
Hill, b Garrett 0 c Massie, b Giffen 7
Peate, st Blackham, b Giffen 6 b Palmer 11
Hunter, b Giffen 0 not out 1
B 3, lb 1 9 B 11, lb 2 13
Total 92 Total 153
AUSTRALIANS.
A. C. Bannerman, c Lockwood, b Hill 34
H. H. Massie, st Hunter, b Peate 7
W. L. Murdoch, c Bates, b Peate
T. Horan, c Lockwood, b Peate \
P. S. M'Donnell, c and b Peate 1
G. J. Bonnor, c Bates, b Peate 9
J. M‘C Blackham, b Bates 2
G. Giffen, c Emmett, b Peate 15
G. E. Palmer, st Hunter,b Peate 4
F. R. Spofforth, b Bates 9
T. W. Garrett, not out 0
B 3, lb 2 “"I!.!""”""""""!..... 5
Total 148
In the second innings Bannerman scored (c Hunter, b Bates) 36, Massie
(b Emmett) 32, Murdoch (c Hunter, b Peate) 18, Horan (c Lockwood, b Peate) 1,
M‘Donnell (not out) 0, Bonnor (not out) 4; b 7, lb I—total 99.


The team left Sheffield by the 6-15 Great Northern train on Wednesday
evening, and arrived at their old quarters at the Tavistock Hotel, Covent
Garden, at half-past 10 at night. The team was selected on Thursday
morning to play the Gentlemen of England. Boyle, whose hand was still
had, stood ont, and it was decided, somewhat to my surprise, to also leave
out Horan. Unless the crack Victorian batsman was unwell, I cannot
see where he is inferior to Jones, Bonnor, and M‘Donnell. Of course,
Giffen and Garrett where played as change bowlers, and quite properly,
for the Gentlemen’s side was remarkably strong in hatting. Still, Horan
had, I think, done better than either of those I have mentioned.
While talking on the subject of the relative merits of the men, it will be
interesting, before touching Thursday’s cricket, to glance at what had
been done previous to the contest with the Gentlemen—the first really
great match of the Australians’ tour. And the first important fact we
meet with is that except for the sensational scores of 206 and 286 not out,
with which Massie and Murdoch opened the tour, there had been nothing
extraordinary in the play of ths Colonists. They had exhibited great
pluck on many occasions, and proved themselves a veiy strong all-
round team, particularly hard to beat. But the batting averages were
decidedly low, the bowlers had not obtained wickets so cheaply as of
old, and the fielding had been less certain than was that of either the
1878 or 1880 team.
Up to and including their victory over Yorkshire, the Australians had
played 10 matches, winning six, losing one, and drawing three. They
beat Oxford, Sussex, Surrey, Lancashire, Derbyshire, and Yorkshire ;
lost with Cambridge, and drew with Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and the
Orleans Club. The biggest innings of the side had been 643, and the
smallest 75, while the highest innings hit against them was 271 by the
Orleans Club, and the lowest 48 by Surrey, Murdoch, of course, headed
the batting averages. He is by far the best man on the side, playing in
the most finished style and with unlimited confidence. He had made 806
runs in 15 completed innings, averaging 63’9 runs per innings. Massie,
who hits with great power and brilliancy, but who is not to my thinking
a very safe or patient batsman, came next with 589 runs in 16 innings,
averaging 3610. Blackham came third with 205 inns in eight innings—an
average of 25'5 ; and Bannerman fourth, with 367 runs in 16 innings—an
average of 2215. After these four were Giffen 293 runs in 14 innings,
averaging 2013 ; Horan 219 runs in 11 innings, averaging 1910 ; Bonnor,
148 runs in eight innings, averaging 16 ; Palmer 160 runs in 12 innings,
averaging 13'4 ; Boyle 101 in eight innings, averaging 12 - 5; Jones 147
runs in 12 innings, averaging 12 - 3; M‘Donnell 123 runs in 13 innings,
averaging 9’6; _ Spofforth 82 runs in 10 innings, averaging B'2; and
Garrett 80 runs in 10 innings, averaging 8. Turning now to the bowling
I find that Palmer had taken 53 wickets for 776 runs, an average of 14'33
runs per wicket. Spofforth’s 40 wickets had cost 676 runs, an average of
16‘36. Garrett had taken 29 wickets for 451 runs, averaging 1516;
Boyle 25 wickets for 346 runs, averaging 13 21; l7 wickets
for 276 runs, averaging 16 "4.


USTRALIANS V. GENTLEMEN OF ENGLAND,
Played at Kennington Oval, June 22, 23, and 24.
Thursday morning was very cloudy and dull, and there had been some
rain. The wicket had not been covered up, and was consequently slow,
and not particularly easy. Several thousands of people were present at
the start, and the official return gave the number of persons who paid
“gate” throughout the day at 11,028. Murdoch had the good fortune to
beat Hornby in the toss for choice of innings. He selected Bannerman
and Massie to open the Australian batting, and the bowlers opposed to
them were Steel and C. T. Studd. Massie hit Studd to the off for four,
and repeated the hit next over. This last was a very difficult chance to
G. B. Studd at extra-mid-offi Steel began with five maiden overs, but
in his sixth he was twice hit for four by Massie, the ball in each case
going over the head of Read at third man, and neither hit being a good
one. The big hitter made a couple more fours—one from each bowler,
and at 33 Ramsay went on. In the Cantab’s fourth over, Massie was very
neatly and well caught at long-on by Read for 32 out of the 34 runs made.
Murdoch came in, and with Bannerman made a long stand, and played
admirable cricket. The pace of the run-getting was perhaps not so rapid,
but the quality of the batting was higher than when Massie was in.
There were no risky hits. Every ball was played properly, and the game
was a treat to witness. Lucas went on for Steel at 55, and at 73 Grace
took the ball from Ramsay. The hitting continued for a time and then
came a lull. Still no wicket fell, so Read’s lobs were put on at 94. The
100 went up at ten minutes to two. Studd resumed at 107, at which total
the luncheon interval occurred.
At a quarter to 3 play was resumed, but only for about 12 minutes.
Then rain fell heavily and persistently for fully an hour and a half. The
weather cleared up soon after half-past 4, and the spectators got impatient.
There werecriesof “play, play,” and a few half angry, half laughing groans.
The English field turned out at a quarter to 5, and at 12 minutes to the
hour the game was continued. Steel and Studd were again the bowlers.
Runs came very slowly indeed for a time, but just after Bannerman had
made his 50, and had been batting two hours and a half, he hit out at a ball
from Steel, and sent it spinning up towards cover point, where Hornby
easily caught it. Bannerman’s admirable exhibition of steady defence and
hard hitting included six fours, a three, and six twos. MTJonnell joined
Murdoch. The only big hit for a long time was a neat, hard cut for four
by the new comer off Steel. Lucas had what was a possible chance of
catching M‘Donnell from a skyer at mid-on, but he did not quite get to
the ball. Ramsay was tried in place of Steel at 148, and from his sixth


ball M‘Donnell was brilliantly caught by G. B. Stucld at extra mid-off;
three' for 152. Giffen came in, and the score rose very slowly. Studd
bowled particularly well, and could not be hit. He had, since Banner-
man was out, bowled 26 overs (20 maidens) for 10 runs, when Ramsay
took the ball from him at 182. Steel had previously gone on for Ramsay
j*t the Gasworks end at 161. Giffen hit the Lancashire gentleman three
times for four, so just before time a double change of bowling was tried,
Grace going on for Steel, and Studd for Ramsay. This last alteration
brought about the dismissal of Murdoch, who from a pretty hard cut was
well caught by Grace at point at the second attempt. This finished the
day’s cricket, four Australian wickets being down for 192. Giffen was
not out 31, a useful and good innings. Murdoch’s 57 was the best batting
display. His care, patience, and judgment were all admirable. He was
in about three hours and a half, and in all that time he only made one or
two bad hits. His figures were three fours, five threes, four twos, and 22
singles. He, like Bannerman, was loudly applauded by the spectators,
who had certainly witnessed an exhibition of first-class cricket. The
fielding of the Englishmen had, with one or two exceptions, been smart
and good. Leslie and G. B. Studd were the most conspicuous. The latter
stopped a tremendous number of hard hits, and probably did more work
than any other two men, except of course, Tylecote, whose wicket-
keeping was as good as ever. Leslie, by his quick return, nearly ran out
both Murdoch and Bannerman. Hornby, Grace, Patterson, Lucas, and
Read were all deserving a word of praise.
The weather on Friday was much more pleasant than on Thursday,
and long before the time announced for starting there was a large crowd
of spectators. Play was resumed at 12 o’clock, Giffen (not out 31) being-
accompanied to the wickets by Bonnor. Steel and C. T. Studd shared
the bowling. Runs came very slowly at first, and it was a quarter-past
12 before the 200 went up. Just after this, Bonnor let out at Studd, and
sent him to the off boundary for four. In Steel’s next over Bonnor made a
very lofty drive, which Leslie might certainly havecaughthadhejudged the
ball well. This was a mistake which gave the Gentlemen most serious
trouble, for afterwards Bonnor hit in splendid style, and played very fine
cricket. In one over from Steel he scored twelve—a cut for four, two
drives for two, and a grand straight drive for four, which pitched over the
screen. Garrett had given a very hard chance to Steel offhis own bowling.
Ramsay went on in place of Studd, but did not affect a separation, so
the Cambridge crack resumed at 251. Steel’s severe punishment caused
him to retire at 254. Giffen hit the champion’s first ball to leg for four,
but from his next ball was out leg before. Giffen had batted very finely,
and throughout his long innings had only given one difficult chance.
His chief hits were four fours, a three, and six twos. Blackham came
in, and Bonnor made a cut for four from Studd, and then drove the same
bowler magnificently to the on for four, the ball pitching clean over the
reserved stand. Tliis sensational hit was greeted with loud cheers.
Ramsay took the ball from Studd at 267, and Bonnor made a good leg
hit for four from Grace. Bonnor scored much more rapidly than his
partner. When the total had reached 284 Grace tempted Blackham to
liit to leg, and the Australian wicket keeper was sent back by an
exceedingly good catch at square-leg by Lrrcas. With one run added to


the score, Lucas thoroughly eclipsed his previous performance hy catching
Bonnor magnificently at long-off. Bonnor made a very hard drive from
Ramsay, which seemed almost certain to reach the boundary, hut Lucas,
running from long-off, “grabbed” at the ball about a foot from the
ground and brought off one of the most brilliant catches of the season,
amidst immense enthusiasm. This catch was really one of the finest
within my recollection. Bonnor’s 74 was certainly the best innings I had
seen him play. He hardly made a false hit, and all his drives were clean
and hard. He was loudly and deservedly cheered. The figures of his
innings were ten fours, four threes, seven twos, and singles. Palmer
came in, and Jones hit Ramsay to square-leg for four. A grand piece of
fielding by Lucas at square-leg was loudly applauded, and then Jones
was out “lb w” to the champion. Garrett followed, and hit a ball
high and hard to square-leg for four, Lucas made a fine attempt to reach
it, but only just touched the ball before it went to the boundary. A loud
cheer announced the appearance of the third hundred on the telegraph
board. At 306, W. G. Grace clean bowled Palmer with a good length
ball, which just took the top of the leg stump. The last wicket gave a
considerable amount of trouble. Garrett played in capital form, and
made one or two very fine cuts. Two changes of bowling were tried,
but no parting had been effected up to lunchean time, the score then
being 331 for nine wickets. In the first over after resuming, Garrett was
caught at mid-on, and the long innings came to a close for 334. This
was, of course, a very fine total, but it must be taken into consideration
that the wicket was in splendid condition, and the Gentlemen’s bowling-
weak. I give the analysis below, and it will be seen that W. G. Grace’s
figures are by far the best: —
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Steel 81-2 46 129 2
C. T. Studd 68 39 68 1
Ramsay 58 28 67 3
Lucas 8 2 16 0
Grace 28 9 45 4
Read 2 1 4 0
At seven minutes past 3 Lucas and Grace began the Gentlemen’s
innings to the bowling of Palmer and Spofforth. the former from the
Pavilion end. At starting both batsmen played with great caution, but,
after a time, Grace drove Palmer finely to the off for four. Lucas hit
Spofforth to leg, and Grace again sent Palmer to the off for four. Nearly
all the runs now came from Palmer’s bowling. Lucas cut him behind
point for three, and hit him to leg for four, causing Garrett to go on at 33.
In the new bowler’s third over Lucas gave a sharp chance to Bonnor at
short-slip, which was not accepted. The mistake, however, was not
attended with any serious result, as at 37 Spofforth bowled down Lucas’s leg
stump. Up to this time Spofforth had bowled very well, sending in 11
overs for seven runs and a wicket. Patterson joined Grace, and a long
stand was made. The Kent amateur played with the utmost care, and
left his partner to do nearly all the scoring. The champion hit with a
good deal of freedom, but did not seem to have quite his old mastery over
the bowling. Two of his best hits were a couple of on-drives for four off
Garrett. Patterson was at the wickets nearly 20 minutes before he
scored. From Garrett’s bowling Grace made a bad hit on the on-side


which fell a yard or two short of Giffen at mid-on. After this Grace con-
tinued his hitting, and completed his 50 at half-past 4 amidst cheers.
Giffen was put on in place of Garrett at 81, and this change proved to be the
turning point in the game From the first the batsmen played the South
Australian with anything but freedom or confidence. Grace gave a hard
chance to Spofforth off his own howling, but the hall only went to Spof-
forth’s left hand. The 100 was put up amidst loud cheers at five minutes
past 5, and then, at 101, Giffen howled the champion’s middle stump.
As I said before, W. G. Grace had not played one his best innings; but,
nevertheless, he deserves a large amount of credit. His chief hits were
eight fours and seven twos. Read joined Patterson, and for a time runs
came rapidly. The Reigate amateur drove Spofforth to the on
for four, and got Giffen finely away to leg for the same num-
ber. Palmer replaced Spofforth at 117, but the separation came
from the other end, Giffen dismissing Read with a good length
ball that just took the top of the wicket. A series of disas-
ters now befel the Gentlemen. C. T. Studd, who had, perhaps, played
better cricket against the Australians than anybody in England, was clean
bowled by the second ball he received; and at 128 Patterson was
easily caught at mid-on, when he appeared to be thoroughly well set. Patter-
son had beenin for nearly two hours, and had exhibited wonderful patience.
Five of the best wickets were now down for 128, and it appeared very
doubtful whether the Gentlemen would save the follow on. The wicket
was, perhaps, not quite so good as on the previous day, but still, with
such batting strength as the Gentlemen had, it was quite likely that even
then they might make up their lost ground. Hornby and Steel played
steadily for a time, the latter seeming more at home with Giffen than
many of the others. Spofforth displaced Palmer at 138, and Steel hit
Giffen for three fours. These, however, were his only hits, as at 147 he
was out leg before to Spofforth. G. B. Studd followed, and an appeal for
a catch at mid-off made to both umpires was given in favour of the
Cambridge captain. Some desperately short runs were tried, Studd once
or twice being in great danger of losing his wicket. Hornby cut Spofforth
in front of point for four, and then, in trying to drive Giffen, only half
got hold of the ball, and was finely caught at mid-off by Bannerman,
the seventh wicket falling for 161. Leslie, who was sent in very late,
became G. B. Studd’s partner, and the score was steadily increased.
Studd cut Giffen for four, and Leslie hit Spofforth finely to square-leg for
another four. Studd was now, however, out leg before to Giffen, and
Tylecote was clean bowled by the third ball he received. With Tylecote’s
departure the last hope was gone of the Englishmen saving the “ follow
on,” as no one expected very much from Ramsay, The last wicket
only as a matter of fact put on six runs, and then Ramsay was easily
caught at forward short-leg, and the innings closed at ten minutes to
7 for 182, or 152 runs behind. Leslie took out his bat for 13. After such
a good start everyone expected the Gentlemen would make many more
runs. It was certainly a very poor performance for such a batting side
to be dismissed for 182, after the two first wickets had put on 101. The
breakdown must be chiefly attributed to the most admirable bowling of
Giffen, whose analysis is wonderfully good. He kept a good length and
got a lot of work on the ball. Taking eight wickets for just over six


runs each against such a batting side is a performance which has seldom
been excelled on a good wicket. Analysis ;
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Palmer. 16 4 31 0
Spotforth 53 27 61 2
Garrett. 20 9 28 0
Giffen 31-2 13 49 8
There was an enormous attendance, the number of persons who paid
for admission being 18,540, so that with members and others there must
have been nearly twenty thousand persons present. Such an attendance
had not been seen on a London ground since the memorable match
between England and Australia in the September of 1880.
The whole sporting world are long before this familiar with the
fact that on Saturday, June 24, the Australians beat the Gentlemen
of England in a single innings, with a run to spare. I cannot believe
this to be the real form of the teams. One side undoubtedly had the
worst of the luck, while the want of a fast bowler was painfully evident
all through the match, and Hornby did not to my thinking make the
best of what bowling he had. The wicket, too, which was wet and easy
at the start, wore very bare, especially at the Gasworks end, from which
Spolforth bowled. My readers, perhaps, know how the “Demon” cuts
up the ground. But when all is said and done, the big fact is still there,
that the Australians beat us in one innings, and by greatly superior
cricket. They batted much better than we did, their bowling was
infinitely better than ours, and their fielding was quite as good, though
they did nothing equal to Lucas’s catch on Friday, It is scarcely
necessary that I should describe the play of Saturday, which consisted of
the second innings of the Gentlemen, who were 152 runs behind on the
first innings, and only made 151. W. G. Grace got his runs well, Lucas
was out from a hard drive, Patterson and Read were very careful, C. T.
Studd was out directly Giffen went on to bowl, Hornby and Steel showed
about the only confident and fast hitting on their side in the match, G. B.
Studd was nervous, Leslie was disappointing, Tylecote’s usual coolness
deserted him, and Ramsay was out to a grand catch off a big hit. That,
briefly stated, is the story of the Saturday’s play. Of course, the Gentle-
men were at a great disadvantage, having to go in against 152 runs, but I
expected better things of them. They did not play the determined, sound
game they ought to have played, but on the contrary were nervous and
disheartened. The Australians, on the other hand, showed grand cricket.
Their bowling was difficult and good, and their fielding was superb. I
am sorry for the result, but I am not blind to the high quality of the
Colonists’ play, and wish neither to make any excuses for our men that
are not fair and real, nor to detract from the merit of Australians’ victory,
and withhold the praise they so thoroughly deserve. I append the
bowling analysis of the last innings and the full score of the match :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 25 12 35 1
Giffen 24 5 60 3
Palmer 26 13 22 4
x „
Garrett 23-2 13 28 2


Palmer made two brilliant catches. Score: —
AUSTRALIANS.
A. C. Bannerman, c Hornby, b Steel 50
H. H. Massie, c Read, b Ramsay 32
W. L. Murdoch, c Grace, b C. T. Studd .... 57
P. S. M'Donnell, c G. B. Studd, b Ramsay 19
G. Giffen, 1 b w, b Grace... 43
G. J. Bonnor, c Lucas, b Ramsay 74
J Me. C. Blackham, e Lucas, b Grace 6
S. P. Jones, 1 b w, b Grace 4
G. E. Palmer, b Grace 8
T. W. Garrett, c Hornby, b Steel 26
F. R. Spofforth, not out 10
B 3,1 b 2 j 5
Total 334
GENTLEMEN.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
6l b Palmer 32
W. G. Grace, b Giffen 61 b Palmer 32
A. P. Lucas, b Spofforth
W. H. Patterson, c Palmer, b Giffen..
W. W. Read, b Giffen
C. T. Studd, b Giffen
A. N. Hornby, c Bannerman, b Giffen
A. G, Steel, 1 b w, b Spofforth
G. B. Studd, 1 h w, b Giffen
C. F. H. Leslie, not out
E. F. S. Tylecote, b Giffen
R. C. Ramsay, c Jones, b Giffen
B 7,1 b 6
16 c Spofforth, b Giffen 2
21 b Palmer 15
17 c Jones, b Giffen 19
0 c and b Giffen 11
20 c and b Palmer 17
12 not out 32
9 c Blackham, b Garrett 6
13 b Spofforth 10
0 c and b Palmer 1
0 c Jones, b Garrett 0
13 B 4,1 b 2 6
Total 182 Total 151


AUSTRALIANS v. UNITED ELEVEN,
Played at Chichester, June 26, 27, and 28.
On the evening of the day following their famous victory at the Oval
the Australians left London for Chichester. They travelled from London
Bridge Station by a very slow train, and after a journey lasting some
three hours, arrived at Chichester about half-past nine at night. The
townsfolk turned out in considerable numbers to see their visitors, and
appeared deeply interested in all matters concerning the Colonists. The
night was fine and clear, giving every promise of good weather on the
succeeding day. Fortunately this anticipation was fully realised; indeed
I scarcely remember a brighter and more pleasant day than the Monday at
Chichester. If the weather had any drawback, it was just a little too
warm, hut I do not think any one objected to that, heat having been
such a rarity up to the present. Good weather had to atone for many
faults in the match. The contest as arranged was to he against a
powerful‘team of the United Eleven, and at first there appeared every
prospect of a fairly even encounter. Several of the names, however, put
forward as being included in the United Eleven, turned out incorrect,
and on Monday morning there were two serious disappointments, R. T.
Ellis and Midwinter writing to say they could not come. The United
Eleven had therefore to get whoever they could, and telegraphed to James
Phillips and Woof to play, besides engaging Howard, the Sussex pro-
fessional. These alterations, of course, robbed the game of nearly all its
importance, and the chances of the United Eleven were still further
impaired when, on winning the toss, W. G. Grace decided, on account of
the absence of those mentioned, to put the Australians in to bat. The
ground where the contest was fought out w r as the charmingly situated
Priory Park, Chichester, where even now there exist remains of the old
Priory. The Duke of Richmond is the owner of the place, and he lets it
to the Priory Park Club. Owing to the difficulty in getting his eleven
together it was nearly one o’clock when W. G. Grace led his side into
the field. There were two substitutes for J. Phillips and Woof,
namely, Tester, the Sussex professional, and Underdown, a local
cricketer. Barratt started bowling to Massie, while Bannerman was
opposed by Jones. From the start runs came freely from the slow
bowler, Massie driving him to the boundary—rather an easy one—
on several occasions. In the course of 18 overs the score reached 31,
of which 27 had been made off Barratt’s bowling. Soon after-wards
Massie hit Barratt for three fours—two off drives and a cut, and
Bannerman put Jones away to leg for four. Two leg-byes sent up 50 on
the telegraph board after 40 minutes’ play. E. M. Grace, with lobs, then
relieved Barratt, while Jones, though bowling very straight and well,
was taken off for W. G. Grace. In E. M. Grace’s second over Massie


cut a ball hard to Howard at point, but the latter did not make the
catch. Massie had up to that point scored 39. After this E. M. Grace
was severely punished, so at 75 Barratt resumed bowling. Neither
batsmen, however, could do much with W. G. The rate of scoring was
much slower after the change, and just before the adjournment for
luncheon Massie was out 1b w. He had hit in his well-known clean and
vigorous style for 60, in which were ten fours, a three, and four twos.
Despite the lateness of the hour when the game was started the players
were away fully an hour for luncheon. Murdoch joined Bannerman, who
had been batting with even greater care than usual. As before the
interval, the bowlers were Barratt and W. G. Grace. By good cricket
the score reached 107, when Gilbert was put on to bowl. With three
runs added Murdoch made 12 in one over from Barratt, cutting him for
four and twice driving him to the off-boundary. This severe punishment
brought on E. M. Grace at 122. Three overs later Murdoch was caught
most easily at short mid-off from one of the worst hits I have seen him
make during the present season. With the fall of the second wicket
M‘Donnell came in, the score standing at 125. Bannerman all this
time was batting as carefully as ever, and though he must have fairly
“got his eye in,” scarcely ever attempted to hit. M‘Donnell, on the
other hand, at once began to let out, scoring freely off Gilbert’s bowling.
Barratt resumed bowling at 162, but it was from the other end that the
batsmen were separated, M‘Donnell being caught at point. Three wickets
were now down for 163 ; but this was the last success the United Eleven
were to obtain that day. Horan joined Bannerman, who now began to
score more freely, hitting Gilbert for a couple of fours, while Horan did
the same. Gilbert gave way to W. G. Grace at 183, and at 196 Jones
was put on. The fast bowler again checked the run-getting ; but, after
sending down eight overs for a run he gave way to Barratt. I don’t
think Jones had completely recovered from his recent accident; at all
events if he were quite well he was not bowled nearly enough. The
latter part of the day’s cricket was decidedly dull. Bannerman soon
returned to his careful, patient defence, and Horan scored very slowly.
Maurice B.ead was put on to bowl at 251, and he and Gilbert together
sent down 23 overs for eight runs. At 6 o’clock—when stumps were
drawn for the day—the score was 250 for three wicket, Bannerman (not
out) 74, Horan (not out) 56.
Neither James Phillips nor Woof could get away from this match, so
on Tuesday Underdown, who had been fielding as substitute on Monday,
was selected to play, and Midwinter was again sent for, but he didn’t
appear during the day. There was thus still a substitute in the field, and
he proved by no means efficient. Play began on Tuesday just before
noon in charming weather, though rather more windy than on Monday.
Still the day was very pleasant, and the attendance, commencing fairly
well, increased largely throughout the afternoon. W. G. Grace and
Barratt shared the bowling against Bannerman and Horan. With the
total at 278, Bannerman, in contrast to his previous play, ran out to
drive a short-pitched ball from W. G. Grace, missed it, and was easily
As far as I saw Bannerman gave no chance whatever. He
was batting for about four hours and a half, and during that time played
every good ball carefully and well. He also hit when opportunity pre-


sented itself, and included in his 88 were 13 fours, a three, and six twos.
Bonnor then joined Horan, and quickly put on runs, doing considerably
more to raise the score than his partner. At 25 minutes to 1 the 300 was
put up on the telegraph board, and, with seven runs added, Jones, dis-
tinctly the best howler on the other side, relieved Barratt. Three overs
later E. M. Grace took the hall from his brother. Ten overs produced
only six runs. Shortly afterwards Bonnor was tempted to hit out at a
“ loh,” and was well taken at long-off by Maurice Read. The game then
stood at 330 for five wickets. Blackham then became Horan’s partner, hut
Jones was howling so well that the score rose very slowly. Those runs that
were made came from E. M. Grace, so at 344 Gilbert went on to bowl. In his
third over Horan returned a hall very hard and high, hut Gilbert though
stopping the hall failed to hold it. Horan had then made 93. When the
total reached 375 Horan completed his 100. At luncheon time Horan
was 110 Blackham 29, and the total 385. The interval lasted an
hour and five minutes, but it was during that time that the
Australians were photographed by Malhy, of Chichester, who
succeeded in getting an admirable likeness of the Colonists in a group.
The team have been taken in nearly every town they have been to, hut,
to my idea, this picture was as good as any. When the game "was pro-
ceeded with two successes were quickly gained by the United Eleven,
who appeared in for another day’s fielding. Oft - the last hall of the third
over Horan was caught at the wicket, and the very next hall dismissed
Blackham in a similar manner. To the best of my recollection, this is
the first time that Horan had made a three-figure innings in England. In
1878 he was a distinct disappointment, and this year he has had little
opportunity of distinguishing himself, owing to an injnred thumb and to
his being left out of the Eleven on several occasions. At Chichester, how-
ever, his day had come, and though he gave two very hard chances, his
hatting was "wonderfully sound and steady. That he was a great bats-
man one could have no doubt after reading of his performances in Australia
and I heartly congratulate him on his success over here. One now
begins to ask the reason of his being omitted from the Eleven who played
against the Gentlemen. Both Horan and Blackham "were out at 390 —•
the only time during the innings that two "wickets fell close together.
Giffen and Garratt hatted vigorously, the former especially so. Fifty-
four runs were made in 15 overs, and then Giffen who had been missed
directly after he came in, was easily stumped; eight wickets for 444.
The scoring, however, did not end here, as Spoffbrth and Garratt hit the
worn-out howling almost as they pleased. The fielding, none of the best
at any time, was gradually deteriorating, hut Garratt, in attempting to
take advantage of this lost his wicket, a hall hit straight to mid-off being
smartly returned by Cranston, About 20 minutes past 4 this long
innings came to a conclusion. Spoffbrth ran out to drive a “lob,”
missed it, and was howled middle stump. Five hundred and one inns
had been scored during seven and a half hours’ hatting. It was a great
performance, hut the total might have been reduced had the fieldsmen
been as smart as they should have been, and had Jones been able to
bowl more. When Maiming the fielding, however, I must except Read,
Underdown, Howard, and the Graces, who were all very active in trying
to save runs. Analysis :


Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Barratt 67 24 153 1
Jones 46 31 37 0
E. M. Grace 49 16 87 2
W. 6. Grace 53 18 118 3
W. R. Gilbert 52 23 94 3
Read 12 9 5 !!!!" 0
Gilbert bowled three wides.
The United Eleven went in for an hour and twenty minutes’ hatting
before the drawing of stumps. Spofforth and Palmer opposed the brothers
Grace. The start was most disastrous. In the second over from Spofforth
W. G. Grace was taken at short mid-on, while in the third E. M. Grace
was howled middle stump ; one wicket for four, two for seven. Cranston
now joined Read, and by some good hatting the state of the game was
slightly improved. A catch at cover-point got rid of Cranston at 31, but
when Gilbert joined Read some capital cricket was shown. Read batted
in admirable style and with plenty of confidence. Palmer gave way to
Giffen at 49, but the change proved ineffective, and at the drawing of
stumps the total was 67—Read (not out) 43, Gilbert) not out) 10.
Wednesday was again fine and pleasant, but the one-sided state of the
game had robbed the match of nearly all interest. Still there was a large
number people on the ground, though as far as I could see not so many
as on Tuesday. Just before noon Gilbert and Read took up their
positions at the wicket, and were opposed by Spofforth and Giffen. For
the first half hour the cricket was really worth watching; indeed, it was
as good if not better than on either of the previous days. Both batsmen
played in finished style, and while scoring, freely made all their runs by
good clean hits. Half an hour’s play brought the score fx-om 67 to 12i,
and then Garrett, who had relieved Spofforth, dismissed Gilbert with a
“yoi'ker.” This was the turning point of the innings, as whatever chance
the United had possessed of making a good fight was now gone. Maurice
Read played pluckily and well, but no one x-endered him real assistance.
At last he, too, was out —caught at a cover-point from a “skyer”—and
the innings closed for 166, or 335 to the bad. Read’s 90 was, to my
thinking, one of the best innings that had been played against the
present Australian Eleven, and was cei’tainly the best piece of batting in
the match. He gave one chance—hard back to the bowler—when he
made 68, but otherwise no fault could be found with his innings, which
included 12 fours, two threes, and seven twos. Midwinter did not put in
an appearance, so the United batted one man short. I don’t admire these
matches at any time, and this particular one tnrned out a very tame
affair, what with substitutes and uncertainty as to who would form the
United Eleven. The following is the analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 36-3 16 51 ' 4
Palmer 21 9 33 2
Giffen 26 5 50 2
Garrett 11 3 23 1
When the United Eleven “followed on” the batting was far worse
than before ; indeed, the innings needs no description, as there was not
even a redeeming feature like the stand made by Read and Gilbeid.
Spofforth and Palmer bowled throughout the innings, and met with but


little resistance. Three wickets fell for 13 runs, and then Read, who
again was hatting well, was joined hy W. G. Grace. On the stay made
hy these two depended all chance of drawing the match. Some good
steady cricket was shown during about sixteen overs, and then Grace
refused to run for a single hy Read, and the latter lost his wicket. Before
another run had been added W. G. only half got hold of a hall from
Spofforth, and was taken at mid-on. Cranston and Gilbert were together
for a little, and Jones assisted Gilbert while 20 runs were put on, but at
no time was any real interest felt in the play. By a quarter-past 4 the
nine wickets had fallen, and the side were all out for 72. Thus the
twelfth match of the tour ended in favour of the Australians hy an
innings and 263 runs. Bonnor kept wicket in place of Blackham during
this innings. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 28 13 31 4
Palmer 27-3 15 36 4
A. C. Bannerman, st Pooley, b W. G. Grace 88
H. H. Massie, 1 b w, b W. G. Grace 60
n. XX. mcISCJIG, 1 U W, U VV . VJ. uo
W. L. Murdoch, c W. G. Grace, b Gilbert 28
P. S. M‘Donnell, c E. M. Grace, b Gilbert 26
T. Horan, c Pooley, b W. G. Grace 112
G. J. Bonnor, c Read, b E. M. Grace 37
J. M‘C. Blackham, c. Pooley, b Gilbert 32
G. Giffen, st Pooley, b Barratt 34
T. W. Garrett, run out 37
F. R. Spofforth, b E. M. Grace 37
G, E. Palmer, not out 3
Byes, &c 7
Total 501
UNITED ELEVEN.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
W. G. Grace c Palmer, b Spofforth 4 c Palmer, b Spofforth.. 11
E. M. Grace, b Spofforth 2 b Palmer 1
M. Read, c Garrett, b Spofforth 90 run out 16
J. Cranston, c Massie, b Spofforth 7 b Palmer 10
W. R. Gilbert, b Garrett 38 b Spofforth ........ 12
Howard, b Giffen 0 c Palmer, b Spofforth..
Underdown, c Blackham, b Giffen 4 c and b Spofforth 0
Jones, c Bannerman, b Palmer 11 c Horan, b Palmer 8
Rarratt, b Palmer 0 notout 4
-oairaLL, o jramier w uu.u ■
Pooley, not out 1 st Bonnor, b Palmer .. 0
jruuiey, not out j- uuuuux, x. ..
Midwinter, absent absent -
Byes 9 Byes, &c 5
Total 166 Total 72


AUSTRALIANS V. LEICESTERSHIRE.
Played at Leicester, June 29 and 30.
The Australians had to he at Leicester on the Thursday, so it was
fortunate the Chichester match ended early, and they were enabled to
leave soon after 5 o’clock. Travelling afterwards from St. Pancras, they
arrived at Leicester about half-past 11, and put up at their old quarters,
the White Hart. The encounter with Leicester had not been anticipated
with any great excitement, and it seemed very probable that the
Colonists would gain a single innings victory. The game, however,
turned out a very different one to what had been expected. Murdoch
won the toss, and, as the wicket appeared in good condition, sent his side
in first. As usual, Massie and Bannerman were the first pair of batsmen,
while Parnham and Rylott shared the bowling. Runs came freely from
Parnham at first, hut in his seventh over Massie was missed at slip off
one hall, and at the wicket off the next. He took advantage of the let
off hy driving Parnham to the off for five, hut immediately afterwards
was caught at deep slip. This was one wicket down for 30. Murdoch,
as usual, filled the vacancy, hut only stayed four overs. In the over he
was dismissed he was missed hy Parnham from a hard return, made a
cut for two, and was then easily taken at slip for six—not a remarkable
performance. M‘Donnell followed, hut very little could he done with
the howling. Getting impatient he went out to drive Parnham, hut only
put the hall up near point, who missed the chance, which was not easy.
Instead of profiting hy his escape M‘Donnell hit out at the very next
hall, and was well caught at long on. Bannerman’s new partner was
Horan, who soon after his arrival drove Parnham to the on for five.
Some slow play followed, and then Parnham clean howled Horan ; four
for 57. The next comer, Bonnor, was caught at mid-off from a distinctly
had hit, and two overs later Bannerman, the only one who had played at
all well, was stumped. Giffen and Blackham were together at lunch
time, the score standing at 77 for six wickets. When the game was
continued, a good catch, low down, hy the howler sent hack Giffen, and
Palmer was howled off his pad. Spofforth and Blackham made a useful
stand, though the hatting was not very sound. At 104, however, Spofforth
was stumped, and a little later Garrett was caught at slip. The Australians
were thus dismissed hy the second-rate county, Leicestershire, for 106.
The wicket, it is tine, was slow and a hit difficult, while Parnham howled
extemely well, hut I think that over-confidence had a good deal to do with
such a poor show. Parnham is entitled to every credit for his splendid
howling, and so gratified with it were some people present that they


subscribed £8 for him on the ground. It is worthy of note that he and
Kylott were unchanged throughout the innings. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wicket.
Parnham 43-3 13 68 9
Rylott 43 21 37 1
43-3 13 68 9
Poor as the Australian batting had been it was highly creditable when
compared with that of Leicestershire. The county went in to bat at 22
minutes past 4, and were all out at 25 minutes to 6 for the paltry score of
43. The only one to offer any opposition at all to the bowling of Spofforth
and Palmer was C. Marriott, who, though his play was by no means
faultless, batted well and with spirit. He was out sixth with the score at
37, and the other wickets fell for half a dozen runs. Palmer had a
unique analysis:—
Overs. Maidens, Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 18 9 24 5
Palmer 17 10 15 5
Palmer.
The Colonists had 10 minutes’ batting before the drawing of stumps,
and just at the finish Bannerman, who had gone in first with M‘Donnell,
was caught at mid-on. Time was then called, the score being eight for
one wicket.
On Friday Parnham and Bottomore again bowled with great success,
and dismissed the strong Colonial team for 116 runs, a highly creditable
performance. Parnham, in the match, took 15 wickets for 129 runs, and
deserves to be tried in a big match on the strength of this bowling. The
Leicestershire eleven fielded capitally, but when they went in to get the
big score of 180 they proved unequal to the heavy task, though they
batted fairly well, and were only beaten by 74 runs. Analysis and score: —
Australians.—Second Innings.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Parnham 37 12 61 6
Rylott 17 5 32 ...... 0
Bottomore 19 11 18 2
37 12 61 6
Bottomore
Leicestershire.—Second Innings.
Spofforth 33-2 11 54 7
Palmer 28 14 32 3
Giffen 5 1 12 0
33-2 11 54 7
Giffen
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
H. H. Massie, c Bottomore, b Parnham.. 22 c Curzon, b Bottomore.. 8
A. C. Bannerman, st Crofts,bParnham.. 17 c Warren, b Pamham .. 3
W. L. Murdoch, c Rylott b Parnham 6 c Crofts, b Pamham 18
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Wheeler, b Parnham.. 4 c Parnham, b Bottomore, 25
JL . O. J.VX l/UUUOily C V r XlOOlCi., KJ JL Oil JJ.XACWX* . . t A
T. Horan, b Parnham 8 b Pamham 28
G. J. Bonner, c Curzon, b Parnham 2 c Thompson, b Pamham. 2
J. M‘C. Blackham, not out 20 c Turner, b Pamham .. 0
J. JLVJ. vv. JDldOKlldlil, HUL UU.U v luiuci, w x aiimaiu . . u
G. Giffen, c and b Parnham 8 run out 8
G. E. Palmer, b Rylott 1 not out 9
F. R. Spofforth, st Crofts, b Pamham.... 16 cG. S. Marriott, b Parn-
ham 2
T. W. Garrett, c Rylott, b Parnham 1 run out 8
o run o
1 not out 9
Bye ’. 1 Byes 5
Total 106 Total 116


LEICESTERSHIRE.
Lord Curzon, b Spofforth
A. W. Crofts, c sub, b Palmer
Wheeler, b Spofforth
C. Marriott, c Palmer, b Spofforth
G. S'. Marriott, b Palmer .........
Turner, b Palmer
Parnham, c Massie, b Spofforth...
Warren, st Blackham, b Palmer .
Thompson, b Palmer
Rylott, c Bannerman, b Spofforth.
Bottomore, not out
Byes, &c
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
.. 2 b Palmer 0
.. 8 c Blackham. b Spofforth. 6
.. 5 c Giffen, b Spofforth 38
.. 17 c Bonnor, b Spofforth 14
.. Ob Palmer ..... 4
6 b Spofforth 13
4 c Bannerman, b Spofforth 5
0 c Murdoch, b Palmer 0
0 c Massie, b Spofforth 5
5 c sub, b Spofforth 3
0 not out 10
4 Byes, &c 7
43 Total 105


AUSTRALIANS V. NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
Played at Northampton, July 3 and 4.
The Leicester people were veiy anxious that the Australians should
play a return, or virtually a scratch match on Saturday, in order to give
the country folk an opportunity of witnessing the play of our visitors. The
Colonists, however, refused to yield to the pressure brought upon them,
thinking that a holiday during so trying a tour was too good an opportu-
nity to he missed. This was undoubtedly a wise course to take,
although it fell very hard on the Leicester authorities, who had been at
a considerable outlay over the match, and very sore at losing, through
the collapse of the match, their best day, in a paying sense. Various
attempts had been made to induce the Colonists to play odds at
Northampton, but adhering strictly to their avowed intention to engage
in none but eleven-a-side matches, they refused, and so on all hands the
contest was looked upon as a foregone conclusion. Leicestershire, of
course, did wonderfully well to run the Australians so close ; but the
same could not be expected of a county which is scarcely among the
second-class list. So easy an affair did the Colonists imagine it to be
that Massie was permitted to stand out of the match, and his place was
taken by C. W. Beal, the popular manager of the tour. Boyle’s hand
was still very bad, and another name had to be added to the sick list—
Blackham having injured his arm at Leicester in taking a ball from
Spofforth. A good wicket had been selected, and a ground enclosed with
canvas on the Northampton race course, while long before the game
began there was a large number of people present. The morning was
bright and fine, and only a few better cricketers on the Northampton side
were required to make an interesting match. I should not omit to
mention that the county team, aware of their own deficiencies, had
obtained the services of Alfred Shaw. The home side, who were captained
by F. W. Kingston, won the toss, and though there had been a storm at
Northampton on Sunday the wicket was quite good enough to
go in first. The innings does not require any large amount of
description. F. W. Kingston and J. Furley went to the wicket.
Spofforth and Palmer bowling. Fifteen runs were made in the course of
three overs, and then Palmer dismissed Kingston. Spofforth did the
same with Furley. J. P. Kingston was in with H. Pigg for some time,
but he did nothing, the third wicket falling at 22. C. Pigg then joined
his brother, and the only stand during the innings was made. C. Pigg,
however, was twice let off at the wicket in one over by Murdoch, who
took Blackham’s place. After this the batsmen played well, and the
bowling was changed at both ends, Giffen relieving Palmer, and Spofforth
giving way to Garratt. For a few more overs runs still came freely, but


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Spofforth
15 ....
.... 1
... 32 ...
8
Palmer
20-3 ..
.... 9
... 34 ...
4
Garrett
14 ....
.... 3
... 27 ...
3
Giffen
.... 6
... 10 ...
0
at 67 Garratt finely caught and bowled H. Pigg for a well-played 26.
Three runs later two wickets fell, C. Pigg being taken at the wicliet, and
Bowley “yorked” by the first ball he received. Palmer then resumed
bowling, and despite some free hitting by Alfred Shaw and Winch, eight
wickets were down at the interval for 104. The players were away for an
hour and 10 minutes, but when the game was continued the innings came
to a speedy conclusion for 122. Bowling analysis :
It was about a quarter to 4 when the Australian innings was com-
menced by Murdoch and Bannerman, Alfred Shaw sharing the bowling
with Alley, a professional. The batting that followed was not particularly
creditable to so renowned a team as the Australians. Murdoch made 15
out of the first 17 runs, and was was then well caught at slip. Horan,
who came in, was immediately missed at the wicket, and Bannerman was
let off at slip. The latter also put a ball just over short leg’s head. The
batsmen, however, did not take much advantage of their good fortune,
as at 33 Horan was finely caught near the boundary from a leg hit.
M‘Donnell, after starting with a lofty on-driver for three, which was very
nearly a chance, batted in a style which reminded me of the cricket he
showed in 1880. Among several other boundary hits, he drove Shaw
straight over the canvas for four, and lifted Alley to square-leg out of the
ground for six. Bowley went on at 71, and off his first ball Bannerman
was caught at sharp-leg. Giffen and M‘Donnell hit very freely, so at
86 J. P. Kingston relieved Shaw. From the first ball sent down by the
amateur M‘Donnell was missed at mid-on. Furley soon took the ball
from Kinston. This change soon took effect, M‘Donnell being clean bowled
in the second oyer from Furley. There were only three singles
M‘Donnel’s 38, his hits being a six, a four, seven threes, and two twos.
With four wickets down for 104, Bonnor came in. The bowling was
then completely collared. Giffen hit very hard and clean, and Bonnor
made several good cuts. When stumps were drawn for the day the score
was 142—20 runs on—with six wickets to fall, Giffen being not out 41,
and Bonnor not out 15.
Although on Tuesday there was again a large crowd present on the
ground, the cricket was not nearly as enjoyable as on Monday. What
little interest there had been in the match quickly departed when it was
seen that the Australians were in for a long score, and in addition to this
the weather was all against the game—dull, cold, and windy. Alley and
Furley started the bowling, but both Bonnor and Giffen scored fast, so a
double change was tried. The total had reached 197 before Giffen played
a ball from Bowley into his wicket, and retired for a finely-played innings
of 51, in which were four fours (drives over the ropes), eight threes,
and four twos. Alfred Shaw clean bowled Jones at 214, three runs later
Bonner was run out, and at 218 Spofforth was bowled. Bonner was out
through a misunderstanding with Garrett, the two batsmen being together
in the centre, when the wicket was thrown down. He had played a re-
markably good innings of 58, nearly all his hits being safe and clean. His


chief contributions were a four, 13 threes, and five twos. Shaw and
Bowley were howling, when Palmer joined Garrett. Both punished Bowley
severely, hut little was done with Shaw. At lunch time the hatsmen had
increased the score to 267. Three overs afterwards sufficed to finish the
innings. The second hall of Winch’s second over heat and bowled
Garrett, who had hit hard for 32, and the fourth sent hack Beal, who thus
did not stay long enough to give me any idea of his power as a batsman.
The innings was over at 20 minutes past 3 for 270, Palmer carrying out
his hat for 20. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Shaw 57 34 58 1
Alley .' 43 13 ...... 84 2
Bowley 28 10 59 3
J. P. Kingston 2 0 ...... 11 0
Furley 11 1 ...... 28 1
Winch 7 3 7 2
H. Pigg 1 1 0 0
Shaw, it will he seen bowled well, hut he was not effective.
Northamptonshire required 148 runs to save an innings defeat,
hut were dismissed for far less than that number. Alfred Shaw,
on the strengh of his good batting in the first innings, was
put in first with Furley, but Spofforth dismissed him second
ball, and also sent hack J. P. Kingston in the same over. Fur-
ley made 10 out of the dozen runs, and was then caught at short
mid-on. C. Pigg joined H. Pigg, and the only hatting worthy the name
during the innings was shown. Neither played steadily, hut scored freely
every over without making any had hits. Runs were added, almost exclu-
sively by drives and leg-hits, very quickly. Spofforth was punished to the
extent of 27 runs in eight overs, while 15 were made in seven overs from
Palmer. The score had been increased from 12 to 57 in the course of 15
overs, when Palmer bowled H. Pigg for a prettily-played innings of 22.
It is a curious fact that in each innings, though the cricket was better in
the second than the first, the brothers Pigg got together when their side
was faring badly, and by plucky, determined cricket, added 45 runs before
they were parted. The remainder of the innings was almost too ludicrous
to chronicle. I scarcely remember such a faint-hearted lot of batsmen as
the Northamptonshire men proved themselves. Undoubtedly Palmer
bowled finely, but from the way the county “tail” shaped at him, I
don’t think they would have stayed long however he bowled. Twice he
obtained two wickets with succeeding balls, and in all got rid of six bats-
men, four clean bowled, mostly by the irresistible “ yorker.” The innings
only lasted an hour and a quarter, and closed for 68, the Australians
winning their fourteenth match by an innings and 80 runs. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 14 3 35 2
Palmer 18 9 22 6
Garrett 4-1 2 4 1
There was not so much to complain about in the match as far as Mon-
day’s play went, but Tuesday’s cricket showed how ridiculous it is for a
team like the Australian Eleven to encounter even-handed a side which
only fields well at times, bats tamely, and has to obtain the services of a
bowler from another county. Score: —


NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.
J. Furley, b Spoffbrth .. .
F. W. Kingston, b Palmer
J. P. Kingston, b Spofforth
H. Pigg, c and b Garrett
C. Pigg, c Murdoch, b Garrett
H. J. Kingston, st Murdoch, b Garrett
Bowley, b Garrett ’
A. Shaw, not out
R. P. Winch, b Palmer.. :
Rev. H. St. J. Reade, b Spofforth.
Alley, b Palmer
B 12,1 b 7
Ist inn. 2nd inn
.. 9 c Spofforth, b Palmer .... 10
2 notout ..’ 3
4 b Spofforih o
26 b Palmer 22
17 c Beal, b Palmer 24
2 b Palmer o
0 b Palmer o .
22 b Spofforth o
15 runout 2
5 b Palmer o
1 c Bannerman, b Garrett.. 0
19 Byes 7
122 T0ta1..,. 68
AUSTRALIANS.
W. L. Murdoch, b Shaw, b Alley ic
A r< Dnnv. TT T J 1_ T-» 1
” • Hi-UIUULU, U Olid W, U Ik
A. C. Bannerman, c H. J. Kingston, b Bowley 17
T. Horan, c C. Pigg, b Alley ’ ’ -m
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Furley
G. Giffen, b Bowley 51
Lr. iriiren, d ±>owi6y
G. J. Bonnor, run out ro
S. P. Jones, b Shaw !.!]!!!. 5
r. jones, b snaw c
T. W. Garrett, b Winch ™
Tf i
F. R. Spofforth, b Bowley 1
6. E. Palmer, not out 20
vjt. r.. maimer, not out on
C. W. Beal, b Winch 0
w . neai, b w inch n
B 17, 1 b 6 p.
Total 270


AUSTRALIANS v. MIDDLESEX.
Played at Lord’s, July 6 and 7.
There was considerable interest felt in the meeting of Middlesex and
the Australians, as no Colonial team had appeared on the old ground since
1878, and it was thus shown that the last particle of the ill feeling had dis-
appeared. The Middlesex Eleven were weak in bowling, A. F. J. Ford,
one of their most valuable men, being absent. The Hon. Alfred
Lyttleton was not in any practice, and Capt. Borrowes had to keep
wicket. At the last moment J. E. K. Studd was substituted for G. F,
Vernon. Unfortunately the weather on Thursday morning was terribly
wet and dull, and I thought at one time there would be no play at all.
The rival captains—Murdoch and Walker —made an inspection of the
wicket, and determided to take luncheon earlier than usual, and make a
start, if possible, at 2 o’clock. It was, however, half an hour after that
time when Murcoch, having lost the toss, led his men out into the field.
Webbe and Walker began the batting to the bowling of Spofforth and
Palmer. In five overs six runs were scored, and then rain stopped the
game for 20 minutes. On resuming the score was taken to 21, when a
catch at slip sent back the Middlesex captain. The ground was too wet
to be difficult, but every now and then the ball got up dangerously. This
fact may in some measure account for the large number of extras.
Stanley Scott and Webbe took the score up to 34, when the old Oxonian
had the ill luck to play a ball on to his wicket. Leslie had just joined
Scott when rain stopped the game for three-quarters of an hour. On
resuming, Palmer was hit for five in one over, so Garratt was put on at
53. With the score at 67, Scott, in trying to drive, did not quite get
hold of a ball from Spofforth, and was well caught by Jones running in
from cover point —low down with the right hand. C. T. Studd and
Leslie looked like making a stand, but when the score went up to 71,
Garrett shot down the latter’s off stump. Four wickets for 71 was not
such a very bad start, and most people expected that the total would at
least reach 150. After the fall of Leslie’s wicket, however, a complete
“ rot ” set in. The ground had dried a little, and commenced to play
very treacherously. G. B. Studd, in attempting to hit to leg was easily
caught at slip, and C. T. Studd, who had played good cricket for his 23,
was clean bowled. J. E. K. Studd and Pearson were each bowled by
Garrett, Burton was completely beaten by Spofforth, and Garrett
dismissed Captain Borrowes, the innings closing at 20 minutes past 5 for
104. In such a small total it was curious that there should be so many
extras, and had Blackham been at the wicket the number would doubtless
have been considerably less. Murdoch did not keep wicket well, but, in
common fairness, it must be admitted that many of the balls got up so


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets,
Spofforth
.... 13 ...
... 27 .
5
Palmer
13 ..
.... 2 ....
.. 24 .,
0
Garrett
15 ..
.... 3 ....
,.. 24 .
5
that they would have gone for byes with any man. It was not until at
least a dozen byes had been run that a long stop was put on even to
Spofforth. Spofforth and Garrett were in splendid form, and some idea of
the quality of the bowling may be judged from the following analysis:
Bannerman and Massie began the Colonial innings at twenty minutes
to 6, the professional slow bowler, Burton, and C. T. Studd sharing the
attack. Bannerman pulled Burton to the on for three and four, and
then lost his partner, Massie been particularly well caught and bowled
by Studd from a hard hit (one for 8). Murdoch joined Bannerman, and
the score was slowly taken up to 21, when Bannerman drove Studd for
two and two fours, the last two hits being grand ones from successive
balls. Robertson relieved the Cantab at 31, and at 34 Bannerman was
easily caught at point in hitting to leg. M‘Donnell became partner to
Murdoch, and Studd immediately resumed bowling. The new-comer
hit a three, and was then easily caught at cover-point from a false hit;
three for 37. Horan came in. Neither batsman could do much with the
bowling, and Murdoch was missed by I. D. Walker at slip. J. E. K.
Studd was tried for a few overs just before time, but no separation was
effected, and at 7 o’clock, when stumps were drawn for the day, the score
stood at 60 for three wickets, Murdoch (not out) 18, and Horan (not out)
12. The wicket had played very badly, and the light had been most
puzzling. Perhaps the only really good things in this innings had been the
catch that dismissed Massie and the wonderfully fast and good fielding
of G. B. Studd at extra mid-off.
In bright, but showeiy weather, the game was continued on Friday at
twenty-five minutes to 12, Horan and Murdoch going on with the
Australian innings to the bowling of Burton and C. T. Studd. One or
two light showers kept the wicket fairly easy for an hour or so, but after-
wards, under the influence of bright sunshine, it became exceedingly
difficult. Indeed, when Middlesex went in it was absolutely dangerous
to face Spofforth’s bowling.
Murdoch drove Studd for four, but in that bowler’s second over he was
missed at slip by Burton—a mistake which had a serious effect upon the
game. By good careful batting the score was steadily increased, and
when it had reached 75 I. D. Walker went on with lobs in place of Burton.
Eighty was put up at five minutes past 12, and at 85, as no wicket
fell, C. T. Studd changed ends, and Robertson was tired. Horan’s style
is not seen to advantage when placed in direct contact with Murdoch’s,
but he played with great judgment and patience. With a four to each
batsman, and smaller hits, the score was raised to 97, and soon after this
there were two interruptions for rain. On play being continued after the
second interval, Webbe was tried for Robertson, and, curiously enough,
this change parted the batsmen, Murdoch being caught at third man off a
long hop. In first wicket down with the total at 8, Murdoch was batting
while exactly 100 runs were made, and out of that number he scored 51.
He gave two chances at slip, and he might once have been stumped, but,
nevertheless, the innings was not unworthy of his reputation. During


the partnership of Murdoch and Horan no fewer than 71 runs had been
put on. From this point a great change came oyer the game. The
wicket naturally got more difficult as the sun dried it, and the remaining
Australian batsmen did not show much ability to bat on it. C. T. Studd
went back to his original wicket, and Burton was put on again. No
other change was found necessary. At 114 Bonnor was caught at slip in
hitting to leg, at 122 Giffin was clean bowled, and at 125, in two succesive
balls from Burton, Palmer was very cleverly caught at slip, and Garrett
well caught at point. Previous to this Horan nad given a chance to
Burton at slip. Spofforth made a drive for four, and in all eight runs,
and was then dismissed by a catch at the wicket. Jones was out leg
before wicket from the first ball he received, and the innings, which had
at one time given promise of a good score, was all over for 136. The last
six wickets fell for 28 runs. Horan took out his bat for 38, an admirable
innings except for the chance at slip. The Middlesex bowling comes out
as follows:
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets
Burton 43 25 38 3
C. T. Studd 59-3 24 73 6
J. Robertson 5 3 8 0
J. E. K. Studd 3 2 3 0
I. D. Walker 6 3 5 0
A. J.Webbe 3 ...... 1...... 5 1
C. T. Studd bowled most perseveringly, but with very bad luck, as
Murdoch ought twice to have been out from him.
With 32 runs to the bad Middlesex sent in the brothers J. E. K. and
G. B. Studd to the bowling of Spofforth and Garrett. G. B. Studd was
hit three or four times by Spofforth but still stood up pluckily to his work.
When the interval came the score was six. On resuming, the two brothers
played a very determined game, and despite the state of the ground, made
runs at a quick rate. One leg hit of G. B. ’s looked like going to the boundary,
and as it was some little time before a fieldsman started after it, five runs
were scored. The score was up to 35, and then both batsmen were out in
the same way—caught by the wicket-keeper standing 10 yards behind.
With the score still at 35 Leslie was bowled. Scott and C. T. Studd then
stayed together, but for some few overs the bowling was too good to be
hit. At last Scott drove Garrett to the off for four, and immediately
afterwards Studd drove Spofforth to the Pavilion for the same number.
With the total at 55, however, Studd was all but caught at cover-point by
Horan. The fieldsman got the ball in his hand, but fell and let it drop.
Taking advantage of his good fortune, Studd again drove Spofforth for
four, and 60 went up. Then at 61 Scott hit a ball into cover-point s
hands. He had again played good cricket. Webbe made a brilliant cut for
four off Spofforth, but this was his only hit, for at 70 Garrett clean bowled
him. Pearson joined C. T. Studd, and seven singles were scored in suc-
cession. Studd drove Garrett to the off for four—a very fine hit. At 81
a change of bowling was tried, Garrett giving way to Palmer. Studd,
after giving an extremely difficult chance at slip, close to the ground, and
another chance at point, was out to a remarkable catch at mid-on.
Studd’s 30 was a pluckily played put fortunate innings. The Middlesex
innings now came to a very rapid conclusion. Walker was caught at
third man off Spofforth, and then Palmer took three wickets, Captain


Borrowes playing on, and Burton and Pearson were clean bowled. The
wickets fell to the first, second, and fourth balls of the over. The total
was only 91, the last four wickets having fallen for seven runs.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 41 28 35 4
Garrett 33 15 46 3
Palmer 8 4 9 3
The Colonists had only 60 runs to get to win, and no doubt could be felt
as to the result. There was a little excitement, however, before the
match ended. Bannerman and Massie went in, and with the score at 16
the latter was missed at deep cover-point by G. B. Studd. At 18
Bannerman was finely caught at slip at the second attempt, and with
one run added Murdoch was clean bowled. The applause at the fall of
the big wicket was tremendous. Then, by some very brilliant hitting
Massie and M‘Donnell made the remaining runs, the latter’s 21 including
five fours. Massie hurt his leg, and had Garrett to run for him. He
gave a second chance to G. B. Studd, but it was very hard. At 6 o’clock
the match ended, the Australians winning by eight wickets.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Burton 15 ...... 7 ...... 16 1
C. T. Studd 15-1...... 4 39 1
J. Robinson 1 ...... 0 5 0
MIDDLESEX.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
9 b G&rrctt 4
lofforith 9 c M ‘Donnell, b Spofforth.. 0
jrth 14 c M‘Donnell, b Spofforth., 12
lO b Garrett 0
A. J. Webb, b Spofforth
I. D. Walker, c Garrett, b Spofforth
S. W. Scott, c Jones, b Spotiorth
C. F. H. Leslie, b Garrett
C. T. Studd, b Garrett
G. B. Studd, c Garrett, b Spofforth.
T. S. Pearson, b Garrett ..
J. E. K. Studd, b Garrett.
Capt. Borrowes, b Garrett
Burton, b Spofforth
J. Robertson, notout)
Byes
23 c Palmer, b Spofforth 30
2 c Murdoch, b Spofforth .. 20
4 b Palmer 8
0 c Murdoch, b Garrett 15
3 b Palmer 0
1 b Palmer 0
0 not out 1
29 Bye 1
104 Total 91
AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie. b and b C. T. Studd 1
A. C. Bannerman, c Pearson, b Burton 28
W. L. Murdoch, c Robertson, b Webbe 51
P. S. M‘Donnell, c J. B. K. Studd, b C. T. Studd 3
T. Horan, not out 38
G. J. Bonner, c Webbe, b C. T. Studd : 2
G. Giffen, b C. T. Studd 4
G. E. Palmer, c Robertson, b Burton 2
T. W. Garrett, c Pearson, b Burton.. ; 0
F. R. Spofforth, c Borrowes, b C. T. Studd 8
S, P. Jones, 1 w b, b C. T, Studd 0
B 2,1 b 2 4
Total 136
In the second innings Massie scored (not out) 28, Bannerman (c Robertson,
b Burton) 10, Murdoch (b C. T. Studd) 1, M‘Donnell (not out) 21; b I—-total 61.


AUSTRALIANS V. I.C.C. AND GROUND.
Played at Lord’s, July 10, 11, and 12.
One ot the four great matches of the tour, and probably the second in
importance, was the encounter with the M.C.C. and Ground. Cricketers
will remember the famous match on May 27, 1878, between the first
Australian Eleven and the M.C.C. and Ground, when the Colonists
gained a nine wickets victory, and earned a reputation which has been
increased with each succeeding visit to this country. The 1878 team
played twice afterward’s at Lord’s against Middlesex, whom they heat,
and against Cambridge University, who heat them in one innings. The
Colonists of 188 Q were rather under a cloud when the fixtures were
made, and there was no engagement at Lord’s. Much interest had been
excited by the Marylehone match, and a great deal of curiosity had
been displayed as to whom the M.C.C. would select to do battle for
them. In the end it turned out that their eleven differed but in four
instances from that which suffered such signal defeat at the Oval three
weeks before, Lord Harris, Barnes, Flowers, and Morley taking the
places of C. F. H. Leslie, R. C. Ramsay, W. H. Patterson, and W. W.
Read. The Marylehone team was undoubtedly stronger than the
Gentlemen’s side, more especially in bowling. Monday opened bright
and fine, but the weather soon turned very wet, and there was only an
hour and fifty minutes’ play. The pleasant morning, however, and the
prospect of a good match brought a great number of people to the
ground, the attendance numbering quite 6,000. Cricketers were rejoiced
to find Blackham sufficiently recovered to take his place in the Austra-
lian team. During the Middlesex match there were most desponding
accounts of his injury, and it was said that he was unlikely to play for
several weeks. His presence was an immense advantage, as Murdoch
does not keep wicket very well now, and runs a great risk of knocking
up his hands for batting.
Hornby beat Murdoch in the toss for choice of innings, and decided to
go in. So, at five minutes past 12, the Marylehone batting was started
by Grace and the Lancashire captain. Spofforth sent down the first over
to Hornby, while Palmer bowled to Grace. The bowling was very
straight, and little could be done with it, though Hornby, in his usual
impetuous style, made frequent attempts to score. He drove each bowler
for two, and made eight of the first ten runs. As most of the rims came
from Palmer, that bowler at 24 gave way to Garrett. Up to this time
W. G., who was batting in a style quite worthy of his old reputation.


had only scored four runs. The score now rose more rapidly, singles
coming in nearly every over. Grace cut Garrett for two, and seven runs
were added in one over from Spofforth, Grace making a single, and
Hornby an off-drive for two and a hard cut for four. In the following
over, however, Hornby made a very dangerous hit. Giffen, at mid-off,
had to judge the catch while running backwards, and just failed to get to
the ball. About this time, indeed, Hornby was batting very badly, and
made several false strokes. His chief mistakes, after the chance
mentioned, were a “skyer” over the short-mid-on’s head, which no one
could reach, and, in the next over, a lofty on-drive, which fell a foot or
two in front of M‘Donnell. It was very evident that the Lancashire
amateur would not stay long if he did not mend his cricket. Grace
drove Garrett to the off for two, and Hornby replied by hitting Spofforth
finely to square-leg for four. Runs now came fast. Grace drove
Spofforth grandly for four, and at 56 that bowler gave way to Giffen.
Hornby was again getting impatient, and soon afterwards paid the
penalty, Blackham stumping him very cleverly off Garrett’s bowling.
His 45 included three fours, a three, and eight twos, but I think I have
said enough about the innings to show that it was not a good one. One
wicket for 67. Lucas came in, and Grace immediately put Giffen to leg
for three. Eighty was soon up on the telegraph board, and with five
runs added, a double change of bowling was tried, Palmer and Spofforth
going on at the ends opposite to those at which they had started. A fine
on-drive for four by Grace sent up the 100 at 20 minutes to 2. Giffen
attempted to field the ball, but fell in so doing, and it went to the
boundary. The next three overs produced two runs, and then a good
ball from Spofforth bowled Grace for 46, in which were three fours, a
three, and six twos. W. G.’s batting was sound and finished all through
and I heartily congratulate him on his success. With two wickets down
for 102, C. T. Studd joined Lucas, but he had hardly come on when
a heavy shower burst over the ground. The players, however, maintained
their positions. Studd at once put Palmer through the slips for four, and
to overs later cut the same bowler for three. At five minutes to two
the rain came down so heavily that the players were forced to leave the
ground, the score being 113 for two wickets, Lucas (not out) nine, and
C. T. Studd (not out) 11. It rained more or less between 2 and half-past,
and about 20 minutes to 3 there was such a heavy downpour that the
wicket was quite flooded. There was no cessation of the wet until after
3 o’clock. The sun then shone out brightly, and it seemed as if we were
going to have a fine afternoon, but after half-an-hour’s sunshine the sky
darkened, and again the rain fell in torrents. It was soon evident that
there could be no more play, and at a quarter-past four the stumps were
drawn for the day.
On Monday evening the Australians were entertained at dinner at
Lord’s by the Marylebone Club, and from all I can hear a very pleasant
evening was passed.
Tuesday’s play had been anticipated with great interest; but alas for
those who came up to Lord’s and for the chance of a good match, the
weather prevented any play ! There had been a steady persistent rain
all the morning, and at the hour when play would naturally have been
commenced, a heavy mist hung over the ground. Soon the rain increased


to a regular downpour, so that any possibility there might have been of
the match proceeding was quickly disposed of. The rival captains soon
agreed that it would he useless to attempt to go on with the game that
day, and it was arranged to start on Wednesday at 11 a.m. Though this
course robbed the M. C. C. of any chance of finishing, it was undoubtedly
the correct thing to do, as cricket on such a wicket as that at Lord’s on
Tuesday would have been a mere farce.
On Wednesday there was a full day’s play, though instead of beginning
at 11 o’clock it was a quarter to 12 before the match was proceeded with,
the wicket being still wet and soft. Palmer and Spofforth were the
bowlers, C. T. Studd and Lucas going on with the Marylebone innings.
Ten runs were scored in five overs from Palmer, who at 129 resigned the
ball to Garrett. Both batsmen played in good style, but a curious thing
happened when the score was 136. Spofforth delivered a no-ball to Lucas,
who, hearing the umpire, deliberately “slogged” at it, and was easily
caught atmid-on by Giffen. This, of course, could not be said to inanyway
impair Lucas’s innings. Runs came slowly after this, but the batting was
distinctly good. Giffen relieved Garrett at 154, and Studd immediately
drove him to the off for four. Bannerman took the ball from Spofforth at
158, but without effect. Studd did not shape particularly well at Giffen,
but Lucas batted in excellent style. The score rose more rapidly after the
two changes, runs coming freely from Bannerman. The total was soon up
to 163 when Garrett resumed in the place of Bannerman. When the score
was 199 rain interrupted the game for a quarter of an hour. On resuming,
at a quarter to two, a single by Studd sent up the 200, amid immense
cheering. Eight more runs were added, and then an easy catch at slip
got rid of Lucas, who had played faultless, patient cricket for 45. The
adjournment for luncheon was then made, the total being 208 for three
wickets, Studd being not out 64. The pair had added 106 runs to the
score. Rain delayed play until eight minutes to 3. Giffen and Garrett
then shared the bowling, while Lord Harris joined C. T. Studd. For a
time the game went against the M. C. C. With the score only increased
to 220, a catch at long-on by Palmer dismissed Lord Harris. Two runs
later a breakback from Giffen got rid of Barnes, and at 237 Steel was
easily taken at mid-on. With six wickets down G. B. Studd joined his
brother. The score then rose fast, the new-comer hitting in very deter-
mined style. He made a fine squar-leg hit for four from Giffen, but
three overs later was twice let off, Bonnor missing badly at slip, and
Palmer at long-on, just faililng, after a grand attempt to catch the next
ball. The Cambridge captain took advantage of the escapes by driving
Giffen for four, and cutting Garrett for three, but was then again missed,
Bannerman, in the long-field dropping a very easy catch. It was curious
that Bannerman, who had been fielding so well up to that point, should
miss what was really as easy a chance as any one in the long-field could
expect to get. Immediately afterwards G. B. Studd made two splendid
drives in one over from Giffen, and then a grand off-drive for four by C. T.
Studd completed that batsman’s 100, amid loud and prolonged cheering.
Off the last ball of the same over G. B. Studd was out 1 b w for 25,
which, though very lucky, included some really grand hits. The innings
now came to a speedy finish. At 293 a good catch at extra mid-off sent
back Flowers, eight runs later C. T. Studd was bowled, and with a single


Spofforth
Overs,
45 ..
Maidens.
21
Runs.
59
Wickets.
Palmer
26 ..
8
59
Garrett
60 ..
14
99
Giffen
n
90
Bannerman
.... i ....
.. 16 ..
.... 0
added Evans was caught at short mid-on. The total had reached 302,
a considerably higher score than had yet been made against the present
Australian Eleven. It would be difficult to say too much in praise of
C. T. Studd’s innings of 114. It is true, he at times, shaped badly at
Giffen’s bowling, hut except for this, his cricket was singularly correct
and good. His defence was excellent, his hitting clean and well timed,
and he placed the hall with an amount of judgment to which many an
older batsman could not aspire. His hits were nine fours, three threes,
and 16 twos. With regard to his performance I may mention
one or two facts. This was the second 100 C. T. Studd had
scored against this Australian Eleven; indeed, he is the only English
cricketer who on English grounds has twice made a three-figure innings
against Colonial bowling, while the score he made on Wednesday is the
fourth hundred that has ever been played against an Australian team
over here. The others were as follows:—113 by the Hon. E. Lyttleton
for Middlesex, at Lord’s in 1878; 152 by W. G. Grace for England, at
the Oval in 1880; and 118 by C. T. Studd for Cambridge University at
Cambridge, in May this year. I may also point out that those who were
so successful in this match—C. T. Studd, W. G. Grace, A. P. Lucas,
and A. N. Hornby—all took part in the engagement at the Oval last
month when the gentlemen of England suffered such a crushing defeat.
Bowling analysis:—
Spofforth bowled a no ball.
It was half-yast 4 when Bannerman and Massie began the Australian
innings against the bowling of Flowers and Steel. The third ball of the
second over from Flowers Massie hit to square-leg for four, but off the
next he was caught at the wicket, Tylecote making several attempts
before he finally secured the ball. This disastrous start was immediately
followed by another misfortune for the Colonists, Bannerman being easily
caught at mid-off in the next over from Steel. Such a commencement
looked like a speedy dismissal of the Australians, and for a time the
game went all in favour of the Marylebone Club. Two wickets were
doAvn for five runs, and M‘Donnell joined Murdoch. The Australian
captain batted with great steadiness, and evidently intended not to lose
his wicket by any carelessness. M‘Donnell, on the other hand at once
began to score. He got fairly hold of a ball from Steel, and lifted it on
to the awning of the Grand Stand, while three overs later he drove
Flowers to the on for four. The score, however, was only up to 25 when
a brilliant catch by Evans, the old Oxonian, at forward square leg, sent
back M‘Donnell. Horan came next, and scored much faster than
Murdoch. The score was increased to 40, when a clever one-handed
catch at short-leg got rid of the Australian captain for two. Horan who
was batting well had Bonnor for his next partner. The new comer was very
uncomfortable with Flower’s bowling, and for a long time the batsmen
scarcely increased the score at all. After a lot of very slow play Horan


hit Flowers to leg for two and four in one over, sending up 50 after an
hour and five minutes’ hatting. Bonner now began to hit out, making a
drive on to the Pavilion from Flowers, and a four to the off from Steel.
As the batsmen were getting set, Evans relieved Flowers at 61, but
proved quite ineffective. Bonnor scored freely for him, playing him to
leg for three, and hitting him for a couple of twos. The score now rose
rapidly, and a double change of bowling was tried at 82. Steel resign-
ing in favour of Barnes, and C. T. Studd going on at the Pavilion
wicket for Evans. The Cantab separated the batsmen, Bonner being
smartly stumped for a well-played 25; five wickets for 88. Giffen
followed, but again matters went very badly, Horan was caught at slip,
Blackman cleverly caught at point, and Garrett well taken at the
wicket. Three wickets thus fell in three following overs from C. T.
Studd, who up to the time that Garrett was dismissed had sent down
eight overs (six maidens) for six runs and four wickets—a splendid piece
of bowling. I should not forget to praise Horan, who batted pluckily
and well at a time when his side were faring very badly. The sixth,
seventh, and eighth wickets had fallen at 95, and with a single added
Barnes clean bowled Palmer. Giffen, who had not been playing at all
well, was then joined by Spofforth. I didn’t expect the innings to last
muclx longer, but the “demon” hit out remarkably well. The wicket
was very treacherous, and instead of batting carefully he ran out to
every ball he received. This plan succeeded admirably, for by hard,
good drives he so rapidly increased the score, that the bowling was
changed at each end. Runs, however, came very fast, and it seemed as
if the batsmen would not be separated before time. Just at 7 o’clock,
however, Grace was put on to bowl, and with the third ball of the last
over of the day and the match he clean bowled Spofforth for a finely-hit
28. Thus the encounter between the Australians and the Marylebone
Club ended in a draw, though it was almost certain that if time had
permitted the English Eleven would have gained a decisive victory.
Bowling analysis:
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Flowers 25 10 47 2
A. G. Steel 29 18 39 2
A. H. Evans 5 0 10 0
Barnes 13 10 11 1
C. T. Studd 13 7 26 4
W. G. Grace 1-3 0 1 1
Score
M. C. C.
W. G. Grace, b Spofforth 46
A. N. Hornby, st Blackham, b Garrett 45
A. P. Lucas, c Bonnor, b Garrett 45
C. T. Studd, b Palmer 114
Lord Harris, c Palmer, b Garrett 4
Barnes, b Giffen 0
A. G. Steel, c Giffen, b Garrett 6
G. B. Studd, 1 b w, b Garrett 25
Flowers, c Murdoch, b Garrett 0
E. F. S. Tylecote, not out 8
A. H. Evans, c Palmer, b Garrett 0
84, lb 4, nbl 9
Total 302


AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, c Tylecote, b Flowers 5
A. C. Bannerman, c Hornby, b Steel 0
W. L. Murdoch, c C. T. Studd, b Flowers 3
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Evans, b Steel 16
T. Horan, c Steel, b C. T. Studd 42
G. J. Bonnor, st Tylecote, b C. T, Studd 25
G. Giffen, not out 14
J. M. Blackham, c Grace, b C. T. Studd 6
T. W. Garrett, c Tylecote, b C. T. Studd 0
G. E. Palmer, b Barnes 1
G. E. Palmer, b Barnes 1
F. R. Spofforth, b Grace 28
B 2,1 b 2 4
Total 138


AUSTRALIANS v. YORKSHIRE.
Played at Dewsbury, July 13, 14, and 15.
After the match at Lord’s the team hurried off to catch the 9 o’clock
Great Northern train for Bradford, the next engagement being against
Yorkshire, at Dewsbury. Thursday morning was ominously dull, and on
the way from Bradford to Dewsbury rain commenced falling with a
steadiness that did not give much hope of fine weather. After luncheon
it was decided to put off the match till the following day. Before
starting out in the morning it had been decided that Blackham and Jones
should stand out, Boyle having a place in the Eleven for the first time
since his accident at Derby. Everyone was glad to find Peate on the
ground, sufficiently recovered from his sprained ankle to justify him in
playing for Yorkshire. The Australians, however, learned with regret
that, owing to a slight accident in the Surrey match, Bates would not be
among their opponents.
Friday proved very different to the preceding day, bright, warm
weather favouring the match. The county won the toss, and, though the
wicket was very soft after the heavy rain of Thursday, decided to take
first innings. Ulyett, in company with Hawke, was sent to the wicket,
while Garrett and Spofforth shared the bowling. Each batsman made a
hit for four, and then a “ yorker ” from Garrett dismissed Ulyett, Hall
followed, but the score was only up to 12 when Spofforth got rid of
Hawke. This was a disastrous start for Yorkshire; hut matters
improved when Lockwood joined Hall. Lockwood has been generally
successful against the Australians, and yesterday he proved himself of
immense service to his county. He batted in his best style, and how
good that is most of my readers will know. Three times he hit Spofforth
for four, and he also played Garrett to the boundary. The total soon
reached 38, and then Palmer relieved Spofforth. After the change runs
came more slowly, hut the hatting was still excellent. Twenty-two runs
had been added since the fall of the previous wickets, when a catch at
short mid-on sent back Hall. Emmett joined Lockwood, who for the
second time in the innings might have been run out had the ball been
properly fielded. At 76 Palmer, as he had proved ineffective, resigned
the ball to Boyle, but the total was up to 88 before Emmett, like his
predecessor, was taken at short mid-on. Lockwood all this time had
been playing splendid cricket; but now came a change. At 91 he was
clean bowled by Garrett, and before another run had been added Landon
was caught by Massie standing as a forward point. I have said that
Lockwood’s batting was excellent, and indeed it was worthy of great
praise. He is in fine form this year, and I was extremely glad to see
him play so well at a time when his side were fairing badly. At the


luncheon interval the score was 94 for six wickets. On resuming Garrett
proved very destructive. He quickly got rid of Hill, Peate, and Peel
but Grimsliaw hit very pluckily, and the last wicket added 20 runs.
Bowling analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Garrett 40 18 50 7
Spofforth 18 5 41 1
Palmer 15 —.. 10 21 6
Boyle 6-1 2 13 2
The Australians went in at twenty-five minutes to five, and at the
call of time had scored 111 for five wickets.
Friday’s fine weather was succeeded by heavy rain on Saturday morning,
and, on arriving at Dewbury, the weather was so had that for a couple of
hours it seemed almost certain the match would have to he given up.
However, the players waited patiently, and about 1 o’clock there was a
welcome change. The sun shone out brilliantly, and the ground, which
had been deserted, began rapidly to fill. So heavy had been the down-
pour, however, that the ground was saturated, and 'some time elapsed
before it was possible to go on with the game. Of course all idea of any
other result than a draw had long been abandoned, and, as a natural
consequence, the interest in the cricket suffered. Still, the play was
watched with close attention, and the number of visitors was much larger
than had been expected after the wet morning, there being a thick ring
all round the ground. At a quarter to 4 the Australian innings was
continued, Horan and Giffen being opposed by Peel and Hall. The latter
is not often tried till things are very bad indeed, and I suppose Emmett
put him on with the notion that his mild-looking slows would do well on
the soft wicket. The Yorkshire captain’s judgment was not much at
fault, for though Hall only got one wicket he was very lightly punished.
Feeble indeed was the resistance offered by the last few Australian
wickets. Horan was caught at point off Hall at 115 from a tame hit, and
then Peel, the new bowler, carried all before him. At 124 he bowled
Spofforth, at 127 he bowled Giffen, at 138 he bowled Garrett, and at 141
he bowled Palmer, the innings ended at 5 o’clock. The ground was too
soft to be particularly difficult, and I was surprised to see the wickets
fall so fast. The analysis for the Australian innings, gives the following
result:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Peate 31 13 44 0
Peel 46-2 24 41 6
Emmett 8 5 8 0
Hill 28 19 19 2
Ulyett 4 3 2 1
Hall 21 11 16 1
As it had been arranged to draw stumps at 6 o’clock, Yorkshire had
only three-quarters of an hour to bat. Ulyett and M. B. Hawke went
in, and, as a few more runs did not matter, Murdoch went on to bowl
himself, with Massie at the other end. Neither of the great New South
Wales cricketers seemed very formidable with the ball, and runs came
at a rapid rate. Latter on M‘Donnell and Bannerman were tried.
Ulyett was missed at the wicket by Bonnor off Bannerman, and was
bowled M‘Donnell, the score when the wicket fell being 64. Of this
number the Yorkshire crack had made 34. Hall went in, but, before


another run had been made, time was called, and so came to an end a
match that the rain had utterly ruined. Of course the final score goes
for nothing, as Murdoch would not have ventured on any howling
experiments had there been the slightest chance of finishing the game.
The efforts of the four men tried show the accompanying figures:
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Massie 6 1 18 0
Murdoch 7 1 25 0
M‘Donnell 6 3 7 1
Bannerman 4 1 10 0
I append the full score :
YORKSHIRE.
Hon M. B. Hawke, b Spofforth 8
Ulyett, b Garrett 4
Hall, c Palmer b Garrett 8
Lockwood, b Garrett 61
Emmett, c Boyle b Garrett 8
C. W. Landon, c Massie, b Boyle 0
Grimshaw, b Boyle 20
Hill, c Horan, b Garrett 7
Peate, b Garrett 0
Peel, b Garrett 1
Hunter, not out 8
Byes, &c - 4
Total 129
AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, c Ulyett, b Peel 0
A. C. Bannerman, b Ulyett 34
W. L. Murdoch, b Hill 30
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Hawke, b Hill 14
T. Horan, c Lockwood, b Hall 24
G. J. Bonnor, st Hunter, b Peel 0
\jr• . DUllllUl, Dl IIUUIOI) KJ X V
G. Giffen, b Peel 10
F. R. Spofforth, b Peel 3
T. W. Garrett, b Peel 12
G. E. Palmer, b Peel 0
H. F. Boyle not out 3
Byes 5,1 b4,w b 2 11
Total 141
In the second innings of Yorkshire, Hawke scored (not out) 26, Ulyett (b
M‘Donnell) 34, Hall (not out) 0; byes 4—total 64.


AUSTRALIANS v. YORKSHIRE.
Played at Bradford, July 17,|18, and 19.
The Australians having to meet Yorkshire on Monday at Bradford,
the team were happily free from the necessity of railway travelling, and
a quiet Sunday was welcomed by them all. Unfortunately rain fell
heavily on Sunday night, and all hopes of having a fast, true-playing
wicket were at once destroyed. The Bradford ground is too new to be
good at any time, and gloomy anticipations were indulged in as to what
it would be like after the rain. Monday morning broke line and clear,
and on arriving at the ground it was evident there would be a big atten-
dance. Before leaving the hotel, the Australians had determined to play
exactly the same team as at Dewsbury, Blackham and Jones standing
out. The Yorkshire team differed in one instance from the Eleven that
met the Australians in the previous week, Bates replacing Peel. Bates
did not strike me as looking particularly well, and every now and then
he gave signs that his sprained ankle was not quite right. Murdoch
won the toss, and, thinking the wicket might get worse in the afternoon,
he decided to go in. Massie and Bannnerman opened the innings, and
were opposed by Peate and Bates. It is a curious habit of Emmett’s to
start with his two slow bowlers, and I certainly think he would often act
with more judgment if he went on himself with Bates or put on Hill with
Peate. The game began most favourably for Yorkshire, for with the total
at 15 Massie pulled a ball from Bates on to his wicket, and before another
run had been scored Murdoch was caught at short mid-on. The down-
fall of the two great New South Wales batsmen caused a genuine sensation,
and provoked tremendous applause. However, on M‘Donnell joining
Bannerman the character of the game soon changed. M‘Donnell had to
do nearly all the run-getting, for Bannerman contented himself with a
strictly defensive game, and was actually at the wicket an hour for two
and a single. One hit by M‘Donnell off 'Peate was especially fine, the
ball pitching over the Football Pavilion at the entrance side of the ground.
Hill was tried for Peate at 32, and the latter went on at 46 in place of
Bates. Then, just as he seemed set for a long innings, M‘Donnell cut a
ball to cover point, and was very smartly taken. On Horan be-
coming Bannerman’s partner Peate changed ends again, and Bates was
tried. Both played with extreme care, and when the luncheon interval
really arrived the total was 71. Directly after resuming play Horan
was caught at slip and Bonnor at the wicket. Giffen then joined Bannerman
and a fine exhibition followed, the cricket being by far the best of


Peate
Overs.
37
Maidens.
16
Runs,
. 54 ..
Wickets.
3
Bates
37 ...
... 23 ....
.. 33 ..
.... 2
Hill
21 .
15 .
. 12 ..
.... 0
Ulyett
9
5
12 ..
.... 0
C. W. Landon
7
4
9 .
.... 0
Emmett
n-i
... 7 ....
.. 10 ..
.... 5
the day. Bannerman hit much more freely than before, and showed the
spectators that, apart from his watchful and untiring defence, he
possesses considerable powers of punishing.. Giffen gave him excellent
support, and the cricket became thoroughly interesting. Ulyett and Hill
were tried without success, and at 110 Landon and Emmett took the ball.
The amateur’s delivery was very curious, and caused a good deal of
laughter. The score reached 123, and then came an astounding change.
Bannerman was caught at slip, and after he left no one could do any-
thing with Emmett’s bowling, aided as it was by a rapidly-drying wicket.
One after another, Garrett, Giffen, Palmer, and Boyle were caught off the
Yorkshire captain, and the innings, which had looked to be worth 200 runs,
was summarily finished off for 132. Bannerman’s 42 was as good a display
of hatting as he has given in England. Garrett, I must mention, was
out to a piece of had luck, Landon making a one-hand catch at cover-
point that would not come off once in twenty times. Yorkshire bowling
reads as follows, Emmett’s figures being remarkable :
The Yorkshiremen had three-quarters of an hour’s batting on Monday
afternoon against Spofforth and Garrett, and contrived in that time to
lose all the advantage they had gained by dismissing the Australians so
cheaply. Five of the best wickets fell for 27 runs, the breakdown being
as much due to bad batting as to the fine bowling of the Colonists.
Hawke was bowled by a very good “ yorker ” from Garrett, and Ulyett
played on, but, on the other hand, Lockwood was out in trying to pull a
plain straight ball from Spofforth. The call of time was an evident relief
to the spectators, as there was no telling where the “ rot ” might have
ended, The wicket, of course, was difficult, but it did not excuse the
batting.
Bain fell heavily on Monday evening, and Tuesday opened with every
indication of more wet. When Grimshaw and Hall went on, with the
Yorkshire innings at 10 minutes past 12, 26 were still wanted to save the
“ follow on,” and no one seemed to feel very certain they would be made.
Confidence was far from being restored, when, at 33, Grimshaw put a
hall from Spofforth up to short mid-on, and was caught by Boyle. After the
fall of this wicket rain came down fast, and stopped play for 50 minutes.
The effect of the rain was, for a time, to make the wicket easier. Landon
stayed with Hall, and though Palmer replaced Spofforth at 47, the “follow
on ” was averted. At 58 Boyle took the hall from Garrett, and for an
additional 10 runs the innings was brought to a conclusion. Landon,
who made his 15 in very fair style, was out lb w, and then the Yorkshire
tail revealed its weakness, Hill, Peate, and Hunter going out for two
runs between them. The total was 68, or 64 behind. Hall, a batsman
for whose patience and judgment I have a great respect, though I cannot
admire his style, took out his bat for 19, having been in since the fall of
the first wicket. Without him Yorkshire would never have saved the


innings. I think Horan might have caught him at short leg, and he
made one rather lucky hit past point, hut still, all things considered, it
was a capital innings. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Garrett 33 20 19 ’ 3
spofforth 25 !!!!’.! i 4 !!!!!! 24 3
Palmer 15-1...... 9 13 !!!!!! 2
Boyle 8 6 4 2
I thought Garrett bowled the best of the four. He was very straight,
with every now and then a capital break.
When the Australians went in for the second time it was certain that
the wicket would favour the bowlers, but I am sure that no one was
in the least prepared for the cricket that ensued. Massie and Bannerman
were the first pair of batsmen, and Peate and Bates the bowlers. From
Peate’s second ball Massie ought to have been caught at long-off, but
though Landon touched the ball, he did not hold it. Then in 'one’over
from Peate, Massie made three fours—one drive to the off, and two to
the on. This heavy punishment caused Emmett to take the hall from
Peate, and the change had a wonderful effect on the game, the Yorkshire
captain again proving terribly destructive on the had wicket. With the
score at 19, Massie cut a ball from Bates into Lockwood’s hands at point,
and then followed a surprising collapse At 22 Bannerman was caught
at slip, and M‘Donnell caught and bowled, and at 30 Horan
and Bonnor were clean bowled, Emmett twice obtaining two
wickets in an over. The applause at all these disasters was enthusiastic,
the Bradford crowd, though very appreciative of good cricket on the part
of the visitors, being of course keen sympathisers with the county team.
At 38 Giffen was caught at point, and Garrett joined Murdoch, the latter
having gone in at the fall of the first wicket. Eight runs were slowly
added, and then a pelting shower stopped play for a quarter of an hour.
I omitted to say that Peate had replaced Bates at 34. I thought the
rain would have given the Australians forty or fifty runs, as the wicket
appeared to be much easier afterwards, but still everything went in
favour of Yorkshire. Garrett was caught at cover-point, Murdoch was
howled, and Palmer was run out, nine wickets being down for 54.
Spofforth, who had given a couple of hard chances, now had Boyle for a
partner, and, by some very useful, though unorthodox hitting, the score
was raised to 67. Then a catch at cover-point got rid of Boyle, and the
third Australian eleven were out for their smallest score in England up
to that time. Certainly the wicket was queer, and Emmett’s bowling
difficult, but, after the rain, they ought to have made more. As will he
seen below, Emmett’s figures were again extraordinary. Altogether the
famous left-hander took eleven wickets in the match for 32 runs—
certainly one of the most remarkable bowling performances of the season.
Bowling analysis :
„ , Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
-j-» . v V01o» ITJ CIIUC/UO« liUliOi VV ivlv
Peate 17-2 10 27 2
Bates ii o 7 i
Bates 11 9 7 x
Emmett 23 12 22 6
23 12 22 6
Yorkshire had 132 to get to win, and in the 10 minutes that remained
for play Gnmshaw and Hall made 11 runs without the loss of a wicket.


Analysis:—
Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets
Boyle
39 .
18 ...
,... 39 .
6
Garrett
28 .
15 ...
... 21 .
Spofforth
11 .
2 ...
,... 21 .
Wednesday turned out beautifully fine, after one light shower about
half-past 10, and a look at "the wicket caused good judges to feel very
doubtful indeed as to Yorkshire’s chance of making the 121 runs still
wanted to win. In the opinion of the Australians themselves, rain
would have given the county a great advantage. At 12 o’clock, Hall
and Grimshaw resumed their places at the wicket, and were opposed by
Boyle and Garrett. For a few overs both men played well, and the
spectators were getting quite cheerful when Grimshaw hit a ball up to
square-leg, and was easily caught by Massie. It had already become
evident that the wicket suited Boyle to perfection, the ball getting
straight up from the pitch in a most awkward fashion. Ulyett went in,
but two misfortunes for Yorkshire soon followed, Hall being easily
caught at slip, and Lockwood just as easily taken at short mid-off.
Three wickets were down for 26, and all to Boyle’s bowling. Lockwood,
for the second time in the match, had failed to make a run. The Hon.
M. B. Hawke joined Ulyett, and while these two were together
there was still a good chance. However, the score had only reached 39
when Ulyett let out at a ball from Boyle, and just succeeded in placing
it into M'Donnell’s hands at long-on. Bates and Hawke then played
very plucky cricket, and tried their hardest to save the game. Every-
thing depended upon them, for of the other batsmen only Emmett was
at all to be depended on. Fifty went up, and at 53 Spofforth replaced
Garrett. Eleven runs were quickly added before another catch at long-
on got rid of Bates. From this point very little doubt was felt as to the
result. Certainly there were five wickets to fall, but no one thought
them worth 68 on such a wicket and against such bowling. Landon was
out at 70 to a simple catch at forward point, and Emmett joined Hawke.
Sixty-two were wanted, but the last possibility of making a close fight was
gone, when, at 78, the Yorkshire captain in his over-eagerness called Hawke
for an impossible run. The Cantab ran hard, but he must have been
out by more than a yard. He had made 27 in really good style, playing
the bowling at a most critical time with coolness and judgment.
Emmett looked very downcast at his blunder, and I have no doubt felt
far more unhappy about it than Hawke himself. Ido not think for a
moment the result of the match would have been different, but the
Australians would have won by a smaller majority, as Hawke was well
set, and might have carried out his bat. Little need is there to prolong
the story. The last three wickets soon fell, and the match was over, the
Australians winning by 47 runs. The Colonists are never seen to such
advantage as when compelled to do their very best, and, except for one
slip by Gitfen, the out-fielding was magnificent. How Boyle bowled the
analysis will show. It has often been said that a slow wicket brings
batsmen to the same level, and the present match furnishes a striking
proof. On a hard ground the Yorkshiremen, this year at least, would
never, I think, play the Australians so close a game. All the same, there
is a great deal of credit due to them.


Full score;—
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
H. H. Massie, b Bates 11 c Lockwood, b Bates. 14
A. C. Bannerman, c Bates, b Emmett 42 c Bates, b Emmett .. 5
W. L. Murdoch, c Grimshaw, b Bates 0 b Peate 10
vv . JLJ. IVIUIUULII, U VJHillSllclW, U -DclttJS U U JTtJctttJ J.U
P. S. M ‘Donnell, c Hawke, b Peate 31 c and b Emmett 0
lid VV iVL/j LI -L Cd/tC Ui O CtllU. U _LLiJ.JUIJ.JLL/LL/ ....
T. Horan, c Bates, b Peate 13 b Emmett 7
6. J. Bonnor, C. Hunter, b Peate 0 b Emmett 0
G. Giffen, c Bates, b Emmett 27 cLockwood,bßmmett 0
VJI. VJUXAL/U, JL>cU,CO, U JlillillietL 61 UUUGh. WUULI, UihUHHCII LI
T. W. Garrett, c Landon, b Emmett 2 c Ulyett, b Emmett.. 2
• '-J IGlu, L/ JUaUUUHy U JDjHHJJCUI. ......... 6 L Ulj Ltlj LI . • u
F. R. gpofforth, not out 3 not out 16
G. E. Palmer, c Peate, b Emmett 0 run out 0
H. F. Boyle, c Ulyett, b Emmett 1 c Hawke, b Peate .. 2
Byes, 1,1 b 1 2 Wides 1. blO .... 11
2 Wides 1. blO .... 11
Total 132 Total 67
YORKSHIRE.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
Hon. M. B. Hawke, b Garrett 2 run out 27
JLXLIU. -i-TJL. IiaWAC, LI V*ttl-LCI/t 6 i Ull UUI 61
Ulyett, b Spofforth 10 c M‘Donnell, b Boyle 9
GIJC-11, LI OpUIJLUI LII J.LI aVX IAUIIIICII, LI DUJ'iC C 7
Hall, not out 19 c Bonnor, b Boyle .. 9
Lockwood, b Spofforth 0 c Bannerman,b Boyle 0
Bates, c Bonnor, b Garrett 0 c Bonnor, b Spofforth 12
Emmett, b Garrett 0 b Boyle 9
Grimshaw, c Boyle, b Spofforth 12 c Massie, b Boyle 12
C. W. Landon, Ibw, b Boyle 15 cßannerman,bßoyle 0
Hill, c Massie, b Boyle 0 b Spofforth 0
Peate, b Palmer 2 not out 2
Hunter, b Palmer 0 c Bonnor, b Spofforth 1
B 5,1 b 3 8 82,1 b 1 3
Total 68 Total 84


AUSTRALIANS v. YORKSHIRE.
Played at Middlesborough, July 20, 21, and 22.
Journeying to Middlesborough on Wednesday afternoon, the team
commenced on Thursday morning their fifth and last match with
Yorkshire, three engagements with that county having followed in
immediate succession. Quarters were taken at the Queen Hotel, a laige
building close to the railway Station. Before starting for the groum in
the morning it was decided to leave out Bonnor, Blackham being able
play and keep wicket; Jones had been unwell, and was staying at
Littleborough. A shower of rain fell for a few minutes about 12 o clock
but afterwards the weather turned out gloriously fine, and though the
attendance did not reach the Bradford standard there was a very fan
company. For the first time for several matches the wicket was m leal
run-getting condition, and on winning the toss the Australians did not
fail to male good use of their chance. At one time, indeed l
they would have made over 300, for at lunch time, with only three
“U down, the score was 142. Runs had come at a tem»c Pace
Massie and M'Donnell hitting superbly. After the rnteiwal, howeve ,
there was a change. TJlyett and Peate bowled with great effect and the
last seven wickets only put on 80 Ulvett broke back a good, deal and
bowled better than I had seen him for a long time. Certainly the
feature of the day’s cricket was M‘Donnell s innings. _ Veiy laidy does
one witness such brilliant driving. In at 51 for two wickets the popu
young Victorian made 82 out of 131 before being caught and bowled fiom
i tremendous skyer. His chief hits were eleven fours, four threes, and
nine twos. He had been very unfortunate in previous matches, and
everyone was delighted at his success. Murdoch played well, but he
ought to have been stumped very early. . . , .. } •
Yorkshire went in for an hour and a quarter, and m that tame
five best wickets for 57 runs, all the men being out to Gaiiettbsplemlid
bowling. Hall played carefully, but got no assistance, except from
B piay was resumed on Friday morning at a quarter-past,l2.
and Emmett continued the Yorkshire innings to the bowling of Gmrett
and Palmer. By very slow cricket the score was taken to 82, when
Emmett was bowled by Palmer for 10. Sidgwick was caught at mid-ott


after scoring five, but on Hill joining Grimshaw the field were given
considerable trouble. At 109 Hill was dismissed by Palmer, and Peate
and Hunter giving little trouble, the innings closed for 129. Grimshaw
took out his bat for an admirable 50. Yorkshire having, of course, to
follow on, commenced batting after the luncheon interval with Ulyett and
Grimshaw, to the bowling of Garrett and Boyle. The first two wickets
(Ulyett and Hall) were down for 22, and then capital batting was shown
by Hawke and Grimshaw. The bowling was twice changed, but the
score had reached 74 before the Cantab was bowled off his pads for a
capital 30. Matters then went badly with Yorkshire, Bates and
Lockwood being both dismissed without scoring. At 93, Grimshaw’s
excellent innings of 37 was brought to a close by a catch at slip.
Sidgwick was bowled, and Emmett caught in the long field, but Hill and
Peate made an unexpected stand. The innings at last closed for 140.
The Australians, with 46 runs only set them to win, had lost one wicket
for three runs at the call of time, so that with nine wickets to fall, 43
runs were still required.
The number of runs was too small to give Yorkshire any chance of
success, but still a fair number of people visited the ground on Saturday
morning, hoping, I suppose, that the accidents of the game would favour
their side. At one time indeed it really looked as though the Australians
would be hard pushed to win. The day was beautifully fine, but rain
had fallen on the previous evening, and the hot sun by drying the wicket
on the top enabled the bowlers to get a lot of work on the ball. Bannerman
and Murdoch, the not outs, went on with the Australians’ innings, and
were opposed by Peate and Ulyett. Bannerman drove Ulyett finely for
four, but in the course of 14 overs this was the only important hit. When
the score had been raised from three to eleven, Bannerman half played a
ball from Ulyett, which just removed the leg bail. M‘Donnell went in,
but when he had made a couple of lofty drives for two each, Murdoch was
given out caught at the wicket, a decision with which he was by no
means satisfied. After the match the matter was mentioned, and the
umpire said he certainly thought it was a catch, though the course of the
ball was not altered, Now came the only critical part of the morning’s
play. Three of the hest wickets were down for 15, the number still
wanted to win being 33. Horan was the next batsman, and before he
had scored Bates missed him at slip off Peate. Even had the catch been
taken I don’t think for a moment that Yorkshire would have won, but
with the men fielding up and Peate breaking as much as he was, two or
three other wickets might very likely have fallen. As it was Horan and
M‘Donnell stayed together, and by some good free hitting won the match
for the Australians by seven wickets. One off-drive to the boundary that
M‘Donnell made off Ulyet was especially fine—very hard, and never more
than a couple of feet off the ground. In this match M‘Donnell gave his
average a very useful lift, scoring 105 runs for only once out. This was
the last of the five encounters between Yorkshire and the Colonists. The
County was beaten three times, and the other two matches had to be left
unfinished. I don’t think the Yorkshiremen have played badly; they
have simply been over-matched, Ulyett’s repeated failures destroying
their best chance of success. One of the chief features of the five matches
was the wonderfully good bowling of Garrett. Full score and analysis:—


AUSTRALIANS.
A. C. Baxmerman b. Bates 0
H. H. Massie, b Hill 35
W. H. L. Murdoch, b Ulyett 44
P. S. M‘Donnell, c and b Peate 82
T. Horan, b Peate 3
G. Giffen, c and b Peate 1 11
J. M‘C. Blackham, b Ulyett 8
F. R. Spofforth, b Ulyett 0
T. W. Garrett b Ulyett 9
G. E. Palmer, b Ulyett 9
H. F. Boyle, not out 0
B 19, w 2 21
Total 222
In the second innings, Bannerman scored (b Ulyett) 7, Massie (b Ulyett) 0,
Murdoch (c Hunter, b Peate) 3, M‘Donnell (not out 23, Horan (not out) 14; leg byes
2—total 49.
YORKSHIRE.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
G. Ulyett, c M'Donnell, b Garrett 0 b Garrett 10
Hon. M. B. Hawke, b Garrett 2 b Palmer 30
L. Hall, c Palmer, b Garrett 29 b Boyle 2
W. Bates, b Garrett 14 b Palmer 0
E. Lockwood, c Banerman b Garrett 0 1b w, Palmer 0
J. Grimshaw, not out 30 c M‘Donnell, b Palmer.. 37
T. Emmett, b Palmer 10 c Spofforth, b Palmer .. 12
R. Sidgwick, c Murdoch, b Garrett 5 b Garrett 4
A. Hill, b Palmer 16 not out 19
l6 not out 19
E. Peate, c Blackham, b Garrett 7 b Boyle 20
J. Hunter, b Boyle 1 b Spofforth 0
B 11,1-b 2, w b 2 15 Byes 6
Total 129 Total 140
ANALYSIS OF THE BOWLING,
Australians.—First Innings,
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Bates 12 2 49 1
Peate 31 12 54 3
Hill 7 3 18 1
Emmett 8 3 15 0
12 2 49 1
Ulyett 29-1 14 42 5
Hall 6 0 25 0
Emmett and Hall each bowled a wide.
Second Innings.
Peate 20-1 13 24 1
Ulyett 19 9 20 2
Bates 1 0 3 0
19 9 20 2
Bates.
Yorkshire.—First Innings.
Garrett 45 22 49 7
Giffen 11 }4 0
Palmer 31 15 47 2
Bovle 2-1 1 4 1
Boyle
Second Innings.
Garrett 24 9 45 2
Bovle 14 6 26 2
Boyle 14 6 26 2
Palmer 24 9 42 5
£4- V U
h 14-3 5 21 1
Spofforth.


AUSTRALIANS v. NORTHUMBERLAND.
Played at Newcastle, July 24, and 25.
The next engagement was with Northumberland, and the majority of
the team journeyed over to Newcastle on Saturday evening, quarters being
taken up at the Turk’s Head. Monday was tine, but the ground at
Gosforth, near Newcastle, was suffering from the effects of recent rain,
and once more the Australians found themselves on a sticky wicket.
Into the details of the Northumberland match I do not propose to enter
very fully. I have seen a great many cricket matches, but Ido not think
I ever before saw two teams meet on even terms with such an enormous
disparity in their relative strength. I understand that the original idea
was to get together some sort of North England eleven, hut that the plan
was found to be impracticable. Under the circumstances, as the Australians
continued firm in their resolve not to play against odds, I think the match
ought to have been scratched. Northumberland, so far as I could form
an opinion, is not sufficiently strong in hatting to have a 4 to 1 chance
against Sussex, so my readers may imagine what sort of prospect they
had in facing the Colonists. Wonderful are the ways of cricket, however,
and during the first two hours’ play on Monday the county team gained
a great advantage. The Australians went in first, and the county bowling
was entrusted to Bookless and J. J. Ogilvie. The former is a fair average
medium pace howler, and the latter bowls left-handed “grubs” of the
most pronounced description. Between them they got six of the best
Australians wickets down for 45 runs, and things really began to look
serious. Bonnor, for the fourth time in succession, failed to score, thus
running a dead-heat with Lockwood, who in the previous week had met
with the same ill-fortune. After this came a change, Horan, who was
playing a very sound and excellent game, had Jones for a partner, and
before they were separated the pair had increased the score to 92. Nine
were down for 100, when Garrett joined Horan, and then the bowling was
completely mastered. I have never seen Garrett hit so hard or so well.
As one of the team expressed it, he was playing his true game for the first
time during the trip. When once Bookless and Ogilvie had been collared,
Northumberland had very little bowling to fall back upon, the best of the
chances being K. Spencer of last year’s Cambridge University Eleven.
Despite all that the bowler’s could do the score reached 193 before a catch
at the wicket got rid of Garrett. Horan took out his bat for 76, an innings
free from anything like a chance, and altogether a model of steady defence.
Bookless and Ogilvie divided the ten wickets between them, the former
taking seven and Ogilvie three. Bookless bowled well, but had very bad
luck, three palpable catches being missed off’ him, besides an easy chance
of stumping. Horan said that Ogilvie got a lot of bias on the ball, and
was the best bowler of the sort he had ever met. Of the Northumberland


batting I will say very little. Dr. Abrahams, who by the way is a very
fair wicket-keeper, hit with great spirit for 25, but only two others reached
double figures. The batsmen were unfortunate in having to meet Palmer
on a wicket that might have been specially prepared to suit him, and his
splendid bowling, combined with their own nervousness, may serve as an
excuse for the failure. At 20 minutes to 4on Tuesday afternoon the match
was over, the Australians winning by an innings an 95 runs. The figures
■of Palmer’sjbowling will certainly repay perusal. Full score and analysis:—
AUSTRALIAN.
W. L. Murdoch, b Bopkless 2
H. H.' Massie, b Ogilvie 3
T. Horan, not out ....... 76
p'. S. M‘Donnell, b Ogilvie 20
G-. Giffen, c Ogilvie, b Bookless 1
g! J. Bonner, o and b Bookless 0
S." P. Jones, c Crawford, b Bookless 12
j! M. Blackham, b Ogilvie 3
G. E Palmer, c and b Bookless 0
H. F. Boyle, c Guild, b Bookless 7
T." W. Garrett, c Abraham, b Bookless 59
B 9, 1 b 1 10
Total 193
NORTHUMBERLAND.
Ist inn.
2nd inn.
R, Spencer, c Murdoch, b Boyle ...
J. F. Ogilvie, c Palmer, b Boyle ...
S. J. Crawford, c Bonner, b Boyle.
2 b Garrett 15
4 o Giffen, b BOyle 9
0 b Palmer 0
J. S. Russell, b Palmer
Bookless
A. Guild, b Palmer
R. M. Warwick, b Palmer
Dr. Abraham, c Blackham, b Boyle
3 b Palmer 0
13 b Palmer 0
0 c Giffen, b Garrett 6
2 b Palmer 0
.. 25 b Palmer 0
Foreman, b Palmer
F. Carr, b Palmer .
C. Liddell, not out
Byes, &c
6 st Blackham, b Palmer .. 4
1 not out 1
0 Ibw, b Garrett 0
63 Total 35
ANALYSIS OF THE BOWLING.
Australians.—First Innings.
Overs, Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
64-3 25 109 6
Bookless 64-3 25 109 6
Ogilvie 53 39 24 8
Spencer 12 4 19 0
Guild 3 0 14 0
Foreman 3 0 9 0
Foreman 3 0 9 0
Crawford 7 3 8 0
Crawford
Northumberland. —First Innings.
Boyle 17 3 35 4
Palmer 16-2 7 21 6
Second Innings.
Garrett 15-3 7 20 5
Giffen 5 2 9 0
Palmer 9 4 6 5


AUSTRALIANS v. GENTLEMEN OF SCOTLAND.
Played at Edinburgh, July 27 and 28.
Leaving Newcastle at about a quarter past 12 on Wednesday the team
had a most pleasant journey to Edinburgh, the weather being magnificent.
One famous batsman said it was the finest day he had seen in England
and added directly afterwards, “I suppose as there’s cricket on, it will
rain to-morrow.” He was not incorrect in his gloomy anticipations, for
Thursday morning turned out dull and overcast, and for several hours the
weather was very bad. However, the rain cleared oft’ in time for the
match at the Grange Ground, though it had done its evil work in injuring
a wicket which had been carefully and specially prepared. To meet the
Colonists the Gentlemen of Scotland had got together a very fair team,
but I don’t suppose even the most sanguine of them entertained any
real hope of victory. Most familiar of the eleven names was, of
course, that of J. M. Cotterill, one of the finest batsmen that
ever went into the cricket field, but now in much better practice
at the delicate art of surgery than in driving half volleys to the
ropes. It is five years now since Cotterill made his first and only
appearance for the Gentlemen at Lord’s, scoring an almost perfect
innings of 92, and making, if my memory serves me correctly, a clean
drive for seven. Alas ! for Sussex that he should have pitched his tent
so far from Brighton. That unfortunate county may never again have
such a cricketer. With the other members of the Scotch Eleven I cannot
pretend to be very well acquainted, excepting only J. G. Walker, of this
year’s Oxford team, a gentleman of Avhom much was expected, but who,
in London at least, did very little. The Australians won the toss, and
went in first—a considerable advantage, as the wicket was far more
likely to get worse than better. As Bannerman was standing out, in
company with Spoffbrth, Murdoch himself opened the innings with
Massie, the Scotch bowling being entrusted to Craig and Thompson.
Craig is right-handed and very slow, and has something left of a once
formidable break from leg. Thompson is above medium pace, with a
good delivery ; very straight, and a capital length. His bowling, indeed,
was the feature of the day’s cricket. He did not seem in the least intimi-
dated by the fame of the batsmen opposed to him, and worked away
with refreshing energy and enthusiasm. Certainly the ground made him
more difficult than he would otherwise have been, but still it was a big
Eerformance for a young bowler against the Australian team to take, as
e did, seven wickets for 47 runs. Massie was out at 20, but Horan
stayed with Murdoch, and during the partnership the score was raised to
69. Horan was out at last to rather a feeble stroke —easily caught at
forward short-leg. M‘Donnell was not seen to advantage. He gave two
chances at slip in one over, and was caught in the long field for 17. He


•was out at 107, and at the same total Giffen was caught at short-leg;
then, in quick succession, Blackham, Bonnor, and Murdoch were all
dismissed in precisely the same way —caught by the wicket-keeper, who
was standing two or three yards behind, to Thompson’s howling.
Murdoch played a capital innings, treating every good hall with respect,
and yet rarely failing to punish a loose one. Palmer made two or three
good hits, hut the innings was all over for 159, eight wickets falling
after luncheon for 73. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Craig 35 12 63 2
Thompson 50-2 27 47 7
Hay-Brown 10 2 15 0
D. Brown 11 4 17 1
Pearson 4 2 7 0
Palmer and Boyle proved far two good for the Scotch batsmen on a
howler’s wicket, and at the call of time six of the best men on the side
were out for 43 runs.
On Friday the match was concluded in splendidly fine weather. The
second innings of the Scotchmen was finished off for 67 without incident.
Palmer howled particularly well, taking six wickets for 27 runs. Having
of course, to follow on, the Gentlemen began their second innings with
Balfour and Wood. Palmer and Garrett were the howlers, and for a
time the hitting was very good and free. Indeed, the score rose rapidly
to 42, both bowlers coming in for punishment. Then Boyle took the
hall from Garrett, and a great change was immediately effected. A catch
at forward point got rid of Wood, and Balfour was howled; after this
the end soon came. Wicket after wicket fell before the splendid howling
of Boyle and Palmer, and the unfortunate Northern team were soon in
the position of being beaten in one innings with 18 runs to spare.
Analysis :
GENTLEMEN OF SCOTLAND.
First Innings.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets,.
Palmer 27 19 27 " 6
Boyle 26 9 !..." 32 4
Second Innings.
Palmer 23-3 8 39 4
Garrett 8 3 14 ... . 0
Boyle 14 9 17 6
AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, b Craig 12
Kf V/ICWg 1(5
W. L. Murdoch, c Balfour b Thompson 58
T. Horan, c Craig, b Brown 22
P, S. M‘Donnell, c Walker, b Craig 17
G. Giffen, c Hay-Brown, b Thompson 0
J. M‘C. Blackham, c Balfour, b Thompson 5
G. J. Bonnor, c Balfour, b Thompson '. i
S. P. Jones, b Thompson " ” 13,
T. W. Garrett, c Craig, b Thompson 3
H. F. Boyle, b Thompson 6
G. E.'Palmer, not out 12
b s, 1 b 2 10
Total 159


1st inn.
L. M. Balfour, c Bonnor, b Boyle
.. 13
b Palmer
H. Hay-Brown, b Palmer
.. 4
c Palmer, b Boyle
.. 0
J. M. Cotterill, b Palmer
.. 0
c Bonner, b Royle
.. 14
J. G. Walker, c Murdoch, b Boyle —
.. 13
b Boyle
T. R. Fleming, b Palmer
7
b Boyle
.. 8
W. R. M'Cormiok, c Murdoch, b Boyle
.. 12
b Palmer
A. Pearson, c Palmer, b Boyle
.. 0
b Palmer
.. 5
A. L. Wood, not out
.. 8
c Palmer b Boyle
.. 22
P. Thompson, b Palmer
.. 2
c Bonnor, b Boyle
.. 1
J. Craig, c M‘Donnell, b Palmer
.. 0
st Blackham, b Palmer
.. 1
D. Brown, b Palmer
.. 8
not out
.. 0
Hhr w ' , “Byes
.. 8
Byes
—
—
li r Total
.. 67
Total
.. 74
GENTLEMEN OF SCOTLAND.
On the Friday evening after the conclusion of their match with the
Gentlemen of Scotland, the Australians dined at the Waterloo Hotel as the
guests of the Australasian Club at Edinburgh. The banquet was an
illustration of the homely adage of “killing two birds with one stone.”
It is, I understand, the regular plan of the Club to give a dinner to all
Australian gentlemen who are successful in taking their degrees at
Edinburgh University, and the date of this particular festivity was altered
in order that the cricketers might be present. As part of the company I
can bear personal testimony to the enthusiasm with which the team were
received by their brother Australians, and to the thoroughly social and
pleasant character of the proceedings. Possibly the excellent speech of
the chairman (Mr. R. Richardson, 8.A., vice-president of the club), in
proposing “The Australian Eleven,” was marred by too evident signs of
preparation, but it was quite to the point, and very clearly delivered.
Mr. Murdoch responded with the fluency and good sense which always
characterise his after-dinner remarks, and laid special stress upon the
fact that the extraordinary development of cricket in the colonies was
entirely due to the visits of the English elevens, and to the lessons that
had been learnt from the players of the old country. The five gentlemen
who had taken their M.B. degree—-Messrs. A. S. Bowman (N.S.W.),
W. A. Giles (South Australian), J. B. Nash (N.S.W.), J. J. Stapleton
(Victoria), and A. M. Moore (N.S.W,) made more or less effective speeches
after their health had been proposed, and with various other toasts,
songs, &c., the evening passed pleasantly on. The only member of the
team who took any share in the vocal portion of the entertainment was
Mr. S. P. Jones, who earned loud applause for his delivery of “Jack’s
Yarn.”
On the Saturday, at the special request of the Scottish Cricket Union,
the Australians consented to play an extra match with the Gentlemen of
Scotland, but it was, of course, only a scratch game, and, as regards the
result, of no importance whatever. Blackham and Horan went away for
the day to study the beauties of Scottish scenery, so Bannerman and C. W.
Beal completed the Eleven. As an instance of the fascination of cricket,
I may mention that Bannerman spent his holiday in watching the matches
at Newcastle and Edinburgh. He had a week’s rest allowed him, and
could have gone whenever he liked, but the attraction of the game was
too strong, and each morning found him in his place, concerned about
nothing but the success of his companions. Mr. Beale the popular


manager of the team, did a “best on record.” He bowled the widest
wide that ever was seen. In sending down this remarkable ball, which
ambled quietly past point, he went over the crease, so that altogether
the achievement was one to be vividly remembered. Into the details of the
scratch match I shall not trouble to enter. The Scotchmen got all the
best of it, as the score will show, and the onlookers were naturally
delighted, there being a show of applause when the Australians’ total
was passed. The game was played through in quite the proper spirit,
but Murdoch put himself in tenth, and Massie ninth, and did not allow
either Palmer, Garrett, or Boyle to bowl a ball. There were three changes
in the Scotch team, and the Australians were full of surprise that such a
good bowler as M‘Nair should have been left out of the legitimate match.
Certainly he ought to have been played in preference to three or four who
were chosen. No one else on the side could bowl so difficult a ball.
Balfour’s batting was the feature of the afternoon. He played good, free
cricket, and among other fine hits sent Beal to square-leg for six, the ball
pitching clean out of the ground. Asher only scored 18 (not out), but he
made his runs in a style which gave abundant promise for the future. I
had almost omitted to say that on opening the Australian innings Garrett
and Palmer put on 46 runs before they were parted. I append the full
score: —
AUSTRALIANS.
T. W. Garrett, run out 28
G. B. Palmer, b M‘Nair iq
T. W. Garrett, run out
G. B. Palmer, b MtNair 18
S. P. Jones, b Thompson 4
A. C. Bannerman, c sub, b M‘Nair 1
H. F. Boyle, c Walker, b Thompson 5
G. Giffen, c Thompson, b Craig 9
G. J. Bonnor, st Balfour, b Craig l?
P. S. MUonnell, b M‘Nair ..”111"*" 8
P. S. MUJonneil, b M'JNair a
H. H. Massie, b M‘Nair 3
H. H. Massie, b M Nair 3
W. L. Murdoch, not out .......1..!!..! 22
C. W, Beal, c Balfour, b D. Brown 7
Byes ". ’!! .....'. 4
Total 122
GENTLEMEN OF SCOTLAND.
L M. Balfour, 1 b w, b Murdoch 73
A. L. Wood, c and b Jones 1 5
A. I/. Wood, c and b Jones 15
J. M. Cotterill, c Boyle, b Murdoch 24
J, G. Walker, c Murdoch, bMassie 19
A. G. Asher, not out 18
a. Ur, Asner, not out 28
H. Kay-Brown, st Palmer, b Murdoch 0
F. Sanderson, c Massie, b Murdoch 0
ouii, maooio, KJ IUUIUULU (J
P. Thompson, c and b Massie _"' 3
J. Craig, not out \ \ ” |” 3
B 9, 1 b 1, w b 1, n b 1 12
Total 157
R. M'Nair and D. Brown did not bat.


AUSTRALIANS V. LIVERPOOL CLUB.
Played at Liverpool, July 31, August 1 and 2.
The team left Edinburgh on Sunday afternoon, and after a six hours
journey arrived in Liverpool at a little past midnight. They one and all
enjoyed thoroughly their visit to the Scottish capital. In no town have
they met warmer friends, and had it been practicable they would have
been delighted to prolong their stay.
Monday’s match on the new and splendid ground at Liverpool was
against Liverpool and District —a team which might more properly have
been described as the Lancashire Eleven without A. N. Hornby. The
bright sunshine at Edinburgh had led one to almost believe that genuine
summer weather had come at last, but such fond anticipations were doomed,
at Liverpool, to speedy disappointment. Rain threatened all day on
Monday and during the night, and on the following morning there was such
a steady and continuous downpour, that on Tuesday not a ball could be
bowled. Monday’s cricket, however, despite the gloomy and unseason-
able weather, was full of interest. For the fifth match in succession
Murdoch won the toss, and, of course, chose to go in first. The wicket
was a trifle soft from the effects of the rain on Sunday, but, in the absence
of the sunshine, it played faultlessly all day. Before starting from the
hotel in the morning it had been decided that Bonnor and Jones should
stand out of the Colonial Eleven. Massie and Bannerman opened the
innings to the bowling of Crossland and A. G. Steel. Crossland’s
bowling is, to my thinking, distinctly unfair. I hear a good deal about
a whip from the wrist and other expressions which are intended to
disguise the fact that a bowler throws instead of delivering the ball in a
proper manner. lam sure it would be a good thing for English cricket
if the M.G.C. would act with firmness in the matter, and allow no
questionable bowling at Lord’s. The example of head-quarters would
speedily be followed, and we should get rid of the evil. Paid umpires
are naturally afraid to act without authority, for fear of injuring their
positions, but several I could name have passed the so-called bowling,
which in conversation they have admitted to be unfair. lamin no way
prejudice against Crossland. I simply take him as the most conspicious
example of a class, and I would simply ask any impartial judge of cricket
to compare his action with that of Palmer, or Garrett, or Morley, or
Alfred Shaw. To borrow an apt simile from an enthusiastic writer, well
known to the readers of Bell’s Life , it is as the “ kick of a cow to the
stride of a race horse.” After this long, but not altogether unnecessary
digression, I will return to Monday’s play. The Australians began very
badly. Massie and Murdoch were both bowled by Crossland, M‘Donneil


A. G. Steel
Overs.
47 ..
Maidens.
18
Runs.
68
Wickets.
Crossland
49-5..
.... 22 .
72
Watson
29 ..
14
7A
Barlow
32 ..
.... 18
27
W. S. Patterson
7 ..
1
16
Briggs
10 ..
.... 3 ....
.. 19 ..
.... 0
was caught at slip, and Bannerman was out 1 b w, the score at the end
of three-quarters of an hour’s being 37 for four wickets. The Liverpool
players were getting quite jubilant, and it really looked as though the
Australians might be out for under 150. Then, however, came a stand
which would have given conclusive proof, had any been needed of the
teams immense strength in batting. In no way disturbed by the early
downfall of their predecessors, Horan and Giffen played splendid cricket
and for a long time defied all efforts to part them. Horan’s remarkable
power of scoring on the leg side as never in England been seen to greater
advantage. He met Crossland’s fastest balls with easy confidence, and
continually played them away to sharp leg for twos and singles. In one
over he made a couple of fours. I believe he gave a chance when he had
made 26, but, nevertheless, it was the best innings I have ever seen him
play. Giffen’s method of batting is quite different, and by reason of its
greater freedom more attractive to the on-lookers. At first both men
scored slowly, the total at luncheon being only 70, but afterwards runs
came at a good pace. Abating the question of fairness or unfairness
Crossland certainly did very well, but A. G. Steel could get little or no
work on the ball. Barlow and Watson at one time kept down the run-
getting, and the former, though a little short, bowled exceedingly well.
Giffen, I must mention, was missed by Jones in the long field. The chance
was a warm one, the ball going from the fieldsman’s hands to the boundary,
but it ought to have been held. Despite all the bowling changes that
could be tried, the score reached 152 before the two batsmen were separated
the partnership thus producing 115 runs. Horan was the first out supris-
ingly well caught by Barlow at point. His figures were four fours, a three,
12 twos, and 27 singles. The crowd, who throughout the day were
thoroughly impartial, applauded him as heartily as though he had been a
member of the local team. Blackham, who has been completely out of
luck lately, was soon bowled, but Garrett stayed some time, and was well
set when he played a ball on to his leg and into the wicket. Giffen was
at last dismissed by a running catch at forward cover-point, having made
81 —his highest and certainly his best innings in England. On the form
shown during the present trip he is one of the five most dangerous batsmen
in the team. In Australia he might have to give way to M’Donnell, but
there would not be much to choose between the pair. His hits on Monday
were four fours, six threes, 11 twos, and 25 singles. The last part of the
innings was remarkable for the really good and vigorous hitting of Palmer
a batsman who has not hitherto shown the improved form that was
expected of him. I think he wants better wickets than he can often
command in our fickle and unsettled climate. Out of 236 from the bat
Giffen, Horan, and Palmer scored between them 184. With the close of
the innings play ceased for the day, the Liverpool bowling reading as
under :
Patterson bowled a wide.


On Wednesday the Liverpool players found themselves in a very
unenviable position. They couldnotpossiblywin, but they had a very great
chance of losing. After the heavy fall of rain the ground was naturally
very soft, and play, instead of starting at eleven o’clock, as orginally
intended, did not begin until quite half-past twelve. Liverpool had the
offer of a new wicket, but preferred the old one. A tremendously high
wind was blowing in the early part of the afternoon, and seemed to have
a beneficial affect upon the ground, which never became very difficult.
When the sun came out I thought Liverpool would make very small
scores, but the wicket remained sufficiently good for batsmen to playforward
at Boyle without any serious fear of consequences. The Australians started
with a piece of very bad luck, for play had not lasted a quarter of an hour,
when Garrett, in stopping a hard drive of D. Q. Steel’s, received a severe
cut on the third finger of his left hand. He at once left the field, and
took no further part in the match. Later in the day Spoffbrth strained
his thigh, and so the team lost two bowlers. The wicket was considered
too soft to suit Giffen, and so all the work devolved upon Palmer and Boyle.
Liverpool’s first innings opened fairly well. Barlow remained in an hour
for 9 runs, and at lunch-time four wickets had fallen for 58. Out of this
nnmber A. G. Steel, by really capital batting, had made 37. After the
interval, he tried to force the game, and did not play so well. He might
have been stumped off Palmer if the ball had kept a little higher, and
Boyle missed him at short mid-on—a sharp chance. However, with the
score at 79 he was caught and bowled for 50—an innings without which
his side would have fared badly indeed. After he left the wickets fell
fast, and though Watson hit up 14 the total only amounted to 112. A
minority of 128, of course, compelled a “ follow on,” and I fully expected
a single innings victory for the Australians. Barlow and A. G. Steel
played exceedingly well together, and during their partnership raised the
score from sto 49. Steel was out at 68, and then came a series of
misfortunes, the total for seven wickets being only 88. With 40 runs
still wanted, the chance of averting a single innings beating seemed very
remote, but Pilling stopped while Jones hit, and gradually matters
improved. When Pilling was dismissed the score had reached 115.
Briggs became Jones’s partner, and when by some vigorous hitting the
128 had been reached their was, of course, a burst of cheering. The
innings did not last much longer. Jones was caught in the long field for
a plucky and invaluable 36, and Crossland was caught at mid-on. The
Australians had 10 runs to make, and rather less than 10 minutes to play.
Massie was caught at the wicket in the first over, and when the clock
chimed half-past six, the time for drawing stumps, only six runs had
been scored. Thus the match ended in a draw, the Australians having
nine wickets to fall, and wanting only four runs to win. Some of the
Australians, I fancy, felt a little aggrieved that the game should not have
been finished, and to have to stop with only four runs wanted was
aggravating. I understood A. G, Steel was willing to go on, but
that the Liverpool Club wished otherwise. It is important to remember
that the local team had nothing to play for all day but a draw, and
having gained their object might have been disappointed to find play
prolonged beyond the usual hour. But for the rain on Tuesday, I
certainly think we should have had a better match, but the Liverpool


team was hardly strong enough in batting to extend the Colonials.
I append the three last analyses, and the full score :
Liverpool.—First Innings.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Palmer 39-2 13 60 5
Boyle 39 14 51 5
Second Innings.
Palmer 33 11 73 4
Boyle 33-1 8 56 6
Australians.—Second Innings.
Barlow 2 2 0 1
Watson 2 0 6 0
Palmer and Boyle, it will he seen, howled without a change in the
Liverpool innings. They kept to their work with the utmost pluck and
resolution. Full score:
AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, b Crossland 10
A, C. Bannerman, 1 b w, b Crossland 12
W. L. Murdoch, b Crossland 1
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Watson, b A. G. Steel 6
T Horan, c Barlow, b Crossland 70
G. Giffen, c Royle, b A. G. Steel 81
J. M. Blaokham, b Crossland 2
T. W. Garrett, b Barlow 15
G. E. Palmer, not out 33
F. R. Spofforth, b Crossland 6
H. F. Boyle, c Pilling, b Crossland 0
r. uujic, u xiiixiig. u k2iuooiauu w
B 1, 1 b 2, w 1 4
Total 240
In the second innings Massie scored (c Pilling b barlow) 0, Murdoch (not out)
3, Boyle (not out) 3; total 6.
LIVERPOOL CLUB.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
Barlow, b Boyle 9 b Palmer 24
jjauuw, u xjvyxxz ux ct-iiiicx a-r
D. Q. Steel, b Palmer 9 c Blackham, b Boyle 4
A. G. Steel, c and b Boyle 50 c Boyle, b Palmer 29
Rev. V. F. Royle, c Blackham, b Boyle 2 c Palmer, b Boyle 12
W. S. Patterson, st Blackham, b Boyle.. 0 b Boyle 1
C. L. Jones, b Palmer 16 c sub, b Palmer 36
Pilling, c Bannerman, b Boyle 2 c sub, b Boyle 3
E, H, Porter, b Boyle 6 b Palmer 3
Briggs, b Palmer 0 not out 15
Watson not out 14 c and b Boyle 0
l4 c and b Boyle 0
Crossland, b Palmer 3 c sub, b Boyle 2
Bye 1 Bye 7,1 b 1 8
Total... 112 Total 137
GGasaaiast


However, he played and bowled wonderfully well. The weather was
gloriously fine, and when Gloucestershire won the toss, and went in to
hat on a perfect wicket, there seemed no reason why they should not make
200 or 250. However, the county’s supporters had to put up with a
bitter disappointment. W. G. Grace misjudged the pace of a ball from
Garrett, and was clean bowled, with the total at 19. Greatly as
Gloucester’s batting has fallen off, I fancy it the captain had stopped for
an hour or two there would have been a good score; his early downfall took
all the pluck out of the side. Two or three very good catches were brought
off, and soon after the luncheon interval the innings was all over for the
miserable total of 108. Moberley and Midwinter played good cricket,
more especially the former, whose cutting was wonderfully clean. Of the
others I will say very little Gilbert made 13 after giving three chances,
and of the last five men Peake alone played the bowling with any con-
fidence. Allowing for the unquestionable excellence of the bowling, it
was still a most feeble display, for a better wicket has scarcely been
played on this season. Garrett was on throughout, but Boyle did not take
the ball until the score had reached 88. How effective they -were will be
seen from the analysis :—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Palmer 26 8 35 1
Garrett 33 12 58 6
Boyle 7 1 4 10 3
AUSTRALIANS v. GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
Played at Clifton, August 3,4, and 5.
On Wednesday night the team journeyed from Liverpool to Bristol,
and on Thursday morning commenced on the Clifton College Ground the
first of their two matches with Gloucestershire. The county that once
held undisputed rank as champion has done so badly this season that I
can’t say I looked forward to the encounter with any particular interest.
Spofforth stayed behind at Liverpool, and hut for the fear of the Clifton
wicket I think Garrett would also have been allowed to stand out.
On the Australians going in to hat all sorts of opinions were indulged
in as to the number of runs that would be made. The result was
formidable enough, hut on the first day it did not come up to the sanguine
expectations of the onlookers. Massie and Bannerman opened the
innings in capital style, hut just as they had got set Massie was very
finely caught at third man by Gilbert. At 67 Bannerman was howled,
Woof taking his wicket directly he went on, and at 94 Murdoch was
stumped off the same bowler for 21. Three wickets down for 94. On
Horan becoming M‘Donnell’s partner, the spectators witnessed the best
cricket of the day. M‘Donnell was in great form, hut for some consider-
able time the howling was too good to allow of much hitting. Gilbert,
however, went on at 108, and though he ought to have caught and howled
Horan, the change proved terribly expensive. Five times M'Donnell hit


W. G. Grace ..
ANALYSIS OF THE
Overs.
57 .
BOWLING.
Maidens.
10
Runs.
.. 146 .
Wickets.
3
Midwinter
E. Rake
96-2 .
23 .
45 ....
7 ....
.. 119 .
.. 40 .
4
0
Wod
27 .
5 ....
.. 82 .
3
W. 1. Gilbert..
7 .
1 ....
.. 30 .
0
E. IV. Grace ..
5 .
0 ....
.. 23 .
0
Gilbert for four—three times in one over. This punishment was too
much even for Gilbert, and at 157 he retired. Peake and Midwinter took
up the bowling, and then at 170 MTfonnell closed his brilliant innings by
cutting a ball into the wicket. Included in his 70 were 11 fours, a three,
and six twos, and except for one hit which fell betwixt two fieldsmen at
long-on, I have never seen him play much better. Perhaps, however, it
was not such a splendid display as his 82 at Middlesborough a fortnight
back. After he left Giffen was caught at the wicket, and Palmer bowled,
the score at the call of time being 191 for six wickets.
On Friday the Australians achieved an astonishing batting success,
keeping at the wickets till late in the afternoon, and scoring a first innings
of 450 runs. Play began at twenty minutes to 12, Bonnor becoming
Horan’s partner. The bowlers were W. G. Grace and Midwinter, and oil'
the latter Horan was badly missed by Woof at slip. This mistake cost
the County team a tremendous lot of trouble, as after some steady
batting the fowling was mastered. Horan scored faster than his partner,
who had a kcky escape in the long field, Greene misjudging the ball.
Woof was tried, but Bonnor four times drove him four. At 261 Bonnor
was'caught at long-off, his 33 including six fours. Blackham was Horan’s
new partner, and as runs again came freely E. M. Grace’s lobs were tried.
The third hundred was reached at ten minutes to 1 o’clock. Further
bowling chaiges were tried, and at last, at 330, Blackham was out leg-before
for a most useful 42. Boyle came in, and again there was a stand, the
Colonial totil going steadily on. Horan completed his 100 amid general
applause. The score at the luncheon interval was 377, Horan 119. The
fourth hundred was telegraphed soon after the resumption, and then
Boyle was fowled for a good 39. Garrett hit with great freedom, driving
W. G. six femes for four. At length, when the score was 460, a catch at
long-off broight the long innings to an end. Horan’s innings was marred
by two chaices, but it was, nevertheless, a splendid display of cricket,
and coming as it did after his shows, makes me wonder more and more
at his ever having been left out of the team. Horan’s real form has
been seen now, and I congratulate him sincerely on his success. The
Victorians chief hits were seven fours, nine threes, and 18 twos.
Midwinter bowled a no-ball.
Glomester, with the terrible minority of 342 runs against them, had
two hotrs batting yesterday evening. They lost five wickets for 130, and
will, a course, lose the match to-day. W. G. Grace is, however, still
not on, having played superb cricket for 55.
I don’t think I need say much about the finish of the match with
Gloucestershire at Clifton. The state of the score when stumps were
drawn on Friday evening left Gloucestershire with a very remote chance
of savng a single innings’ defeat. Five of the best men were out, and
212 nns were still wanted. Under such circumstances it was not


cond innings, together with the full
score
Overs.
Maidens. Rius. Wickets.
Garrett
46 ..
... 14 84
3
Palmer
43 ..
. . 17 61
4
Boyle
.Giffen
32 ..
6 ..
... 20 28
... 4 2
1
1
Full score:—
GLOUCESTERS HIRE.
1st inn.
2nd inn.
W, G. Grace, b Garrett
...12
77
E. M. Grace, c Bonnor, b Palmer
...11
b Palmer
18
F. Townsend, c Horan, b Garrett
... 1
c Massie, b Garre
t 18
Midwinter, c Palmer, b Garrett
... 25
c Massie, b Garre
t 1
W. O. Moberley, b Boyle
...29
c Palmer, b Boyle
25
W. R. Gilbert, b Garrett
...13
bPlamer
21
J. Cranston, c Blackham, b Garrett
... 1
run out
liier .. 7
A. D. Greene, b Boyle
... 1
c Blackham, b Pa
E. Peake, not out
... 9
c Massie, b Garrett 2
Woof, b Garrett
... 1
c Boyle, b Giffen
2
J. A. Bush, b Boyle
... 0
not out
1
B 1, lb 4
... 5
B 6, 1 b 2 ....
8
Total
.. 108
Total
..... 183
AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, c Gilbert, b Midwinter
29
A. C. Bannerman, b Woof
26
W. L. Murdoch, st Bush, b Woof
21
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Midwinter
70
T. Horan, not out
141
surprising that Saturday’s play excited but a small amount of interest.
Onljr enthusiasts could be expected to pay at the gate with no prospect
of cricket after luncheon, hut I have no doubt that many who stayed
away would certainly have been present had the position of the game
been reversed, and Gloucestershire been certain of an easy victory. As
it turned out, the last five wickets only put on 53, and so the match
resulted in a decisive win for the Australians by an innings and 159 runs.
W. G. Grace increased his overnight score of 55 to 77, and was at last
given out 1 b w—a decision at which he was highly indignant. I never
like to question umpires, and I was not in a position to give an opinion,
but there was certainly an impression that a mistake had been made.
W. G. did not hit with the freedom of former days, but I have not seen
a sounder innings this year. For the two hours that he was batting on
Friday he did not play a single ball badly, and his only mistake on
Saturday was with a popping ball from Boyle, which not oily beat him
but beat the wicket-keeper as well. I don’t fancy thal, nowadays,
Gloucester would win one match in five with the Australians, but the
defeat would not have been such an overwhelming one if Woof had
caught Horan on the Friday morning. That unfortunate mistake made
a difference of quite 150 runs. I append the analysis in the county’s
second innings, together with the full score :
G. J. Bonnor, c W. G. Grace, b Woof 33
J. M‘C. Blackham. Ibw, b W. G. Grace 42
H. F. Boyle, b W. G. Grace 39
T. W. Garrett, c Green, b Midwinter 33
B6, lb3, nbl 10
42
G. Giffen, c Bush, b Midwinter
G. E. Palmer, b W. G. Grace
Total.


AUSTRALIANS v. KENT.
Played at Canterbury, August 7,8, and 9,
With the exception of Massie and Spofforth, the Australians left
Victoria Station on Sunday evening hy the boat express on the London,
Chatham, and Dover Railway, arriving at Canterbury punctually at half-
past 9. Massie came on in the morning, but Spofforth’s strained thigh
prevented him playing, so he stayed in London. The team put up at
the Freemason’s Tavern in St. Margaret street, a house that was scarcely
suitable in the accommodation it afforded. Some of the Eleven took
beds elsewhere.
Monday morning was very fine and warm, though a few clouds now
and then came between the sun and the surface of this little planet.
The High street of the Ancient city was gay with flags of all sorts, shapes,
colours and devices, selected from one of the big national dockyards.
Besides the ropes of flags across the streets, there were many private
decorations of flowers, bannerets, festoons, besides the legends such as
“Welcome to the Australians,” “Let Cricket Flourish,” which blazed
out in light when the evening came on. I don’t think I ever saw the
Canterbury streets so full as they were on Monday, and everybody you
met was talking of the cricket. The town was, as a young and ardent
little friend of mine said, doing the right thing for once. Last year there
was apathy where now there is energy—indifference where now there is
enthusiasm. It would be ungenerous not to recognise the change and not
to applaud the feeling which brought that change about. When I got to
the ground at St. Lawrence I found a great improvement there also. A
triple row of seats replaced the single benches, and the playing rink or
area had been enlarged by throwing back the tents several yards. The
immemorial elms, the stately beeches, the graceful poplars, lent a
charm to the scene, and set off by contrast the snowy tents, the parti-
coloured banners, and the bright, vivid green of the turf.
Bonnor and Spofforth were the two men left out of the Australian team.
Murdoch, with his usual good luck, won the toss for choice of innings.
He has only lost once out of the last seven times he has called. Of course,
the Colonists went in first, and, of course, the friends of Kent felt their
faint hopes grow fainter. Bannerman and Massie, the J upp and Humphrey
of the Australian team, took their places at the wickets at 12 o’clock,
there being at that time between 3,000 and 4,000 spectators on the ground.
The Kent bowlers were Foord-Kelcey, the old Oxonian, and Wootton,
the young left-handed player. Runs were scored very rapidly, Massie
hitting with the brilliancy for which he is famous. He made nearly all
the runs, his off-driving being extraordinarily hard and clean. At 56 the


bowling was changed at both ends, Hearne and Wilson going on. The
score still rose, but Massie’s hitting had become reckless, and after making
two or three bad strokes he was neatly caught at cover-point, one hand.
He had made 54 out of 87 by 10 fours, a three, four twos, and three singles.
Murdoch altogether failed, being smartly stumped before a run had been
added. M’Donnell joined Bannerman, and the score Avas hit to 100 in
65 minutes. By far the quickest part of this quick hitting was when
Massie began. Wootton and Foord-Kelcey resumed bowling, and at 121
both wickets felt, M’Donnell’s off-stump being bowled out of the ground,
and Bannerman being very cleverly stumped for 47, a patient, careful,
and thoroughly good innings, including six fours, a three, and seven twos.
Giffen and Horan were now partners, but when the total had reached 142
Horan was out, caught at Avicket. Blackham came next, and the position
of the game at the luncheon interval was 159 for five Avickets.
The Colonists Avere entertained at lunch in the Corporation tent on the
ground by Mr. G. A. Frend, Mayor of Canterbury, who proposed the toast
of “ The Australian Cricketers.” Mr. Murdoch replied in a few Avords of
thanks.
Soon after the game was resumed Giffen Avas smartly run out by Lord
Harris and Foord-Kelcey, the latter putting doAvn the wicket. Jones
Avas the neAv comer, and he played very much the best innings I have
seen him play. Without Avishing to put it offensively, I must say that
up to this time Jones had been the failure of the team. On Monday,
hoAvever, he played Avith ease and certainty, hitting hard, and getting
Avell on the top of the ball. Mr. Beal, the Australian manager, said to
me, “It was on this form Ave brought Jones home.” To continue the
story of the game—Patterson relieved Wootton at 180, and George Hearne
boAvled again ten runs later. In one over from Patterson, Jones, in
admirable style, hit three fours. The second of these, a pretty cut, sent
up 200 at half-past three. There Avere several other changes of bowling,
Jones still scoring faster than Blackham, who, hoAvever, had all this time
been playing capital cricket. He now gave a hard chance of “ c and b ”
to Lord Harris, Avho had just gone on to bowl, At last at 259, or after
93 runs had been made during the partnership, Jones ran himself out.
His 59 included 11 fours, a three, and three tAvos. Palmer Avas boAvled
directly, but Boyle and Blackham kept together till 296, when the latter
Avas exceedingly ivell caught at point, Foord-Kelcey running in and hold-
ing the ball. Blackham’s 62 was the top score of his side. He made his
runs very safely and steadily by five fours, five threes, six tAvos, and
singles. Garrett joined Boyle, and the 300 went up at 20 minutes to five.
A feAV minutes later Garrett’s off-stump was boAvled out of the ground,
and the Australians Avere all out for 307. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Foord-Kelcey 31 13 65 1
W00tt0n .............................. 31 8 78 2
Hearne 33 17 51 3
Wi150n.'.’.'.'.'.’.'.'........ .' .'. 4 0 17 3
Lipscomb 18-3 5 50 2
Patterson 6 1 25 0
Harris 4 1 10 0
Kent went in at five minues past five, Patterson and Lord Harris being
opposed by Palmer and Garrett. Patterson scored two fours from


Palmer
45 ....
.. 16 ...
... 70 ...
... 3
Garrett
40-2 ....
.. 20 ...
... 62 ...
... 6
9 ....
.. 2 ...
... 28 ...
... 0
12
2 ...
... 26 ...
... 0
Jones
9 ....
.. 2 ...
... 21 ...
... 0
Palmer, and the Kent captain hit Garrett for two fours. At 36, however,
Patterson was caugnt by Blackham, standing several yards behind the
wicket. George Hearne came in, and Lord Harris, after giving what I
think was a hard chance to Murdoch at point, was easily taken at extra
mid-off, the second Kentish wicket falling at 42. So far the hatting had
been good, hut now a great change came over the game. Hearne was
given out caught at the wicket at 42, Jones’s off-stump was howled down
at 43, and Foord-Kelcey was howled first ball. Mackinnon and Tylecote
put on 20 runs, when the former ran himself out. Six wickets were down
for 63 when Kemp joined Tylecote. The pair added 21 runs, and then
time was called, Kent being in an apparently hopeless position. The
Colonial bowling and fielding had undoubtedly been good, but the chief
cause of the breakdown was, no doubt, the extremely bad light. I don’t
say this in any way to excuse the batting failure, but simply state what
was a fact, that the light, especially for the batsmen playing at the city
end, was really very bad.
On Tuesday, at twenty-five minutes to twelve, the match was resumed,
Tylecote twenty-eight and Kemp two continuing their innings to the
bowling of Garrett and Palmer. Tylecote, after cutting Palmer for three,
gave what looked to me like a chance at the wicket off Garrett. This,
so far as I know, was the only mistake in the old Oxonian’s splendid
innings. Kemp played a ball into his wicket at 91, he being the seventh
Kent batsman out, and there being but three wickets to fall and 137 runs-
to avert the follow on. Wilson, a Tonbridge schoolboy, and, if my
memory serves me, captain there last year, and who is now an under-
graduate at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, became Tylecote’s partner. The
pair batted in admirable style, and though Wilson’s innings was not free
from chances, the form he displayed and especially the way he placed the
ball to leg were most favourably criticised. It was, of course, not
surprising to see a man of Tylecote’s experience playing up at a crisis,
but for a young man, unaccustomed to playing in first-class company, to
defy the bowling so long and so ably as Wilson did was quite a remarkable
event. The Australian bowling was frequently changed without result,
and it was not until 125 runs had been put on that Wilson lost his wicket,
hein" caught by Blackham standing several yards behind. Wilson’s
chief hits were six fours, four threes, and six twos. Though only 12 runs
were required to avert the follow, the last two batsmen were unequal to
the task. They did indeed stay long enough for Tylecote to make his
100, but that was all, Kent at the close of the innings being in a minority
of 85 runs. Tylecote’s 100 (not out) was the third three figure innings
scored against the present Australian team, and the fifth ever scored
against Australian bowling in the old country. Tylecote hit thirteen
fours, three threes, and seven twos. The ground was, of course, very
hard and favourable to rapid scoring. Nevertheless, Tylecote’s play
against the formidable Colonists was worthy of ail praise. Bowling
analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.


Tylecote and Wilson, the pair who had done so well, began the second
innings of the county. Their partnership, this time, was not of long
duration, as with the score at only 13, a fast “ yorker ” on the off stump
howled Tylecote. Patterson joined Wilson, and the spectators were
afforded a thorough batting treat. Oxford past and Cambridge present
rivalled each other for both style and efficiency. Just after four o’clock
in the afternoon the single innings defeat was averted amid loud and con-
tinuous applause. At 91, however, Wilson was bowled for a second
admirable innings, played indeed with greater certainty and confidence
than he had before displayed. He hit four fours, three threes, and four
twos. Altogether in the match he made 107 runs, and was in while 216
were scored. He did his best in the first innings to save his side from
following on, and though he could not avert that catastrophe, he did the
next best thing, which was to prevent a single innings defeat. Lord
Harris became Mr. Patterson’s partner, but after the score had been
carefully taken to 132, the great hope of Kent was bowled for 59, a
superb exhibition of high-class batting, included in which were
six fours, a three, and eight twos. The third wicket thus fell
at 132, and the last seven only increased the total by 33 runs. Lord
Harris contributed 24 in his usual finished style, but of the other men of
Kent nothing can be said. In plain English they showed wretched form,
and were half out before they went in, Foord-Kelcey was again bowled
first ball, he and Wootton each earning the trophy least desired by
cricketers—a pair of spectacles. I have seen Foord-Kelcey bat well
before now, but lately he’seems not to be worth a run. Kent were out
for the second time at twenty minutes to six for 165, or 80 to the good.
Bowling analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Garrett 38-1 14 58 6
Palmer 36 13 44 4
raimci OD JLO t t t t t
Boyle 12 7 19 0
Giffen 14 5 33 0
Massie and Bannerman opened the second innings of the Australians, and
at the call of time on Tuesday evening were both not out, the total being 21.
Wednesday’s cricket was neither very good nor very exciting. There
were only 60 runs wanted and 10 wickets to fall, and so, of course, the
Australians were sure of victory. They didn’t bat well, however.
Massie’s hitting was reckless, and few people were surprised to see him
caught. He had made 42 out of 57. His dash,and energy were as noticeable
as ever, but there was more than the usual want of caution. Bannerman
was easily caught at 67 at forward short-leg, and M'Donnell was as easily
caught at point. Then Horan joined Murdoch, who had been missed
from an easy chance to Lord Harris at slip, andtheruns were hitoff just under
an hour, the Australians winning by seven wickets. Bowling analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Foord-Kelcey 17-2 7 36 2
Lipscomb 16 10 14 0
juipsuuiiiu io j-w yj
Hearne 13 9 12 1
XlCcLllie IO V j-
Wootton -. •. 3 0 16 0
Though it is not original, I should like so say here that 775 runs were
scored in the match for the loss of 33 wickets, an average of 23 T 6
runs per wicket. Kent made a capital fight of it, and would have done
still better but for the complete failure of some good men. Full score :


AUSTRALIANS.
A. C. Bannerman, st Tylecote, b Wootton 47
H. H. Massie, c Kemp, b Heame 54
W. L. Murdoch, st Tylecote, b Hearne 0
P. S. M'Donnell, b Foord-Kelcey 11
T. Horan, c Tylecote, b Wootton 6
G. Giffen, run out 25
J. M‘C. Blackham, c Foord-Kelcey, b Heame 62
S. P. Jones, run out 59
G. E. Palmer, b Lipscomb 0
H. F. Boyle, not out 1 27
T. W. Garrett, b Lipscomb 3
B 5, 1 b 8 13
Total 307
In the second innings Bannerman scored (c Wootton, b Foord-Kelcey) 19, Massie
(c Foord-Kelcey, b Lipscomb) 42, Murdoch (not out) 14, M’Donnell (c Harris, b
Foord-Kelcey) 2, Horan (not out) 1; byes &c 3—total 81.
KENT.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
W. H. Patterson, c Blackham, b Palmer 19 b Garrett 59
Lord Harris, c Palmer, b Garrett 17 b Garrett 24
G. G. Hearne, c Blackham, b Palmer 2 b Palmer 0
E. F. S Tylecote, not out 100 b Palmer 4
R. S Jones, b Garrett 1 c Bannerman, b Garrett 0
W. Foord-Kelcey, b Garrett 0 b Palmer 0
F. A. Mackinnon, run out 8 b Palmer 5
M. C. Kemp, b Garrett 3 not out 6
C. Wilson, c Blackham, b Garrett 57 b Garrett 50
F. Lipscomb, b Palmer 0 b Garrett 2
Wooton, c Boyle, b Garrett 0 c Blackham, b Garrett.. 0
B 9, 1 b 6 15 B 8, 1 b 3 11
B 9, 1 b 6
Total 222 Total 165
I am not fond of the peculiar form of skittles known as scratch matches,
because I never saw a scratch match yet in which the players really
seriously tried. They don’t “ play for keeps,” as the Australians call it.
Still, irregular as it is, I feel bound to publish the score of the Wednesday
afternoon game, because young Jones, of New South Wales, made 100.
THE WORLD.
G. J. Bonner, st Marsham, b Knight 17
E. G. S. Hamilton, b Harris 0
G. E. Palmer, b Harris 22
G. G. Hearne, c Jones, b Knight 4
S. P. Jones, c Marsham, b M Alpine 100
W. L. Murdoch, c J. Patterson, b Foord-Kelcey 32
H. H. Massie, c M Alpine, b Throwley 22
W. Hoare, b M Alpine 39
F. Randolph, st Marsham, b Wilson 7
Capt Moore, b Harris 6
F. Lipscombe, not out 29
Wootton, b Harris 15
B 5,1 b4,n b 1 10
Total 303
BAND OF BROTHERS.
Lord Throwley, c Hearne, b Bonner 0
R. S. Jones, not out 38
E. Knight, not out 11
81, Ibl 2
Total 51


AUSTRALIANS v. PLAYERS OF ENGLAND.
Played at Kennington Oval, August 10, 11, and 12.
The Australians returned to London by the 7-58 Chatham and Dover
train on Wednesday evening to he ready to play their Mg match against
the English professionals at the Oval. Spofrorth was still unable to
support his side, and Jones was left out in order that Bonner should play.
There was a pretty big crowd at the Oval on Thursday, about 8,000
paying gate. Barlow and Pilling were away playing for their county
against Gloucestershire, and Midwinter and Crossland Avere also engaged
in the same match. I don’t suppose the last named Avouid have been
chosen in any case, because, though he is very destructive, and is allowed
to “howl” Avithout protest for Lancashire, his delivery is considered
unfair by many of our leading cricketers, several of whom have openly
told me in correspondence or conversation that in their opinion Crossland
is a thrower. Mid-winter intends to settle in Australia, and therefore
would not play for any representative side against the Colonist. With
these exceptions, the professional eleven was very strong. The day was
singularly cloudy and heavy, and the light was consistently had and
gloomy. Nevertheless, so far as I could see, the wicket played very Avell
indeed. The lavo captains Murdoch and LockAvood, went out into the
open ground and tossed for choice of innings. Murdoch called, and called
Avrong; accordingly at a quarter past twelve the English team went in to
hat. Then commenced a most remarkable day’s cricket. The Australians
made in an hour and three-quarters more mistakes in the field than I ever
saAv a Colonial team make before in a whole day. Cricket, like Avhist,
seldom forgives you if you do wrong, and the Australians paid the
penalty of their blunders before luncheon by having to field throughout
the afternoon against some of the most brilliant, and yet careful, batting it
has been my lot to witness for a long time. A remarkable contrast was
indeed presented by the play before and after the interval. Up to tAvo
o’clock the English batting Avas fluky and spiritless. It Avas during that
time that Bonner distinguised himself by missing at least four possible
ehances at slip, and Murdoch let off Read at point. In justice to these
usually brilliant fieldsmen I should say that not one of these chances was
a really easy one, but still some of them, at least, ought to have
been taken. On the resumption of the game, Read and Barnes played
grand cricket, and afforded their opponents feAv other opportunities.
They hit with dash and rapidity, and Avorked the spectators up to a pitch
of enthusiasm seldom reached, even at the Oval. These two batsmen,
avlio, between them, scored 217 out of the 291 runs made from the bat for
the nine Avickcts which fell during the day, put on 158 runs during the
partnership, taking the total from 37 for four Avickets to 195 for five.


Then Barnes was howled for 87, the chief hits of which were eight fours,
five threes, and ten twos. Afterwards Flowers stayed with Read till the
total was 264, when he was out to a bad stroke for 25. Read had just
before this, when he was 87, given a fairly easy chance to Horan at long-
on from a lofty drive. This mistake, which was cetainly a bad one, was
the only palpable chance I saw during the whole afternoon’s play. Read
kept in until he had made 130, and the total was 303. He was batting a
little over four hours and a quarter, and though he was decidedly lucky,
giving, I think, four chances, the hitting he showed in the afternoon was
splendidly brilliant. His 130 consisted of 16 fours, six threes, 11 twos
and singles. It was the highest innings scored against the present
Colonial team, the second hundred hit from their howling this week, the
fourth, so far, in the tour, the sixth ever made on an English ground
against Australian bowling, and the second only in point of numbers to
W. G. Grace’s 152 in 1880. There was, of course, immense enthusiasm,
and a subscription was immediately got up for Read, with the handsome
result of £4l 10s. being handed to him. Maurice Read’s fame as a bats-
man is now firmly established. People tell you, and with a large amount
of truth, that his style is as good as Hayward’s was, and that he is as
good a man for the county as either Jupp or Tom Humphrey. It is a big
fact that he averages over fifty runs per innings against the Australians,
and though on Thursday he gave the chances I have mentioned, besides
making some bad hits, and being two or three times nearly bowled, his
performance was a notable one to he long and pleasantly remembered.
Having said so much it is not necessary that I should enter into a detailed
description of Thursday’s play. Most of my readers will know before
this is in print that the first four men—Uylett, Shrewsbury Bates, and
Lockwood —were out for 37, that then the big stand was made, that the
Australian howling was completely collared, that there was some splendid
fielding by Massie, M’Donnell, and others, that Blackham’s wicket-keeping
was conspicuous as ever, that though he let off a lot of leg balls, Read’s
hitting on the on side, was hard and effective as was Barnes’s on the off,
and that at the drawing of stumps for the day the English total was 310
for nine wickets, Sherwin and Morley, the last pair being together, not
out, with two and four respectively.
The match was continued on Friday just before twelve o’clock, Sherwin
and Morley being opposed by Palmer and Garrett. With five singles, a
cut for three, and a drive for four, the score was raised to 322. Then a
surprisingly fine one-hand catch by Bannerman, running from mid off,
got rid of Morley, and the innings was over. From the analysis below,
it will he seen that Murdoch relied chiefly upon Garrett and Palmer. I
think he might have howled Boyle more, and though Giffen was freely
punished, nine overs seems a very small share of work in an innings of
over three hundred. Bannerman was tried as almost a last resource, and
his figures are much the best: —
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets,
Palmer 60-2 27 99 3
Garrett • • '7l 31 ...... 106 .. 3
Boyle 35 18 ...... 35 1
Giffen 1 |5 0
Bannerman 14 £ 20 2
M‘Donnell 12 ...... 4 18 0
Palmer bowled a no-ball.


39 ....
.. 18 ...
... 47 ...
... 2
30-2....
.. 17 ...
... 39 ...
... 4
Ulyett
13 ....
.. 2 ...
... 27 ...
... 2
11 ....
7 ...
... 8 ...
... 0
Emmett
8 ....
.. 4 ...
... 15 ...
... 1
The Australian innings opened in a fashion that threw the crowd into
a wild state of excitement. Peate and Morley started the howling, and
before a run had been scored Bannerman was smartly caught at slip, and
Massie equally well caught at the wicket. The downfall of two such
batsmen was a terrible blow to the Australians, and it was only natural
that Murdoch and M‘Donnell, who followed in, should commence with
unusual caution. After a time, however, Murdoch began to score with
great freedom from Morley, hitting him thrice for four. M‘Donnell also
hit the same bowler for four, and also drove Peate for four. In this way
the score was carried to 37, and a change was very properly tried, Morley
giving place to Ulyett. With seven runs added M‘ Donnell was caught
off the new bowler, the ball touching the wicket-keeper, and flying up to
slip. Horan went in, but when the total had reached 62 the Australians
met with a great disaster, Murdoch being bowled by Peate for a capital
35. The ball that dismissed the Australian captain was a good one, and
seemed to break across a great deal from leg. Flowers bowled for Ulyett,
and at lunch time Horan and Giff'en had raised the score to 73. For some
little time after resuming play the batting was remarkably good. Peate,
whose analysis up to lunch had been very fine, was hit three times for 4,
and a change had to be tried at each end. Morley replaced Flowers, and
Emmett bowled for Peate. In Emmett’s first over Giff'en was neatly
caught at slip, the fifth wicket falling at 94.
Horan and Blackham played very steadily together, and for a
considerable time resisted all the efforts of the bowlers. The 100 went up
at a quarter past three, and then in one over from Emmett Blackham
made two fine drives for four each. Horan also hit a couple of fours—one
from each bowler—and at 120 Peate resumed in place of Emmett. With
five runs added Horan was very cleverly caught at slip, close to the
Sound. He had played a very sound and careful innings of 47—the
ghest score of the day. So far the Australians had done very well,
considering that Massie and Bannerman had failed to score, and I
thought they were going to make 200. My expectations, however, were
far from being realised. Bonnor made two splendid drives over the ring
from Peate, so at 138 Ulyett was tried again. From this point there
came a rapid change, the innings being finished off for an addition of
only 12 runs. In Ulyett’s second over Bonnor was bowled—middle stump
clean out of the ground—and directly afterwards Boyle was run out by
a brilliant piece of fielding. Flowers stopped a hard drive at mid-on,
and then very smartly threw down the wicket. Garrett was bowled
without getting a run, and nine wickets were down for 141. Palmer
made one hit, a drive for three, and then lost Blackham, the innings closing
for 150. The last four wickets only put on 25 runs—rather a surprising
collapse for a team that so often scores well down to the eleventh man.
The Players’ bowling was very good, and was changed by Lockwood
with excellent judgment. The figures come out as follows :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets..
Emmett bowled a wide.


Being 172 runs behind, the Australians had, of course, to “follow on,”
this being only the second time during their tour that such a thing had
occurred to them. Bannerman and Massie went in, and though the
latter did not play in anything like his best style he made runs. Two or
three times he hit balls up that fell harmless, and Morley might have
caught and bowled him from a very hard return. A ball that he after-
wards sent back at Bates was rather wide of the wicket, and too hot to be
held. Having scored 31 out of 48 the dangerous hitter was caught at
forward cover-point. Bannerman was bowled by Peate at 53, but some
fine steady cricket was shown by Murdoch and M‘Donnell. These two
batsmen stayed together till within two or three minutes of time. Then
M'Donnell was caught at the wicket—a decision with which he did not
seem satisfied—and the day’s play ended, the Australians having seven
wickets to fall, a"fld wanting 89 runs to avert the single innings defeat.
I must not forget to praise Sherwin’s wicket-keeping, which was
wonderfully good and plucky.
At twelve o’clock precisely on Saturday the not out, Murdoch 15, was
joined hy Horan. Ulyett and Morley were the howlers, and off the
former Horan hit a three to square-leg. In Morley’s first over, however,
Horan was easily caught at mid-off from a had hit; four for 86. Giffen
came in and the play was very steady, the bowlers being on the wicket
every ball, and the batsmen acting entirely on the defensive. Though it
was only now about half-past twelve, and there were six wickets to fall
and 85 runs to get, it occurred to me that the Colonists were possibly
playing up for a draw. If that were so I consider they made a mistake.
It was almost hopeless to expect to stay at the wickets all day, while to
wear out the bowling of an eleven, including Peate, Morley, Bates,
Barnes, Flowers, Ulyett, Emmett, Read, and Lockwood was an
impossible task on anything but a perfect wicket. The only chance
was to go in for hitting. Ninety went up at half-past twelve
exactly, so that half an hour was occupied in making seven
runs. Then Murdoch, who had not increased his overnight score,
was easily caught at point off a fast rising ball from Ulyett; five
for 90. Blackham, the new comer, showed poor form, and was soon out,
well caught by Barnes running in from mid-on ; six for 95. Bonnor and
Giffen made a stand, defying the howling for a little while. The only
big hit, however, was a straight drive by Bonnor for four to the Pavilion
off Ulyett. At 104 the bowling was changed at both ends, Barnes and
Peate going on. Giffen drove Peate straight for four, in magnificent
form, and scored two off the next ball, a possible chance of “c and b. ”
Then Bonnor was smartly caught at the wicket; seven for 110. Palmer
was bowled first ball, the leg-stump flying out of the ground. These two
wickets fell to Barnes from successively bowled balls—the last of one
over and the first of that which followed. Boyle could do nothing with
Peate, and was caught from a feeble stroke at cover-point; nine for 111.
Garrett was last man, and the batting became comparatively lively. The
new comer hit Barnes to the on for four, and cut Peate late for two.
Giffen scored four off each howler—square-leg hit and off-drive. At 12
minutes to 2 the 130 went up amid applause. Ulyett and Morley here
resumed. Garrett cut the former late and hard for four, and scored a
single from each howler. The latter of these was extremely well fielded


at third man by Read. Giffen placed Morley to square-leg for two, but
in that bowler’s next over was easily caught at cover-point. This finished
the match, the Australians losing by an innings and 34 runs, by far the
most severe Colonial reverse that has occured for a very long time.
Bowling analysis:— Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Morley .' 39-2 28 31 3
Ulyett 32 22 31 2
Peate 32 14 42 3
Bates 14 7 16 0
Barnes 11 9 8 2
Full score :
PLAYERS.
Shrewsbury, c Bonnor, b Palmer 6
Ulyett, c Bannerman b Garrett 12
Barnes, b Bannerman 87
Bates, c Bannerman, b Garrett 0
Lockwood, b Palmer 3
Read, run out 130
Flowers, b Boyle 25
Emmett, c Bonnor, b Garrett 21
Peate, c Boyle, b Bannerman 1
Sherwin, not out 10
Morley, c Bannerman, b Palmer 8
B 7,1 b 11, nb 1 19
Total 322
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
A. C. Bannerman, c Shrewsbury, b Peate 0 b Peate 14
H. H. Massie, c Sherwin, b Morley 0 c Barnes, b Peate 31
W. L. Murdoch, b Peate
P. S. M’Donnell, c Peate, b Ulyett...
T. Horan, c Peate, b Morley
G. Giffen, c Shrewsbury, b Emmett.
J. M’C. Blackham, b Morley.
G. J. Bonnor, b Ulyett
H. F. Boyle, run out
T. W. Garrett, b Morley
G. E. Palmer, not out
B 11,1 b2,w b 1
35 c Lockwood, b Ulyett 15
12 c Sherwin, b Ulyett 18
47 c Shrewsbury, b Morley. 3
12 c Ulyett, b Morley 23
17 c Barnes, b Morley 1
9 c Sherwin, b Barnes 8
1 e Flowers, b Peate 0
0 not out 15
3 b Barnes 0
14 B 6,1 b 4 10
150 Total 138
Now that the story is told, it is necessary to make a few remarks upon
it. First, then, the Players howled and fielded splendidly, and won the
match by superior all-round cricket. Next, the wicket did not wear well,
and was by no means in condition for run-getting when the Australians
were hatting on Saturday ; and last, the only man who played up to his
reputation on the last day of the match was Giffen, who combined
defence and hit in his best form. With the best of the luck the Players
did extraordinarily well, and deserve the gratitude and thanks of all
English cricketers. But for the chances they missed on Thursday
morning—all sharp ones, be it remembered—the Australians would have
had a grand show of winning, but when once the opportunity passed,
their professional opponents held firmly to the advantage gained. With
the best feeling towards the Australians, I am heartily glad at the result
of their contest with the Players, because whatever can he said in excuse
for the Colonists in this match can with greater truth and increased force
be advanced on behalf of the Gentlemen for their defeat in June.


AUSTRALIANS V. AN ELEVEN OF ENGLAND.
Played at Derby, August 14, 15, and 16.
The great majority of the team left St. Pancras by the 3.10 p.m. train,
and arrived in Derby shortly after six, taking up their quarters, as before,
in Derby at the Midland Hotel. Massie, Bonnor, Spofforth, and the
manager came on by a later train. It had been arranged in the original
programme that the second match at Derby should be a return with the
county eleven, but after the poor show made in June, it was determined
to ask C. I. Thornton to get up an England Eleven to oppose the
Australians. This was in every way a good course of action, as another
match between the Australians and Derbyshire could not have excited
any real cricket interest. Thornton succeeded in getting a good eleven
together, considering that Lancashire, Yorkshire, and Middlesex were all
playing on the same day ; though, perhaps, there should have been another
bowler. The Australian team was selected before leaving the hotel in the
morning, and it was determined to give a rest to Palmer and Giffen.
The weather on Monday morning was bright and fine, but just before
twelve there was a smart shower of rain. W. H. Patterson’s name had
been announced on the English side, but at the last moment his place
was taken by C. Marriott, an old Oxonian, and the captain of the
Leicestershire County Eleven. A start was made at a quarter-past
twelve, and Thornton having beaten Murdoch in the toss for choice of
innings, went himself to the wickets, with Tylecote as a partner, Garrett
and Spofforth sharing the Australian bowling. Thornton at once commenced
hitting in quite his own style, getting hold of some balls splendidly, but
making several false hits. One on-drive of his from Spofforth went clean
over the ring for six, and was loudly applauded by the large company
that had now assembled on the ground. When Thornton had made 29
out of 37 he was caught at long-on from a lofty hit. Maurice Read joined
Tylecote, and some admirable cricket was shown. Both men played with
care and judgment, seldom letting off a ball that wanted hitting, and
also showing some fine defence. Tylecote, when he had made 18, cut a ball
sharply to Garrett at point, but the chance was not taken. After his
escape the Kentish amateur never made a mistake. Boyle went on for
Garrett at 64, and then Read hit Spofforth for 10 in one over by drives to
the on for four and six. This caused Jones to be tried at Spotforth’s end
at 80. Still the batsmen continued to play well, and Maurice Read
appeared to be getting thoroughly set, when at 92 he was dismissed by a
smart catch at the wicket. Barnes came in, and a general cheer
announced the appearance of the 100 at twenty-five minutes to 2. Jones’s
bowling came in for rather severe punishment, Tylecote hitting him to


Overs.
24-1.
Maidens.
9 ..
Runs.
41 .
Wickets,
2
Spofforth
50 .
23 ..
.... 78 .
5
Boyle
43 .
15 ..
.... 75 .
3
Jones
7 .
1 ..
.... 19 .
0
square-leg for four, and cutting him for three, and Barnes cutting him for
another three. Garrett relieved Jones at 114, hut after a few overs gave
way to Spofforth. When the hell rang for luncheon the score was 124,
with only two wickets down. Just after the players had left the field
rain came down in torrents, and continued for some little time. At a
quarter to 3 the Australians went out again into the field, hut on an
inspection of the wicket it was found that it wanted about a quarter
of an hour to dry it, so the game was not resumed rmtil five minutes
past three. As usual after a heavy shower of rain, the wicket
did not play very well, several halls from Spofforth kicked up hadly.
Murdoch, who was keeping wicket in place of Blackham, stood ten yards
behind to the fast howling, and in that position got rid of both Barnes
and Tylecote. The Nottingham professional had hatted well for 23, and
Tylecote had played remarkably good cricket for 56. In fact, after his
performance at the Oval I did not think Tylecote had the cricket left in
him that he had shown both at Canterbury and Derby. His 56 included
seven fours, four threes, and one two. Flowers and Shrewsbury now got
together. The former was missed by the wicket-keeper standing a long
way behind, hut the mistake did little harm, as at 160 Flowers was caught
at third man from a very tame stroke. Docker, who was greatly cheered
by the crowd when he went in, was easily caught at mid-off after scoring
three. Scotton joined Shrewsbury, who had been batting patiently and
well. The new comer drove Boyle straight for four, and an overthrow by
Bonnor increased a single of Shrewsbury’s to four. When the score was
up to 198 Shrewsbury was well caught at the wicket at the second attempt.
Marriott followed, and the 200 went up at a quarter to five. Scotton was
let off from a fairly easy chance by Murdoch behind the wicket, and after
his escape played in capital form. Boyle, who had kept on for a long
time, was replaced by Garrett at 219. Marriott skied a hall, which fell
just out of harm’s way, and at 229 was bowled off his pads. The innings
then came quickly to a close, Scotton being caught by the wicket-keeper,
and Shaw being caught and bowled, the last wicket falling at twenty-five
minutes past five for 230. I give below the analysis, from which it will
he seen that Spofforth was the most successful bowler :
Jones bowled a wide.
As there was only about a quarter of an hour left to play, Murdoch
departed from his usual order of going in, and sent in Garrett and Jones,
Barnes and Mycroft being the first pair of bowlers. Three runs only had
been scored when Garrett was caught by the wicket-keeper, standing
quite six yards behind. Spofforth came in, and at the call of time the
score was 11 for one wicket.
On Tuesday the game was resumed at a few minutes before twelve. Rain
had fallen heavily during the night, and the weather in the morning was
dull and cheerless. Jones and Spofforth went on with the batting, to the
bowling of Mycroft and Barnes. Spofforth, after scoring two, was
caught at cover-point. Just after Bannerman had come in there was a


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
50-1..
.... 19 ....
.. 82 ..
.... 7
36 ...
,... 18
.. 50 ..
.... 3
Flowers
20 ..
.... 7 ....
.. 23 ..
.... 0
Shaw
24 ..
.... 14 ....
.. 14 ..
.... 0
terrific gale of wind, which blew down four tents, and sent hats and
umbrellas flying about in all directions. Although the storm only lasted
a few minutes, the scene presented a most curious appearance, the
people seeming to be taken entirely by suprise. Fortunately there was no
harm done, and in a very short space of time the tents were put up again.
After the storm had ceased rain came down heavily, and the game was
not proceeded with until ten minutes to three. At that time there were
many more people on the ground than I expected to see, and for the rest
of the day play was continued without interruption. Bannerman was
cleaned bowled at 19, and it seemed quite possible that the Australians
would be out for a small score. However, when Murdoch and Jones got
together the game assumed a very different aspect. Both men played
with extreme caution, and steadily increased the score. The wicket was
too wet to be difficult at first, but as it dried it commenced to play
falsely. Shaw and Flowers were put on, but not proving successful,
Mycroft and Barnes resumed bowling. Each batsman gave more than one
hard chance, but, nevertheless, the cricket was decidedly good. When
the score had reached 135, Mycroft clean bowled Jones for a patiently -
played and invaluable 50, including five threes and eleven twos. Horan
followed, but with six runs added Murdoch was very smartly caught by
the wicket keeper for a splendid defensive innings of 70, made up of five
fours, four threes, four twos, and twenty-eight singles. Both Jones and
Murdoch were loudly and enthusiastically cheered. They had put on 116
runs while they were together. Massie was caught behind the wicket for
four, and then Horan and M‘Donnell played out time, the score at the
close of the day being 158, with six wickets down.
There was no rain on Tuesday night, and, as was pretty generally
expected, the wicket played very badly on Wednesday. During the day
nineteen wickets fell for 191 runs. The hot sun in the morning had quite
baked the ground, and made it play most treacherously. At a few
minutes before twelve Horan and M'Donnell went on batting to the
bowling of Mycroft and Barnes. Horan hit Barnes to square-leg for four
and three, and then M ‘Donnell played a ball on to his wicket. I need say
very little about the remainder of the innings. Horan was caught at the
wicket-keeper standing some yards behind. Blackham was easily taken
at mid-off, and Bonnor, after making a great drive over the canvas for
six, was caught behind the wickets, the inning closing for 180, or 50 runs
to the bad. Barnes was by far the most successful bowler, as will be
seen from the figures given below ;
Thornton and Tylecote began the second innings of the English Eleven,
and commenced hitting in capital style. Spofforth and Garrett were the
bowlers. Tylecote played Spofforth away to leg twice for four, and
Thornton drove the same bowler right over the people for six. The score
was soon taken to 33, when an appeal for leg before was answered in the
bowler’s favour, and Tylecote retired for 14. On such a wickek, 33, with
one man out, was by no means a bad start; but with Tylecote’s departure


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Spofforth
26 ..
.... 13 ....
.. 37 ..
4
Garrett
21 ..
.... 10 ....
.. 24 .,
3
Boyle
5 ..
.... 1 ....
.. 8 ..
3
began a series of disasters. Read was caught in the slips from a hall that
fot up a good deal. Thornton played on, Shrewsbury was clean bowled
y a good ball from Garrett, which he let alone, thinking it would miss
the wicket. Barnes was finely caught at short mid-on, and Flowers was
easily taken. Scotton and Marriott played steadily for a time, and Boyle
replaced Garrett at 51. Three runs later Marriott was out to a catch by
the wicket-keeper, standing quite 15 yards behind. The game was then
adjourned for luncheon, and on resuming the wicket began to play a trifle
easier. Spofforth and Garrett shared the bowling. Docker and Scotton
played well and cautiously, and slowly took the score of 72, when Boyle
went on again. This change was attended with tremendous success, the
last three wickets all falling to Boyle’s bowling. Docker was neatly
caught—rlow down—at slip, Shaw was caught and bowled, and Scotton
clean bowled, the last wicket falling at half-past three for 78. I did not
expect to see a long score, but, after 33 had been made for the first wicket,
the total should certainly have been larger. Analysis:—
Spofforth bowled two no balls.
The Australians had 129 runs left them to win, and as it had been
arranged to draw at a quarter to six in order to catch an early train for
London, there was hardly any possibility of the runs being made in the
time, while the Englishmen had just a chance of getting their opponents
out. As I stated above, the wicket had been gradually getting easier;
but had it been as bad as in the early part of the day, there was every
possibility of the Australians being defeated. Bannerman and Massie
commenced the innings at ten minutes to four, to the bowling of Mycroft
and Barnes. Massie evidently intended forcing the pace, and hit out
most recklessly. When he had scored 14 out of 19 he was clean bowled
in trying to drive. Murdoch joined Bannerman, and both men played
with excellent judgment, showing capital defence, but still hitting well
when an opportunity presented itself. The score was slowly increased to
50, when Tylecote, standing about six yards behind the wicket, caught
Bannerman at the second attempt. Just previously Flowers had gone on
for Barnes. M‘Donnell, who followed, had only scored two when he was
magnificently caught at long-on from a very lofty hit by Barnes, who
judged the ball running sideways. This was, perhaps, the best piece of
cricket during the day, and was loudly applauded by the spectators.
Horan was very neatly caught and bowled by Flowers—low down with
the right hand, and four wickets were down for 62. Jones now became
the partner of Murdoch, who had been playing a sound and patient game.
Barnes resumed bowling at 72, and Jones hit him round to square-leg
for four. In the hope of getting another wicket before time, Thornton
went on with fast underhand at My croft’s end, and much to every one’s
surprise clean bowled Murdoch with his third ball. Bonnor and Jones
played out time, and the match was left drawn. If the game had been
played out I think the Australians would have won, as, with five wickets
to fall, only 38 runs were wanted to win. Of course there are accidents


at cricket, but it was hardly likely that five wickets would have gone
down for such a small number. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Mycroft 31 15 34 1
Barnes 19 8 36 1
Flowers 12 5 16 2
Thornton 2 1 2 1
Thornton.
One of the most curious things about the match was the extraordinary
success achieved on both sides by the wicket-keeper standing several
yards behind, no fewer than 11 of the 35 wickets that fell being to catches
in that position. Murdoch also made two catches in the first innings
standing up to the wicket. Below is the full score :
ELEVEN OF ENGLAND.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
C. I. Thornton, c M’Donnell, b Spofforth 29 b Garrett 18
E. F. S. Tylecote, c Murdoch, b Spofforth 56 Ibw, b Spofforth 14
Read, c Murdoch, b Boyle 28 c Garrett, b Spofforth.... 0
Barnes, c Murdoch, b Spofforth..
Shrewsbury, c Murdoch, b Boyle
Flowers, c Bonnor, b Spofforth ..
L. C. Docker, c Jones, b Boyle ..
Scotton, c Murdoch, b Garrett ~
C. Marriott, b Spofforth
Shaw, c and b Garrett
Mycroft, not out
B 8,1 bB,W bl
23 c Boyle, b Spofforth 1
24 b Garrett 1
12 c Horan, b Garrett 6
3 c Murdoch, b Spofforth.. 10
26 b Boyle 10
11 c Murdoch, b Spofforth.. 8
1 c and b Boyle 0
0 not out 1
17 B 5,1 b2,n b 2 9
Total 230 Total 78
AUSTRALIA,
S. P. Jones, b Mycroft 50
T. W. Garrett, c Tylecote, b Barnes 0
F. R. Spofforth, c Marriott, b Barnes 2
A. C. Bannerman, b Barnes 3
W. L. Murdoch, c Tylecote, b Barnes 70
T. Horan, c Tylecote, b Mycroft 24
H. H. Massie, c Tylecote, b Mycroft 4
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Barnes 2
G. J. Bonnor, c Tylecote, b Barnes 12
J. M‘C. Blackham, c Read, b Barnes 0
H. F. Boyle, not out 2
Byes 2,1 b 9 11-
Total 180
In the second innings,. S. P. Jones scored (not out) 12, A. C. Bannerman (c
Tvlecote, b Mycroft) 24, W. L. Murdoch (b Thornton) 32, T. Horan (c and b
Flowers) 4, H. H. Massie (b Barnes) 14, P. S. M‘Donnell (c Barnes, b Flowers) 2,
G. J. Bonnor (not out) 0; byes 3.—Total, 91.


AUSTRALIANS v. CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY.
(PAST AND PRESENT.)
Played at Portsmouth, August 17, 18, and 19.
In order to get a night’s rest before going to Portsmouth, the Australians
left Derby by the 6-40 p.m. train to London, where they, as usual, stayed
at the Tavistock Hotel. The team had to turn out very early, however,
and by seven o’clock were on their road to Portsmouth by the Brighton
and South Coast Railway, arriving at about half-past nine. Quarters
had been secured at the Beach Mansions Hotel, Southsea. It was rather
late before the men arrived on the ground, which was a long way from
the hotel. There was little difficulty in selecting the teams for the day,
as neither Palmer nor Giffen was well enough to play. A great deal of
trouble had been taken in getting up the team of Cambridge University
Past and Present to oppose the Australians, and the side was decidedly
a strong one. Only three members of this year’s Cambridge eleven were
included—C. T. Studd, G. B. Studd, and C. A. Smith—but J. E. K.
Studd would have played had he been well enough. C. H. Allcock, who
has never gained his “ blue,” but has made a lot of runs in small matches
at Cambridge, was put in as a substitute for J. E. K. Studd. The new
ground of the United Service Club looked in capital condition, and
several stands and marquees had been erected. A good deal of rain had
fallen on Wednesday, and the wicket was somewhat slow when play
commenced. Murdoch evidently thought that the ground must improve,
for on winning the toss he decided to put his opponents in first. This
may or may not have been the right course of action, but I think with
our uncertain weather it is generally best to have the first turn at the
wicket. Thornton and A. Lyttelton began the Cambridge innings at 25
minutes to one, to the bowling of Boyle and Garrett, Spofforth not
having arrived when the game started. Before many runs had been
scored Thornton should have been run out, if the ball had been returned
to the right end. After that the two batsmen played with great care,
Thornton showing much more caution than usual. Just after Spofforth
had arrived he missed a sharp chance of catching Thornton at point off
Garrett’s bowling. At 36 Boyle gave up the ball to Spofforth. From the
new bowler Thornton made a grand off-drive for four, which seemed
almost to fly to the boundary. The 50 went up at twenty minutes past one,
and then Jones replaced Garrett. Thornton drove Spofforth to the on for
four, and cut him for the same number, but when the score was up to 73
he pulled a ball on to his wicket. Thornton’s 45 was a much more careful
and praiseworthy innings than I have seen him play for some time. He


was loudly applauded. Lucas came in, and then Lyttelton played a hall
from Jones on to his wicket. Although Jones had been put on several
times before, this was the first wicket he had taken in England. After
the interval for luncheon C. T. Studd joined Lucas. The wicket did not
play particularly well, and runs came hut slowly. After a time Studd
pulled Jones round to square-leg for four, and Lucas also hit him for four.
This brought on Garrett at 97. A cheer announced the appearance of the
100 at ten minutes past three. Boyle replaced Spofforth, hut still no
parting was effected. Blackham was applauded for a fine piece of
fielding at mid-off. Bannerman was tried at Garrett’s end at 127, and at
once proved successful. C. T. Studd being caught at the wicket from
his second hall. The Cambridge crack had batted well for his 28. G. B.
Studd was caught at mid-off after making a single. Steel joined Lucas,
who put up a hall, which just fell out of Murdoch’s reach. Steel appeared
to be in anything hut his best form, and missed hitting several balls on
the leg side. Before he had made 10, Steel returned a hall to Bannerman,
hut the chance was not accepted. When the score had reached 156,
Lucas was run out for a most admirably played 42, by far the best
innings of the day. E. Lyttelton came in, and scored much faster than
his partner, who still seemed very uncomfortable with the bowling.
Bannerman gave way to Spofforth at 174. Lyttelton was missed at
long-on by Bonnor, but the mistake did little harm, as at 184 he was
smartly caught at short mid-on. After Lyttelton’s departure the innings
came rapidly to a close. Steel was clean bowled, Allcock was caught at
point off his glove, and Smith was howled. Morton was howled by a
no-hall from Spofforth, and then, after scoring four, was caught at the
wicket, the innings closing at twenty minutes past five for 196 I give
below the howling analysis ;—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Boyle 47 20 55 3
Garrett 26 12 39 0
Spofforth 28-2 12 42 4
Jones 12 5 22 1
Bannerman 20 6 30 1
Spofforth bowled a no ball.
Jones and Blackham began the Australian innings at twenty-minutes
to six to the howling of Morton and C. T. Studd. Jones hit Morton to
square-leg for four, and then played a hall on to his wicket. Garrett
joined Blackham, and runs came at a great pace. Blackham drove Studd
twice for four, and Garrett hit the same howler for another four. Steel
went on at 21, hut at the call of time no separation had been effected, the
score standing at 27 for one wicket, Blackham being not out 16, and
Garrett 6.
On Friday the match was continued, the genuine interest it had aroused
in the neighbourhood of Portsmouth being made evident by the large
attendance. When play started there was a good crowd on the ground
and the numbers naturally increased as the day Avent on. Fortunately,
the weather was fine, so there was nothing to interfere with the enjoy-
ment of the game. Garrett and Blackham, the not-outs, went on with
the Australians’ innings, and were opposed by C. T. Studd and Morton.
The play went greatly in favour of the Cambridge men, who fielded well,
and whose good bowling was changed with excellent judgment. With


Morton
Overs.
21 ..
Maidens.
7
Runs.
44
Wickets.
2
C. T.Studd
18 ..
8 ..
. 32
2
Steel
18 ..
10
24
0
Alloock
9 ..
4 ...
19
2
Smith
11-1..
.... 5 ...
... 16 .
4
the score at 39 Garrett was smartly caught at the wicket. Bannennan
went in, and Steel at 46 took the ball from Morton. The next wicket fell
at 58, Blackharn being caught at mid-off for a capital innings of 35. So
far the Australians had done very badly, hut on Murdoch joining:
Bannerman strong hopes of improvement were entertained. Bannennan
hit Studd for a couple of fours, and caused Morton to take the hall again.
This change was attended with a disastrous result for the Australians,
Murdoch being clean bowled without getting a run. Horan came next,
and during his partnership with Bannerman two other changes were tried.
Allcock going on for Steel and Smith for Morton. Each of the new
bowlers was successful, Horan being easily caught at mid-on off Smith,
and Massie, the next batsman, returning a ball to Allcock. With six
wickets down the score was only 103. M‘Donnell joined Bannerman,
but had only made 11, when Allcock bowled him. Bannerman after
playing a sound and patient innings of 26, was out leg b w, and at
luncheon time the total was 115. After the interval Bonnor and Boyle
put some life into the game, but despite all they could do, the innings
was finished up for 141, or 55 behind the Cambridge total. Smith bowled
with brilliant success, taking four wickets for 16 runs.
At half-past three Cambridge’s second innings was opened by
Alfred Lyttelton and Thornton, to the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle
The start was unfortunate, for Thornton had only made a single when a
catch at slip dismissed him. Lucas went in first wicket down, but when,
by steady cricket, the score had reached 23, he was bowled by a fine ball
from Spofforth. The early downfall of such a splendid batsman was a
disappointment. It was curious that in one afternoon Murdoch, Massie,
and Lucas should have been out for four runs between them. With
C. T. Studd and Alfred Lyttelton together the cricket was, of course,
remarkably good. The Australians were fielding very smartly, and
Spofforth and Boyle bowling their best. The score reached 52, and then
Studd was finely caught at forward-point by Bannerman. Steel went in
and the hitting became much more vigorous than before. Thirty-six
runs were rapidly added, and then Steel, like Studd, was caught at
forward-point; four wickets for 88.
Whitfeld only made five, and G. B. Studd 13. Alfred Lyttelton,
however, continued to play splendid cricket. His defence was as stubborn
as his hitting was clean and hard. At the call of time he was 59 (not
out), and the total was 131 for six wickets.
Throughout the day on Saturday the game was watched with the
keenest interest, and the cricket displayed will long live in the memory of
those who witnessed it. The weather was, if anything, finer than on the
two previous days, and two military bands were on the ground during the
afternoon, but I am afraid the spectators paid but little attention to the
music when the game began to get exciting. Play was resumed on
Saturday at a little after twelve, and in about twenty-five minutes the


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Spofforth
33 ....
.... 20
.. 42 ...
5
Boyle
49 ....
.... 23
.. 63 ...
5
Garrett
8
.... 4
.. 15 ...
0
M‘Donnell
9 ....
.... 3
.. 16 ...
0
innings was finished off for 152. A. Lyttelton only added a single to his
overnight’s score. His chief hits were six fours, three threes, and five
twos. E. Lytteltcn was dismissed hy a brilliant one-handed catch by
Boyle at short mid-on. From the following figures it will be seen that
Spofforth and Boyle divided the wickets, the former having the better
analysis;—
The Australians were left with 208 to get to win, and opinions were
greatly divided as to whether or not the runs would be made. The
wicket played rather better than before, and the light was excellent, so
that the spectators were almost certain to see a splendid struggle, knowing
how well the Australians play an uphill game. Massie and Bannerman
were the first pair of batsmen, the bowling being entrusted to Smith and
Allcock, the two men who had been so successful in the first innings.
Massie, after making six, was clean bowled, the first wicket falling for
16. Bonnor then joined Bannerman, and some remarkable cricket was
witnessed. Bonnor commenced steadily, but after he had settled down to
his work he hit with extraordinary freedom. Morton Avas put on for
Smith at 27, and Bonnor twice hit him for four. Then Bannerman was
badly missed at slip by Whitfeld, a very serious mistake for the Cantabs.
Just afterwards Bannerman gave a much more difficult chance in the slips
to Allcock off Morton’s bowling. Bonnor now began to score at a terrific
pace, and his hitting was some of the hardest and most brilliant that I
ever remember to have witnessed. He drove Allcock clean over the ring
for six, and soon caused a double change of bowling, C. T. Studd and
Steel going on. Bonnor punished Studd’s bowling tremendously.
No fewer than three times he drove him a long way over the ring
for six, and in addition to this cut him for three, and drove him
twice to the on for four. From Studd’s bowling, however, Bonnor
should have been caught at slip by Allcock, but the chance was
not a very easy one. The score was very soon up to 95, Avhen
Bonnor was easily caught and bowled. The giant had scored 66 out
of the 79 made while he was at the Avickets by magnificent hitting,
and he fully deserved the cheering that greeted him on his return to the
Pavilion. He Avas only in about half an hour, and the figures of his
innings were remarkable—four sixes, six fours, three threes, a two, and
seven singles. Bonnor’s hitting seemed to have taken the edge off
the boAvling, and the game looked all in favour of the Australians when
at luncheon time the score Avas 99, with only tAVO wickets down, Banner-
man and Jones being not out. On resuming play the bowlers were Steel
and Morton, avlio were so straight and well pitched that nine o\’ers had
been sent doAvn before the 100 went up. With the score at 110 Morton
clean bowled Jones with a fast yorker on the leg stump. Murdoch
became Bannerman’s partner, and a long and determined resistance was.
offered to the Cambridge bowling. Both men played with great care and
judgment, and, though the bowling was repeatedly changed, the score
kept on being steadily increased. At one time it seemed almost possible


that the runs would be hit off without another wicket falling, as the two
men were so thoroughly set. The batsmen continued to defy the efforts of
the bowlers until the score was up to 155, when Bannerman was given
out, caught behind the wicket—a decision with which he evidently did
not feel satisfied. Bannerman had been two hours and fifty minutes in
making his 30, and hut for his mistakes in the slips had played admir-
able cricket. Fifty five runs were wanted to win, with five wickets to
fall, when Horan joined Murdoch, and the game looked almost a cer-
tainty for the Australians. However, Bannerman’s departure was the
commencement of a series of disasters. At 163 Murdoch was neatly
caught at slip, and three runs later Horan returned a hall to the bowler.
Murdoch had played a splendid defensive innings of 43, the chief hits
being four fours, three threes, and four twos. With, perhaps, the two
most dangerous batsmen got rid of, the Cambridge men played up with
great energy, and their efforts were rewarded with success. Blackham
was smartly caught at the wicket, and M'Donnell was easily taken at
point, both batsmen being out at 171. The game now became intensely
exciting, and every ball was watched with interest. Thirty-seven runs
were wanted to win, with two wickets to fall, when Boyle and Garrett
got together. Five runs were added, and then G. B. Studd missed Boyle
from an easy chance at extra mid-off—a mistake which made the Can-
tabs look very doleful, as it seemed as though it might cost them the
game. The excitement increased as Boyle hit Steel twice for two, and
Garrett drove Allcock to the off for three. With the score at 184,
Garrett was finely caught at slip—low down— by E. Lyttelton, leaving
24 runs to win, with one wicket to fall. Spofforth was last man in,
hut the end soon came, as Boyle, after cutting Allcock for three,
was beaten by a hall from Steel, and played it on to his wicket.
Thus, amidst a scene of wild excitement, the Past and Present of Cam-
bridge University won a great match by 20 runs. Taken altogether, this was
by far the closest and most exciting match in which the Australians had
yet taken part, and at the conclusion there was loud and prolonged
cheering, the people crowding outside the Pavilion, and not being satisfied
until they hacf had nearly all the players out to acknowledge the applause.
The Cantabs deserve great credit, but in estimating the victory it must
not be forgotten that the Australians were playing without two of their
best men. It was a splendid game throughout, and I for one shall never
forget it. It is very curious how well Cambridge cricketers have always
fared against Australian howling. In 1878 Cambridge, who had then a
grand side, heat the first team in one innings. This year Cambridge won
by six wickets, and now the Past and Present of the University have
won by 20 runs. I give below the analysis in the last innings, drawing
particular attention to the figures of A. G. Steel, who has not bowled so
well for a long time: —
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Smith 20 10 34 0
Allcock 30 14 51 4
Morton 24 12 31 1
C. T. Studd 16 7 38 0
Steel 41 30 24 5
Thornton 3 1 7 0


Below is the full score :
CAMBRIDGE ELEVEN.
Ist inn. 2nd inn,
Hon. A. Lyttelton, b Jones 25 c M ‘Donnell, b Boyle 60
C, I. Thornton, b Spofforth 45 c M‘Donnell, b Boyle 1
A. P. Lucas, run out 42 b Spofforth 3
C. T. Studd, c Murdoch, b Bannerxnan.. 28 c Bannerman, b Boyle 12
G. B. Studd, c Blackham, b Boyle 1 c Boyle, b Spofforth 13
A. G. Steel, b Boyle 18 c Bannerman, b Boyle 19
XJ CZ „ C3>-v/-wflKrNTvfV, Vv C
H, Whitfeld, not out 5 c Spofforth, b Boyle 5
Hon. E. Lyttelton, c Boyle, b Spofforth.. 18 c Boyle, b Spofforth 8
C. H. Allcock, c Spofforth, b Boyle 0 b Spofforth 7
C. A. Smith, b Spofforth 2 b Spofforth 0
P. H. Morton, c Murdoch, b Spofforth .. 4 not out 8
B 6,1 bl,n b 1 8 B 3,1 bl 3 16
Total 196 Total 152
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn,
S. P. Jones, b Morton 4 b Morton 8
J. M‘C. Blackham, c G. B. Studd,
bC. T. Studd 35 cA. Lyttelton, b Allcock .. 2
T. W. Garrett, c A. Lyttelton, b C, T.
Studd
A. C. Bannerman, 1 b w, b Smith
W. L. Murdoch, b Morton
T. Horan, c Steel, b Smith
H. H. Massie, c and b Allcock ...
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Allcock
G. J. Bonnor, not out
H. F. Boyle, b Smith
F. R. Spofforth, b Smith
Byes
Total
14 cE. Lyttelton, b Steel 5
.26 cA, Lyttelton, b Allcock . .30
. 0 c Steel, b Allcock 43
18 c and b Steel 9
1 b Allcock 6
11 c Thornton, b Steel 5
12 c and b Steel 66
14 b Steel 11
0 not out 0
6 B 1,1 b 1 2
141 T0ta1..... 187


AUSTRALIANS V. SOMERSETSHIRE.
Played at Taunton, August 21, 22, and 23.
On Sunday morning the Australians commenced their journey to
Taunton, where on Monday they had to commence their match against
Somersetshire. Giffen and Palmer were still unwell, and as Garrett
wanted a rest, the three stayed down at Southsea. The others left
Portsmouth at 8.50 a.m., and arrived in London at about one o’clock.
They drove over to Paddington, and put up for the day at the Great
Western Hotel, starting at nine o’clock by the limited mail. After
another long and tedious journey, Taunton was reached a little after
half-past one in the morning. The match with Somersetshire was not
looked forward to with any great amount of interest, as no one could for
a moment have expected the county team to have any real chance with
their powerful opponents. Somersetshire got together perhaps their best
eleven, while C. W. Beal, the manager, was included in the Australian
team. The new ground at Taunton looked in splendid condition, and the
wicket was as good as any the Colonists have yet played on. When they
won the toss it was fully anticipated that the total would he very little
rshort of 350.) The weather on Monday was bright and fine, and the
attendance, considering that Taunton is anything but a cricketing town,
was fairly good. Massie and Bannerman began the Australian innings
to the bowling of Fothergill and Evans. Massie commenced hitting at a
great pace, but when he had made 26 out of 31, he was beaten and bowled
by a good ball from Fothergill. Murdoch joined Bannerman, and both
played steadily and well. The style of Evans’s bowling pleased me
immensely. He seems to have altogether lost that “whip” from the
wrist, which gave rise to so many unpleasant remarks, and he no longer
halts on the crease as he used to do. Murdoch appeared to be getting well
set, when at 54 he was run out by Newton and Evans. Considering the
excellence of the wicket the Somersetshire men were somewhat lucky in
getting rid of two of the most dangerous batsmen for such a small score.
On M‘Donnell joining Bannerman the total was increased very rapidly,
the former hitting with great brilliancy. Reed and Winter were put on
for Evans and Fothergill. M‘Donnell punished Reed most severely,
hitting him for three fours in one over. Ramsay replaced Winter at 99,
and this slightly checked the pace of the run-getting. Evans resumed at
115, and with his third ball bowled M'Donnell, the ball pitching on the
middle stump and taking the leg-bail. The young Victorian had played
a capital innings of 48. Horan, after quickly scoring 17, was caught and
bowled from a full pitch. All this time Bannerman had been batting


steadily and well Bonnor came in at luncheon time, when the score was
154 for four wickets. On resuming Bonnor was missed at cover-point by
Newton, but the mistake did little harm, as in the same over he was clean
howled. Jones gave little ti-ouble, hut when Blackham came in the
howling was hit about pretty freely. Winter took the hall from Evans,
and at 194 succeeded in getting Bannerman well caught at deep long-leg
for a most patiently-played and admirable 50, including six fours, a three,
and three twos. The remainder of the innings was only remarkable for
the capital hatting of Blackham, who played the fast bowling extremely
well. Boyle was ran out, Spofforth howled, and Beal stumped, the last
wicket falling for 245 —only a moderate total on such a wicket. Bowling
analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Evans 44 11 98 3
Fothergill 20 6 47 3
Reed 5 0 34 0
Winter 6 0 16 1
Ramsay 30 18 39 1
44 11 98 3
Ramsay
Ramsay bowled a wide.
The Somersetshire batsmen shaped badly at the bowling of Spofforth,
who was in his best form. Fowler made 13 in four hits, and was then
bowled. The others seemed to play with nervousness and uncertainty,
and were evidently not used to such good bowling. At the close _of
Monday’s play five Somersetshire wickets were down for 86, all having
fallen to Spofforth’s bowling. Newton, Ramsay, Sainsbury, and Roe got
into double figures, but that was not very remarkable, considering
that the ground was hard and the boundaries easy.
On Tuesday, when the game was resumed, the wicket played as well as
before, but the batsmen could do little or nothing with the bowling, and
the last five wickets only added 10 runs, the innings terminating for 96.
Spofforth accomplished a splendid performance, as will be seen from his
figures, which I give below: —
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth : 32 15 51 9
■Rovl p. 32 19 42 1
Boyle 32 19
Spofforth bowled one no-ball.
Somersetshire were 149 runs behindhand had, oi course, to follow on.
Their innings, however, requires very little description. Certainly their
total was higher than before, but still the batting was very poor. Newton
made 32, but his innings was not a good one, and he played Boyle’s
bowling with but little judgment, several of his hits falling just out of a
fieldsman’s reach. Towards the close of the innings there was some free
hitting by Fothergill and Evans, but this proved of little service, and the
last wicket fell for 130, leaving the Australians with a very easy victory
by an innings and 19 runs. Spofforth and Boyle were again unchanged
throughout, and the figures of both men read very well;—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 40 18 62 4
Boyle 40 18 64 6
Spofforth bowled a no-ball.


The following is the score :
AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, b Fothergill 26
A. C. Bannerman, c Fox, b Winter 50
W. L. Murdoch, run out 17
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Evans 48
T. Horan, c and b Evans 17
G. J. Bonnor, b Ramsay. t 3
F. R. Spofforth, b Fothergill 10
S. P. Jones, b Evans 10
J. M‘C. Blackham, not out 43
H. F. Boyle, run out 5
C. W. Beal, st Welman, b Fothergill 5
B 3,1 b7,w b 1 11
Total 245
SOMERSETSHIRE.
W. H. Fowler, b Spofforth
W. N. Roe, b Spofforth
S. C. Newton, h Spofforth
H. F. Fox, c Massie, b Spofforth ...
E. Sainshury, not out
R. C. Ramsay, b Spofforth
F. T. Welman, b Spofforth
A. H. Evans, c and b Spofforth
Fothergill, c Jones, b Spofforth ...
C. Winter, c and b Spofforth
Rev. F. Reed, st Murdoch, b Boyle
B 1, 1 b 1, n b 1
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
.. 13 b Spofforth 15
.. 15 c Spofforth, b Boyle 7
.. 17 b Spofforth 32
.. 0 c Spofforth, b Boyle 6
.. 16 c Bannerman, b Boyle .. 7
.. 16 st Murdoch, b Boyle 10
.. 8 b Spofforth 14
6 b Spofforth 10
2 st Murdoch, b Boyle 19
0 not out 4
6 c and b Boyle 2
3 Lb 3, nbl 4
96 Total 139


AUSTRALIANS V. GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
Played at Clifton, August 24, 25, and 26.
Heavy rain had fallen at Clifton on Wednesday afternoon, causing the
Gloucester and Nottingham match to he abandoned, and on Thursday
morning the weather was again so had as to give little hope of cricket.
Matters did not improve as time went on, and, the college ground being
saturated, it was arranged about two o’clock to postpone the match till
the following morning. There was more rain in the night and again
in the morning, so that on Friday the game was not commenced
until five minutes past three in the afternoon. Palmer and Murdoch,
owing to indisposition, stood out of the Australian side, this being the
first match that the latter had missed since the commencement of the
tour. The Australians won the toss, an immense advantage on such a
wet wicket, and of course determined to go in first, Massie and Bannerman
opened the innings, and were opposed by Woof and MidAvinter. Massie
got to work at once, and made runs at a terrific pace, as nearly as possible
two a minute. Midwinter and Woof changed ends, and then, as no wicket
fell, W. G, Grace Avent on for Midwinter. Forty had been put up after
20 minutes’ cricket. Off the bowling of the Gloucester captain Massie
was finely caught at long-off, just when he seemed set for a big innings.
His 39 included eight fours. Bonnor went in first wicket down, and runs
again came very fast, Bonnor drove W. G. for a six and two fours, but
when the score had reached 77 he was grandly caught by Midwinter with
one hand at long-on. The catch was one of the best of the season. After
this the Australians met with two disasters. M’Donnell was Avell caught
at long-off, and Garrett at long-on, the third and fourth wickets both
falling at 81. Horan was Bannerman’s next partner, and MidAvinter soon
resumed boAvling in place of Woof. The 100 went up at ten minutes past
four, but at 105 Bannerman was very smartly caught at point, close in,
for 17—a patient innings that contrasted curiously with the play of Massie
and Bonnor. Giffen, the next batsman, was missed by Cranston in
the long field; but when he had made 12 a capital catch at point
dismissed him ; five Avickets for 129. Jones joined Horan, and began
by cutting W. G. for four and two. At ten minutes past five rain came
down heavily, and stopped the game for forty minutes. On a fresh start
being made Horan and Jones kept up their wickets till the call of time,
both playing good and steady cricket. At the drawing of stumps the
score Avas 167 for the loss of six wickets, Horan got 40, Jones not out, 25.
There was little or no rain during the night, and on Saturday the
Avicket, which had partially dried, was slow and treacherous nearly all
day. Gloucestershire were left in a very hopeless position, as there Avas
just the possibility of their being beaten in one innings, Avhile the most
they could hope for was a drawn game. Although the weather Avas
dull and overcast, a large number of people visited the Clifton College
Ground during the afternoon. It is not necessary for me to say much


about the conclusion of the Australian innings, as the last four wickets
only added 21 runs. W. G. Grace followed up his success of the
previous day by taking three of the four wickets that fell. Horan
was dismissed by Woof, after adding a single to his overnight score,
and a fast ball from W. G., which kept very low, sent back Jones when
lie had made eight more. Below is the analysis, from which it will be
seen that W. G. has seldom bowled with such success against Australian
batsmen.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Woof 36 16 51 2
Midwinter 11 2 32 0
W. G. Grace 36-1 7 93 8
Pcate 4 2 7 0
Gilbert 3 2 1 0
Gilbert
Gloucestershire went in to bat at a quarter to 1 with the brothers Grace
to the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle. From the first ball in the innings
E. M. Grace had a very narrow escape of being run out. In starting for
a short run he was quite four yards out of his ground when the ball was
returned from the field, but Blackham failed to put down the wicket.
After this E. M. Grace hit freely, but when the score was up to 15, lost
the partnership of his brother, who was dismissed by a good length
ball from Spofforth which broke across from the leg. Townsend
followed, and played the bowling with ease and confidence. E. M. Grace
skied a ball from Spofforth, which would have been an easy catch to
either Garrett or Bannerman, but each thought the other was going for it,
and the ball dropped harmless between them. The score was soon hit
up to 44, when E. M. Grace was caught at point for 24. Moberly, after
making 9, was out to an exceedingly good catch at point by Spofforth, who
took the ball almost on the ground with his right hand and fell in securing
it. Midwinter joined Townsend, and when the bell rang for luncheon
the score was 65 for three wickets. On the resumption of the game,
before another run had been added, Townsend was bowled by a perfect
length ball from Spofforth, which just took the top of the wicket. After
Townsend’s departure matters went very badly, and I began to think it
would be hardly possible to avoid a “follow on.” Cranston, Midwinter,
and Pullen were all clean bowled, and seven wickets were down for 83.
However, when Gilbert and Taylor got together there was some good and
plucky hitting. Taylor’s style created a most favourable impression.
He seemed to have little difficulty with the bowling on the false ground,
and it is not too much to say that it was to a large extent due to his
batting that Gloucestershire were saved from following their innings.
Gilbert played a ball on to his wicket at 107, and four runs later Peake
was clean "bowled. Woof and Taylor put on 20 runs for the last wicket,
and then Taylor was bowled for 17, and the innings closed for 131, or 59
runs to the bad. Bowling analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs Wickets.
Spofforth 38 13 60 5
Boyle 23 9 44 3
Garrett 16 8 18 2
Spoftorth bowled a no ball.
38 13 60 5
The Australians had only an hour and a half left to play, so Massie,
who captained the side in Murdoch’s absense, considerably altered the
usual order of going in, and for a time this change was attended with


anything but success. The Gloucestershire men bowled and fielded
admirably, and there was loud cheering as the Australian batsmen went
out one after the other. SpofForth and Bannerman began the innings to
the bowling of W. G. Grace and Woof. In the third over Spofforth
drove a ball tremendously hard to W. G., who brought off a most brilliant
catch. From the very next ball, in answer to a general appeal, Jones
was given out for a catch at the wicket, and two batsmen were out for
only two runs. Garrett quickly hit up 10, and was then splendidly
caught at mid-off by W. G. Grace close to the ground. Boyle was
speedily caught at point, and four wickets were down for 32. Giffen,
after making a very fine drive into the reserved stand, was dismissed by
a wonderfully well judged catch at long-on by Midwinter. This made the
third catch that Midwinter had brought off during the match, and earned
him loud and prolonged cheers. In my humble opinion it would be
difficult to find a better out-field or a safer catch than Midwinter, When
Bonnor came in the field, as usual, went very deep ; but the first ball he
received he played at tamely, and placed it gently into Pullen’s hands at
third man. Six wickets were down for 36, and the Gloucestershire eleven
were very jubilant. However, whenMassie joined Bannerman, the character
of the game completely changed. Massie, before he had made a run, might
have been cauglit in the long field by Taylor, who did not start in time
for the ball. After that Massie hit out with extraordinary brilliancy, and
did nearly all the scoring. He made one or two bad hits, but did not give
another chance until he had scored 48, when he should have been stumped
by Moberly off W. G. Shortly after this time was called, and the match
ended in a draw, the Australians being 167 runs to the good, with four
wickets to fall. Out of the 62 runs put on while he was in, Massie
scored no fewer than 55, his chief hits being six fours and ten twos. The
last ball of the day—a full pitch from W. G. Grace—split the middle
finger of Bannerman’s right hand, and hurt him so much that for a time
it was feared he would not be able to play in the great match of Monday.
I give below the analysis of this incomplete innings :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
W. G. Grace 25 5 59 4
Woof 22 11 56 2
Full score:—
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
H. H. Massie, c Cranston, b W. G.
Grace 59 not out... r 55
A. C. Bannerman, c E. M. Grace, b
W. G. Grace 17 not out 21
G. J. Bonnor, c Midwinter, b W. G.
Grace 29 c Pullen, b Woof 0
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Taylor, b Woof 2
T. W. Garrett, c Midwinter, b W. G.
Grace 0 cW. G. Grace, b Woof .. 10
T. Horan, b Woof 41
G. Giffen, cE. M. Grace, bW. G. Grace 12 c Midwinter,bW.G.Grace 4
S. P. Jones, bW. G. Grace 55 c Moberly, bW. G. Grace 0
J. Blackham, b W. G. Grace 5
F. R. Spofforth, c Moberly, bW.G. Grace 2 c and bW. G. Grace 2
H. F. Boyle, not out 4 cE.M.Grace, bW.G.Grace 5
Leg byes 6 B 1, 1 b 2 5
Total 190 Total 98


GLOUCESTERSHIRE,
W. G. Grace, b Spofforth 4
E. M. Grace, c Bannerman, b Spofforth 24
F. Townsend, b Spofforth 27
W. 0. Moberly, c Spofforth, b Boyle 9
Midwinter, b Garrett 7
J. Cranston, b Garrett 4
W. W. Pullen, b Spofforth 3
W. R. Gilbert, b Boyle 15
E. J. Taylor, b Spofforth 17
E. Peake, b Boyle 5
Woof, not out 9
B 8, n b 1 9
Total 151


AUSTRALIA v. ENGLAND.
Played at Kennington Oval, August 28 and 29.
The Australians left Clifton on Saturday night by the 6-40 p. m. train,
and arrived at Paddington at about twenty minutes to eleven. Massie
did not accompany the team, but came on to London by a Sunday train.
They drove at once to the Tavistock Hotel. A very quiet day was spent
■on Sunday in preparation for the great contest of the morrow.
The match itself was, of course, the event of the tour, but I must
confess I looked forward to it with feelings of doubt and uncertainty.
In the first place, I think at least three matches should have been
arranged between England and Australia, as one contest between two
splendid teams can hardly be looked upon as a real cricket test, and in
the second place, if there was only to be one match, the fixture was
made quite a month too late in the year. At the end of August the
weather is uncertain, the light is bad after about half-past five, and the
men on both sides have had too much cricket. The greatest possible
pains had been taken in the selection of the English eleven, Four
gentlemen had sent in lists—Lord Harris, V. E. Walker, F. Burbidge,
and I. D. Walker—and from their pick the team was chosen. The
eleven was good enough to satisfy almost every one, but for my own part
I should like to have seen it include two of the “ old hands,” such as
Lord Harris and Shrewsbury. Morley would, I believe, have been
selected had he been well enough. It is an unpleasant thing to say of
such a popular and genuine sportsman as the Lancashire captain, A. N.
Hornby, that he was not quite good enough to be in the eleven, but I
cannot see what form he has ever shown against Australian bowling in
this country to justify his selection. Maurice Read was, of course,
chosen on the strength of his performance in the Players’ match. The
Australian team was not picked until Monday morning at the Oval. It
was at first decided to leave out M‘Donnell and Jones, Palmer being
considered well enough to play. The young Victorian, however, had
medical advice on the ground, and as he was told that if he played it
might do him serious injury, he gave way to Jones. I am not by any
means sure that it was a wise thing to leave out M‘Donnell, as he has
seldom failed when a lot has been expected of him, and he certainly
cannot be considered a nervous cricketer. Few people will forget the
capital cricket played by him in the England and Australia match of
1880, when he scored 27 and 43. There had been a great amount of rain
at the Oval on Saturday and Monday, and the wicket on the latter day
was exceedingly slow and treacherous, and likely to get worse. Winning
the toss, was, therefore, an advantage, but as will be seen from my
remarks below, the Australians did not make very much use of their
opportunity.


Every spot whence a sight of the game could be obtained had long been
occupied, and the ring of people round the ground was several deep, when,
at 10 minutes past twelve, the game began. Murdoch had won the toss,
and decided to go in—a course which, under any circumstances of weather,
the captain of a side could scarcely hesitate about, as this year the Oval
wickets have always played badly after the first day. Following the
general custom, the first Australians were Massie and Bannerman,
while the bowling was shared by Peate (from the Gas Works end)
and Ulyett. In a match like this every fact is interesting, so for the
benefit of my readers I append the various positions of the Englishmen in
the field. Lyttelton kept wicket, Grace stood point, Steel slip, and Hornby
short mid-on. With Peate bowling, Studd was extra mid-off, Barnes
mid-off", Ulyett cover-point, Barlow long-slip, Lucas deep cover-point, and
Read long-off; while to Ulyett, Studd stood cover-point, Barlow mid-off,
Barnes third man, Lucas short-leg, Read sharp long-leg, and Peate
cover-slip. Bannerman opened the score by driving the last ball of
Peate’s first over to the oft" for three, and then played a maiden over from
Ulyett. A single to each batsman and a bye had brought the total up
to six, when Ulyett, with the third ball of his second over, took Massie’s
leg stump amid great applause. Such a commencement had naturally a
most inspiriting effect upon the Englishmen, and they fielded and bowled
splendidly. Murdoch came in, and in the next over from Ulyett made a
pretty cut for four, Studd just failing to save the boundary. Nothing
happened after this until a ball from Peate beat Bannerman, but it just
touched the bat, and went for two. Murdoch now scored two twos
to square-leg off successive balls from Ulyett, and next drove him to the
on for two. Here I must give a word of praise to W. G. for his fielding
at point. He stopped lots of hard cuts an the coolest manner, and the
way in which he crept in and almost picked the ball off the bat met with
much appreciation from the crowd. As Murdoch seemed getting the
better of Ulyett’s bowling, Hornby wisely replaced him, Barlow being
the man to take the vacant position. A single to Murdoch off each
bowler brought the score up to 20, and there it remained for a long time.
Neither batsman seemed quite at home with the bowling, and for a series
of overs the smartness of the home team was far too good to peraiit any-
thing like a run. Some idea of the cricket may be gathered from the
fact that no fewer than fourteen consecutive maidens were sent down.
In an ordinary match slow scoring is always productive of apathy
among the spectators, for though they may appreciate the other points of
the game, good hits are the things that make them enthusiastic. On
Monday it was quite the reverse. Every ball bowled, and every bit of
fielding was keenly appreciated, while at the conclusion of an over,
Barlow and Peate always received a i-ound of applause. At last Murdoch
got a single oft" Barlow, but this proved his last contribution, for three overs
later he played on. The ball was a good one, and beat him, and as far
as I could see would have hit the wicket had he not touched it. Two
wickets for 21. The early downfall of the Australian captain was a great
piece of good fortune for England, for it made a lot of difference to those
who followed him. Bonnor was bowled “middle and oft” for a single,
and Horan partnered Bannerman, who put Barlow thi-ough the slips for
three. In the next over from Peate came a splendid left-handed catch


by Grace, low down at point, and four wickets were down for 26. Giffen
was in next, and though he and Horan stayed for some time they did
very little towards improving matters. To my mind they both played
nervous, tame cricket, and were completely “stuck up” by the bowling.
Slowly the score reached 30, when they were both bowled, Horan leg
stump by Barlow, and Giffen in the next over from Peate. With six of
the Australians out for 30, the enthusiasm of the people knew no bounds,
for England had up to then done far better than the most ardent believer
in the cricket of the old country could have anticipated. Garrett and
Blackham were then together, and for the first few overs after then-
arrival batted very shakily. They improved, however, after a time,
though their cricket was never really good. Garrett drove each bowler
to the on for two, and hit Peate in a similar direction for three, Blackham
putting the next ball away to leg for two. In Peate’s next over Garrett
made an off-drive for two, and off Barlow Blackham made a good on-
drive for three. This was the only bit of free batting in the whole
innings. As it was drawing near lunch time a change was tried at both
ends at 47, Steel relieving Peate, and Ulyett resuming at the Pavilion
wicket. Blackham made a single in Steel’s second over, but this was
the only addition to the score before the bell rang, the score then being
48 for six wickets, Garrett (not out) 10, Blackham (not out) 8.
The sky looked very threatening during the interval, but the rain held
off, and at a quarter to 3 the game was continued. Peate and Barlow
resumed bowling at the same ends as before, and off the left-hander’s
fourth ball a well-judged catch at long-off by Maurice Read sent back
Garrett; seven for 48. Boyle came next, but had only made to singles
when a beautiful ball from Barlow disturbed his wicket. Jones joined
Blackham, who soon cut Peate for four, and three overs later followed it
up with a straight drive to the pavilion from Barlow. In the same over,
however, the renowned wicket-keeper “skied” a ball very tamely, and
was easily caught by Grace at point; nine for 59. Spofforth was last in.
He drove Peate to the on for four, but the end soon came, a catch at third
man dismissing Jones and finishing the innings at ten minutes past three
for 63. This 1 may remind my readers, was the poorest score the Colonists
had made in all their thirty matches. Barlow had a great deal to do
with the speedy dismissal, and the figures of his analysis are worth
remembering, while Peate’s are exceedingly good :
Overs. Maidens. Runs, Wickets.
Peate 38 24 31 4
Ulyett 9 5 11 1
Barlow 31 22 19 5
A. G. Steel 2 1 1 0
Only a quarter of an hour was taken between the innings, and W. G.
Grace and Barlow came out as the first pair of English batsmen. They
were greeted with a hearty and general cheer. Spofforth and Garrett
shared the bow-ling, the former from the Gasworks end. The field was
placed as follows ;—Blackham kept w-icket, Murdoch stood point, Banner-
man forward point, Boyle short mid-on, Bonnor slip, Horan short leg and
third man, Massie mid-off and extra mid-off, Jones cover-slip and long-
held, and Giffen long-on and cover-point. When not bow-ling Garrett
stood cover-point, and Spofforth mid-off. Of course these positions were


afterwards changed to suit the styles of the different batsmen. At first
the score was increased chiefly by singles, but after a time Barlow drove
Garrett to the on for two and three. When the total was up to 15,
Spofforth, with a good fast yorker, bowled down Grace’s leg-stump, and
the best English batsman was out for four. Ulyett filled the vacancy,
and in the first over he received gave a rather hard chance of stumping,
and was twice nearly bowled. After this, however, the Yorkshire crack
settled down to his work and played the splendid bowling with more
confidence. At 18, Barlow was caught at forward point, and Lucas came
in. The bowling was exceedingly good, and the batsmen scored but
slowly. Four byes were run, and then there was nothing above a single
for some time. After seven overs had been bowled for four runs, Lucas
played Spofforth hard to square-leg for four. When the score had reached
41 Spofforth changed ends, and Boyle went on at the Gasworks wicket.
Ulyett now made nearly all the runs, and the 50 was put up at half-past 4.
Murdoch was applauded for a piece of smart fielding at point. Both men
continued to play well, but when Ulyett appeared to be thoroughly set
he rushed wildly out to drive Spofforth, and missing him, was very easily
stumped. To this piece of rash cricket I certainly attribute a good deal
of England’s subsequent misfortune. The only real chance that a bats-
man had on such a wicket was to get his eye in, and Ulyett had got his
in, and he certainly ought to have kept steady, and played the strict
game. Three wickets for 57 was not by any means a bad start, and
I thought the total would be sure to reach 150. Lyttelton and Lucas
stayed together for some little time, but they could not get the bowling
away. At 59 Lucas was smartly caught at the wicket, and with his
departure commenced a series of disasters. C. T. Studd was clean
bowled without scoring, the ball breaking in a long way from the off,
and just removing the off bail. Read came in, and when the Australian
total had been equalled Lyttelton was caught off his glove by the
wicket-keeper. Barnes, who followed, made a single and a four to
square-leg, placing the English total in front amidst loud cheers. The
score was only 70, however, when Barnes was clean bowled, Steel now
joined Read, and some of the best cricket of the innings was shown.
Read shaped remarkably well at the difficult bowling, and Steel scored
with a good deal of freedom. The old Cantab hit each bowler to leg for
three. Garrett replaced Boyle at 88, the light at this time being very
bad. Steel cut the new bowler late for four, and Read drove Spofforth
finely to the on for the same number. Four overs produced one run, and
Read made a late cut for three off Garrett, and again drove Spofforth to
the on for four. The cheering as the English score rose was most
enthusiastic, but the applause had hardly subsided when Steel, in
playing forward at Garrett, was unlucky enough to snick a ball on to
his wicket. Hornby came in next, and Read cut Spofforth for three.
A single to the Lancashire captain put the 100 up at twelve minutes to
6. Then the innings rapidly came to a conclusion. Hornby was
bowled by a splendid ball from Spofforth, and Peate was easily caught
at forward point, the last wicket falling at about eight minutes before
time for 101, or 38 runs to the good. Read took out his bat for a well
and pluckily hit 19. Spofforth bowled magnificently. He, of course,
had a wicket that suited him to perfection, and he was able to get a


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets
Spofforth
36 3..
18
46
Garrett
16 ..
7
.. 92
Boyle
19 ..
15 ...,
... 26 ..
2
tremendous amount of “work” on the ball I have always held the idea
that Spofforth in his best form is a long way the finest bowler that the
Australians have ever sent over, and this performance goes still further
to prove the soundness of this view. Analysis :
Spofforth bowled one no ball.
There was a good deal of rain on Monday evening, and a heavy down 1
fall on Tuesday morning between half-past 9 and half-past 10. It was
just upon the advertised time for resuming play—half-past 11—when I
arrived at the Oval, and one look at the ground was sufficient to convince
me that for an hour or two the bowlers would he at a serious disadvan-
tage. The heavy roller had only made bad worse. I thought before a
hall was bowled, and I still think, that the rain more than compensated
the Australians for the balance of 38 runs they had against them on the
first innings. The wicket was bound to be easy for a time, and was also
bound to be difficult if it dried up in the afternoon. I don’t make these
remarks with any intention of excusing the English team, and still less
with any idea of disparaging the Australians. It is simply necessary, in
recording a memorable game, to state the facts as they were. The
weather, during the last twelve years of my experience, has had a vital
effect upon more matches than I can recall, and I have given up the
hope of ever again seeing in England a summer like that of 1868, when
matches were played through day after day in bright sunshine. The
present season has been a fairly good one—very good indeed by com-
parison with two or three of its predecessors—but except for a fortnight
or so in May there have been very few matches of importance in which
the wickets have not suffered more or less from rain. To return to
Tuesday’s cricket. Play began at ten minutes past twelve, the second
innings of the Australians being commenced by Bannerman and Massie,
to the bowling of Barlow and Ulyett. From the first runs came very fast,
and though every now and then the ground kicked rather awkwardly it
was evident that the balls were keeping their course, and not breaking
as they had done on the previous day. Massie saw his opportunity, and
made the most of it. His game was to hit, and hit he did with a power
and brilliancy that perhaps no one else in the two elevens could have
equalled. There was no suspicion of nervousness or hesitation about his
play. He got nearly every ball in the middle of his bat, and treated the
spectators to the only piece of really rapid cricket that was seen in the
match. Peate and Studd went on in the hope of checking him, but he
served them both alike, and sent them clean away to the boundaries.
Then, at 47, Barnes replaced Studd, and from his first ball Massie was
missed by Lucas at long-off. The hit was a pretty hard one, but Lucas
got the ball in his hands, and ought to have held it. The mistake was a
piece of very bad luck for England, and the whole team looked terribly
downcast. So far Massie had made 38, and taking advantage of his good
fortune he went on hitting as finely as before. Steel—the sixth man
tried in about three-quarters of an hour—went on for Peate at 56, and with


10 runs added, he clean bowled Massie with a half volley, the downfall of
the brilliant hitter being received with a perfect tumult of applause. Out
of the 66 runs scored for the first wicket Massie had made 55, and, bar the
chance at long-off, and, I think, a possible chance of stumping, no one
could find fault with his innings, It was a splendid display, and it came
just at the right time. As I have said the wicket was easy by compari-
son with what it had been on Monday, but still, it was a big performance
to make 65 runs in as many minutes. Massie’s figures were nine fours,
two threes, three twos, and seven singles. Hard hitting having answered
so well, the order of hatting was slightly altered, Bonnor going in first
wicket down instead of Murdoch. With very good judgment, Hornby
put on Ulyett, who, in his first over, clean howled Bonnor, the middle
stump flying out of the ground. The ball was a very fast one, of good
length, and it broke a little. Two for 70. Bonnor’s share in the big
match was thus very small. He scored three runs, and did not make a
catch ; but, perhaps there was consolation in the fact that neither Horan,
Gift'en, nor Jones did much better. All four fielded very well, but their
total contribution to the Australian score was 16 runs for eight times out,
and they had nothing to do with the dismissal of a single English
batsman. Murdoch came in, but with the score unaltered Bannerman
was easily caught at extra mid-oft’ for an extremely careful 13. He had
been 70 minutes at the wicket. When Horan came in to bat Ulyett was
immediately taken off and Peate substituted, another piece of real good
captaincy, for which Hornby deserves praise. We are beginning to see
how strong Horan is with fast bowling, just as we have discovered that a
first-rate ball of great pace is the thing to get rid of Bonnor. The new
change took tremendous effect. Horan played a puzzling hall from
Peate gently into Grace’s hands at point, and Giffen, who followed, was
out in exactly the same way from the very next ball. Four and five
for 79. There was loud, excited cheering when these wickets fell.
Blackham came next, and people, perhaps, hoped Peate would accomplish
the hat trick. He, however, bowled a dreadful long hop, which was hit
for four. Blackham put a ball dangerously near slip, and then Murdoch
hit Peate for two twos, both on the leg side. The Australian captain
was soon after this quite beaten by a ball from Peate, which shot past
him within an inch or two of the wicket. Four byes were run for this.
The total was 99, when at about a quarter to two rain drove the players
to shelter. The shower was sharp but very short. There was no further
play till after luncheon. Murdoch was now 14 (not out) and Blackham 7.
Directly after the resumption of the game Blackham was cleverly
caught at the wicket; six for 99. Jones was Murdoch’s next partner, and
a single by the latter sent up 100 [cheers]. Jones cut Barlow for two and
four, the latter a very fine forward hit just in front of point. He, how-
ever, did not shape at all well to Peate. Murdoch scored a 3 from
Barlow, who at 113 gave way to Steel at the Pavilion end. It was here
that the only unpleasant event of the match occurred. Murdoch hit
Steel to leg, a fluky half-hit that went up in the air, and might have
been a catch had we been playing a short-leg sharp. As it was Lyttelton
ran for the catch, but could not quite get to it. The batsmen rah, and
after the first run had been completed Jones strayed out of his ground.
Lyttelton returned the ball, and Grace put the wicket down and appealed


for the run out. Thoms, the umpire, immediately gave Jones “out,” as
he was bound to do. It was reported to me that Thoms, on being
appealed to, answered: “If you claim it, sir, out!” Now, I thought
this unlikely, so I took the first opportunity, after the match was over, of
asking Thoms what he really did say, telling him at the same time what
I had heard. He, as I expected, denied having said anything more than
than the necessary word. “Out!” Thoms told me the point was a very
simple one, the ball was not dead, and the batsman was run out. If
Grace, instead of going up to the wicket and putting off the bails, had
thrown at the stumps and missed them, the batsman could, and probably
would, have run again, and then every one would have said what a smart
thing the Australians had done. Jones did a foolish, thoughtless thing
in going out of his ground, and he paid the penalty of his rashness.
Grace did what he was perfectly justified in doing, and there can be no
doubt the run out was legal and fair. It was in my hearing called
“Cricket, but dirty.” I can’t agree in this opinion. It may not have
been a particularly courteous or generous action, and if England had won
a close match we should never have heard the last of the matter. The
thick-and-thin supporters of Australian cricket would have talked about
sharp practice, anti ungentlemanly play, and there would probably have
been some revival of the old ill-feeling. I don’t mean that the Austra-
lians themselves would have been weak enough to make a serious com-
plaint as to an action which could not be attacked on any but
sentimental grounds. But Murdoch expressed his disapproval openly in
the field, and was evidently angry, and we all know how strong sentiment
is, and how easily a grievance grows and spreads. I personally cannot
say I approve of what Grace did. It was strict cricket, but it was taking
full advantage of the thoughtlessness of a young player, and I am sorry
that anything should have been done to give any one a chance of saying
with any basis of truth, however small, that a member of the picked
eleven of England played a discourteous game.
Perhaps I have said too much about this affair, and so I return to the
story of the game. Seven wickets were down for 114, when Spotforth
joined Murdoch, who hit Peate to leg for three. This was the only
addition to the score, for in the same over Peate completely beat the
“demon,” and bowled his middle stump; eight for 117. Garrettwas the new
batsman, and Murdoch scored a single and a two. Garrett then hit Steel
very hard to the off. Hornby ran after the ball, which Garrett seeing,
called Murdoch for a third run. The English captain adroitly threw the
ball toStudd,who,without a moment’s loss of time, returned it to Lyttelton,
who put the wicket down brilliantly, and ran out Murdoch by fully half
a yard. This was distinctly the best bit of fielding in the match, and Eng-
land can thus claim to have done the biggest thing in the field, as well as to
have made the best catch. I allude, of course, to the one that dismissed
Bannerman in the first innings of Australia; nine for 122. Murdoch’s
29 was an admirable display of sound defensive cricket on a wicket that
was getting more difficult every minute. Boyle’s life was very short.
He popped up the first ball, and was bowled by the second, and in this
way the Australian innings closed at twenty-five minutes past three, for
the very respectable total, under the circumstances, of 122. Sixty-six of


13 ....
... 5 ...
... 27 ...
... 0
6-
... 2 ...
... 10 ...
... 1
21 ....
.. 9 ...
... 40 ...
... 4
4 ....
... 1 ...
... 9 ...
... 0
11 ....
... 5 ...
... 15 ...
... 1
A. G. Steel
7 ...
... 0 ...
... 15 ...
... 2
these runs, or more than half, were made in the first 55 minutes, and
made, too, while the wicket was wet, and certainly much less difficult
than it either had been on Monday or became as Tuesday progressed.
Of the 56 runs made by the last nine wickets, Murdoch had, as I have
said, made 29, and not one of the other batsmen played with an approach
to confidence. They all seemed to realise the high quality of the bowling,
to be impressed with the closeness of the fielding, and to hold in some-
thing more than respect the difficulty of the ground. Lyttelton’s wicket-
keeping had all through been magnificent. He stood up to Ulyett and
Barnes with unflinching courage, and of the six byes that were given
four were from the ball of Peate’s which so nearly bowled Murdoch. It
appeared to me that both Murdoch and Lyttelton thought this ball had
actually hit the wicket. Of the six English bowlers tried Peate was the
most successful, and Barlow the least. The former never seemed easy to
play, and his eight wickets in the match for 71 runs was a performance
worthy of the reputation of the best of English bowlers. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Now came the fourth innings of the match, the real climax of perhaps
the most important cricket struggle in the history of the game. The
twenty thousand spectators seemed to concentrate their attention more
closely and earnestly than before, and it is certain that a game has never
been more anxiously and narrowly watched than was the English innings
on the Tuesday afternoon, with its hopes and fears, its early promise, its
humiliating failures, and its almost disastrous end. The people cheered
the Australians heartily enough and almost enthusiastically when the
game was won, but while the struggle was proceeding the applause was
chiefly for the batsmen, many of whom must have been surprised, and
perhaps unnerved, by the exceptional warmth of the popular greeting as
they walked from the Pavilion to the wickets. All sorts of opinions were
expressed as to England’s chances of making the runs. Superficial
critics, men of sanguine temperament, and probably imperfect knowledge,
had no doubt England would easily win, but there were plenty of
pessimists who knew, or thought they knew, that the forthcoming trial
was beset with difficulties, and that if England won at all, it would only
be after a very desperate fight. These men made full allowance tor the
worn and treacherous condition of the wicket, which they knew to be in
precisely the state to suit Spoftbrth, and many of them knew, also, from
long experience as players or spectators, how hard it was to make runs
at the pinch of a game, how it is always the batting side which monopo-
lises the nervousness, and how extraordinarily well the famous Colonial
eleven finish an uphill game. There was a good deal of speculation as to
who would start the innings, and a lot of applause greeted Grace and
Hornby as they walked down the Pavilion steps to commence it.
The first ball was bowled by Spofforth to Grace at a quarter to


four. Garrett bowled at the Pavilion wicket. Seven singles were
rapidly scored, and then Hornhy placed Spofforth well through the
slips for four and hit him to leg for two. With the total at 15 only
Hornhy was beaten by Spotforth, and lost his off stump. Barlow
followed in, and the finest cricketer that ever lived had for a partner
one of the safest and most successful of English batsmen. To the
evident surprise of the spectators the association of this pair was only
momentary, for Barlow was bowled by the very first ball. It was a fast
one, with a lot of break from the off, and though Barlow touched it, he
could not keep it out of his wicket. Ulyett came next, and the serious
character of the game was soon relieved. Grace drove Garrett for three
and Spotforth for two, and then drove the latter to the on in magnificent
form for four and three in one over. (Loud and general cheering.) The
score was 30 when Spofforth crossed over to the Pavilion wicket, and
Boyle went on instead of Garrett. Grace drove Spofforth for two, and
Boyle, in attempting to stop a very hard return from Ulyett, had one of
his fingers cut open. Grace now hit Boyle grandly to square-leg for four,
and the next ball—the first of Spofforth’s succeeding over—was also hit
to square leg for four by the Yorkshire professional. This hard, free
hitting raised the hopes of the spectators very high. Ulyett had not,
perhaps, played in particularly good form, but he had scored fast.
Grace, despite two or three lofty hits, had played first-rate plucky
cricket, and looked like stopping till the match was won. Spofforth
scarcely got a ball past his bat, and the popular belief that the “ demon ”
was his master appeared as if it would be falsified. Few among the
spectators could have thought when 50 went up after 55 minutes’ play,
and with only two wickets down, that the defeat of England was
impending. Those who, at the start, had given most weight to the
difficulties of the English task began to see that, but for some extraor-
dinary collapse, the batting side must win. The Australians themselves
could hardly at this time have thought of victory. Tw r o grand players
were in, and well set, and there were six first-class batsmen to follow,
while only 30 runs were wanted to win the match. However, the
extraordinary collapse did occur, though for a long while the fate of the
game hung trembling in the balance. A very smart catch by Blackham
off Spofforth low down on the off side of the wicket got rid of Ulyett at
51, and at 53 Grace only half got hold of a ball from Boyle, which he tried
to drive and placed in Bannerman’s hands at mid-off. If he had hit the ball
a yard higher or a yard or two on either side, it would probably have gone
for four, and victory would not have been snatched from our grasp. As it
was Grace was out for 32, made in about an hour by batting worthy of our
veteran Champion’s reputation ; four for 53. Lyttelton joined Lucas, and
a three, a two, and two singles sent up 60 just before 5 o’clock.
Lyttelton then hit Spofforth neatly to leg for four, and notwithstanding
the wickets that had fallen, it appeared as if England would win with
something in hand. Now came a new phase over this remarkable innings.
Instead of big hits and the fall of wickets there was a long period of
extremely careful play. The Australians had not lost confidence for a
moment or betrayed the smallest hesitation. Blackham all the time had
kept wicket superbly, and the fielding of the team, especially that of


Bannerman, had been admirably close and safe. Spofforth and Boyle
scarcely bowled a ball that it would have been possible to bit without
incurring the greatest risk, and it was matter of general remark
bow well they kept their length, and bow much break they got
on at the pace. Twelve maiden overs were bowled in succession, then
Lyttelton made a single, and then after four more maiden overs he was
bowled by an exceptionally good ball from Spofforth, and five English
wickets were down for 66, or 19 to win. Steel joined Lucas, who cut
Boyle very late for four. Now, within sight of goal, when a triumph
seemed all but assured, came that dreaded breakdown which already forms
part of cricket history, and which will always be remembered against
English batsmen as one of the most conspicuous instances of failure at a
supreme crisis. Steel, after shaping very badly at two or three balls, was
easily caught and bowled from a wretched stroke. Maurice Read was
clean bowled by the second ball he received, and seven wickets were down
for 70. Barnes became Lucas’s partner. He hit Spofforth to the on fox-
two, and three byes were run in the same over - . Then Lucas, against
whom no charge of nervousness could be made, and who had played cool,
steady cricket for a long time, and had stopped many better balls than
those that had taken wickets, had the misfortune to “ play on.” At this
period the sanguine hopes of England must have altogether disappeared.
At the fall of each of these latter wickets the fieldsmen congregated
together, and exhibited to the full their increasing delight. Studd came
in, the total being 76 for eight wickets, or ten to win. There was only,
however, one more over, for from Boyle’s first ball Barnes was vexy easily
caught at point of his glove. Peate came in, and hit the next ball to leg
for two, played the third ball flukily, and was clean bowled by the fourth.
This closed the English innings for 77, and gave Australia the victory by
seven runs. The innings had lasted precisely two hours. At the end of
the first hour four wickets were down for 53 ; in the second hour six
wickets fell for 24. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 28 15 44 7
Garrett 7 2 10 0
warren / iu u
Boyle 20 11 19 3
Spofforth bowled a no-ball.
Full score:—
AUSTRALIA.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
A. C. Bannerman. c Grace, b Peate.. 9 c Studd, b Barnes 13
H. H. Massie, b Ulyett 1 b Steel 55
W. L. Murdoch, b Peate 13 run out 29
G. J. Bonnor b Barlow 1 b Ulyett 2
T. Horan, b Barlow 3 c Grace, b Peate 2
G. Giffen, b Peate 2 c Grace, b Peate 0
J. M’C. Blackham, c Grace, b Barlow 17 c Lyttelton, b Peate 7
T. W. Garrett, c Read, b Peate 10 not out 2
H. F. Boyle, b Barlow 2 b Steel 0
S. P. Jones, c Barnes, b Barlow 0 run out 6
F. R. Spofforth, not out 4 b Peate 0
Bye 1 Byes 6
Total 63 Total 122


1st inn.
2nd inn.
Barlow, c Bannerman, b Spofforth
.. 11
b Spofforth
... 0
W. G. Grace, b Spolforth
.. 4
c Bannerman, b Boyle ...
...32
Ulyett, st Blackham, b Spofforth ..
.. 26
c Blackham, b Spofforth .
...11
A. P. Lucas, c Blackham, b Boyle
.. 9
b Spofforth
... 5
Hon. A. Lyttelton, c Blackham,
b
Spofforth
.. 2
b Spofforth
...12
C. T. Studd, b Spofforth
.. 0
not out
.. 19
0
Barnes, b Boyle
.. 5
c Murdoch, b Boyle
... 2
A. G. Steel, b Garrett
.. 14
c and b Spolforth
... 0
A. N. Hornby, b Spofforth
.. 2
b Spofforth
... 9
Peate, c Boyle, b Spofforth
.. 0
b Boyle
... 2
B 6, 1 b 2, n b 1
.. 9
B 3, n b 1
... 4
Total
..101
Total
...77
ENGLAND,
The wickets fell thus : —Australia, first innings : One (Massie) for 6,
two (Murdoch) for 21, three (Bonnor) for 22, four (Bannerman) for 26, five
(Horan) for 30, six (Giften) for 30, seven (Garrett) for 48, eight (Boyle)
for 50, nine (Blackham) for 59, and ten (Jones) for 63.
England, first innings : One (Grace) for 13, two (Barlow) for 18, three
(Ulyett) for 56, four (Lucas) for 59, five (Studd) for 60, six (Lyttelton)
for 63, seven (Barnes) for 70, eight (Steel) for 96, nine (Hornhy) for 101,
ten (Peate) for 101.
Australia, second innings: One (Massie) for 66, two (Bonnor) for 70,
three (Bannerman) for 70, four (Horan) for 79, five (Giiien) for 79, six
(Blackham) for 99, seven (Jones) for 114, eight (Spofforth) for 117, nine
(Murdoch) for 122, and ten (Boyle) for 122.
England, second innings: One (Hornhy) for 15, two (Barlow) for 15,
three (Ulyett) for 51, four (Grace) for 53, five (Lyttelton) for 66, six
(Steel) for 70, seven (Read) for 70, eight (Lucas) for 75, nine (Barnes)
for 75, and ten (Peate) for 77.
Of the forty wickets that fell for 363 runs, twenty-one were howled,
sixteen caught, one stumped, and two run out.
Here if I followed my own inclination I should like to stop. I have
described the game with a fulness which I am afraid many readers
will think tediously prolix, and I have earnestly striven to he fair
and just to both winners and losers. Having, however, gone so far I
must not leave the story incomplete. And it would be manifestly unjust
if I did not praise Massie for his magnificent hitting, Murdoch for his
excellent generalship, Blackham for his admirable wicket-keeping, Boyle
for his steady bowling, Bannerman, and all the others for their brilliant
fielding, and, above everything else, Spoftbrth for a bowling performance
which is almost unrivalled in the records of the game. Of course the
triumph is the triumph of the Australian eleven, hut as I have pointed
out Bonnor, Horan, Giffen, and Jones had really very little to do with it.
Massie was the man who made an Australian victory possible by his hard
fierce hitting on Tuesday morning, and Spofforth by his wonderful
howling, converted the possibility into an accomplished fact. The
“ demon ” was talking to me in the dressing room a few minutes after
the game was over, when the loving cup was passing round, when
Hornby, Lyttelton, Earl Darnley, and others were congratulating


Murdoch and his men upon the success which had attended their
magnificent uphill fight, and Spottbrth said that he could not possibly have
had a wicket that suited him better. I know this was the case, and I
know also that the Australians behaved with modesty and good taste in
their hour of triumph, and that the Englishmen took their beating with a
good grace, as gentlemen and good sportsmen should. They freely
acknowledged that the Australians had played up wonderfully, and that
Spofforth’s bowling had been about the finest ever seen in a cricket field.
A great deal has been said, and a great deal more will be said, about the
nervousness of some of the English batsmen. I saw it, and I regret it;
but it was not only the English batsmen who lost heart, and from what
I saw of the way several of the Colonists shaped at the wicket I think it
is very likely that had Australia gone in for the runs instead of England
they, too, might have failed when the pinch came. After all, there is
not very much to find fault with. Spofforth was at his best, and we have
no Spofforth ; the wicket was a bad one, and we had the worst of it ; and
though England for the first time had to lower her colours to Australia,
we were beaten only by a magnificent eleven, before whose prowess it
was no disgrace to fail.


AUSTRALIANS V. UNITED ELEVEN,
Played at Tunbridge Wells, Aug. 31, Sept. 1 and 2.
Fresh from their now memorable victory over England the Australians
journeyed to Tunbridge Wells, where a team, playing under the com-
prehensive title of the United Eleven, were ready to encounter them.
The ground at Tunbridge Wells has always been notorious for the bad
wearing of the wicket, and on this account there was no “Week” at the
Kentish watering place last year. Thanks, however, to the efforts of
two Oxford ground men engaged by the local authorities, a great
improvement has been made ; hut, nevertheless, the Australians gained
a great advantage when they Avon the toss. They left out from their
eleven Palmer and Bannerman, hut all the other members of the team
were in good health. Every preparation had been made for the match—
the great event of the week—and the ground had been enclosed with a
high ring of canvas—not high enough though to prevent some hundred
or tAVo adventurous spectators gaining a good view of the game from the
neighbouring boulders and rocks. Play began at half-past tAvelve, Mur-
doch sending in Jones and Massie. Parnham, who had been selected to
play in the match on account of his success in the encounter betAveen
Leicestershire and the Australians, started the bowling, Lipscomb, the
Kent amateur, taking the other end. The wicket was in good condition,
and the boundaries so easy that the Colonists ought certainly to have run
up a good score. They, hoAvever, made a most disastrous start, and it
Avas not until after the rain that they played at all Avell. Jones soon
drove Pamham for four, but with the score at six called Massie for a
foolish run, and being unable to get back lost his Avicket. Murdoch
followed, and for a time the score rose rapidly. The Australian captain
hit Parnham twice in one over for four, and very quickly the total
reached 27. A fine one-handed catch at mid-off by ToAvnsend then
dismissed Massie, and M‘Donnell came in. Murdoch was missed at
point off' Parnham- a chance, which though somewhat difficult, E. M.
Grace ought certainly to have made. In the folloAving over, M‘l)onnell
Avas clean boAvled, the third Avicket falling at 28. Horan came in, but
the bowling proved too good for the batsman to do much with it. A
smart catch at the Avicket sent back Horan at 38, and in the folloAving
over Murdoch ran out to drive Parnham, missed the ball, and was
easily stumped. Thus far the Colonists had played very bad cricket,
and I certainly expected to see them out for a comparatively small
score. Blackham joined Giffen, and the play was much steadier than
before. Twenty runs had been added when, at twenty-five minutes to
two, rain came on and interrupted the game, the score standing at 58,


Giffen 10 and Blackliam 10. The wet continued more or less heavily for
over two hours. Of course the wicket was thoroughly saturated, but
after waiting until twenty minutes to five, a decision was arrived at to
proceed with the game. The batsmen had then an immense advantage.
There had not been enough play to spoil the wicket, but the ground
was far too wet to permit the fieldsmen obtaining a good footing or
the bowlers doing anything with the ball. Nevertheless, Blackham
and Giffen are entitled to considerable credit for the way in which they
completely altered the aspect of the game. Parnham, W. G. Grace, and
Midwinter all bowled, but the score was up to 87 before anything like a
mistake was made. Giffen then “skied” a ball, and was unaccountably
missed by E. M. Grace. Profiting by the let-off, he scored much faster,
and the total was up to 115 before a separation was effected. Giffen then
gave Parnham a fair chance of “c and b,” which was not accepted, but off'
the next ball was well taken at mid-off by Townsend. Bonnor came in,
and off the last ball of the over Blackham was taken at the wicket. The
famous Australian wicket-keeper had made 35. He never plays in what
Englishmen consider good style, but he batted soundly, and made his
runs like a cricketer. As far as I can recall his batting during the present
tour, this innings was one of the best he had played. Seven wickets were
down for 116, when Garrett joined Bonnor. The new comer twice cut
Parnham for four, but the total had only reached 131, when the rain came
on again, and, as it was nearly six o’clock stumps were drawn for the
day, Garrett being (not out) li and Bonnor (not out) 6.
Rain fell incessantly on Friday, and there was no possibility of pro-
ceeding with the game. Early in the morning the prospect looked very
gloomy, but jt was not until a little before three that it was decided to
abandon all idea of playing until the next morning.
The night was very stormy, and on Saturday morning, though the rain
had ceased, the wind blew boisterously. The game had lost a considerable
amount of the interest attaching to it, as there was small probability of it
being played out. Still, there was a large attendance on Saturday, when
the game was continued at ten minutes past twelve. Bonnor and Garrett,
the not outs, with 6 and 11 respectively, were opposed by Parnham and
Midwinter. The wicket -was still wet, and the bowlers could do very
little. Bonnor soon began to hit out in his usual vigorous style, scoring
fast off both bowlers. He was missed at long-on by Townsend, and
then batted freely and well. Among other hits, he made a splendid
on-drive out of the ground for six from Midwinter, but was soon after-
wards bowled by Parnham. His 45 was extremely useful, but was not an
innings to be highly praised; it included the six mentioned, three fours,
two threes, and two twos. Eight wickets were thus down for 179, and
when Lipscomb went on in place of M idwinter he finished off the innings
in three maiden overs. Garrett, who had batted very patiently, was clean
bowled with the last ball of the young Kent amateur’s second over, and
Spofforth with the last ball of his next. At a quarter to one the innings
closed for 182—a fine total, considering that five wickets were down for
38. It must, however, be remembered that for the greater part of the
innings the wicket was so wet that the bowlers were placed at a con-
siderable disadvantage. Lipscomb bowled straight and well, as the
analysis will help to show:—


Parnham
Overs.
37 ..
Maidens.
9 ...
Runs.
...101 ..
Wickets.
5
F. Lipscomb
26 ..
.... 14 .
.. 22 ..
.... 4
W. Gf. Grace
15 ..
6 ...
... 26 ..
0
Midwinter
16 ..
.... 6 ...
... 31 ..
0
Overs.
Maidens
Runs.
Wickets
29 ..
.... 13 ....
.. 43 ..
2
28 ..
.... 10 ....
.. 55 ..
3
Boyle
30 ..
.... 22 ....
.. 19 ..
5
From the manner in which the innings of the United Eleven began it
seemed as if they were in for a long score. Shrewsbury and E. M. Grace
were the first pair of batsmen. Spofforth, with the wind behind him,
sent down the first over, off which Shrewsbury made a four and a two
to leg, and two leg byes were run. Garrett bowled at the other end.
Twenty runs were soon up on the telegraph board, but before another
addition had been made, E. M. Grace, who was batting rather wildly,
fell to a catch at long-on. Townsend, for a batsman of his reputation,
played very poorly, but Shrewsbury, though he scored slowly, batted in
excellent style. There was a brief interval for rain, and some slow cricket
before Spofforth bowled the amateur. With W. G. Grace in, the batting
was well worth watching. He made several good hits, and, despite a
change of bowling, the total at lunch time was 43. Boyle and Spofforth
shared the bowling on resuming, but the latter soon gave way to Garrett,
who, at first, was punished severely. Grace, in trying to make a boundary
hit against the wind, just failed, and was well caught by Giffen at deep
mid-on. Two overs later, Boyle sent back Shrewsbury, the fourth wicket
falling at 64. With Midwinter and Read together, Spofforth resumed
bowling, and soon got rid of Midwinter. Gilbert, who came next, was
cleverly taken close in at point by Murdoch off the first ball he received.
Six wickets were down, and 30 runs needed to save a “ follow-on,” when
C. C. Clarke Joined Maurice Read. There was then a very fair chance
of this, as, with all due defference to C. C. Clarke, and every respect for
his all-round cricket in I Zingari and Esher matches, I didn’t imagine he
would stand long against Spofforth and Boyle. This view was greatly
strenghtened at starting, for he was beaten by three of the first four balls
he received from Spofforth. Afterwards, however, he showed far better
form, and rendered the assistance to Read which saved the “follow,” for
certainly no one else could. The Surrey professional carefully avoided
attempting to score off Boyle, but made four splendid boundary hits from
Spofforth. Thirty-four runs were added before a fine running catch by
Bonnor from long-on dismissed Read for an invaluable 30. Then the end
soon came. Neither Posley nor Parnham scored, and after Clarke had
twice driven Spofforth finely to the off, he was beaten and bowled for
23 —an innings which reflected considerable credit upon him. Though
56 runs to the bad, when they were all out, the United Eleven had averted
all chance of defeat, for there was only an hour and twenty minutes left
for play when the innings closed. Analysis :
Boyle’s figures are splendid, but I must mention the fact that such a
storm of wind was blowing that it was next to impossible to score off him
in front of the wicket.
With only an hour before the drawing of stumps, all interest had died
out of the game, when the Australians went in for the second time. The


Parnham
13 ....
3 ...
... 25 ...
... 7
5 .
3 .
3 ...
... 0
2 .
0 .
6 ...
... 0
W. G, Grace
5-3 ....
2 ...
... 15 ...
... 3
cricket, however, proved some of the most sensational of the tour. The
Australian captain was so unprepared for what happened that he put all
the “ tail” in first. It seems hardly worth describing an innings in which
there was scarcely a bit of batting worthy of praise, but I suppose I had
better mention the facts as they occurred. Parnham and Lipscomb
shared the bowling, and when only eight runs had been made, Boyle,who
went in first with Jones, was finely caught and bowled low down by
Parnham. Garrett, who came in, was bowled with the score of 12, while
the next ball was too good for Spoftbrth to play. His successor, Bonnor,
had almost as speedy a dismissal. In one over from Parnham he hit a
two to the off, was badly missed at point by Gilbert, and was easily
stumped. Jones and Gift'en were together for what was comparatively a
long time, but though two changes of bowling were made, I cannot say
they caused them. Gilbert, who relieved Lipscomb at 14, was hit for six
runs in two overs, so at 20 W. G. Grace took the ball. Jones had
quickly to leave, and in the following over Pooley stumped Giffen.
Though the repeated successes of the English team met with much
approval from the crowd, every one was asking when the Australians
were going to make a stand, and until the innings was over could not
realise how badly the Colonists had batted. The enthusiasm of the
public knew no bounds when a ball from Parnham pitched wide of the
leg-stump, came back quite a foot, if not more, and bowled the Australian
captain for 0. At the same total Horan tamely returned a ball to Grace,
the eighth wicket falling at 25. With only a few minutes left for play,
Massie joined M‘Donnell, and during an over or two the score rose fast.
At 43, however, Parnham bowled M‘Donnell, and Blackham, the last
man, took his place. The end soon came. Grace pitched a ball up to
Massie, who drove it splendidly out of the ground for six, but not
getting properly hold of the next, was finely caught by Midwinter,
running hard from long-off. Thus, in less than an hour, the
famous Australian team were out for the paltry score of 49. I know
that the wicket was affected by rain, that the batting order was ridiculous,
while, sure that they could not lose, the Colonists may have played
carelessly; but, for all that, commend me to this innings for distinctly
bad batting. It was their lowest score, up to the present, by 14 runs.
Every credit is due to Parnham for his splendid bowling. He had a
wicket to suit him, and made full use of it, his analysis of seven wickets
for 25 runs being a thing to remember. I may draw the attention of my
readers to the fact that Parnham has only twice bowled against the
Australians, and on each occasion has met with extraordinary success.
Whether he is really a great bowler remains to be seen, but it is undeniably
a big performance for a comparatively unknown cricketer to take, as he
has done, 27 Australian wickets in four innings, at an average cost of
less than 10 runs each. We want good bowlers sadly enough, and I
hope that another year he may have more opportunity of distinguishing
himself than is obtainable in playing for Leicestershire. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.


Full score:—
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
H. H. Massie, c Townsend, b Parnham.. 11 c Midwinter, bW. Grace 13
S. P. Jones, run out 4 bW. G. Grace 4
W. L. Murdoch, st Pooley, b Parnham .. 17 b Parnham 0
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Lipscomb 1 b Parnham 11
T. Horan, c Pooley, b Lipscomb 4 c and bW. G. Grace 3
G, Giffen, c Townsend, b Parnham 40 st Pooley, b Parnham 7
J, M‘C. Blackham, c Pooley, b Parnham 55 not out 0
G. J. Bonnor, b Parnham 45 st Pooley, b Parnham 2
T. W. Garrett, b Lipscomb 20 b Parnham 3
P. R. Spofforth, b Lipscomb 3 c sub, b Parnham 0
H. F. Boyle, not out 0 c and b Parnham 6
H. F. Boyle, not out 0
B 1,1 b 1 2
Total 182 Total 49
UNITED ELEVEN.
E. M. Grace, r c bonnor, b Garrett 6
Shrewsbury, b Boyle 24
F. Townsend, b Spofforth 5
W. G. Grace, c Giffen, b Boyle 23
M. Read, c Bonner, b Garrett 30
Midwinter, c Jones, b Spofforth 4
W. R. Gilbert, c Murdoch, b Boyle 0
C. C. Clarke, b Boyle 25
Pooley, b Garrett 2
Parnham, c Garrett, b Boyle 0
F. Lipscomb, not out 0
B 6, 1 b 3 9
Total 126


AUSTRALIANS v. NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
Played at Nottingham, September 4,5, and 6.
With the exception of Palmer the team went down to Nottingham on
Sunday afternoon, and took up their quarters at the Flying Horse, one of
the most comfortable hotels in this famous sporting town. There was
heavy rain during the day on Sunday, and dismal opinions were
expressed as to the prospects of the morrow and the probable condition
of the ground The odd man out of the Nottingham match was Jones,
who had by no means followed up his Canterbury success. Murdoch,
with his usual good fortune, beat Oscroft in the toss for choice of
innings, and though the wicket was evidently slow and heavy decided to
go in first, and thus at any rate have the best of the light—no small
consideration at a time of year when the evenings are beginning to close
in rapidly and gloomily.
Bannerman and Massie started at a quarter-past twelve to the bowling
of Shaw and Morley. The cricket for a time was very slow, and in the
12th over, when the total was only four, Massie’s middle stump was
bowled down by Morley. Murdoch, who followed, was loudly applauded
as he walked to the wicket. He began his splendid innings by hitting
Morley four times for three—two on-drives and two leg hits. The 20 was
put up on the telegraph board after the last of these hits, when very
nearly fifty minutes had elapsed since the start. Flowers then took the
ball from Morley, but as each batsman hit him for three Barnes relieved
him at 32. In the new bowler’s second over Murdoch drove him finely to
the off for four. The 40 went up after eighty minutes’ batting, and then
a big square-leg hit for four off Barnes by Murdoch was enthusiastically
cheered. Wright was tried at 44, and at 49 Gunn bowled in place of
Shaw, who, though not fortunate enough to get a wicket, had been keeping
up his end particularly well. I don’t remember to have ever seen
Gunn bowl. He is rather below medium pace, and hardly seems to take
advantage of his great height. However, there was not much chance of
judging him, for Murdoch hit his first ball to square-leg for four, drove
his second ball to the on for four, and in the following over hit him
square for three. Murdoch next drove Wright hard to the off for four,
and in the same over made the only mistake of his long innings, returning
a bad very hard, which Wright might have caught had he shaped pluckily
at it. Morley went on for Gunn, and the total at the luncheon adjourn-
ment was 68 for one wicket.
Directly the game was resumed Bannerman was missed at mid-off by
Selby from a skyer. After this let oft’ Bannerman hit freely, quite
changing his usual game. He drove Shaw to the oft' for three, and hit
Morley tremendously hard to the on for four. He next hit Shaw to the


59 ...
... 36 ...
... 48 ...
... 5
38 ...
... 26 ...
... 38 ...
... 2
4 ...
... 0 ...
... 10 ...
... 0
7 ...
... 3 ...
... 10 ...
... 0
Wright
15 ...
... 9 ...
... 13 ...
... 3
Gunn
2 ...
... 0 ...
... 11 ...
... 0
off for two, but was out immediately afterwards, neatly caught at point
low down. His innings of 26 had occupied two hours and five minutes ;
two for 83. M‘Donnell began with a lucky and lofty on-drive for three,
but in Morley’s next over was easily caught at extra mid-off; three for 86.
Horan was leg before wicket immediately ; four for 88. Giffen drove
Shaw twice for four, both splendid hits to the ring. He was then as
nearly as possible caught at point, but Oscroft fell in reaching the ball.
The 100 went up at half-past three, after two-and-a-half hours’ play.
Murdoch next hit Morley to leg for two, driving him well to the off for
four in the same over. Shaw “fed ” Giffen with a nice slow ball, and the
batsman, as it was evidently intended he should do, drove the ball to
long-on, where Wright missed the catch. Giffen had then made eight,
but he soon increased his score, snicking Morley for three, and driving
Shaw to the on for four. Morley and Shaw changed ends at 114, the
apparent reason being that the slow bowler should be able to place his
men deeper in the long field. He sent out Gunn, Scotton, and Flowers,
but Giffen drove a ball for four between them. Murdoch next hit Morley
square for four, so Wright was tried at 124. No sooner was this change
made than Giffen was cleverly taken at slip ; five for 124. Giffen’s 20
consisted of four fours, a three, and a single. Bonnor came in, and the
field spread out even deeper than before. Shaw, however, proved the giant’s
master, completely beating him with a good ball; six for 125. Blackham
joined Murdoch, whose long innings now came to a close, Wright bowling
him for 72, out of a total of 121 made while he was batting. Considering
the slow wicket, the good bowling and fielding, and the little assistance
he received from his colleagues, I look upon this innings of Murdoch’s as
one of the very best I have seen him play. He kept the ball on the
ground, was very patient, and yet hit grandly, his figures being eight
fours, six threes, four twos, and 14 singles. He was batting exactly three
hours. Garrett was easily stumped at 128, Blackham was caught at
mid-off, and Spofforth was bowled by a ball which he ran half up the play
to drive. The innings thus closed at twenty-five minutes to five for 131,
made from the following bowling:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
The Nottingham men, except for the mistakes mentioned, fielded
capitally.
At ten minutes to five the county began batting, Shrewsbury and
Oscroft going in, and Spofforth and Boyle being the bowlers. At three
Oscroft hit a ball into his wicket. Barnes came in, and the batting was
good, despite the misty and increasingly difficult light, Shrewsbury twice
rove Boyle to the off for three, so at 21 Garrett went on. Shrewsbury
hit Spofforth to leg for three, and, amid loud cheers, each batsman hit
Garrett finely to square-leg for four. Barnes was bowled at 33, and then
in the semi-darkness three disasters occurred for Notts. Selby was
caught at the wicket at 37, Blackham securing the ball at the third
attempt after he had fallen ; three for 37. Flowers evidently could not


see the howling, and was out at 40, while just before six o’clock Scotton
was howled hy a good hall, and time was called. Nottingham, with five
wickets to fall, being 90 runs to the bad. Shrewsbury had been batting
for seventy minutes for his 25 not out. He played Spofforth and the
others as cooly and confidently as if the wicket had been hard and the
light good, and he deserves great praise for averting a collapse.
Rain fell sharply on Tuesday morning, and prevented any play until
twenty-five minutes to one o’clock. Gunn then joined Shrewsbury, who,
after scoring three, was bowled by Spofforth, off-stump out of the ground.
Six for 44, or eight to save the follow on. Shaw became Gunn’s partner and
by some indifferent, but very valuable hits, the necessary runs were made.
After that the hitting becam6 hard and confident, Shaw in particular
scoring well. Boyle was tried for Garrett at 75, and the latter replaced
Spofforth at 82. This latter change proved effective, Shaw being well
caught at forward cover-point at 84. He had made 25, and the pair had
put on 40—a really good performance. Wright was easily caught at 90,
but Sherwin stayed in with Gunn, who just before lunch drove Boyle
for two, and hit him grandly to square-leg for four in the same
over. The total at the adjournment was 107 for eight wickets. When
play was resumed at a quarter-past three the last two wickets soon fell,
the innings closing at 25 minutes past three for 111, or twenty to the bad.
Gunn’s 26 was a capital display of cricket, of immense value to the side.
The Australians, with one or two exceptions, fielded really well on the
wet, slippery grass. I append the bowling analysis in Nottingham’s
first innings:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 35 15 46 6
Boyle 19 "7 29 0
Garrett 28-3 13 35 4
35 15 46 6
Garrett.
Bannerman and Massie began Australia’s second innings at a quarter
to four. Shaw and Morley were the bowlers, and when Massie had
made 17 he hit a ball very hard back to Shaw, which the fieldsman could
not hold. Thirty went up after twenty minutes’ batting, and then
Wright relieved Morley. The total was 47, when a neat catch by short-
leg, standing rather deep, dismissed Bannerman for 12, the result of
three-quarters of an hour’s batting. Murdoch came in, and Massie hit
Shaw to leg for four. The very next ball, however, clean bowled the
great hitter for 38 out of 55, made by three fours, two threes, five twos,
and ten singles. M‘Donnell and Murdoch then played admirable
cricket against good bowling in a very bad light. Rain stopped play at
a quarter-past five for about fifteen minutes, but though the bowling
was changed afterwards the pair remained partners at the drawing of
stumps, M‘Donnell was 41 not out, a faultlessly - hit innings, and
Murdoch with a steady and good 22. The total was 114 for two wickets,
or 134 on with eight wickets to fall.
On the Monday 172 runs were scored for 15 wickets ; on Tuesday 184
for only seven wickets. The ground was much more difficult on the
former day, rain keeping it pretty easy on Tuesday. The light both
afternoons was extremely bad. Oscroft must have done very fairly well
so far, as over 7,000 people paid on Monday, and I should say about
6,000 on Tuesday.


Overs.
37 ..
Maidens.
.... 15 ....
Runs.
.. 55 ..
Wickets.
1
34-2..
.... 13 ....
.. 74 .
5
35 ..
.... 12 ....
.. 54 .
4
5 ..
.... 1 ....
.. 16 .
0
Barnes
5 ..
.... 2 ....
.. 9 .
0
There was some rain on Wednesday morning, but the clouds cleared
oft', and before the time came for resuming the game bright sunshine
and a keen wind had partially dried the surface of the wicket, with the
effect of making it false and treacherous. The Australians played the
proper game under the circumstances. They had made very nearly
enough runs on the wet, easy wicket of Tuesday afternoon to win the
match, and so on Wednesday they went in for hitting, to get as many
runs as they could, hut to get them quickly and leave themselves suffi-
cient time to get Nottingham out. The event fully proved the soundness
of this course.
It was ten minutes past twelve when Murdoch and M‘Donnell took
their position at the wickets. Shaw and Morley were the howlers, and in
the former’s first over Murdoch was hadly let off by Barnes at mid-on.
Nothing had been scored up to this time, and the mistake cost Nottingham
27 runs. Gunn had a possible chance of catching M‘Donnell at long-on,
and soon afterwards the Victorian drove Shaw splendidly out of the ground
for six. At 141 both wickets fell, M‘Donnell being well caught at long-
on, and Murdoch easily taken from a false hit on the off-side. M‘Donnell’s
brilliant and thoroughly good 63 included the six just mentioned, two
fours, two threes, and thirteen twos. Giffen directly after he came in,
drove Shaw to the on for six, the ball going clean out of the ground, and
very near where M‘Donnell’s hit had been. Horan played Morley very
hard round to leg, and Shrewsbury, in attempting to stop the ball, knocked
up the third finger of his right hand so badly that he had to leave the
field. Garrett, and afterwards Massie, kindly came out in Shrewsbury’s
place. Wright went on at 151, and Horan hit him to leg for three, after-
wards hitting Morley square for the same number. Giffen sent Morley
to leg for four, a capital hit, and then Horan scored a couple of twos.
At 174, however, the Victoria batsman was leg before wicket for a good
19. Blackham, after being missed from an easy chance by Selby at mid-
off, was bowled for a single. Garrett joined Giffen, who was brilliantly
stumped. Sherwin was the most prominent player just about this time,
for, after getting rid of Giffen, he missed Bonnor and stumped Garrett,
all three things happening in about five minutes. Boyle and Bonnor did
some hard hitting till the former was bowled at 198. Spofforth was last
man, and a three of his sent up 200 at a quarter to two. Seven or eight
minutes afterwards Bonnor was easily caught at cover-point, and the
innings was over for 212. Bowling analysis :
Oscroft had the heavy roller, weighing 34cwt. on the wicket for nearly
half an hour during lunch time, but this did not do much good, for when
the county went in to bat the difficulty of the ground was quite as great
as before. Shrewsbury and Oscroft began, to the bowling of Spofforth
and Boyle. Nine runs were scored, and then Shrewsbury was smartly
stumped. Oscroft was bowled at 11, and Selby bowled first ball. Barnes
was the next victim, cleverly stumped at 15, and then came Shaw, who


was taken at point at 19 by Murdoch jumping in. Gunn ran in to drive
Boyle, and was easily stumped, while at 28 Flowers was caught at slip in
hitting to leg. Seven wickets were now down for the miserable total of 28.
Sherwin came, and played about the best cricket of the innings. He and
Scotton put on 20 runs. Nothing else was done, the innings closing just
after four o’clock for 48, or 184 to the bad. By this large number
Nottingham were beaten. Blackham kept wicket very finely indeed,
and the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle was worthy of all praise. The
analysis speaks for itself:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets,
Spofforth 19 9 .. 18 5
Boyle 18 6 27 5
More feeble batting than that of the Nottingham men I have not often
seen. Shrewsbury’s bad finger is an excuse for him, but for the rest the only
thing that can be said is that they were quite overmastered by the quality
of the bowling and the falsity of the ground. Oscroft, I was told, cleared
over £6OO by the match, including the subscriptions. The total sum
paid for admission to the ground during the match was a few shillings
under £l,OOO. Score: —
AUSTRALIANS.
19 9 ...... 18 5
Ist inns.
2nd inns.
A. C. Bannerman, c Oscroft, b Shaw
26 c Flowers, b Wright .. 12
2 b Shaw 38
H. H. Massie, b Morley
W. L. Murdoch, b Wright
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Flowers, b Morley
72 c Barnes, b Morley 26
3 c Gunn, b Morley 63
0 Ibw, b Wright 19
20 st Sherwin, b Wright.. 13
1 c Barnes, b Morley 20
3 b Morley 1
1 st Sherwin, b Morley.. 1
2 b Wright 7
0 not out 8
T. Horan, 1 b w, b Shaw
G. Giffen, c Shaw, b Wright
G. J. Bonnor, b Shaw
J. M‘C. Blackham, c Selby, b Wright
T. W. Garrett, st Sherwin, b Shaw
H. F. Boyle, not out
F. R. Spofforth, b Shaw ,
Leg bye
1 81, lb 3 4
Total.
131 Total 212
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.
Ist inns.
2nd inns.
Oscroft, b Spofforth
Shrewsbury, b Spofforth
Barnes, b Spofforth
Selby, c Blackham, b Spofforth ..
Flowers, b Garrett
Scotton, b Spofforth
Gunn, b Spofforth
Shaw, c Murdoch, b Garrett
Wright, c Bannerman, b Garrett
Sherwin, c Giffen, b Garrett
Morley, not out
Leg bye
1 b Spofforth 8
28 st Blackham, b Boyle.. 2
12 st Blackham, b Boyle.. 4
2 b Spofforth 0
1 c Bonnor, b Spofforth.. 5
0 b Spofforth 10
26 st Blackham, b Boyle.. 7
25 c Murdoch, b Boyle 1
4 not out 0
11 c Blackham, b Boyle .. 8
0 b Spofforth 0
1 B 2,1 b 1 3
111 Total 48


C. T. Studd
17 ....
.. 10 ...
... 23 ...
... 2
14 ....
.. 7 ...
... 18 ...
... 0
31-3....
.. 17 ...
... 32 ...
... 6
37 ....
.. 14 ...
... 71 ...
... 1
Lucas
4 ....
.. 1 ...
... 4 ...
... 0
AUSTRALIANS v. I ZINGARI.
Played at Scarborough, September 7,8, and 9.
The majority of the Australian team left Nottingham by the 5.20 train
on Wednesday afternoon, but some others were obliged to stay for the
seven o’clock train in the morning, which landed us in Scarborough
shortly before noon on Thursday, ready to commence one of the most
interesting engagements of the tour —that against a picked eleven of
I Zingari. Though the sea breeze was rather keen, we could scarcely
have had a finer day for cricket than Thursday was, and the sunshine,
the hard wicket, the band, and the big crowd of ladies made the game
more like a holiday and less like the stern, serious contest which a big
cricket match has now become. Murdoch’s luck stuck to him, for he beat
Lyttelton in the toss for choice of innings, and the Australians were
batting from twenty minutes past twelve till about twenty minutes to
five. Massie, by some splendid hits —seven fours and four twos being his
chief figures—scored 51 out of 57; then, curiously enough, Massie, Mur-
doch, and M‘Donnell were all out, the two latter playing the ball into
their wickets. Bannerman was well caught at the wicket at 64, he
having been seventy minutes making eight runs. Another wicket fell
before lunch, Giffen being cleverly caught at point low down ; five for 70.
All these men were out to the bowling of Walter Forbes, the old Eton
boy, who was loudly applauded for his remarkable success. The only
two mistakes I saw in the field were made while Horan and Bonnor were
together, for after luncheon Mitchell missed Horan from a very easy
chance at slip, and Edward Lyttelton failed to catch Bonnor from a big
lofty off-drive. The giant was afterwards nearly taken at long-off, and
Blackham was caught at long slip at 129. Then a grand catch at mid-off
from a hard clean hit got rid of Horan, whose patient 32 was of con-
siderable value. Spoffbrth and Boyle put on 21 runs for the last wicket,
the latter hitting well. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Evans had the ill-luck to injure one of his fingers early in the game.
I Zingari went in at 5 o’clock for an hour’s batting before time. The light
was good, though the shadows got very long before 6 o’clock. A. Lyttelton
was admirably caught at the -wicket when the score was 14, but his was the
only wicket that fell, Lucas and G. B. Studd being partners at the


drawing of stumps, the latter with 18 and the former with 21. Studd
made some pretty cuts, and I don’t remember to have seen Lucas play
much better. Two on-drives for four from successive balls from Spofforth
were superb hits. The Australian bowlers were Spofforth, Giffen,
Garrett, and Boyle, and the total when play ceased for the day was 50
for one wicket. There was great public interest taken in the game all
through, and the cheering when Forbes bowled the three crack Australian
batsmen at 57 was most enthusiastic.
On Friday the weather was again charmingly fine, and though the
company looked rather small before luncheon, the attendance in the
latter part of the afternoon was even larger than on Thursday. Scar-
borough does not, as a rule, excite itself much over cricket, and I should
think no match in the town ever aroused such interest before, not even
the meeting of Gregory’s team and the Gentlemen of England in 1878.
The day was one of serious disasters for the Australians, two members of
the team meeting with accidents after luncheon. Giffen again injured
the knee he hurt in the Players match at the Oval, and Blackham while
keeping wicket received a blow in the face, his mouth being badly cut
and two of his front teeth knocked off. Every one will, I am sure, have
been sorry to hear of the great wicket-keeper’s misfortune. To return
now to the incidents of the game. Play began shortly before twelve
o’clock, Lucas and G. B. Studd being opposed by Spofforth and Boyle.
For a few overs the hitting was brilliant. Lucas cut Spofforth very late
for four, and Studd drove Boyle splendidly for a three and two fours.
Just after this, however, Lucas was missed at slip by Murdoch—an easy
chance. The Australian captain got the ball in his hands, and let it
drop. Overnight Lucas had given a sharp chance at slip to M‘Donnell.
Studd now made a lofty hit to long-off, which Giffen misjudged, and
allowed to go to the boundary for four. With the total at 80 the batsmen
were parted, Lucas being beaten and bowled by a slow breakback from
Spofforth. Notwithstanding the two chances, his 26 was a finely played
innings. C. T. Studd joined his brother, who hit a ball back to Boyle;
it just touched the bowler’s fingers, and went over his head. The
first change of bowling was tried after this, Spofforth crossing over, and
Giffen going on at the Pavilion wicket. The 100 was up at one o’clock,
and as two threes followed, one to each batsman, Spofforth gave way to
Boyle. C. T. Studd cut the new bowler grandly for four, and then
Blackham missed an easy chance on the off side of stumping G. B. off
Giffen. Runs came at a rapid rate, and Garrett took the ball from Giffen.
In Boyle’s first over after the change, C. T. Studd was very neatly
caught at slip for 21. He had made his runs in capital style. Three
wickets were down for 125, the brothers having put on 45 runs during their
partnership. Lord Harris went in, and again the Australian bowling
came in for severe punishment. The hitting indeed was of a most
brilliant character. Giffen bowled again for Garrett, but at a quarter
to two the score had reached 150. There was loud applause when these
figures went up, and the cheering was renewed when a drive for four by
Lord Harris put the Zingari ahead of the Australians with seven wickets
to fall. The run-getting continued, so Spofforth went on again in place
of Giffen. At lunch time the score was 172, G, B. Studd having made
77, and Lord Harris 32.


Spofforth
Overs.
69 ..
Maidens.
.... 30 ...
Runs.
106
Wickets.
4
Giffen
21 ..
.... 6 ...
... 45
o
Garrett
15 ..
.... 6 ...
... 17
0
Boyle
68-3..
.... 32 ...
... 97 .
6
Play was resumed at ten minutes to three, Spofforth and Boyle sharing
the bowling. Lord Harris was bowled by a “no ball” from Spofforth.
G. B. Studcl made a couple of fours, and was then caught at forward-
point, Bannerman jumping in and taking the ball very cleverly with one
hand. Studd’s innings of 86 had lasted three hours and twenty minutes.
He gave two chances, and made some bad hits, but his innings against
such bowlers as Spofforth, Boyle, Garrett, and Giffen was, nevertheless, a
very fine one. Garrett, I must mention, was unwell, and not able to bowl
so much as he would have done. Studd’s chief hits were eight fours,
six threes, and eight twos. Four wickets for 193. Steel became
Lord Harris’s partner, and at a quarter-past three 200 went up. It
was just after this that Blackham was hurt. Giffen, who had pre-
viously left the field, came out again, but he was too lame to run,
and Alfred Lyttelton took his place. At last Lord Harris skied a
ball, and was caught at extra mid-off. His brilliant innings of 47
included six fours, two threes, and five twos. Edward Lyttelton was
soon bowled, and Mitchell joined Steel. Again some good batting
was shown, but at 242 Steel was caught at the wicket. Marriott was
caught at mid-off, and Forbes, without making a run, was splendidly
caught by Alfred Lyttelton at deep mid-on, high up with one hand.
Mitchell and Evans gave a lot of trouble for the last wicket, the former
reminding every one now and then of his old grand form. Another good
catch by Lyttelton dismissed him, and the innings closed for 279—126
ahead. The following analysis will show how heavy was the work that
devolved upon Spofforth and Boyle ; the latter’s figures are the best:—
The Australians were in for about forty minutes’ batting, and lost
Massie, who was easily caught and bowled.
The Zingari Eleven, wearing the familiar colours, red, black, and
yellow, went in a body to the Scarborough Theatre on Friday night to
see Miss Litton in “Moths.” I heard rather a good story about this play.
A lady spectator seeing a clergyman in the theatre, asked one of the
Australians whether he thought it was a proper play for a priest to see.
The lady was evidently oblivious of any possible suggestion of impropriety
on her own part, so our young Colonist mildly answered that the Rev.
Mr. C r was there to see if the play really was one against which he
ought to warn his parishioners. There was another lady’s story that will
bear repetition. During the England match at the Oval when the English
wickets were going down in the second innings, a gentleman exclaimed
in his vexation, “If they would only play with straight bats they would
be sure to get the runs. ” To him the lady, ‘ ‘ Would they really ? Couldn’t
you get them some ?”
Saturday was again a beautiful day, with, however, a sharp breeze
blowing in from the sea. The attendance of spectators was not large in
the morning, but in the afternoon the people crowded the ground, and
when the big hitting was going on they were going frantic with delight.
I believe that about 17,000 persons paid for admission on the three days,


which was not had, hut not extraordinary, considering how very full
Scarborough was just then. The wicket kept hard and firm all day, and
was certainly a batsman’s wicket throughout the match. The south end,
however, was not perfect at any time, and before luncheon A. G. Steel
was doing more with the ball than I have seen him do for some time.
While talking of English howling, I must say how extremely pleased I
was to see that A. H. Evans has changed his style, and now delivers the
hall with a scrupulously fair overhead swing. I spoke to several of the
Australians about the matter, and they all agreed that Evans was
now a perfectly fair bowler. They did not, however, think him very
difficult. A different opinion was expressed about W. F. Forbes. They
did think he was difficult when he was on the wicket, but they certainly
did not think he was fair. Two or three said distinctly that he
threw, and that he would not be allowed to bowl in that style in
Australia. This I quite believe, for all the Australian bowlers are not
only fair but above the suspicion of unfairness. It is not necessary to
argue to the verge of apoplexy about the delivery of Spofforth, or Palmer,
or Boyle, or Garrett. They are so fair that no doubt on the subject has
ever, so far as I know, been expressed, either privately or in print. Can this
be said of some of our bowlers ? Do not people tell you openly they think
so and so a “ chucker ? ” And many of the people who tell you so are the
umpires who stand quietly by, and haven’t the moral courage to “ no ball”
them. Some people think lam mad on this subject, but lam content to
be thought to share the same delusions as such practical judges of the game
as Lord Harris, the Hon. Ivo Bligh, Mr. Murdoch, Mr. Massie, and many
others I could mention. I honestly believe that throwing is dangerous to
batsmen and dangerous to the future of the game. But there is throwing
and throwing, and there does not seem to me the same objection to the
slow, wristy chuck that there is to the “ bowling” of the men who pelt
away at you as hard as ever they can. Still, the whole thing is wrong,
and not only could, but speedily would, be altered if umpires were in a
less dependent and uncertain position than they are. I would have
umpires regularly examined and certificated just as pilots are, of course,
admitting in most cases the qualifications of men of undoubted standing
like Robert Thoms, Robert Carpenter, Luke Greenwood, C.|K. Pullin,
and Thomas Hearne. The men should be on a regular rota, and they
should go wherever they were wanted. This would make them independent
of all committees and captains, certain of their living, and not afraid to
say plainly and publicly what many now say dubiously and privately.
There would be two umpires engaged for a match by the secretary of the
home side, who would no more know what men he was going to have
than the men themselves would know where they were going. We should
not then have one umpire for one side and one for the other, but the men
would be fearless and absolutely impartial, unbiassed judges of the game.
Having relieved my mind at the pen’s point, I will now go on to tell
the story of Saturday’s cricket.
A start was made at half-past eleven sharp, when Bannerman (not
out 7) and Boyle (not out 1), faced the bowling of Steel and Forbes.
Each batsman hit a four, and then a good ball from Steel bowled Boyle,
and two wickets were down for 38. Murdoch joined Bannerman, and then
began that steady, perfect exhibition of defensive cricket which wore


down the bowling and rendered matters easy for the batsmen who
followed. The Australian captain was fully twenty minutes before he
scored, but then, after a single, he drove Forbes straight for four, the 50
going up at twenty minutes past twelve. Thus on Saturday the first
fifty minutes were occupied in scoring only 20 runs. C. T. Studd now
relieved Forbes, and presently Evans went on for Steel. Lyttelton gave
up wicket-keeping to the fast bowling, his place being taken by Mitchell.
The batsmen were becoming well set, and the score rose at a fair pace, so
Alfred Lyttelton tried his lobs at one end, and put on Forbes again at the
Pavilion wicket. The slows not doing any good, Lord Harris went on in
place of Lyttelton. About twenty minutes past one the hundred went
up, and soon afterwards Studd resumed bowling. No impression could
he made upon the batsmen, and the score still mounted, so Harris
changed ends, and Evans went on. The balance of 126 runs against them
was knocked off by a quarter to two, and still only two wickets were
down. There was loud applause when it became known to the crowd
that the heavy arrears had been wiped out, and still more did the people
cheer when Murdoch, in attempting to place a good hall from Evans, was
clean howled, leg stump out of the ground. The Australian chief had
been hatting about two hours. He went in with the total at 38, and out
when it was 129, and of the 91 runs made during the partnership he
scored 53, without a chance, by five fours, three threes, two twos, and
singles. I have seen him play a better innings,_ because on Saturday
several balls were put up dangerously, hut for patience and value this 53
will rank high. McDonnell joined Bannerman, and wdien he bail only
scored two was missed from a tremendous skier by Evans at deep mid-on.
The chance was not an easy one —no very lofty hit is—-but still it ought
to have been caught, and the mistake not only cost I Zingari 40 runs, but
its moral effect was serious. If four wickets had fallen for 131 runs, the
fate of the game might have been very different. Directly after his escape
M‘Donnell began hitting splendidly, and at the adjournment for luncheon
he was 23 not out, Bannerman being 47 not out, and the total 154 for
three wickets. , _ , .
On the resumption of the game after lunch Forbes and Steel were the
bowlers. Big hits followed each with rapidity, so Evans was tried. An
overthrow for four gave Bannerman the only five in the match. At last,
at 189, Evans bowled down M'Donnell’s oft stump. The early chance
notwithstanding, M‘Donnell’s 42 was an admirable display of vigorous
hitting. It consisted of six fours, a three, five twos, and a single.
Horan now joined Bannerman, and hit Evans for three fours in one over.
Altogether, 40 runs were put on by capital cricket before the next wicket
fell, Horan being caught at the wicket in hitting to leg ; five f°r 229.
Giffen was Bannerman’s next partner, with Murdoch to run for him, and
the score was rapidly hit up to 256, when a good catch at deep-1 ong-oft
dismissed the South Australian for 15. Six wickets were now down, the
Colonists "were 130 to the good, and the time was a quarter past four, or
only one hour and three-quarters of time left. Ihe game was thus certain
to be a draw, and if it had been left in its then condition, it would have
1366T1 ci fairly even draw. However, Bonnsr came in, and, by some of the
most extraordinary hitting ever witnessed, made the game very much in
the Australians’ favour before six o’clock struck, for, without the loss of


another wicket, 167 runs were added in that hour and three-quarters,
and so, when the game was finally abandoned, Australia, still with four
wickets to go down, were 297 runs to the good. Into the details of that
167 runs Ido not intend to go. The worn-out bowling was changed again
and again without the least effect, the fielding, which had been both
smart and safe, became demoralised at the finish, and, indeed, for the
best part of an hour before the finish. Lord Harris alone kept his brilliant
form all through the long day’s “leather hunting,” and I think I may
safely say that he not only never lost a run, hut continued to save runs.
For the rest, they were done up. The rubbish that was bowled after five
o’clock was not creditable to the side. There were, however, only two
chances missed in the field, both given by Bonnor off Steel. The first
mistake was made by Marriott, straight behind the howler, and was a fairly
easy catch without any complications. Marriott had not to run to it or take
any pains to judge it, or to wait long for it. It was simply a hard drive,
which any fieldsman out deep should he prepared for. I was the more
surprised at this mistake, and at that made afterwards by Edward
Lyttelton, as both these gentlemen had been fielding admirably before.
Bonnor had hit about nine fours before the first chance, and in the over
afterwards he made his first six, a tremendous off-drive from Steel, clean
out of the ground. Then came the second chance. It was also from a
hard drive, but the ball went straight to Lyttelton’s hands at long-off,
and fell out again ! Steel now gave up howling, and Lucas went on.
The Surrey man’s fourth hall was hit by Bonnor right out of the ground,
hut it was the third over that came in for the severest punishment.
Bonnor drove the first hall out of the ground for six, cut the second hall
for four, drove the third for four, and hit the last once more out of the
ground for six. Twenty runs from one over of four halls is an event of
the rarest occurrence, and Bonnor received round after round of hearty
applause. I don’t remember anything bigger in the way of hitting since
Ben Griffith hit Farmer Bennett for four sixes in one over many years ago.
There were no more sixes after this, and no more chances, hut the
hitting went on with great freedom, the hatting having completely
mastered the howling. At last six o’clock came, and the stumps and
game were drawn, the Australian score for six wickets being 423, or 297
to the good.
Bonnor’s performances will long he remembered. He went in at a
quarter past four, as nearly as I can say, for I did not take the precise
time, when the score was 256 for six wickets, and he was not out at six
o’clock with 122 to his credit. It was the first time he had ever scored a
hundred in one innings in England, and certainly a finer display of
hitting than this innings has not often been seen in this country.
He was hatting in considerable pain for the last half hour, he having
been badly hit on the left elbow-joint by a full pitch from Lord
Harris, and the blow was so severe that he had to see a doctor on
Sunday morning, and carry his arm in a sling for several days.
There were no bones broken, hut the bruise was a serious one,
and kept Bonnor out of the Leeds match which followed. His hits
were four sixes, sixteen fours, a three, eight twos, and fifteen singles.
Besides the hits out of the ground Bonnor made a number of superb off-
drives, all along the ground, while his cutting was so clean and hard.


that the ball seemed to he at the boundary the instant it had left his bat.
To my thinking, his cuts were the best hits in the innings, though, of
course, they did not come in for the cheering that the drives did. It was
wonderful thing to go in after Bannerman had been batting five
hours, and had made 84 runs, and then to score more at the finish, when
both were not out.
Until just this moment I had not mentioned Bannerman’s name for a
very long time. Yet he was batting all through the innings, and carried
out his bat for 120, made without a single chance, and with scarcely a
false hit. The chief credit of the long innings belongs to Bannerman,
because, whoever was hitting at the other wicket, Bannerman was his
partner, playing the steady, quiet, useful cricket that wins many
matches. He was, as I said, 84 when Bonnor became his partner, and
he reached his hundred long before the giant did. But after they were
both in three figures they kept scoring very closely together, and in the
end there was only two runs difference between them. This was also
Bannerman’s first hundred in this country, and I heartily congratulate
him upon such a climax to three seasons of careful, patient, scientific
batting. His figures were one five (four for overthrow), 11 fours, three
threes, 18 twos, and 26 singles. So ended one of the most remarkable
matches of the entire tour—a match in which 855 runs were scored for
the loss of only 26 wickets in three full days’ cricket, an average of 35
runs per wicket, less a small fraction. Of these 26 wickets eight were
bowled, 17 were caught, and one was run out. It only remains for me
to publish the analysis of the Zingari bowling in the last innings and the
full score of the match ;
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Steel 52 21 96 1
Forbes 47 24 60 1
C. T. Studd 36 18 61 2
Evans 27 8 80 2
A. Lyttelton 16 7 29 0
Harris 13 3 28 0
Lucas 3 1 27 0
E. Lyttelton 8 2 20 0
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
H. H. Massie, b Forbes 51 c and b Forbes 18
A. C. Bannerman, c A. Lyttelton, b
Forbes 8 not out 120
W. L. Murdoch, b Forbes 0 b Evans 53
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Forbes 0 b BA'ans 42
T. Horan, c Forbes, bC. T. Studd 32 cA. Lyttelton, bC. T. Studd 26
6. Giffen, cC. T. Studd, b Forbes 3 c Lucas, bC. T. Studd 15
G. J. Bonnor, c Lucas, b Steel 17 not out 122
J. M‘C. Blackham, c Marriott, b Forbes 15
T. W. Garrett, c Steel, b C. T. Studd.. 1
H. F. Boyle, run out 12 b Steel 5
F. R. SpofForth, not out 9
B 3,1 b 2 5 B 17, 1b 5 22
Total 158 Total 423


Hon. A. Lyttelton, c Blackham, b Spofforth
6
G. B. Studd, c Bannerman, b Boyle
86
A. P. Lucas, b Spofforth
26
C. T. Studd, c Bbnnor, b Boyle
21
Lord Harris, c Garrett, b Spofforth
47
Hon. E. Lyttelton, b Spofforth
3
A. G. Steel, c Murdoch, b Boyle
29
R. A. H. Mitchell, c sub, b Boyle
32
C. Marriott, c. Garrett, b Boyle
4
W. F. Forbes, c sub, b Boyle
0
A. H. Evans, not out
11
B 9, 1 b 4, n b 1
14
Total
279
I ZINGARL
On Sunday, after the doctor had reported favourably upon Palmer, and
had ascertained that, though Bonnor was badly bruised, there was no
permanent injury to his arm, the team visited Sarony’s studio on the
South Cliff, just above the Spa. This establishment is probably the
finest of its kind in the world, and many of the enlarged photographs of
individuals and groups, painted in oils, are high class works of art. The
proprietor was at great pains to get effective and truthful likenesses of the
Colonists, of whom he afterwards took several groups at Leeds, on the
bowling green attached to Holbeck Ground, during the luncheon hour on
Monday. In these the “ demon ” bowler was sitting down, and in order
to increase his demoniacal character he moulded clay round the spikes of
his cricket boots until those spikes looked very terrible indeed. In the
evening cricket was talked most zealously until bed time, and in the
morning we left for Leeds, a two hours’ journey by express train. Palmer
was left behind at Scarborough, in the kind care of Mrs. Beal, the manager’s
mother, who has made the long trip with her son, and to whose constant
attention M‘Donnell owed a great deal during his illness on board ship
coming over.


AUSTRALIANS y. SHAW’S ELEVEN.
Played at Holbeck, Leeds, September 11 and 12.
Arriving at Leeds at ten o’clock, the team put up at the Queen’s Hotel,
one of the most comfortable hotels in the United Kingdom. An early
start was made for the Holbeck Ground, on reaching which we found that
Shrewsbury’s injured finger would prevent him playing, and that Peate
had cut his knee through the had behaviour of a cab horse, and could not
take part in the match. These serious losses could not he repaired, but
Lockwood consented to take one of the vacant places, the other being
being filled by Lillywhite, who was telegraphed for when Shrewsbury
knew he could not play, There had been heavy rain in Leeds on Sunday
night, and the ground was soft and difficult. But for this rain the local
authorities said the wicket would have been a splendid one. lam not
very sanguine on this point myself, hut I must say the turf had been well
rolled, and looked all right.
Murdoch once more called “woman ” when the opposing captain tossed
the coin into the air, and, for the eighth time in succession, he won.
Massie and Bannerman opened the Australian innings, and the former
was clean howled first ball by Midwinter. This sensational start excited
the spectators, who cheered tremendously. The people were even more
delighted when at 11 Murdoch was caught at short mid-on, and when
Bannerman was taken at slip four runs later, in attempting to drive
Emmett. Horan joined M‘Donnell, who had hit Midwinter for four, and
now drove him out of the ground for six. In the same over as this last hit
Horan was clean bowled for 0; four for 22. Giffen came in, and stayed
while M'Donnell hit. This the Victorian did with extraordinary
rapidity. He cut Emmett wide for four, and put the next ball through
the slips for four more, but ought to have been caught by Scotton at deep
long-off when his total was 19. Immediately afterwards he again hit
Midwinter out of the ground for six, so Ulyett was tried, the total being
39. M‘Donnell drove the new bowler to the off for four, and then drove
Emmett for four, scoring still another four for a false hit off Ulyett, and
yet another for a grand off-drive from Ertimett, who heat him, however,
and got him caught at mid-wicket for 45, hit in half an hour, while his
various partners were making one run between them. This remarkably
brilliant innings consisted of but 13 hits—two sixes, seven fours, a two,
and three singles. Of course there was great applause. Jones came in,
and Midwinter resumed bowling. The new batsman was caught at the
wicket without scoring; six for 58. Blackham, however, hit Midwinter
for two and three, and Emmett for four. TheYorkshireman soon had his
revenge, howling Giffen for a patient four ; seven for 76. The last three
batsmen were rapidly disposed of by three good catches, Garrett at the
wicket, Boyle at long-on, and Spofforth at point. The innings had just
lasted an hour and a half. Analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Midwinter 20 11 34 4
Emmett 21-1 13 30 ...... 6
Ulyett 2 0 10 0


After luncheon the English players went in, Ulyett and Barlow
starting to the howling of Spofforth and Boyle. The Lancashire man
was caught at four, and Ulyett was missed at mid-on hy Spofforth when
he had scored seven. Ulyett and Lockwood each hit Boyle to square-leg
for four, but at 25 the former was neatly caught at long-on from a big
hit. Bates joined Lockwood, and this pair made the only stand of the
innings. Bates hit Spofforth for three twos in one over, and then drove
him straight for four, Lockwood cutting him very finely for another four.
Bates next drove him for four, and, 30 runs having been hit oft’ the
“ demon’s” 13 overs, he gave way to Garrett at 51. Lockwood drove the
new bowler to the off for four, but at 57 was easily caught at slip. His
30 was an excellent innings, and after he left the wickets fell rapidly.
Midwinter was caught at point first ball—the fifth of the over—Scotton
was bowled at 60, Selby was caught at third man at the same total,
Emmett was leg before wicket at 68, Shaw cleverly stumped at 75, and
both Pilling and Lillywhite caught at 79. Thus the last seven wickets
only put on 22 runs—a miserable collapse; however, we had done no
worse than the Australians, and so people were fairly satisfied. Blackham
had kept wicket well and pluckily, despite his Scarborough mishap and
his consequent false teeth. The wicket was too slow for Spofforth, but
Boyle came off grandly, and Garrett’s three wickets for 12 runs was a
good performance. Analysis ; —
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 13 5 30 0
Boyle 21-3 8 32 7
Garrett 9 2 12 3
Bannerman and Massie opened the second innings of the Australians.
Tire big hitter was in great form and scored 23 in six hits, two tremendous
drives out of the ground for six each from Midwinter, a lofty off-hit for
four from Emmett, a beautiful off-drive for four from Midwinter, a
two and a single. He was then caught at short mid-on ; one for 29.
Bannerman was directly afterwards caught at point, and Garrett was
howled, the total at the fall of the third wicket being 37. Play then
ceased for the day, Blackham being 6 (not out).
There was a “gala” on the ground after the cricket was over, and
though the wicket was protected, the outside ground was danced upon
so industriously, that when we arrived on Tuesday morning the turf
looked more like mud than grass. Mind the dancing did not interfere
with the playing portion of the ground, only with the outfielding. I
suppose there were nearly 10,000 people on the ground on Monday, and
from the number present at the start of play on Tuesday I had no
doubt the second day’s attendance would quite equal that of the first.
This proved to be the case, and as a matter of fact I believe there were
more people to see the finish than witnessed the start. This match, like
that which Shaw’s Eleven played last September before sailing for
America and Australia, was arranged to take place during Holbeck
Feast, a great local jollification, when men, women and children all make
holiday in the most terribly persevering manner, and Holbeck Moor is
alive with swings, booths, stalls, and knock ’em downs. Holbeck is not
a lovely place. In fact its grim ugliness is almost startling to a south-
ener, even to one fairly well accustomed to the manufacturing districts.
I was told by a local authority that Holbeck was famous for muck and


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
14 ..
.... 4 ....
,.. 50 .
2
21-2..
.... 8 ....
... 35 .
5
Ulyett
11 ..
.... 5 ...
... 19 .
0
Barlow
7 ..
.... 2 ...
,.. 12 .
3
money, I saw plenty of the first, and the gallant way the people paid their
shillings to see the cricket was evidence of the existence of the other.
Tuesday was cold and chilly, heavy clouds making the light dim and
uncertain, and in the afternoon, when the ill-starred Players were
batting, there was a perplexing mist hanging over the ground. Play
began at ten minutes past twelve, Murdoch joining Blackham. A
quarter of an hour was occupied in getting ten runs, and then the
Australian captain was clean bowled by a ball from Emmett that broke
across. M'Donnell again proved of immense service to his side.
He hit the first ball he had to play right out of the ground for six,
and drove the second ball very prettily to the off for four. Midwinter
went off after this punishment, and Ulyett came on. M'Donnell
drove the big Yorksbireman for two fours in one over, but Blackham
after hitting Emmett for four, was beaten by the pace of a slow ball, and
fell to an easy catch at deep mid-off: five for 78. Horan joined M‘Donnell,
and the score was very rapidly taken to 96, when Barlow was put on for
the first time in the match. The people cheered when this change was
made, and I certainly think, in the face of his performance in the England
match, and considering his county average, the Lancashire player might
have been tried sooner. Midwinter, is too slow for such hitters as Massie
and M‘Donnell on a small ground like that at Holbeck. The total was
108 when M‘Donnell was remarkably well caught at deep long-on by
Emmett, who took the ball about a yard from the ropes, and when he
had it safely in his hands, sat down on a gentleman’s knee. M‘Donnell’s
35, scored out of 61, consisted of 13 hits—a six, five fours, two twos, and
6 singles. Eighty runs in 26 hits, with one chance, in a match like this,
is a performance to be proud of. Giffen came in, and Horan was as nearly
as possible bowled by Barlow, the ball hitting the off stump, and rattling,
but not removing the bails. Midwinter went on again, and at 114 Horan
was smartly caught at short-leg, the ball hitting the bottom of his bat,
and being in Selby’s hands in an instant; seven for 114. Jones became
{>artner to Giffen, who in one over from Midwinter hit a four and a six—the
atter out of the ground—and both capital hits. Jones was next over
driven on to his wicket, having again failed to score ; eight for 124.
Barlow changed ends, and Emmett resumed, these changes soon getting
rid of the last two Australian wickets, and the side being out at 25 minutes
to two for 126. Pilling kept wicket very well, and the general fielding
was good. So indeed was the bowling, but Midwinter was persevered
with too much on Tuesday. Barlow was not tried enough, and neither
Bates nor Shaw went on at all. Analysis :
Shaw’s Eleven had 127 runs to get to win. I for one did not think it
at all likely they would make them, but I was not looking forward to the
miserable exhibition that followed. The ground was harder than on
Monday, and suited Spofforth better, but the batting was feeble, and
entirely mastered by the brilliant bowling, fielding, and wicket keeping.
I do not intend to waste much space describing the 37 runs, so I will


briefly say —Ulyett was stumped at 7, Lockwood smartly caught at point,
one hand, for a good 12, at 21; Bates bowled at 22, Midwinter grandly
caught at 25 by Massie, running from deep long-off; Barlow bowled for
4at 28, he having been in an hour, and playing most carefully; Selby
bowled at 29, Scotton brilliantly caught at the wicket at 30, from a ball
which I am told he played between his legs ; Shaw admirably caught in
the slips by Jones, left hand, low down, at 32; Emmett cleverly stumped
at 34, and Pilling easily caught at long-on at 37; thus, in less than an
hour and a half, Shaw’s team, which did us such credit in Australia last
winter, were all out, and were beaten, after a tie on the first innings, by
89 runs. I admit the bad light and the difficult wicket, the excellent
bowling, and the more than excellent fielding. I cannot see that the
absence of Peate and Shrewsbury ought to have made such an extra-
ordinary difference, as Lockwood was playing, and was top scorer in each
innings. Altogether I was not satisfied, and hoped for better things at
the Oval in the following week.
Spofforth and Boyle both had an extraordinary analysis, and the latter
in the match took 12 wickets for 52 runs :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 22-1 12 15 5
Boyle 22 14 20 5
Boyle.
Full score: —
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
A. C. Bannerman, c Scotton, b Emmett 7 c Lockwood, b Midwinter.. 5
H. H. Massie, b Midwinter 0 c Lillywhite, b Midwinter . 23
W. L. Murdoch, c Ulyett, b Midwinter 3 b Emmett 5
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Barlow, b Emmett 45 c Emmett b Barlow 35
T. Horan, b Midwinter 0 c Selby, b Barlow 15
6. Giffen, b Emmett 4 not out 12
S. P. Jones, c Pilling, b Emmett 0 hit w, b Barlow 0
O, x, J L I ilillig, KJ IhllUUCtt ...... w u xvj V/
J. M‘C. Blackham, not out 12 c Ulyett, b Emmett 21
T. W. Garrett, c Pilling, b Midwinter . 1 b Emmett.. 2
H. F. Boyle, c’Selby, b Emmett 1 c Lockwood, b Emmett— 0
F. R. Spofforth, c Lockwood, b Emmett 1 1b w, b Emmett 0
82, Ibl, wbl, nbl 5 B 7,1 b 3 10
Total 79 Total 126
SHAW’S ELEVEN.
Ulyett, c Massie, b Boyle
Barlow, c and b Boyle
Lockwood, c Jones, b Boyle
Bates, not out
Midwinter, c Bannerman, b Boyle
Scotton, b Garrett
Selby, c Spofforth, b Garrett
Emmett, 1 b w, b Garrett
Shaw, st Blackham, b Boyle
Pilling, c and b Boyle
Lillywhite, c Giffen, b Boyle
Leg byes
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
. 11 st Blackham, b Boyle 7
1 b Spofforth 4
. 30 c Murdoch, b Boyle 12
29 b Spofforth 1
0 c Massie, b Boyle 1
1 c Blackham,b Spofforth.. 1
0 b Boyle 1
1 st Blackham, b Spofforth 4
1 c Jones, b Boyle 1
0 c Jones, b Spofforth 3
0 not out 0
5 Byes 2
Total 79 Total 37
Wednesday was an off day, and it was quite right that there should
have been nothing else on the day that Arahi and Geheimniss were
beaten. I don’t think the Colonists had much sympathy with the former,
hut a few of them would, perhaps, have liked the latter to win.


AUSTRALIANS v. NORTH OF ENGLAND.
Played at Manchester, September 14, 15, and 16.
Leaving Leeds in the afternoon, the team arrived at the Waterloo Hotel,
Manchester, in time for dinner. Thursday morning was wet and
threatening, and, indeed, it looked at one time as if there would be hut
little cricket. However, somehow or another, the rain left off, though
the sky looked as heavy and leaden as before, and by the time lor
commencing play there were fully 5,000 people round the Old Trafford
Ground, a number that was just doubled in the afternoon. Murdoch, no
doubt very much to his astonishment, called wrong for once, and so the
Englishmen had first innings, a luxury they had not enjoyed for some time.
Bonner was able to play, so Jones stood out. The North team was
very strong indeed, though, of course, with A. G. Steel, Barnes, and
Morley on board ship for Australia, and Shrewsbury’s finger still too bad
to allow him to play, it was scarcely the full North of England. For
myself, I should have been fully satisfied if Shrewsbury had been in the
Eleven. Anyhow, the team was a really good one, and worthy to oppose
the famous Colonists.
Barlow and Hornby began the batting just after a quarter-past 12, the
bowlers being Spofforth and Boyle. The former bowled a maiden, but
Hornby cut Boyle’s first ball for four. Then for several overs nothing
was done. At last Hornby hit Boyle for four, two, and one, which
latter stroke brought him down to Spofforth’s end. The third
ball he had to play got him out. It glanced from his pad on to the leg
stump, and just knocked off the bails ; one for 11. Ulyett came, and by
a series of good hits seventeen runs were added, when Ulyett was caught
by Boyle off his own bowling. The return was low and sharp, but
Boyle, though he fell down and rolled on his back, held the ball and
threw it up ; two for 28. Boyle was playing in very good form when a
splendid ball from Spofforth bowled him ; three for 43. Then came the
stand of the innings. Lockwood joined Barlow, who had made 19, and
by really good steady cricket the score rose slowly but surely. There
were a few uncertain snicks, but nothing like a chance, while the way
Lockwood cut and Barlow placed the ball brought out the prompt
applause of the keen Lancashire crowd. At the interval the total was 72
for three wickets, Barlow (not out) 32, and Lockwood (not out) 17.
Rain fell during luncheon, but not very heavily. Play was, however,
not resumed until 20 minutes past three, when Giffen, who had come on
at 66, shared the bowling with Spofforth. The two professionals now
batted better than before, a beautiful off-drive by Lockwood from Spofforth
being noticeable among several other excellent hits. Garrett went on
at 99, and then a loud cheer welcomed the appearance of the 100, which


number had taken just two hours to make. Each scored a four off
Giffen, who at 120 gave way to Boyle. Seven runs later the long part-
nership was ended, Lockwood being caught at mid-ott‘ for 53, an innings
without a chance, and consisting of six fours, three threes, three twos,
and singles. The wicket had put on 84 runs ; four for 127. Bates was
out in hitting a full pitch, Garrett smartly making a catch wide on the
on side; five for 129. Flowers had no sooner joined Barlow than the
latter was leg before wicket to Boyle. He had been batting two hours
and 40 minutes, and though he was as patient as ever, his play was by
no means cramped or slow. He, like Lockwood, made no mistakes, and
his figures were two fours, three threes, nine twos, and singles. Barlow
did not score after Lockwood got out. He tried very hard, but without
success, to reach his 50; six for 129. Emmett came in, and Flowers
was caught at the wicket; seven for 130. Four wickets had now
fallen for only three runs, and it looked as if the innings would
be but a moderate one, notwithstanding what Lockwood and Barlow
had done. Pilling, however, came to the rescue. He hit three
threes off Garrett, and one off Boyle, and then Emmett cut Boyle
for three. Spofforth resumed bowling at 147. Pilling hit each bowler for
three, and Giffen went on for Boyle. This did not last long, for Spofforth
changed ends, and Garrett was tried again. Pilling continued to hit,
though he could not get the ball quite to the boundary, but at 172
Emmett was bowled. The pair had put on 42 runs by some excellent
cricket. Crossland joined Pilling, who drove Garrett straight for three,
and was then caught at deep mid-off. The Lancashire wicket-keeper was
almost as heartily cheered as Lockwood and Barlow had been; nine for
178. Peate was last man, as he was in another match that I remember.
He snicked Garrett to leg for four, and drove Spofforth very well to the on
for four, and I also remember that it was just eight runs that were wanted
of him in that other match. Why didn’t he do it then? Crossland drove
Garrett hard to the off for four, but was missed in the same over by Horan
from a moderately easy running catch. This was the only chance missed
throughout the innings. Play then ceased for the day, the score of the
North being 193 for nine wickets, Peate (not out) 9, Crossland (not out) 7.
The wicket played easily and well, far better than I expected, but the
light was bad all day, and against such bowling and fielding, I think the
North made a very good show.
Everything seemed to promise an enjoyable day’s cricket when the
game was continued soon after noon yesterday. The weather was fine
and sunny, and there was a very large attendance, which increased
rapidly until, in the afternoon, the number of people present was larger
than I ever remember at the Old Trafford. As the North had only one
wicket to fall, I don’t suppose that even the most sanguine of their
partisans anticipated Peate and Crossland would add more than 10 or 20
runs at most. As the game turned out these two hit wonderfully well,
and from the time they got together on Thursday evening put on no
fewer than 67 runs. Spofforth and Garrett were the bowlers, but the
former met with so much punishment that he soon gave way to Boyle.
The change proved unfortunate for the Australians, as 11 runs were made
in the Victorian’s first over. Peate sent the first ball to leg for four, a leg
bye was run from the second, while Crossland cut the third and fourth


for four and two respectively. The score thus rose very rapidly,
so at 255 Spofforth came on again. Ten more runs were added
before Garrett bowled Crossland for a thoroughly well hit and most
plucky innings of 35. Peate, too, I must not forget to mention.
His 29 (not out) was well played, and an invaluable contribution. It
was quite refreshing to find the “tail” of an English eleven making
such scores as 32, 35, and 29 (not out). The total reached the formid-
able number of 245.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 57 25 82 3
Boyle 43 23 70 3
Giffen 18 6 27 0
Garrett 33 15 60 4
Twenty-five minutes elapsed before the Australians’ innings was com-
menced by Massie and Bannerman. Peate and Crossland shared the
bowling. At starting Massie hit a ball past Lockwood at point; it was
just a possible chance, but no more, and one that it was no disgrace not
to take. The same batsman made several good hits, but the fielding
was far too close to get the ball away. Afterwards he drove Peate to the
off for four, but in the slow bowler’s next over both Massie and Banner-
man were beaten. Another off-drive for four by Massie took the score up
to 24, when a fast ball from Crossland sent back Bannerman. Murdoch
came in, and Massie, who had been striving very hard to score, drove
Crossland for two fours and a three in one over. The last hit I must
mention was misfielded by Boyle, a gentleman who rarely indeed makes
a mistake in the field, and who it is but fair to say fully atoned for his
error later on. Crossland was taken off in favour of Barlow, and im-
mediately afterwards Peate brought out immense cheering by clean
bowling the Australian captain, leg stump, for a single. M‘Donnell, the
next comer, made even a briefer stay, as in the same over he was brilliantly
caught at slip; two and three wickets for 39. When Horan came in there
were some lucky hits made by both batsmen, but no further wicket fell
before luncheon, though Emmett relieved Peate. At two o’clock the score
was 54 for three wickets, Massie (not out) 44. When play was continued
at ten minutes to three the bowling was still shared by Barlow and Peate.
Horan in attempting three for a hit of his own was smartly run out,
Mr. Boyle fielding the ball, and Peate putting the wicket down; four
for 57. With the score unaltered Massie, whose 44 was brilliantly hit,
and included six fours, a three, and two twos, was magnificently caught
at cover point. This fine piece of fielding elicited loud cheers from all
parts of the ground. Bonnor came next, and Crossland resumed bowling
The “giant” did not play at all well. He put a ball from Peate danger-
ously up on the on side, and might have been caught at deep long-off but
Ulyett misjudged the ball. Giffen made one or two good hits, and 80
went up on the telegraph board at a quarter past thx-ee. Soon afterwards
an easy catch at short-leg got rid of Bonnor, and then the innings came
to a very speedy conclusion. Crossland clean bowled Blackham and
Garrett, Giffen, who had batted freely and well for 24, was easily caught
at cover-point, and then Hornby caught Spofforth. The innings thus
finished just before four o’clock for 110. Considering that at no time was
the wicket difficult or treacherous getting out for such a poor total as 110
was a distinctly bad performance for a team with the reputation of the


Australians, and on the other hand Peate and Crossland
are to he heartilv
congratulated on
their admirable bowling. Analysis :—
Peate
Overs. Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
31-3 12
. 54
5
Crossland
27 11
. 39 ,
4
Barlow
. 12
0
Emmett
2 2
. 0
0
The Colonists were in the unenviable position of being 135 runs behind,
and had, of course, to follow on. The usual order of going in was departed
from, Blackham and Massie being the first pair of batsmen. Crossland
and Peate were, of course, chosen to start the bowling. Massie was not
seen to advantage. He was nearly bowled, and before he had scored
returned a ball in the tamest manner to Peate. Murdoch followed, but
lost the company of Blackham, whose off stump was bowled by Crossland.
With two wickets down for 11 runs M‘Donnell came in. The Englishmen
bowled and fielded remarkably well, and for some time runs came very
slowly. The score, however, reached 41 when Barlow relieved Crossland,
and eight runs later Peate gave way to Ulyett. The latter change proved
successful, as in Ulyett’s third over a brilliant catch at slip dismissed
M‘Donnell for 21; three for 53. Horan came next, and some steady play
was seen. Emmett went on, but could not get another wicket, and at
the drawing of stumps the score was 59 for three wickets. Murdoch not
out 24, Horan not out 6. The Colonists, with seven wickets to fall,
requiring 76 runs to save an innings’ defeat.
On the Saturday the Australians suffered their fourth defeat in England,
being beaten by ten wickets. The game began at a few minutes
after twelve, Murdoch and Horan going on with the innings of the
Colonists. Peate and Crossland were the bowlers, and when 20 runs
had been added the former dismissed Horan. Murdoch was out leg-
before-wicket directly afterwards for an extremely careful 33. The
downfall of these two famous batsmen left the game in an almost hope-
less position for the Colonists ; five for 80. Bannerman joined Giffen,
and 16 runs were put on before the South Australian was very well
caught at the wicket. Only six runs later three other wickets fell,
Bannerman being clean bowled by Peate, and Bonnor and Spofforth
both bowled by Crossland ; seven, eight, and nine wickets for 102.
Garrett was last man, 33 runs being wanted to avert a single innings’
defeat. Neither of the last two men, Boyle and Garrett, was at all well,
the former being very ill indeed. The batting was, however, both
plucky and spirited, and do what they could, the Englishmen were
unable to obtain the last wicket. It was not until after lunch that
Boyle was bowled for 23. Garrett carried out his bat for 29. During
this long stand the people had been very excited, the big hits were cheered
very heartily, but there was evident disappointment as the score rose,
and a single innings’ defeat of the Colonists became less and less likely.
When the innings was really saved, after lunch, there was almost
feverish anxiety manifested to get the wicket, and when at last it did
fall, at 162, the enthusiasm was tremendous. It would be difficult to
find the record of a match in which the last wickets on both sides did
such serviceable work. I have praised Crossland and Peate for their
batting on behalf of the North, and now I can say that better pluck or
more confidence has seldom been witnessed than that displayed by


Boyle and Garrett, Of course they could not save the match. That
was gone too far. But instead of suffering a single-innings’ defeat the
Australians won the satisfaction of putting their opponents in for 28 runs.
Before I say how those 28 runs were made it is necessary to mention the
admirable judgment displayed by Hornby in placing his field and
changing his bowling, the coolness and skill of Pilling behind the
wickets, the brilliant fielding of Boyle, Barlow, and, indeed, the whole
eleven, the destructive energy of Crossland, and last, but not least, the
superb bowling of Peate, whose performance in the match of taking 10
wickets for 105 runs on a perfect wicket will long be remembered to his
credit. Analysis:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Crossland 33 14 49 4
Peate 51-1 30 51 5
Barlow 20 11 32 0
Ulyett 4 3 1 1
Emmett 1 0 2 0
Bates .. 4 2 11 6
The twenty-eight runs necessary to win were made by Hornby and
Barlow in a quarter of an hour by some brilliant, dashing hitting. The
first fifteen runs occupied just over ten minutes, and then in two overs
the match was won. Hornby drove Garrett brilliantly for four twice in
one over, Barlow placed Spofforth well to leg for three, and Hornby cut
the next ball grandly behind point for four, this finishing the game at a
quarter to four in favour of the North by ten wickets. Analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 4-3 1 14 0
Garrett 4 0 15 0
A grand match, played through on a good hard wicket, was won with
a lot in hand by greatly superior all-round cricket. The Colonists
batted very much below their form, considering the excellence of the
wicket. Crossland was too fast and too good for the weaker batsmen of
the team, and Peate has seldom done so well on a batsman’s wicket.
There was no luck and no fluke about the match, which was to a con-
siderable extent a revenge for the Oval defeat of August 29, and supports
the opinion I have always held that, strong as the Australians are, they
are not equal to our very best teams when the ground is in good order.
Full score:—
NORTH OF ENGLAND.
A. N. Hornby, b Spofforth 11
Barlow, 1 b w, b Boyle 48
Ulyett, c and b Boyle 6
Rev. v. F. Royle, b Spofforth 7
Lockwood, c Bannerman, b Garrett 53
Bates, c and b Garrett 2
Flowers, c Blackham, b Boyle 0
Emmett, b Garrett 16
Pilling, c Bannerman, b Spofforth 32
Crossland, b Garrett 35
Peate, not out 29
B 1,1 b 5 6
Total .245
In the second innings, Hornby scored (not out) 18, Barlow (not out) 11; bye 1—
total 30.


AUSTRALIANS.
a' o'Barfnpr’mn^ 0 ?p ** P , eat ? 44 c and b Peate 2nd o inn *
w r nn ,? rn u a u* r? Crossland 3 b Peate 11
WV?-*', Murdoch, b Peate 1 ibwb Peate «
6 ° w ’. buiyett ' :::: g
S bSSia b n? 08Sland .;. : 10 0
T w C p?rre^ b S l,OB ! 18,11 * 1 1 b Crossland 5
w w^'iS^ rett ’ P Grassland 0 not out 29
H. F. Boyle, not out 8 b Peate
F. It Spofforth, c Hornby, b Peate 5 b Crossland *o
B 1; 1 b 4 5 B 6, 1 b 10 16
Total 110 Total 162


AUSTRALIANS v. SHAW’S ELEVEN.
Played at Kennington Oval, Sept. 18, 19, and 20.
The team stayed over Saturday night in Manchester, and came up to
town by the five o’clock train on Sunday afternoon, arriving at King’s
Cross soon after ten. Monday’s match at the Oval was the return with
Alfred Shaw’s Eleven, and the last engagement of the team in London.
Palmer was still too unwell to play, and Jones was the other man left out.
Shaw’s team suffered a severe loss, Shrewsbury’s bad hand again
preventing his appearance. As it turned out, Gunn proved a very fair
substitute, playing the capital howling of the Colonists with patience and
sound judgment. The weather on Monday was overcast, hut not
unpleasant. As at Leeds and Manchester, stumps were drawn at half-
past five, but even then the light for the last hour was very indifferent.
Contrary to the usual plan at the Oval, the wickets were pitched across
the ground—at right angles to their usual position. The object of this
was to get a pitch on the less worn portion of the turf, and also to have a
canvas at the back of each howler. Alfred Shaw heat Murdoch in the toss
for innings, and naturally chose to go in first. The ground seemed firm
enough, hut as sawdust was used at both wickets I suppose there had been
some rain. The Colonists turned out to field soon after twelve o’clock,
Spofforth and Boyle bowling to Barlow and Ulyett. At first the two batsmen
seemed likely to make a good stand. For several overs they played sound
cricket, Ulyett showing unusual steadiness. However, with the score at 15
they were both dismissed. Ulyett, in trying to place a hall from
Spofforth, was wonderfully well caught at short-leg by Horan—close to
the ground—and Barlow was clean bowled by Boyle. Midwinter and
Gunn had to play some splendid bowling, and it was not surprising that
they could not get it away. Boyle kept his length to perfection, and
Spofforth broke back in a way that might have beaten any batsman.
Midwinter stopped a number of good balls, but at 25 Spofforth clean
bowled him. Three wickets for this small score was a very bad beginning,
but fortunately for the English team matters soon changed when Bates
J'oined Gunn. ' The latter continued to play a strictly defensive game,
»ut Bates at once began to hit. He drove Spofforth for two, cut him very
neatly for three, and then made two twos and a three from Boyle. Having
scored 14, however he was very nearly caught by Bannerman at mid-off.
The hit was a lofty one and the fieldsman, having to go sideways as he
judged the ball, never got it in his hands. Soon after this Bates cut
Spofforth for three. With the total at 46 Murdoch tried his first change
of bowling, Garrett going on in place of Boyle. Fifty went up at five-and-
twenty to two, but at 53 Bates was easily caught at point, a bumping ball
from Spofforth going off the shoulder of his bat. Despite the difficult
chance to Bannerman his innings of 26 was as good as it was useful. Only
28 runs were scored during his stay. Scotton was in next, and in one
over from Spofforth seven runs were scored, Gunn making a three to


square-leg, and the new batsman a snick for four. Boyle bowled again
for Garrett at 65, and at lunch time the total was 69.
Play was resumed at a quarter to three, and for some time the game went
against the English team. At 79 Scotton was neatly caught at slip, close
to the ground; at 82 Gunn was clean bowled ; at 86 Selby was bowled, in
hitting out at Boyle, and at 93 Shaw was bowled; four wickets going
down for 24 runs. Gunn, as I have said already, played a capital innings.
I must confess I was suprised to see him oiler so stout a resistance to
Spofforth’s break-backs. It was scarcely a discredit to him that at last
the great bowler found a weak point in his defence. With eight wickets
down for 95 Pilling became Emmett’s partner, and by some really good
cricket the score was rapidly advanced. Emmett hit Boyle to square-leg
for four, and with a cut for two sent up the 100. Pilling cut Boyle finely
for four, and brought on Garrett at 107. Still runs came freely, Pilling,
among smaller hits, getting Spofforth through the slips for four. At
121 Spofforth gave way to Boyle, and, with eight runs added, the innings
came to an end. Emmett was exceedingly well caught by Bannerman—
fielding out deep and wide on the on-side—and Peate was easily caught
and bowled. It was just after four o’clock when the last wicket fell.
During their partnership Emmett and Pilling put on 36 runs. In no
previous match this season had I seen Emmett play the Australian
bowling with such confidence and spirit; his 27 was in every way a good
performance. The players thought the wicket a very good one for the
time of year, but the bowlers were able to get plenty of work on the ball.
Spofforth’s figures were very good, as the analysis shows :—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 45 25 57 6
Boyle 38-1 17 48 3
Garrett 11 2 19 1
The Australians had as nearly as possible an hour’s batting, and a
very sensational hour it proved, seven wickets being lost for 38 runs.
Certainly the light was bad, but the main cause of the breakdown was
Peate’s magnificent bowling. Spofforth had cut up the pitch a good
deal, and of this fact the young Yorkshireman took full advantage.
Bowling quicker than usual, he put on a tremendous break, and so
thoroughly demoralised the batsmen, that they were afraid to let him
pitch.
Midwinter started the bowling with Peate, and dismissed Massie with
his first ball, a feat that he had performed at Leeds in the first match
between the same teams. Then in one over Peate got Bannerman caught
at point, and clean bowled M ‘Donnell, three wickets being down for
two runs. The spectators cheered enthusiastically at the successes
of the home eleven, and well they might, for it is not often that
three such batsmen as Massie, Bannerman, and M'Donnell are dis-
missed in half-a-dozen overs. Murdoch and Horan stayed together for
a little time, but the score had only reached ten when Horan jumped
out to drive Peate and was stumped. Giffen joined Murdoch,
and for a time the bowlers met with a check. Both batsmen played
Midwinter with apparent ease, but they were very uncomfortable with
Peate. Murdoch gave a hard chance of stumping when he had made 11,
but the ball beat the wicket-keeper as well as the batsman. A little
later Pilling appealed for stumping, but the umpire decided in Murdoch’s


Midwinter 13 9 14 1
Peate 28 12 43 6
Ulyett 5 1 12 1
Barlow • 14-3 4 ...... ,14 2
With an advantage of 42 runs on the first innings, Shaw s team went in
at about twenty minutes past one. Barlow and Ulyett opened the
hatting to the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle. Before he had made a
run Barlow was missed at point by Murdoch —rather low down, but not,
to my thinking, a difficult chance. The mistake proved a serious one for
the Australians, as Barlow afterwards played good cricket, and was not
favour. Thirty went up at twelve minutes past five, and at 31 Shaw
very wisely put on Ulyett in place of Midwinter. Giffen hit a two in
the fast bowler’s first over, and then Murdoch, running out once too
often at Peate, was smartly stumped. Other disasters quickly followed.
Giffen was bowled by Peate, the ball touching his pad, and Blackham
was easily caught at cover-slip. It only wanted four minutes to time
when the last wicket fell, so stumps were drawn for the day. On
returning to the Pavilion the Englishmen had a splendid reception, Peate
■coming in for the lion’s share of the applause. I really think that had
play lasted twenty minutes longer the whole side would have been out,
•as there could be no question that Peate was exceptionally difficult.
Unfortunately for Shaw’s team cricket on Tuesday was impossible.
Rain fell for several hours without intermission, and soon after two
■o’clock it was decided to postpone the game till the following day.
On Wednesday the match ended in a draw. No other result was
likely, for the wicket was much too soft to be difficult. Had the sun
•come out in the morning the character of the cricket would, no
doubt, have been entirely different, but the weather all day was
miserably dull, and there was no fear of the ground getting dry. _ For
the half hour that our men were batting before luncheon the wicket
certainly seemed treacherous, but a light rainfall soon made it easy
again. Undeterred by the threatening clouds a large company assem-
bled on the ground, and the cricket was watched with eager interest.
As in all matches that the Australians have played in London, the
applause was far from being one-sided. A smart piece of fielding by any
one of the Colonists was as promptly recognised and as warmly cheered
as a good hit by an English batsman. It is hardly necessary that I
should follow the play in close detail, the game at the finish being
undecided.
The Australian innings was resumed at seven minutes past twelve, and
ended in a trifle under an hour. At starting 12 runs were wanted
to save the “follow on,” but before an over had been completed it was
•evident there was no chance of three wickets falling for such a number.
Bonnor played a vigorous game, and made 28 runs out of the 32 put on
during his stay. He ought to have been easily caught at long-on off
Peate, but Gunn misjudged the ball, and went forward two or three yards
instead of standing where he was. When he tried to get back it was too
late. Boyle was out at 52, and Bonnor at 70. Garrett and Spofforth
gave a good deal of trouble for the last wicket, and the total amounted
in the end to 87. Peate, of course, could not bowl as he had bowled on
Monday, but his analysis for the whole innings was still remarkably good.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.


got rid of till more than a hundred runs had been scored. With the total
at 13 Ulyett was out to Spofforth’s howling, and Midwinter joined Barlow.
When two byes had been added rain stopped play, it being then nearly
ten minutes short of lunch time. The game was continued at ten minutes
to three, the light being wretchedly bad. It improved after a time, but
was never good. Midwinter and Barlow took full advantage of the easy
wicket, and scored rapidly, 26 runs being made from eight overs. Spofforth
and Boyle gave way to Bannerman and Garrett, and with the total at 50
Midwinter was caught at cover-point. His 25 was a really capital innings.
Shaw’s team were now 100 runs ahead with eight wickets to fall, and it
was certain that the game could not be completed. Gunn ran himself
out at 65, hut Scotton stayed with Barlow, and a most obstinate
resistance was offered to the Colonial howling. For some time the
cricket was unmarked by any special features. At last, however, a
drive for four by Barlow sent up the 100, an hour and five minutes being
left for cricket. M'Donnell and Murdoch went on to bowl, and at 118 the
former succeeded in dismissing Barlow. Apart from a chance at point,
Barlow had made two or three lucky hits, but his innings of 56 was by no
means unworthy of his reputation. It included two fours, five threes,
and nine twos. For the remainder of the afternoon runs were freely
scored. Knowing that the loss of a wicket or two would make no
difference, the Englishmen hit out with refreshing vigour and confidence.
Bates was out at 140, but Selby and Scotton punished all bowlers alike,
and put on 48 runs during their partnership. At last Selby was caught at
point. Emmett then went in, and at the call of time the total was 190
for six wickets. 1 have not often seen Scotton play much better. His
49 not out was a distinctly creditable performance. Shaw’s team were
232 runs ahead, with four wickets to fall, and thus the draw was all in
their favour. I should not myself rank them quite so good as the
Australians at any point, but in this particular match they had the
advantage throughout, and the rain on Tuesday was cruelly unlucky for
them. Bowling analysis Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 19 7 34 1
Boyle 22 7 35 1
ct, I M i
Garrett 21 11 28 0
Bannerman 24 9 36 1
M’Donnell 9 1 19 1
Murdoch 9 2 22 1
The ground was too soft for Spofforth to get a proper foothold, and
after luncheon he seemed quite easy. Full score ;
SHAW’S ELEVEN.
Barlow, b Boyle
Ulyett, c Horan, b Spofforth
Midwinter, b Spofforth
Gunn, b Spofforth
Bates, c Murdoch, b Spofforth ..,
Scotton, c Bonnor, b Spofforth ...
Selby, b Boyle
Emmett, c Bannerman, b Garrett
Shaw, b Spofforth
Pilling, not out
Peate, c and b Boyle
B 3,1 b 2
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
.. 7 b M’Donnell 56
.. 8 b Spofforth 7
5 c Garrett, b Bannerman.. 25
.. 21 run out 3
26 c Garrett, b Murdoch 13
12 not out 49
3 c Murdoch, b Boyle 19
27 not out 2
5 B 14, 1 b 2 16
Total.
129 Total 190


AUSTRALIANS.
H. H. Massie, b Midwinter 0
A. C. Bannerman, c Barlow, b Peate 2
W. L. Murdoch, st Pilling, b Peate 14
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Peate 0
T. Horan, st Pilling, b Peate 3
G. Giffen, b Peate 16
J. M‘C. Blackham, c Selby, b Ulyett 0
G. J. Bonnor, c Emmett, b Peate 28
H. P. Boyle, b Barlow 1
T, W. Garrett, c Peate, b Barlow 11
P. R. Spofforth, not out 8
Byes 4
Total 87


AUSTRALIANS v. ELEVEN OP SCOTLAND.
Played at Glasgow, September 21, and 22.
The team had a long journey on the same night that the match with
Shaw’s Eleven was concluded, in order to fulfil there engagement at
Glasgow on the Thursday and Friday. They left King’s Cross at half-
past eight, and reached Glasgow about eight in the morning. Rooms had
been secured at the Grand Hotel, out towards Kelvin Park. Cricket in
Scotland is of comparatively recent growth, and even the best Scotch
eleven would have little chance when opposed to one of the chief English
counties, so that an even fight against the Australians, especially as some
of the most prominent of Scotch cricketers were not included in the eleven,
was not to be anticipated. Watson, the Lancashire bowler, took part in
the game as a Scotchman by birth, as did another professional, Buchanan,
who proved very successful. On the Australian side Palmer was still
unable to play, and imagining they had an easy task before them, the
Colonists permitted Massie to stand out of the match. Jones took the
vacant place. The ground at Patrick is not a very big one, and the wicket
had been rendered soft and difficult by the recent wet weather. Still the
Scotchmen, on winning the toss, ought to have done better than they did.
Anything more feeble than the show they made I can scarcely call to
mind. J. G. Walker, of the Oxford Eleven, made 12 runs out of the first
16 and was out fourth ; but after he left it seemed almost as if Spotforth
had merely to bowl the ball to get a wicket. I shall not pretend to go
into any details of the innings. Suffice it to say that in an hour and a
quarter Spofforth and Boyle dismissed the whole side for 32—the smallest
total for which the Australians have disposed of an eleven in any one of
their matches. Spofforth’s bowling was truly extraordinary Certainly
he had a wicket all in is favour, and the batsmen opposed to him were of
distinctly inferior ability, but it was a wonderful performance to get eight
wickets at a cost of eleven runs. As far as the figures are_ concerned they
are the best he has had during the tour. Bowling analysis :
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets
Spofforth 19' 1 12 •
Boyle .'.'.'.'.'‘*. ’''''•'’• ■•••••-•-• • ■ • '• • 19 9 21 * 2
As Massie was absent M‘Donnell went in first with Bannerman, while
Watson and Morton, the Cambridge fast bowler, opposed them. The
Victorian was soon bowled, but when Murdoch joined Bannerman the
score was increased to 16, when the players retired foi luncheon. An
hour elapsed before the game was proceeded with, Morton and VV atson still


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Watson
31 ..
.... 22 ....
.. 33 .,
2
Morton
21 ..
8
44
Buchanan
25-1..
6
5ft
Parsons
6 ...
... 4 ....
.. 8 ..
.... 0
■bowling. Bannerman soon played a ball from the amateur into his
wicket, and retired for 15. With two good wickets down for 28, the
Colonists were not doing well, when Horan joined Murdoch. These two,
however, played capital cricket, and, despite a change of bowling—
Buchanan for Morton—no fewer than ol runs had been added when
Murdoch was bowled for a well-played innings of 30. Horan next had
Gillen for a partner, but the score had only been increased to 95 when the
comer was dismissed by a splendid catch at third man by Walker,
who tumbled over in taking the ball. Now came a series of disasters for
the Australians, indeed the rest of the innings was only redeemed by
some vigorous hitting on the part of Garrett. Bonnor, who came in, was
quickly caught at long-on, and soon afterwards Horan slipped in trying a
run, and lost his wicket. The latter had played a thoroughly sound and
eminently useful innings of 45, in which were three fours and eight twos.
Jones,who had been completely out of form, was bowled by Buchanan, and
seven wickets were down for 117. Garrett then came in, and at once
began scoring freely. He, however, soon lost the company of Blackham,
who was run out. Boyle and Spofforth rendered Garrett no assistance,
and at half-past five the innings was over for 155. Buchanan deserves a
word of praise both for his bowling and fielding. Analysis :
On Friday the match had lost nearly all interest, a single innings’s vic-
tory for the Australians being anticipated all round. Despite this fact, and
the dull, cloudy weather, there was a fairly good attendance when the
game was resumed at twenty minutes to one. Spofforth and Boyle were
again the bowlers, but the captain of the Scotch team made an alteration
in the batting order. Parsons was sent in with Sharp. The start was
disastrous, Parsons being bowled off-stump when the score was only 3.
Walker joined Sharp, who twice hit Spofforth to square-leg for four!
After this the game turned very slow, though the cricket was good.
Gradually the score reached 29, when a beautiful ball from Spofforth, just
removing the off-bail, dismissed Walker. Anderson came in, but quickly
lost the company of Sharp, who, in trying to pull a straight ball from
Boyle, lost his wicket. He had batted in good style for 25 ; three
for 33. Anderson did very little, but the batting improved when
Dunlop and Morton got together. I don’t remember Morton ever doing
anything really noteworthy in batting in any of the big matches he has
played in London, and was greatly surprised at the freedom with which
he scored from Spofforth and Boyle. He hit Boyle for two twos and a
three, and after Dunlop had been run out made two more fours from
Boyle. Buchanan again failed to score, but when Morton had Shanks
for a partner the old Cantab brought out enthusiastic applause by hittino-
Spofforth thrice in one over for four. At 86, however, Spofforth bowled
him, and at lunch-time seven wickets were down for 91. On the resumption
of play the innings came to a very speedy conclusion. Shanks was
bowled for 11, and both Asher and Crichton failed to score. The total
reached 100, Watson carrying out his bat for 11. Thus the Australians


gained a most decisive victory by an innings and 23 runs, this being the
twenty-second match they had won. Bowling analysis
Overs. Maidens. Runs Wickets-
Spofforth 26 12 47 6
Bovle 26 7 52 3
Boyle 26
Spofforth’s figures are again remarkably good. Score
ELEVEN OF SCOTLAND.
Ist inn. 2nd inn.
J. G. Walker, b Spofforth 12 b Spofforth 6
A. G. G. Asher, b Spofforth 1 b Spofforth 0
A. O. Dunlop, c Murdoch, b Boyle 1 run out 10
R. Sharp, c Bannerman, b Boyle 2 b Boyle 25
X U w
Boyle 1 run out 10
2 b Boyle 25
XL. OlJLdip, G w jjuju/ “ —J -
Watson, b Spofforth 1 not out 11
D. Crichton, st Blackham, b Spofforth 0 b Boyle 0
T. Anderson, b Spofforth 9 b Boyle ...... .. 4
Buchanan, c Bonnor, b Spofforth 0 c and b Spofforth 0
P. H. Morton, c Bonnor, b Spofforth 5 b Spofforth 32
R. Shanks, b Spofforth 0 b Spofforth 11
G. Parsons, not out 1 b Spofforth 0
Lb l
Total 32 Total 100
AUSTRALIANS.
P. S. M‘Donnell, b Watson 2
A. C. Bannerman, b Morton 15
W. L. Murdoch, b Buchanan 3d
T. Horan, run out 45
G Giffen,’ c Walker, b Buchanan 5
U V/ »» «■ KJ
G. J. Bonnor, c Buchanan, b Watson 5
J. M‘C. Blackham, run out J
S. P. Jones, b Buchanan 4
T. W. Garrett, not out 25
H. E. Boyle, b Buchanan 4
11* L • ic, u
F. R. Spofforth, b Buchanan 0
11. o uuuui in, u ojuciiauau „ :
B 7,1 b 7 14
Total 155
I hear that the photographs taken by Barony, of Scarborough, were very
satisfactory, and indeed this was to be expected.


AUSTRALIANS v. AN ELEVEN OF ENGLAND.
Played at Harrogate, September 23, 25, and 26.
After the conclusion of the Glasgow match on Friday, September 22,
the Australians travelled all night to Harrogate, where they had to
commence the last match of their tour. Sleeping cars had been put on
the 8-50 p.m. train, and the Australians, after a somewhat tedious
journey, arrived in Harrogate at half-past eight on Saturday morning
Quarters had been secured at the Queen Hotel, one of the largest at which
the Colonists have stayed in England. Massie, who had been given two
days’ holiday, joined the team at Harrogate. The eleven got together
to oppose the Australians was a fairly strong one, but it was hardly the
sort of side likely to play well together. W. G. Grace, who had been
announced, was kept away by a business engagement, and his place was
taken by Lockwood. The curious thing about the match was that it was
fixed for Saturday, Monday, and Tuesday—a proceeding that is quite
novel in this country. I never remember to have seen a match before
that was broken by a Sunday. The Australians selected their team
before leaving the hotel and decided to leave out Jones and Palmer, the
latter being still unfit to play cricket. The ground at Harrogate was
hardly the place for a first-class match, as the wicket was fiery and the
out-fielding exceedingly rough. On Saturday the wicket played very
badly, and many balls got up dangerously. The attendance was good,
over 5,000 persons paying for admission. E. M. Grace, who captained
the side in his brother’s absence, won the toss, and sent in Ulyett and the
Hon. M. B. Hawke, the bowling being shared by Spofforth and Boyle.
The Yorkshire professional was twice hurt by Spottorth, but he kept
pluckily to his work, and played fairly good cricket. Runs came slowly
at starting, and then each batsman hit two twos. After about forty
minutes’ play the score reached 23, when Ulyett cut a ball into his
wicket. One for 25 was not such a bad start, but after Ulyett s
departure the Englishmen fared very poorly. Maurice Read was neatly
caught at slip at 24, and at 31, both Hawke and Lockwood were
dismissed —the former playing a ball hard on to _his wicket, and the
latter being finely caught at slip. The disasters did not end here, how-
ever, as at 32 Grace sent a ball into Murdoch’s hands at point, and with
twelve runs added, Gilbert was exceedingly well caught deep behind the
bowler. Riley became Emmett’s partner and gave a hard chance to
M‘Donnell at long-on from the first ball he received. The mistake, however,
did very little harm, as at 53 Riley from a false hit was easily caught at third


man. Roller, of the Surrey County Eleven came in next, and Emmett made
the first four of the match—a good off drive from Boyle. When the bell rang
for luncheon the score was 61 for seven wickets. On resuming the innings
was very quickly finished off. Roller ran himself out. Peate was caught
at slip, and Leatham was bowled, the last wicket falling for 72. Emmett
who took out his bat for a capital 23, was about the only man who seemed
really comfortable with the howling. Spofforth and Boyle were in their
best form, hut the Englishmen ought to have made more than 72. The
hatting was half-hearted and nearly every one seemed frightened of the
wicket. Bowling analysis.
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 30-1 14 29 4
Boyle 30 10 41 5
Bannerman and Massie began the Australian innings at twenty-five
minutes past three, to the bowling of Ulyett and Peate. Bannerman cut
a long hop for 4, and soon afterwards made an off drive for the same
number. Massie drove Peate for 4, and the total was soon up to 15, when
Ulyett howled down Bannerman’s middle stump. Murdoch filled the
vacancy, and Massie hit Peate twice for 4. Then at 27 a well judged
catch at long-off got rid of Massie. M‘Donnell, the next man in, was
twice nearly bowled by Ulyett, who also went very close to Murdoch’s
wicket. M'Donnell after scoring eight was easily caught at slip, the third
wicket falling at 40. Horan came in, and Murdoch was missed from a
rather difficult chance at point by Grace. The ball went only to his left
hand, and the catch would have been a very good one had it come off.
Horan made an on drive for 4 from Peate which pitched over the ropes,
and a 4 to square-leg off Ulyett, but these proved to be his only hits, for at
53 he was easily caught at cover-slip. Giffen, who followed, cut Ulyett
twice for 4, and caused Emmett to take the ball at 67, a change that was
at once attended with success, Giffen being caught at cover-point from
the Yorkshire captain’s second ball. Bonnor became Murdoch’s next
partner, and began with one of his sensational drives, sending Emmett
clean out of the ground for 6, amidst loud cheering. With the score at
73 Peate clean bowled Murdoch’s leg stump, and the Australian captain
retired for 15. Just after Bonnor had been missed at long-off by Read,
Blackham was run out, and seven wickets were down for 73. I now
thought the innings would be soon over, but when Garrett and Bonnor
got together runs were put on at a great pace. About this time the field-
ing was very loose. Gilbert at long-on missed Bonnor from a very lofty
drive, and many runs were lost in the field. The 100 went up at a quarter to
five amidst cheers, which were renewed when Bonnor again drove Emmett out
of the ground for 6. In trying to repeat this performance Bonnor was splen-
didly caught at long-on, at the second attempt, by Gilbert, who, thus to some
extent, made up for his previous mistake. Bonnor’s 27—the top score of the
day—was a well hit, but lucky innings. Boyle was smartly caught by
Ulyett with one hand at forward cover-point, the ninth wicket falling at
113. Spofforth joined Garrett, and for a few minutes there was some
dashing cricket. Spofforth drove Emmett to the on for 4, and Garrett
sent Peate to the off for the same number. In one over from Peate
Spofforth made three drives for 4, but off the last ball of the same over


was caught at the wicket. Thus the innings, which had lasted an hour
and forty minutes, closed for 134, or 62 runs to the good. Garrett took
out his bat for an admirable 24. I give below the howling analysis :
Overs, Maidens. Runs. Wickets.
Ulyett 14 3 32 1
Peate 25 9 64 4
Emmett 11 •••••• 2 33 3
Ulyett bowled a wide.
The English Eleven went in for about five minutes’ hatting in a very
had light. Hawke and Gilbert commenced the innings, and when stumps
were drawn the score was one with no wicket down. On Saturday evening
there was a dance at the Queen Hotel, at which several of the
Australians were present. Sunday was spent quietly, the Colonists
being very glad of a day’s rest after their hard week’s travelling.
I thought there would be little interest in Monday’s play after the
poor batting exhibition given by the Englishmen on Saturday, but it
turned out that I was much mistaken, as at the drawing of stumps the
Englishmen had not much the worst of the game. The weather was
more pleasant than on Saturday, and the attendance was capital, over
six thousand persons paying for admission. Hawke and Gilbert con-
tinued the second innings of the English team at ten minutes past
twelve, to the bowling of Spofforth and Boyle. Hawke played in admir-
able form, but Gilbert was rather unsteady at starting, and gave two
chances—one very difficult—to the wicket-keeper, and the other—fairly
easy—to Murdoch at point. Garrett went on for Spofforth at 30, and
with sixteen runs added got Hawke caught at short mid-on for an
excellent 31. While Lockwood and Gilbert were together there was
some sound and spirited cricket. The wicket still kicked a good
deal, but both batsmen played the bowling with freedom and
confidence. The single innings defeat was averted at a quarter
past one, and the score was up to 79 before Lockwood was caught
at short slip from a ball that kicked up off the shoulder of his
bat. He had made 21 in his best style. Emmett became
Gilbert’s partner, and again runs were put on at a good pace.
The 100 was hoisted amidst cheering at a quarter to two, but
almost immediately afterwards Gilbert did not quite get hold of a ball
from Garrett, and placed it into Bannerman’s hands at mid-off. Although
he was a trifle lucky, Gilbert’s 36 was a capital innings. Ulyett was
bowled without scoring, and at luncheon the score was 104 for four
wickets. When the game was resumed Maurice Read became Emmett s
partner, and Spofforth and Garrett shared the bowling. Read made two
brilliant square-leg hits for four, and then Garrett gave way to Boyle.
Just as he looked to be getting dangerous, Read was out to a grand catch
at forward square-leg by Bannerman, who took the ball with the right
hand, running sideways. After this the game went all against the
Englishmen. E. M. Grace, Riley, and Roller only made four funs
between them, and the eighth wicket fell at 137. Emmett, who had
again been playing with great judgment, was now joined by Peate. Ihe
Yorkshire captain drove Boyle splendidly to the off for four, and Peate
hit Spofforth twice for four. The score was quickly taken to 163, when
Garrett replaced Boyle. His first ball, a fast “Yorker,” clean bowled


30-2 ....
.. 22 ...
... 13 ...
0
25 ....
.. 10 ...
... 48 .
... 4
10 ....
.. 3 ...
... 26 ...
... 2
Roller
3 ....
.. 1 ...
... 2 ...
... 0
Emmett for 36 —by far the best innings on the side. Peate was run out,
and the last wicket fell at four o’clock for 165. Garrett bowled extremely
well, as will he seen from the analysis which I give below:—
Overs. Maidens, Runs. Wickets.
Spofforth 41 16 61 2
Boyle 35-3 12 52 2
ic ou-o j. 6 £
Garrett. 27 10 43 5
With 104 runs set them to win, the Australians commenced hatting at
twenty-five minutes past four with Bannerman and Massie, to the
howling of Emmett and Peate. The start was unfortunate, and six runs
only had been scored when Massie was easily caught at deep cover-point.
Murdoch followed, and the scoring became very slow. Emmett and
Peate were both bowling finely, and little could be done against them.
When the total was up to 23, Peate drove Bannerman back on to his
wicket. M‘Donnell came in next, and hit Peate clean out of the
ground for six—a splendid drive—and sent him to the off for four. This
brought on Ulyett in place of Peate at 37, a change which proved very
successful. Ten runs were added, and then in one over Ulyett clean
botvled both M'Donnell and Horan amidst great applause. With the
fall of Horan’s wicket play ceased for the day, the score being 47 for four
wickets, the Australians thus wanting 57 runs to win, with six wickets
to fall.
In the hope of witnessing a good finish, a great many people visited the
ground on Wednesday morning. I had almost forgotten to mention that
it had been mutually agreed that the wicket should be rolled every
morning, no matter what the state of the game. The weather was again
fine, but there had been a heavy dew, which kept the ball rather wet.
Murdoch (not out overnight with 11) was accompanied to the wickets by
Giffen. The bowlers were Emmett and Peate. Giffen began to hit with
considerable freedom, and the Englishmen’s chance of success soon
became very small. Murdoch was content to play a strictly defensive
game, and left his partner to do nearly all the scoring. The South
Australian hit Peate to square-leg—out of the ground—for 6. Ulyett
went on at 67, and Giffen hit him twice for 4. A double change was
tried at 81, Roller and Peate replacing Ulyett and Emmett. Giffen drove
Peate out of the ground for 6, and then in trying to repeat the per-
formance was easily stumped for a well hit and invaluable 31; five for 90.
Bonnor came in, and Peate changed ends. Before a run had been added
Murdoch was palpably out leg before to Peate, having played a most
patient 19. Only 14 runs were now wanted to win, but with good
fielding the Englishmen would have got rid of two more batsmen.
Blackham gave a hard chance to E. M. Grace at point, and Bonnor was
missed at long-off by Read. The runs were hit off at a few minutes after
one, and the Australians won a good match by four wickets. Emmett
bowled well, but without any luck, as will be seen from the following
figures:—
Overs. Maidens. Runs. Wickets.


Full score;—
ELEVEN OF ENGLAND.
Ist inns. 2nd inns.
G. Ulyett, b Boyle 11 b Garrett 0
Hon. M. Hawke, b Spofforth 15 c Boyle, b Garrett 31
M. Read, c Bonnor, b Spofforth 1 c Bannerman, b Spofforth. 14
E. Lockwood, c M‘Donnell, b Spofforth 2 c M‘Donnell, b Garrett.... 21
E. M. Grace, c Murdoch, b Boyle 1 c Massie, b Spofforth 3
T. Emmett, not out 23 b Garrett 36
W. R. Gilbert, c Bonnor, b Boyle
M. Riley, c Giffen, b Boyle
W. E. Roller, run out
E. Peate, c Bonnor, b Spofforth .
G. A. B. Leatharo, b Spofforth
Byes
8 c Bannerman, b Garrett.. 36
6 c Murdoch, b Boyle 0
3 c Murdoch, b Boyle 1
0 run out 14
0 not out 0
2 Byes 6,1 b 3 9
Total 165
AUSTRALIANS.
Ist inns.
2nd inns.
A. C. Bannerman, b Ulyett
H. H. Massie, c Emmett, b Peate ...
W. L. Murdoch, b Peate.
P. S. M‘Donnell, c Gilbert, b Peatel.
T. Horan, c Emmett, b Ulyett
G. Giffen, c Riley, b Emmett
G. J. Bonnor, c Gilbert, b Emmett .
J. M‘C. Blackham, run out
T. W. Garrett, not out
H. F. Boyle, c Ulyett, b Emmett ...
F, R. Spofforth, c Leatham, b Peate.
Wides 1, byes 4
9 hit wicket, b Peate 4
14 c Hawke, b Peate ~ 4
15 Ibw, b Peate 19
8 b Ulyett ... /.'.'.V.'.'.V.V.'.V. 18
8 b Ulyett 0
8 st Leatham, b Peate 31
27 not out 13
0 not out 0
. 16
. 5 Byes 15,1 b 1 16
Total.
134 Total 105 ”
The Australians left Harrogate at 4.15 p.m., and, after a pleasant
journey, arrived at King’s Cross at about a quarter-past ten, taking up
their old quarters at the Tavistock Hotel,


1711 ....
... 286* ...
5 ...
... 30-31
1175 ...
... 141* ...
... 5 ...
... 25-
1405 ...
... 206 ...
.... 4 ...
... 24-37
1201 ...
... 120* ...
.... 2 ...
... 22-13
815 ...
... 122* ...
.... 7 ...
... 20-15
873 ...
... 81 ..,
.... 4 ...
... 18-9
900 ...
... 82 ...
.... 3 ...
... 17-16
612 ...
... 62 ..
.... 7 ...
... 17-
370 ...
... 59 ..
.... 1 ...
... 11-29
496 ...
... 59 ...
.... 6 ...
... 11-34
266 ...
... 35 ...
.... 8 ...
... 11-2
300 ...
... 39* ...
....13 ...
... 9-12
282 ...
... 37 ...
...11 ...
... 8-10
GENERAL SUMMARY OF THE TOUR.
I have followed the story of the great tour so closely, and in such
detail, that it is not necessary to do more here than place on record my
general impressions on the men and their doings. The first thing is to
give the batting averages, and that I proceed to do :
BATTING AVERAGES.
No. of Total Most in an Times
nnings. Runs. Innings, notout. K '
Innings.
W. L. Murdoch
T. Horan
H. H. Massie
A, C. Bannerman
G. J. Bonnor
G. Giffen
P. S. M‘Donnell ..
J, M‘C. Blackham
S. P. Jones
T. W. Garrett
G. B. Palmer...
H. F. Boyle ...
F. R. Spotforth.
C. W. Beal played two innings, scoring 0 and 5.
* Signifies not out.
Four men thus scored over a thousand runs each. Murdoch, in my
judgment, is now second to no batsman in the world. His care,
coolness, patience, and courage are all admirable, his style is irreproach-
able, and his knowledge of the art of scientific batting is profound,
while his cutting and his power of placing and keeping the ball
on the ground have earned him the respect of all good judges of
the game. His average against all our bowling and on our difficult
wickets is a really excellent one, and, most appropriately, he has
the largest aggregate, and has played the largest individual innings.
Horan is the only man besides his captain who has twice reached three
figures. In syle and method he does not compare well with several of his
colleagues, but the care with which he watches the ball, and the ease
with which he scores on the leg side —especially against fast bowling—
makes him an extremely valuable man on a side, and a most difficult
wicket to get. It is, too, fitting that the best bat in Victoria should come
second on the average list. Massie’s splendid hitting has made him a
terror to bowlers and a torment to fieldsmen. We have now no such
rapid scorer and no one so likely to demoralise the field and change
the aspect of a game. His off-hit, which is neither a cut nor an orthodox
drive, reaches the boundary with astonishing speed, but in trying it he is
very often caught. With a full appreciation of his value, and a
knowledge of the fact that his aggregate is second and his position on the


Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Average.
H. F. Boyle
... 1208-2 .
535 ...
... 1682 ..
.... 144 ...
... 11-98
F. R. Spofforth
... 1594-3 .
699 ...
... 2282 .,
188 ...
... 12-26
G. E. Palmer
... 1192-3 .
515 ...
... 1731 .,
138 ...
... 12-75
T. W. Garrett
... 1209-2 .
489 ...
... 1759 ..
128 ...
... 13-95
G. Giffen
... 386-3 .
120 ...
... 728 ..
32 ...
... 22-24
A C. Bannerman ...
... 67 .
23 ...
... 112 ..
4 ...
... 28-
list third, I must still say that I consider Massie a rash, impatient
hitter, who too often sacrifices safety for the sake of brilliancy.
Bannerman, though he can hit hard and with good judgment, goes to the
other extreme. It is, of course, nonsense to find serious fault with a man
who has scored 1,200 runs and has an average of 22‘13, and I shall say
nothing in dispraise of a cricketer whose patience and stubborn defence
have been the theme and admiration throughout the whole country.
With all respect for Bonnor’s unequalled driving power, I think he is a
little higher on the average list than according to strict merit he ought to
he. He has played several remarkable innings, notably at Scarborough,
the Oval, and Portsmouth, and has, on many other occasions, made
runs when they were badly wanted. Giffen, the sole representative
of South Australia, bats in first-class form, and has been a decided
success. He drives very hard, and has several other good hits.
M'Donnell has played uncertain cricket—sometimes hitting rashly
and flukily, sometimes as brilliantly and grandly as any one
could wish to see. Blackham still makes his runs in very
moderate form, but he makes them, and is a long way ahead of the other
five members of the team. The first of these is Jones, who showed at
Canterbury that he is a really good bat on fast, hard wickets, but whose
general play on our difficult wickets has been very far below what we
were led to expect. I don’t wish to hurt Jones’s feelings, and I hope, as
he is young with all his career before, he will forgive my saying that he
has been the failure of the tour. Garrett has, I believe, a big batting
reputation in Australia. Here he is only a hitter—a good stylish hitter
certainly—but not a difficult man to get out. Palmer s runs are always
made in capital form. Boyle, despite his 13 not out innings, has failed to
reach a double figure average, and Spofforth is decidedly not so good a bats-
man as he was in 1880. It is worthy of remark that the six New South
Wales batsmen scored 5,465 runs between them, and the six Victorians
4,068. Murdoch was out 7 times without scoring, Horan 3 times,
Massie 9 times, and Bannerman 4 times. Murdoch was bowled 24
times, Horan 13 times, Massie 21 times, and Bannerman 15 times.
Murdoch, of course, wins the batting trophy.
Boyle is the victor of the bowling trophy, as will be seen from
the accompanying table:—
P. S.’M‘Donnell...’.'.’36 !!!!!! 11 !!!!!! 60 .’.!!!’. 2 !!!!!! 30‘
S. P. Jones 40 9 85 1 85‘
W. L. Murdoch bowled 16 overs (5 maidens), for 47 runs and one wicket, and
H. H. Massie 6 overs (1 maiden), for 18 runs. - ~f • i
The famous Victorian, with his 144 wickets for less than twelve runs
each, has had a most successful season, and by his untiring energy and
remarkable accuracy of pitch has increased his already great reputation in
England. It is no compliment to say that he is straight, for that is true
of all Australian bowlers. Boyle has, since Palmer’s accident, had to work


very hard indeed, and, though he himself has been unwell, he has answered
■every call made upon him. Spofforthcomes secondonthe averages, hutsince
the Lancashire match he has by magnificent bowling fully sustained and
even added to his fame. Whatever else he may have done, he won the
England match, and that alone suffices to make him in the popular
estimation the greatest of living bowlers. For my own part, lam sure
that I have never seen his equal on a difficult wicket. His grand break
from the off beats the best batsman, and the wholesome awe he inspired
in 1878 and 1880 still remains almost umimpaired by time and use. He
was for the first month of the tour quite out of form. I believe when
the ground is really sound and good he is not very difficult, but we get
so few perfect wickets in England that this goes for little. Palmer has
not played since the 12th of August, and he thus lost the advantage of
bowling on the false wickets since that date. He nevertheless comes
third with an excellent average. He is a grand bowler, varying his pace
with excellent judgment and breaking both ways. Perhaps no man bowls
so good a yorker. Garrett has been an extremely useful man, and many
good judges think him the best of the four. The peculiarity of his bowling
is that it rises very fast from the pitch, and he can perhaps make the ball
“do more ”on a good wicket than any of his colleagues. Like Boyle, he
has gone through the season without delivering either a wide or a no-ball,
and like all the others he is so fair as to be above suspicion. Giffen was
not bowled very much, and, personally, I think his performance against
the Gentlemen at the Oval was something of a fluke. Still his break from
the off is pretty certain, and he is very deceptive in the flight of the ball.
Of the others it is not necessaiy to speak, except to say that Jones was
altogether unsuccessful; neither he nor Giffen was tried nearly enough to
let us see over here what they really can do. Spofforth and Garrett took
316 wickets against the 282 that fell to their chief Victorian rivals. Garrett
went on unsuccessfully 13 times ; Spofforth, Palmer, and Boyle 6 times
each.
Blackhani’s wicket-keeping has been superb. No one takes the ball
so near the bails, and no one whips off these bails so quickly. Perhaps
our best men make the catches at the wicket as well as he does, but
very few take fast bowling so cleanly, or with the same certainty, and
fewer still can equal him on the leg side. He caught 28 batsmen and
stumped 17. After wicket-keeping I must talk of fielding. Here the
palm ought, in my judgment, to be awarded to either Bannerman or
Massie. I could not say which is the better, and I feel rather diffident
in placing them before Boyle, Palmer, M‘Donnell, Giffen, and Garrett.
All these seven men are splendid fields—rapid, safe, and full of confi-
dence. Jones also is first-rate; Bonnor is brilliant, but rather showy and
not always certain; Murdoch has greatly improved at point, and the only
weak field in the whole team is Horan.
I now proceed to give the Table of Results, but must premise that
while the Colonists scored 10,795 runs for 556 wickets, an average of
19‘231, their various opponents lost 653 wickets for 9,089 runs, an average
of 13 ‘6OO runs per wicket. They won the toss 21 times and lost it 17,
their highest total was 643, and their lowest 49, while the largest
innings hit against them was 322, and the smallest 32.


SUMMARY OF MATCHES.
(38 Played; 33 Won; U Lost; 11 Drawn.)
May 15 16 17—At Oxford, v The University—Australians, Ist innings 362, 2nd
innings 64 for one wicket; Oxford University, Ist innings 189, 2nd innings
234. The Australians won by nine wickets.
May 18 19 20—At Brighton, v Sussex—Australians, Ist innings 643; Sussex, Ist
innings 95, 2nd innings 193. The Australians won by an innings and 355 runs.
May 22 23—At Twickenham, v Orleans’ Club—Australians, Ist innings 75, 2nd
innings 240 for nine wickets; Orleans’ Club, Ist innings 271. Drawn.
May 25, 26, 27—At Kennington Oval, v Surrey—Australians, Ist innings 100, 2nd
innings 119 for four wickets; Surrey, Ist innings 170, 2nd innings 48. The
Australians won by six wickets. . . ,
May 29, 30, 31—At Cambridge, v The University—Australians, Ist mnings 139,2nd
innings 291; Cambridge University, Ist innings 266, 2nd innings 168 for four
wickets. Cambridge won by six wickets. . . ,
June 1 2, 3—At Manchester, v Lancashire—Australians, Ist innings 259, 2nd
innings 129 for six wickets; Lancashire, Ist innings 118, 2nd mnings 269.
The Australians won by four wickets. . .
June 5,6, 7—At Bradford, v Yorkshire—Australians, Ist innings 128, 2nd innings
135; Yorkshire, Ist innings 146, 2nd innings 30 for three wickets. Drawn.
June 8,9, 10—At Nottingham, v Nottinghamshire—Australians, Ist innings 142,
2nd innings 106; Nottinghamshire, Ist innings 110, 2nd mnings 12 for one
wicket. Drawn. _ , ~
June 12,13,14—At Derby, v Derbyshire—Australians, Ist innings 292 ; Derbyshire,
Ist innings 106, 2nd innings 77. Australians won by an innings and 109 runs.
June 19, 20, 21—At Sheffield, v Yorkshire—Australians, Ist innings 148; 2nd
innings 99 for four wickets; Yorkshire, Ist innings 92, 2nd innings 153. Ihe
Australians won by six wickets. n ,
June 22, 23, 24—At Kennington Oval, v Gentlemen of England— Australians, Ist
innings 334; Gentlemen of England, Ist innings 182, 2nd innings 151. The
Australians won by an innings and a run. .
June 26, 27, 28—At Chichester, v The United Eleven—Australians, Ist innings,
501; United Eleven, Ist innings 166, 2nd innings, 72. The Australians won
by an innings and 263 runs. , , . . , ,
June 29, 30—At Leicester, v Leicestershire—Australians,! Ist innings 106 2nd
innings 116; Leicestershire, Ist innings 43, 2nd innings 105. The Australians
won by 74 runs. . .... , , . nrrn
July 3. 4—At Northampton, v Northamptonshire—Australians, Ist innings, 270;
Northamptonshire, first innings 122, 2nd innings 68. The Australians won
by an innings and 80 runs. . . ~, _ , . . ~ „
July 6, 7—At Lord’s, v Middlesex—Australians, Ist innings 136, 2nd innings 61 tor
two wickets; Middlesex, Ist innings 104, 2nd innings 91. The Australians
won by eight wickets. , . , , . . . . TO
July 10 11 12—At Lords, v M.C.O. and Ground—Australians, Ist innings 138;
M.C.C. and Ground, Ist innings 302. Drawn .
July 13 14 15—At Dewsbury, v Yorkshire—Australians, Ist innings 141, xorK-
shire, Ist innings 129, 2nd innings 64 for one wicket Drawn.
July 17 18 19—At Bradford, v Yorkshire—Australians, Ist innings 132, 2nd
innings 67; Yorkshire, Ist innings 68, 2nd innings 84. Australians won by
July 20, 21,**22—At Middlesbrough, v Yorkshire—Australians. Ist innings 222, 2nd
innings 49 for three wickets; Yorkshire, Ist innings 129, 2nd innings 140.
The Australians won by seven wickets. .
July 24 25—At Newcastle-on-Tyne, v Northumberland—Australians, Ist innings
195; Northumberland, Ist innings 63, 2nd innings 35. The Australians won
by an innings and 95 runs. .
July 27 28—At Edinburgh, v Gentlemen of Scotland—Australians, Ist innings
* 159 ; Gentlemen of Scotland, Ist innings 67, 2nd innings 74, The Austra-
lians won by an innings and 18 runs.


July 31, August 1, 2—At Liverpool, v Liverpool and District—Australians, Is
innings 240, 2nd innings 6 for one wicket; Liverpool, Ist innings 112, 2nd
innings 137. Drawn.
August 3,4, s—At Clifton, v Gloucestershire—Australians, Ist innings 450;
Gloucestershire, Ist innings 108, 2nd innings 183. The Australians won by
an innings and 159 runs.
August 7,8, 9—At Canterbury, v Kent—Australians, Ist innings 307, 2nd innings
81 for three wickets; Kent, Ist innings 222, 2nd innings 165, The Austra-
lians won by seven wickets.
August 10,11,12—At Kennington Oval, v TheJPlayers of England—Australians,
Ist innings 150, 2nd innings 138; Players of England, Ist innings 322. The
Players won by an innings and 34 runs.
August 14, 15, 16—At Derby, vAn Eleven of England—Australians, Ist innings
180, 2nd innings 91 for five wickets; Eleven of England, Ist innings 230, 2nd
innings 78. Drawn.
August 17,18,19—At Portsmouth, v Past and Present of Cambridge University—
Australians, Ist innings 141, 2nd innings 187; Cambridge, Ist innings 196,
2nd innings 152. Cambridge won by 20 runs.
August 21, 22 —At Taunton, v Somersetshire Australians, Ist innings, 245 :
Somersetshire, Ist innings, 96, 2nd innings 130. The Australians won by an
innings and 19 runs.
August 24, 25, 26—At Clifton, v Gloucestershire—Australians, Ist innings 190, 2nd
innings 98 for six wickets; Gloucestershire, Ist innings 131. Drawn.
August 28, 29—At Kennington Oval, v England—Australians, Ist innings 63, 2nd
innings 122; England, Ist innings 101, 2nd innings 77. The Australians won
by 7 runs.
August 31, September 1, 2—At Tunbridge Wells, v United Eleven—Australians,
Ist innings 181, 2nd innings 49; United Eleven, Ist innings 126. Drawn.
September 4,5, 6—At Nottingham, v Nottinghamshire—Australians, Ist innings,
131, 2nd innings, 212. Nottinghamshire, Ist innings 111, 2nd innings 48. The
Australians won by 184 runs.
September 7, 8. 9—At Scarborough, v I Zingari—Australians, Ist innings 153, 2nd
innings 423 for six wickets; I Zingari, Ist innings 279. Drawn.
September 11, 12—At Leeds, v Shaw’s Eleven—Australians, Ist innings 79, 2nd
innings 126; Shaw’s Eleven, Ist innings 79,2nd innings 37. Australians won
by 89 runs.
September 14,15,16—At Manchester, v North of England—Australians, Ist innings
110, 2nd innings 162; North of England, Ist innings 245, 2nd innings 30 for no
wicket. North of England won by ten wickets.
September 18, 19, 20—At Kennington Oval, v Shaw’s Eleven Australians, Ist
innings, 87; Shaw’s Eleven, Ist innings 129, 2nd innings 190 for six wickets.
Drawn.
September 21, 22—At Glasgow, vAn Eleven of Scotland—Australians, Ist innings
155; Eleven of Scotland, Ist innings 32, second innings 100. The Austra-
lians won by an innings and 23 runs.
September 23, 25, 26—At Harrogate, vAn Eleven of England—Australians, Ist
innings 134, 2nd innings 105 for six wickets; Eleven of England, Ist innings
72, 2nd innings 165. The Australians won by four wickets.
Of all these matches only about ten or twelve were played on really
good hard wickets, while many were seriously interfered with by rain,
seven whole days being lost, and only a little play taking place on more
days than I can count.
The Colonists, grandly as they have played, have on several occasions
been decidedly lucky, and it will he admitted that, at least, nine of their
twenty-three victories were achieved over opponents so weak that any
moderate English side would have won with ease, if not with the same
ease that the Australians did. Giving full allowance for all this the tour
has been very successful in every way, and the fame of the Australian
Eleven of 1882 already overshadows that of their predecessors.


I now publish the Batting and Bowling Averages of the Englishmen
who have played in four or more innings against the Australians. These
speak for themselves, and need no introduction ;
ENGLISH BATTING AVERAGES.
No. of Total Most in an Times Averaa . e
Innings. Runs. Innings, not out.
... 4 77 54* 2 38-1
Mr. H. E. Whitfeld 4 77 54* 2 38 T
Mr. C. T. Studd 12 374 118 2 37'4
Mr. E. F. S. Tylecote ... 7 ...... 183 100* 2 !!!.’" 36'3
M. Read 12 360 130 1 ...... 32’8
Mr. W. H, Patterson 4 114 59 0 28*2
Mr. W. G. Grace 12 340 77 0 ... . . . 28 - 4
Mr G. B. Studd 10 252 86 0 . . . . . . 25’2
J.VXA VX. KJUUU.U. iv OOC OO U 60 6
Barlow 13 272 66* 2 24 - 8
Mr. A. P. Lucas 11 247 87* 1 ! .]!!! 24 - 7
Mr. W. W. Read 4 95 49 ! 0 !!!!!! 23 - 3
Mr C. I. Thornton 5 118 45 0 23'3
ATJLX V/. X. XUUUIIUU O iiO U 60 O
Lockwood 15 304 66 2 23.5
Lord Harris 4 92 47 0 ..23'
Mr. J. E. R. Studd 4 87 66 0 21’3
Mr. A. G. Steel 13 259 50 1 21 "7
Hon. A. Lyttelton 5 105 60 0 21*
Mr. C. P. H. Leslie 6 102 56 1 20*2
Mr. C. P. H. Leslie 6 102 56 1 20*2
Hon. M. B. Hawke 8 141 31 1 201
Watson 6 59 18 3 19*2
6 59 18 3 19*2
A. N. Hornby 9 152 45 1 .! 19*
Gunn 6 75 26 ...... 2 ...... 18'3
Grimshaw 8 ...... 126 37 ...... 1 .!..!! 18*
W. R. Gilbert 8 143 38 0 17*7
Shrewsbury ... 7 .'. 115 30 0 16’3
P. H. Morton 4 49 32 1 ..... 161
Emmett 16 212 ...... 36 ...... 2 15'2
XHXXXXUCKI. XU C.LC, OO 10 6
Barnes 9 ...... 136 . 87 0 151
Sherwin 4 ...... 45 16 1 15*
Scotton... 10 ...... 113 ...... 49*...... 2 141
Rev. V. F. Royle 5 65 ...... 30 0 15*
F. Townsend 4 51 27 ...... 0 ...!". 12’3
T> O fttAAl d IQ n io*7
D. Q. Steel 4 ...... 51 ...... 19 .'.'.Y. 0 "!!.'! 12*3
Briggs 4 ...... 38 17V 1 12*2
20 238 ...... 38 ...... 0 1118
Bates. 14 ...... 156 30 ...... 1 12*
Ulyett 20 V 238 38 ...... 0 111!
Hall 10 82 29 3 11*5
E. Peake 5 44 28 1 11*
C. Marriott 5 54 17 0 10 - 4
M. C. Kemp 4 32 23 1 10'2
-LVX. XVCIIIJJ 06 CO 1 I\J 6
Pilling 9 ...... 84 32 1 10*4
JTllliUg o*+ OC i J.U
Jones 4 41 22 0 101
Barratt 4 10 6* 3 10*
Crossland 5 49 35 0 9 - 4
A. H. Evans 4 27 11* 1 9-
L. C. Docker 4 35 21 0 B'3
R. C. Ramsay 5 35 16 1 B‘3
Midwinter 8 68 25 0 B'4
E. A. J. Maynard 4 35 18 0 81
I. G. Walker 6 49 17 0 81
Peate 15 105 29* 2 B*l
W. E. Roller 4 32 26 0 8*
Signifies not out.


Flowers
8 ....
... 49 ....
... 25 ...
... 0 ....
... 6-1
J. Cranston
5 ....
.. 25 ....
.. 10 ....
... 0 ....
... 5*
Mycroft
4 ...
... 5 ....
... 4 ...
... 3 ....
... 5‘
R. Sidgewick
Lillywnite
6 ....
4 ...
... 28 ....
... 9 ....
... 16 ....
... 5*...
... 0 ....
... 2 ....
,.. 4-4
... 41
Morley
4 ....
... 8 ....
.. 8 ....
... 1 ....
... 2-2
Hunter
8 ...
... 11 ...
... 8*...
... 3 ...
... 21
Pooley
5 ....
... 3 ....
... 2 ....
... 1 ....
... 0-3
Overs.
Maidens.
Runs.
Wickets.
Averages.
Plmmett
181-2..
.... 95 ....
... 242 ..
.... 29 ....
.. 810
Parnham
120-3..
.... 37 ....
... 255 ..
.... 27 ....
.. 912
Wright
78-2..
.... 34 ....
.. 96 ..
.... 10 ....
.. 9-6
Crossland
162-2..
.... 68 ....
... 223 ..
.... 22 ....
... 10-5
Ulyett
174-1..
.... 82 ....
... 264 ..
.... 21 ....
.. 1212
Peate
585-1..
.... 277 ....
.. 818 ..
....63 ...
... 12-62
Barlow
196-3..
.... 109 ....
.. 224 ..
.... 17 ....
..13 3
Morley
216-2..
.... 123 ....
.. 258 ..
.... 19 ....
.. 1311
Barnes
142-1..
.... 63 ....
.. 216 ..
.... 15 ....
... 14-6
Mr .F. Lipscomb
65-3..
.... 22 ....
.. 89 ..
.... 6 ....
... 14-5
Shaw
243 ..
.... 142 ....
.. 221 ..
.... 13 ....
... 17-
Mr, R. C. Ramsay
192 ..
.... 84 ....
.. 285 ..
.... 16 ....
... 1713
Mr. W. G. Grace
269 ..
.... 79 ....
.. 595 ..
.... 32 ....
... 1819
Hill
102 ..
.... 65 ....
.. 96 ..
.... 5 ....
... 191
C. T. Studd
346-2..
.... 162 ....
.. 539 ..
.... 26 ....
... 2019
Bates
192-1..
.... 95 ....
.. 289 ..
.... 13 ....
.. 22-3
A. G. Steel
465-2..
.... 216 ....
.. 726 ..
.... 29 ....
.. 251
Midwinter
170-2..
.... 77 ....
.. 280 ..
.... 11 ....
,.. 25-5
109 ..
.... 44 ....
.. 164 ..
.... 5 ....
... 32-4
A. H. Evans
90 ..
.... 26 ....
.. 206 ..
.... 5 ....
.. 411
W R Gilbert
64 ..
.... 26 ....
.. 131 ..
.... 3 ....
,.. 43-2
E. Peake
71-2..
.... 24 ....
.. 148 ..
.... 3 ....
.. 491
124 ..
.... 67 ....
.. 159 ..
.... 3 ....
... 5P4
A. P. Lucas
34 ..
.... 12 ....
.. 91 ..
1 ...
... 91*
ENGLISH BATTING AVERAGES — continued .
No. of Total Most in an Times . OT , nrrn
Innings. Runs. Innings, not out. - a - veia «o.
Selby 8 63 38 0 7*7
E. M. Grace 9 66 24 0 7‘3
Hill 8 49 19* 1 7-
Shaw
10 59 25 1 6'5
* Signifies not out.
Among those who played less than four innings the following were the most
successful. A. J. Wehhe4s, 9 and 4: E. D. Shaw 78 not out and 9; C, Wilson 57
and 50; R. T. Ellis 10 and 52; P. F. J. Greenfield 23 and 31; A. O. Whiting 0 and
55; J. Shuter 27 and 3; S. S. Schultz 34.
ENGLISH BOWLING AVERAGES.
Jones bowled in three innings taking seven wickets runs; Barratt in
three taking six wickets for 251 runs; W. P. Forbes in two innings taking seven
wickets for 92 runs; and E. M. Grace in two innings taking two wickets for 116
E. Hulton & Co., Printers, 2, Mark Lane, Manchester.


Exhibited and worked at the Oxford, Cambridge, Surrey, Middlesex,
Taunton and Gloucester Matches, with the Australians.
Telegraphs for Cricket, Athletic and Race Meetings, also Lawn
Tennis Scorer,
A °
in O
*3 ’ 'g
3
to
£
o 3 <zj
■s ft
£
i. a .
m%• « •
w I .
t» cc
oi£ • m •
if O • <D •
~1 « *
f 1 « a
ft • S '
ft £
c 3 O
6D ®
CO ®
(5 2 a
H 3 a
ft o
.§ a s«
o o ft
•C ° 03
o
000 o o o
O O to o o o
HHHH
oo oo a o o*
rH
ft • • „• • • g •
s g .s .a .a .a s
hnlO !D®t-CCH
“XXXXXX .
h .2 .a .a .a .a .a
m 3 i> i> ® ffl o
s*
ci Qj
r r. r ~ r *
# " m
5 . <»
03 Ol d CM (M %
O <M CM CO CO CO CO Q
‘-VOOOCOOC/2
w
ftHHHHHrI’d
Cb cd
o S
fe-2 r r. r r -Cj
§ l
All Orders to be sent to and information obtained from
F. DENING, Inventor and Patentee, Cbard, Somerset.
For Cricket no plates are required, and any Number from 1 to 999 can
be placed before the Public in a moment.
For Athletic and Pace Meetings the Numbers show both sides, and are
always on the Board ready for any event and any Number of Kunners ;
only three Numbers are removed to Ist, 2nd, and 3rd, thus saving con-
siderable time and trouble in placing the running and winning numbers
before the Public, and no chance of misplacing or losing any plates.
Extract from Nowlen's “ Weekly Chronicle," Chard, April 22 nd, 1882,
A most useful and ingenious invention in the way of telegraphs for
cricket matches, races, or athletic sports, has just been patented by our
respected townsman, Mr. F. Dening. It consists of an arrangement by
which all the usual bother and trouble of taking down and re-hanging the
numbers in cricket matches, See. , maybe obviated, the numbers working
on rollers, and the operator thus being able to place any number before the
public in a moment.
Taunton Athletic Club, May 9 th, 1882.
The Committee thank you for the loan of your Patent Telegraph at their
late Sports, and they have much pleasure in bearing testimony to its
efficiency. W. H. WAKE, Hon. Sec.


MOOR E’S
LONDON & COVENTRYTRICYCLE& BICYCLE
SHOW ROOMS.
KENNINGTON PARK CORNER, LONDON, S.E., and
Bowling Green Street, Kennington Oval.
THE ORBI-CYCLE (Patent) Front Steerer.
All the Driving and Hill-Climbing Gear is enclosed in the Oil
Proof Orbs and Tube, thus securing perfect protection from the
weather, dirt, &c.. No chains to stretch, or grease to corrode.
Ball bearings to all parts. On Hire, with option of Purchase.
ALL THE LEADING MOUNTS IN STOCK, NEW AND SECOND-HAND,
INCLUDING
The Premier
ROYAL BALVO.
Cheylesmore
Phoenix
Omnicycle
The Excelsior
Royal Mail
Meteor
Fleet
Zephyr
Coventry
Devon
Challenge
[Caroche
Rob Roy
Rapid
Flying Dutchman
SOCIABLES OF EVERY MAKE.
The Excelsior Folder, &c.
Youths’ or Young Ladies’ at
£8 Bs. A splendid Machine
Also Salvo Sociable.
The Coventry Phoenix Sociable
„ Royal Mail „
„ Excelsior Tandem „
„ Coventry Convertible.
„ Juvenile Sociables,£s 10s.
Any Make supplied to any part of the Kingdom on the Hire System,
An Excellent Trial Ground.


THE SPORTSMAN
THE BEST DAILY SPORTING PAPER.
PERMANENTLY ENLARGED.
PRICE ONE PENNY.
SATURDAY, DOUBLE NUMBER (56 Columns)
PRICE ONE PENNY.
—LATEST NEWS OF THE DAY.
The “SPECIAL COMMISSIONER” & “VIGILANT”
deal fully with Turf Topics.
“V INDEX” contributes his Interesting Article on Coursing.
DRAMATIC NOVELTIES reviewed by a Competent Critic.
“LORGNETTE’S” ARTICLE, “THE LOOKER-ON,”
Appears EVERY SATURDAY.
nSTOTBS OUST I^EWS.
REVISED TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION.
The Sportsman will be forwarded free by the early morning post at
the following rates: —
Three Months, Daily .. .. .. ..£099
Six Months ~ .. .. • •• 0190
Twelve Months ~ .. .. • • ■ • 119 0
For Saturday’s Sportsman alone :
Six Months, Free by Post .. .. .. • • 0 3 3
Make Orders payable to C. H. ASHLEY.
THE “SPORTSMAN” OFFICE,
BOY COURT, LUDGATE HILL, LONDON, E.C.


NOTHING incompatible with judicial
DIGNITY IN THE ENJOYMENT OF ENGLISH SPORT
C. Russell, Q.C., M.P.
BELL’S LIFE IN LONDON
HAS A WIDE-SPREAD CIRCULATION.
THE OLDEST AND ABLEST SPORTING
PAPER IN THE WORLD.
Wherever the English Language is spoken, there
you will find Bell’s Life.
PUBLISHED EVERY SATURDAY.
72 COLS. 12 PAGES.
Price 6d., or by Post, 6Jd.
Contains Accurate Reports of Every Sporting Event of the
Week, together with Dramatic and other original Articles
by Writers of Well-known Ability.
The Extensive Circulation of Bell’s Life in London , both at
Home and Abroad, renders it an Unrivalled Medium
for Advertising everything to which the eye, not
only of the sportsman, but of the public
generally, should be attracted.
Subscription, post free to any part of the United Kingdom,
7s. per Quarter, or 28s. per year, payable in advance.
OFFICES :
9 & 11, CATHERINE STREET, STRAND,
LONDON, W.C.


THE SPORTING CHRONICLE
PUBLISHED DAILY.
RACING, STEEPLECHASING,
TRAINING REPORTS,
-Me * cricket, * football
ATHLETIC SPORTS,
ROWING, I PEDESTRIMISM, I TROTTING,
SHOOTING, BILLIARDS.
SOLD EVERYWHERE.
OFFICES :—M ARK. LANE, MANCHESTER.
London Office Catherine Street, Strand.
THE ATHLETIC NEWS,
AND CYCLISTS’ JOURNAL
Has a Larger Circulation than any other Cycling and
Athletic Paper Published.
CRICKET, ATHLETIC SPORTS,
FOOTBALL*
BICYCLING, TRICYCLING,
AND OTHER AMATEUR SPORTS.
EVERY WEDNESDAY, TWOPENCE.
OFFICES: —2, MARK LANE, MANCHESTER.
London Office Catherine Street, Strand.


The Best Impartial Authority on all Sporting Matters in England,
CONTAINS EVERY WEEK:
CRICKET.—ATHLETICS. —Latest Reports from the Universities,
ROWING.—BICYCLING. —and a Critique on passing Important Events
on the River, the Running Path, the Cricket
Field, Billiard Table, Swmming, Bicycling, &c.
FISHERIES. —Late st In telli gence for Anglers, Products of Rivers,
Deep-Sea Fisheries, News from Rivers and Fishing Quarters.
SHOOTING.— News from Shooting Quarters; Notes, Queries, and
Discussions on Game Preservation ; Management of Dogs,
Shows ; Useful Inventions relating to Fire Arms, Ac.
HUNTING.— Lists of Appointments direct from the Kennels;
Special Letters from the Hunting Field during the Season ;
YeterinaryNotes, Stable Hints, Sales of Hunters, Hounds, Ac.
TURF. —A Summary of Results of the Week’s Racing, inde-
pendent Criticisms on the Past and Anticipation of the
Coming Events, Sales of Yearlings, Stud Notes. Ac.
COACHING AND INTERESTING NOTES of the Road, Sales
of Coach Horses, Recollections of Old Days, Ac.
YACHTING.— AII the important Reg attas, Club Races, Arrivals
and Departures from all the principal Port# and Meetings.
CHESS & PROBLEMS occupy a considerable space, and all
Queries receive prompt Replies.
UNIVERSITIES.— With Summary of the Week’s doings, Sporting
and Social Chit-chat.
PUBLIC SCHOOLS. —A Weekly Letter from one of the Head Boys,
noting their doings in and out of School.
Ac. Ac. Ac. Ac. Ac.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Free by post, quarterly, 75.; half-yearly, Ms.; yearly £1 Bs.—Thin Copies
for Transmission Abroad, 7/7 per Quarter.—P.O.O. made payable to
Wai/teb Bates, on the Fleet Street Office, or Stamps must accompany
all orders. —Advertisements received up to Mid-day Friday.
WALTER BATES, Publisher, 176, Fleet Street, London.


QUEEN I HOTEL
FIEST CLASS ACCOMMODATION,
CLOSE TO TZEEIE SEA
-Me ¥/IBIiE + D’PO'FK'. -ix-
HOME COMFORTS with MODERATE CHARGES
H SPECIAL f ARRANGEMENTS * WITH 4 FAMILIES. K
SANITARY ORGANISATION COMPLETE.
L. BELL (Widow of the Late John Bell), proprietress.
REDUCED TERMS from Ist of OCTOBER to the Ist of AUGUST.
■** LIVEIRPOOL. *-*-
HDELPHI+HOTEL,
rpms old-established Family Hotel having been entirely rebuilt and
1 refurnished, is now one of the largest in Europe. It contains upwards
of 250 Sleeping-Rooms ; about 50 Parlours ; Drawing-Rooms ; a spacious
Smoking-Room in front; Restaurant; Visitors’ and Luggage Lifts ; Bil-
liard-Room, with six tables, &c., &c.
The corridors on each floor are of fire-proof construction, and fire extin-
guishers are laid throughout the building.
The Hotel is centrally situated, is near the Railways, Landing Stage, and
places of amusement, and has for upwards of fifty years been exclusively
patronised by the leading families of Great Britain, Canada, and the United
States.
Carriages of all descriptions constantly in attendance.
A porter in livery attends all trains by the Great Northern, Manchester,
Sheffield, Lincolnshire, and Midland Railways.
All letters and telegrams to be addressed to
W; LUDLOW, Manager.


SHILLING. THE SQUIRE; SHILLING,
A MONTHLY MAGAZINE FOR COUNTRY GENTLEMEN.
CONDUCTED BY MORGAN EVANS.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
“ Very readable ; sport and fiction being very pleasantly mingled. ” — Globe.
1 • Fresh and pleasant, winning on all sides hearty wishes. ” — Life.
“ The Squire is a most desirable acquaintance and companion, full of
entertaining matter. "—Fun.
“ The Squire has all the vivacity as well as the energy of youth.”— Bell's
Life.
“ It is just what a magazine for country gentlemen ought to be.”— Judy.
“It is de facto a magazine for country gentlemen. Its contents are just
of that character which residents in the country look for. ” — Society.
LONDON: FEANKLYN & 00.. 92 & 93, FLEET STEEET, E.O.
“THE EUROPEAN MAIL,”
-Me JiUfiW'RJUilJi v § v NEW v
Published Bi-Monthly on the arrival of the English Mail, via Brindisi ,
With a Special Edition for New Zealand, Monthly, via San Francisco.
SUBSCRIPTION (Payable in Advance ) |fj s 2d. PER ANNUM, Postage Paid,
fpHE “EUROPEAN MAIL” contains every item of intelligence
I from Mail to Mail, with an extensive resume of Home and Continental
Politics, Science, Art, and Social News, together with a retrospect of the
Commercial Transactions of Great Britain and the Continent, Market
Reports, Prices Current, Shipping Intelligence, &c., thereby rendering it
the MOST COMPLETE NEWSPAPER AND HIGHEST COMMERCIAL AUTHORITY
despatched from England.
A Special Section is devoted to Illustrated Descriptive Notices of
Novelties in every branch of Home Industry.
Post Office Orders to he made payable to Wm. Yaughan, London.
Orders received through Mr. George Robertson, Messrs. Gordon & Gotch, any book-
seller or newsagent, or direct at the Offices, Colonial Buildings, Cannon St., London,E.C.


GEO. REES’
PORTING PICTURE
PICTURES.
FOX HUNTS, by Sir John Dean Paul.
ie set of Four, Beautifully Coloured by hand. Size 30 by 17. Price 255.
A Struggle for the Start. A Scurry in a Pewy Country.
The First Ten Minutes. The Death.
CELEBRATED WINNERS.
Coloured by hand, with Jockey up. Correct Portraits. Size 34 by 24,
PRICE 15s. EACH.
SHOTOVER,
T. CANNON,
FOXHALL,
W, MACDONALD
IBONOMY.
T. CANNON.
SIR BEVVS
e. FORDHAM.
WHEEL FORTH
F. ARCHER.
JULIUS C/EBAR,
F. ARCHER.
SEFTON,
CONSTABLE
GALOPIN,
MORRIS.
DUTCH OVEN,
F. ARCHER.
IROQUOIS,
F. ARCHER.
BEND OR,
F. ARCHER.
ROBERT THE D-
T. CANNON.
PETER,
WOOD.
Also,Same Price
Size 28 X 22.
GREAT MATCH
BETWEEN
BEND OR AND
ROBERT THE 0.
The above being our own publications, we are prepared to issue them to
the Subscribers of this Book in Sets of 10 for £5 55., or 5 for £3 ss.
CHAMPION SCULLERS: o°/ AUSTRALIA.
Seated in their Boats in Rowing Costume. With views of the Thames.
Neatly Coloured hy Hand. Size 30 by 20. Price 3s. 6d. each.
Can be had Uncoloured, 2s. each, or 3s. 6d. the pair.
Large Stock of Hunting, Boating, Steeple Chasing, Coaching,
Coursing, Racing, and Sporting Pictures.
GEORGE BEES has always Special Parcels of Pictures bought at
Great Keduction, which he offers exceptionally Cheap.
ENGRAVINGS by the Best Masters. In Parcels from 4to 10 for 21s.
CHROMOS by Popular Artists. In Sets, from 4to 12 for 21s.
OLEOGRAPHS. Choice Subjects. In Series of 6to 8 for 21s.
All New Executed in the best manner, suitable for Drawing Room, Dining Room,
’ Sitting Room, Parlour, Study, Bed Room, Nursery, &c„ &c.
\ll persons remitting any amounts, say £5 or £lO, will receive full value, and au extra
cash discount will be added. In orders, please state what kind of subject is preferred.
savoy house, GEORGE REES, ns, strand.
And 41, 42, and 43, RUSSELL STREET, COVENT GARDEN; LONDON
All'Goods sent Carriage Paid- Europe 5 %, Colonies 10 % extra.


F. H. AYRES,
IN, ALDERSOATE STREET, E C.,
MAKER OF ALL KINDS OF
IN-DOOR AND OUT-DOOR GAMES
.. /a\
CRICKET BATS, in Cane, Whalebone, and all Descriptions.
WICKETS, in Lancewood or Ash, or Special Selection.
F, + H. + AYRES’ + MATCH * CRICKET I BALL.
Cricketing Gauntlets, Cricketing Belts, Cricketing Shoes.
Batting Gloves, Cricketing Scoring Boards,
Cricketing Boxes, Scoring Books, &c.
The Patent “Cavendish” Lawn Tennis Poles,
The “Championship” Lawn Tennis Bat.
Tennis, Croquet, Archery, Golf, Curling Clubs, Dumb Bells, and all
manner of In-door and Out-door Games. Bagatelle, Chess, SfC,
PHICK LISTS OK APPLICATION.


FELTHAM & CO.,«^'
CITY STEAM WORKS, 49, 50, 51, 52, LITTLE BRITAIN, .
And 64, ALDERSGATE ST., LONDON, E C ,
MANUFACTURERS OF
ARCHERY, CRICKET, LAWN TENNIS, CROQUET,
AND EVERY KIND OF
IK AND OUT-DOOH GAMES
HIGHEST AWARD,
SYDNEY,
1879.
HIGHEST AWARD,
MELBOURNE,
1880.
FELTHAM’S REGISTERED “STEAM COMPRESSED ” CRICKET BATS.
FELTHAM’S PATENT “DOUBLE TREBLE SEAM” CRICKET BALLS
Cricket Stumps, Leg Guards, Wicket-Keeping Gauntlets,
Batting Gloves, Shoes, Bags, Nets, and every requisite for the
Game of Cricket.
FELTHAM’S LAWN TENNIS SETS.
Felthams “ETOJS HARROW ’ SET , Strongly Recommended,
Feltham’s Celebrated “Alexandra” Lawn Tennis Bats and Balls.
Patent “Thauma” Lawn Tennis Balls, Patent “Acme ” Tennis
Scorer, and every Article for Lawn Tennis.
FOOTBALLS, BOXING GLOVES, FENCING GOODS,
Backgammon, Chess, Draughts, Cribbage, Compendiums,
and every description of In and Out-Door Games.
ILLUSTRATED PRICE LISTS ON APPLICATION.
LONDON: 49-82, LITTLE BRITAIN, & 64, ALDERSGATE STREET.


THURSTON'S
PRIZE MEDAL, LONDON, 1851.
HONORABLE MENTION, 1862.
PRIZE MEDAL, SYDNEY, 18/9, “FIRST AWARD,”
ESTABLISHED ISIP-.
BY APPOINTMENT.
TABLES.
AVWVWWVVWWWV^
16, CATHERINE STREET, STRAND,
LONDON, W.C.
John 13. Cttrsons, Printer, 11, St, Bride Street, Ludgate Circus, London, E.C.
