

THE
TO QUEENSLAND
1'
:i
BY THE
Ijwsbjitmait Cjmrtjj of Ridorta
AND THE
REY. JOHN G. PATON, D.D.,
Of the New Hebrides Mission.
Melbourne, March, 1892,
KANAKA LABOUR TRAFFIC
PROTEST AGAINST ITS RENEWAL


gßuvd? of Victoria.
FOREIGN MISSION COMMITTEE,
It having been reported to this Committee that the Queensland
Government intends to re-open, at an early date, the Kanaka Labour
Traffic with the New Hebrides Islands, a meeting of the Executive
was held this day to consider the matter, when it was unanimously
resolved —(l) “To record the Committee’s regret at the renewal of
the traffic ; (2) in the interests of the New Hebrides Mission and
the natives of the Islands to protest against it to the Imperial
and Queensland Governments, and, further, to publish and circulate
the Protest prepared by the Rev. John G. Paton, D.D.” In
accordance with this resolution the accompanying Protest is issued,
in the hope, not merely that it will receive careful attention from all
whom it may concern, but also that it will rouse the Christian con-
science of the British people to effectually forbid and prevent any
possible repetition of what the Royal Commission on the subject
pronounced to be nothing short of slave-trading.
In name and on behalf of the Committee,
JAMES GIBSON, Convener.
West Melbourne,
21 st March, 1892.


/M 33.5 S
fls
THE QUEENSLAND LABOUR TRADE.
DR. RATON’S PROTEST AGAINST SIR SAMUEL GRIFFITH’S
PROPOSAL.
The Polynesian labour traffic, which at one time made Queensland notorious,
was, in that colony, abolished by law in 1890. Sir Samuel Griffith, the
present Premier of Queensland, and a former opponent of Kanaka labour,
recently announced his conversion to the cause which he had formerly opposed,
and consequently the following correspondence has passed between the Rev.
Dr. Paton, the well-known missionary, and Sir Samuel on the subject :
“ Dear Sir Samuel, —With pain we read that you have ‘ issued a manifesto
reviewing the decline of the sugar industry in Queensland, which is now
struggling for an existence, and it has therefore been decided to extend the
period for the employment of Polynesian labour for a further period of ten
years.’ We do hope and pray that no pressure will ever lead you to renew
this Polynesian laoour traffic to Queensland, which you know has been so
demoralizing and ruinous to all connected with it. It has no doubt been a
great saving of money to many employers ; but it has blunted, if not destroyed,
the best feelings of their nature, and also of the Queensland public, as seen
by their taking upon themselves, by the largest petition said to have been
ever signed and presented in your colony, to condone the crimes and murders
of the crew of the Hopeful , in clamouring for their release from all punishment
till they were set at liberty as good members of society, though their hands
were dripping with the blood of the many islanders they had slain. But
surely, fcsir Samuel, you, whose praise has been proclaimed over the world for
getting this labour traffic suppressed to Queensland, will never be led also to
proclaim its continuance for another ten years. You have seen clearly that
in defiance of all your regulations in bonds and agents such crimes have always
been inseparable from this traffic, and were common in it, as brought out in
the printed report of your last Royal Commission, in the record of crime and
murders it reveals for one year. When by such evidence of its crimes you,
by a protracted fight, got it closed to Queensland in 1890, how can you, on any
ground, be justified in re-opening it, without now being responsible for all its
evils, and this surely you would shrink from. If re-opened to benefit the
sugar planters Ichabod may be written, not only on that industry, but on those
who renew it and engage in it. God cannot smile on a trade so steeped in
human suffering and bloodshed. When your last Royal Commission brought
before the world such a record of kidnapping and crime in one year by the
witnesses of all the six vessels whose conduct it inquired into, notwithstanding
all your regulations and bonds, with M'Neil, one of your sworn agents, paid
by you to prevent such crimes, himself one of the principal murderers in the
Hopeful, what would the Commission’s record have been had it so examined
into the conduct of all the fifteen or sixteen which were engaged getting natives
for your plantations during its last year, 1890 ? Even apart from its murders,
you, as a husband and a father, think of the sorrow, the suffering, and the
agony caused to thousands of island homes by the recruiters of this cheap
labour for your plantations tearing children away from their parents and
parents away from their children, wives from their husbands and husbands
from their wives, as you know well every vessel in the trade does. I most


Earnestly plead with you, in the interests of humanity, for yoUr own honour
and the honour of Australia, not to renew the Polynesian labour traffic. How
can you sanction a trade which has always done on the island what you and
every parent in Queensland would be justified in murdering the collectors to
prevent them doing in Brisbane ? Hear Sir Samuel, do try to avert the
calamity and punishment in retributive justice sure to follow a renewal of this
traffic and its crimes for even ten years. Bather use your powerful influence
to get Britain to annex the New Hebrides and be able for ever to close it
there to all nations, on which God’s blessing would rest.
“ Yours faithfully,
“ JOHN G. PATON.
“ Moreland Grove, Coburg, Iffi/t February, 1892.”
To the above letter Sir Samuel Griffith sent the following reply :
“ Merthyr, Brisbane, 27th February, 1892.—My dear Sir, —It was not
without much reluctance that I came to the conclusion that it is the right
thing to do to remove the prohibition against the introduction of Polynesians
into Queensland. lam fully sensible—no one more so—of the abuses that
prevailed. They had, however, been reduced almost to a minimum by the
end of 1890, and still more stringent provisions will be made in the future, if
it is in my hands. I have publicly given my reasons at length for my change
of opinions, and have nothing to add to them except this—that I could not
sit still and look calmly on at the ruin of hundreds and thousands of our own
people from want of labour when such labour is available, as I believe, without
any moral wrong-doing. This is the pass to which the insensate action of the
so-called Labour Party has brought us. You are quite mistaken in supposing
that my action is avowedly, or at all, in the interests of the planters exclusively.
I think of them, but I have in my mind the whole people with whose interests
I am charged, and I do what my conscience bids me.
“ Yours very truly,
“ (Signed) S. W. GRIFFITH.”
Dr. Paton replied :
“ March 4, 1892. To the Hon. Sir Samuel Griffith, Premier of Queensland.
My dear Friend,—l thank you for your reply to my appeal, though your
conclusions astonish and grieve me exceedingly. Surely, with the knowledge
of the past history of this traffic which you possess, you cannot again renew it,
and look calmly on the ruin of hundreds and thousands of our poor islanders, as
in the past, by it, to benefit a small section in Queensland, without being held
responsible for its crimes. I know that, by renewing that traffic, you do not
intend to renew its evils ; but you know that such evils have always been
inseparable from it, and no doubt, in defiance of all you can do to prevent
them, they will continue in it, on the islands and at sea, while it exists.
Surely the conduct of no party should lead us to inflict wrong and suffering
on the innocent. The minimum of the traffic’s evils in lb9o was appalling to
all out of Queensland and to many in it. Taking children from parents and
parents from children, wives from husbands and husbands from wives, may to
some appear a minimum of evil in this traffic, and all in the trade know that
this is the common practice of every labour vessel to Queensland and elsewhere ;
and who knows how many are murdered in getting them away from the
islands ? But God sees and knows all, and will punish the guilty.
“ KIDNAPPING,
“Shortly before you closed the traffic one of our missionaries was re-
quested by a number of men on his island to go with them to a labour vessel
which had a considerable number of their wives on board, and had them con-
fined to take them away; but the captain and agent refused to give one of
them up, and took them all away. The missionary was abused for pleading
for them. Although one of the fathers held up his infant child, pleading
for the mother to be given back to it or it would die, yet the slavers
Would not give back the mother to the infant, nor yet the child to the


mother. Can pity be found among such labour collectors ? But to
plead further is useless, seeing you have made up your mind and
‘do what conscience bids’ you! So, to free my conscience, using the
knowledge which I possess of the traffic, I shall now appeal to the Aus-
tralasian public and to Britain, pleading with all to unite and, if possible,
secure the complete suppression of this shocking traffic, at least to every
British colony.
“lam, dear Sir Samuel, yours faithfully,
“JOHN G. BATON.”
MR. BATON’S ABBEAL AND BROTEST.
At the close of 1890 the Kanaka labour traffic was suppressed in Queensland,
chiefly by the influence of Sir Samuel Griffith in denouncing its atrocious
crimes and murders as a disgrace to humanity ; but all the labour vessels
which could sail with licenses to collect men before the last day of 1890
continued to bring in their loads of recruits until far into 1891. And having
put on additional vessels, they got an extra supply, and bound all to serve for
three years. It is only about seven or eight months since the planters ceased
to get additional labour, and seeing thousands of Bolynesians are now working
on the plantations, closing the traffic cannot account for the decline of the
sugar industry in Queensland.
DEPOPULATION OF THE ISLANDS.
This traffic has taken away some 70,000 of the most healthy lads and girls
from the New Hebrides, and similar proportions from other groups. Though
the young and healthy chiefly were taken away, yet from long hours of hard
work, and changed circumstances of food, clothing, and houses, the mortality has
been very great. Many thousands of them have been laid in their graves in
Queensland, buried like dogs, and others brought so to labour and suffer and
die by the planters’ greed of gain. Dreadful immorality is also encouraged
among them ; but the veil must be drawn here.
INTOXICATION AND FIGHTING.
The law forbids giving them intoxicating drinks, yet they get them, and a
planter informed another minister and me that he dreaded Sabbath, as by
drink on it they fought, and he could scarcely keep them from burning their
houses and his own. I heard another planter say he had sold them two hogs
for £lO for a feast, after which they had savage fighting among themselves, to
the amusement of a crowd of white onlookers, and even police. On the sugar
plantation by law they are paid 4d. per day, if they live to get it, for doing
work for which they would have to pay white men from ss. to Bs. per day.
On the Clarence and Richmond River districts, in New South Wales, many
small farmers and planters seem to make a good living by producing the
sugar-cane by white labour, and selling it to the mills. Thus a large
population is supported by it without Kanaka labour. Why should it not be
so in Queensland ? Before me and a number of gentlemen a planter put the
following questions to a number of his men : —“ Are you happy ? Do you
like plantation work? Do you get plenty of food? Would you like to go
back to your own islands ? ” They replied “ Yes ” and “ No,” to his delight,
when he said, “You see how happy they are,” <Sc, Soon after I asked them
the same questions in their own language, when their answers were the
reverse of what they had before given, and they implored me to get them
taken home to Tanna.
REPORT OF LAST ROYAL COMMISSION.
I quote from the report of the last Royal Commission in Queensland. The
investigation of the commission continued from the beginning of January till
about the end of May, 1885- The vessels appointed for examination were the
Ceara, Lizzie, Hopeful, Forest King, Heath, and Sybil— all under the strictest
bonds and regulations of the traffic at present, yet the report says


Ist. Of the Ceara, page 26 —“Our opinion is that all the recruits brought
by the Ceara on this voyage were seduced on board by false pretences ; that
the nature of their engagements was never fully explained to them ; that they
had little or no comprehension of the work they had to perform, and that the
period for which they had agreed to come was in no single instance for three
years.” Of the second voyage of the Ceara, at page 27 —“ Our opinion is that
a system of deliberate fraud was practised in engaging all the recruits during
this voyage . . . that none believed they had agreed to remain in Queens-
land three years. ”
2nd. Of the Lizzie, at page 26—“ We are of opinion that not one of the
labourers brought by the Lizzie on this voyage agreed when recruited to serve
and remain in Queensland for three years ; that the nature of their engage-
ments was never duly explained to them; and that the method of recruiting
was cruelly deceptive and altogether illegal. ” Of the second voyage of this
vessel, at page 28 —“ On reviewing the whole evidence as to the recruiting on
this voyage of the Lizzie, we are of opinion that while some of the natives
were forcibly kidnapped, all of them were allured on board by false state-
ments ; that the nature of the engagements to which they subsequently
attached their marks was deliberately misrepresented to them ; and that they
had no clear understanding that they were coming to work on a Queensland
sugar plantation for three years.”
3rd. Of the Hopeful, at page 32 —“ We are of opinion that none of the
recruits on board the Hopeful were lawfully recruited, and that not one
understood he had to remain and serve in Queensland for three years.”
4th. Of the Sybil, at page 34—“ We are of opinion that the attempts made
to explain the nature of the engagements to the recruits, both at the islands
and at the port of arrival, were wholly inadequate ; that the engagements
were not fully understood by the recruits ; and that none of them appreciated
that the term of service for which they had left their homes was three years.
The inspector at Mackay, having read the Sybil’s log, made the following
entry :— ‘ Having read this log, ic is a record of drunkenness and incapacity
on the part of the master, and consequent insubordination on the part of the
crew.’ ”
sth. Of the Forest King, at page 35—“ We are of opinion that all the
recruits brought by the Forest King were decoyed on board under false
pretences ; that the nature of their engagements was never explained to
them ; and that none of them understood that they were to work on a sugar
plantation for any period, much less for three years.”
6th. Of the Heath, at page 36 —“ Our opinion is the recruits brought by the
Heath were enticed on board under false pretenses ; that the nature of then-
engagements was never satisfactorily explained to them ; and that none of
them comprehended that they were coming to Queensland to work on a sugar
plantation for three years.”
The report states that the mortality amongst the natives brought by these
vessels straight from the islands, in their most healthy condition, was as
follows :
Deaths per cent,
on the
Plantation.
Of 107 by the Ceara 26 were dead ... ... 24.3 in 1 year
~ 137 ~ Ceara 22 „ ... ... 16 in 10 months
~ 126 „ Lizzie 12 ~ 9.5 in 1 year
~ 66 ~ Lizzie 11 „ 16.6 in 8 months
~ 112 ~ Hopeful 13 ~ 11.6 in 7 months
~ 21 ~ Forest King 2 ~ 9.5 in months
~ 37 ~ Sybil 6 ~ 16.4 in 2 months
~ 19 ~ Heath 5 ~ 26.3 in 2J months.
KIDNAPPING AND MURDERS BY THE SLAVE HUNTERS.
Of the doings of the Hopeful, the commission says at page 29, “At Marari
30 recruits were taken on board. Some declared that in stretching up the
side of the vessel for tobacco in exchange for their fruits, they were dragged


on board by M'Neil and Alec against their wishes and taken away. At
Bentley Bay, by M'Neil and Alec, a woman and several young men were,
under threats of being shot, ordered by M‘Neil, or dragged by Preston, into
the boat. This woman, who had been wounded in the struggle, afterwards
escaped by swimming ashore at Teste Island. Both boats subsequently
returned to the shore, the people ran into the bush, and M‘Neil set fire to
their houses. At Ferguson Island natives came out in canoes to trade with
the Hopeful. Two of her boats were lowered, one manned by M‘Neil, Preston,
Harry, Jack, and Alec, and the other by Barney, Williams, Rogers, Charley,
and two Teste Island boys. The canoes turned shorewards, upon which chase
was given. M'Neil followed one with eight natives in it, and Williams
another with six or seven in it. M'Neil was unable to overtake the one he
was pursuing, when he stood up in his boat and fired at the canoe. . . .
The steersman fell into the canoe dead, and the ball also struck the man
in front of him, who fell overboard and sank. The occupants of the
canoe leapt into the water, and M‘Neil cut it with his tomahawk, and
directed his men to pick up the natives who were swimming in the water;
four were so recovered, and to prevent their escape placed under the thwarts
of the boat. The other canoe was cut by Williams, and the natives, as
usual, took to the water. A rifle was fired, and one islander shot ; five and a
small boy were picked up by the boat. One of the rescued islanders jumped
over from the boat, whereupon Williams followed him with a large knife in
his hand ; and as the native was coming up on the reef, Williams cut the
poor wretch’s throat, and he sank into deep water. The boat then pulled up
to the reef, Williams leapt into it, and the two boats joined company. The
little boy, who was of no use as a recruit, was cast adrift on two cocoanuts,
which were tied together under his arms. The little fellow was seen to
slip from the nuts, and was drowned in the surf. The canoe M‘Neil had cut
contained the body of the dead steersman. Williams cut the head off, and
the mutilated remains were thrown overboard. There were now four natives
in each boat under the thwarts to prevent their escape. These eight escaped
when sent to the Victoria plantation (in Queensland), and wandered about in
the bush for two months, and when at last found they were conveyed to
Ingham.
At Normanby Island, on M‘Neil landing, the natives ran away into the
bush, and were followed by M‘Neil, Williams, Preston, and Rogers. Rifle
shots were heard, and M‘Neil and his men returned to the boats. Preston
declared he had killed two men, and Williams owned to having shot a boy.
That night two boys escaped, and next day M‘Neil went on shore, and
threatened to fight if the boys were not got. He fired two houses near the
beach. The natives rushed out, throwing spears and stones at the boat’s
crew. The boat’s crew responded with rifles by which two native men were
killed. At Ceawata Island a canoe, with five natives, came out from the
island. In a boat manned by M'Neil (agent), Captain Schofield, Preston,
Rogers, Alec, Harry, and Jack, they pulled after the canoe. The natives
shook their heads, saying they did not want to go. M‘Neil cut the canoe
with a tomahawk, and the natives jumped into the water. Four of the five
were picked up, and put under the thwarts to prevent their escape till they
got to the ship. It was too dark to see the fifth. . . . That night, to
prevent the boys escaping, a sentry was placed on deck with a rifle. Next
morning, M‘Neil’s and Williams’s boats gave chase to a canoe containing four
natives, who refused to come to the ship. M‘Neil cut the canoe and it sunk.
Three of the boys were picked up, and the fourth was also dragged into the
boat and taken away.” After all this, “the Hopeful was boarded by the
boarding officers of H.M.S. Swinger, who overhauled the Government agent’s
log (M‘Neil’s), and the captain’s, and finding all right, the next day the
Hopeful sailed for Queensland.” The Royal Commission sums all up,
page 23 :—“ The history of the crimes of the Hopeful, of which the foregoing
is an outline, drawn from the evidence submitted to us, is one long record of
deceit, cruel treachery, deliberate kidnapping, and cold-blooded murders.
The number of human beings whose lives were sacrificed during the


recruiting can never be accurately known. In addition to the two men killed
at Sanaroa, for which Williams and M'Neil were tried and condemned by the
Supreme Court .... the stories narrated to us more than confirmed
the facts brought out at the public trial. There is, in our estimation,
abundant evidence of the commission of many other murders. The inhuman
slaughter of the natives of Hilewau was amply corroborated by six or seven
witnesses. Anything more heartrending we have never heard nor seen than
the tale of the father of the drowning of his little boy, or the horror depicted
in Waneipa’s eyes and face when describing the doing to an atrocious death
the boy on the reef. ”
I have quoted this history of the traffic from the report of the Royal Com-
mission, as none should doubt its truthfulness ; but much more from many
sources can be produced to prove its disgraceful character as steeped in
human sufferings, bloodshed, and deaths, on the islands and at sea, from its
commencement up to the present. How is it that for many years the sugar
industry has been declining in Queensland when the planters had all the
Polynesian labour they could get ? And how is it that fortunes have been
made and as quickly lost in it, and other industries not prospering? No
doubt God’s curse rests on the sugar industry there. When a petition with
28,000 signatures was presented to the Governor-in-Council in Queensland to
get the kidnappers and murderers of the Hopeful pardoned, and “ a deputation
waited on Sir Samuel Griffith to get M'Neil and Williams reprieved from the
gallows, they pled for mercy on the ground that these atrocities had been
common in the traffic, and it was hard to make these men the first victims .”
Regarding the Hopeful, Sir Samuel said, “He had never heard of such a
voyage of murderous atrocities. At East Cape, New Guinea, natives took
trade from a boat and bolted to the bush. The white men followed. One
was speared, and a fight followed, and 38 natives were shot.” He then told
them of other nine natives having been shot, two drowned, two women having
been struck with tomahawks on the head, and other 15 kidnapped—all
different from the crimes for which the men of the Hopeful had been tried.
When he first read the papers he exclaimed, “ It would have been the right
thing if every one of them had been hung to the yardarm. ” — Brisbane Courier.
Now, how can it be possible that Sir Samuel Griffith, with his eyes so opened
to the past horrors of this dreadful traffic, is not only going to condone them
all, but also renew it ? As we praised Sir Samuel for closing this traffic with
its evils in 1890, so now most solemnly we protest against his re-opening it,
licensing such vessels with their fiendish crews to continue it, with no more
than the crew of the Hopeful had to prevent them daily repeating their
crimes on the islands and at sea for the next ten years. Henceforth he will
be responsible for all its evils.
As nearly all the available labour has by the traffic been taken away from
the islands already to Queensland, Fiji, New Caledonia, Samoa, the Pearl
shell fisheries in Torres Straits, and for traders and planters on the islands,
where many thousands of them have been laid in the grave ; with now the
ever-increasing demand for such cheap labour in all these places, and the
increasing difficulty to get the few who remain away from their island homes,
atrocities in recruiting are sure to increase while the traffic lasts.
We plead with our beloved Queen Victoria to add another rich source of
wealth to her Australian possessions by annexing those islands, and so to be
able for ever to stop this shocking traffic to traders of all nations, and we
plead with the Press, the Churches, Australia, and Britain to help in doing all
possible to get the Kanaka labour traffic stopped for ever to all places,
especially to our British colonies. And against its renewal to Queensland
most solemnly we protest in the interests of our islanders and mission, of the
planters and their collectors, of Queensland and humanity, and for the dis-
honour to Sir Samuel, Australia, and Britain. 0 that Britain would annex
the New Hebrides and so be able to close this traffic on them to traders of all
nations !
John Murray, Printer, 475 Coljins-street, Melbourne,
