

i
THE DEVIL
IN SYDNEY S
BARMAIDS, BALDHBADS, MASHERS, ETC.
SYDNEY:
THE ANGLO-AU STRALIAN PUBLISHING COMPANY.
1895.




THE
DEVIL IN SIDNEY;
BARMAIDS, BALDHEADS,
MASHERS, ETC.
ATST AXJTOBIOGORAIPIIY.
SYDNEY ;
THE ANGLO-AUSTE ALLAN PUBLISHING COMPANY.
MDCCCXCV.
All JRights Reserved.




THE DEYIL IN SYDNEY,
&c., &c., &c
most of the autobiographies
I have perused, the writer
endeavours to impress upon
the reader the fact that lie
or she is descended from
some titled or otherwise
eminent individual. Now,
as I wish to be truthful,
and at the same time am perfectly indifferent as to the
position my great-grandfather occupied, I shall devote but
small space to what appears to be to some a matter of much
importance. Besides, as I was born in New South Wales,
and both my parents first saw the light in the same place,
it might turn out that a search into the archives of the
colony would prove more astonishing than pleasant. Bearing
this in mind, I will let the past lie “ down among the dead
men,” and briefly state how I became a Barmaid.
When my father, who was something in the land agency
line, left this sphere for, it is be hoped, a better world, I
was handed over by my mother to the care of a maiden
aunt, who, in addition to being a very kind and religious
woman, had a life interest in a row of houses in one of the
most attractive suburbs of Sydney. Many attacks upon her


celibacy (and houses) were made by the sterner sex ; but
she firmly repulsed them all. Being in her confidence, E
once asked her the reason of her not marrying. She replied
that most men were deceitful, and cautioned me to be ever
on my guard, as they were nothing more than “lambs in
wolve’s clothing.” I am very much inclined to think that
my aunt had suffered some wrong in her youth, her hatred
of men was so strong; day after day would she lecture me
on her favorite topic—the wickedness of man, and nothing
pleased her so much as to see in the newspaper the account
of some ruffian who was sent to gaol for ill-using the
partner of his joys and sorrows. This she would read
aloud for my edification, broadly hinting at the same
time that such would be ray lot were I to neglect her
warning.
When I arrived at the age 15 my aunt took me with
her on a visit to a lady friend residing in a charming villa
on the Blue Mountains. We spent a most delightful time
there, our mornings being generally occupied in rambles
amongst the hills, and the evenings in pleasant conversa-
tion, interspersed with music. Our hostess had two
daughters, and one son, an agreeable and good-looking
young fellow ; and it was here I felt for the first time that
indescribable and pleasing sensation, a yearning for the
companionship of one of the opposite sex. I wish my
readers to understand that at this time I was a pure and
rather simple-minded girl, and knew nothing of that which
is termed “ the wickedness of the worldand 1 have
often since thought that those were the happiest days of
my life.
Before leaving our friends, on our return to Sydney, the
young gentleman I have mentioned begged the favour of a
walk with me, and his request being granted, he lost no
time in stating that my ingenuous manner and personal
attractions had made a profound impression upon him, and,


should his mother not object, he would gladly make me
his wife, provided, of course, that I was willing. I had
reason to believe from his manner towards me that this
declaration would come sooner or later, and being some
what “in love,” I met him half-way, and referred him to
“aunty.” The misguided youth immediately sought an
interview with my relative, who received him very coldly,
and gave him to understand that her niece was penniless,
and would have to “ do something for her living ” when she
(the speaker) died, as her income, as previously stated,
was only a life one. $ This latter statement considerably
cooled the young man’s ardour, as he had calculated that
the old lady would make me her legatee;—he himself was
depending on his mother for a home. A pleasing exterior
does not always indicate goodness of heart, and so it proved
in this instance : my would-be husband ceased his atten-
tions, and, as I afterwards found out, transferred his
Adonis-like figure to the notice of another young person,
living in the neighbourhood, who, however, rejected his
advances, knowing exactly his impecunious position.
On our return to Sydney my aunt, who numbered
over sixty summers and was getting rather feeble, suddenly
became imbued with the idea that continuous sea-bathing
would prolong her life, and lost no time in putting the plan
into execution, the result being a severe cold, which settled
on her lungs, and the end of three months saw her an
inmate of the “ narrow home.”
After her death I was informed that the premises we
had occupied must be vacated at once. The furniture and
other effects were accordingly sold by auction, and the
funeral expenses having been paid, the balance, amounting
to about £l6, was handed to me. My aunt had lived up
to her means, and the sum mentioned, and a few articles of
jewellery and some clothing, were all I became possessed of
at her decease. \


I now found myself without a single relative or friend
in the colony, my mother having previously married an
American gentleman, who, not liking Australia, after a
brief stay, returned to his native land.
My first step was to seek a suitable lodging, which was
easily procured, and my next to devise some plan by which
I could earn an honest living. I first thought of going as
a nursery governess, but on searching the “ Wanted ”
columns of the daily papers, I came to the conclusion that
I did not possess the necessary qualifications. Advertise-
ments of the class mentioned were not by any means
infrequent; but the employers wanted a great deal for
their money. A young person was expected to teach
English, French, music, and very often painting, also to
understand dressmaking, the salary in most instances being
about £2O a year—not the wages of a common housemaid.
When this fact is taken into consideration, is it to be
wondered that girls will take situations in public houses,
where the remuneration is somewhat reasonable 1 Not
being a dressmaker or strong enough to undertake domestic
duties, my aunt having always kept a servant, I endea-
voured, unsuccessfully, to procure a situation as atten-
dant in a shop; but seeing numerous advertisements tor
barmaids, I finally made up my mind to adopt that profes-
sion, believing that ray knowledge of the amenities of
civilised life, and a presentable appearance, would stand
me in good need. I knew very well that barmaids, as well
as actresses, are looked upon by a great many persons
as a set of painted, scantily dressed, low-minded creatures,
to be shunned by all respectable members of society; but
for reasons best known to myself, I disregarded those
opinions. I therefore called at one of the requiring hotels,
and was very civilly received by the landlady, who put the
usual questions as to where I had been previously employed,
ic c. I briefly told her my history, and she seemed pleased


when I stated that this was the first time of my seeking
employment of any kind, remarking that it was something
in my favour, as a new face always attracted custom.
After some further conversation, in which her husband,
who appeared to be somewhat younger than his wife, joined,
I was engaged at a salary of £1 a week, my duties being
to take charge of the private bar attached to the
establishment.
I commenced the following morning, the landlady
initiating me into the mysteries of the “ dispensary,” as one
of the servants termed it, and not without some reason, as
I afterwards found out, there being a good deal of
“doctoring” gone on with. Empty bottles having genuine
labels were refilled with inferior liquor, and many a would-be
clever customer who called for a particular brand would
swallow his “ tot ” under the belief that he was served
with the article paid for, I frequently amused myself
by asking what the gentleman thought of it, the answer
generally being that it was “ the real thing and no gammon.”
Before the liquors reached the various bars, they underwent
considerable manipulation at the hands of the cellarman,
sulphuric acid being a common substance used. It is not
long since a Sydney publican was fined £2O and costs for
adulterating his grog with the poison named, the Govern-
ment Analyst, in his evidence given at the Police Court,
stating that the imbibition of such stuff' was provocative
of insanity. I have been told by more than one person
from the interior that the profession of “ drink doctor ”
is no myth. They (the poisoners) travel from one
township to another, finding plenty of employment, as
they make six gallons of “ tire-water ’ from one gallon of
pure spirit. Just before shearing time and also at
Christmas their services are in great request, and many a
poor fellow who delivers up his cheque to the publican to
be “ taken care of,” wakes up to find himself in the gaol or


the lunatic asylum. In ray opinion, the people who sell
such vile stuff are guilty of moral murder, as doctored grog
undoubtedly shortens life. On one occasion I had an
opportunity of seeing how things were managed. Being
short of some particular spirit, I went down to the cellar
and spoke to the man in charge, who had a mysterious
looking bottle in his hand. On asking him what the bottle
contained, he merely looked up, and, with a significant grin,
answered, “ Oh, never mind, it’s nothing you would like—
nine drops of it would kill you !” I saw him pour some of
the fluid into a tub half full of spirits, which he afterwards
diluted with water. I did not stop to see the whole
process, but I saw enough to convince me that the common
or threepenny, and in many instances sixpenny, variety of
spirits is anything but a pure beverage. When invited by
a customer to take a glass of something, I invariably took
a small quantity of colonial wine, which is the most
harmless thing a girl can imbibe. Many barmaids take to
drink, and when they do, it is generally a case of “going
to the dogs.”
.The landlady of the house where I was employed was
old enough to be my mother, but nevertheless very youthful
in point of attire. It was her usual practice to spend a
couple of hours every evening in the vain attempt to make
herself look beautiful. Her low-necked dress was anything
but a success, revealing as it did such bony shoulders and
scraggy arms, with the accompaniment of corkscrew ringlets,
as to remind one of the saying about “mutton dressed
lamb-fashion.” She frequently came into the private bar
to “ assist,” as she said, but in reality to enjoy the society
of the spoonies who spent the best part of their evenings
in rambling from one house to another. She was awfully
fond of a pudding-headed young fellow, whom she frequently
“ liquored up,” as they say in drinking phraseology, and on
one occasion, having to leave the room for a few minutes, I


“ Many Barmaids take to drink, and when they do, it is generally a case
of ‘ going to the dogs.’ ” —(See page 8.)


found them on my return sitting on the couch, imparadised
in one another’s arms! She did not seem to be in the least
put out by my entrance, and on her lover’s departure she
volunteered the information that she was desperately fond
of Mr, , and would “ marry him to-morrow ” if she
were free. On my remarking that she had already a good-
looking husband, she shrugged her shoulders and stigmatised
that wretched individual as being “no good,” whatever
that vague expression meant. It is probable that she was
equally “ struck ” on her spouse previous to annexing him.
Thus it is that possession cloys the appetite.
My customers were rather of the better class, many
superior persons patronising my bar, more than one of
whom informed me that their advent was out of compliment
to myself, at which I felt flattered and pleased.
It is a well-known fact that amongst the most prominent
and enthusiastic admirers of barmaids are those rich, white-
vested, and gold eye-glassed old gentlemen who are irreve-
rently styled “ Baldheads,” and as one of that class will
take an important position in my sketch, which is drawn
from life and may be relied upon as strictly true, the reader
will be able to judge whether they (the hairless ones) are
the wicked persona some newspapers would have us believe.
I myself fail to see any crime in the desire to chat with a
neatly dressed, well-developed, and pretty woman ; and
though they frequently give the object of their admiration
a present, it does not follow that their kindness is accom-
panied by anything of a prurient nature. I must admit
that in the practice of my profession I have come in contact
with two or three old reprobates who would think as little
of ruining an innocent and confiding girl as of eating their
lunch ; but these satyrs are not so numerous as some people
imagine. No doubt when a barmaid “ sets her cap,” as the
saying goes, at one of the class, she seldom fails to get him
safely in her clutches, and he would be more than human


who could successfully withstand those little endearments,
such as hugging, kissing, &c., which an artful woman
knows so well how to practise. Besides, elderly people are
very susceptible to those favours, the aphorism “ Dry sticks
burn quickly ” being very applicable in their case.
The Masher differs from the Baldhead in a very marked
degree. While the latter is generous, and thankful for
favours however slight, the former in most instances is
tolerably careful of his bawbees, and expects admiration
from the girl, thinking himself irresistible. For my part,
I would sooner have the company of one nice old gentleman
than a dozen of those “clothes horses,” who, on the strength
of a sixpenny drink, spend an hour or more in a private
bar, and compel the unfortunate dispenser of liquids to
listen to their vapid nothings.
In addition to gentlemen customers, I had many of the
opposite sex; but their visits took place generally m the
forenoon. They were for the most part lady canvassers,
hospital nurses, fast married women, and so forth, their
drink invariably being spirits, which some of them would
put out of sight in a twinkling and without a wink, so
accustomed were they to “revivers.” I have known a
married lady, the wife of a shopkeeper in the neighborhood,
to imbibe four glasses of brandy in the space of half an
hour, and then walk out of the bar as steadily as if she
had been drinking new milk. It is astonishing the quantity
of liquor some women can put away. I remember on one
occasion a young person coming into the bar about 10 a.m. ,
she treated herself to a modicum of what she elegantly
termed “ hard stuff.” I gathered from her remarks that at
one time she had been in charge of the bar I occupied ; but
having been ruined by one of her customers, she, to use
her own words, “ chucked up the business and went the
whole hog.” She remained chatting with me until lunch
time, indulging in “ nips ” innumerable, so much so that I


expected to see her tumble off the chair. She preserved
her equilibrium, however, and although a little “ fresh,”
managed to get into a cab, and was driven home. Before
leaving she gave me what was no doubt good advice—never
to “play” with drink. “Even if you inclined to be
virtuous,” said my friend, “you are physically unable to
help yourself should you swallow the damned stuff to any
extent. Althoagh I am seemingly fond of it, I hate it;
it is for ever bringing to my remembrance the happy
state from whit;h I fell.” I sympathised with the young
woman, who, notwithstanding her strong and somewhat
slangy language, had an air of gentle breeding about her,
and evidently disliked the occupation she followed—for she
was nothing more than a common strumpet. This is an
ugly, but nevertheless a very expressive word, and brings
to my recollection something I read in a book in ray aunt’s
little library—“ The Speeches of Richard Lalor Shiel,” a
celebrated legal orator who figured some fifty years ago.
He was defending a rich gentleman in an action for
seduction, and the evidence adduced proved that the
“ innocent victim ” was no better than she should be.
Mr. Shiel commenced his address as follows ;
“My Lord and Gentlemen of the Jury,—We have
proved this woman to be a common strumpet; and what
is a strumpet? A foul and mercenary utensil of depra-
vity, who vnnds her artificial love, and for money turns
her body into a common sewer—a sink of sensuality, into
which the public passions may conveniently disembogue !”
Pretty hot that; was it not ?
The learned gentleman then proceeded to analyse the
evidence, tearing the woman’s character to “ ribbons,” with
the result that his client gained the day.
I mentioned hospital nurses as being amongst ray
lady visitors; but more than one in the garb of that
particular class had no claim to the title : they were


simply “ sly women,” who adopted the costume in order to
trade on it. I have been given to understand that this is
an old game with certain members of the Cyprian Corps in
various parts of the world—they dress as Quakeresses,
Salvation Army lasses, nurses, &c., and also frequently
come out in profound mourning; they assume a modest,
quiet demeanor, and many is the fool who falls a prey to
their wiles. Some dress like domestic servants, and appear
bareheaded in the streets, as if they only came out on a
message; while others, at night time, wear short frocks
and pinafores, in order to appear very youthful. Like the
young lady who sang the mock serenade to Don Quixote,
they seem to say—
“ I’m a virgin pullet truly,
No one better e’er was seen,
A mere chicken, fledged but newly ;
Hang me, if I’m yet fifteen,”
They are, however, nearer to thirty than fifteen. They
haunt badly lighted localities, in order that their physiog-
nomies may not be scrutinised too closely;—all cats are
black in the dark.
Another class of women pose as dressmakers, milliners,
Am. ; they carry a parcel or a bandbox, and when spoken
to give the name of some respectable establishment where
they are not employed ; they are known to the police as
“ parcel prostitutes.”
'While on this rather unsavoury subject, I would like to
say a few words about a sufficiently numerous class who
have not the plea of poverty to excuse them ; they are
generally the wives of men in comfortable positions, but
not, however, sufficiently wealthy to give their extravagant
“ ribs ” all they want. The latter carry on a nice little
game—receiving presents of jewellery, drinking expensive
wines, and taking delightful outings with their kind


friends ; at the same time they inveigh loudly and bitterly
against any poor girl who has openly fallen. There is a
great deal of truth in that cry of Aurora Leigh’s when
she hears of a light woman’s shameful treatment of an
erring sister :
“ Oh, cruel world,” I cried, “ ridiculous
If not so lamentable ! ’Tis the way
With these light women of a thrifty vice,
My Marian —always hard upon the rent
In any sister’s virtue! While they keep
Their own so darned and patched with perfidy
That, though a rag itself, it looks as well
Across a street, in balcony or coach,
As any perfect stuff might. For my part,
I’d rather take the wind side of the stews
Than touch such women with my finger end!
They top the poor street-walker by their lie
And look the better for being so much worse.
The devil’s most devilish when respectable.”
We have only to carefully read the records of the
Divorce Court to enlighten us on the “ respectable ” wicked-
ness of the class alluded to.
I had been about a month in my situation when I
became acquainted with a gentlemanly-looking man, who
dropped in almost every evening for a “refresher,” and
chatted pleasantly when no other persons were present.
He was faultlessly attired, and his diamond studs and
tinger-ring shone with great brilliancy. From the fact of
his seldom visiting the bar in the day time, I concluded he
was engaged in some occupation, and on interrogating him
on the subject, he merely smiled and said he had to do
something for his living like other people. He was very
kind, taking me for a drive on more than one occasion, and
his conduct was all that a respectable girl could desire. I
was beginning to think that he had “ serious intentions,”
when a circumstance happened that completely dashed my
hopes to the ground. One evening, as was his usual


custom, he paid me a visit, and had not been in the bar
many minutes when two men, whom I recognised as detec-
tives, also entered, and said something to him in an under-
tone. He became somewhat agitated, and addressing me,
said, “ Excuse me; I have some business with these gentle,
men.” He then departed. I afterwards learnt that he
occupied a high position in one of the banks, and had been
making free with his employers’ money, his defalcations
amounting to some thousands. After undergoing the usual
ordeal at the Police Court, he was committed for trial,
and, pleading guilty, received a sentence of five years’ penal
servitude. One of the detectives subsequently informed me
that the unfortunate man’s trouble was brought about by
an inordinate weakness for “ diamonds and dollymops.”
The officer also stated that there were officials enough in
“ quod ” to start half-a-dozen first-class banking concerns.
Amongst the constant visitors to my bar was an exceed-
ingly nice old gentleman, who generally came in the after-
noon. He gave me to understand that he was a widower,
and on one occasion paid me the compliment of saying that
he wished he were young for my sake. As I heard that he
wealthy, I was very particular in attending to his orders,
and in response to the compliment alluded to, I told him
that his seniority made very little difference; in fact, I
looked upon it as a qualification—a set-off against the
erratic propensities of young men. I gave him every
encouragement to “pop the question,” but my fish wouldn’t
bite, although he made me some nice presents, and appeared
most ardent in his attentions. I once asked him the reason
of his voluntary celibacy, and after some hesitation he gave
me to understand that he intended never to marry again.
He also said that he loved me platonically, and explained
for my information that Platonic Love was a pure spiritual
affection subsisting between the sexes. I rejoined that if
he loved me as much as he said, he ought to make me his


wife. In answer to this he stated that when most men
arrived at a certain age they are unfit to enter the nuptial
state, not on account of any dislike to the opposite sex, but
by reason of their physical condition.
This led me to think over the matter, and I now for the
first time began to understand the meaning of those lengthy
medical advertisements which dilate so eloquently on the
subject of “ Lost Manhood ! ”
There are plenty of young men also who are quite unfit
for the married state. What can be more ridiculous than
to see a consumptive creature “ annex ” a healthy, full-
blooded young woman ? I once knew a case of this descrip-
tion—the wife was bursting with development; the husband
sickly and weak, —in fact, he had not the strength to eat a
good square meal, although his partner, who had previously
been a cook, was unremitting in her endeavours to furnish
tempting little dishes—a cup of tea, and a bit of toast
scarcely big enough to feed a sparrow, was all he could
tackle—a nice juicy rump steak would sicken him. The
poor man only lived a twelvemonth after his marriage, his
appearance for some months previous to his death being
that of a living skeleton. In my opinion, the man, and
also the woman, should undergo a compulsory medical
examination previous to wedlock. This is a matter that
ought to be seen to by the Government. Before a barrister,
solicitor, surveyor, &c., receives permission to practise he
has to stand an examination; then why not candidates for
matrimony 1
When a woman marries a rich old man she does so with
her eyes open. If she is sensible, she ought to accept his
wealth as a set-off against his age, and not grumble at her
lot. A good banking account is the old man’s best argument,
and few impecunious women are able to withstand it. I
am acquainted with a barmaid who has been on the look-out
for a rich husband these five years past; I heard her say


on mere tban one occasion that she would marry “Old
Nick’s grandfather if he were wealthy.”
Castlereagh-street, where my bar was situated, is
remarkable for the number of offices occupied by hard-up
solicitors, broker*, commission agents, &c. It does not
take much to enter into the latter business—a table, a
couple of chairs, a bottle of ink, a few pens, some paper,
and plenty of “ cheek ” being all that is required. The
majority of these people would have you believe that they
are doing an excellent business; but most of them are in
such a state of poverty that they would “ rob a church ” to
better their condition. Many a time have I given them a
drink when they were unable to pay for it. Some of theiq
are married, and I could point to several who live on the
unchaste earnings of their wives.
I once had occasion to employ an attorney on a little
private business. lie was a frequent visitor to the house,
but appeared to be very hard-up, as he never paid for his
drinks, always bringing in some client or other person who
“ did the amiable.” When the case for which I engaged
him was concluded he presented me with a bill of costs
to the tune of £7 odd, the items being such as these :
“To seeing you relating to the case, 6s. Bd.; “To receiving
instructions, 6s. Bd. and so on Before commencing his
advocacy he said that the expense on my part would be
about half-a-sovereign, and I therefore felt very reluctant
to pay him more. I showed the bill to several of my
regular customers, who stigmatised it as a swindle, and
one of them resolved to have some fun out of the trans-
action, With this object in view, he wrote at the foot of
the document, in large letters and with a red pencil, the
following:—
To picking your pocket ... ... 6s 8d
To putting the plunder into my own 6s 8d
and attached the bill to the wall. The man of law came
in shortly afterwards, and saw the addition, with the
result that he tore the thing down, and made matters
straight by saying, “ Give me 12s. 6d.', my dear, and I
cry quite.” I took him at his word, and handed over
the coin.


Most writers appear to have a “ down ” on attorneys for
their grasping proclivities. Coleridge, in his poem “ The
TeviTs Walk,” says :
“ He saw a Lawyer killing a Yiper
On a dunghill beside his stable.
And the Devil smiled, for it put him in mind
Of Cain and his brother Abel.”
One evening, as I sat behind the bar, 1 was startled by
the entrance of my Blue Mountain lover. lie seemed to
be somewhat intoxicated, and was accompanied by a
showily dressed female, who evidently belonged to the
demi-monde. He did not appear to recognise me, so I
merely served the pair with what they required, and
they soon left. This was at nine o’clock, and about
an hour afterwards he returned alone, minus his hat, watch
and money. It appeared that while parsing through Hyde
Park, on his way to the supposed residence of his lady
triend, he was knocked down by two men and robbed, his
inamorata looking on all the time and coolly walking away
with his assailants. One of the gentlemen in front of the
bar gave him a glass of beer, and as it was near shutting-up
time I requested him to leave, which he did quietly.
Many of those women are married to, or in league with,
thieves, and act as jackals to them.
I had now been in my situation about three months,
and wished for a change. 1 mentioned this to one of my
customers, a well-dressed, gentlemanly looking man, who
quietly remarked that I would never learn much, by
remaining in the same situation. “Go into the world and
see life,” he said, “ and take note of everything that passes
before you ; and as you appear to be fairly educated, you
could put your experience and opinions in print, and
probably make something out of the transaction. I will
give you all the assistance I can, as I have both time and
money at my disposal.” In short, my friend Mr. X., who
was a visitor to Australia for the benefit of his health,
pronosed that after my duties were over I should adopt
male attire a few nights each week, and in his company
visit the various haunts of gaiety in the city and suburbs.
Being naturally of an adventurous disposition, I acquiesced,
and accordingly the following evening saw me transferred


into an apparently fresh-looking youth about nineteen, my
clothing consisting of trousers and vest, black frock coat,
Inverness cape, felt hat, elastic side boots, &c. These
things were provided by Mr. X., in whom I had every
confidence.
The first place we visited was a notorious den in King-
street called the Cafe W ; it was kept by a foreigner,
and there could not have been less tnan a dozen fiimsily
dressed waitresses flitting about the room, chatting with
the customers, or sitting on the letter's knees, and varying
their conversation with a hug, a kiss, or a request for a
bottle of “fizz,” which was frequently granted. There
were several Baidheads in the room, and I particularly
remarked that the endearments of the girls were more
generally bestowed on that class than on the more youthful
visitors. My friend having ordered a bottle of claret, we
were quietly sipping it at a small table, when one of the
damsels came towards us, and Hopping herself in my lap,
said, “ Well, lovey, how are you? I haven’t seen you for a
long time.” I answered that hitherto f only came to
Sydney occasionally, but was now about to reside perma-
nently in town. She said she was pleased to hear me say
so, as there was something abont ray looks and manners
that pleased her, and she wished to get fond of me. After
bestowing on me a kiss, and saying that she would not
ask me to “ shout,” as there was an almost full bottle
before us, she .v ithdrew to attack an innocent who had
just entered. This little incident amused both myself
and friend, who said that we would “ have some fun out
of Polly,” which was the name the girl was known by.
Shortly* afterwards another Baldhead entered the room,
and was pounced upon by Polly, who, if paid by results,
certainly earned her money, as she succeeded in extracting
a treat fiom several of the visitors during thej short time
I was present. The old gentleman alluded to, I was given
to understand, was in a large way of business as an
auctioneer, and spent a great portion of his time at night
in visiting this and similar places ; he was very liberal to
the girls, who repaid him with an extra quantity of hugging
and kissing. There was one individual in the room who
looked like an undertaker, so solemn was his appearance ;


but he turned out to be an Elizabeth-street solicitor,
remarkable for the success of his District Court practice.
He wandered vacantly about the place for some minutes,
finally seating himself at a table and ordering a glass of
brandy. He did not appear to receive much attention from
the girls, probably for the reason that he had never been
known to spend anything on them, and he seemed to be
contemptuously indifferent to their good looks and pre-
sence. What his object was in visiting the place night
after niuht no one could tell. The nymphs called him
“ Old Solemnsides.”
The remainder of the company was composed of well-
dressed men of various positions in life—fast bank clerks,
commercial travellers, shopkeepers, remittance men, a few
swell spielers, and individuals who “ lived on their wits.'’
These latter persons form a numerous class in Sydney;
they dress tolerably well, have the signs of good breeding
about them, and do not, as a rule, over-indulge in liquor;
the}’ are, however, eternally on the borrowing tack, and
after ingratiating themselves into the good graces of some
casual acquaintance, invariably wind up by soliciting the
“ loan ” of half-a-crown or five shillings, the modesty of
their request generally ending in a favourable response.
My mentor giving me a hint that it was time to leave,
in order to pay a visit to one or two other establishments,
I arose from the table, when Polly again approached us,
and, calling me aside, asked me to promise to come another
time, as she wished to “ speak to me.” I gave her the
required assurance, and after telling her that my Christian
name, which she inquired for, was Fred,” she threw her
arms around my neck, and, with a hearty kiss, bade me
“ Good night!” with the parting admonition, ‘‘Now, Fred,
take care of yourself!” On reaching the street, Mr. X.
remarked that my make-up was excellent, no better proof
of it being required than the mistake of P.dlv, who had
the reputation of being one of the smartest girls in the
hotel.
It was now past twelve o’clock, and we proceeded up
Piit-street, stopping at .Mrs. H.’s, a well-known establish-
ment, remarkable for its fairly good liquor and suppers,
duck and green peas being a standing dish, served at the


reasonable tariff of 2s. per head. The bouse was situated
nearly opposite the Victoria Theatre (afterwards burned
down), and though closed at the time of our visit, there
was no difficulty in procuring admission through the side
door. We had scarcely entered the inner or supper room
when I was startled and so newhat frightened at witnessing
a scrimmage between a tall, well-made young Scotch-
woman and a damsel of lesser stature. j.he fight was
short but decisive, the lady from the “Land o’ Cakes”
coming off victorious, though her faded finery was very
much damaged. Mr. X. having ordered “ duck and green
peas for two” and a bottle of stout, we sat down to enjoy
our supper, but had scarcely been seated, when a fragile
young creature approached us, and, addressing my friend,
said, “ .Master, give us a bit of supper.” Mr. X. looked at
me and said, “ 1 suppose I must,” and telling the girl to
call the waiter, invited her to sit dow r n. ihe poor thing-
appeared to be famishing with hunger, as she literallj*
“ wolfed ” the delicious food on her plate. After imbibing
a glass of the stout, she became very communicative, and
seeing that I was a stranger, told me the name and brief
history of nearly every girl in the room. Ihe big Scotch-
woman, she said, was known as Harriet, her “ char ami
being a darkie minstrel, remarkable for being the possessor
of a huge mouth, which was chiefly his stock-in-trade
when before the footlights. The woman who fought with
Harriet was a “disagreeable thing,” who was always inter-
fering or saying nasty things, and otherwise creating a
disturbance ; she was called “ Melbourne Kate. Ihe
young person with the hat and feathers w r as a “good girl,
and, when flush of cash, very kind to her erratic sisters in
distress; her father had a shop in George-street. Ihus
did our hungry friend rattle on, until some male acquain-
tance hove in sijht, when she suddenly started up, and,
hurriedly thanking us for our kindness, made towards him.
“ You see the sort of life most of these characters lead,”
said my companion ; “ although they are gaily attired and
assume a light-hearted manner, the pangs of hunger are
frequently knawing their vitals. Kven if they become
possessed of money in a moderate degree it does not seem
to do them any good, as it generally goes to pay their


little debts, redeem their jewellery, or purchase some
article of wearing apparel of the latest fashion.”
The company at Mrs. H.’s was not so select as that at
the Cafe W ; very few members of the outside demi-
monde visited the latter establishment, whilst at the
former any girl passably dressed could procure admission.
The men who patronised Mrs, H.’s place were a mixed lot,
chiefly of the trading class, and this was noticeable in
their manner of eating, and the profusion of oaths with
which they garnished their conversation.
It now being close upon 2 a.ra., we left Mother H.’s,
with the intention, however, of paying her nest another
visit. On reaching my residence in Castlereagh-street I
let myself in by the private door, and bidding Mi’. X. a
hearty “Good night,” was soon afterwards in the Land of
Nod. It must not be supposed that I was absent from the
house without the knowledge of the landlady ; on the
contrary, she gave me full permission to enjoy myself
after my duties were over, and apparently did not trouble
herself as to where I went to do so. She once re rn a riled
to me that youth was the time for enjoyment. u Go it
while you’re young, my girl,” she said; “you will have
quite enough of trouble in your old age.”
The day after my first adventure in disguise was a very
quiet one, and I was beginning to feel downhearted at. the
lack of trade. My spirits were, however, enlivened by the
entrance of my ancient friend, who as usual inquired after
my health, and then requested me to serve him with a
glass of his favourite beverage. In the course of conver-
sation I gave him to understand that I was dissatisfied
with my position in life, as putting by money for a rainy
day was out of the question, a barmaid being expected to
dress well. He said that he wished to make me an offer,
a d would be supremely happy should I accept it. He
was the owner of a nice little residence in one of the
suburbs, and would furnish it in a suitable manner for my
reception, making me his housekeeper at a liberal salary.
I asked him in what way his offer was to be taken, as it
had a very doubtful aspect. He rejoined that he had
previously explained to me his views on the subject of
marriage, and repeated his reinaaks about Platonic Love.


I told him that I was willing to become his wife, and
would do everything in my power to add to his comfort;
but that the Platonic business was not in my line, and his
offer was declined. He said that I was a strange girl, but
would give him credit for something more than admiration
later on. A customer coming in at this period of the con-
versation, my Lothario took advantage of the circumstance
to leave the room, and I saw no more of him for fully a
fortnight.
That night Mr. X. paid the bar a visit, and agreeably
chatted about our adventures. He proposed that we should
go out the following night, when he would introduce me
to some of his acquaintances. Accordingly on that occa-
sion, about 11.15 p. m„ I again assumed my disguise, and
accompanied him to a house in Palmer-street, Woolloo-
mooloo, at which he knocked, and we were quickly
admitted, an elderly lady greeting him with seemingly
great respect. We were requested to he seated, and in a
few minutes three young ladies, each possessing consider-
able personal attnetions, joined us. Wine and glasses
were placed upon the table, and there being a piano in the
room, one of the damsels treated us to a song, on the
conclusion of which she came and sat beside me, inquiring
if I were foud of music, at the same time furtively
squeezing ray hand. I returned the pressure, and answered
that anything she played gave me great pleasure. In reply
to her query as to my age, I said I was about 19, and
volunteered the information that I had come to Sydney to
visit my lelative (Mr. X.), and also to see a little “ life.”
She said she highly approved of the latter idea, and would
give me every assistance in her power ; would I come alone
to-morrow and see her ? I replied that perhaps I would ;
and after some further conversation, which need not be
here related, we left, my friend giving the old lady soma
money, I presume in payment for the wine.
‘‘You see in the house we have just left,” said Mr. X.,
“ three well-bred, well-e lucated, and, in a certain sense,
well-behaved young women. They have unhappily fallen
from a state of purity to a condition of downright depravity
and slavery, for they are willing to sell themselves body
and soul for money ; when their good looks leave them


they will be forsaken by their so-called friends, their fate
being probably an untimely death from drink or disease.
The old dame who let us' in is the proprietress of the
establishment; she is a human vampire, and the only god
she worships is money. She manages to keep her lodgers
always in debt, frequently purchasing goods for their
adornment.”
I ventured the remark that they were sumptuously but
nevertheless tastefully, dressed.
“Yes,’ said Mr. X., “ the love of ornament is the ruling
passion of the sex. So it has been, and so it will ever be.
There’s not a woman that lives who does not regard the
matter of dress as a most important consideration. Even
the old and decrepit, or the young and the unseemly, will
trv on a dashing hat or a handsome shawl with a butter
of the heart that speaks plainer than a thousand words the
delight it occasions. This is partly the result of education
and°habit. The first toy a girl generally gets is a doll,
and the first thing she learns is to dress it in the moat
attractive manner. These infantile idols are kept in rich
vestments, and the little worshipper learns the value of
such externals by their influence upon herself. As the
child increases in years, the knowledge that superiority in
dress is the passport to general admiration gains strength.
The girl views it as a means of insuring attention, and the
woman relies upon its assistance to strengthen her power
over the other sex, or increase her influence with her own.
Dress is the pivot on which every feminine action must
turn. The prottiest infant would appear a stranger to its
mamma without its lace cap and muslin robe ; the bride
would be unknown to her friends in a ‘ respectable ’ mar-
riage unless clad in virgin white; it would be impossible
f or ° the widow to grieve for her lost husband if the
mourning was not ‘ becoming;’ and no old lady of a good
family can be expected to sleep soundly in her coffin when
her grave clothes are unfashionably made.”
We retraced our steps towards the city, and on our way
across the Park passed a great many forlorn looking crea-
tures, who were, my friend informed rnc, styled “ Jossers, 1 ’
the derivation of which word I have been unable to find
out. Thev appear to have no fixed place of residence, if


the gaol be excepted, and their position in the social scale
caniTot be much lower. We also saw several “ lords of the
creation ” —ill-clad, dark-browed, ruffianly looking indivi-
duals, whom I thought very undesirable persons to meet
on a dark night in a lonely neighbourhood.
The walk made us rather peckish, and we determined
to call at Mother H.’s on our way home. We accordingly
entered that place and had our supper. The same ladies
were there “ vending their artificial love,” and the same
he-animals were also knocking about, making their presence
known by the energetic manner with which they guzzled
their drink and belched forth profanities. We did not
spend much time there, leaving for home immediately on
the conclusion of our repast.
Two nights afterwards we sallied forth to visit a
billiard-room in George-street, where, I was given to
understand, considerable sums frequently changed hands
on the issue of a game. There were two tables provided
for the use of the players, who were all of the seemingly
respectable class, at least so far as their apparel went.
The foreign element was strongly represented, Germans
preponderating, and Frenchmen making a good second;
the latter seemed to be the most successful players. So
intent were the company on the game, that our entrance
was unnoticed, and we quietly sat at a side-table, and had
a few glasses of wine. Not more than a few yards away
from us stood a man with the most sinister squint I ever
saw. I asked my companion who the individual was, but
be could not inform me, beyond staling that there was a
current rumour to the effect that the mysterious party got
his living in the day time by gathering rags, bones, and
other domestic waifs and strays, “ coming it strong in
tailor-made clothes at night, and paying his way like a
gentleman.
“ You see that man now striking the balls,” said my
my friend; “he is a regular habitue of the room, and
calls himself a commission agent, but the greater part of
his income is derived from the introduction of gilded
youths to establishments similar to the one in Palmer-
stree* we visited a few nights since. The party leaning
against the mantel-shelf is ‘billiard-mad.’ He spends


over a pound a night; but where he gets the money n© one
knows ; probably the truth will come out some da3'.”
Leaving the billiard-room, we directed our steps towards
am hotel on the opposite side of the street, and entered the
private bar, which was presided over by a young woman
with highly coloured cheeks. She was a late arrival from
the country, and this was the more noticeable in her dress,
which was covered with an enormous something between
a cabbage and a dahlia. She wore a largf gilt brooch,
with a piece of yellow cut glass in the centre as big as
the eye of au ox. She was the image of embodied health,
and probably could eat fat bacon like a ploughman. There
was another person in the room—a fast-looking youth, a
son of the Hon. Bovine Muggins, M.L.0., a gentleman of
extensive fortune and small intellect. He seemed to be
on very good terras with the barmaid, addressing her as
“ Carry, m3 7 dear,” and inviting her to join him in a glass,
.''he acquiesces, and pours out a large tumbler of stout,
which she polished off at one gulp. This young lady
afterwards married a very decent journeyman tailor. After
her marriage she developed into a confirmed drunkard, and
led her unfortunate husband a sad life. He had, however,


some revenge on the destroyer of his happiness. Coming
home one night, and seeing his spouse lying drunk on the
bed, he put a goose iron in the tire, and, when red hot,
applied it to a certain portion of her anatomy, with the
result that, with a terrific yell, she jumped up, and rushed
out of the house into the street, only to fall into the
clutches of a policeman, who took her to the watchhouse.
It is said that after this transaction she became a strict
teetotaller, and is now a model of propriety.
A son of the Hon,
Bovine Muggins, M L.C.”—(See page 26.)
We next went into a private bar managed by a dark,
Jewish-looking lady. No other visitors were present,
and our stay did not last more than ten minutes—jus'
sufficient to call for and drink each a glass of wine.
“ That lady,” said Mr. X., “ is the mother of several
children, and resides with her htisband in one of the
suburbs. She passes herself off as a single woman, and
inveigles men, young and old, to her house. When there
drugged liquor is introduced, and the visitor is soon in
oblivion. The husband and wife then ease him of his


cash, but are careful to leave his jewellery intact. The
victim is probably in some responsible position, and seldom
makes any row over the matter, beyond giving vent to
some strong language. Should, however, he prove restive,
the husband, who acts as “ chucker-out,” appears on the
scene, and orders him off the premises, with the threat of
a kicking should he not clear out very quickly. This
generally has the desired effect, and the duped one retires,
inwardly vowing vengeance. The lady is quite an adept
at the game, and selects her pigeons with great tact, mild
and studious young men being her especial favourites.
It is a well-known fact that the latter class are the most
easily influenced by female charms. The less they have
mingled in the society of women, and often when they are
almost complete!}’ deprived of such enjoyment, the more
powerfully does a pretty face act upon them.”
The following day Mr. X. paid me a visit, and for the
greater part of the time sat silently smoking a cigar. To
break the gloom, I said, “ Mr. X., were you ever in love f”
He seemed somewhat startled at the suddenness of my
question, and after some minutes replied: ‘‘Well, if you
can call the feelings of a youth of seventeen by that name
1 certainly was. Some time ago I committed the incidents
to pa| er, and will let you peruse them.” True to his
promise, shortly afterwards my friend handed me the
manuscript, which was as follows :
Mb. X.’s Stoby.
My father dying while I was in my first year, I was
left entirely to the care of a fond, indulgent, indolent
mother, who, because I was her only child, and.heir to the
family property, petted, spoiled, and neglected me. During
my boyhood, when headstrong, ungovernable, and ignorant,
my mother added to her establishment a young girl, the
illegitimate daughter of an Italian woman. She entered
our house an object of charity, and she was engaged to be
my attendant, that is, to become the uncomplaining victim
of all my whims. 1 was a tyrant —a sellish, proud, and
tyrant j but IMaria possessed a thousand fascina-
tions —was lovely, kind, gentle, and amiable ; and, in a
few days, I felt more gratification in being persuaded by


her than in requiring her to perforin my wishes. Imper-
ceptibly her influence advanced. At her desire I allowed
the services of a tutor, and, with her assistance, I soon
made rapid progress in my studies. I became less violent;
I grew more rational. My mother, observing with p ensure
the improvement taking place in my disposition, treated
the author of it with increased kindness ; and the poor
girl, who had experienced little of such generous behaviour,
looked upon me as its origin, and made greater exertions
to procure ray happiness.
Years passed by, and I became a youth of better feelings
than 1 had known in my boyhood ; yet headstrong upon
occasions, and independent of all control save that of my
fair companion. Maria increased in loveliness and excel-
lence. She was my senior by two or three years. Her
form swelled like the bud of some glowing flower, and
blossomed into the full maturity of womanly beauty. She
looked as if (he Promethean fire of some mighty passion
had been breathed into her nature : every glance, every
gesture, spoke a new influence. Her cheeks were dyed
with a warmer bloom ; her lips were bathed with a more
delicious fragrance ; and her ey*es were suffused with a
more delightful humidity than they had hitherto possessed.
Her heart had become freighted with a store of sweet
affections, that seemed offered to the first adventurer who
sought the prize. Then I experienced a change—a gradual
and important change. I became restless and uneasy when
Maria was away from me ; I trembled when she touched
me ; and when, in all the innocence of her guileless nature,
her warm lips rested on my own, my cheeks were flushed
with a burning heat, and a sudden sen-e of faintness
seemed ready to take from me all consciousness of exis-
tence. What these emotions were I knew not ; but they
increased in power, and the excitement they produced
occasioned a dangerous fever.
During my illness Maria was constantly at my bedside.
She was unremitting in her attentions ; and, more from
her care than through the skill of the physicians, I reco-
vered. We were continually left together; for my mother,
satisfied that I had profited by Maria’s society, gave her.-elf
mo further concern upon the subject. She never dreamt


of evil. Foolish woman ! While the moral happiness of her
son was trembling upon a precipice, she was sleeping in
security. But why should I blame her ? her indolence
was the mere effect of necessity. It would be a useless
labour to attempt to pourtray the ineffectual exertions
which two young and innocent beings made to struggle
with their evil destinies. The result was natural. A
different arrangement of circumstances could not have
occurred. Thus was laid the foundation stone of a fabric
of human misery !
My mother was suffering from severe indisposition. She
had been obliged for some time to confine herself to her
bedroom ; consequently possessed few opportunities of
observing the destructive intimacy springing up so near
her. I bad long been left completely my own master. I
now made my independence assist my inclinations. Maria
often appeared very unhappy : I soon found out the cause,
and learnt the necessity of immediate concealment. I
wrote a letter in a disguised hand that appeared to have
been sent by a friend of Maria’s brother, residing in
London, to the purport that, if Maria wished to see her
parent, she must use the utmost despatch, as the latter was
in the last agonies of death. This note I carried to my
mother, and found no difficulty in persuading her to allow
me to accompany Maria on her journey. I procured a
lodging for her in a retired part of the town ; and the
people of the house, being well paid, were not inquisitive.
Here I gave myself up to the full indulgence of my fatal
passion, and week after week passed by finding me still
the slave of enervating and unprolitable pleasures. I
loved Maria with a maddening earnestness, and she
returned my passion with the ardour of her fond and
generous nature. Both experienced the frequent conviction
that we were doing evil, and both felt occasional regrets
for its consequences.
My stay in London greatly alarmed my mother, and
heightened her disease ; and someone having informed
her of the true cause of my absence, the dreadful intelli-
gence came upon her enfeebled frame with so sudden and
unexpected a shock, that it was thought she would not
survive the day. A despatch was immediately sent off


Maria.


for me, urging my instant return home. I left Maria in
tears, and returned to my mother’s house with the utmost
speed. Alas ! it was too late. She had died a few hours
before I arrived. I became frantic with grief, and the
powerful workings of my nature produced a dangerous
attack of inflammation of the brain.
When I became convalescent, I found that, by my
mother's will, I was left to the care of a guardian during
my minority. Without informing anyone of my pro-
ceedings, I hastened towards London. When I arrived
there I traversed the streets with rapid steps till I came
to Maria’s lodgings. The street door.was partly open, I
entered the house without knocking, and went directly to
her room. As I opened the door I beheld her in tears,
sitting by the side of a table, on which lay something
covered over with a white cloth. She did not appear to
observe my entrance. Her eyes were fixed on the table
with an intense expression of sadness 5 but what was the
object of their contemplation I could not imagine. I went
up to her, and caressed her with my usual fondness. She
started from ray embrace ; then, casting on me a look of
reproach, she drew aside the cloth from the table, arid,
covering her face with her hanJa, sank back sobbing upon
her seat. A sight met my gaze, which to the day of my
doom will never be effaced from my memory ; it was the
body of an infant, dead and stiff, lying shrouded in a
small coffin. I shuddered and drew back from the appalling
spectacle, and tried to shut it out from ray sight. There I
stood, trembling like a condemned criminal, afraid to speak,
and unable to move, till Maria approached rae.
« It is dead !” said she, in a solemn whisper, that sunk
into my heart liko a lacerating weapon.
« Dead !” I exclaimed, in an agony I felt insupportable.
« Dead !” she replied ; and the tears chased each other
upon her cheek. u But look upon its indd eyes and gentle
countenance,” she continued, as well as her sobs would
enable her to proceed. “It seems so peaceful and happv
in its death.”
I took my hands from before my eyes, and oh ! the
horror I endured when I beheld the fearful object in her
arms so close to me, that it almost touched my person. I


staggered back a few paces with an involuntary shriek of
terror, and then fled from the spot as if the Angel of Death,
was on my footsteps. I cannot describe my sensations
at that dreadful moment, which were heightened, no
doubt, by my illness. When I found myself in the street
I grew better—the cool air revived me—and I began to
breathe without pain or oppression. I had, however, gone
but a very short distance, and was considering what was
necessary to be done in Maria’s present situation, when I
was seized by two men, who, immediately my absence was
discovered, had been sent in pursuit of me by my guardian,
and in spite of my struggles and entreaties, was forced
into a coach and hurried home.
I was kept a close prisoner in the house of rny guardian,
who, dying shortly afterwards, I became a ward in Chan-
cer}’, and my wants were more kindly attended to.
AJasters were engaged to instruct me ; and I then entered
with such application into the spirit of my studies, that I
quickly understood as much as older youths, and more
perfectly of the nature and order of things. In due time
I was sent to College.
It must not be supposed that I forgot Maria. The
impression she made upon me was not to be erased except
by death. Upon the very tirst opportunity I proceeded to
town. I found the house she had inhabited tenanted by
people who had never seen her, and consequently could
not direct me to her residence. In the utmost anguish of
mind I searched for her in all directions, and instituted
every inquiry : my exertions were unsuccessful.
It was during my tirst vacation at the University, as I
was returning from a dinner in the city, rather elevated
with wine, 1 was accosted b}’ one of those unfortunate
females who throng the public streets. The night was
foggy, and I paid little attention to her features ; but I
allowed her to lead me through a labyrinth of dark alleys
and narrow courts, till we arrived at a mean-looking
house, in the dirtiest row of buildings I ever beheld. My
companion pushed open a glass door, partly covered with
a green curtain ; and I followed her, scarcely knowing
what I was about, up a filthy narrow staircase, into a room
scarcely more inviting, furnished only with a bed of the


humblest kind, two or three broken chairs, and a dilapi-
dated table. As she placed the candle on the table I had
an opportunity of observing her features. It sobered me
in an instant.
“Good heavens, Maria!” I exclaimed, as I sunk for
support against the bedstead. She gazed at me for some
moments with a look of mingled insanity and intoxication,
and Hung herself into my arms. I was shocked to observe
the change that had taken place in her features. Her
faded, sunken cheeks were daubed over with rouge, and
her dark eyes gleamed out of their sockets with an expres-
sion unnatural and restless. Her lips were thin and
bloodless ; and her black glossy hair, once so silken and
beautiful, now looked coarse and uncombed. Her full and
graceful form had shrunk into a mere shadow.
“ You are come, then!” she exclaimed, starting from
her position, and gazing on me with a look so wild, that I
shrunk from it in alarm. “ But you are here when I have
ceased to expect you. They told me you never meant to
come, and they called me a fool for believing in man’s
promises. But I still hoped you would not abandon me
to the terrible desolation I have known ; and I long looked
for you to save me from the shame that has been spotting
me like a pestilence. You have come at last—once more
lam yours. Again we shall be happy.”
She threw her arms round my neck, and attempted to
press her lips on mine. I felt her breath burning hot
upon my face, steaming with the fumes of ardent spirits.
“Not now, Maria ; not now!” said I, as I endeavoured
to extricate myself from her embrace.
“ Nay, we will not part so soon !” cried the unfortunate
girl, as she again proffered her unwelcome caresses. I
shrunk from her with visible repugnance.
She noticed my disgust, and a fearful change imme-
diately passed over her features. I had stirred up all the
revengeful passions of the Italian. She placed herself
before me, her eyes flashing with fury, and her limbs
trembling with rage.
“So this is all lam to expect!” she exclaimed bitterly.
“Scorned, thrust aside, and trampled on! And thus
treated by one who robbed me of my everlasting happiness,


and left me to be the victim of a thousand pollutions.
Have I borne shame and hatred—the contempt of one
sex—the loathing of the other—and the execrations of all
to be so used? Accursed wretch!” she continued more
vehemently ; “Give me back my immortal purity of soul:
rer-tore me ray treasured innocence of heart—make good
to me the vows you pledged before heaven, so often and
with so deep an earnestness—or I will have so ample a
revenge—l will make such bloody retribution—l will
force from you so terrible an amende—that all the world
shall acknowledge my wrongs have been most completely
avenged. What hinders me now ?” she exclaimed furiously,
as she snatched up a long knife that lay on the table.
“ What hinders me from punishing your damnable trea-
cheries ? Justice is denied! Revenge alone is left; I
must have blood ! blood ! blood !”
The weapon was raised above her head, and her look was
dark and deadly. My death appeared certain, for I felt it
impossible to make any resistance. I could not stir.
There was a fascination in her eyes that rooted me to the
spot. I gazed on her with fear. As the last words were
repeated, she drew back the knife as with the intention of
making a desperate plunge. Her bosom began to heave
with the most tumultuous action. A moment elapsed. I
observed a convulsive movement of the muscles of the
face—a sound like that of choking proceeded from her
throat—the revengeful expression of her look underwent a
complete change—the knife dropped from her hand—and
she fell senseless to the floor. I left her with all the
money I had about me, gently laid her on the bed, and
got out of the house without being observed. Next
morning, I sent a person in whom 1 could confide to rescue
her from her degraded condition ; but she had left the
house, and was unknown to its inmates except by occa-
sional visits. Since then I have never seen her.
I was rather astonished one evening when the landlady
of the hotel informed me, without any prelude whatever,
that my services would not be required after the ensuing
Saturday. I remarked to her that in discharging an
employee some reason for doing so was usually given.


“ Well, then/’ said Mrs. Boniface, “ since you must know,
I will tell you—you are becoming stale ! When you first
came here, jour good looks and engaging ways took with
the customers, and trade naturally became brisk ; but now
they appe»*r to be less enamoured of you, and I think a
change would do good. I have engaged a dashing, devil-
may-care sort of a girl—quite your opposite—and although
she is not by any means your equal in personal appearance
and so forth, she will do to keep things lively for a while.”
I said nothing in answer to this explanation, and about
midnight on the Saturday took my departure, having pre-
viously engaged a bedroom.
On the following Monday, about 7 p.m., I met Mr. X.
by appointment. I wore my disguise, and we proceeded
in the direction of the Balmain Ferry. When in Sussex-
street, we were overtaken by a heavy shower of rain, and
there being no other shelter at hand, we entered a barber’s
shop, a small room sumptuously carpeted with sawdust.
Upon the walls were various pictures —coloured prints,
old and damaged. I observed amongst them a representa-
tion of a monkey shaving a cat—a design more appropiiate
than the owner or his customers imagined. In the centre
of the apartment a tall cadaverous-looking individual, with
high cheek-bones, red whiskers, and crop to match, wearing
t.n apron which was once white (bearing in its huge
pockets his professional apparatus), and with sleeves of a
similar fabric, was operating upon the chin of a customer,
an apoplectic-looking man, with a red nose and a capacious
“ corporation.” Shortly after we had entered a person
resembling a farmer made his appearance. On observing
the barber at leisure, he placed himself in the vacant seat.
“ Fine weather lately, sir,” blandly insinuated the man of
shaving. “ Yea,” briefly replied the unknown. The
operator then commenced sharpening his razor on a leather
strap nailed to the table; but during the process his
tongue was not allowed to remain in idleness.
“ Did \ou see onything interesting in the Herald
to-day, sir?”
“ I never see anything but nonsense in that beastly
paper,” observed the stranger with some asperity.
“ Hoot awa, mon !” exclaimed the barber with consider-


able surprise ; “ sure an it’s the leading journal ; a maiat
respectable periodical j professing leeberal opinions 5 al-
ways pooblishing the earliest intelligence ; and then its
leading articles are so pointed and clever !”
The bristles being now all removed from the stranger's
face, the latter, as he put on his hat, remarked to the
tonsorial artist that it was a pity he could not shave a
customer without inflicting upon him a lot of damned
Scotch twaddle.
u Sir, you’ve insulted me,” replied the barber ; “ youv’e
cast reflections on my country!”
“Your country /” said the stranger, contemptuously;
11 w hy> you don’t mean to style that miserable, dirty,
beggarly province called Scotland a country ? the home of
rags and filth, of disease and vermin; a wilderness of
barren rocks and fetid lakes ; where nothing grows but
the heather and the thistle, a few stunted fir trees, and
some half-withered pines. A wretched place, inhabited
by a few beggarly, cowardly miscreants ”
“ Cowardly !” exclaimed the indignant Scotchman, as
soon as he could find courage to interrupt the torrent of
abuse directed towards his beloved birth-place ; “do ye
call the people of Scotland cowardly ? Were Wallace,
were Robert Bruce, were the victors o’ Bannockburn
cowards, ye false loon ?”
“ Yes, you poor, pitiful, sneaking knave, they were all
contemptible cowards, or they would have stood up and
fought like Englishmen, instead of stealing about like
thieves in the dark, and surprising their enemies when off
their guard. The battle of Bannockburn is their grand
boast; and how did they gain that ? By digging pits,
into which a tired army and imbecile king were entrapped,
a stratagem worthy of Tom Thumb. The great heroes !
Did they ever gain a fair stand-up fight F Halidon Hill,
I* alkirk, Cuton Moor, Flodden Field, and Neville Cross
reply in the negative. A treacherous, malignant, vindic-
tive race. Who betrayed Charles the First ? the beggarly
Scotchmen; and they would have betrayed their fathers
for the same sura. Who destroyed poor Mary Stuart ? the
beggarly Scotchmen ; and they would murder their mothers
if they could get anything by it. And yet they mention


England as owing all her glory to them. When did they
ever produce a Nelson, a Marlborough, or a Wellington ?
They boast, too, of monopolising all the wisdom and genius
of the kingdom. Where are their Shakespeares, their
Miltons, their Newtons, their Bacons? The only poet they
ever had was Burns, and him they starved to death.
Hear a Scotchman speak of his country, you would think
he could not exist out of it; and yet of the thousands who
leave it for England, America, and Australia, scarcely one
ever thinks of returning.”
Having exploded himself thus far, the stranger threw
down his threepence on the counter, and stalked out of
the shop. The rain being now over, we left also.
u It is strange,” Mr. X. exclaimed, u that in all climates
barbers should be remarkable for their loquacity. The
Christian barber and the infidel, the black shaver and the
white, are all the same. Bj r a wise dispensation of Provi-
dence, they are gifted with extraordinary conversational
activity. The great South American'ant-eater inserts his
long tongue into an ant’s nest, and the poor insects,
attracted by its smoothness and oiliness, throng around it,
and are devoured. The barber catches his prey by the
same means.”
We proceeded to the ferry station and crossed over to
Balmain, a few minutes’ walk bringing us to a quiet little
street. The house at which we knocked was seemingly in
complete darkness, but after the lapse of a few minutes
the door was opened by a young girl, who, recognising
my companion as an occasionable visitor, ushered us into
a neatly furnished parlour, saying that the missus would
attend on us immediately. An elegantly dressed and
rather prepossessing woman, about 28, soon made her
appearance, and after bidding us the salutation of the
evening, implored us to leave, as Mr, Blank was inside,
three parts tipsy, and would kick up a row if he knew'
there were strangers in the place. We accordingly
withdrew. From what I gathered from my friend, it
seems that the lady in question was the separated wife of
a Wesleyan clergyman, who finding that she was addicted
to over-gay habits, very properly refused to live with
her, and she is now following the bent of her wicked


inclinations. Those who are acquainted with the particulars
of her marital trippings sympathise very much with her
hu>band, who had the reputation of being kind, loving and
faithful. The gentleman alluded to as Mr. Blank is a
well-known member of Parliament, old enough to be the
lady’s father. lie frequently takes the chair at social
purity and temperance meetings; but is nevertheless a
profound worshipper et the shrines of both Venus and
and Bacchus. He is also very jealous, and when in his
cups rather quarrelsome, which will account for our hasty
retreat from the premises.
We returned to Sydney, and visited an upstairs private
bar in King-street, where I discovered ray ancient Platonic
friend in a rather compromising position. He was seated
on a sort of sofa, with his arms around the young lady
who ought to have been attending to her bottles and
decanters. The old gentleman had evidently been imbibing
rather freely, as he carried on in a very frisky manner.
He first of all called for a bottle of champagne for our
special use, and then endeavoured to take up his position
behind the bar, at the same time expressing his firm
determination to have another kiss, and to keep him quiet
the barmaid let him have half-a-dozen, at which he seemed
very pleased. The wicked old Baldhead—to behave in
such a manner after professing so much ardent love for me.
I felt half inclined to reveal my identity. On second
thought, however, I resolved to interview him on another
oceasion and tax him with his perfidy.
In most private bars there is generally a couch ; but
in this one there was actually a bed, though it was some-
what hidden from view by a screen. Whether the young
lady who rented the concern lived altogether there, or only
made it a temporary stopping-place, I cannot say ; but this
I firmly believe, that a great many of these private refresh-
ment rooms are—well, no better than they should be.
Mr. Blank, of whom I have just spoken, when addressing
a social purity meeting, would probably stigmatise them
as being “ engines of the deviland as that gentleman—
(l don't mean Old Nick) —has the reputation of being on
very familiar terms with most of the fast-living barmaids
of the metropolis, he is probably correct.


Some years have passed since Mr. X. and myself went
the rounds of the private bars; but although the hours of
closing, &c., have been more strictly attended to, in conse-
quence of increased vigilance on the part of the police,
scenes of a very doubtful character are now of common
occurrence. In proof of this statement I will give in
extenso a report of the proceedings of the Central Division
Metropolitan Licensing Court, held on Monday, June 4,
1894, and copied from the Australian Star of the day
following. The sign of the hotel in each case is given,
but, in kindness, I have omitted the name of the licensee.
After stating that licenses to the number of 289 had been
granted, the police not objecting to their renewal, the
newspaper proceeds :
i( The first of the cases involving objections to renewals
on the grounds of private bars and the questionable
character of their occupants was that of the Royal Town
Hall Hotel, Druitt-street. The objections were that the
licensee had let a private bar to women of improper
character ; and that he had been fined for delaying admis-
sion.—Sergeant Carberry, in support of the objection, said
that on May 4 he visited the private bar at the house in
question. There he saw a girl named Ellen behind the
bar with a man, w r ho was squeezing her. In a room off
the bar Pauline, another barmaid, was sitting on a cane
lounge, with her arms around a man’s neck, and the man
was behaving in an indecent manner. On May 12 he
went there again. Both the girls were in the bar, but
there was ‘ nothing doing.’ On another occasion he saw
a man lying on the cane lounge, and Mias Pauline was
sitting on his stomach. (Laughter.) As far as he could
see, the licensee had no control whatever over the girls.
The witness described what he saw in that little ante-room
on one occasion. Details are unpublishable.—Senior-
constable Ross said he had often seen the barmaids of the
Royal Town Hall Hotel leaving the premises in cabs with
men after hours. He had also seen the barmaids accost
men passing by.—The licensee denied that since his last
renewal he had let a bar to anybody. None of the scenes
described had ever been brought under his notice. Cross-
examined, he said that he taxed the girls with the mis-


conduct set out in the objections. They denied it, and he
dismissed them. One of them received 30s. a week, and
she found an assistant out of that sum.—The Bench unani-
mously refused the license.
“ The renewal of the Mount Druitt Hotel was opposed
upon the grounds that it was a house of inferior construc-
tion, and that the licensee had let a bar to women for
their own control.—lnspector Potter gave evidence in
support. —Senior-constable Ross said the house had been
very badly conducted during the past twelve months. A
private bar had been sublet to a girl named S. and others.
He had seen these women the worse for drink and also
accosting men in the street. He had witnessed improprie-
ties in the bar. The house was frequented by pro-titutes,
larrikins, and thieves.—License refused.
“ The licensee of the Gaiety Hotel, Castlereagh-street,
appeared to answer an objection to the renewal of his
license on the ground of sub-letting a private bar to
females of a shady character,—Sergeant Carberry said he
visited the premises on the evening of April 21. He saw
three girls in the private bar, Miss V., Mabel, and Lottie.
On May 4 he saw Mabel lying down on a long couch.
(Here the witness described what was going on.) Another
man was in the room, keeping watch. On May 25 witness
paid another visit; Miss Y. was behind the bar, and Mabel
in a back room, sitting on a mams knee and kissing him.
He knew the house as a resort of convicted thieves and
criminals.—Mr. Gannon, for the defence, thought that
where the police became cognizant of the character of
these women they should, in fairness to the licensee, let
him know. As for a girl kissing a gentleman in a back
room —well, he might have been a relation of hers.—
Mr. Johnson, S.M. : There is quite enough evidence before
us to show that the place is little better than a brothel.—
The licensee said that he let no bars, and was not aware
of any improprieties on the part of the ladies employed
therein. When the private bars were inspected there was
half a bottle of whisky, half a bottle of brandy, half a
bottle of sherry, and some coloured waters to hll up the
shelf.—The Presiding Magistrate announced that the
Bench were unanimous in their refusal.


The renewal of the license of the Commercial Hotel,
Yoi’k-street, was objected to on the grounds that the private
bar was let to women of unquestionable shadiness.—
Constable McDonald said he visited the private bar on
April 26. There were two girls in the bar, Louisa Me.
and Louie P, On a data later than the one named be saw
Louie P, and a man in the bar. They were in an indecent
posture. Subsequently he saw Miss Me. very drunk in
the bar. That same young lady was, upon another occa-
sion, giving a huge kicking display for drinks, an admirer
holding his hat 5 ft alott for the dainty toe to reach.
'lhe proceedings were of an enthusiastic and exhilarating
character. Miss Me. won the drinks.—Further evidence
having been given, the Chairman said the testimony was
not sufficiently damaging to warrant a refusal of the
renewal.”
The Court stood adjourned to the following day, when,
according to the authority quoted,—
“ The licensee of the Golden Anchor Hotel, George-
street West, appeared to answer an objection to the
renewal of his license.—Senior Constable Jeffs gave
evidence, in the course of which he stated thet the women
employed in the private bar were in the habit of standing
at the door and accosting passers-by.—Senior Constable
Jones said he had seen two women at the door of the
George-street private bar addressing passers-bj'. One night
one of them came out of the bar at a quarter to 12. She
was far from sober. She stopped him and asked him to go
to Bellevue-street, where she lived.—ln answer to an
objection by defending counsel, Mr. Roberts pointed out
that in all instances applicants had every opportunity of
calling these barmaids to deny imputations made against
them, but counsel in their wisdom had refrained from
doing so.—Senior Sergeant Broderick described scenes of
a very exciting nature which he witnessed at the house in
question.—The licensee handed in two characters for the
perusal of the Bench. He denied the f-cenes of riot and
razzle which it had been alleged took place on the premises.
The barmaids were hired ladies, one of them receiving 10s.
per week and the other £l.—The renew al was unanimously
refused.”


On the 12th June several other cases came before the
Court. I give one as a sample :
“The licensee of the Yorkshire Stingo Hotel, Goulburn
and Castlereagh streets, applied for a renewal of his license.
The police objected, on the ground of sub-letting the private
bar. Police Officer Orr said that on April 10th lie was
passing the hotel, and hearing voices in the private bar he
looked up. There were in the room a woman and a man.
As the witness proceeded to describe in detail what was
visible from the street the temperature became quite tropical.
Just before the climax was reached several young women
walked out of court and two new policemen blushed, and
with the culminating of the history it seemed as if a
susceptible solicitor would have to be brought round with
restoratives.—The application was refused.”
Most of the hotels mentioned in the above report have
been re-licensed to other parties, who each informed the
Bench that the establishment would be conducted on strictly
virtuous and pi’oper lines.
On page 7 I alluded to the adulteration of liquor. Quite
recently a number of publicans have been heavily fined for
tlie offence, Inspector Lenthall being the prosecutor. The
evidence of the Government Analyst was much the same in
each case. Here is the certificate of one sample;—“The
specific gravity of the distillate was - 964, the percentage of
absolute alcohol by weight was 25.7, and the alcoholic
strength degrees under proof. It was manufactured
from raw immature spirit (probably illicit), coloured with
burned sugar and tea infusion flavoured with cocculus
indicus and cayenne pepper, and diluted with water. It
was totally unfit for human consumption.” In another
instance, in addition to a multiplicity of abominations,
there was “a residue of tobacco!” Very nice, indeed!
I should think that the report of these convictions ought to
be a powerful weapon in the hands of an intelligent teetotal
advocate. It is not alone the disarrangement of what our
American friends call our “innards” from the imbibition of
such stuff that is to be taken into consideration : the effect
on the brain must be something terrible; a great many
murders, savage assaults, offences against women, &c.,
undoubtedly owe their origin to doctored liquor.


A young person being required to temporarily manage a
private bar in Castlereagh street, I applied for the billet
and got it without any difficulty, my novitiate in the
previous situation being deemed a sufficient recommenda-
tion. The landlady was a kind-hearted, benevolent woman,
but nevertheless a bit of a humbug. She wished to be
considered very strict and virtuous ; but her fondness for
money obtrusively showed itself. She pretended to have a
great reverence for the Sabbath, and seldom neglected
going to church on that day. Like our friend the Sussex-
street barber, she hailed from the “ land of brown heath
and shaggy wood.” One Sunday morning a regular cus-
tomer happened to come in by the side door, to indulge in
a “ nip,” and being a musician, I asked him his opinion of
the new opera then playing at the Royal. He mentioned
one air as being, in his opinion, exceedingly pretty, and
whistled a portion of it for my edification. The lady of the
house, coming into the bar at this moment, said ; “ Mr.
Musician, you can have a glass of guid whuskey or a chat
with the lassie in my hoose ; but I’ll nae allow whustling
on the Saibbath !” On another occasion, just as the bells
were ringing for devotional exercises, two young men came
in for a drink, when she informed them that “ not a drop
would be drawn until ‘ kirk ’ came out;” but previous to
leaving, she handed me the keys of the bar, with the remark
that I might require them before she came back.
The young lady who preceded me in the situation was a
really nice girl, and fulfilled her duties with credit to
herself and satisfaction to both her employer and patrons.
She was, however, the victim of a gross outrage. It seems
that amongst her customers was a well-dressed and seem-
ingly well-to-do foreigner, who invariably called for a bottle
of claret. He always came alone, and beyond speaking in
a quiet, gentlemanly way to the barmaid, seldom spoke fo
anyone. He came in one morning rather early, and after
requesting to be served with his usual beverage, produced a
small bottle of what he said was scent, and asked the girl’s
opinion of it. Having no suspicion of anything wrong,
she did as requested, with the result that she became
unconscious, and remembered nothing further until awak-
ened by the landlord, who, accompanied by his wife and two


others, had come into the room on an alarm being raised
by one of the servants. The bottle of wine stood on the
table untouched; but it is almost needless to say Mr.
Foreigner had vanished. The matter was kept very quiet
for a time; it leaked out, however, through a talkative
housemaid.
I have been told that when foreigners become ena-
moured of a girl they stand at nothing in order to accom
plish their ends. That is the reason why their advances
and protestations of love are received with such caution by
the experienced of our sex.


I had not been more than a week in my new situation
when I received a visit from my ancient Platonic friend,
who greeted me most kindly and inquired particularly after
my health. I was suffering from a nasty cold and did not
look my best, which he was not slow to observe. He
insisted on my accepting some money, and advised me to
take a comfortable lodging and “ nurse myself,” telling me
at the same time that he would supply me with enough to
tide over the winter. I could not help expressing my
gratitude, at which he seemed pleased. I did not allude to
his little capers in the King-street upstairs private bar, but
endeavoured to make him feel “at home,” as the saying
goes. He remained chatting for fully an hour, and before
leaving gave me to understand that although he acted
foolishly now and then, his thoughts always reverted to
myself, and he believed there was some inexplicable reason
why this was the case.
Mr. X. coming in shortly after his departure, I told
him of the incident, and he advised me to accept the old
gentleman’s offer, as there was nothing dishonorable in the
transaction. He himself had remarked my pale and wearied
looks, and no doubt a month or two’s rest would brine: back
tiie roses to my cheeks. Accordingly, I informed the land-
lady that I was afraid my health was not good enough to
stand the long hours, and I wished te resign. I may here
mention that my daily duties commenced at 9 a.m., and did
not terminate until close upon midnight. She said if I
could afford to “ lay up,” I was foolish to continue working,
and advised me to seek some lighter employment. She
further stated that there was no “grist” in colonial girls ;
in her ain country she could lay her hand on a dozen braw
lassies in as many minutes who could teach the people out
here how to work. Much further did she dilate on the
decadence of females in Australia, and the excellence of
their sisters in Old Scotia ; and finally wound up by telling
me that she would endeavour to give me a shakedown and
my “ meat ” should I ever be in need of same, for which
offer I tendered my thanks. The following evening a
stranger was installed in my place, and I resumed my former
convenient lodgings.
Three nights afterwards I donned my disguise, and


accompanied Mr. X. on a ramble through Woolloomooloo.
Proceeding in the direction of Cow.per Wharf, we passed a
public-house, in front of the bar of which a number of
persons were congregated. There were several females
amongst the lot, and it did not require much search to
discover that they were all more or less intoxicated. My
friend suggested that we should enter, as he had a slight
knowledge of one of the women, who was at one time
intimately connected with the English aristocracy. We
did so, and, pushing our way to the bar, called for two
glasses of colonial wine, which was duly served by a dirty,
ill-looking fellow, who smoked a short black pipe, and
whose appearance generally was quite in keeping with the
surroundings. The fallen star alluded to was at the time
of our visit engaged in conversation with a man, who,
judging by his habiliments, followed the occupation of a
coal lumper. He appeared to feel honored by the lady’s
condescension, and more than once invited her to “finish
that and have another,” a request which was ultimately
complied with. Having had a good look at the party, and
given a small coin to an old dame who asked for it, we
went outside and resumed our walk.
“You see in that woman, said Mr. X., “the terrible
effects of drink. She once occupied a good position in
society, and might yet retrieve herself if she would only
turn over a new leaf. She is in receipt of a comfort-
able annuity, paid quarterly, the greater part of the
money being spent in “ high living,” her companions being
anything but what she was used to in her early days.
She frequently makes her appearance in the Police Court
amongst the drunk and disorderly contingent, the penalty
in her case never being more than a tine of 205., with the
alternative of three days’ imprisonment, the magistrates no
doubt taking into account the fact that she has a visible
means of subsistence. She once or twice had the temerity
to visit an up-country tow r n, with the result that the autho-
rities laid it on pretty hot. When in funds she is very
liberal, and accordingly is kindly treated by many of those
whom she befriended. Her sister was formerly the wife of
a well-known English baronet, but was divorced from that
gentleman for adultery with about half-a-dozen co-respon-
leuts.”


Woolloomooloo is remarkable for the number of its
■churches, public houses, and brothels, though the latter
have decreased very much of late, owing to the action of
some of the residents. Still there is a considerable pro-
portion of these places, but they are mostly confined to the
ny-streets, and are conducted in a more quiet manner than
formerly. The rank and file of the Cyprian corps form a
very strong element in the numerical strength of the
inhabitants, and this fact has caused the Salvation autho-
rities and others to devote more attention to their rescue
work in what has been described as “ the Woolloomooloo
abomination.” My friend remarked that they resembled
very much the London street-walkers in certain localities,
say Piccadilly for instance, and a description of the one
class would suit the other. “To take the girls as a crowd
and reckon one just about the same as another would be a
fatal mistake. Each one has her peculiar difficulties, and
the way to her heart lies in helping her to bear her sorrows,
overcome her obstacles, and forsake her sins. Many of
them have lost all faith in human aid, and regard the
whole race as divided into two great classes : the prey
seekers and the prey. Betrayed into evil courses, and
sustained therein, who can wonder at their losing hope ?
For they are indeed a prey. Their life is sometimes
regarded as having a certain side of glitter—if sinful
glitter—but when we come to facts the glitter disappears.
The Piccadilly girl is a quarry for .the filthy birds of
London iniquity. Her betrayal is often a mere matter of
money, for some rascal or other generally pockets a few
pounds over her fall. 1 Wheresoever the carcase is, there
will the eagles be gathered together.’ The brothel keeper
fastens on her, extorts enormous rents, and carefully keeps
her in de'>t, so as to bar the way back to virtue. The
police in many cases harass and bully her until blackmail
is forthcoming; the publican and oyster-shop keeper, with
their attendant myrmidons of chuckers-out and waiters,
make huge profits out of her and her class. Consequently
she seldom has any money ; it is gone as soon as it is
gained.”
There seems to be much poverty in Woolloomooloo,
judging from the great number of ragged, half-starved,


unhealthy looking children to be met with all over tin-
place. Much of this state of things is no doubt due to
intemperance on the part of the parents, and also to early
and improvident marriages. It is really a shame that
people without a tangible means of keeping the wolf from
the door should be allowed to marry, and bring into the
world children whom they are not able to feed.
“Yes,” said Mr. X., “it is sad to think that so much
misery is engendered by these unions ; but there is nothing
to prevent their taking place. The marriage laws of various
nations are, however, a curious study. In England a boy
of fourteen years and a girl of twelve years may be married,
a lower age than in most of the civilised countries of the
world. Greece prohibits the marriage of adults above
eighty; they might very well have reduced the age to
seventy. Occasionally, even in this Christian colony, a
dried pea’s-cod of an old lunatic does get married when he
is over seventy years of age. In Servia, however, men over
sixty and women over fifty are prohibited from marrying-—-
a very proper regulation. Servia, indeed, seems to have a
wiser set of marriage laws than prevails in most countries.
Thus a widow is not allowed to marry until ten months
after the death of her husband, or proof of non-pregnancy ;
and idiots, cripples, maniacs, the deaf and dumb, school
pnmls, those very ill, or suffering from hereditary disease,
ana the widows of clergymen, are not allowed to marry.
In that way a fine, healthy race is preserved, just as the
excellence in horses is the result of pedigree. A similar law
is very much needed in Australia, where all kinds of diseased
persons are allowed to propagate an inferior offspring. In
twenty-three of the American States marriage is void
between white and negro. It is, of course, w'ell known
that in Catholic countries there is no divorce, only a sepa-
ration from bed and board. Germany, like some of the
American States, grants divorce on the ground of ‘ insuper-
able aversion.’ Persons proved guilty of adultery are
punished with imprisonment in Germany ; and in Portugal
the wife and her paramour are sentenced to eight years’
cellular confinement, with hard labour. A guilty husband,
however, is let off’ by a fine of £>2. In Sweden, if a man


seduces his betrothed, and refuses to complete the marriage,
she shall be declared his lawful wife, and be entitled to her
full share in his property. Moreover, 1 where a man and
woman have been declared lawful husband and wife, though
no marriage ceremony have been performed, the wife shall
share the husband’s property. If the husband have objected
to the marriage ceremony being performed, he shall have
no share in his wife’s property.’ In some of the South Sea
Islands polyandry is allowed, many a women having no
less than four husbands to support and comfort her. Only
one at a time, however, is allowed to reside in the marital
dwelling, a lunar month being the period allotted to each.
On the last evening of the month the wife affixes to the
front of the house a peculiary shaped board, which is
intended to convey to the gentleman next in rotation the
intelligence that his presence will shortly be required.”
Woolloomooloo is full of horrors. In a house pointed
out to me there occurred two separate murders and a
suicide. In another a chimney sweep hung himself in an
attic room, and his ghost is said to haunt the place ever,
since. A hovel in a lane off Stanley-street was the scene
of a fratricide; and not a stone’s throw from the latter
place a clever young musician, who was living in concubi-
nage with a barmaid, strangled himself with a handkerchief
which he attached to the bedstead, the young lady only
awakening from a sound sleep some hours after life was
extinct. A letter from the deceased, upraiding the girl
for her infidelity, was found on the dressing-table. Further
to the east Miss Harrison was outraged and murdered by
Archer, who expiated his offence on the scaffold. Some-
where between Riley and Yurong streets a young woman
named Lizzy Graham was outraged by a mob of larrikins
and otherwise brutally ill-treated, the clothes being com-
pletely torn from her body and the unfortunate creature
left to die from exposure and exhaustion. Nearly every
street is connected with a tragedy of some sort or another.
Infanticide is not infrequent, and drunken mothers are
addicted to the doubtful practice of overlaying their children.
Savage assaults with murderous weapons are anything but
unknown; and on the evening of our ramble I saw a man,


knife ir. hand, pursuing bis wife (in her night dress), who
took refuge in a corner public-house, in front of which a
number of peisons were congre ated. One of them inquired
of the pursuer whether he wanted to kill the woman.
“ What the (sanguineous Gehennah) is that to you whether
Ido or not,” answered the miscreant; but a policeman
who had been attracted by the screams coming up at this
moment, the cowardly fellow slunk up a right-of-way and
disappeared. A bystander to whom we spoke gave us to
understand that scenes such as the one wo had just wit-
nessed were quite common in the neighbourhood.
Passing through a side-street, I could not help noticing
that at almost every residence the female head of the
establishment was seated on the door-step. There was
a wonderful similarity of “ blowsiness ” in their dress
and general appearance, and many of the dames were
in that interesting condition in which ladies like to be
who “ love their lords.” I also remarked that the beer-jug
appeared to be in great request.
Ihere seem to be very few sources of amusement in
\V oolloomooloo ; but a certain section of the inhabitants
find delectation in witnessing the arrival and departure of
that sombre-looking vehicle known by so many different
appellatives. By some it is called the “ Black Maria
seafaring individuals nickname it “ Long Tom’s Coffin;”
a many loyal and genteel people style it “ Her
Majesty’s Carriage,” from the fact the crown and the
letters V.R. are emblazoned on its sides ; but the limbs of the
law and the employees of the various courts laconically dub
it “The Van.” It arrives at the lock-up, a rather classic
building, precisely at eight o’clock every morning, and on
its appearance a crowd, consisting of the misery, thievery,
drunkery, and drabbery of the neighborhood, gathers as if
by magic. (I occasionally took an early walk in the
Domain, and on my way home to breakfast had an oppor-
tunity of witnessing the proceedings.) After an interval
of three or four minutes, the doer is opened, a shuffling of
feet is heard in the passage, and each prisoner is escorted
to the van by a policeman—or “ crusher,” as the residents
of the locality elegantly term him. The first to enter is a
<lark-browed, sallow-looking youth, who scowls at the


onlookers as he passes; next come two battered and seedy
individuals, who seem to be suffering from the previous
night’s debauch. A young lady dressed in tawdry finery,
and who appears at a distance to be all hat and feathers,
comes smilingly down the steps and springs jauntily into
the carriage; she has probably been “in trouble” before.
A virago without hat or shawl follows ; she is charged
with biting off a portion of a woman’s nose ; but according
to the newspaper report the “ other party ” was the
aggressor, and the magistrate merely bouud over defendant
to keep the “ peace.” The remainder of the voj'agers consist
of a blackfellow,two youngsters,several jossers,and a feeble
old man, evidently taken up for protection. The door is
then shut, a policeman with a bundle of papers seats him-
self behind, the crowd pass scathing critical remarks on
the occupants, and the perambulating prison drives off.
As we were about entering the Park on our way to
town, an animated bundle of ragged clothing accosted us
and requested the gift of sixpence. “What do you want
it for?” said Mr. X. “Well,” answered the old woman,
“ I won’t tell an untruth about the matter: I’m dead beat,
and a glass of beer and a crust of bread would do me all
the good in the world.” My friend promised to favourably
consider the matter, provided she would relate a bit of her
history, as probably her tale would be interesting. The
beer-loving party said she would gladly run over her past
life, which contained many ups and downs. A seat being
near, we sat down and listened to
The Josser’s Story.
u 1 was born in the county of Dorset, England, and
arrived in this colony when quite a child with my parents,
who were of the agricultural class. I will puss over the
early part of ray life, as it was uneventful and consisted
of nothing but household drudgery. I was married at the
age of 16 to a miner, who held a very comfortable situation
in the Newcastle district. He was a tolerably sober ami
hard-working man, though somewhat given to betting on
horse-races, cock-fights, &c. There was, however, no such
thing as Love in his composition, and I verily believe that
he thought more of his bull-pup than his wife—l was


simply his legal housekeeper. We were married about
twelve months when my tirst child was born, and I assure
you, gentlemen, up to this time I had never tasted a drop
of beer or spirituous liquor. On the birth of a child a great
many uninvited guests make their appearance, and drink
has to be provided for them. The midwife, an intemperate
old hussey, pressed me to take ‘ something,’ saying it would
do me good, but for a long time I resisted her importunity;
I ultimately gave way, however, and did as the others
wished me. I date my downfall from that fatal occasion.
From taking a little now and then I became fond of it.
My husband, of course, observed the change in my habits,
and many was the walloping I got from him when he came
home and found me in a ‘state.’ This continued for about
two years, when another infant was born, but it sickened
from its birth and died when three months old. Another
year passed, and my old man took sick, and to add to our
unhappiness my only child was run over by a baker’s cart
and killed. When my husband recovered, he became much
changed in his manner, and never once struck or upraided
me, even when I deserved it. The reason, however, soon
became apparent. One day a particular chum of his called at
the house, and my husband left with him, saying he would
be ( back the following night, but I have never laid my eyes
on him since. It appears that both of them went to
Newcastle and shipped for California. I can scarcely blame
him, as I made the home very unattractive; but, as I said
before, it was all the fault of the women who taught me to
drink, bad luck to them; may their ribs be a gridiron to
roast ”
“ Come, come,” said Mr. X., “ you mustn’t curse anyone;
proceed with your narrative.”
Well, sir, I at once realised my unfortunate position,
and resolved to make a desperate effort to retrieve myself;
so I sold off the bits of furniture in the house, and left for
Hydney the same night. The following day I called at the
Temperance Hall in Pitt-street, and took the pledge from a
gentleman, to whom I briefly related my circumstances.
With his assistance I got a billet as housekeeper to a well-
to-do widower and his three sons, and got on very nicely
until one day the youngest of the latter, who by-the-bye


was a bit of a scamp, invited me to take a glass of brandy;
I did so, and found it the best I ever drank in my life—>
quite different to the ‘ fireworks ’ one gets in the public-
houses around the coal-mines. I drank another, and several
others, and then became stark, staring, jumping, mad drunk,
so much so that they had to lock me up in my bedroom.
The following day, instead of trying to get myself right, I
went out and purchased a pint of rum, and when that was
finished went out for more. The upshot was that, my duties
being totally neglected, I was paid off and ordered to leave
the premises. I continued drinking until all my money was
spent, and awoke one morning to find myself in the lock-up,
charged under the Vag Act with having been found sleeping
in the open air. I got a month for that little caper. On
my release I went as nurse in the family of a tradesman
living in George-street, and kept on the stead}' for a few
weeks, when I broke out again, and let the child I was
carrying tumble into the gutter. I was given into custody
by a bystander, and got another month—fortunately the
little thing was not injured, or I would probably have been
sent for trial. It would be tedious to enumerate the many
times I picked myself up and broke out again, the many
times I was sent to gaol, and the many times I have been
taken in hand by good people ; but drink has got such a
hold on me that I fear it’s no use trying to reform ; besides
I am getting old and feeble, and few persons will employ
me. I could tell yarns connected with the outcast life lam
leading that would shock both you and tiie young gentleman
sitting by your side. I have been solicited by so-called
respectable women to swear falsely against their husbands,
so that they could get a maintenance order and carry on
their little games to their own satisfaction ; and more than
once I have been consulted by females who wanted to rid
themselves of relatives by poison. I hope to have the
pleasure of relating my history more fully on some future
occasion, but I am now really sick and faint, and must
cease talking.”
Mr. X. remarked that she had told enough to convince
him that her life must be a very unhappy one; and giving
her half-a-crown, bade her good night. The old lady was
profuse in her thanks, and before waddling off prayed that


every hair of her benefactor’s head might be a wax candle
to light him to glory !
In less than a quarter of an hour afterwards we were
seated in Mother H.’s parlour at supper—the usual duck
and green peas. There were very few persons in the room
at the time of our entrance, it being rather early, but after
a while the usual stragglers and habitues made their appear-
ance. Amongst the latter was a tall, ladylike woman, who
had evidently seen better days. My friend informed me
that her father was a London wholesale warehouseman, who
spent a small fortune on her education. She had various
teachers—French, drawing, and dancing, but the latter
taught her something more than what he was engaged for.
The physical condition of the young lady after a while
becoming painfully apparent, her parents hurriedly married
her to what they had previously termed “a presumptuous
young fellow,” but whom they were now glad enough to
have for a son-in-law. After the “ honeymoon,” bless the
mark ! the father presented the couple with £SOO and an
outfit, and “packed them off” to Australia, that dumping
ground for all kinds of ne’er-do-wells. Within a few
months after landing, a child was born, which circumstance
greatly astonished the husband ; but his mind was set at
rest by the accoucheur, who stated that such early births
occasionally happened during the first year of marriage, but
never afterwards ! They lived like fighting-cocks while the
money lasted, and then the unfortunate woman had to get
a living for herself and child by giving lessons in music, her
spouse being a worthless creature, quite unable to keep
himself, let alone a wife and family. Now and then a
present of £2O or so came from the “ old man,” but this
source of supply ceased, and she had to rely upon her own
resources. A “ kind old gentleman ” furnished a house and
put her into it, whereby she was enabled to add a little to
her income by letting apartments, &c., her husband being
quite content to keep both eyes shut so long as he got
plenty of ctrink and a shilling or twm to be in a position to
visit his favourite pubs. This went on for some time, but
becoming much behind in their rent, the furniture was
seized and sold, and they had to retire to a single room in a
back street. Step by step the social ladder was descended.


The husband next got mixed up in a swindle and was sent
to gaol, the baby died, and the wife openly became a
member of the “ heteroe.”
Another person in the room was described to me as a
really nice girl, the victim of as foul a conspiracy as man
could be guilty of. She was an orphan, employed in a
high-class drapery establishment in George-street, and
being remarkably good-looking, it was not long before she
was followed by a certain cla-s of fellows who spend the
greater part of their time in endeavouring to ruin confiding
females. There was one in particular, who professed
great love for the girl, but finding her “ obstinately vir-
tuous," went the len.th of offering marriage, expressly
stipulating that the ceremony should be performed at the
Registry Office, and that their union should be kept secret
for at least three months, in order, as he said, that be
might “ gently break the news to bis relatives.” The poor
thing, being really fond of the rascal, agreed to everything,
and it was further arranged that they should proceed to
the Blue Mountains to spend the honeymoon. Accordingly,
on a certain day she was driven in a cab to the residence
of the Registrar, a thin gentleman with a dissipated face,
but solemnly clothed in black. He also wore a white
(i choker ” and steel spectacles. “Is this the lady?” he
asked, raising his solemn face. When the girl had smiled
in answer, be continued, “ Then we had proceed with the
ceremony at once. Step this way.” Ihe couple were
ushered into a front drawing-room, in one corner of which
was a desk. Then, looking fearfully solemn, the Registrar-
proceeded to business. First the intending husband had
to declare that he knew of no just cause or impediment
why he should bo thwarted in his desires to make the girl
his wedded wife ; and then the poor victim was made to
repeat a statement that she was equally anxious to he
united to him. Finally, the Registrar, turning up his eyes
from excess of zeal, solemnly declared that the two were
tightly joined together; and with the signing of names
in a big hook with a red cover, the ceremony was declared
to be at an end. The bridegroom then presented the
Registrar with a note for £2O, and it did the bride’s heart
good to hour that • facial wish them a pleasant honeymoon.


He spoke in such an affectionate manner, hoping that their
lives would be one long sunny holiday, undisturbed by the
slightest conceivable cloud, and praying that their family
would grow up around them, a blessing to their parents and
a glory to the colony. He was only checked in his bene-
dictions by the bridegroom inquiring when the marriage
certificates would be made out and ready for him. This
question pleased the bride very much, as she was extremely
desirous of possessing documentary evidence of her lawful
union. The papers were to be prepared and waiting by the
time they returned from their wedding trip. They drove
down to the railway station. She was so flurried and so
supremely happy, that it seemed as if the hobbling old
cab-horse flew over the ground with lightning speed, so
rapidly did the time pass. They held each other by the
hand, and whenever her companion muttered “ darling,”
she sighed “ dearest.” They reached the Blue Mountains,
and spent a very pleasant month there—at least the girl
did. It is quite possible, however, that when the scoundrel
calmly contemplated his villany he felt his soul shrink up
within him. They returned to Sydney and rented a fur-
nished cottage at Waverley; also hiring a servant, an
intelligent young woman, who in the course of a conversa-
tion with her mistress, a few days after commencing her
duties, stated that she was a widow, having been married
three 3'ears previously at the Registry Office in Elizabeth-
street; she also produced her “marriage lines.” Now, as
the alleged marriage of our young lady took place in a house
in Liverpool-street, she began to feel rather uneasy, particu-
larly so as her husband made some excuse whenever the sub-
ject of the certificates was mentioned. The following day,
under the pretence of shopping, she came into town and
called at the place where she was married and inquired fot
the Registrar. She was told by the landlady that no such
person lived there; if the lady meant the gentleman she
and her friend called on about five weeks since—well, he
was only in her house a week, although he had paid a fort-
night’s rent in advance.
The poor girl now came to the conclusion that she had
been cruelly duped. She could see through it all: the
mock Registrar was some impecunious and disreputable


acquaintance of her husband, who for the £2O had dressed
himself up for the occasion. She was strengthened in this
belief after an interview with the real official, who gave
her some sound advice as to the course she ought to pursue.
That evening a stormy interview took place between the
unhappy girl and her betrayer. She told him where she
had been, and the advice given her. At first he seemed
quite dazed and unable to make any excuse for himself, but
after a while he nonchalantly remarked that if she were
not satisfied, he was willing to have the ceremony performed
in a sacred edifice by a clergyman of the Church of England ;
and for that purpose would accompany her to make the
necessary arrangements. This seemed to the girl fair
enough, but, as it afterwards turned out, the move was only
to gain time. However, the following day they called on a
recognised clergyman, who agreed to marry them, and a
day was fixed for the event. Before that time the scamp
disappeared, having taken his departure from the colony in
a vessel bound for South America. To make matters worse,
the wretch left the girl with little or no money, and she
was soon reduced to poverty. A well-known money-lender,
however, heard of the case, and let her have a few pounds
on “personal” security. This individual, who thought
nothing of selling the bed from under a starving family,
was very liberal in any matter in which a good-looking
woman was concerned. She lived under his “ protection ”
for a few months, but was ultimately “sacked” for walking
out with a counter-jumper belonging to the establishment
where she had previously been employed. The poor thing
had many ups and downs before she became a public
character At the time of our leaving the supper-room she
was engaged in conversation with an elderly man, who
looked as if he had been assisting at a fire and had collared
a suit of clothes several sizes too large for him. From what
my friend told me, it appeared that he was a man of loose
habits in more senses than one. Possessed of a consider-
able amount of house property, which rumour said he was
fond of letting to gay people on account of receiving high
rents, he brought up a large family in a comfortable if not
luxurious manner, spending the day-time in visiting race-
courses, &c., and his nights in roaming from cafe to cafe.


Occasionally he has a religious turn, and has been known to
hawk the plate around in church ; but the fit does not last
long, a pretty face or well-shaped ankle being quite sufficient
to swerve him from the paths of rectitude. He is rather a
favourite with the girls, being often good for a bit of supper
and a drink.
The following evening we started on a voyage of dis-
covery. As we were proceeding down Pitt-street, our
progress was interrupted by a crowd which congregated to
witness a fight between two drunken men. To escape the
crush we entered a sixpenny restaurant, and seating our-
selves at a vacant table, requested to be served each with a
cup of tea, the waiter looking very much astonished when
we informed him that we required nothing else. There was
a mixed company present, the working element being promi-
nent. The tea was passable, and there seemed to be an
unlimited supply of bread and butter, both apparently of
fail- quality. Stews and other made dishes appeared to be
in great request, and I noticed a swellish-looking individual,
who sported a silver-headed malacca cane and massive gold-
looking chain, wiring into a huge plate of “dry hash.”
There is an old story of a customer once finding a sleeve-
link in a dish of this description, and on drawing the
attention of the negro waiter to the fact, the latter replied
that some people were never satisfied-—“ surely the gentle-
man did not expect to find the whole set on his plate !”
The odour from the various viands rendering the place
rather unpleasant, we paid our shilling to a man who sat
near the door, and left.
I remarked to my friend that the Sydney people appeared
to be very partial to hashes.
“Yes,” said Mr. X., “there is an endless variety of
tastes. Man’s appetite differs in every part of the globe.
Some are carnivorous; some are granivorous; some are
both; some are neither. A few wish for the general
adoption of a vegetable diet, and argue that cabbages and
salads produce virtue and goodness ; others are more loudly
eloquent in praise of animal food, and find patriotism in a
round of beef, and valour in a rump steak. But food has
different effects in different climates. The respectable
Gentoos live upon rice, and are effeminate fool; the very


lowest Irish starve upon potatoes, and are murderous vaga-
bonds. Nothing is more true than the old proverb, ‘ What
is one man’s meat is another’s poison.’ The Turks chew
opium ; the Dutch tobacco. The Hampshire boor loves
nothing like fat bacon, and the Jew abominates swine's
flesh of every description. ‘De gustibus non est dispu-
tandum.’ The Esquimaux epicures mix sawdust with
their train oil. The Laplanders find nothing so delicious
as a dish of fir bark and rein-deer tallow. Some Japanese
delight in a ragout made of scraped whalebone. Rotten
eggs, in Cochin China, are eaten as delicacies. A South
American tribe, when deprived of fish by the inundations
of the Orinooko, feed on balls of a peculiarly nice unctuous
clay. The quarrymen of Kiffhceuser spread a similarly
rich earth on their cakes, and eat it with the gout of a
schoolboy who puts sugar on his bread and butter. Sir
John Franklin and his companions, in one of their arctic
expeditions, made a charming repast off fried bones and
old shoes. The Chinese consider a certain bird's nest the
greatest delicacy thej' can enjoy, and they fatten dogs for
the table. The people of Madagascar prefer locusts to any
other fed. Elephants, lions, bears, ants, moths, spiders,
snails, rats, serpents, and snakes, are all in their turn
devoured. Everything mat’ be eaten ; there is no need of
waste. There is also a vast difference in the modes of
cookery pursued by different countries. The Abyssinian
cuts his steak out of the living animal, sews up the wound,
and drives the convenient larder forward while he makes
his meal. The Tartar uses his meat as a saddle, and argues
that food so dressed must eat tender, and become exceed-
ingly savoury. It is the custom of old people of some of
the Battas tribes to ascend a tree, and call together their
friends and relations to come and eat them ; and a Brazilian
woman, being at the point of death, a clergyman inquired
if there w r as any kind of food she could fancy, but the old
lady objected to everything, till at last she confessed that
she could pick the little bones of ihe little head of a little
Tapuya boy. At a pinch the civilised European has been
known to stop the ravages of famine with a chop cut from
his companion. According to the celebrated Sydney Smith,
* cold missionary on the sideboard’ was to be found in the


establishment of every respectable South Sea Islander.
Some prefer their meat raw, and others will only touch it
when done to rags. The Burmese are fond of putrid fish ;
the Germans delight in putrid vegetables; and the English
find the greatest enjoyment in putrid game. Taste changes
is frequently as anything else. In the time of Henry the
Fifth it was the fashion to eat the porpoise; the subjects of
Queen Mary devoured cygnets, storks, and cranes; those of
Elizabeth preferred boars’ heads and barons of beef. In
-he reign of Queen Anne some delighted in cats fattened
upon oysters, and barbacued hogs. Swans and peacocks
have been displaced by larks and wheatears; the John Dory
has been pushed out of fashion by the whitebait; and the
wholesome meat from the grass-fed beeves of our ancestors
has been sacrificed to the greasy flesh of prize oxen fattened
upon oil cake.”
What did you mean," I inquired of my friend, “ when
you said that some people were neither carnivorous nor
graminivorus ? ”
“Well,” answered Mr. X., “I would venture to say
that persons who live exclusively on a milk diet, or on
colonial beer like our acquaintance the Josser whom we
met in the Park the other night, are neither the one nor
the other.”
“ With regard to the fondness of the Sydney people for
hashes and stews,” continued my friend, “ there is nothing
extraordinary in that; those dishes are more suited to a
warm climate than are heavy joints. For myself, I consider
a wallaby stew one of the greatest delicacies a person can
«it down to.”
The old Josser who lived on colonial beer!


After leaving the restaurant we paid a visit to the cafe
where my admirer Polly was employed. She recognised us
immediately on entering, and upraided me for not keeping
my appointment. “Fred,” she said, “you men are all
deceivers ; but I don’t blame you so much as your relative,
who appears to look after you very sharply. Are you
going to shout, my lord 1 ” she inquired, addressing Mr. X.
“ Yes,” answered my friend. “You and your sweetheart
can have what you like ; but I want a glass of your very
best brandy.” Polly at once attended to the order, and
very shortly returned with a small bottle of champagne and
the brandy, and after payment had been
made, seated herself beside me and began
to unbosom her plans. She was tired of the
wretched life she was leading—it was killing
her by inches. Would I take her away from
the place and make her my housekeeper 1
She had £37 in the Savings’ Bank, and if I
had not the ready cash to commence, she
would lend me it all, on ray word of honor
that it would be repaid. Perhaps, she added,
1 might like her well enough to marry her,
and if so she would prove a good and
faithful wife.
As the girl was ignorant of my s Q x, I
scarcely knew what reply to make, but got
out of the difficulty by saying that as I was
MR. X. under age, I could not accept her kind offer
without offending my parents. However, I
could assure her that I admired her very much, and, like
Victorine in the play, would “ sleep on it.” lam convinced
the poor girl was sincere in her desire to give up her occu-
pation for something more respectable ; but as I had no
desire at the time to reveal my sex, I let the matter remain
in abeyance. Before we left she called me aside and kissed
me, the tears starting from her eyes.
Of course I recounted the particulars of the conversation
to my friend, who remarked that there are many well-
authenticated cases of females who adopted male attire
having struck the tender chord in other members of their
own sex, some even going the length of getting married !


There being a new burlesque opera company at one of
the theatres, we went to witness the performance. Seated
near us in the stalls was a Baldhead and his severe looking
spouse. The former was armed with a double-barrelled
opera glass, and while constantly scrutinising the liberal
proportions of the fair dancers connected with the ballet,
he gave utterance to such expressions as “ Highly immoral!”
“ Disgraceful! ” “ Shocking ! ” &c. This was no doubt to
‘please his old dutch, who sat as a rigid as a ramrod, without
a smile on her countenance, all the
evening. The gentleman was an occa-
sional visitor to ray bar in Castlereagh
street, and I saw him once “gallivant-
ing” with a girl young enough to his
grand-daughter, in the Cafe W. ; so 1
concluded there was no sincerity in his
remarks. Besides, at every fresh evo-
lution of the nymphs he would apply
the binocular to his eyes in order to
revel (at a distance) in their charms.
Wicked old Baldhead !
When the performances were over
and we had left the theatre, I asked
my friend whether he had heard the
remarks of the gentleman who sat
near us.
“ Yes, indeed, I did,” answered Mr.
X , “ but it was all put on for the
occasion. I have seen the old ram in
almost every cafe in town, and pro-
bably will again.”
“What is your opinion of the Ballet
—does it savour of immodesty?” I
asked.
“ Highly immoral !’
“ -Disgraceful !”
“ Shocking 1”
“Well, that is rather a difficult question to answer.
Every people has its own peculiar ideas of what constitutes
female modesty. In Mexico ladies of good repute and
considerable culture do not consider it necessary to close
the blinds or even the door when taking a bath. In Japan
people of all ages, sexes, and social condition splash around


together in the public bath houses naked as a lot of South
Sea Islanders. In some Spanish-American countries a
society belle thinks nothing of exposing her entire bosom.
A Turkish woman, rather than have her face seen by a
man, will cover it with her skirt, even if that be her only
garment. American beauties appear in mixed assemblages
in dresses that would make the front row at a burlesque
opera blush. Modesty is inherent in women, but its method
of expression is governed by customs, many of them ridi-
culous in the extreme.”
I next alluded to bicyle riding, and my friend spoke
highly of ladies indulging in the pastime. I agree with
him on that point, as I consider that, besides being a
healthful exercise, women are physically suited for it.
What can be more ridiculous or uncomfortable than the
present way of horse-riding ? Sooner or later the natural
method of equitation will be permanently adopted in all
civilised countries.
The day after my visit to the theatre I received a lettei
from my old Platonic friend and admirer. The events
which followed being of a most startling, thrilling, and
sensational character, I am compelled to close the hist pait
of my autobiography, in order that the details may be fully
placed before the reader.
END OF PART I.
W. Molloy, Printer, 25 Francis Street, Sydney.




