





Cl)e ©astern (Question association*
PAPERS on THE EASTERN QUESTION.
No. 2.
RELIGIOUS ASPECTS OF
THE EASTERN QUESTION.
BY THE
REV. J. LLEWELYN DAVIES, M.A.,
Rector of Christ Church, St. Marylebone, and
Hon. Chaplain to the Queen.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION ASSOCIATION,
38, CANADA BUILDING, WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL FETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris New York.




RELIGIOUS ASPECTS OF THE
EASTERN QUESTION.
The insurgent and disaffected inhabitants of the European pro-
vinces of Turkey are Christians, and the Turks who claim to rule
them are Mussulmans. Two great religions have thus been
brought into deadly conflict with each other. Looking at the
struggle in Eastern Europe from the religious point of view, we
see on the one side followers of the Cross, on the other side
followers of the Crescent. Is this all that English Christians
need to know about the matter ? Are we to take for granted that
it is our duty, because we are Christians, to sympathise with our
struggling fellow-Christians, and to help them to throw off the
yoke of an alien race and religion ?
It is inevitable that some account should be taken of the fact
that the disaffected subjects of Turkey are Christians. There are
persons in this country —others as well as Jews —to whom this
fact is a reason for lending their sympathies to the Turks. There
are many more who have been primarily induced by it to wish
well to the cause of the insurgents. It is reasonable that such'
ties as those of a common religion should be felt deeply. No
one will think less respectfully of tire prosperous English Jews for
sympathising with oppressed Jews in Roumania or elsewhere ; no


one ought to think it strange that the cries of suffering Christians
should touch the hearts of their fellow-Christians. Nor ought we
to make an effort to quench our instinctive feeling when we are
reminded that these Bosnian and Bulgarian Christians, though
they bear the common name, profess a Christianity of a very
different type from our own. There is neither folly nor injustice
in thinking more of the points in which we agree than of those in
which we differ. We have a right to believe that in any com-
munion to which the name of Christ is supremely sacred, and
which confesses the paramount authority of the New Testament,
however it may have been degraded by superstitious corruptions,
there are objects of appeal and sources of moral influence which
justify the hope of a regenerated future. It is surely the fanaticism
of philosophic impartiality which can expect as much new life for
a corrupt Mohammedan world from a recurrence to the primary
traditions of the Koran, as we might reasonably hope to see
beginning to stir in the dry branches of the Eastern Church, if its
priests and people would turn with opened eyes and teachable
hearts to the Christ of the Gospels—their own Christ. English
Christians cannot forget that a Reformation is possible. And
therefore it may be freely admitted that the professed religion of
these millions who are either defiantly casting off the Turkish
yoke or moving their shoulders uneasily under it, does something
to warm our hearts into goodwill towards them. The very fact
that the vital instincts of resentment and independence are burst-
ing into expression, suggests a hope of religious reform. The free
national spirit is akin to the love of truth. Men who are facing
risks in defence of domestic honour and security are in the way
to rise above servile superstitions.
4


We may frankly confess, therefore, that, as Christians, we feel
impatient when we see a Christian population trampled upon by
Mussulman rulers. But it is no spirit of religious partisanship
which has set the mass of the people of this country against the
Turkish dominion as it exists and works in Europe. We are
open to the reproach that English Christianity is so rent by the
divisions of sects and parties that we do not willingly unite under
its common banner. It is often 9 cause of sadness and complaint
that Churchmen and Dissenters, the High Church and the Low,
are so little responsive to appeals which address them as all
Christians together. But now we see men of all schools and
communions united in the pro-Christian cause. The bishop
stands shoulder to shoulder with the Dissenting minister, the
Ritualist clergyman with the promoter of the Public Worship Act.
The truth is that our common humanity feels itself outraged ; and
the religious mind amongst us is still, thank God, profoundly
humane. We are believers in the Son of Man, and in proportion
to the strength of our faith we make it a matter of conscience to
care for the sacred human interests.
If the operations known as the Bulgarian Atrocities or Horrors
had been a unique and solitary outbreak of exasperation and
panic, they were, even in that case, of a nature to justify the
revulsion of feeling in relation to Turkey which occurred in this
country and throughout European Christendom. If a man whose
character has been previously irreproachable is betrayed into a
single act of murderous or lustful violence, he must suffer the
penalty; and, though human compassion will pity him, it will not
excuse him. I deny myself here the use of any damnatory term
or epithet to describe the acts by which the feeble Bulgarian
5


attempt at insurrection was trampled out; but I can imagine that
it may become a melancholy necessity to restate in some detail
what then took place. If people affirm that nothing was done
in Bulgaria much worse than has been habitually done by the
Russians in Poland, in Turkestan, and elsewhere, or than was
done by the English in the suppression of the Indian mutiny, it
can only be supposed that they refused, -with the natural loathing
of humane and delicate minds, to read the authentic reports of
the doings of the Turks in that province, or else that these
things have faded with strange quickness from their memories.
But those who happened to know anything of the general con-
dition of the Christian provinces of Turkey during recent years,
or who have since made it their business to inquire into the
customary character of the Turkish administration, are aware that
the Christians of those provinces lead lives continually exposed to
insults, wrongs, and outrages such as no man can bear whose
spirit is not crushed, and for which they can obtain no redress.
If these allegations can be disproved, the English people have
been misled by statements of which the Turks have good right to
complain. Feelings and policy should rest upon fact and
evidence; and the really important question in this whole
business is whether the local Turkish administration is hopelessly
corrupt and oppressive or not. But the charge is not only
sustained by irresistible evidence, it is virtually admitted by the
accused. The very promises and new decrees of the Porte imply
that the complaints of the Christians are well founded. The
answer returned contemptuously by all Europe to these Turkish
offers of amendment is, that their hollowness is too well known.
The Turks can promise nothing, decree nothing, which they have


not repeatedly promised and decreed before. Men accept such
professions once or twice, but in time they grow tired of them.
There is no reasonable prospect whatever of any substantial and
lasting amendment of the condition of the Christians if the Turks
are left in unrestricted power over them. What should make
things better in the future than they have been in the past ? The
Turkish Empire is not in a more vigorous state; its finances are
not more flourishing; it is not less at the mercy of venal officials
and a licentious soldiery. Its Christian subjects, struggling
against hopeless misgovernment, cry out for sympathy and assist-
ance. If man is ever to help his brother man in trouble, why
should we turn a deaf ear to these suffering millions ?
The question might be asked, “Suppose that the positions
were reversed—that the Turks were Christians and the Slavs
were Mussulmans—would you be so ready to plead the cause of
the oppressed?” We ought not to shrink from the question;
and my answer would be —I hope that Englishmen in general
would be still more indignant than they are now. I am sure
there are many of us who would feel so acutely the shame brought
on the Christian profession and cause by such iniquities, that
our simply human hatred of them would be stimulated by an
eager desire to clear our religion from the discredit of them. I
cannot deny that cruel and unjust deeds have been done by
Englishmen in their dealings with less civilised races. The
memory of these things may reasonably make us slow in con-
demning others. Our sympathy with those who now suffer
at the hands of Turks should quicken our consciences in the
appreciation of any injury we ourselves may be doing, or may
be tempted to do, to weaker populations. But if it were


reported here that in the remotest part of Asia some thousands
of natives were receiving from Englishmen anything approaching
the treatment which k has been the daily lot of the Christian
millions in European Turkey, does any one doubt that there
would be an outburst in England of honest and effectual indig-
nation against those who brought so great a dishonour on our
country and our religion ?
Much scorn has been cast, during the recent agitation of this
question, upon sentimental benevolence. Indignation against
Turkish violence has been represented as the luxury of those who
like to have their feelings stimulated by sensational descriptions.
Contrasts have been drawn between the politics of popular emotion
and the prudent wisdom of statesmanship. Let it be admitted, with-
out hesitation, that enthusiastic meetings are not fit to be entrusted
with the administration of our foreign policy; that it would not do
to commence a crusade of redress whenever we hear of wrongs or
cruelties perpetrated in any part of the world. Let us listen with
the utmost respect to the cautions of prudence. It would be a
folly to embroil the world in the attempt to remedy some local
evil; and the passionate enthusiasm of ignorant and irresponsible
persons is not incapable of committing such a folly. There is some
danger therefore, let it be frankly admitted, in such demonstrations
of feeling as those of the last half-year in favour of the Christian
subjects of Turkey. The work of ministers and diplomatists is
not to be set aside by popular emotion. But, on the other hand,
to suppose that the world either is or ought to be governed
by ministers and diplomatists is a delusion—a graver delusion,
perhaps, than that of those who believe too hastily in public
meetings. The world goes by motive power, and the motive


power is supplied, not by the wariness of statesmen, but by the
convictions and desires of populations. These convictions and
desires are not always noble; it is not in their nature to be
diplomatic: but they move the machinery; and where would the
engine-driver be without steam? Now and then some great
minister of state —more of a hero than a diplomatist—has an
exceptional opportunity of forcing on, by his individual energy,
an important step in the development of human history. But of
late years the power of making changes for the better in the
condition of nations and of the world has been chiefly diffused
amongst the general populations. Every decade of history con-
victs the shortsightedness of those who imagine that the arts of
diplomacy possess the final control over human affairs. Revolu-
tions, wars, reforms, have all been instinct with emotional impulse,
sometimes simply patriotic, often strongly religious. Let any one
compare for a moment what has been done by religion in the
world, and what by the professional knowledge and skill of
ministers of state!
It is not wonderful that men who are born to be bureaucratic
agents, and all those who are for keeping things quiet, have a
distrust and dislike of popular movements. These troublesome
phenomena disarrange their calculations. It is natural that
such persons should make the worst of the froth that is thrown
up by a philanthropic agitation, of the ignorance of the many, of
the disproportion between the aims of platforms and practical
possibilities, of the interested element which mixes itself with
every public-spirited movement. But the abler kind of minister
respects the resolute convictions and ardent desires which are
indispensable to a great policy; he does not think himself


humiliated by the sense of a force in such motives superior to his
own skill; he will probably be in sympathy with the living part of
his nation, and he likes to feel a high-mettled steed under him. A
strongly excited national will, and a strong minister acting as its
instrument, may do wrong things. I am not in the least con-
tending that a policy of religious emotion must necessarily be a
good one. But the excitement of religious feeling has been the
historical method of bringing about many of those events which
later generations care to remember and to study.
It is surely apparent to the most sober-minded view that great
things are yet to be done by the action of true Christian senti-
ment operating upon international affairs. Our sense of duty is
notoriously behindhand in its appreciation of the dealings of
nation with nation. In domestic politics it has become a nearly
general conviction that we ought to be governed by the aims of a
high Christian morality, that the strong ought to care for the
weak, and that the well-being of the community ought to prevail
over the interests of the few. But we are hardly awakened to the
idea that, if the laws of morality have any force at all, they must
bind the conduct of the larger societies called nations as much as
that of individuals and classes. Great honour is due to a few
men, who without appealing to the Christian traditions have made
it their business to affirm strenuously and uncompromisingly the
subjection of all politics, foreign as well as domestic, to the laws
of morality. But it is in this sphere that Christianity ought to
speak with pre-eminent authority and power. It was its glory in
the beginning to overleap the barriers dividing nations and
tongues, and to proclaim a unity of men under one God and
Father of all. Catholicity belongs to the primary idea of the


Christian religion. The more Christian a man is, the more he
ought to feel drawn towards men of other races and countries.
For the discharge of all duty towards others, we need that spirit
of self-suppression and service which is the characteristically
Christian spirit. Undoubtedly, if self-abnegation is to be practised
in the dealings of a nation with other nations, it must be practised
under somewhat different conditions from those which the Gospel
prescribes for individuals. A nation must be more careful of its
safety, for reasons on which I need not here enlarge, than a
thoroughly Christian man would be of his. National policy would
never be bound, I imagine, by the most exacting standard of
Christian duty to be what might justly be called reckless or
Quixotic. But it seems to me certain beyond the possibility of
denial that, if we are to think of nations as having duties and
virtues, we must desire that the action of our own country should
be marked by unselfishness and generosity as well as by a narrow
justice. We shall never attain to the highest blessings in store for
humanity, nor shall we realise the full scope and power of our
religion, until nations determine to judge their public and mutual
conduct by the Christian ideal. The path, for example, towards
the international peace which is now so much desired, is not
through a more enlightened and sensitive regard to self-interest,
but through loyalty to the common Master of all, and conscien-
tious devotion to the well-being of mankind.
Let those, then, who are conscious of a religious desire that
the power of this country should be used for the liberation of the
oppressed Christians in Turkey, assure themselves that there is
nothing weakly sentimental, nothing but what is rational and in
harmony with the best statesmanship and serviceable to the


highest public ends, in the utmost fervour of such a desire. A
longing like this belongs to the vital and purifying breath of
human existence. Alas for a country when its sons have no
other political aspirations but those of a narrow and sordid
patriotism! The mood that would cynically shut out pity and
kindness and enthusiasm from the external policy of a country
like ours would be as the frost of old age creeping over its
energies, and cramping them in ignoble impotence.
The weight of their responsibilities must needs press heavily
upon the representatives of a state at a crisis like the present. It
is their business to keep their eyes open to all possibilities, to
watch with some jealousy the action of other states, and to be
ready to thwart insidious and dangerous designs. When a
country is in the position now occupied by England, which has
nothing to gain by a disturbance of existing relations, and could
scarcely fail to suffer some injury from a European war, it is
natural that it should be a main object of its ministers to preserve
the status quo, and that the undefinable risks attending the sub-
version of an established government should cause them to shrink
from any action which might contribute to it. It is a very serious
thing, beyond all question, to disturb the equilibrium of such a
body as the congeries of European Powers. It is quite true that
no one can say what may happen if Turkey is brought to bay, and
resolves to fight desperately for its empire and independence. To
promote such a result with a light heart would be criminal folly.
But the religious sentiment of a thoughtful people has this
advantage over the apprehensive wariness of the diplomatist, that
it consists essentially of faith. We Christians cannot think of the
world as subject to chance. We habitually assume that human


affairs are under the control of a righteous Providence. In this
faith it is natural to act with a certain disregard of consequences.
In such a condition as that of European Turkey—the old
dominion, established and maintained by the sword, crumbling to
pieces through internal corruption; the oppressed populations at
once so angered by lawless violence, and so stimulated by new
hope, that they refuse to be patient any longer—we see a Divine
judgment beginning. We deem it safer to side with justice and
freedom insurgent, though we cannot foresee what the exact issues
of the insurrection may be, than to use our influence to preserve
the status quo which crushes them.
At the same time it would be affectation to assume that any
policy which it has been proposed that England should adopt
with regard to this Eastern Question would make a grave demand
upon the faith that stands by a good cause and pursues noble
ends in defiance of possible consequences. The boldest course
suggested is, in the opinion of many shrewd and experienced
public men, the safest. That England should join with Russia in
using force to compel the Turks to submit to restrictions which
united Europe believes to be reasonable and necessary, is probably
the most considerate mode of dealing with the Turks, and the
best calculated to prevent any dangerous convulsion. It is idle
to suppose that a settlement can be effected on any terms which
will not wound the self-respect of the Turks and diminish their
power. It is not pleasant to a generous mind to see a nation
humiliated, whatever its misdoings may have been; and the Turk
is admittedly at his best when fighting against an equal or
superior foe. It is an act of high policy to disarm the Turk as
the arbitrary ruler of Christians, and we are accustomed to


feel some admiration for an offender who shows spirit and
courage even against the representatives of justice. But a
painful struggle may be averted by the use of strength so
overwhelming as to make submission a matter of course.
It would be an easy task for Russia and England together
to reduce the Porte to instant submission. This policy, there-
fore, has very strong recommendations for those who shrink
from bloodshed and convulsions. But there has been nothing
impracticable or Quixotic in the temper or demands of those
Englishmen who have advocated the liberation of the Chris-
tian subjects of Turkey. We are most of us well aware that
we do not possess the information which would justify us in
affirming peremptorily and in detail what this country ought to
do. We are anxious to learn, and willing to be instructed by any
one who has special knowledge. Whatever may be alleged with
plausibility as to the attitude and language of some few persons,
we deny that there is anything sentimental or fanatical in the
general tone of those, for example, who took part in the St.
James’s Hall Conference.
But having kept our eyes open for many months, and being
conscious of no interest or prepossession which should warp our
minds from the honest desire to see right enforced and wrong re-
dressed, and feeling the obligation that lies upon our country to do
its duty in the sight of God, we cannot doubt that we see with
sufficient clearness the ends at which we are bound to aim. Our
own Government, starting with being avowedly pro-Turkish, has
given its concurrence in the most decided manner to the demands
made by Russia on behalf of its co-religionists. Not a state in
Europe justifies the nonpossumus of Turkey. There still remains


to the army of the Porte the task which it was so slow in
accomplishing, to beat down the resistance of Servia, Bosnia,
Herzegovina, and Montenegro; or, if Servia and Montenegro are
bought off by propitiatory terms of peace, there is the original
insurrection in the other two provinces to be dealt with. The
peasants of Bosnia and Herzegovina have not yet been reduced
to submission. Russia, not to speak of its sovereign’s verbal engage-
ment, will be no more able than before to look on and see the last
embers of their courageous revolt extinguished in blood. All the
signs in the political heavens portend continued war and tumults
until the Christians are secured against Mohammedan license.
We cannot believe that England has permission from Heaven to
play the faineant in this business. It is to the protection of
England that Turkey has owed the power to misgovern for the
last twenty years. Our own hands are not clean; we have some
reparation to make to offended justice. If it has been right to use
our influence and material force to sustain Turkey against what we
believed to be the aggressive ambition of Russia, it must' be right
now, when all reasonable fear of that Power has been dispelled, to
recognise the responsibility we have thus assumed, and to transfer
our protection from the corrupt oppressor to the populations
blighted by his rule.




COe (Eastern Question
PAPERS ON THE EASTERN QUESTION.
No. 3.
Commercial & Financial Aspects
OF THE
Eastern Question.
BY
JOHN HOLMS, M.P.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
eastern question association
28, CANADA BUILDING, WESTMINSTER:
BY
CASSELL FETTER 6c GALPIN.
London, Paris 6* New York.




COMMERCIAL & FINANCIAL ASPECTS
OF THE EASTERN QUESTION.
For generations the Eastern Question has from time to time exercised
a disturbing influence on the commerce of this country. No class has
felt the inconvenience and the loss thus inflicted more severely than
our merchants and manufacturers. Commercial men generally begin
to feel that the suspense which this ever-recurring question creates is
all but intolerable, and must continue so as long as the Eastern
Question remains unsettled. It has now entered upon a phase which
threatens to postpone this result indefinitely. The Turkish Govern-
ment has refused to defer to the friendly advice and opinion proffered
to her by the European Powers, and she is now left to herself, without
an ally, and in absolute isolation.
All past experience shows that the Turkish Government is utterly
helpless to reform itself. Its corruption is incurable, and the evidences
of its decay are to be witnessed in every province, through the tyranny,
oppression, and corruption which are indulged in. The commercial
history of the past year shows clearly the disturbing influence which
the Turkish difficulty has had upon trade and commerce. Great
Britain is more than ever the heart and centre of the financial and
trading transactions of the civilised world, and quickly feels the effect
of any rumour of trouble or of difficulty. The apprehension of a
European war, conveyed through the tens of thousands of miles of
electric wire which now traverse the globe, paralyses trade every-
where, and immediately sends back a deadening and depressing
influence on ourselves.
The British people will watch with the deepest concern the course
of events in the Turkish Empire. Meanwhile, it is well that they
should avail themselves of every opportunity of forming a just and
fair conception of the state and condition of that country, and of the
power and capacity of its Government.


During the discussions which have taken place on the Eastern
Question within the past few months, it has been frequently and con-
fidently asserted that Turkey is a Free-Trade nation. The commercial
policies of Russia and Turkey have been contrasted, much to the
disadvantage of the former; and an earnest effort has been made to
enlist our sympathy and our support on behalf of the Turkish Govern-
ment, on the plea that their commercial system is of that liberal and
enlightened character which we can best appreciate and understand.
Two greater fallacies have never before been presented for acceptance
to a rational and reasoning people.
We will briefly state a few facts and figures relating to our inter-
national trade with Russia and Turkey which will give our readers a
clear understanding of their relative value, and will enable us at the same
time to correct a most erroneous statement on the same subject which
emanated a few months ago from a source that many people would be
inclined at once to accept as authoritative. At a meeting of the Man-
chester Chamber of Commerce, held on the 30th of October last, the
President, Mr. Edmund Ashworth, made some remarks upon the Eastern
Question “as it was likely to affect commerce.” “He would,” he pro-
ceeded to say, “draw the attention of the Chamber to the returns showing
the value of Russia to England as a trading community, and the value
of Turkey as compared with it. The exports to Russia of our manu-
factured goods was only three millions , and the total of our imports
from that country was twenty millions. . . . Our business with
Turkey last year was ,£12,900,000, as against the figures he had
already mentioned relating to Russia.” (“ Hear, hear.”)
We cannot for a moment suppose that Mr. Ashworth had any
intention to mislead the members of the Manchester Chamber of
Commerce ; but it will be admitted, when the official figures are
examined, that he could not possibly have stated the case in a manner
more likely to give rise to misconceptions and misunderstandings.
What are the facts ? From the Board of Trade returns for the year
1875 year quoted by Mr. Ashworth), we find that our imports or
purchases from Russia amounted to ,£20,640,000, and our exports or
sales to Russia were ,£11,346,000, making together a total sum of
,£31,986,000.
In the same year the value of our imports from Turkey (European
and Asiatic combined) was ,£6,556,000, and of our exports to that
empire ,£6,347,000, making a total sum of ,£12,903,000.
Our volume of trade) therefore, with the Russian Empire in the
year 1875 was .£31,986,000, not ,£23,000,000, as Mr. Ashworth repre-
sented it to be; while the £1 2,900,000 which he spoke of as representing
“our business with Turkey” includes, as we have shown, both imports
and exports.


We are not prepared, let it be clearly understood, nor have we the
least desire to defend the protective commercial system adopted by
Russia. We think it opposed to the best interests of that country as
well as to our own. No country in Europe we are satisfied would
profit more by a Free-Trade policy than Russia. The wide extent of
her territory, her proportionately sparse population, and the want of
cheap, ready, and convenient means of transit, render her ill-adapted
for the successful prosecution of manufactures. Were the energies of
her people concentrated upon the development of her natural wealth
and resources, her prosperity and her wealth would be established on a
much sounder basis. Her existing high protective duties, moreover,
undoubtedly stimulate smuggling. This practice is indulged in on
some of the frontiers of Russia to an extent that would hardly be
credited, causing a serious loss to the Imperial revenue, and
demoralising the people.
But let this be as it may, as Free Traders we cannot refrain from
expressing surprise at finding the President of the Manchester
Chamber of Commerce quoting Turkey as an example of the ad-
vantages derived from unrestricted commerce. For if we trace the
official returns back for a few years, we will find that our inter-
course with Turkey, which, according to Mr. Ashworth, is a Free-
Trade nation, has been stationary, while with Russia it has increased
in a rapid ratio. In 1865, the volume of our trade with Russia was
£23,564,000 ; in 1875, as we have just seen, it stood at £31,986,000,
showing an increase in the ten years of nearly forty-five per cent. In
the case of Turkey, the figures for 1865 were £12,700,000 ; and for
1875. £12,900,000 —practically showing no increase.
But the case becomes still stronger if we confine our comparison
to our exports of British manufactures and produce to Russia and
Turkey. In 1865, we exported of the manufactures and produce of
the United Kingdom to Russia to the value of £2,923,000 ; in 1875,
the value had increased to £8,059,000, showing an increase of about
one hundred and seventy-five per cent. Our exports of British
manufactures to Turkey in 1865 were valued at £5,677,000; ten
years later they had only increased to £5,897,000, or less than four
per cent.
The figures which we have here quoted refer to our commercial
transactions with the entire Turkish Empire; but in reality what we
have to deal with during the present crisis are the European provinces
only. It is their misgovernment and maladministration that has
created the present difficulty, and if we examine the figures relating to
our trade with them, we will obtain even still more conclusive proof of the
utter incapacity and incompetency of their Mohammedan rulers. In
1865, the volume of our trade with European Turkey was £8,282,068;


in 1875, >t had fallen to £7,931,841. Our exports, which were £5,133,068
in 1865, in 1875 had diminished to £4,007,500. When we deal with
the produce and manufactures of the United Kingdom separately the
case is worse still. In 1865, our exports of these to European Turkey
were valued at £4,961,731; in 1875, at £3,630,365—5h0wing a decrease
in the ten years of £1,331,366, or more than 25 per cent. No more
conclusive proof, perhaps, could be adduced of the increasing poverty
of the population of European Turkey.
But the comparison of the value of Russia and Turkey to us from
a commercial point of view does not end here. We are more than
manufacturers, we are carriers, and much of our national progress
and prosperity is to be traced to our success in that capacity. The
contrast between the figures illustrating this branch of our commerce '
in respect to the two countries is very remarkable. In the year 1875,
the number of vessels entered and cleared between the ports of the
United Kingdom and Russian ports was 7,360, with a combined
tonnage of 2,843,766. The corresponding figures for the Turkish
dominions were —vessels, 835; tonnage, 550,448.
The official figures which we have quoted are sufficient to disprove
the assertion that our commercial connection with Turkey is more
valuable to us than that which we possess with Russia. At the same
time we may remark that the Turkish difficulty, as it now presents
itself for our consideration, is something altogether apart from our
relations either with Russia or any other country, and we have
discussed this point so far simply with the view of disposing of
Mr. Ashworth’s arguments. Our figures ought also, effectually and
finally, to dispose of that erroneous and most absurd idea which
many people ignorantly encourage—that the Turks are Free Traders,
and that the Turkish Government possesses an intelligent and en-
lightened conception of a liberal commercial policy.
Forty years ago Mr. Cobden thus wrote of the Turks ; “Probably
in nothing has this people been more unduly represented than in the
praises which have been bestowed on their unrestricted principles of
trade. The Turk knows nothing and cares as little about freedom of
commerce —he disdains trade himself, and despises it in others ; and
if he has failed to imitate more civilised nations (though in this point
of view not wiser) by fortifying his coasts with custom-houses, it is
certainly from no wise principle of taxation, but simply because such a
circuitous method of fiscal taxation would be far too complicated and
wearisome for the minds of Ottoman governors, who prefer the simple
mode of raising a revenue by the direct extortion of the Pasha or the
Aga.”
Much has happened and a great deal of information has been
brought to light since these words were penned which go to establish


their justice and their truth. “ The Turks know nothing and care as
little about freedom of commerce.” What better proof of this could we
have than the fact that there is not a trade or industry carried on in
Turkey that is not subject to restrictions and regulations which violate
the first principles of freedom. Even when the Turk attempts to
reform, he knows not how to go about it in a way that will be satis-
factory. Some few years ago Reschid Pasha introduced a series of
commercial changes, from which a great deal was hoped and expected.
He abolished the practice which the Government followed of selling
the exclusive right to purchase the produce of a district or a province,
and which led to the most shameful and scandalous spoliation of the
cultivators of the soil, but he substituted an export duty which in
principle was equally as bad. All produce transported from province
to province was charged a duty of nine per cent., and if exported to a
foreign country the rate was increased to twelve per cent. The financial
straits to which the Turkish Government has been reduced in later
years, owing to its extravagant expenditure and the increasing poverty
and depopulation of the country, has induced them to resort to means
for raising a revenue which, if persevered in, will ruin the population.
The right to purchase all the tobacco grown in the various provinces
of the Empire was sold as a monopoly a short time ago, and recent
reports from our consuls bear evidence'of the fact that the result has
been that in some districts the plant has ceased to be cultivated. The
import duties levied upon foreign manufactures introduced into Turkey
are no doubt light by comparison with some countries. A great deal
of evidence, however, could be quoted to show that the Turkish
Government have a desire to increase these import duties, and the
alterations made, within recent years, in their tariff treaties are all
in this direction. The Turkish Custom House, moreover, is as corrupt
as any other of the administrative institutions in the country.
Such is the prejudice, or the ignorance, with which Turkish
institutions are criticised by English writers, however, that notwith-
standing these facts, we find the commercial policy of Turkey thus
alluded to in an article in the current number of the Edinburgh
Review. Speaking of the Turkish Government, the writer says : “It
encourages more than any European State, except ourselves, great
freedom of trade, a fact which has of late been much forgotten in
England.”
When dealing with the Turkish Empire and its rulers, it is really
idle to talk of their possessing a commercial policy at all, not to speak
of its vaunted enlightenment. It may be accepted as an axiom that
there can be no trade or commerce worthy of the name in any country
without capital, and capital is the creature of confidence. Now, it is
impossible to lift a book written by an impartial hand relating to


Turkey, without finding in almost every page of it the most convincing
proof that the government of Turkey is nothing but an organised
system of corruption and robbery. Intelligent Turks themselves know
and acknowledge ■ this to be the case. Achmed Veofic Effendi,
Minister of Justice at Constantinople in 1857, said to Mr. Senior,
“ With us government is supposed to exist for the benefit, not of the
governed, but of the governors.”* Violence, extortion, treachery, and
fraud are the characteristic features of a modern Turkish adminis-'
tration. The highest offices of the state are bought and sold, and if,
by chance, one Turkish statesman is found occasionally to make an
effort to resist the contagion of corruption, the chances are that he is
sacrificed at once by some political or harem intrigue, and ends his'
days in poverty and obscurity.
Another of Mr. Senior’s correspondents says:—“The Turk is
utterly unimprovable. He hates change, and he hates civilisation; he
hates Europeans—he hates and fears all that they propose. There is
not a word in the Hatt i Humdyoon that does not disgust, or irritate,
or alarm him. Nothing but force will oblige him to give to it the
appearance of execution. And what is the value of apparent reforms
in a people without an aristocracy, without a middle-class, without a
public opinion, without the means of communication, without news-
papers, without even a post-office, accustomed for 400 years to plunder
and oppress Rayahs, and to be oppressed and plundered by sultans,
pashas, cadis, and janissaries ? ”
The natural resources of the Turkish Empire are enormous, and,
under a just and honest and efficient Government, might be developed
to an extent which is practically almost without limit. But the Turks
themselves are a non-producing race; they are a parasitical popula-
tion, and exist by robbing and plundering the industrious Christian
populations of their European and Asiatic provinces.f Mr. Blunt,
for twenty years British Consul at Salonica, says : —“ The poorer, the
humbler the Turk is, the better he is ; as he mixes with the world, and
as he gets money and power, he deteriorates. In the lowest class I
have sometimes found truth, honesty, and gratitude ; in the middle
classes, seldom ; in the highest, never.”
“ How much of Asia Minor do you suppose to be uncultivated ?”
asks Mr. Senior of the Prussian Consul at Smyrna, Herr Spiegelthal.
“ Ninety-nine hundredths,” was the reply. “If you go from hence
towards Magnesia, you will ride ten hours through fine land without
seeing a human habitation. But such is the fertility of the hundredth
• Journal kept in Turkey and Greece by Nassau W. Senior, pp. 17. This is a
book which will be read with interest by all who wish to obtain information upon
the Turkish Empire and its government.
f Senior’s "Journal in Turkey and Greece," p. 189.


part—that which is cultivated —that, if there were roads, its produce
would influence sensibly the markets of Europe. A few years ago the
crop of madder failed in the south of France. The export from
Smyrna doubled, and in a great measure supplied the loss. If we had
roads we should drive the French madder out of the market.”
Evidence equally strong and conclusive respecting the condition
of the European provinces of Turkey could be culled in abundance
from the pages of almost every modern book upon the Turkish
Empire. How it is possible for men to talk of the “ enlightened
commercial policy” of the Turkish Government with such over-
whelming proof at their hand of the misrule and corruption that
prevails, we cannot understand. How can commerce and trade
flourish in a country without roads, and in which the inhabitants are
constrained to destroy any means of communication which they may
have with the outer world in order to protect themselves from the
tyranny, oppression, and robbery of Turkish officials? Mehmet
Kuprisli Pacha, an intelligent Turk, formerly Minister at Berlin and
London, acknowledged to Mr. Senior that Turkey was without “ a
single real road, except a bit about five miles long which the French
made for us.” How hopeless it is to expect a population to grow in
wealth and comfort under such a system of government may be
gathered from the following incidents :
Captain Ward, an Englishman, rented, at a distance of about
twelve miles from Constantinople, 4,000 acres of land ; the soil was
of the finest description ; the rent only £7O a year. Captain Ward
spent from £3,000 to £4,000 in cultivating and improving the
property, but the want of roads nullified all his efforts. He was
unable to bring his produce to market, for it was more costly to
move a quarter of grain from a distance of twenty miles in the
interior of Turkey to Constantinople than it was to convey it from
London to that port.
In the preface to an interesting little book, which has just been
issued, and the author of which (Mr. Barkley) is a civil engineer,
who was for some years employed on the construction of a railway
between the Danube and the Black Sea —we find a statement made
which so strikingly illustrates the misery and misrule which exists
under this Turkish system of “ commercial enlightenment ” that we
cannot refrain from quoting it.
“ About twelve miles from Varna, and not far off the route to
Shumla, is the flourishing village of Gebedji, which is partly Turkish,
partly Bulgar. On entering it, one is at once struck by the appear-
ance of prosperity exhibited in the well-built houses and large flocks
of cattle. Between this village and the road is a swamp with a
narrow but deep brook running through it. To assist in the construe-


tion of the line, which passed by the village, I caused a road to be
made across the marsh, and a wooden bridge thrown over the brook
The first night after the bridge was completed it was cut down ; and
on making enquiries about it, a Turk told me that rather than live
with this easy access to the road, the inhabitants, both Turks and
Bulgars, would burn their houses and migrate to some spot where
Turkish officials, Turkish troops, and, above all, Turkish Zaptiehs
(policemen) could not so easily get at them.
“ Over and over again,” says Mr. Barkley, “ I have seen every
woman and girl of an entire Christian village disappear, as if by
magic, at the approach of a Zaptieh.” What a mockery it is for pro-
fessedly liberal and intelligent Englishmen to write and talk about the
“enlightened commercial policy” of a Government which is either
unable or unwilling, or perhaps both unable and unwilling, to protect
the lives, the honour, and the property of its industrious and peaceable
subjects from the oppression and the rapacity of its own officials !
All this, let it be borne in mind, applies to a Government which
has, during the last twenty years, not only squandered every penny of
the revenue of the Turkish Empire, but which has, at the same time,
utterly exhausted its credit by foreign loans, and plunged the country
into a hopeless state of bankruptcy. Prior to the Russian War,
Turkey practically had no debt, while her income and expenditure
fairly balanced each other. What is her position now in these re-
spects? During the last twenty years she has incurred great liabilities
by foreign loans, of which there is still outstanding one hundred and
sixty millions sterling; her treasury has long ceased to be able to meet
the national obligations, her credit is exhausted, and her Government
is in a hopeless state of bankruptcy.
The estimated expenditure of the Turkish administration for the
year 1875-6 was 143,000, and to this falls to be added the cost
of suppressing the insurrections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, estimated
at making together a total expenditure of over ,£32,000,000.
To meet this outlay the nominal revenue was given at ,£19,106,000, but
it was calculated that not more than ;£i 5,300,000 would be collected —to
such an extent has the country become impoverished. The efforts of the
Turkish tax-collectors to raise even this modified sum must have created
an amount of suffering which it is horrible to contemplate. The inhabi-
tants of every town and village will have had to endure unspeakable
tortures before such a sum could be raised, and the abominable system
of farming out the collection of the taxes to the highest bidder gives
the inhabitants over to the will of men who know neither compassion
nor mercy. And when we see that at least two-thirds of the revenue to
be raised in 1875-6 —viz., tithes, £ 7,000,000; property-tax, ,£2,500,000;
and the tax on sheep, about £ I,6oo,ooo—are in the hands of the tax-


farmer, we can readily judge how completely the industry of the people
is in the hands of their task-masters.
No better proof could be adduced of the demoralisation which pre-
vails throughout the Turkish dominions, than the fact that the Govern-
ment itself estimated that the tithes collected from the cultivators
of the soil would yield £i, 000,000 less in 1875-6 than in the previous
year; the sheep-tax, in like manner, ,£350,000 less. All this obviously
shows the rapidly-extending poverty and misery of the people.
Of the of ordinary expenditure, ,£4,400,000 is absorbed
by the Turkish army and navy, whilst the debt charges amount to
.£10,925,680, Out of this latter sum, has to be deducted
for interest and sinking fund of the foreign debt, the balance,
,£5,163,000, being for the interest and charges of the internal and
floating debt, the total amount of which it is difficult to obtain any
trustworthy information about. Two things, however, regarding her
obligations are quite clear. First, that she has repudiated all at once
her foreign debt. Second, that her internal and floating debt have
enormously increased, for the estimated amount required to meet the
interest upon them in 1874-5 was only ,£2,230,000, whilst for 1875-6,
as we have just shown, it was nearly ,£3,000,000 more; and for the first
time there appears in the Turkish estimates a most significant item,
namely, interest on various advances, ,£989,272.
If, then, we even put aside altogether the interest upon her foreign
and repudiated debt, her expenditure for 1875-6 was nearly £27,000,000,
whilst her revenue was only ,£15,300,000. All that is bad enough, and
shows most clearly bankruptcy within and bankruptcy without; but if
such was the condition of things during the past year, what hope or
expectation have we of improvement in the future. The provinces of
Bulgaria, Herzegovina, and Bosnia, have been sacked and plundered
since these estimates were made. Towns and villages have been
burnt and destroyed, and the inhabitants slain, outraged, or dispersed.
The whole industry of the country has been paralysed, and the very
soil in many places has ceased to be cultivated.
Recent reports received from our secretaries of embassy and from
our consuls confirm in a painful manner the remarks we have just
made. Mr. Baring, writing in September last on the subject of the
national revenue of Turkey, says, that while the average amount
received yearly from the Sandjak of Phillippopolis (a district of Bul-
garia) is £BOO,OOO, not more than .£500,000 can be expected during
the current year. Such, he goes on to say, is “the result of the
reckless way in which the late insurrection was suppressed.” The
Turkish Government, when it can least afford it, is a heavy loser,
as Mr. Baring remarks, “ by the deeds of the Bashi-Bazouks.”
The last report published from our Consul at Bosnia gives a


most deplorable account of the commercial condition of that province.
Numbers of the commercial class are “completely ruined.” The
revenue of the province has fallen from 00 1° &-7' 2 ! 000 —the
tithe on agricultural produce, which is the chief item, having fallen off
by at least two-thirds. “ There can be no revival of trade at present,”
he goes on to say ; “ everything is rising in price ; not more than two-
thirds of the breadth of the land usually under cultivation has been
sown this year; and a further continuance of the present state of
things must inevitably bring the country to a condition of poverty and
distress from which it will require many years of peace, abundance,
and good government to recover.”
We could amplify quotations like these almost indefinitely, but our
readers will be inclined to concur, we think, in the opinion that further
proof of the financial collapse, as well as the wretched condition to
which the population of the Turkish Empire has been reduced by the
tyranny and incapacity of its Government, is quite unnecessary.
Having at the commencement contrasted our trade with Russia
and Turkey, at this point we would say, as to the finances of Russia,
that although the expenditure of 1874 was estimated at
and the revenue at ,£77,120,000, yet as the former sum does not include
certain charges, such as the Imperial Court, in place of a surplus
generally there is a deficit: indeed, to cover long-continued annual
deficits, and at the same time to obtain capital for the construction of
her railways, she has been forced to obtain many foreign loans, and
her debt since 1859 has steadily increased. Scarcely a year has passed
since then without a considerable foreign loan, the last being, in 1875,
for ,£15,000,000.
Under Turkish misrule we have shown how her European pro-
vinces have gone back. We will now show how each province that
has been lopped off from the decaying trunk has exhibited vitality and
vigour, and progressed in civilisation—a progress which has fully
justified those Powers which aided them in gaining their freedom.
Greece, thanks to the combined efforts of England, Russia, and
France, for five-and-forty years has been free, and has made pro-
gress. Moldavia and Wallachia, which in 1829, through the action
of Russia alone, were loosened from the thraldom of the oppressor —
let us look what progress they have made. What was the condition
of Wallachia and Moldavia forty years ago ?
Cobden, in 1836, writing of Wallachia and Moldavia, said : —“The
condition of these two Christian provinces, situated on the north bank
of the Danube, and so frequently the scenes of desolating wars
between Turkey and her neighbours, has been, perhaps, more pitiably


deplorable than the lot of any other portion of this misgoverned
Empire. The hospodars or governors of Moldavia and Wallachia were
changed every year at the will of the sultan, and each brought a fresh
retinue of greedy dependants, armed with absolute power, to prey
upon the defenceless inhabitants. These appointments, as is the case
now in every pachalick, were openly sold to the highest bidder, and
the hospodars were left to recover from their subjects the price of the
purchase to pay an annual tribute to the Porte, which was actually
levied in kind, giving scope “for the most arbitrary exactions.”
To remedy this state of affairs Russia demanded certain changes
from Turkey in her relations with Wallachia and Moldavia, and
Cobden says :
“The Treaty of 1829 between Russia and Turkey stipulates that
the hospodars shall be elected for life, that no tribute of any kind
shall be levied ; it also engages that a quarantine shall be placed on
the Danubian frontier, thus separating these provinces from the rest
of Turkey. This case of intervention is appealed to as a proof of
Russian ambition, and Lord,Stuart, in the course of his speech, before
alluded to, complains that by this policy its power is increased in
those quarters. Admitting that Russia interferes in behalf of those
unhappy countries with no loftier aim than the augmentation of her
influence, and that the result will be the separation of the Christian
provinces of Moldavia and Wallachia from the rest of the Turkish
Empire—nay, admitting that this should prove inimical to the interests
of England (though the supposition is absurd enough, since whatever
tends to advance the civilisation and augment the wealth of any part
of the world must be beneficial in the end to us who are the greatest
commercial and manufacturing people), still the English would, we
sincerely hope, feel a disinterested gratitude to the Power which by
its merciful interposition has rescued this suffering Christian com-
munity from the cruel, remorseless, and harassing grasp of its
Mohammedan oppressor.”
Need we feel surprise that such rule had brought these fair pro-
vinces to decay and desolation, that the population was dying out,
and that not more than a sixth part of the land of Wallachia was
cultivated, and that commerce was almost unknown ; not only was
there no protection of property by the Government, but the chief duty
of the officials seemed to be to watch the growth of capital of any
kind only in order that they might pounce upon it and carry it off.
Nor is it to be wondered at that, brought so low, her progress
should at first be slow, or that corruption should still unhappily linger
in the administration of her laws, or that financially she still has a
struggle. Her revenue, in 1875, of ,£3,657,600, was ,£228,000 less
than her expenditure, which, with previous annual deficits, brought


up the public debt of Roumania to £21,290,000 in 1875. But it
is right to observe that the railways are State property, and since
1869, when the first line was opened, she has completed a network of
railways to the extent of 550 miles (being about two-thirds as much
as exists in all Turkey in Europe), connecting herself with Russian
and Austrian lines, and also with the Black Sea, and so greatly
developing her industry and trade—four-fifths of all her debt has been
raised since she commenced to construct railways.
Her commerce has steadily increased, and, as Cobden predicted,
it has greatly increased with this country'. Roumania, in 1861, only
took from us a total of ,£196,000 worth of goods; in 1875, she took
,£1,163,231, of which £677,000 was cotton goods—indeed, just in
proportion as her railway system has been developed her trade has
increased. When we look at this change it is surely not remarkable
that Russia should have some influence with such a people, more
especially when we remember that nearly the whole population
belongs to the Greek Church, and that now in every village there
is a church and a school. They now pay a tribute of £36,000 a
year to Turkey, so we may readily believe that they will not object
to become, like Greece, entirely independent.
Greece nearly fifty years ago virtually ceased to be a province of
Turkey, and after suffering much trial, and passing through many
difficulties, she can now boast of possessing a Constitution under
which the laws, are honestly enforced, equality of religion maintained,
the freedom of the press upheld, and commerce is extending, and free
education is given to every child.
We have said that she has had to pass through many difficulties—
for the struggle for liberty left her prostrate, shell and cannon had laid
her chief towns in ruins, whole forests were burned to ashes, all the
olives and mulberry trees were destroyed, vineyards and cornfields
were trampled under foot by soldiers in their march from place to place,
her commercial navy had nearly disappeared. On the site of ruins
now stand handsome new towns. Athens which in 1830 had only a
population of 7,000, in 1876 had about 50,000. The total population
of Greece in 1534 was but 612,600, now it is 1,258,000 (exclusive of
240,000 in the lonian Islands). In 1533 she had a revenue of only
£280,000; it is now £1,416,000, with an expenditure which therevenue
about balances. Although there have been few years without some
deficit, arising mainly from the excessive number of Government
officials, numbering 18,860, which with their families amount to an
undue proportion of the entire population, and swallow up £586,000
of the revenue —a very grave and serious blot in her Administration.
In 1858 the value of the total exports and imports of Greece was
about two and a half millions —the imports being one and a half, and the


The number of Greek Houses in London ...
1853.
... 65 ...
1876.
120
if
ff
„ Liverpool
... 30 ...
30
ff
ff
„ Manchester
... 60 ...
64
exports one million. During the five years 1870 —74 the average has
been six and a half millions —the imports being about three and a half,
and her exports about three : about one-half of the imports come, and
three-fifths of the exports go, to the United Kingdom. In 1875 the
imports to the United Kingdom (including the lonian Islands) was
,£1,762,300, of which currants, the staple produce of Greece, amounted
to ,£1,410,680. Whilst our exports amounted to ,£1,147,680, of which
cotton yarns and goods amounted to ,£580,000, the increase of our
export trade to Greece since IS6I has been considerably more than
threefold ; our exports in that year being only ,£324,000.
Her mercantile marine—which was almost swept from the sea at the
end of the war, and in 1835 numbered but 3,370 vessels, of 90,000 tons
—at the end of 1872 reached 6,142 vessels of all kinds, with a tonnage
of 420,210, and sailors to the number of 35,000. At Constantinople
and Leghorn the Greek flag ranks second only to the English, at
Marseilles only to that of France. A large portion of the trade of
the Black Sea and eastern parts of the Mediterranean is carried on
under the Greek flag.
As a commercial people their progress is also shown by the fact
that at the time of the Declaration of Independence there w'ere but
few Greek establishments abroad ; now in most commercial cities of
the world Greeks are to be found, and have pretty steadily increased.
And in London there is now a Greek bank, as well as a Greek
insurance establishment. Where do we see a Turkish house of
business ? They are unknown in any commercial town in Europe!
No doubt it has been said, and said truly, that in Greece all is not
well, and that brigandage exists.
No doubt it unhappily exists in some parts of Greece ; but where
does it chiefly prevail? Why, certainly upon the Turkish frontier.
From the nature of the country the brigands find shelter and protec-
tion in the neighbouring Turkish provinces.
In these districts bordering on Greece the tyranny of the Turkish
Government has had much to do with brigandage. If Thessaly and
Epirus formed part of Greece we should hear but little more about it.
Servia, ever since 1829 the year when Russia loosened
Wallachia and Moldavia from the thraldom of Turkey—has virtually
teen independent of Turkey, which independence was made more
complete by her coming under the protection of the great European
Powers by the Treaty of Paris in 1856, and since which she has made


some progress. Her commercial progress, however, it is very difficult
for us to measure, as we do no trade with her; her trade is entirely with
her neighbours, Austria, Turkey, and Roumania. Her imports, which
amount to ,£900,000, are chiefly from Austria, and her exports of
1, 100,000, chiefly live animals —particularly pigs, of which there are
countless herds —are sent to these countries. Her finances have been
for some years in a well-regulated condition; her revenue of about
being slightly more than her expenditure, and she had no
public debt; but unhappily the late war has left her poor indeed, and
although it is said her financial condition at present is bad enough, yet
it is not at all desperate, and may at no distant day be put upon a
sound footing.
Montenegro. The independence of Montenegro, although
threatened continually by the arms of the Ottomans, has always
been maintained by these gallant mountaineers. Her hardy popula-
tion of not more than 200,000 are wholly of the Greek Church, which,
again, accounts for a natural sympathy between Russia and this people.
Of trade they have little or none, and commercially they have no
chance of progress; for fear of invasion from the neighbouring Turkish
towns has caused them to avoid making roads; and besides, they have
no port, and this prevents their having any external commerce; so that
practically they are shut in from intercourse with the world.
As to the future of European Turkey, we may form all kinds of
conjectures, but no reasoning as to that future can be regarded as
logical, or accepted as practical, that does not take into account
the broad features of her history during the past half-century, as well
as her actual present condition. Diplomatists, whom many people
suppose to be our best guides, are precisely those whose council in
this case we must guard against, if we hope to arrive at a sound
judgment. Constantinople has always been regarded as one of the
great prizes of the diplomatic circle ; the members of which still blindly
remain the warmest friends of the Turk. Sir Henry Elliot is reported
as saying, the other day, on leaving the capital of the Turk, “ That,
from his experience of the country in which he was a resident
ambassador, he firmly believed in the future of Turkey, in spite of het
vicissitudes and political embarrassments ! ” and the same day in
which this is reported in the Times , a letter appears, signed by “An Old
Diplomatist,” who says, “The position of Turkey is not so embarrassed
now as it was at the period to which I have referred [1827]. Tb<


Turkish army is not only larger, but disciplined as troops are in more
civilised countries, and led by better-instructed officers, and is capable
of fighting much better than in 1827. The Porte, since the Crimean
War, has had no Russian fleet to threaten it at Sebastopol, and the
Russian fleet, if it appears in the Mediterranean, will not find a foe
unworthy of her under Hobart Pasha’s command.”
It will be observed that this writer boldly asserts that the position of
Turkey is not so embarrassed now as it was in 1827 ! He would lead
us to suppose that she has become stronger since that time, and that
her embarrassment is now but temporary, and that she will again
be strong, and arise in her strength. Whilst the truth is, that not only
has she never recovered the shock of 1827, but her very existence ever
since has been but a living death.
Critically examined, the battle of Navarino was the very death-
knell of European Turkey. With the loss of Greece, in 1829, and prac-
tically of Wallachia, Moldavia, Servia, and Montenegro —all within two
years of the same time—she lost not only two-fifths of her territory,
and more than two-fifths of her population in Europe, but nearly
encircled herself with a ring of implacable enemies, who, friendly to
and deeply sympathising with their unhappy neighbours that still
remain under the rule of the Sultan, will only be too glad at any time
to assist them in securing a like freedom to themselves.
In addition to all this, the recent conference has clearly shown she
has not one friend amongst all the European Powers. But then “An
Old Diplomatist” tells us she has a larger army and a stronger fleet
than before. Is that a source of strength to a Government whose
crying crime is extortion of taxes from her people to such an extent
that cultivation is ceasing out of her land, and her inhabitants in despair
are crying for help to us and every other Christian people of Europe ?
The navy of Turkey is the only tangible thing which she can show for
her existing— but repudiated—foreign debt of The
creation and maintenance of her fleet and her army have been the
direct cause of her prostration and exhaustion. Her army and navy
are maintained not alone for fear of enemies from without, but from
fear of her own subjects within, who may now fairly be said to be in
a chronic state of insurrection—massacre succeeds massacre.
The pressure of taxation becomes day by day more severe ; every
turn of the tax-farmer’s screw extinguishes so much of the remaining
energy 0 f the people. Not only has industry been blighted by the
continual confiscation of its fruits, but in that very garden of nature
lts sit down in despair.
What was the direct and simple cause of the present expose of
Turkish misdeeds, and the insurrection in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
the Servian war?


Why, the rising of the people against the tax-farmer, the legalised
plunderer of the inhabitants.
Mr. Evans, in his book on “Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1875,”
says : “The centralised Government set up in Bosnia since 1851 is
so much machinery for wringing the uttermost farthing out of the
unhappy Bosniac Rayah. The desperate efforts of Turkish financiers
on the eve of national bankruptcy have at last made the burden of
taxation more than even the long-suffering Bosniac can bear. It was
the last straw.” The last straw provoked the Herzegovinians and the
Bosnians to insurrection ; it did more —-it awakened the sympathy of
their neighbours on the opposite bank of the Drina.
The Servians, remembering their own sufferings when under the
Turkish yoke, saw with indignation and horror the outrages perpe-
trated on their Bosnian neighbours, and, to their lasting honour, at
a great sacrifice to themselves, they declared war against their old
oppressor, the Turk.
The Servian war was the voluntary war of a whole people for a
righteous cause, supported in a practical and self-sacrificing manner.
The rich put down their carriages, and gave up their horses for the
use of the army ; their senators renounced nearly all their salaries ;
the peasantry freely brought their gifts, even the gold ducats that
adorned the heads of their peasant-girls were yielded up in the cause
for which they had undertaken to do battle.
From all this, and from the information we have as to the condition
of Greece, Roumania, and Montenegro, it is evident that Servia and
those three states suffer very materially even from contact with their
corrupt and oppressive neighbour, paralysing and retarding their full
and free development.
From the progress which, with all their disadvantages, we have
seen that these provinces have made since they were freed from
Turkish rule, it is not difficult to conceive how quickly, under similar
freedom, the whole of European Turkey would flourish in agriculture
and commerce, and become a blessing among the nations of Europe,
instead of being, as at present, a constant source of worry, anxiety,
and danger.
Englishmen would flock to her shores, English capital and enter-
prise would be attracted, railroads—the first want of the country —
would be constructed, and an immense trade would be created.
English influence and sentiment, too, would spread in the best
way—by encouraging industry and enterprise where both might
secure a higher reward than in almost any other part of the world.
The rule of the Turk in Europe is doomed, and the sooner it ends
the better it will be for the inhabitants of Turkey, and the greater the
guarantee that they will be able to assert and maintain real inde-


pendence. The longer the present rule continues the more im-
poverished and unsettled will the country become, its recuperative
power will be lessened, and the people will be left the easy prey of
any designing and powerful neighbour.
Even now, with the present half-hearted attachment of Roumania
and Servia to Russia, if the combined powers of Europe act vigorously
they may quickly establish additional independent principalities, and
so pave the way for securing the independence and freedom of all
Turkey-in-Europe, and we will no longer hear that the whole question
is “ either that of preserving European Turkey in Turkish hands, or
keeping it out of those of Russia,” for it will be in the hands of inde-
pendent Christian principalities, of which we have admirable types
already both in Roumania and in Servia.
A good deal has been said about Bosnia and Bulgaria not being
capable of self-government; but happily it is generally the case, both
with men and with nations, that when they are entrusted with respon-
sibility they prove themselves more capable than was expected.
Long before there was any thought of Bulgaria obtaining inde-
pendence, one of our consuls gave a very candid opinion as to their
condition and capacity. Writing from Adrianople in 1867, Vice-
Consul Blunt said :
“ As far as my experience goes, I consider the Bulgarians to be, on
the whole, a shrewd, active, and industrious people, ranking in capacity
and intelligence with any other of the European races.
“ They require only the full development of their good qualities for
attaining a high accomplishment in modern civilisation. The aspira-
tions of the younger and more impartial generation have for the
present no other political purport than to place the Bulgarian na-
tionality on the same footing with the remainder of the Christian
communities of the Ottoman Empire.”
And as to the Bosnians, Mr; Arthur Evans, in his book already
referred to, says: “The Bosnians are of a temperament admirably
fitted for parliamentary government; and what is more, owing to
their still preserving the relics of the free institutions of the primitive
Slavs, they are familiar with its machinery. In their family com-
munities, in their village councils, the first principles of repre-
sentative government are practised every day.”
It is clearly the interest of England that Turkish rule in Europe
should cease. Quiet as both Germany and Austria have remained, it
is obvious that when that rule does cease it will not be replaced by
Russia. The maintenance of the Danube as a free river is of para-
mount importance to them; and whatever we either think or do in the
matter, they will prevent at all hazards the Russians from obtaining a
footing south of the Danube.


Let us act heartily with Russia and every other Power in gaining
that end which she at all events has in the past done the most for-
namely, the freedom of the Christians in Turkey.
But whatever our interests may be, we cannot but feel that we have
imposed a duty upon ourselves from which we should not flinch
During the past many months, the cry of anguish which came to us
from Bulgaria so stirred the heart of the nation, that, throughout the
length and breadth of the land, men of all classes and of every shade
of opinion openly declared that the Christians of Turkey should be free.
It is impossible for us to be satisfied with matters as they now are,
or to put the slightest faith in the last burlesque constitution of Midhat
Pasha ; for we know perfectly well that we will be but handing back
to the revengeful sword of their rulers those helpless and unarmed
Christians for whose safety we have professed so much, and in whose
interests Her Majesty’s Government, on the 21st September last, sent
one of the strongest and most peremptory dispatches ever transmitted
from one Government to another.
It is perfectly idle to suppose that there is peace now. The con-
dition of things which exists on the west bank of the Drina and
under the shadow of the Balkans is such that it very closely resembles
war. “ For what is war?”—a modern historian says —“ What is war, but
anxiety, distress, and often anguish to nations?” And the peace
that exists in European Turkey to-day is but “anxiety, distress, and
anguish” to nine-tenths of the whole people.


Z\)t (Eastern ©nation donation.
PAPERS on THE EASTERN QUESTION.
' No. 4.
THE RACES, RELIGIONS,
AND
INSTITUTIONS OF TURKEY
AND THE
NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES.
Being the Substance of Two Lectures delivered in the
Kirkcaldy Burghs,
BY
SIR G. CAMPBELL, M.P.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
eastern question association,
28, CANADA BUILDING, WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL FETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris & New York.




THE
RACES, RELIGIONS, and INSTITUTIONS
OF TURKEY
AND THE NEIGHBOURING COUNTRIES.
Doubts have sometimes been cast upon the effects of race on
social and political problems. Other things besides race of course
largely affect the conduct of nations; but, knowing as we do the
effects of breed upon dogs, cattle, and other domestic animals, I
think it is hardly possible to doubt that race must be a large
factor in estimating the capacities and Conduct of nations. You
are probably aware of the great divisions of the human race.
The civilised nations of the world are derived from three great
stocks—the Aryan or Indo-Germanic, the Semitic, and the
Turanian. The physical features of the Semitic race can hardly
be distinguished from those of the Aryan, but the language and
the genius are essentially different. The Semites are well known
to us as the source of the earliest civilisation, and of the pre-
dominant religions of the world. The Phoenicians, the Jews, and
the Arabs represent this Semite race. The Turanians are the
yellow, broad-faced people who inhabit the centre, the east, and
north of Asia, and the extreme north of Europe. In the Chinese
we have at the further extremity of the world a Turanian race


highly civilised, but the Turanians who have come in contact with
the west are generally barbarians.
The sources of the Aryan races, which now occupy Europe
and some parts of Asia, are, it is believed, in Central Asia; but
swarms of that branch of mankind have passed from their original
seats in times anterior to history. The Persians were a very early
and very civilised Aryan race, inhabiting a country much larger,
much more fertile, and much more prosperous than the present
Persia. Other Aryan races passed to the east, and, conquering
the aboriginal tribes of India, formed the modern Hindoos. In
Western Asia, again, Armenia, and Asia Minor were occupied by
Aryan races; and in Europe, in the dawn of history, we find
the greater part of the Continent occupied by early Aryan races
—Latins, Greeks, and Celts. The Latins conquered and assimi-
lated most of the Celtic countries, and formed the present Latin
nations of Italy, France, and Spain. A portion of the countries
to the eastward of Italy, upon the Danube, were also Latinised
in early days, and traces of these Latinised races are still found
there. The Greeks, though great in their civilisation, were never
a very numerous people. They pushed their colonies and their
civilisation beyond their own limits, and the neighbouring Mace-
donians becoming identified with them, they conquered a great
part of the world. Although they were subjected by the Romans
they achieved a moral conquest of their conquerors; and the
Roman Empire in its later days became Greek in its language, its
literature, its arts, and its religion. The Teutonic or German
races were a later wave of the Aryan immigration, and occupied
the modem Germany, the low German countries of Holland and
Sleswig, England, and the countries which we call Scandinavian—
viz., Denmark, Sweden, and Norway. Last of the Aryan races
came the Slavs into Europe, and they are so important to our
present subject that I shall ask your particular attention to them.


They not only occupied the modern Russia, but pushed far west-
ward into Central Europe, occupying the greater part of modern
Turkey up to the shores of the Adriatic, the adjacent parts of
Austria and Hungary, Bohemia, and Poland.
It seems as if these great Aryan emigrations had dried up
the sources from which they came. The Semites also had their
clay, and their decadence. Next followed great incursions of the
Turanian races, which I have described as barbarous. They
occupied Persia and the greater part of Asia. At this day the
countries known under the general name of Turkestan in Central
Asia, while still retaining some traces of their former Persian
character, are mainly Turkish. Modern Persia was conquered by
a Turkish tribe, and although there the Persian language and
civilisation have prevailed, and a separate form of Mahomedanism
separates the Persians from the Turks, Persia under its present
rule is reduced to a very inferior position. These Turanian
barbarians have also repeatedly invaded Europe, but they have in
most cases been eventually repulsed or absorbed by die European
races. A notable instance of this absorption is the case of the
Bulgarians, who now occupy the greater part of European Turkey.
They were a Turanian tribe which invaded that country and
conquered the Slavs whom they found there; but the Slav
language and physical character prevailed, and the people whom
we now call Bulgarians are, in fact, for the most part Slavs. They
are Slavs modified by the Bulgarian immigration, and both in
language and characteristics a good deal separated from the other
Slavs. We may, in fact, compare the position of the Bulgarians
to that of the Franks in France; they have formed a new people
who bear the name of the conquering tribe, but in other respects
follow the language and features of the conquered. In only one
instance in ancient times did the Turanian invaders of Europe
settle down with their own language and nationalities forming a


Turanian element in Europe—l allude to the Hungarians. Their
position in Europe was, in fact, very similar to that of the later
invaders, the Turks; but there is this material difference, that,
coming in early days, before the prevalence of Mahomedanism,
they became Christians, and so, amalgamating with the European
races, they are now, in features and in blood, for the most part
European, although still Turanian in language.
Later hordes of Turanians, the Turks and the Mongols,
afterwards invaded Europe; but they passed through countries
where the Mahomedan religion was dominant, and thus became
Mahomedanised. That difference of religion kept them apart
from the Europeans among whom they settled; and they never
became Europeanised, as did the Hungarians.
Here, then, we must note religion as one of the factors which
largely modifies the race-proclivities and history of nations.
Christianity was given to the Semitic Jews in a pure, simple, and
lovely form; and in that form, by its moral force, it spread as
much to the east and south as to the west. But when it was
taken under the state protection of the Roman Empire it became
corrupted and overlaid with Roman mythologies and Greek
metaphysics; and especially patronised as it was by an empress
of the East, great concessions were made to the religious vanity
of women by elevating the Virgin Mary to a great position, and
establishing many female saints. The idolatry and corruptions of
the Christianity of the sixth and seventh centuries became very
offensive to the Semitic peoples among whom the religion had
made much progress, and paved the way for the new religion of
Mahomet which then sprung up, and which has so much altered
the face of the world. Mahomet borrowed much from Christianity,
and corrected many abuses which had crept into the Christian
churches. Images and idolatrous forms he wholly abolished, and
he established a worship which had much purity and simplicity


about it; but he fell into errors and abuses of another kind.
Not only did he deny the Divinity of Jesus, but his religion
has none of the humility and charity of Christianity; it gives
too much encouragement to pride, conquest, and domination.
The tenets of Mahomedanism are not nearly so bad as they are
painted; there is not really in the religion all the incitement to
massacre and destruction which is sometimes alleged. Mahome-
dans are only encouraged to fight for the faith when what is called
a “Jehad" is proclaimed; and, according to the most reliable
authorities, a Jehad should only be proclaimed when the faith is
persecuted, when freedom of worship is not permitted, and the
sound of the “ call to prayer ” can no longer be heard.
The barbarous Turks and Mongols who accepted Mahome-
danism much relaxed and perverted the tenets of that religion;
they took all the bad, and left out much of the good. Nothing
can be more detestable than the character of the modem Turks of
Turkestan; rapine, slave-dealing, and murder are their occupations.
It was in the character of Mahomedans that the Turks settled in
Asia Minor and in parts of Europe. The people of Asia Minor
seem always to have been in some respects soft and inferior. They
have been conquered by a long succession of foreign races—by
Persians, Greeks, Romans, Arabs, and finally by the Turks—and
it may well be believed that they were very much effete. The
Turks seem to have converted and absorbed them, and I believe
that the modern Turks of Turkey are formed by a mixture of the
conquering Turkish tribes with the conquered peoples of Asia
Minor. Crosses sometitnes make good breeds, but in this case I
fear that the cross has turned out badly. These modern Turks
have some good qualities, but they retain much of the barbarity
of their Turanian ancestors, and have retained none of the intellect
and energy of the Aryan races. Well governed, they would make
tolerable subjects; but they are now quite unfit to govern others.


It was after the most famous, or infamous, Turkish dynasties
of former ages had had their day, and had passed away, that the
comparatively small Ottoman, or Osmanli, tribe rose to power,
and established its dominion, first in Asia Minor, and afterwards
in Eastern Europe. Asia Minor they made entirely their own,
with the exception of a fringe on the coast, and the adjacent
islands. In Europe they did but encamp as a conquering
garrison, and to this day they are there only in that capacity, and
nowhere form the mass of the people in any part of Europe.
Nor have they succeeded in converting to Mahomedanism the
European peoples whom they conquered. The European Ma-
homedans are comparatively small in number, and may be con-
sidered exceptional. Very few Greeks were converted, not very
many Bulgarians, and but a moderate number of Bosnian Slavs
and Albanians. There remained, then, subject to the dominion
of the Turks in Europe, the following European and Christian
races:—first, the Greeks, occupying old Greece and part of
Macedonia, as well as the country about the Eastern Rome—
Constantinople—and much of the coast and islands; secondly,
the Bulgarians, occupying the greater part of the interior of
European Turkey to the Danube and the Black Sea; thirdly,
the South Slavonic races, whom we now know as Serbs, Bosnians,
Herzegovinians, and Montenegrins —all, in fact, identical in race;
and fourthly, the Albanians of the hilly country near the Adriatic,
a very ancient race, of which we do not well know the origin,
but who seem to be allied to the Greeks. To these we may
add a people once really, and still nominally, subject to the
Turks, the Latinised people of the Danubian country, whom
we now call Roumanians.
The people of these countries are divided not only into
Christians and Mahomedans, but also, unhappily, into different
sects of Christians, between whom there exist almost as much


bitterness as between Christians and Mahomedans. You
probably know how great has been the rivalry, and I am afraid I
must say the hatred, between Greek and Roman Christians. The
Romans have always had a more united organisation under one
pope, who claimed to be the superior of kings and emperors.
The Greek Christians have never had any such pope; they have
generally been divided into several churches ; but despotic rulers
have always sought to use the authority of the Church to promote
their own influence. The Roman Catholic religion not only pre-
vailed amongst the Latin and Teutonic races, but also amongst a
large portion of the Western and Southern Slavs. The Poles,
most of the Austrian Slavs, some of the Bosnians, and most of the
Northern Albanians, are still Catholics, and the Roman Catholic
hierarchy have steadily attempted to push their dominion further
east into the Greek countries. Not only, however, the Greeks
proper, but also the Bulgarians, the Servians, most of the Christian
Bosnians, and the Roumanians, as well as the great Russian
people, have maintained the Greek form of religion. The Turks
themselves have not neglected the influence which attaches to
ecclesiastical domination. They have always taken the Greek
patriarchs under their protection, and sought through pliant
ecclesiastics to secure their own authority. Under the Turks
the leading Greeks represented the Greek Church, and by
connivance of the Turkish Government, the Greek ecclesiastics
of Constantinople obtained great ecclesiastical and much civil
power over the whole of the Bulgarian people. It was but the
other day that the Bulgarians revolted against these dominant
Greeks, and after a long struggle established their ecclesiastical
and educational independence.
At this day we have several Greek churches following the
same religion, but separated from one another for ecclesiastical
purposes. First, there is the old Greek Church of Constant!-


nople; then there is the Church of independent Greece allied
to it; then the Bulgarian Church, now quite independent of
the Constantinople patriarchs; and there is the great Russian
Church, of which the Russian emperor has constituted himself the
head.
In Asiatic Turkey the Armenians are still Christians, and the
bulk of them belong to a separate Armenian Church ; but a good
many have been converted, or by political influences attracted
by Catholics and Protestants. In Syria there are some peculiar
Christian sects. Protestant missionaries are active both in
Turkey-in-Asia and Turkey-in-Europe.
The Jews form an important element in all the eastern
countries of Europe. They are generally sojourners in the towns,
but they are very wealthy and very influential. They command
great financial interests, and great power in the Press. It would
appear that of late their sympathies or their interests have a good
deal attracted them to the Turkish cause, and —out of Turkey,
at any rate —they have been very active in supporting it in late
discussions.
Mahomedans, like Christians, are a good deal divided among
themselves, and there are various sects. The Persians and some
other Mahomedans are as much opposed to the Turks as are
Catholics and Greeks to one another; and a large proportion
of the Arabs, called Wahabees, are bitterly opposed to the
Turkish rule as well as to the Turkish form of Mahomedanism.
In Syria, too, there are some Mahomedan sects holding special
tenets.
If you look, then, at the map, you will find Central Asia now
occupied by Turks or Turcomans of a very barbarous character,
Mahomedans in name, but robbers and slave-dealers in reality;
you will find Persia under a regime which has traces of old
Persian civilisation, but under which the country has become but


the shadow of its former condition; you will find the central
parts of Arabia occupied by Wahabee tribes, who hold their own
against the Turks, and who have from time to time succeeded in
freeing the greater part of Arabia from foreign dominion. Of
late years, however, the Turks have prevailed over considerable
parts of Arabia, and have obtained possession of the holy cities
of Mecca and Medina. Mesopotamia and the greater part of
Syria are occupied by Arab races under Turkish dominion. The
mountainous countries in which the Euphrates and the Tigris
have their sources are held by the Kurds, an old Persian race,
now Mahomedan, very predatory in their habits. To the north
of them are the Christian Armenians and Georgians, and, farther
north, the Caucasus range, principally held by Mahomedan
tribes, but now subject to Russia; to the west, Asia Minor is
mainly populated by Osmanli Turks of the mixed race which I
have described; but that country is very greatly reduced from its
ancient populousness and productiveness. I very much doubt
whether the number of the Turks in Asia is really so great as is
sometimes represented. In Europe the Turks are by no means
numerous. I have already noticed the position of the various
Christian races in and about Turkey, the Greeks occupying the
coasts and islands, as well as Greece, the Bulgarians the main
body of the country, and the South Slavs and Albanians the north-
western portion. The Greeks, dependent and independent, must
number from two to three millions, the Bulgarians about double
that number. The Albanians are nearly a million and a half,
some Greek Christians, some Catholic Christians, and a large
proportion of them Mahomedans.
I must here more particularly note the present position of
the Slav races and of the other peoples with whom they have
become intermixed. The Slavs are usually divided into East
Slavs or Russians, West Slavs —viz., Poles, and Czechs or


Bohemians; South Slavs, whom I shall further describe; and
Bulgarians, forming a race apart. The South Slavs in Turkey
number, perhaps, two and a half millions—that is, about a
million Serbs, and nearly one and a half millions ■ of Bosnians,
Herzegovinians, and Montenegrins, of whom a good many
Bosnians are Mahomedans. There is a larger South Slav
population in the adjoining Austro-Hungarian dominions. The
South Slavs and Bulgarians are now separated from the other
Slavs by two distinct races—first, the Hungarians, and, secondly,
the Roumanians or Wallachs. The Hungarians are found in
Hungary, but by no means occupy the whole of that country.
They are but a dominant race, somewhat, as I have said, like the
Turks in Turkey. A good deal of the centre of Hungary, the
country of which Pesth is about the centre, is, for the most part,
Hungarian, the Slavs, there called Slovenes, being an inferior
population ; but a great part of the political kingdom of Hungary
is really pure Slav—l mean the provinces of Croatia, Slavonia,
and Dalmatia, extending from the River Drave, a tributary of the
Danube, to the Adriatic Sea. On the other side of Hungary
there is a very large Roumanian population, said to number some
two millions, besides some West Slavs in the north of Hungary.
The Roumanian race is numerous and important. I have
alluded to the Latinisation of some of the peoples on the Danube;
the modern Roumanians represent these Latinised peoples. They
are, no doubt, much mixed with Slavonic and other barbarous
blood, but they still retain the Latinised language, and some of
the Latin characteristics. They not only form the whole of the
population of the modern principality of Roumania, amounting to
four or five million people, but also, as I have said, a large part of
the population of Hungary, a considerable portion of the popula-
tion of Bessarabia, now a Russian province, and a comparatively
small proportion of the population of Turkey proper. These


Turkish Roumanians are, however, entirely separated from"their
congeners, having been many centuries ago driven into the hilly
countries adjoining Greece, and some other hilly parts of Turkey.
The whole Roumanian race must number seven or eight millions
at least.
To complete the account of the races in Turkey, I should
add that in very recent years a considerable Mahomedan
population, expelled from the Russian dominions, have settled in
Turkey. These are the Tartars, the remains of the former con-
querors of Russia, and the Circassians of the Caucasus, a gallant
and courageous but very predatory tribe.
I think I have now described the principal races and religions
in the Eastern countries in which we are at present interested.
The influence of race and religion upon political affairs will be
further apparent when I come, as I now do, to the institutions of
these countries.
Freedom is not new; in the form of local self-government it
existed long before the rise of the kings, tyrants, and nobles,
by whom it was afterwards destroyed or much reduced. The
“village” of the Aryan nations was, in fact, a small republic,
and that form of local government existed in all the countries
from India to England. To this day the “village republic”
underlies, in very many countries, the Governments which have
passed over it, and which are more visible to the world.
Again, communism in respect of goods held in common, has
never been very widely spread in the world, but a sort of
communism in land is, in fact, a very old, and a very wide-
spread, if not a universal institution. The land is shared by
the people, the village communities to which I have alluded, as
small free republics. In this village system the land is so far
common that it is the right''of all the members of the com-
munity, but it is not absolutely held and cultivated in common.


The arable land is divided for convenience of cultivation, while
the common lands and other rights are enjoyed by the whole
community. In the cultivated land the common right is long
maintained by a system of periodical repartition. It is not till
a later stage in the history of the village communes that we come
to more fixed individual property. Where individual property is
recognised, there is a tendency to the gradual growth of ine-
quality, and the law-givers of old were very careful to guard
against this inequality, as an evil, by providing for a periodical
return of the land to the original owners. Such an arrangement
was the year of Jubilee, by which the Jewish lands were restored
to the people, and inequalities were redressed at the end of
certain fixed periods.
The system of village government is, as I have said, repub-
lican; there is a council of elders, with a sort of executive
committee of management, within the village.
There is another form of communism which we find in many
countries, viz., that of the family. This communistic family often
extends to two or three generations. The land seems to be actually
cultivated by the family in common, and even the earnings ot
members of the family outside the commune, from professions or
other sources, are brought into the common stock. Such a
family system is now in existence in many parts of India, and
also in parts of Russia, and in Servia, and other such Slavonic
countries.
Under the old village system the unearned increment of the
land, the rent as we now call it, forms the state fund, from which
the burdens of common defence are borne and common expenses
are derived. All over the East this is still the existing arrange-
ment ; the burdens of the state are apportioned upon the holders
of the land.
The village communities did, in truth, carry the lamp of


freedom through many of the dark ages of tyranny to the pre-
sent day. They exist throughout the greater part of India, and
in other countries of Asia, as well as in the greater part of
Europe. In most of these countries, however, successive waves
of conquest have given rise to inequalities of condition, and
probably on race divisions are founded the systems of castes,
&c., which have prevailed in many countries. We sometimes
speak of caste as if it were peculiar to India; but, in fact,
European caste feelings, though not in the same shape, have
been almost as strong. The feudal system was developed by
conquering peoples, and by a conquering caste the free villagers
have too often been reduced to the condition of serfs ; but under
that system the lords so much depend on the support of their
followers and subjects, that there is much to limit the oppression
of the inferior holders of the land. It is in another stage that
kings, claiming to hold by Divine right, have established standing
armies and a more complete subjection of the people. They
have generally succeeded in reducing the political rights of the
nobles, but they have turned these nobles from feudal office-
holders into owners of property, have taken away from the people
the sacred right of rebellion, and rendered the condition of the sub-
ject races more deplorable than ever. Still, through it all, the village
communities have generally more or less survived in all countries
except England. They have been subjected to heavy burdens,
but the land has been left in their hands. In Southern countries
the burdens imposed upon them have generally been a share
of the produce or money; in Northern countries these burdens
have generally taken the shape of labour supplied to the lord
for the cultivation of his own lands. In the West of Europe and
in India the communities have generally, to some degree, divided
their holdings permanently amongst individuals, retaining only
certain rights in common. In other countries, notably in Russia,


no such division has taken place, and the land has continued to
be held as common property, and re-divided from time to time
among the male members of the community. In very recent
days the serfs have generally been emancipated in consequence
of the march of civilisation and enlightenment, and in that case
it has been found that, slaves though they were, they still had
rights in the land; in releasing them from their servitude, a
share of the land has been assigned to them. In Prussia, in
Russia, and in other countries of Europe, that has been the case.
It might have been supposed that in the times when the free
peoples were gradually subjected to a harsh serfdom, Christianity
would have intervened to mitigate their condition, but unfor-
tunately it has too often happened that the heads of the Christian
Church have allied themselves with kings and tyrants, and have
become preachers of submission rather than protectors of the
people. From the earliest days down to our time, when in
Constantinople Christian patriarchs and exarchs preach to their
flocks the cause of the Turks, that has unhappily been the case ;
only in Scotland and in some other small countries has the
Christian Church embraced the cause of freedom.
In the East another religion, that of Mahomet, has exercised
a more direct influence upon the institutions of the people who
have come under its power. Mahomet wholly rejected the system
of castes, and maintained in a very practical way the equality of
man. The Mahomedan religious laws, too, put very much restraint
upon the unbridled power of the rulers. Under the earlier
Mahomedans—the Arabs—the principles of the Mahomedan
religion were really carried into practice, and great results were
achieved in many Mahomedan-ruled countries, both in the East
and in the West. The personal serfage of the people has
generally been abolished by Mahomedan rulers, and to this day
such serfage is little found in any of the countries of Asia. The


Turks and Mongols, who succeeded to the Mahomedan power,
were very far inferior to the Arabs; but the Mongols, conquering
countries formerly inhabited by Persians, acquired much of the
Persian civilisation, and when they came to rule an inferior race
in India their rule was not without many good points. Similarly
the Turks, when they conquered the Greek Empire, availed them-
selves of much of the civilisation of the Greeks, at a time when
there was little civilisation in Europe beyond the Greek pro-
vinces. It was probably to the arts and sciences obtained from
the Greeks that the Turks owed much of their organisation and
power in Europe. They have not been able to sustain that
position. They have themselves gone back very much, and have
become effete, while superior races have grown up around them,
and even under them.
While the Mahomedan laws maintained and carried into
practice the equality of all men who accepted the Mahomedan
religion, it was an essential condition of these laws that there
could be no equality for those who did not accept the Mahomedan
religion; and the social institutions of the Mahomedans being
entirely different from those of the Christians, a great gulf was
established between the races, so that to this day the Turks have
remained, as I have put it, but encamped in Europe, ruling over
the races which were subjected by them.
The Turkish system in the early part of the present century
was a sort of feudal system. Sultan Mahmoud made a great
change by putting down the Janissaries and the feudal lords,
establishing a standing army, and making himself an absolute
sovereign. Except in the semi-detached province of Bosnia, he
carried out this process, and his reforms have so far been
beneficial to the Turkish provinces that they have got rid of land-
lords, and of the excessive exactions and tyrannies of those local
despots. The village communities remain, no doubt much
B


reduced and weakened by centuries of tyranny and oppression,
but still alive, and the lords have been removed. The villagers
have thus come to be practically for the most part the owners of
their own land, subject to the exactions of the Turkish Govern-
ment. In comparatively recent years the landlords of Bosnia
having rebelled, the Turkish Government very much reduced
their power, and enfranchised the serfs of Bosnia, but they did not
give to the enfranchised serfs there a share of the land, as has
been done in Prussia and Russia. The tenants have remained
subject to the caprices and exactions of the landlords, and their
last state has been almost as bad as their first. Their condition
has given rise to the Bosnian rebellion, which has led to the
present difficulties in Turkey.
Another change in the condition of things in Turkey resulted
from the Crimean War. The nations of Western Europe having
then freed the Turks from the fear of Russian conquest, proposed
to institute a new era in Turkey, under which that country was to
become strong enough, to defend itself, and good enough to
obviate the discontent of its subjects. Unfortunately the idea of
defence against Russia prevailed over the other object—the
security of the people; the one was cared for, and the other was
neglected. The sultan was no doubt encouraged to emancipate
himself from the Mahomedan laws, and to pass laws of his own,
which were supposed to confer all sorts of benefit on his people;
but in reality the benefits were forgotten, and the absolute uncon-
trolled power of the sultan remained. The money of England
and other European countries was freely offered to the sultan, to
enable him to make himself strong and respected. He took the
money, and he made himself strong, but certainly not respected.
A strong army and navy he no doubt got up; but for the rest,
having destroyed all local government in the provinces, he ruled
despotically through a bureaucracy the most corrupt, and at the


same time the most vain and pretentious, in the world. No
mistake can be greater than to suppose that the Turkish Govern-
ment has now no sufficient power in its own provinces ; in fact,
that government is at present one of the most centralised in the
world. Every vestige of independence has been put an end to
the country is governed by officials constantly moved from place
to place. In one sense the government is something like our
government of India acting by its civil servants; in other respects
nothing can be more unlike. To govern tolerably through a
bureaucracy, that bureaucracy must be very strong and good; a
bad bureaucracy is the worst of all governments. Now this
Turkish bureaucracy is, in truth, inconceivably bad. Under the
most superficial varnish of French polish and civilisation, it
contains in itself almost all the evils of which such a system is
capable. It is recruited, without regard to merit, by the most
corrupt and corrupting methods. Offices are shamelessly sold
and bought, and in order to have a greater profit from such
selling and buying, officials are continually changed; so that the
whole administration is but a succession of corrupt locusts, who
succeed one another, and more and more suck the life-blood of
the provinces. As the Turks become weaker and more effete,
and the Christians more numerous, better, and stronger, the ruling
pashas find the greater necessity of guarding in the hands of the
Turks alone the power which will enable them to continue the
tyranny which they now exercise. As is well known, the Christians
are deprived of all arms and means of defence, and an inferior
race rules over them with a rod of iron. Amid all this evil,
°ne good thing only remains—the traces of the old local govern-
ment, which I commenced this paper by describing. The villages
are to some extent administered by their elders and village
councils. In the counties and districts there is some little form,
but unfortunately there is scarcely any substance, of local govern


ment I have then believed that Lord Derby adopted the
thoroughly right view when he set forth his plan of redressing the
evils of Turkey by a development of local government. At
present the state of things is really the worst possible. An inferior
race, of an inferior religion, inferior in numbers, inferior in intellect,
inferior in all economic arts, rules over great provinces by means
of the bureaucratic system which I have described, with the aid
of a great army and navy furnished by European money, a
Mahomedan police, and a Mahomedan population armed by
the government —little useful for industrial purposes, but who
form a garrison to keep down the Christians. I have expressed
the belief that these evils can best be cured by a development of
the system of local government, of which traces still exist in the
country; and I think I am fortified in this belief by the history of
those provinces of Turkey which have already achieved a semi-
independence, and the full administration of their own affairs
—I particularly allude to Servia and Roumania. Now, these
countries have, in one way, profited by the subjection to Maho-
medan rule which they suffered for so long a period. The
Mahomedans have, for the most part, wiped away the tyrannical
rule of the native aristocrats and landlords, and thus by destruc-
tion, if not by construction, the Mahomedan rule has gone far
to prepare for free government. The local aristocracy being
destroyed or weakened, the people of Servia and Roumania
have gradually established a system of government of their own.
Both their government and the tenure of their land is of a free
and popular character. Servia, but a short time back, was in a
very reduced and apparently barbarous condition. Many people
supposed that it was incapable of self-government; but starting
from the government of the village by a compact body of small
village landholders, in a marvellously short time Servia has
attained to an efficient government. From all I could learn when


I visited that part of the world, I am convinced that Servia has
become of recent years a remarkable instance of successful free
government; her people are peasant proprietors, with very few ot
a landless class amongst them; and those peasant proprietors
governing themselves have established a free government and
state. True it is that popular government is sometimes attended
with some mistakes and drawbacks. We have heard that the
Servians, jealous of the Jews, have passed laws restricting the
settlement of Jews among them; no doubt very unfair and very
foolish. But, after all, they have done no more—in fact, they have
done not nearly so much—against the Jews as people of our
blood have done against the Chinese in California and Australia;
and we can hardly on that ground too strongly condemn the
Servians.
Roumania, again, which but a few years ago was supposed
incapable of self-government, is now one of the best and most
progressive countries in Europe. Like Servia, its government is
very free, and very democratic; but it is a well-regulated and a
sensible democracy, against which also no worse things can be
alleged than a foolish jealousy of the Jews, which will probably
soon be got over.
I am afraid I must say that the emancipated province of
Greece is not so favourable an instance of self-government; but
what failure there has been in Greece is, I think, principally due
to the neglect of village institutions and local government. The
country is too small and too poor, and the upper classes are too
ambitious. Still I believe that the evils of the government of
Greece are very much exaggerated by those who are hostile to it.
Greece has no doubt had very many difficulties and many evils
to contend with, but I believe that she is overcoming them.
Brigandage is not now what it was; the government is altogether
better regulated, and only a more complete development of the


system of local institutions is wanting to make the government of
Greece really free and really popular.
Now we come to the greatest neighbour of Turkey—l mean
the Russian Empire. The name of Russia has been hateful to
very many in this country. It is not only disliked by our aris-
tocratic class, who view it with jealousy as an Asiatic power,
but it has also been disliked —and very justly disliked —by the
people of this country as a despotic and a tyrannical power, which
has deprived its own subjects of the semblance of freedom,
which has ruled over them by tyrannical means, and which has
subjected the peoples conquered by the Russian armies to still
greater tyrannies and oppressions. Now, there is no doubt that
these prejudices against Russia were exceedingly well founded.
Down to the time of the Emperor Nicholas nothing could be
worse than the government and institutions of Russia. Russia
is, in fact, an Oriental power; and it has governed with all the
vices of the Oriental despotism, while the people were reduced
to a miserable serfage such as we seldom find in the East. The
despotic government was maintained by a bad bureaucratic
system, involving most of the evils which I have described in the
Turkish system. To this day the instruments of government in
Russia are notoriously corrupt, and that corruption is the great
difficulty with which the best reformers of Russia have to contend.
We may well believe, too, that the tyrannies of the unrefonned
Russian government over the Poles and other subject nations
have been exceedingly great. It was natural and right that we
should regard with extreme jealousy the aggression of such a
power as I have described, and think it important that it should
not be extended over countries not previously subjected to its
sway. But then we must carry our information upon these
subjects down to the present day; we must pay attention to the
great changes which have been made in Russia under the present


emperor. We all know that the emperor has effected the
emancipation of the serfs, and, as I have already said, in emanci-
pating them has even given them a share of the land. In this
change, however, some very peculiar circumstances have come
out, which I will now attempt to explain to you. Even when
enslaved, the old village communities have managed to maintain
an oppressed and reduced existence. The Russian village com-
mune is, in fact, to this day an institution which gives its whole
tone to the country. I have said that in most countries the
village communes have to a great degree resolved themselves
into individual peasant property, with certain common rights;
in the greater part of Russia this has not been so. Russian
economists are not quite agreed as to the reason why there is so
much more of a real communistic system in Russia than in other
countries; but the best account of the matter seems to amount
to this, that when, in the time of Peter the Great, the Russian
peasantry were reduced to complete serfage, and under Peter
and his [successors the most absolute tyranny was established,
the government, for purposes of revenue, insisted upon laying an
equal obligation of payment to the state upon every male. Every
male being thus obliged to contribute equally to the demands of
the state, it followed that, to enable the people to meet these
demands, the land should also be equally divided, and that
inequalities of individual property should not be permitted to
arise. Consequently, this system being maintained, it has hap-
pened that to this day in most of the Russian village communes
the land is periodically divided in equal shares among the male
members of the community. A division takes place ; each man
cultivates his share ; but a few years later a census of the male
population is again taken ; the land is again thrown into one, and
is again re-divided, so as to give an equal share to each male.
At the same time, although the land is divided, and each in


dividual is responsible for his share to the community, the
community as a whole is responsible to the government for the
whole payment. When the government abolished serfage it was
arranged that the rights of the superior landholders should be
commuted for certain large money payments. These sums were
advanced by the state —or, at least, obligations to represent the
money were created—and handed over to the landlords, while
the government recouped themselves by imposing similar obliga-
tions on the enfranchised communities. The consequence is that
the communities are now subject to a double obligation—first,
for the payment of revenue to the state; and, secondly, for the
payment of the obligations which they have incurred as the price
of their freedom; and each member of the commune is respon-
sible for the whole of these obligations of the commune. Being
so responsible, it is held that he cannot withdraw from the part-
nership which that obligation implies; and it has been said that
the Russian serf has only exchanged serfage to the lord. for
another serfage to the commune. There is a great deal of
exaggeration in this statement, but there is some truth in it. No
doubt the Russian peasant finds that the freedom which he has
gained at the price of heavy pecuniary obligations has not at
once landed him in a rural paradise; but all such changes are
attended with many difficulties, and there is every reason to
believe that the present emperor and his advisers are sincerely
desirous of carrying out to a happy and legitimate conclusion the
great measure of enfranchisement which they have undertaken.
The great question of the present day is whether the communistic
system, under which the land is a common property continually
re-divided among the males of the community, is to be maintained,
or whether, as in most other countries of Europe, a division is to
be made once for all, and individual proprietary rights established.
Many people, who take their ideas of property from those


generally established in Europe, think that the country cannot be
prosperous and progressive till individual property in land is
established by the division of the communal lands among the
peasants. On the other hand, the amount of communism which
the Russian system involves falls in with the views of the modern
socialists of Europe, and there is a very large party who are
strongly in favour of maintaining the communistic system as an
institution of a socialistic character. The actual existence of this
communism in the land in Russia is, then, a reason why socialistic
views are more prevalent in that country than in any other
country in Europe. A great ferment in favour of something
more than freedom is going on in Russia. The country is said
to be permeated and undermined by extremely democratic and
communistic ideas; in fact, it has come to this, that the question
nowadays is whether Russia shall remain a despotism, or become
the most democratic country in the world. The present govern-
ment has to struggle not only against that corruption and rascality
among its instruments which it has inherited from Oriental
sources, but also against that communistic leaven which has
come in from the West, and which, seizing upon the very ancient
and primitive communism of the Russian villages, seeks to intro-
duce socialistic institutions, for which the other countries of
Europe are not yet ripe. It is well known that among the
Russians the most active propagandists of Slav ideas belong to
the democratic party. It is they above all others who cherish the
Pan-Slavonic idea; who, regarding as their brethren the Slav
communities far beyond the limits of Russia, seek to unite the
whole of the Slav countries into a common democratic confedera-
tion. It is the democratic societies who have sent out volunteers
to Servia; and Servia being, as I have said already, a very free
and democratic country, it may well be that the success of
Russian propagandism and the prevalence of Russian influence


in the countries beyond the Danube would, in fact, lead to very
free Slavonic institutions rather than to Russian despotism. So
far as I can leam, I believe that the idea of Pan-Slavism is rather
an artificial than a natural one. It is an idea which was started
by some individual philosopher, and which has taken root and
thriven amongst the Slav peoples. In reality I believe that it is
not better founded than would be the idea of a Pan-Latin or. a
Pan-Teutonic people. There is certainly no greater connection
between the different Slav countries than there is between Italy,
France, and Spain, and scarcely a greater connection than there is
between Germany, Sweden, and England. Russia has absorbed the
greater number of Polish Slavs and some other Slav races here-
tofore separate. But both in Austria and in Turkey there are
very large numbers of Slavs. It is on that account that the ideas
of Pan-Slavism are so hateful to the Austrian and Turkish
governments.
The constitution of Austria itself is very peculiar. I am
altogether in favour of a federal system of government, but then
it must be a regulated federalism in which there is sufficient
independence for local matters of the separate constituents of the
federation, and a sufficient and well-regulated control on the part
of a central body, in which the parts are fairly represented,
and in which no one is unduly predominant. Ido not think
that these conditions are at all attained in the Austrian Empire.
Austria and Hungary do not form a confederation such as that
of the American or even the Swiss states, but are, in fact, two
separate countries united by a very imperfect and insufficient
link, under a system which gives rise to continual difficulties,
such as may any day lead to a complete break-up. Not only is
there difficulty and jarring between the Austrians and the Hun-
garians, but within the kingdom of Hungary itself there is much
ill-feeling between the Slavs and the Hungarians. We now


believe the Austro-Hungarian Government to be the least favour-
able of all the European governments to the development of
free institutions in Turkey; yet it was from the Austrian Slavs
that the Turkish Christians, struggling for freedom, first received
sympathy and support. The position of the Germans in Austria,
in the face of the greater Germany to the north, is now so
precarious that Hungarian influences seem to be predominant
in the councils of the Austrian Empire. The Austrian Govern-
ment itself seems always to have grudged the liberties which
were forced from it by its subjects, and, these liberties not-
withstanding, the Austro-Hungarian system, and especially that
of Hungary, seems to be still aristocratic. It is the fashion to
compare the Austrian and Hungarian nobles and gentlemen to
the same class in England, and to say that this is the only
country in Europe in which people corresponding to our good
old English gentlemen can be found. In truth, the Hungarians
are a sort of ruling squirearchy, not only a ruling caste, like
an English squirearchy, but also a race-caste which I have
already compared to that of the Turks. I think that the
sympathy now expressed by the Hungarians for the Turks is
really founded on a considerable similarity of political position.
The Turks and Hungarians alike find themselves a dominant
minority ruling over subject races anxious to throw off their
yoke. In the Hungarian kingdom the Slavonic provinces have
a certain separate organisation of their own, and a moderate
amount of Home Rule; but for more important matters they
send delegates to the Hungarian Parliament, where they form
but a small minority, and are something in the position of the
Irish Home-Rulers in the British Parliament. In this position
they seem to be very discontented and aggrieved. The insti-
tutions of the south Slavs being, as I have said, very democratic,
the Austro-Hungarian Government are especially afraid of the


bad example of freedom, and exceedingly disinclined to encourage
anything like real freedom in the Turkish provinces adjoining
their frontier. That is the real secret of the jealousy of the
Austro-Hungarian Government, under the direction of a Hun-
garian statesman, towards any successful movement of the
Christians in Turkey against their oppressors; and that attitude
this government maintains, nothwithstanding the intense sym-
pathy of its own Slav subjects for their oppressed brethren.
To understand the complications of this situation we must
realise how completely the South Slavonic peoples in Turkey and
Austro-Hungary are absolutely the same race. The language
of the Servians and Bosnians on one side, and that of the
Slavonians, Croatiaus, and Dalmatians, is nearly identical; the
character and the institutions of the people are equally similar ;
they are only divided by an artificial political line, and on
both sides there is a great disposition to efface that line, and
to unite into a single South Slavonic federation. At first
sight it might seem that Austro-Hungary might encourage
this feeling in the hope of adding North-western Turkey to
her own dominions; but if this should take place, the Slavs
under the Hungarian king would be so strong as to endanger
the dominion of the Hungarians, already a minority in their
own country. It is for that reason that the Hungarians are
bitterly opposed, not only to the freedom of their neighbours,
the Turkish Christians, but also to any project for annexing
Turkish provinces to their own country.
The Bulgarians, differing much in language and character
from the south Slavs above described, and also differing in this,
that they belong to the Greek form of Christianity, while most of
the south Slavs are Roman Catholics, it is not likely that the
Bulgarians would be included in any mere South Slavonic con-
federation. But another suggestion has been made. It has been


said that race influences and religious influences may be out-
weighed by political affinities and practical interests, in cases in
which the races are really not very widely divergent. Switzerland
is a remarkable instance of this state of things. As you probably
know, the Swiss people are by no means of one race, nor of one
religion, but are composed of various cantons —French, German,
and Italian, some Protestant and some Catholic; yet by force
of circumstances they have been combined into a federation,
which has lasted hundreds of years, and has defended itself
successfully against the great powers of Europe. Leaving aside,
then, the intricate questions connected with the Austrian Empire,
it has been suggested that most of the Christian provinces
now under the dominion of the Turks might eventually form
a kind of Eastern Switzerland, in the sense of a federation
of states similar to the Swiss Federation, but not so varied in
its elements. The components of such a federation might be
Servia, Bosnia, Herzegovinia and Montenegro, Bulgaria, either
united or forming two separate states, and Roumania. Bulgaria,
it has been shown, while differing from, has still much in common
with, Servia and Bosnia. In Servo-Bosnia the Greek Christians
would be the great majority, the Catholics but a small minority.
The Roumanians, again, though a Latinised people, have probably
much Slav blood, and their institutions and habits are in many
respects similar to those of the Slavs. They also are of the Greek
religion. Isolated as they are from the other Latin races, and not
strong enough to form an independent power, it might well be for
their interest to federate with the Bulgarians and south Slavs.
Such a federation as I have described would comprise twelve or
fourteen millions of people; or if some day the Hungarian and
some other Wallachs can be added, fifteen or sixteen millions of
people. If such an arrangement should ever take place, the
Greeks would be left with a much smaller population; but they


might probably make up for it by genius, energy, commercial
aptitude, and great maritime power. They would be possessed
not only of Greece, but of Epirus, Thessaly, part of Macedonia,
the whole of the islands of the Egean, including Crete and Cyprus,
and possibly one day of Constantinople and the countries between
that and Adrianople, with the tracts on the coast of the Egean.
The Turks, ceasing to be dominant in Europe, might still form a
good, peaceable, and even industrious population there, scattered
amongst the Christian communities; while in Asia they would
still remain a considerable people, no longer in a false position,
ruling over races, which they are ill-fitted to rule, but governing
themselves by the light of Midhat Pacha’s new constitution.
Under such circumstances, in a country really their own, I believe
that they might be a highly respectable and amiable people, and
that their religion would not interfere with a very considerable
amount of civilisation and prosperity.
There would still remain the difficulties of the non-Turkish
dominions in Asia, Probably any weakening of the power of
the Turks would immediately lead to an attack by the Persians
on Mesopotamia, which contains their sacred places, to a revolt
of the Arabs, and to a difficulty in controlling the Kurds and
other races. The position of Armenia, too, would be difficult to
settle. Probably, however, these things would settle themselves ;
we can hardly attempt here to look to the future in so distant a
part of the world.
Before such things as I have foreshadowed can come about,
the Eastern Question will probably trouble us a great deal.
Geographically the countries of which I have been treating are
no doubt far from our island, but we have already mixed ourselves
up in these affairs very much, and, great Asiatic power as we are,
the feelings of so many people in this country have become so
involved in the question that it is scarcely possible that we should


leave it alone. In its management some of our highest interests
are, no doubt, involved; it may lead us into war, it may lead us
into vast expenditure. Mr. Gladstone has truly said that the
people of this country are necessarily very ignorant of these com-
plicated and difficult questions; but affecting us as they do, and
likely as they are to continue to claim our attention till they are
settled, it is very desirable that we should study them as well as
we can, and try to obtain the best knowledge of them possible.
It is in the hope that I may have contributed a little to this
knowledge that I have ventured to describe the races and the
institutions of those Eastern countries so far as I have been able
to understand them.




Cije (©astern (Question association.
PAPERS ON THE EASTERN QUESTION
No. 8.
THE SCLAVONIC PROVINCES
OF THE
OTTOMAN EMPIRE.
ADDRESS AT HAWARDEN.
BY THE
Right Hon. W. E. GLADSTONE, M.P.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION ASSOCIATION,
28, CANADA BUILDING, WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL PETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris &• New York.
18 77-




THE SCLAVONIC PROVINCES OF THE
OTTOMAN EMPIRE.
ADDRESS AT HAWARDEN.
On January 16th, the Right Hon. \V. E. Gladstone gave a reading
in the schoolroom at Hawarden, founded on Miss Muir Mackenzie’s
and Miss Irby’s work on “The Slavonic Provinces of the Ottoman
Empire.” The room was crowded from door to door. Amongst the
company were Mrs. W. E. Gladstone, Miss Gladstone, the Rev. S. E.
Gladstone, and Mr. W. H. Gladstone, M.P.
Mr. Gladstone said : —My friends and neighbours; My object in
addressing you this evening is not to meddle, even for a moment, with
any portion of the political questions that at this moment deeply
interest the country. I do not mean to say that my subject has no
bearing upon those questions, because everything that relates to the
interior state of Turkey and the condition of the Government there
may be said to have an indirect bearing upon them. But I shall not say
a word which can be understood to belong properly to the province
of English politics. My object really is to give a little information,
and I will tell you why. I think that, as a general rule, the English
people feel that it is difficult enough to understand their own affairs,
much less those of other people ; and that is the principle upon which
1 have always been very much disposed to act. I have invariably held,
and have often contended in Parliament, that this nation and its Govern-
ment were already overweighted, and that we had undertaken more
responsibilities than we could properly discharge. Consequently, I
always regret any measure, from whatever quarter it comes, that
tends unnecessarily to increase our responsibilities; but that is no
reason why we should flinch from responsibilities that have been
already incurred, when they amount to honourable engagements ;
and undoubtedly we have incurred responsibilities in the nature of
honourable engagements with respect to Turkey. We have meddled
m the affairs of the East —whether from motives of policy, whether
from motives of philanthropy, whether for the preservation of the


public order of Europe, or upon whatever ground—we have, as you
know very well to your cost, taken an important and active part in
former years in the affairs relating to the Government of Turkey. We
have, in truth, I may say, set up Turkey upon her legs. The proba-
bility is that she would not be upon her legs at this moment but for
the powerful assistance which, in conjunction with France, we rendered
to her, and which it was very doubtful whether France would have
undertaken to render if she had stood alone. Consequently, con-
sidering the grievous complaints that are made, and the horrors that
occur, it becomes a matter of great importance to us in the discharge
of our responsibilities to know something about the interior state of
Turkey. It is extremely difficult for us to know the state of our own
country. We know it but very imperfectly, although we have the
assistance of a Press which is organised to the very highest degree, and
although we have the aid which we derive from the invaluable privilege
of public discussion, inherited from our forefathers, and never more
valued than at present. In Turkey, on the other hand, we are dealing
with a country in a state that is in some respects semi-barbarous, and in
some respects worse than barbarous—meaning by the term barbarous
a country in a very early stage of social progress. We are, therefore,
in some difficulty, because we have duties to discharge, and we are
not amply provided with the means of discharging them.' The
consequences of this are to be seen and felt by us all in our different
positions. I can assure you that I, as a public man, having perhaps
opportunities of information superior to the average, have to lament
very deeply the insufficiency of my own information. For the last six
months I have laboured almost unceasingly to increase it; but I still
feel that it is very defective. My desire this evening is to do some-
thing, as far as time permits, towards providing my hearers with a
clearer view of the interior condition of Turkey than is commonly
possessed at present, and likewise to do something towards bringing
home to the public mind that which is by many most strongly felt —
namely, that down to the ‘present moment, in the case of the people,
in the case even of statesmen, aye, and very often in the case of
travellers, who went to the East and who came back lamentably
deficient of information, we all have been too much in the dark as
to the real state of affairs.
I have chosen as the principal source of what I shall say this night,
the Work of two English ladies. It may seem a little strange that
two ladies should undertake the task of travelling through a country
like Turkey; but these two ladies were persons of great courage and
intelligence, and likewise imbued with feelings of great philanthropy ;
and one of them (Miss Irby) has devoted years of her life, and is
at this moment devoting herself, to the highly important and laudable
purpose of the extension of education in some of the Turkish provinces.


The other, Miss Mackenzie, has been cut off in her honourable career
by death. I have no hesitation in saying that the book I have chosen
is, as far as I know, the very best that can be obtained upon the
interior condition of part of Turkey. They devoted themselves
morning, noon, and night to see with their own eyes, and hear
with their own ears, and consider with their own minds and hearts
the condition of the country. That was the purpose for which they
went there. Another reason why I take their book is that it has not
been produced amid the somewhat heated conditions of the last six
or twelve months. It was published nine or ten years ago; but
the state of things which it described was a state of things which
undoubtedly has not mended. It has decidedly, and that I think by
general confession, grown worse, and not better, in the most essential
points, within that time.
So much, then, for the book to which I am about to refer; but still it
is necessary that I should say a few words to assist you in understanding
the very peculiar and unexampled condition of the Turkish govern-
ment, and the Turkish race in the European provinces of the Ottoman
Empire. lam going to limit myself to a very small portion of the
Turkish Empire. The whole dominion has a population of 40,000,000,
and not only so, but it is composed of a great multitude of
countries differing very much in their political relations to Turkey,
and all of them, I am afraid, having only this in common —that
wherever they are directly under the Government of the Porte, they
are under an incredibly bad government. The best-conditioned of
them by far are those who, although they pay tribute to the Porte,
and maintain a certain mildly-developed connection with it, yet in the
main have the management of their own affairs. To-night we have
to deal with a very small portion indeed of the Turkish Empire.
These ladies have described principally the northern part of Mace-
donia, the country lying immediately round the southern and western
parts of Servia, and also Montenegro. Now, the Turkish Govern-
ment is a government without any parallel, so far as I know, in the
world. It is a government established by conquest, and in that
respect it is exceedingly like a great many other governments that
have been established by conquest. For example, the Norman
Government was established in England by conquest, and was main-
tained for a certain time by force, and for a time there was a great
inequality between a man who was a Norman by birth in England, and
the condition of a man who was a Saxon, or a Briton, or a Dane by
birth; but all these differences have long ago worn off, and we do
not know whether a man is a Briton, a Jute, a Dane, or a Saxon,
or a Roman, or a Celt; we have all happily settled down into one
homogeneous whole. The case of Turkey is exactly the reverse.
There has been no settling down, no amalgamation. It is with


Turkey, not a case of milk put into tea, which amalgamates with the
tea; it is the case of oil put into water, which will not mix. That may
make intelligible to you the condition of the Turks in regard to their
subject races. They are no more mixed than the oil with the water.
The only qualification which I must make to that saying is this:
when the Turks came into the country they came upon this principle,
that all the populations of the countries that they conquered were to
have the choice between three alternatives. One of them was death,
another was a sort of servitude, in which the Christians now re-
main, and the third was the embracing of the Mahometan religion.
A portion of the Christian population of those countries chose to
embrace the Mahometan creed; and lam sorry to say—for it does not
tell well for the benefit of worldly prosperity on the human heart and
character—that these were almost entirely the wealthy people. They
were the people who had what is called something to lose, who had
what is sometimes spoken of as “a stake in the country.” We sometimes
hear “ a stake in the country” spoken of really as if it invested a man
with special virtues and moral excellences. However that may be, in
Bosnia, Herzegovina, Crete, and Bulgaria, a number of those who had
wealth turned Mahometan to save their property, and have formed a
class by themselves, the Turks being partially, and only very par-
tially, mixed with these Mahometans ; but with the Christian popula-
tion, whether Roman Catholic or belonging to the Eastern Church,
they have not amalgamated at all.
Their government was originally a government of force, and
a government of force it still remains. It is impossible for me
to explain at full length the nature of that government, but it is
as unlike as anything can be to the government of England. That
is something of a beginning towards an explanation. If you con-
sider what is done by our government —I do not mean a particular
administration, but the whole constitution, or rather, the series of
those who administer that constitution—if you consider the aspects
of our own government, you must wipe them all out and put them
away, and then start afresh to consider what the Turkish government
is. The business of our government is to preserve property, to preserve
order, to prevent each man from injuring his neighbour, to promote
education, and knowledge of religion, to guard the sanctity of the
family, and, above all, the sanctity and honour of women. In Turkey
not one of these is guarded; except, to a certain degree for the Turks
themselves and the Mussulmans. For the Christian they are not
guarded; and that is the great and palpable fact which distinguishes
the Turkish government from the English government, and, in its
degree, from every government in Christendom.
The Turkish government, in truth, so far as it has merit, has
it not in what it does, but in what it does not do. When this


conquering race came into Europe they were wonderful as a
conquering race. They had an immense talent as a conquering race,
as a military horde, and they understood right well the business of
conquest, the business of bloodshed, the business of setting themselves
up by force above their fellow-creatures. But, as to the ordinary
arts of government, they neither understand them at all, nor care
one pin about them. At times, in the course of the Turkish history,
plans have been submitted to the Ottoman Porte —which, I believe, is
the proper official name of the Government —for the total destruction
and extermination of the whole of the Christians ; but these plans
have been rejected, and why? Because they said, “No, it is much
better to allow the Christian to pay a ransom for his life. When he
has paid a ransom for his life, he will remain and serve our pur-
poses. He will pay taxes for us ; cultivate the soil for us. He will
have no rights of property. His property will only be that which we
do not want. So much of it as we want will be our property. He
shall remain, therefore, upon these conditions ; and, as to the concerns
of his government, we are not going to bother ourselves as to the
government of inferior animals, such as the populations of those
countries that we have trodden under foot. Let them manage for
themselves, so far as they can do so without interfering with
our objects and purposes. As for their religion, let them shift for
themselves: they have paid their ransom.” The name given to the
Christian population was “Rayahs.” 1 am informed, or at least I
have seen it printed in books, by those who profess to understand
the Turkish language, which I do not, that “ rayah ” means ransomed
—one who has paid a price for permission to live. Whether that be
the meaning of the word or not, it is the essential idea of the con-
dition of the Christians in the Turkish Empire.
This was a state of things which you will easily understand
required radical reform ; and radical reform in Turkey was con-
templated as a sequel to the Crimean War. At the end of the war the
Ottoman Government gave an engagement, perhaps the most solemn
ever contracted, certainly one of the most solemn ever contracted
in the public history of the world—for it was an engagement sealed
in blood and tears—in the blood and tears of many an English-
man and English family—a most solemn engagement to set all this
right, and to establish full civil, religious, social, and legal rights
amongst its subjects. Twenty years of tranquillity followed. Ido not
mean that the Empire was always tranquil. There were, there could
not but be, rebellions, a natural growth in such a case, that cannot be
repressed ; but there was no foreign attack or aggression of any kind
upon the empire. At the end of these twenty years, when the recent
rebellions occurred and the facts were brought more fully to light,
we find that, instead of that engagement’s having been redeemed,


matters appear to be absolutely worse than they were twenty-five
years ago.
Such is the state of things which we approach in this great
question. And I will endeavour now to give you some details
which will open it up to you in a certain degree—l am afraid, in
a very limited degree, because it is far too wide to be embraced in
the time which you can to-night devote to it; but I can show you
that the language which I hold is not the language of persons
with inflamed and heated minds. It is rather a striking fact that
several members of the legal profession, and of great legal authority,
have been writing upon this subject in different parts of the continent
of Europe. I have read three works of this description, one of them
by a German who is the greatest authority on international law of the
present day, another by a Belgian legist of very great ability, and the
third by an Italian Advocate; and I will read an extract from the writings
of the latter to show that, although the language I use might appear
to be extremely strong, yet it is not really stronger than what these
lawyers use. These lawyers make no doubt whatever about the fact
that it is the absolute duty of Europe to look at the condition of
Turkey, and to prevent the continuance of the horrible state of things
that prevails there. The Italian lawyer says that Turkey has never
existed in Europe as a nation, if a state be an organic union of one or
more peoples within defined limits of space, dependent upon a sove-
reign authority for the well-being of those associated in it. It follows
logically that Turkey, as it is constituted, is not to be held as a state.
An organic union of the different peoples constituting Turkey does
not and cannot exist, because the denial of the equality of the sub-
ect in the face of the public authority carries logically, as a conse-
quence, the violation of the sanctuary, of the family, of property, of
religion, of personal existence. The Turk believes in his own
supremacy over other people, and does not hold possible any relations
between them except upon this condition. Lawyers are supposed to
take judicial views of these matters, and such is the language of an
Italian lawyer who has written upon this terrible subject.
I shall now go on to describe the condition of Servia, Bosnia,
and Herzegovina, and those southern and northern parts of Mace-
donia which are inhabited principally by people of the Servian
race and people of Servian sympathies. In former times, the coun-
tries that run along the south of the Danube were occupied by two
kingdoms of considerable power. One of them, the Bulgarian kingdom,
was subdued in the fourteenth century; the other was the Servian
kingdom, and that was subdued at the end of the fourteenth century;
that is, they made themselves vassals of the Turks; but the Turks
very soon trampled them altogether under foot. The conditions
under which they submitted to a Mahometan power were broken:


absolute power was established in the whole of the country, and a large
portion of it still continues under the direct government of the Turks.
But one important portion of it —namely, Servia—has exempted itself
from the direct government. In 1804 a very serious rebellion took
place, and there was a long struggle for liberty, ending in the establish-
ment of that liberty about the year 1829 or 1830 ; and that part of the
country is now called, and is to be regarded as, free Servia. But the
other provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which we have heard so
much talked about, are inhabited by people of Servian race just as much
as Servia itself is. The consequence is that Servia did not stand with
them as a foreign country or a foreign state. A great number of
people thought it very odd that Servia, which was very weak, and had
only a million and a quarter of people, should declare war in the
beginning of last July against an empire of thirty or forty millions like
Turkey. These people said: “What has Servia to do with Bosnia
and Herzegovina? Nothing has been done against Servia.” I can
only explain this by an illustration. Suppose that all England had
been subdued in the same way as all Servia was, and then, that after a
length of time Yorkshire or Wales had made a gallant fight, and had
shaken off the yoke of the conqueror, and established its right to self-
government in its own affairs. Do you think there would be no
sympathy in Yorkshire for the rest of England? and do you not think
that the rest of England would look to Yorkshire to assist them to
recover their liberty ? That is the case with the little state of Servia.
The people of Servia, of Bosnia, and of Herzegovina are the same
people, and have suffered in a common servitude. The people of
Servia have been able to shake off that yoke; the others are still
in servitude, and they look to free Servia as their rallying-point,
and as an indication of what they themselves trust they will come
to be in the future. When travelling in Old-Servia, Misses Mackenzie
and Irby once lodged in the house of Pope Dantcha, a person well
known for his intelligence, courage, and uprightness, and looked up to
as he deserved. “There are here,”he said, “but 200 Christian houses,
and from 400 to 500 Mussulman, so the Arnaouts have it all their
own way. They rob the Christians whenever and of whatever they
please . . . and as the Christians receive no support against
them, no enlightenment nor hope from Constantinople, they naturally
look for everything to Servia.” It is not an incredible thing, therefore,
that this country should rush into a war which its resources were
inadequate to maintain.
I shall now give to you some instances which will show the
Persecution and indignities to which Christians are subjected in
Turkey, and the deplorable condition in which they are placed
by being treated as the inferiors of the Turks. The book I hold
in my hand is Mr. Evans’ “ Through Bosnia and the Herzego


vina,” and the incident I am about to relate is at page 204. Mr.
Evans was occupied in sketching a ruin at a place called Travnik,
when he became unpleasantly conscious of stones falling in his
vicinity. Looking round, he perceived a lad of about fourteen : hard
by were a group of armed Turks, to whom Mr. Evans made signs that
he would be obliged to them to restrain the lad’s proceedings. He
then resumed his drawing, but shortly afterwards a large stone struck
him on the middle of the back ; and this time Mr. Evans, thoroughly
roused, pursued his assailant, who fled for refuge into a neighbouring
house. Meantime one of the Turks above-mentioned came up to
him, shouting “Tursko! Tursko !” meaning, says Mr. Evans, that
the boy, being a Turk, might throw as many stones as he liked
at the cursed Giaour. Mr. Evans returned once more to his
drawing, when the lad, accompanied by two armed Turks, one
on each side, issued forth from his shelter, and the three swag-
gered up to insult the dog of a Christian at their leisure. Seeing
Mr. Evans bent on chastising their protegi, they again shouted
“Tursko! Tursko!” (“He is a Turk! he is a Turk!”), as though
they would bid him lick the dust off the urchin’s feet. He simply
replied, “ Inglese” (“ I am an Englishman ”), and gave the stripling a
hearty box on the ear. The rage of the Turks knew no bounds. For
a moment they were dumb with amazement; then one of them drew
his sword-knife; but before he had time to disentangle it from his
sash, Mr. Evans was on him with his stick—happily a heavy one —and
the coward took to his heels. The other Turk imitated the example
of his comrade ; the boy made off also; and Mr. Evans was left in
possession of the field. He went home and provided himself with a
revolver.
A more terrible story is related at page 312. Mr. Evans had
fallen in with a Belgian engineer, who was erecting a bridge across
the Narenta river. As they were walking along, the engineer
pointed to a part of a maize-plot, where the maize was slightly
trodden down. “Do you see that?” he said; and he then re-
counted to him the following story. A few days ago a young
Herzegovinian Christian was passing through the district, provided
with a Turkish pass, properly visid; but as he was passing by some
booths near the bridge, two Turks—not officials or soldiers of any
kind, but armed nevertheless—came up and demanded his pass.
Though they had no right to ask for it, the young Christian complied,
and handed it to them for their inspection. Thereupon the two
Mahometans, who could not read a syllable, swore that the whole
thing was wrong, and, seizing hold of him, began to drag him along,
crying out to the Christians at the booths that they were taking him
off to the Road Commission : but they had not proceeded far when
they suddenly fell upon him, and hauling him off into the maize,


butchered him with seven blows from their handshars. They then made
off in broad daylight, making their way through the Christians and
others whom the young fellow’s cries were bringing to the scene of the
tragedy—not a soul daring to lay a hand on the murderers, for they
were Turks. The Belgian, coming out from his tent, and finding the
young rayah dying or dead, at once sent for zaptiehs to arrest the
murderers, but of course in vain ; they made no real effort. You will
say, “ How cowardly of the Christians to make no attempt to seize
them; ” but cowardice is one of those vices engendered by a long
course of tyranny that crushes the very heart out of its victims.
Wherever there is a subject and a dominant race, the vices of sub-
jection belong not to the oppressed, but to the oppressor. It is on
those who practise the oppression that the whole responsibility of
these vices devolves. Take the case of negro slavery; it is just the
same thing. We are often told that among negroes lying, stealing,
and every kind of petty fraud and trickery prevail, and that they are
poor debased creatures. But who are responsible for this state of
things ? If those Christians failed to do their duty, as they did fail
in not standing up like men to act against the wrong-doers, the whole
responsibility of their failure of duty and justice belongs to the system
under which they live, and to those who favour and maintain that
system.
There is, in fact, a great deal of resemblance between the system
which prevails in Turkey and the old system of negro slavery. In
some respects it is less bad than negro slavery, and in other respects
a great deal worse. It is worse in this respect, that in the case of
negro slavery, at any rate, it was a race of higher capacities ruling
over a race of lower capacities ; but in the case of this system,
it is unfortunately a race' of lower capacities which rules over a
race of higher capacities. The hinge of both alike was the law of
evidence. Whatever misdeed the master of the slave committed, he
was pretty sure of impunity, because the slave’s evidence against him
could not be received. Now that is the case with the Christians
in the Turkish provinces. It was promised in 1856 that that
should be redressed, and that the Christian’s evidence should be
received. But to this "hour it is not generally received. Here is
a story related by Misses Mackenzie and Irby as taking place at
Ipek:—A Servian woman was taken ill : the master of the house went
out to call assistance, and an Arnaout, who had a grudge against him,
shot him dead. In an evil hour, the Christians of Ipek, knowing the
murderer, denounced him to the kaimakam; and thereupon the
Amaouts seized on another Christian, and declared that he, and not
an Arnaout, was guilty of the deed. Christian evidence going for
nothing against a Mussulman, of course the Servian could not be
cleared. The kaimakam threw him into prison. Months passed, and


at length the prisoner was taken to Prizren to be judged by the Pacha;
but he did not return. Would they (Misses Mackenzie and Irby)
intercede on behalf of the poor Serb? They promised to mention
the story to the first consul they met; more they could not do. The
woman who related the story said, “We do not know who you are,
but ever since your coming was talked of the Amaouts have not dared
to meddle with us : they are quite hushed, and sit so,” and she
crossed her hands over her breast. “Ay,” quoth Katerina (Katerina
Simitch was a schoolmistress —one of the most remarkable persons
they met in Turkey, and the bravest woman they knew anywhere:
her school had been twice broken into by the Arnaouts), “ that is what
they always do when a consul is coming; but they make up for it
afterwards, insulting and tormenting us, and exclaiming, ‘Do not
fancy your turn is come yet.’” With these words they left them,
Katerina leading the way, her companions cowering behind her.
Again, as to evidence:—Three horses which had been hired by the
ladies were stolen when pasturing at night. The men in charge were
Christians, but in order to prove they had been in possession of the
horses over-night, they must call in the evidence of the cavass,
“because his oath, as that of a Mussulman, would be received, and
theirs would not.” This state of things entirely destroys the basis of
civil rights between man and man, and poisons the whole of life with
fear and apprehension. Consequently, of these Servians outside of
“ Free Servia,” there are but few who have courage remaining to hold
up their heads like men.
With regard to the abuse of religion, the grievance is not
altogether at the hands of the Turks. The clergy of these pro-
vinces belong very much to their own people, but their bishops
unfortunately do not. I am sorry to say that the accounts given
of them by the lady-writers from whose work I am quoting are
rather disgraceful accounts. They frequently do not reside in
their diocese. They think a great deal more about fleecing their
flocks than feeding them. The clergy are called popes, and they
appear to be closely attached to the people, and the people reciprocate
their attachment. Misses Mackenzie and Irby found the people eager
purchasers of the Bibles, or such portions of the Bible, as they had
with them. For instance, at Velesa they sold all their store —especially
the Old Testaments, of which the few books already translated into
modern Bulgarian were bound together in volumes at as. 6d. apiece;
and the priest was quite cross with them because they had not brought
a larger supply. Again, at Prizren they gave Pope Kosta their last
Servian Testament, little anticipating how welcome the gift would
prove. He received the book without appearance of pleasure, and
took it home with him ; but next morning he reappeared radiant,
together with his wife and another relative. He said that he had


begun reading to the women, and, having found that the language
was such as they commonly used, the words came home to them
familiarly as never in the Church-Slavonic version. They had sat up
till late, poring over the book, and now the pope was going forth into
the villages to read it out to all the people.
I have now endeavoured to describe to you, by the light of these
books of travels, the general state of the Christian provinces of
Turkey; but I must still say a little on the subject of Monte-
negro, which is an extraordinary subject. The history is briefly
this: —A portion of the Slav inhabitants of the northern part of
Albania, near the Adriatic Sea, were conquered by the Turks
in the fifteenth century; but a number of them were determined
not to accede to any of the three alternatives which were usually
given—that is to say, either to be put to death, or to be ransomed
by paying tribute, or to become Mussulmans. Instead of submitting
to any of these conditions, they journeyed to a remarkable group of
mountains, very high and very difficult of access. That was in 1485,
and they remained under the prince who led them, and under his son,
until 1516, when a very curious circumstance happened, and a state
of things occurred that I believe was entirely without example. In
1516 their sovereign retired because he wanted an easier life;
because you must bear in mind that for the sake of their religion
and their freedom this people abandoned everything else that could
make life happy and desirable. They abandoned property; they
went up to an inhospitable climate, with very limited means of
subsistence, to maintain a desperate, struggle against the whole
power of the Ottoman race. They carried on the struggle with
very little aid and almost without intermission for 400 years, and
this remarkable people are there still, and it is to be observed
in the course of the last six months that while the Turks boasted
that they had beaten the Servians and 3,000 or 4,000 Russian
volunteers who aided them, there has not been a Russian volunteer
with the Montenegrins; Theirs is a population of 120,000 or 140,000,
and in every case they have beaten the Turks. (Cheers.) The
Montenegrins have had nothing to fight with, for the most part, except
old-fashioned weapons which no other nation would look at. They
have no cavalry, no artillery, and if ever they had cannon brought
into action, those cannon they had taken from the Turks. With all
these disadvantages, and in spite of the vast numbers that were brought
against them, on every occasion they have beaten the Turkish forces,
and at this moment they are blockading one of the Turkish towns called
Nistics, about which there was a question raised in connection with
the armistice. In 1516, when their lay sovereign retired, what do you
think he did ? He made the government of the country over to the
bishop. A succession of bishops governed that country, and led the


people in their desperate struggle, standing between life and death
almost without intermission for 336 years. These bishops were warriors.
Every priest in Montenegro was and is a warrior. They wore the dress
of the country, and wore arms like the rest of the people. It would be a
very extraordinary thing, you might think, to see the rector and curates
of Hawarden going about with arms in their hands ; but you must
consider the circumstances in which these Montenegrin priests were
placed. It has been a deadly conflict between life and death from
day to day, and from year to year; and at no period during the whole
of these many generations had the people been permitted to lay aside
the terrible habits which were connected with a constant conflict of
blood between different races of mankind. Their object had been to
maintain their freedom and religion. Everything else they lost when
they went into the hills. Their leader summoned them together, and
made them take a solemn oath on the New Testament to abide true
to their faith and nation, and rather die than accept terms with the
infidel. Whoever broke that oath was to be invested with a
apron—(laughter)—and hooted from the ranks of men. You laugh; but
you would hardly believe the respect which these people had and have
for women. These women did hard labour—the severe conditions of
their life required it—and these women were sometimes keen and eager
to go into the fight under the circumstances in which they lived. But
the honour of a woman is never broken, and the purity and chastity of
that people is something marvellous. We may hear people talk of
their superstition and ignorance. They may have superstitions, and
they may be ignorant in many things ; but in many points of the
Christian law they will put us all to shame. And these ladies (Miss
Mackenzie and Miss Irby) inform us that if a traveller wanted to go
through Montenegro, and to be perfectly secure from incivility as well as
violence, the only thing he had to do was to get an unprotected woman
of the country to go with him, and her protection would carry him
safely through. Nay, we learn from the work of the two ladies, that
in Montenegro all unchastity is punished with death. I have spoken
of the cowardice and unmanliness and effeminacy of character which
undoubtedly taints some of the unhappy subjects of Turkey. There
is none of that effeminacy, but there has been a certain taint of
cruelty, in Montenegro. The practice of the Montenegrins when
they took Turks in battle was to cut off their heads and exhibit
them on their battlements. It will be said that this was very
savage, but you will understand it when I tell you something which
is, perhaps, more startling still. When Montenegrins went into
battle together, and one of them was so wounded that he could not
be removed, it was the duty of the other, especially if he were his
brother or his friend, to cut off his head. Why? To save him from
the tortures, the foul insults and disgrace, to which he, whilst living,


would have been exposed at the hands of the Turks. No doubt
this is a wild and awful state of manners, but if the people are
driven to this state of things, it is the oppressors who are responsible
for it. It is idle for the oppressors to complain of conduct of this sort,
because, the more they prove, the more they establish the ground of
condemnation against themselves. lam glad to say that in recent
times great efforts have been made to do away with this ferocity of
character. The Montenegrins still maintain their military valour, but I
do not believe that many excesses, if any, have been established against
them in the present war. For two generations great pains have been
taken by their sovereigns, and I believe with much of success, to establish
peace and order and good government among them, and the repre-
sentation of Miss Mackenzie and Miss Irby is that life and property
are far more secure in Montenegro at this time than they are in
Turkey, and that in the year preceding their visit the whole number
of offences committed in the territory was but two. The patron saint
of Montenegro is St. Peter; known in his lifetime as Vladika Peter I.
He died in 1830, after a long reign of fifty-three years. This is what
•these ladies say about him. Ask a Montenegrin what St. Peter did
for Montenegro, and he tells you —“ There are still with us men who
lived under St. Peter’s rule, heard his words, and saw his life. For
fifty years he governed us, and fought and negotiated for us, and
walked before us in pureness and uprightness from day to day. He
gave us good laws, and put an end to the disorderly state of the
country. He enlarged our frontier, and drove away our enemies.
Even on his death-bed he spoke words to our elders which have kept
peace among us since he has gone. While he yet lived, we swore by
his name ; we felt his smile a blessing, and his anger a curse. We do
so still.” Since that time, one of their leading princes was assassi-
nated beyond the limits of Montenegro by a fellow of bad character.
The event had no connection with politics, and no connection, happily,
with the Turk. The people went into mourning for him, and the
mourning must have been real, for the ladies said, “ It is more than a
year since the whole population went into mourning, but there are
still no signs of its being laid aside,” and in another passage: “ The
secretary told us that for eight weeks after the late prince’s death the
chapel was filled day and night with people lamenting over his grave,
a nd not women alone, but huge sunburnt warriors, weeping like
children.” These Montenegrins are an extraordinary race, both
mentally and physically. I have never seen but one, and that was in
the island of Corfu, about twenty years ago. He was one of the most
magnificent men that I ever met with —very young, very simple in
manner, largely armed even in Corfu, a thoroughly peaceful country,
and perfectly well-behaved. He made a very deep impression on me.
With respect to the character of the race to which he belonged, they


are in truth a race of heroes; and though their history has drawn very
little attention, and though I am far from denying it has dark spots
in it, because, as I have said, the spirit of ferocity in fonner times
prevailed to a considerable extent among them, yet their heroism, the
sacrifices they have made, their noble constancy, will secure to them,
in my opinion, to the latest times, a name far more illustrious than
that which will belong to nations and states and peoples infinitely
greater in the eyes of this world, and according to the common
measure of human judgment.
In conclusion, let me say I have had to use very hard words
about the Turks. I have hardly said a good word for them, ex-
cept that their soldiers are brave and sober, but let me say this to
cover the whole. The Turks are what circumstances have made
them, and depend upon it that if a lot of us were taken and put in
their circumstances we, either individually or as a race, would soon
cease to do even the limited credit to the Christian name that we now
bring to it. They exercise a perfectly unnatural domination over their
fellow-creatures ; and arbitrary power is the greatest corrupter of the
human mind and heart. There is nothing that can withstand it
Human nature requires the restraint of law. There is, unfortunately,
no restraint of law in Turkey, and in the sight of God and man, much
as these Christians are to be pitied, perhaps the Turks, who are the
victims of that system, are to be pitied still more. The very worst
things that men have ever done have been done when they were
performing acts of violence in the name of religion. That has been
the unfortunate position of the Turks, as a race that not only has
conquered, but has conquered in the sacred name of religion. The
corruption that results from such a system as that is deep and pro-
found. Mahometans, where they manage their own affairs, and have
not got the charge of the destinies of other people, can live in
tolerable communities together, and discharge many of the duties of
civil and social life. In certain cases, as, for instance, in the case of
the Moors of Spain, they have exhibited many great and conspicuous
merits. It is not the fact, that their religion is different from ours,
which prevents them from discharging civil duties. Do not suppose
that for a moment. It is not because they are in themselves so much
worse than we are. God forbid that we should judge them. It is
that this wretched system under which they live puts into their hands
power which human beings ought not to possess, and the con-
sequences are corruption to themselves and misery to those around.
God in his mercy grant that the wisdom and patience and courage of
Christendom may apply an effectual remedy to this state of things.
(Loud applause.)—A vote of thanks was passed to Mr. Gladstone,
and the proceedings terminated.


Cfx Eastern (Question 3soocmtioir.
PAPERS ON THE EASTERN QUESTION.
No. 6.
THE
Promises of Turkey.
BY
ARTHUR ARNOLD,
Knight Commander of the Greek Order of the Saviour; Author of “ From
the Levant “ Through Persia by Caravan&>€. &c, &c.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION ASSOCIATION,
28, CANADA BUILDING. WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL FETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris &• New York .




THE PROMISES OF TURKEY.
For nearly forty years the Government of the Ottoman Empire, at
the instigation of the Powers of Europe, has been making promises to
its subjects—especially to its non-Mussulman subjects. The Hatti-
Sheriff of Gulhane proclaimed on the 3rd of November, 1839, the
establishment of religious equality. Abd-ul-Medjid, then a boy of seven-
teen, had just been placed on the throne of his father, Mahmoud 11.,
and the Empire of Othman was in great danger. Mehemet Ali, the
victorious Egyptian, was advancing towards Constantinople. He had
gained Candia, he was master of a great part of Arabia, he possessed
Syria, and there were many in the capital willing to declare him Sultan
and supreme protector of Islam.
The peril was imminent. The Powers —substantially the same
Powers whose unanimous counsels have now been rejected—inter-
fered, and Mehemet Ali was pressed back to his African dominions,
and forced to confine his sovereignty to the banks of the Nile. But
in thus preserving the dynasty, the Powers demanded from the Sultan
a Magna Charta for the Christians, and this, the result of their first
united act of intervention on behalf of the non-Mussulman subjects of
the Porte, was produced in the Hatti-Sheriff of Gulhane, which, after
setting forth the several concessions, declared that—
“ These Imperial concessions shall extend to all our subjects,
“of whatever religion or sect they may be ; they shall enjoy them
“without exception. We therefore grant perfect security to the
“ inhabitants of our Empire in their lives, their honour, and their
“fortunes.”
The promises of Gulhane were promises and nothing more. Seven


teen years later the .same words were replaced in the mouth of the
same Sultan, and again, of course, at the instance of the Powers.
The white fortresses of Sebastopol then lay crumbled in ruins, the
docks torn with explosions, the Russian arsenals riddled and ruined
with cannon-shot and shells ; the soil of the Crimea had been soaked
with blood. Again the throne of Turkey had been upheld by Western
Powers. The people of England and the people of France knew
little or nothing of the condition of the subjects of the Porte ; their
Governments had never striven to inform themselves concerning the
internal affairs of Turkey. But cruel facts could not be kept hidden
even from men who were quite ready to frown upon those of the
consular body who were resolved to tell the truth. To make the
Peace of Paris without consideration for those who were degraded
and suffering because' of the non-fulfilment of the promises of Gulhane,
would have been an outrage upon common humanity. And thus it
came to pass in 1856, that Sultan Abd-ul-Medjid was invited to give
pledges, which should be guarantees, for the better government of his
subjects. The Hatti-Houma'ioun of 18th of February, 1856, was
addressed to the Grand Vizier A’ali Pasha, who was charged with the
execution of the Sultan’s promises.
In order to make the introduction of the promised reforms
most easy, and to avoid the subordination of the Sultan’s authority,
this Hatti-Houma'ioun was made a part of the general Treaty of
Peace between Great Britain, Austria, France, Prussia, Russia, Sar-
dinia and Turkey, by means of the ninth Article, which was as
follows :
“ His Imperial Majesty the Sultan having, in his constant
“ solicitude for the welfare of his subjects, issued a Firman, which,
“while ameliorating their condition without distinction of religion
“or race, records his generous intentions towards the Christian
“population of his empire, and wishing to give a further proof
“ of his sentiments in that respect, has resolved to communicate
“ to the contracting parties the said Firman, emanating spon-
“ taneously from his sovereign will.”


With regard to this Firman, or Hatti-Houmaioun, it was further
stated in the Treaty that—
“ The contracting Powers recognise the high value of this
“ communication. It is clearly understood that it cannot, in any
“case, give to the said Powers the right to interfere, either
“collectively or separately, in the relation of his Majesty the
“ Sultan with his subjects, nor in the internal administration of
“his empire.”
We return, then, to the promises of the Hatti-Houmaioun of 1856,
which was thus formally introduced to the public law of Europe.
These were the Sultan’s words :
“ I have resolved upon, and I order the execution of the
“ following measures :
“The guarantees promised on our part by the Hatti-Hou-
“ma'ioun of Gulhand, and in conformity with the Tanzimat, to
“ all the subjects of my Empire, without distinction of classes or
“ of religion, for the security of their persons and property, and
“ for the preservation of their honour, are to-day confirmed and
“ consolidated, and efficacious measures shall be taken in order
“ that they may have their full and entire effect.”
Thus were the promises of Gulhane, at the requisition of the
Powers, taken up and reproduced, after seventeen years of neglect.
In this Hatti-Houmaioun of 1836 the Sultan was led to promise
much. His Majesty declared that—
“ All the subjects of my Empire, without distinction, shall be
“ received in the civil and military schools of the Government.”
Twenty-one years after this promise was made — i.e., on the sth of
February, 1877 —there appeared the following announcement in the
Times; —“ An Trade of the Sultan ordains that from henceforth the
children of non-Mussulmans will be admissible into all the military
schools.” The promissory note of 1856 has been thus renewed in
1877.
So far as verbal promise could go, the Hatti-Houmaioun of 1836
dealt fully arid fairly with the military grievance. As to the army,


the Sultan Abd-ul-Medjid declared in that solemn promise to his
subjects and to Europe, that—
“ Christian subjects and those of other non-Mussulman sects
“ shall, as well as Mussulmans, be subject to the law of recruit-
“ ment. ... A complete law shall be published, with as little
“ delay as possible, respecting the admission into and service in
“ the army, of Christian and other non-Mussulman subjects.”
This promise was prefaced with a virtuous flourish, proclaiming
that—
“ The equality of taxes entails equality of burdens, as equality
“ duties entail that of rights.”
Such was the promise of 1856. Twenty years afterwards (about the
usual period for the re-making of Turkish promises) what happened ?
There had been no attempt to put into practice the pledge of 1856 ; it
was a pledge incompatible with Mahommedan supremacy, and therefore
a mere cajolement of the Powers. On the 17th February, 1876, Sir
Henry Elliot wrote to Lord Derby, informing his lordship that the
Bulgarians were showing themselves “ disposed to ask ” that Christians
shall be “ liable to military service.” “ They arc aware,” continued
Sir Henry,
“ That the conscription would in many respects press more
“ heavily upon them than the exemption tax : but they know like-
“ wise that no firmans or regulations will do so much to bring
“ about a real equality between Mussulman and Christian. The
“present Ministers" he added, “ are not, I believe , prepared to
“entertain the proposal if it should be brought forward."*
In the new Constitution —the bubble blown by Midhat —this
Firman, without .which all of these promises are worthless, is thrown
aside. The Porte will not put into the hands of non-Mussulman
subjects the strength which might ensure the fulfilment of its
promises. The Irade I have referred to is the only concession which
the Sultan’s government will offer, and that is nothing but a bulwark
* No. 33, Correspondence.
6


of Mussulman power —the admission of clever non-Mussulman boys
to be trained as officers of a purely Mussulman army.
“All the evils of Turkey,” says the Special Correspondent of
“ the Times in Constantinople,* “ may be traced to the difference
“ between the Osmanlis as a conquering race and a military caste
“and the Christians as a people unfit for and unworthy of the
“ privilege of bearing arms and sharing the most sacred of duties
“ —that of fighting for their country. To do away with this dif-
“ ference it is necessary that the law should prescribe universal
“ enlistment. The law of conscription, as it now exists,' falls
“ exclusively upon the Mussulmans, allowing, however, those who
“ wish it to ransom themselves by the payment of a certain sum.
“ But the Christians have no option. They are exempted, or
“ excluded from the service, but must pay a tax for their freedom.
“The consequence is that 15,000,000 of Mussulmans [including
“ those of the Asiatic provinces] must do the military work of
“ 30,000,000, to the severe exhaustion of the productive powers of
“their race, and the 15,000,000 Christians must pay the cost of
“ the war establishment, to their utter debasement and disgrace.”
Now as to this tax, which is falsely called an exemption tax. In
December, 1875, the Sultan issued a Firman, proclaiming and pro-
mising that in future the tax should not be levied upon two categories
of male persons who, by reason of their religion, were not eligible for
service in the army. The Sultan pledged himself that the tax should
be no longer levied upon male infants from their birth till the service-
able age, nor upon “ old men long past service.” f The promise of
this Firman was not observed, and has never been observed. But the
maintenance of the tax upon these useless categories demonstrates the
true character of the burden. It is not an exemption tax ; it is a helot
tax—a badge of serfdom, of slavery, submission to which must produce
oppression on one side and on the other a deepening degradation. Sir
* Times, February 5, 1877.
f Correspondence, No. 33.


Henry Elliot, perhaps because he had lived so long in the dishonest
atmosphere of the Porte, does not appear to have offered any remon-
strance. It was merely another Firman ; the promise of another
Sultan, which had proved delusive. Abd-ul-Aziz was Sultan when
the despatch (No. 33) from which I have quoted was written ; he was
in his grave when our Ambassador returned to the subject on June Bth.
Sir Henry Elliot has always shown himself more solicitous for the
preservation of the Turkish Empire than for the just administration of
the Sultan’s power; and, accordingly, although regarding the exclusion
of the non-Mussulman people from the army as
“ The one great badge of distinction existing between the two
“ races,” *—admitting that “ the Christians have become aware
“ that until it is swept away their nominal equality with the
“Mussulmans cannot be complete and real”—seeing that the
clauses “of the Hatti-Houmaioun Of 1856, drawn up under
“ the advice of the Western Powers,” have hitherto remained
“ a dead letter,” he urges that “it is not necessary that the con-
“ scription should at once be put in force among the Christian
“ population ; but the military schools should at once be opened
“ to them, and they might be received either as volunteers or as
“ substitutes for Mussulmans drawn as conscripts.”
I have no doubt that the Christians of Turkey would object to a
conscription which would appear to make them tools of the mis-
governing rule to which they are subject, and from which they have at
all times suffered grievous wrongs. It is difficult for a free people
to estimate the degrading consequences of ages of oppression, of
exclusion from any association with the governing authority. Yet
we have had many illustrations of the cruel lust of tyranny, of the
miserable results of this divorce from power, and none more
striking than that narrated by the Special Correspondent of the
Times , which appeared in the issue of the 7th Feb., 1877. A saptieh ,
one of the soldier-police who form part of the alien garrison of
• Correspondence, No. 442.


Bulgaria, arrived in the village of Brankortsi, in Bulgaria, on last
Christmas Day. He wished to be quartered upon one Petko, because
that man had two young and pretty daughters who would be obliged
to wait upon him. But the cmet, the village head-man, said this could
not be, as two Albanians had been already placed in Petko’s house;
whereupon the saptieh beat the cmet , which was received as in the
ordinary course of things. But the zaptieh did not stop there.
“He stabled his horse, and came out with bridle, saddle, and
“ saddle-bags, and actually bridled and harnessed and then
“mounted the terrified and unresisting cmet. The wretch rode
“his ‘man-horse’ up and down the street, forcing him into the
“ puddles where the mud was deepest.”
When they came to the house which the cmet had destined for the
zaptieh's residence, the rider
“Pulled up, alighted, and was soon surrounded by the villagers,
“ all aghast at the sight of the strange equestrian group, yet never
“ daring to interfere or remonstrate. The zaptieh bade the land-
“ lord bring out an armful of hay, and as the man ventured to
“ intercede for the poor cmet, the zaptieh struck him in the face
“ with so heavy a blow as to stretch him almost senseless on the
“ ground. The ‘ man-horse ’ was brought up, tied by his rider to
“ a post outside the door, and, whip in hand, bidden to eat the
“hay. The poor man, now thoroughly unmanned, and bathing
“ that forage with his tears, tried to comply with the brutal order,
“and took some of the hay between his teeth. . . . The
“ cmet, a person of importance in the village, and to whom the
“ Government entrusts the collection of taxes to the average
“ yearly amount of 200,000 piastres, would never dare to lodge a
“ complaint of this ill-treatment, as nothing would save him from
“ the policeman’s vengeance, or from that of the body to which he
“ belongs.”
That is the tyranny, such are the instruments, which Mr. Gladstone
demanded, in the name of humanity, should be turned, “bag and
baggage,” out of Bulgaria. This foul and shocking degradation follows


upon the exclusion of the Christians from the military body of which
they are the abject slaves. They are for the most part unequal and
unable to appreciate the fact that equality with the Turk in military
conscription must lead to subversion of the Mahommedan power.
The ample and liberal promises of Turkey in regard to the ad-
ministration of public justice are twenty years old, and are as yet
unfulfilled in any part. The Hatti-Houmaioun of 1856 promised
that —
“All commercial, correctional, and criminal suits between
“ Mussulmans and Christians and other non-Mussulman subjects,
“ or between Christians and other non-Mussulmans of different
“ sects, shall be referred to mixed tribunals.”
“Testimony shall be received, without distinction, upon an
“ oath taken according to the religious law of each sect.”
“ Penal, correctional, and commercial laws shall be drawn up
“as soon as possible, and formed into a code. Translations of
“ them shall be published in all the languages current in the
“ Empire.”
As to taxes, it was promised that—
“ The most prompt and energetic measures for remedying
“the abuses in collecting the taxes, and especially the tithes,
“ shall be considered. The system of direct collection shall
“gradually, and as soon as possible, be substituted for the plan
“ of farming in all the branches of the revenue of the State.”
As to roads and canals and means of communication, it was
promised that —
“ Steps shall also be taken for the formation of roads and
“ canals, to increase the facilities of communication, and increase
“ the sources of the wealth of the country. Everything that can
“impede commerce or agriculture shall be abolished. To ac-
“ complish these objects, means shall be sought to profit by the
“ science, the art, and the funds of Europe, and thus gradually to
“ execute them.”
As to money and monetary facilities, it was promised that —


“ Steps shall be taken for the formation of banks and other
“ similar institutions, so as to effect a reform in the monetary and
“financial system, as well as to create funds to be employed
“in augmenting the sources of the material wealth of my
“ Empire.”
Such were some of the promises of 1856; such were the Sultan’s
“ wishes and commands,” and A’ali Pasha, his Grand Vizier, was bidden
to take “ all necessary measures that all the orders which it [the
Hatti-Houmaioun] contains “be henceforth carried out with the most
rigorous punctuality.”
Of the thirty-five articles of this famous Hatti-Houmaioun, those
that are important have, to quote the words of Mr. Butler-Johnstone,
a zealous friend of the Turkish Power, “remained dead letters.”*
He admits, in regard to the administration of justice, that the
promises of Turkey have been “translated into mock courts, unpaid
judges, arbitrary procedure, and corrupt decisions.” As to the intro-
duction of “ a sounder fiscal system,” he says, “ nothing of the kind
has been done as to corruption, “at present the whole administra-
tion is corrupt;” as to banks, “ nothing of the sort has been thought
of.” Instead of performance of the promises relative to better means
of communication,
“ The absence of roads and canals has prevented the relief of
“ a famished population ; and as to railroads, the only important
“ line finished was a cloak for a most notorious scandal.”
As to the promise of profiting “ by the science, the art, and the
funds of Europe ” for “ the increase of the sources of the wealth of the
Empire,” we see what has been done. With the money of unsatisfied
bondholders an ironclad fleet has been purchased, and is fast wearing
out; a large army has been provided with the most improved weapons
of war, all of which has emboldened the pashas to resist the unani-
mous counsels of the Powers of Europe. Favourites and fawning
courtiers have been enriched, and millions have been wasted in baubles
* Series of letters to Pall Mall Gazette, 1875.


for the delight of sultanas. But as to foreign capital being used for
development of the great resources of the country, Mr. Butler Johnstone
himself says that —
“ Such vexatious obstructions have been placed in the way of
“foreign capital that it has shunned the country; and men of
“ integrity like Scott-Russell and T. Brassey have had all their
“ offers rejected. Unless the pashas catch a glimpse of backshish,
“foreign enterprise is an abomination in their eyes.”
These promises were made to be broken. “ Qui est-ce qu'on
irompe?" as Prince Gortschakoff said to Lord Augustus Loftus. These
reforms were promised with the knowledge that they would not, could
not, be put in operation. The Turkish Power is, in spite of Midhat’s
Constitution, a Mahommedan theocracy. No law is accepted as valid
unless it has religious sanction. The statute book must run with the
Koran. The neglect on the part of the Turkish Power to fulfil the
pledges of 1839 and of 1856 does not vex the mind of a genuine Turk.
The obligation was not to be found in the precepts of the Koran.
They had not the sanction of the Church, which we have seen invoked
and obtained before any would engage in the dethronement of Abd-
ul-Aziz and of Murad.
England has appeared to feel more than any other Power the
disgrace of having been made a party to the manufacture of these
spurious pledges and promises. Lord Stratford de Redcliffe was
instructed in 1858 to —
“ Impress on his Imperial Majesty the Sultan the deep import-
“ ance which Her Majesty’s Government attach to his faithfully
“ carrying out the Hatti-Houmaioun without any unnecessary
“ delay,”
and Lord Stratford reported in the same year that, in audience of the
Sultan, he had—
“ Submitted that little had been done, and that a feeling of
“ disappointment and almost of despair was on that account
“ spreading throughout Europe.”
Lord Stratford was right. Despair did supervene. In Turkey the


progress observed in the rest of Europe was reversed. The Empire
retrograded. But the manufacture of promises continued; and
Napoleon 111. having restored the idea of Imperial democracy, the
pattern of these promises became more and more that of the
Tuileries —in the neighbourhood of which, about the arcades of the
Palais Royal, the ruling pashas have been wont to graduate in what
they believe to be civilisation. Had I been blind I could have fancied
myself at the Tuileries on the loth of May, 1868, when Sultan Abd-
ul-Aziz announced the establishment of the Council of State and the
High Court of Justice. He confessed that there was something
wrong, something rotten in his State, “ for,” said he,
“ If the principles and laws already established had answered
“to the exigencies of our country and our people, we ought to
“ have found ourselves to-day in the same rank as the most
“ civilised and best administered States of Europe.” “ With a
“ view to promote the rights of our subjects,” Abd-ul-Aziz pro-
claimed the establishment of the Council of State, “whose
“members are taken from all classes of our subjects without
“ exception.” “ Another body,” he continued, “ has been
“ charged to assure justice to our subjects in that which
“ concerns the security of their persons, their honour, and their
“ property.”
What happened? The Council of State was nominated, three-
fourths of the members being Mussulmans. It has been a scandal,
an extravagance, a laughing-stock, and is nick-named the “Yes-if-
you-please Council.” Were the Courts of Justice reformed? Not in
any way. No one has said, or can say with truth, that Mr. Yorke’s
description of Turkish Courts in the House of Commons was unfair,
and he described them as—
“ Markets, not open markets, but dirty back-door shops,
“closets for fraud, corners for chicane, and dens where profes-
sional brokers meet the judicial staff to job causes and rob
“ suitors.”
When Murad was put on the throne of Abd-ul-Aziz the same


solemn farce was played. The Grand Vizier addressed himself, via
Murad, in phrases adapted from the failure of 1868.
“All our subjects,” thus ran the Halt of June tst, 1876, “with-
“ out exception, shall enjoy full and complete liberty .... and
“in order to carry out this project .... and with a view to
“ this most essential result, it is both important and necessary
“ that the Council of State should be re-organised.”
When the turn of the present Sultan came, he, in September of
last year, employed much the same language. “To remedy evils,”
which were specified, His Majesty Abd-ul-Ahmed pledged himself
that—
“A Special Council would be charged to guarantee the exact
“ execution of existing laws.”
Last of all, and most pretentious, we have the Constitution of
Midhat, who has fallen under the weight of that newest bundle of
promises. There is nothing in the past history or the present circum-
stances of the Turkish Empire which could lead us to suppose that
the Constitution would have fair play. But the Turks themselves have
left us in no doubt whatever upon that point. There is a journal pub-
lished in Constantinople, printed in the Turkish language, which is called
Truth. It is generally considered to be under the immediate patronage
and direction of the Ministry of War. It became necessary to reconcile
the interests of Truth with the acceptance of Midhat’s Constitution in
the eyes of the Mussulman soldiery, and this was done by an article
in that journal entitled, “ The Partisans of the Constitution and their
Opponents.” The readers of Truth were assured that the National
Assembly, or the Turkish House of Commons,
“ Will be especially careful to avoid everything which may
“ seem opposed to the sacred prescriptions of the Cheri.” * “ But
“it may be objected,” continued Truth, “ that Mussulmans only
“ are concerned with this, while in the National Assembly there
“ will be non-Mussulmans. To those who raise such an objection,
“we reply that they ought to take into consideration—(l.) That
* The codified precepts of the Koran,


“ the majority in the Chamber will be composed of Mussulmans ;
“ (2.) That decisions can only be made by a majority of votes ;
“ and (3.) That all decisions will be submitted to the Upper House,
“ the members of which will be nominated by the Government,
“ and selected exclusively from among the high Mussulman
“functionaries. Thus, we see, the divine order will be faith.-
“ fully assured and executed.”
Such candour leads us by irresistible impulse to side with the Con-
ference in the opinion that the promises of Turkey cannot be accepted
without guarantees “to ensure the loyal and complete application” (I
am quoting the words of the too hastily rejected Berlin Memorandum)
“of the measures agreed upon between the Powers and the Porte.”
Had the British Ministers been as wise in May as they were in
December; had they seen in May as they did in December,
the need for guarantees, how much better would it have been
for the peace of Europe and the interests of this country —those
special objects of their regard! They and those who sympathised
with them have been beguiled by the promises of Turkey. Was there
ever a more grotesque piece of fooling than that played by Midhat
Pasha upon the Special Correspondent of the Daily Telegraph, who on
February 2nd flashed to London intelligence that Midhat, “personally
conversed ” with, had stated that “ twenty-one shorthand writers were
being collected to report the speeches ” in the new Turkish Parliament!
There is a disposition to credulity which blinds the judgment of men,
but that is not the condition of the people of this country. They know
that, by their acceptance of pledges at the close of the war which they
waged to preserve Turkey from Russian conquest, they are not free
from definite and real obligation with reference to those most un-
happy people, some of whom were victims of the Bulgarian horrors,
and they are profoundly conscious that, whatsoever may be their duty
in regard to those people, they would be guilty of hypocrisy if, when
liberty, and life, and honour, are at stake, they bade all men be content
with the promises of Turkey.




CTje (Eastern (©uestton
PAPERS ON THE EASTERN QUESTION.
No. 7.
TURKEY AND THE SLAVE
TRADE.
A STATEMENT OF FACTS.
BY
F. W. CHES S O N.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION
aS, CANADA BUILDING, WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL FETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris A r ew York,
1877.




TURKEY AND THE SLAVE TRADE.
On May 12,1874, a meeting was held in the great hall of Stafford House
for the purpose of promoting the abolition of the African slave trade.
The Duke of Teck, who presided, struck the key-note of the meeting
by expressing his opinion that “ the English nation will not rest
“satisfied until the entire suppression of the last remnant of the
“ African slave trade has been accomplished.” Chevalier Cadorna, the
Italian Minister, with powerful dramatic gestures, presented a vivid
picture of the abject condition of a slave, torn from his native village,
and sold into life-long bondage. “ When,” he said, “ I contemplate
“ the picture, my limbs tremble, and my hands become clenched with
“pity and indignation.” But the speech of the day was delivered by
Count Beust, the Austrian ambassador, who, in inveighing against the
iniquities of the slave trade, rose to the dignity of true eloquence. “In
“this age,” he remarked, “when freedom of the subject is the axiom
“of the Governments from the busy West to the more slowly-following
“ East, when cruelty can no longer be perpetrated under the name of
“justice, when every attempt at secret oppression is jealously watched
“ and publicly denounced by the press, when the relief of the poor is
“no longer considered a mere subject of compassion but an imperious
“ duty, when societies are even formed for the protection of animals,
“ could any nation even tacitly assent to the continuance of a traffic
“by which human beings are lowered to the condition of brutes ? No,
“ it was not in vain that Schiller sang :
“ ‘ Tremble when slaves by force shall break their chain,
Fear not when by thy hand their freedom they regain.' ”
These sentiments met with an enthusiastic response from a crowded
a nd fashionable assembly ; and at the close of the meeting the Duke
°f Sutherland was warmly thanked for having helped to inaugurate
a new crusade against the slave trade. Seeing that the Turks are the
great slave traders of the world, and that in the Ottoman Empire
slavery is now entrenched in its last great stronghold, the recent
Proceedings at Stafford House of a band of Philo-Turkish sympathisers


contrast strangely enough with the philanthropic declamation which
found vent under the same roof only three brief years ago.
When we discuss the differences between Mohammedan and
Christian forms of government in the East, we are too apt to forget
that the one recognises the relation of master and slave as a funda-
mental part of the social system, while whatever may be the imperfec-
tions of the other, at all events, it ever wages war against man-stealing,
and brands it with the stigma of infamy. Although I have no sympathy
with Russian absolutism, yet I must admit that upon this subject a com-
mon sentiment animates both England and Russia. For example, while
we have imposed an anti-slavery policy upon the Sultan of Zanzibar,
Russian authority has proved fatal to the slave trade in those parts of
Central Asia in which the suzerainty of the Czar has been established
and it was not without good reason that at the meeting to which I have
already referred, Sir Bartle Frere applauded Russia for putting an end
to the slave-markets of Bokhara, and opening the prisons of Khiva,
Russia shared in the anti-slavery declarations of the Great Powers at the
Congresses of Vienna and Verona, on which occasions the assembled
.plenipotentiaries proclaimed, in the names of their sovereigns, “their
“wish to put an end to a scourge which has so long desolated Africa,
“ degraded Europe, and afflicted humanity.” The Porte now stands
alone among the Governments of Europe in its contemptuous defiance
of that enlightened'publicjopinion which was so emphatically expressed
more than fifty years ago.
Yet those who are willing to accept Turkish promises in lieu of
Turkish deeds will no doubt find in a succession of state papers
fabricated by the Porte for circulation in Western Europe ample
evidence—so far, at least, as mere words are concerned—of the
existence among the ruling class at Constantinople of an anti-slavery
sentiment. In 1846, the Sultan declared the slave trade illegal. In
1854, he issued a firman, interdicting the traffic in Georgians and
Circassians. In 1857, another Imperial firman announced to the
authorities at Tripoli and to slave traders in the interior of Africa that
the sale or exportation of negroes was absolutely prohibited. In
1868, Fuad Pasha was as benevolently effusive on the subject as even
Midhat Pasha could possibly have been. In a reply to an address
from the Paris Anti-Slavery Conference, in favour of “immediate,
“ definitive, and radical emancipation,” he expressed sentiments which
would have done credit to a'Wilberforce or a Buxton. In a letter to
Professor Laboulaye he said : “ I do not hesitate to say, sir, that you
“defend a principle to which the Government of his Imperial Majesty
“ adheres with its whole heart.” Yet, according to the testimony of
Major Millingen, who read a paper on the subject of slavery in
Turkey before the Anthropological Society in 1870, a wife of Fuad
Pasha, in common with other great ladies of Stamboul, was well known


as an extensive trader in Circassian beauties. The late Sir Philip
Francis, chief judge and consul-general at Constantinople, in a letter
lo Sir Henry Elliot, dated August 12, 1870, commented with great
severity upon the disingenuousness both of Fuad Pasha’s and Nubar
Pasha’s expressions of sympathy with the Anti-Slavery Society. He
justly remarked that “ such language is calculated to affect the
“ popular mind, so as to induce the belief that slavery is obnoxious to
“ the Government in this country, or at least barely tolerated ; whereas
“it seems to me that the anti-slavery views existing in this country are
“ only simulated by the Turks, and their expressions of liberal opinions
“ are only repetitions of the sentiments of others, and foreign to their
“ own ideas.”
Every engagement entered into, as well as every promise made, by
the Porte on the question of slavery has proved absolutely worthless.
Just as the firmans and Hatti-Hoyamouns, which were ostensibly
intended to secure justice and equality for the Christian rayahs, have
never been worth the paper on which they were written, so the various
edicts abolishing the slave trade, which the Porte has flourished in
the face of Europe, have simply been cunning devices for throwing
dust in the eyes of philanthropists. The Circassian slave trade was
prohibited in 1854; and yet what was the state of things existing at
Constantinople in 1856, when British influence was supposed to be
supreme in that capital? In that year, with the prospect of peace
there also came the certainty that Russia would reoccupy the coast of
the Caucasus, and thus stop the Circassian slave trade. The conse-
quence was that, as we read in the journals of the day, “ the dealers
“redoubled their efforts to introduce into Turkey the greatest possible
■“number of women while the opportunity of doing so lasted.” The
Constantinople correspondent of the Morning Post, writing at the
time, says : —“ There is an absolute glut in the market, and dealers
“are obliged to throw away their goods owing to the extent of the
“ supply, which in many instances has been brought by steam under
■“the British flag. In former times a ‘good middling’ Circassian girl
■“was thought very cheap at £ 100; but at the present moment the
“ same description of goods may be had for ! In fact, the creatures
“ are eating their heads off, and must be disposed of at any sacrifice,
“however alarming.” This correspondent further stated that the
temptation to possess Circassian girls at such low prices was so great
in the minds of the Turks, that numbers of black women, some of
whom had been in the same hands for many years, were thrown on
the market in order to make room for the new comers. This was an
illustration of the manner in which the Turks respected English
sentiment, at a period when we had lavishly poured out our blood
and treasure to defend the integrity of their soil. Even when, as
sometimes occurs, the judges are invoked to give effect to the law


abolishing the slave trade, it appears that no better results ensue.
This statement is supported by the following paragraph, headed
“ Slavery in Turkey,” which appeared in the Standard of April Bth,
1870: —“A letter in the Augsburg Gazette states that a Turk lately
“ purchased from a slave-dealer at Varna a whole Circassian family,
“ One of its members hastened to make a protest to the cadi, and
“ promised to indemnify the buyer, in several payments, for the
“ amount which he had given. In spite of this, and although the
“ Turkish judge could not deny that an Imperial firman had abolished
“ slavery throughout the empire, he confirmed the sale. The foreign
“ambassadors at Constantinople have sent in a protest.” The Turks
are familiar with such protests, and no doubt despise them accordingly.
Official testimony is equally conclusive as to the cynical effrontery
with which the slave trade was carried on in Turkey at the period
of the Crimean War. Brigadier-General Williams, in a despatch
addressed to Lord Clarendon from Erzeroum on February 6th, 1855,
says:—
‘ ‘ The buying and selling of slaves, by the officers of the Kars army, is as
‘ ‘ notorious as any other malpractices on their part. Boys are preferred by those
“brutes, and the girls are sent to Constantinople; and until the allied consuls
“ are authorised to demand the restitution of these victims to Turkish sensuality,
“ and are provided with funds to send them back to their families in Georgia ;
“ and until the Porte is bound by treaty to send the culprits so detected to the
“galleys for a certain specified time, this infamous traffic will flourish; and all
“ which has been said, or may be written, about abolitionary firmans, simply
“ adds mockery to crime and woe. When I saw Mustapha Pacha quit the camp
“ at Kars, and fawn upon the soldiers drawn out in line to salute him who had
“ robbed and starved them, he was closely followed, and that at noon-day, by
“two Georgian slaves under an escort of regular cavalry. They had been
“bought the day previous to his departure, and this traffic was notorious
“ throughout the camp. Your lordship may therefore infer that had the Turks-
“ penetrated into Georgia last campaign, very few youths of either sex would
‘ ‘ have escaped pollution ; and I feel bound to tell your lordship my opinion on
“this most interesting subject, which is, that if England does not effectually
“repress this trade by a stringent treaty, Russia will accomplish it by her
“ arms; that is, if peace leave her in possession of Georgia.”
The reader should remember that this was the testimony, not of an
anti-slavery emissary, or even of a subject Christian, but of a com-
mander who had fought gallantly for the Turks, and whose name will
be remembered by posterity as that of the “ Hero of Kars.”
It is greatly to the honour of Lord Stratford de Redcliffe that,
when he was ambassador at Constantinople, he was painfully im-
pressed with the enormities involved in the public sale of Georgian
children of both sexes at Pera and Galata. Those who are disposed
to regard slavery in Turkey with tolerance, on the assumption that it
exists in a mild form in that country, would do well to ponder the


pregnant and weighty sentences in which the great ambassador refuses
to hold any terms with the iniquity. His lordship, in a despatch dated
August 29th, 1854, wrote as follows: —
“ There are persons who distinguish between slavery in the East and
“ slavery in the West. The distinction is not wholly unfounded. Unlike the
“ negro in America, the slave in Turkey is rather a domestic servant than a
“ field drudge or beast of burden. He is not ostensibly ill-treated. If a male,
‘‘ he rises occasionally to posts of profit and honour; if a female, ease, and
‘ ‘ even luxury, may be her portion in the harem of some court favourite or
“ opulent functionary. The degradation nevertheless remains; and the priva-
tion of liberty, not forfeited by crime, is itself an intolerable evil. But the
“injury does not stop there. The slave can hold no property: he is a
“ property himself; and, worse than all, he is but too often an instrument of
‘ 1 vice, and sometimes even of crime. His life is at his owner’s mercy. If a
“ Christian, his children are bom to slavery, as if to reconcile those who never
“ can be parents to the mutilation which deprived them of that hope. In one
“respect there is no difference between negro and Circassian slavery. Black
“or white, wherever slavery exists, the whole society suffers. A curse is on
“ the trade. Dealer and owner are alike affected by the taint. They treat
“ their fellow-creatures like brutes, and are brutalised in return.”
After this noble expression of opinion from a diplomatist of so
much distinction and experience as Lord Stratford, it is passing
strange that any Englishman should be found to defend or palliate the
institution of slavery as it exists in Turkey.
The British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, with characteristic
zeal in the cause of humanity, nearly two years after Lord Stratford
wrote his memorable despatch, presented a memorial to Lord Palmer-
ston on the subject of the Turkish slave trade. They showed that
they were quite as much concerned for the fate of the victims of the
African slave trade as they were for that of Circassian or Georgian
slaves ; for, on this branch of the question they thus addressed his
lordship ; —“ In relation to the traffic in negroes—especially in lads of
“ tender years —from various parts of the interior of Africa, it is well
“ known that the principal demand for them is to supply the Turkish
“ markets ; and the committee regret to find, by the returns of her
“ Majesty’s Consuls and Vice-Consuls at Tripoli, Bengazi, Mour-
“ zouk, Misurata, Massowah, Canea, Cairo, Erzeroum, &c., that the
“ trade is still prosecuted to a considerable extent; whilst to the
“ ordinary incentives which induce the slave-dealers to prosecute
“ their immoral traffic, the authorities of Constantinople hold out to
“them a premium of fifty piastres per head to convey them to the
“metropolis direct, instead of taking them to Tripoli or elsewhere for
“ trans-shipment.”
This aspect of the question, instead of having passed into the
background, now more than ever demands the attention of the great
Powers. A lapse of twenty years has materially aggravated the evil


for which the Anti-Slavery Society, after the Crimean War, vainly
sought a remedy. Mr. Joseph Cooper, hon. secretary of the society, in
his recent excellent pamphlet, “Turkey and Egypt, Past and Present,
in Relation to Africa,” estimates that the number of negroes annually
taken from Africa, chiefly for the supply of Turkey and Egypt, is over
70,000, but that for every slave who reaches his destination five die en
route, or are killed in the savage warfare which takes place in the effort
to capture them. This statement is supported by the authority of Dr.
Livingstone and Professor Berlioux; and the last-named writer also
states that “the countries in which the slave trade exists, and to which
“it introduces incendiarism, devastation, and murder, are of much
“greater extent than the whole of Europe.”* Slaves are drawn from
the interior of Africa, the regions of the Upper Nile, and the shores
of the Indian Ocean. Many are driven in chains across twenty degrees
of latitude to the Mohammedan port of Tripoli, their path over the
burning and arid wastes being too frequently whitened by the ghastly
relics of former processions of captives. Kouka, the capital of
Boumou, is one centre of the traffic, but by far the largest emporium
is Khartoum, at the junction of the two Niles. From Gondokoro
slaves are conveyed to the markets of Arabia, and the misery they
experience in their transit in Arab dhows to the ports of the Red Sea
equals, if, indeed, it does not eclipse, the horrors of the old African
trade. It is absolutely impossible to exaggerate the cruelties or
abominations of the traffic. Every modern traveller, from Living-
stone to Cameron, bears the same dreadful testimony to the
wide-spread desolation and terrible suffering which the slave
trade inflicts upon what Mr. Cooper has justly designated “ the lost
“ continent.”
The attention of the civilised world has not been sufficiently
directed to the fact that the African slave trade is now prosecuted
solely to enable a luxurious class of Mohammedans in Turkey, Persia,
and Egypt to stock or to guard their harems with slaves. It is well
to denounce the brutal Arab slave-dealer, who ravages Africa, or the
corrupt Mohammedan official, who becomes his accomplice after the
fact, but surely the chief culprits are the men whose depraved habits
create the demand for the human merchandise. Even Sir Henry
Elliot, who will certainly not be suspected of being unfriendly to the
Turks, says that “as long as the slave trader is regarded as a man
“acting illegally, but not as guilty of an act reprehensible in its
“ own nature, he will find the means of carrying on the traffic.” This,
according to a British ambassador, is the respect which the Turks
pay to their own laws. It is true that those laws may be the tribute
which vice pays to virtue, but, nevertheless, the shameless and
* "The Slave Trade in Africa, in 1872." Published by Edward Marsh, 12,
Bishopsgate Street Without.


systematic manner in which they are violated constitutes no light
portion of the indictment against Ottoman rule.
A very complete view of slavery in Turkey has been presented to
the members of the Anthropological Society by Major Millingen. He
justly argues that it is the demand for slaves among the wealthy class
of Mussulmans which keeps up the supply, and which is in conse-
quence responsible for the devastation of Africa. “It is evident,”
he says, “that if the customers of Cairo, Mecca, or Constantinople
“ were not bidding £2O or £3O for a slave, the victorious negro chief
“would let the vanquished go free, or at least would allow him to
“ exist under a sky congenial to his nature.” Slavery is inherent in
the Moslem system. It is an essential part of the foundation upon
which the whole fabric of Mohammedan social life rests. As the
women are secluded, it is necessary that their personal attendants,
whether male or female, should be equally under restraint. The
Turk is by nature a despot, and the absolute power which he exercises
over his slave gratifies his imperious temper, while it ministers to his
self-indulgence. From infancy he is taught to regard the possession
of slaves as the greatest evidence of good fortune. “ Nothing,” says
Major Millingen, “can better satisfy the vanity of a Turk than to
“ look upon himself as the master of some human being. As he
41 contemplates two or three slaves standing silent and with folded
“ arms before him, the Turk rises infinitely greater in his own esti-
“mation.” Moreover, at times, a more mercenary feeling than pride
stirs his selfish nature. A good negro female cook, it appears, can be
bought for £73 in Constantinople ; and Major Millingen is of opinion
that, having regard to the rates of wages paid to free servants of a
superior class, the Turk would find a domestic slave of this kind
a satisfactory investment. Sometimes, of course, the poor African
women find good masters and are well treated, but it seems that
generally their fate is very different: —“ They pass through the hands
“of ten or twenty masters, who make them lead the life of cab-horses,
“ beat them at intervals, and at last sell them.” Secret societies exist
among the negroes. Major Millingen does not say that these societies
have been fomented by Muscovite agents, but no doubt some of our
more ardent Russo-phobists are quite equal to the elaboration of
a theory on the subject.
One of the most illusory reforms ever carried out in any country
was the closing of the slave-markets of Constantinople. The public
sale of human beings naturally shocked Western ideas of decency, but
it is manifest that to the slave himself it mattered little whether he
was sold in an open market or by private treaty, while the cause of
humanity on the whole suffered rather than gained by the privacy
with which henceforth the traffic was veiled in the coffee-houses of
Tophaneh and the khans of Stamboul. All visitors to Constantinople


who have made inquiries into this subject will confirm me when I
say that although the external signs of human servitude are only too
apparent, it is extremely difficult to discover how or where the contra-
band trade is carried on.
Unless the Turks entirely alter their social system, it is absolutely
impossible for them ever to make any earnest or effectual endeavours
to prevent the importation of Africans. Negroes in Turkey are a
non-reproductive element in the population. Even when they have
escaped the mutilation which awaits too many of their number, they
yet prove a sterile race. Major Millingen says that “ a descent in
“ the third degree from the pure negro race, or from mixed lineage, is
“ scarcely ever to be met with.” The consequence is that the supply
has constantly to be renewed by the introduction of fresh victims from
Africa, many of the younger of whom are mutilated at Gondokoro or
Khartoum.* Thus Africans are tortured and enslaved, and their
country ravaged by wild beasts in the form of men, in order that a
few thousand Mussulman sensualists may command the services of
slaves in their seraglios.
That the Turks, except at places like Constantinople and Smyrna,
hardly make an effort to disguise the nature or extent of their com-
plicity with the African slave trade will not be denied by any one who
has had the means of personal observation, or who has referred to the
official testimony on the subject. Vice-Consul Wylde, writing from
Jeddah on March 26th, 1876, says :
“ I find that at the former place” (Yembo) “there are a good many im-
“ ported in buglas from the usual depot, the African coast. These slaves find
“ their way up to Medina, where there is a good market for them. A small
“ portion of the number, however, is consumed by the Bedouins; who use
“ them to work in their date-gardens.
“There is no secret made of the traffic, and the Governor of Yembo,
“ however willing he might be to put a stop to the public mode of carrying it
“ on, would be powerless to do so, as he has no force whatever at his disposal.
“At Souakim from conversations I had with native merchants,
“ and the doctor and postmaster (Mr. Formighis, an Italian gentleman in the
“ Egyptian service), I was led to believe that the officials are perfectly aware
“of the enormous exportation that takes place, and derive a pecuniary benefit
“from the same. I think Mr. Formighis’ letter (an extract from which I
‘ ‘ enclose) bears out my testimony as to the extent of the traffic.
“On the morning of my departure from Souakim, a bugla, crowded with
“slaves, left the place of embarkation that I mentioned before, and two
“ others were half loaded, waiting till the arrival of another batch, which was
“ shortly expected.
“ It was estimated that these three vessels would take away at the least 500
‘ ‘ slaves. The bugla that left a few hours before the departure of the Medina
“ —the steamer in which I rvas travelling —arrived near Jeddah before we did,
* Major Millingen, like other authorities on the subject, believes that two out
of three die under the operation.


“ having made a very quick passage—namely, 170 miles, under the twenty-four
“ hours.
“ At Jeddah, although the slave-market is still closed, the sale of human.
“ beings goes on in some private houses adjoining the old market. The town
“is absolutely full of fresh-run slaves ; these could not have entered within the-
“ walls without the knowledge of the officials.
“ I have also the honour to report to your lordship that the Turkish
“steamers Chtrif Rasan and Malakoff, bound for Constantinople, left there
“ with numbers of slaves, and that no steps were taken to conceal them on
“board the vessels.”
In a previous despatch (dated May 28th, 1875), Mr. Wylde wrote-
as follows :—“ If the Quarantine Department of the Turkish Govern-
“ ment collect dues on the import of slaves, and the officers and
“officials openly buy male and female domestics, it will be hopeless-
“ for any representative of her Majesty’s Government to try and put a
“ stop to the trade. The example set by the Turkish officials is a
“guarantee to the Arabs of their not being molested, and they can.
“ prosecute their trade with impunity.” Enclosed in the above
despatch is a statement on the Red Sea slave trade, from “a tho-
“ roughly trustworthy source,” which shows not only the abominable
nature of the traffic, but also sheds light on the corrupt relations that,
exist between the slave-dealers and the Turkish officials. Mr..
Wylde’s correspondent says :
“ Hodeidah, the seaport of the province of Yemen, is the principal mart,
“ and may be considered as the head-quarters of the trade. It is here that the-
“ slaves are first landed after their voyage from the African coast, and the
“ place from which Jeddah and the other towns to the north draw their"
“ supplies. There is not the slightest attempt made at concealing the traffic,
“and indeed it is whispered that the local authorities derive a benefit from
“ each fresh importation, so much per head being paid for all slaves landed.
“ The slave-quarters, a collection of mat huts, are situated but a few yards
“outside the walls of the city, and the business is done by slave-brokers, who
“ go round the cafes inquiring for purchasers, and announcing the qualities of
“ the human chattels for sale.
“ Professional duties having taken me to Hodeidah, I took advantage of
“ the opportunity to make a few inquiries as to how the market was supplied.
“ Accompanied by a Turkish officer, who was anxious to purchase a slave to
“send to Constantinople, and a slave-broker, I went to the house of the-
“ principal dealer. Several young boys were brought in for our inspection.
“Their ages ranged from twelve to sixteen years, and their prices from 75 to-
“ too dollars. A number of female slaves were then shown, young girls
“between twelve and sixteen years of age; 130 dollars was the highest price
“ asked by the dealer, though I was told that a young and good-looking slave-
‘ ‘ girl would sometimes fetch 200 dollars.
“ Most of these poor creatures meet with a miserable fate. Purchased for
“ their good looks, after a month or two of possession the master, becoming
“tired of his victim, resells her to the slave-dealer at a reduction, and thus-
“ they are passed on from one to the other, serving the lusts of many masters,.


■“until they sink down into kitchen drudges, or are cast adrift to shift for
J ‘ themselves.
“ The slaves which I saw were all finely-featured and very intelligent-
‘ ‘ looking. The dealer said they were Abyssinians, although some were dark
enough to have come from Sowalkim in Nubia. At another slave-dealer’s
“ we saw about twenty little fellows, the eldest of which could not have been
‘ ‘ ten years of age
“Whilst at Hodeidah I saw no dhow with the plain Arab flag, and I
“believe the traffic to be carried on entirely under the Turkish and Egyptian
“ flag. The Austrian flag, too, cannot be quite exempted from a charge of
■‘ ‘ indirectly assisting in this traffic, for the steamers of the Austrian Lloyds,
“which trade along the coast of the Hedjaz and Yemen, carry up to the
“northern ports, and sometimes even as far as Constantinople, many a batch
“of deck passengers who are nothing but slaves. ”
It is gratifying to find that the Foreign Office is represented at
Jeddah by a Vice-Consul at once so observant and so humane as Mr.
Wylde. His statements are entirely supported by Consul Beyts at
Suez, who states that all the Government steamers from Hodeidah
calling at Jeddah “have numbers of Africans on board, but they are
“always protected by passports and other documents, signed by the
“cadi, stating them to be the wives of the officers and soldiers. No
“doubt,” he adds, “these documents are destroyed, and the victims
•“ sold into slavery at Constantinople.”
In a despatch addressed to Lord Derby on June 10th, 1875, Mr.
Beyts, in language as strong as was ever employed by any anti-slavery
writer, brings against both Turks and Egyptians the gravest charges
.of bad faith. He says: —
“ So long as the Turkish and Egyptian Governments make mere hollow
“professions of putting down the slave trade, and at the same time knowingly
“permit slaves to be embarked and disembarked at their ports; so long as
“they replenish their coffers by permitting (if they do not instruct) their
■“Governors and other officials to levy a poll-tax on slaves that are landed at
“Jeddah, Hodeidah, and other ports on the Yemen coast, the tax probably
‘ ‘ having been already levied at the ports of shipment on the Abyssinian and
•“ Nubian coasts; so long as slave-landing operations can be carried on under
“ the very guns of the Turkish men-of-war lying in port; and so long as the
“ officials high and low participate more or less in the gains of the traffic,
“beyond dealing with British India subjects, on whom alone the restrictions
“ can be enforced, and making futile representations to the authorities, her
“ Majesty’s Consul can do little good in putting a check on a traffic which is
“carried on by the slave-dealers with the utmost impunity, and in defiance of
“all authority. Any prohibitive measures attempted, without the means to
“enforce them, only incur the scorn and bitter hatred of the dealers, who
“show their resentment by inciting the fanatical Arabs against the Europeans,
“ the small band of which, having no reliable protection, would be, in the
“ case of a rise, entirely at the mercy of a savage mob. ”
The experience of Consul Henderson at Bengazi, in the Regency


of Tripoli, is identical with that of iMessrs. Beyts and Wylde. In
1875 the Porte promised to adopt energetic measures to put a stop to-
the slave trade at Bengazi, and an order to that effect was accordingly
sent to Aali Kimali Pasha, the Governor of that place. Mr. Hender-
son, writing on June 12 th, 1875, laments that “the execution of this order
“ has been delayed, and has been entrusted to the hands of a Governor
“whose interests and fanaticism alike induce him to resist it.” He
charges his Excellency, in the most direct terms, with being personally
implicated in the traffic which it was his duty to suppress, and states
that in the previous month he and the cadi had each sent to Con-
stantinople a batch of slaves who had been purchased only a short
time before. He disclaims any feeling of personal hostility towards
the Governor. “On the contrary,” he says, with great naivety “I am
“ on as good terms with him as men of widely-different characters and
“ habits can well be when forced by circumstances into close relations.”
The mode in which this illicit commerce is carried on in another
part of Turkey is thus described by Vice-Consul Blunt, of Salonica, in
a report to Sir Henry Elliot, dated April 15th, 1876 :
“ From all I hear, there is no doubt that slaves are occasionally imported
“here and at other ports in my consular district; but I cannot yet state
“whether the Ottoman authorities connive at their introduction.
“ These slaves are brought in small numbers at a time, in an underhand
“way, in order to avoid suspicion. Sometimes the dealer represents them as
“his wives, or relatives, or adopted children ; but generally he passes them off
“as his servants. Once landed, they are hurried into the interior to be
“secretly sold. In the same way slaves are also introduced into Thessaly and
“Macedonia by the steamers of other foreign companies. I cannot say, nor
“do I think, that their commanders intentionally connive at the subterfuges
“which are employed by the slave-dealers in their nefarious traffic; but I
“think that the evil would diminish if the commanders and agents of the
“Austro-Hungarian ‘Lloyd’s,’ French ‘Messageries Maritimes ’ and ‘ Frais-
“sinet pere et fils,’ and Italian ‘Trinacreas’ steamers, were authorised to
‘ ‘ exercise more supervision in respect of young slaves which are carried in
“ their vessels under the system I have pointed out.”
I do not think that, as respects responsibility for the slave trade,
any distinction can be drawn between the case of the Porte and that
of Egypt. But as some persons may attach importance to the sup-
posed anxiety of the Khedive to pursue an anti-slavery policy, I am
anxious that the reader should not labour under the delusion that the
Egyptian Government is more hostile to slavery than the Porte. The
great revival at the present time of the slave trade at Khartoum, as
well as the audacious activity of the slave-dealers in the Red Sea,
contrasts painfully with the language the Khedive used at Paris, in
1867, when he said, through the pen of Nubar Pasha, that “ slavery is
“ a horrible institution,” and that “ civilisation and progress in Egypt
“ depend upon its abolition.” His Highness lately had an excellent


•opportunity of exemplifying the sincerity of his belief in these
enlightened principles. When he disgraced Ismail Sadyk Pasha, his
minister of finance, and confiscated the enormous wealth which that
personage had accumulated, it would have been easy for him to set a
good example in the direction of emancipation. But I regret to say
that, instead of liberating the ex-minister’s slaves, he has yielded to
the worst instincts of his race. A letter on this subject, addressed to
Mr. Buzacott, secretary of the Anti-Slavery Society, has been placed
at my disposal by the kindness of Mr. Sturge. The letter is dated
Cairo, December 13th, 1876, and comes from a trustworthy cor-
respondent of the society. The writer says: —“ It fs notorious that
“ the slaves (both white and black) of the ex-mouffetish are now being
“ sold by Habil Aya, the head eunuch of the Khedive, for the direct
“ benefit of the latter’s private purse. Of 300 some 80 still remain in
“hand, and an Englishman, one of the personal attaches of the
“ Khedive, told me on Monday last that he had been invited to inspect
“ them on the previous evening, and had done so. A large number of
“ the slaves I refer to have been sold to two Constantinople dealers,
“ who came here specially to bid for them. One of these dealers has
“ taken a khan immediately behind the town palace of Monsour
“ Pasha, and has there from thirty to thirty-four of ‘ this parcel. 1 I
“ could take you direct to the house were you here.”
I can assure the reader that it affords no pleasure to the friends of
Africa to publish an extract so damaging to the ruler of Egypt.
On the contrary, we should have rejoiced if we had had the least
reason to believe that the Khedive intended to tread the path of
justice and humanity.*
I think that enough has been said to show the complicity of great
Turkish officials with the African slave trade, as well as the hopeless-
ness of expecting provincial governors to enforce instructions which
so entirely conflict with their selfish interests. I will now briefly refer
to the traffic in slaves of another class. Since the conquest of Cir-
cassia by Russia in 1864, the Circassians settled in Turkey have
continued to supply large numbers of girls for the market. Major
Millingen says:—“ The fear of a new-comer serves admirably to keep
“women (I mean Turkish women) in a state of salutary subjection.
“ It is for this reason, then, that the Circassians, either as cheap wives
“or odalisks, are so useful. A Mussulman who wishes to checkmate
* Since the above was in type, I see that in a telegram from Cairo, dated
February 15th, it is announced that Gordon Pasha has been appointed to the
supreme government of the Soudan Provinces. No one can doubt that Colonel
Gordon is most anxious to take effective measures for the abolition of the slave
trade; but, after the experience of the last few years, it would be premature to
assume that the Egyptian Government is prepared all at once to reverse its policy
on this subject.


“ his wife, or who may desire to indulge in a plurality of wives, would
■“ often find difficulty in procuring them amongst his countrymen.
“ Here the Circassian is of use, as by paying a price for her she
“ becomes at the shortest period his property. Besides this, even as
“ a wife the Circassian is preferred to the native; the despotic husband
“ prefers to have a wife whom he can keep under complete subjection
“to his heart’s content. The native woman has too many drawbacks
“ about her—father, mother, brothers, &c., who may cause uneasiness
"to the husband.” As all the women —even in the imperial harem,
whatever their nominal position or rank—in reality occupy only the
legal status of slaves until they are about to become mothers, when it
is customary to give them their freedom, the Sultan himself must be
regarded as the head of a great slave household. The traffic in
female Circassians is a highly-respectable and lucrative business in
Constantinople; and, according to Major Millingen, “a girl of ten or
“ twelve, bought for £2OO, can be sold at the age of sixteen or seven-
teen for a ,£1,000.” Sir Philip Francis' states that the Sultan and
the pashas recruit their harems from the local traffic, and he also
confirms the fact that the wives of these great personages carry on
slave-dealing for their own profit.
In July, 1875, Sir Philip was much interested in the case of a
Circassian female, an Ottoman subject, and about twenty-five years of
age, who sought refuge at the British Consulate. It appears that in
consequence of having received a beating she fled from her mistress,
with whom she had lived for many years, and that in the first instance
she solicited protection at the hands of the police in Constantinople.
One Hassan, a professional slave-dealer, appeared on the scene, and
claimed her on the ground that she was his “wife” or “concubine;”
but after a good deal of prevarication, subsequently pretended that
she was his slave. Hamdy Pasha, Minister of Police, in his reply to
Sir P. Francis’s complaint, took the singular line that slavery in
white, although not in black, women, was still in force in the Ottoman
empire.* Sir Henry Elliot, in bringing the matter before the Grand
Vizier, exposed the worthlessness of the slave-dealer’s evidence, and
then called his Excellency’s attention to the fact that “the Minister of
“ Police, in his zeal in espousing the interests of the dealer, speaks
“ of that individual as Hassan Effendi, marchand d’esclaves dtabli <\
“ FuUh , as if he acknowledged that trade to be legitimate and legal;”
adding that “ the declaration that the Sublime Forte does not sanction
* There was, perhaps, a certain basis of fact in the distinction which Hamdy
Pasha drew between white and black slaves. Sir Philip Francis, in 1870, thus
defined the position of slavery and the slave trade in Turkey“ 1. That slavery
"is still a legal institution in Turkey, in spite of vague professions of a desire to
' 1 abolish it. 2. That the negro slave trade is illegal though tolerated. 3. That
"slaves may be sold by private contract, but not by auction or publicly; and 4.
“That the white slave trade has never been prohibited."


“the traffic in slaves has been repeatedly made to her Majesty’s
“ Government, but it will be difficult to reconcile it with such acts as
“ have in this case been countenanced by so high a functionary as the
“ Minister of Police.”* Both Sir H. Elliot and Sir P. Francis make
it clear that in this case the official who above all others is necessarily
responsible for the execution of the laws for the protection of slaves,
or of individuals whose personal liberty is illegally endangered, was
hand-in-glove with the slave-trader; and that if the poor Circassian
fugitive had not found an asylum in the British Consulate, she would
without hesitation have been handed over to the tender mercies of
Hassan Effendi, “ marchand d'esclaves .”
Slavery, like polygamy, in Turkey is maintained in the interest of
a limited class. There is no reason to suppose that either of these insti-
tutions is in the least degree repugnant to the feelings of the Turks
who are married to one wife, or who, from lack of means, are unable
to indulge in the luxury of owning slaves. But it would obviously be
unjust to make the common people responsible for the acts of their
pashas and other great men. Slavery, no less than polygamy, takes
its root in the pride and lust of the wealthy few, who selfishly cling to
the corrupt customs of their race, and care only for those precepts
of the Koran which justify their evil deeds. It is against such
persons, and such only, that the indictment contained in these
pages is directed. If the African slave trade were effectually
abolished —and this is a policy which certainly ought not to be beyond
the power of united Europe to enforce —I believe that a deadly blow
would be struck at two institutions which, so long as they exist, will
absolutely prevent the superior class of Turks from making the
slightest real approach either to civilisation or to civilised modes
of thought. The gain to Turkey, if the great Powers were to
decide upon adopting measures for the total extinction of the slave
trade, would be incalculable. It is unnecessary for me to point out
what benefits would accrue to that unhappy continent which is now
being ravaged by slave-traders. But it is manifest that the explora-
tions of travellers, and even such enlightened undertakings as the one
which King Leopold is about to inaugurate in Central Africa, will
prove of little advantage to the negro race so long as the European
Powers shrink from enforcing the complete abolition of a system
which has already converted once populous districts into ghastly
solitudes, and threatens the depopulation and ruin of yet fairer
regions. England is bound by a thousand obligations to take the
lead in this great work, and it remains to be seen whether she will
prove true to her mission or abandon Africa to her fate.
* It is a pity that the papers do not inform us, either in this case or in that of
the Governor of Bengasi, ivhat was the ultimate result of the remonstrances we
addressed to the Porte.
i6


€f)e oasrtern (©uestion donation.
PAPERS ON THE EASTERN QUESTION
No. 8.
FALLACIES
OF THE
EASTERN QUESTION.
BY THE
Rev. WILLIAM DENTON, M.A.,
Vicar of St. Bartholomew , Criff legate;
AUTHOR OF “SERVIA AND THE SERVIANS,” “THE CHRISTIANS OF
TURKEY UNDER MAHOMEDAN RULE,” ETC. ETC.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION ASSOCIATION,
28, CANADA BUILDING, WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL FETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris New York.




FALLACIES OF THE EASTERN
QUESTION.
There may be a difference of opinion as to the amount of knowledge
possessed by the people of this country on the Eastern Question at the
moment when the news of the wholesale massacre in Bulgaria first
reached England; there can be no difference of opinion as to the sym-
pathy felt and expressed by Englishmen at the terrible sufferings of the
people of Bulgaria. The country labourer, who rarely interests him-
self with what is passing at a distance; the hard-worked artizan
in our towns; the busy commercial clerk, thought and spoke of
little else for some months of the past year. The sympathy felt was
almost universal, and would have been quite universal but for the
lack of information in some and the jealousy felt by others at the
possibility that the misrule of Turkey might be taken advantage of
by other Powers to the injury of English interests. A conversation
which I had a short time ago interested me so much that I noted
down, so far as I could remember, the line of argument and the
points raised by an old friend on the Turkish Question.
It was one of the unusually mild, almost warm, days which
occurred towards the end of the last month in the old year. I was
sauntering down the broad walk leading from the Uxbridge Road to
Prince’s Gate, enjoying the rare advantage of a dry afternoon, when I
saw an old college friend seated on one of the benches eagerly
devouring the contents of a daily paper. He was so intent upon this
that he did not notice my approach, and it was only on my addressing
him that he looked up from his paper.
“ So,” said he, “ I see your name among those present at what they
are pleased to call the Conference at St. James’s Hall.”
“Not only they,” I said, smiling, “but I have been calling it a
Conference.”
“Well,” he rejoined, “it doesn’t matter what it is called; what I
want to know is what you think of doing in the matter of Turkey
and its people ?”


“ That is a large question.”
“ It’s the real one,” said G., with animation; “ it’s of no use to pull
down unless you have a plan in hand to rebuild ; it’s of no use talking
wildly of turning out the Turk unless you have some one who can
take his place. I don’t ask you what you are going to undo —that’s
bad enough, I confess—but I want to know what you propose to do?”
D. And yet to pull down precedes to build up—to turn out an un-
desirable tenant must go before putting in a new one.
C. Yes, I grant that; but I don’t turn out an undesirable tenant
unless I contemplate a better one taking his place. Now tell me —
what I have never been told yet —what do you propose doing?
Remember, I am not defending the Turk.
D. I don’t venture to accuse you of that; but now to answer your
question. I have no proposals to make of turning out any one. I
want—l should rather say we want, for happily lam not alone —we
want to see the people of Turkey—for remember the people of Turkey
are not the Turks, but the Bulgarians, the Greeks, the Serbs—we want
to see these people have some security for life and limb, to possess
the enjoyment of the fruits of their industry, and a fair measure of
their family rights. And we want one thing more, that Europe should
be freed from the incessant worry, danger, and ruinous expense of
having to keep its armies ready for war on account of Turkish
misrule.
G. Well, but the Turk has promised, and Midhat Pasha is striving
earnestly, to set things right.
D. Midhat Pasha may remain in power, or he may be set aside at
any moment. The Turk has promised at intervals during the last
forty or fifty years, at least, to do what Midhat Pasha promises anew.
He has never performed a single promise of mending the condition of
the people who obey his rule.
G. They have terribly misgoverned, I admit. If they had not, we
should not have the present embroilment. lam not so childish nor
blind as to deny there is much injustice and stolid misrule in Turkey,
but I say “of two evils choose the least.” And a war of races, ending
in a general massacre and the convulsion of Europe and part of Asia,
is not a pleasant prospect for us, nor indeed for the people of those
countries whom you are taking under your protection.
D. A possible war of races —a possible massacre—a possible con-
vulsion throughout Europe and Asia! Have you any grounds for
assuming that any of these terrible things will ever happen ?
G. People who know these countries better than I pretend to do,
say all this is probable, and a wise man will avoid such a risk.
D. A wise man will not forecast evil when he is called upon to
think what is right. It is not a wise man but a slothful one who


shrinks from duty by saying, “a lion is in the path.” But a handful
of experience is worth a waggon load of conjecture. The Turkish fleet
was destroyed at Navarino, Greece was freed from the Turkish yoke,
the Sultan was coerced, and yet none of these things happened which
you dread. Why think they will happen now? We spent our trea-
sure, and poured out our blood in the Crimean war, for the defence
of Turkey, and our reward was Mussulman mutiny in India, massacre
of our people, and danger to the empire. I don’t say we should have
the same return again, but I do say that experience is against the
notion of danger to ourselves if we do right now.
G. Yes; but that is the question. Have we any right to interfere
between the Government of Turkey and its subjects ?
D. An Englishman’s house is said to be his castle; but, tell me,
have I not a right to interfere if my neighbour stores petroleum or
gunpowder in that castle of his ? If I hear cries for help proceeding
from his house, does not humanity demand that I should forget a
little about his house being his castle, and give help? And Turkey
■does store materials as dangerous as petroleum and gunpowder—a
justly discontented people. And every day we hear piteous cries for
help from fathers and mothers, and young maidens and infants,
whose first articulate cry is “Help! help!” and does not all this
constitute, I don’t say a right, but an obligation to interfere ?
G. The sufferings of these people I grant. I don’t deny that in
•some cases we might even be called on to interfere. I don’t think,
however, that has happened yet. Besides, whatever abstract right we
might have we have renounced by treaty, and as honest men we must
abide by our treaty, and that says—l mean the Treaty of Paris in
1856 —that neither collectively nor individually shall the Powers of
Europe interfere between the Porte and its subjects. I don’t re-
member the exact words, I quote the substance of the treaty.
D. A treaty is a solemn thing. Under the Treaty of Paris,
however, we relinquished no right. We never bound ourselves not to
interfere between the Porte and its subjects. You have, I think, fallen
into a very common error on that score. The ninth article of that
treaty, which is what you refer to, says that the firman which the
great Powers required the Sultan to issue “ cannot in any case give to
the said Powers the right to interfere, either collectively or separately,
in the relations of His Majesty the Sultan with his subjects, nor in the
internal administration of his empire.”* No one says the firman gave
any right, still less that it took from us any right. It did neither
one nor the other. The right of interfering when our safety is en-
dangered we have still, and our safety—the safety of all Europe—is
* General Treaty for the Establishment of Peace, with three Conventions
annexed thereto. Presented to both Houses of Parliament, 1856.


endangered by the misgovernment and brutality of the governing
powers in Turkey towards the bulk of its subjects. The right of our
common humanity was not given—it is not pretended that it is
diminished —by the firman which was issued, by the paper which was
blotted, and the promises which were made, and remain unfulfilled.
More than that, the history of the firman, or Hatt-i-Humayoon,
proves that we—whether from considerations of our safety, or of
our obligations as human beings, or from the fact that we had ex-
pended such great treasures, and so many lives, for the defence of
Turkey, because of one or all of these measures we assumed that we
possessed a right to interfere when humanity is outraged and the
peace of Europe endangered. The firman itself was an interference,
and the firman was demanded by the European Powers ; it bears,
indeed, the lie upon its front of being granted “spontaneously;” it is
known that this is untrue.
G. What, then, is its history? I suppose some suggestion was made
by the great Powers, but was it more than a suggestion ?
D. The history of the firman is this : on January the 9th, 1856,
during the negociations which resulted in the Treaty of Paris, the
great Powers agreed that it was essential to the preservation of peace
that the Christian subjects of Turkey should have the guarantees, long
promised by the Porte, at length carried into effect.
G. Not guarantees, surely ?
D. I am citing the words of the Porte, drawn up and insisted upon
by Lord Stratford de Redcliffe, after rejecting the terms proposed by
Fuad Pasha.* “ Fourth guarantee”—some misgiving seems to have
struck the editor of the Blue Book from which I quote, at that
awkward word, “guarantee,” so he translated it “Fourth point;” if,
however, you turn to the original, you will find that it stands thus —
“Fourth guarantee” —l. Effective measures shall be taken that the
guarantees promised to all the subjects of His Majesty the Sultan
may receive their full and entire effects.” f Then when this guarantee
had been entered into, not until then, the plenipotentiaries agreed to
the treaty. Now who were parties to this guarantee ?
G. Of course, the powers which signed the treaty.
D. There can be no question of this. The Sultan guaranteed to
England and to the other powers of Europe that “ every distinction or
designation tending to make any class whatever of the subjects of His
Majesty the Sultan inferior to another class, on account of their
religion, language, or race, shall be for ever effaced from the adminis-
trative protocol.” J It guaranteed protection to its Christian subjects,
* Correspondence respecting Christian Privileges in Turkey. Presented to both
Houses of Parliament, 1856, p. 60.
+ lb., p. 47. + lb., p. 50.


equality of taxation, the abolition of tax-farming, the entrance of
Christians into the army, in short, everything which it has not per-
formed. All this was done at the dictation of the great Powers,
and in consideration of these promises the Treaty of Paris was signed.
But surely the right which was exercised in requiring these promises
may be exerted in demanding their fulfilment; and the Powers by
whom these promises were required, and to whom these promises
were made, have a right, not under it, however, but by the law of
nations, to see they are performed. The integrity of the Ottoman
Empire was menaced, or invaded, in the demand for guarantees, and
in the acquiescence to such demand; it is too late then, when we ask
for the performance of a promise, to say we had no right to receive
such promise.
G. They have not, I fear, been fulfilled?
D. According to the unexceptional evidence of Sir Henry Bulwer,
the Turk never intended to perform what he had guaranteed. Writing
more than four years after the Treaty of Paris had been ratified, he
says —“ The Ottoman Government, when it undertook to place the
empire on a new foundation, was neither entirely sincere in its pro-
fessions nor did it clearly understand what it was about. It accepted
the announcement of great, immense, and sudden reforms less with a
desire to re-invigorate Turkey than to gain Europe. It was less occu-
pied with the laws it was to make than with the newspaper articles it
would produce.” * No wonder, then, since it was not “ entirely sincere
in its professions,” that all witnesses—consuls, ambassadors, and
foreign ministers, as well as travellers and residents in Turkey—
bear witness to these facts, that not a single one of these promises
made to better the miserable lot of its Christian subjects has ever been
fulfilled —has ever been attempted to be fulfilled —by the Sultan and
his advisers.
G. I grant that all this is bad —that the prospect is a very dreadful
one. But the Turks have been thoroughly frightened now, and we
cannot say what this new constitution may effect. I think, at least,
that we shall hear of no new massacres.
D. Resolutions taken in a moment of fright usually last as long as
the fright does. Turkey has been frightened before, and has promised,
but has forgotten its fright and its promises, and has gone on as it did
before it was frightened. I don’t believe in resolutions so born, and
I should be more hopeful that the Bulgarian horrors would not be
repeated, but for this that they are nothing new. They are, on a
larger scale, what is taking place daily there as well as in Armenia
and elsewhere. Besides, this massacre of women and children in
* Papers relating to Administrative and Financial Reforms in Turkey,
1854—61, p. 67.


Bulgaria is the eighth or ninth large massacre which has taken place
during the last three-quarters of a century in Turkey. It is a faithful
revelation of the every-day life of the poor oppressed people of Turkey.
G. Well, it is very sad, I know. It would be easier to know how to
act, but we must take care of the interests of this country, and these
interests require us to protect the integrity of the Turkish Empire.
D. Is such an assertion true? Do you mean that this empire of
Great Britain, on which it is boasted the sun never sets —which is
called the “ mistress of the seas ” —whose possessions are the leading
states of four continents, and whose wealth, “ the sinews of war,” is
unbounded—depends for her pre-eminence, her safety, her existence,
upon the fact that a handful of barbarians is permitted to outrage
humanity at its will, and put women and infants to a cruel death at its
pleasure? Cannot England exist and flourish unless she be the
sleeping-partner in such atrocious deeds ? Is justice and righteousness
the strength of a nation, or a base connivance at injustice and corrup-
tion, and the misery of unoffending people ?
G. No, no; you put a meaning on my words which I did not mean
them to have.
D. Pardon me. I am not taking your words, but lam stating a
common-place bugbear—l won’t call it argument —and this I have
not distorted. It is said frequently enough—too frequently—that we
must support Turkey, even though it does commit these atrocities, for
our own interest and safety.
G. We cannot afford to see Russia in possession of Constantinople
and the rest of European Turkey.
D. Clearly expressed. I would not see Russia there, neither would
the other powers of Europe. Why, however, when we seek to secure
these people from wrong; why, when we demand for them some
measure of freedom, must Russia be thrown in our teeth? You do
Russia much honour if you mean that freedom is an advantage only
to Russia. You do this country much dishonour if you plead that our
interest is to perpetuate tyranny and the debasement of the people.
We say, secure to these people some of the blessings of freedom, and
you answer, that will make them Russian. I should have thought
their freedom would have been incompatible with subjection either to
Russia or to the Turks. Of one thing lam sure, and that is that a
free and flourishing state would be the surest barrier against any
advances from the north. But this perpetual dread that Russia will
take possession of European Turkey, hold Constantinople, and
threaten in some way the road to India, is irrational and childish.
To do so would endanger Germany and Austria more even than it
would injure us, and neither of these Powers have shown any dis-
position to permit Russia to possess the line of the Danube, and so


hold these countries at her mercy. Russia could not then possess
European Turkey until she had annihilated Austria and crushed
Germany, and she is not likely to be allowed to do either; but until
she has done both we have no cause for alarm.
G. But granting that Russia cannot hope to possess these countries
now, may she not, by keeping them in a state of discontent, pave the
way for eventual conquest ?
D. If you dread this, the very dread should enlist you on the
side of Bulgaria, and make you desirous of the deliverance of this
people. It is only their continued ill-treatment which will make their
submission to Russia a possibility ; whereas a free Bulgaria would be
the surest of all barriers against the possibility of what you dread.
G. Whatever truth there may be in this, yet overt acts show that
Russia desires to possess European Turkey.
D. I do not believe that the possession of European Turkey is—at
least at present —compatible with the existence of the Russian Empire.
The attempt to incorporate European Turkey with its other posses-
sions would almost certainly lead to the breaking up of the Russian
Empire ; and this is the opinion of many Russians. But grant for a
moment that Russia is desirous of possessing the country from the
Danube to the Bosphorus, what policy can be more insane than that
of the Foreign Office of England in insisting upon the maintenance of
the people of Turkey in their chronic state of discontent; in turning
away, and taking good care that these people should know that we
turn away, from their cries for help; that we never plead on their
behalf; that with us the Sultan and the seraglio, with all its unspeak-
able abominations, is everything, and the poor suffering people
nothing; that for them our voice is never raised —nay, that if a too
zealous consul ever records some act of atrocity, it is carefully removed
from his report when laid before Parliament, lest the people of this
country should know of the evil doings of the Government of Turkey.
G. But are these charges true ?
D. As to the consular despatches, look at the Blue-book on the
condition of Turkey published in 1861, and you will learn how they
were extorted and then pruned and garbled. As to our apathy to the
sufferings of this people, let me give you an instance coming within
my own knowledge. I was at Constantinople, as you know, about six
years ago. One day, whilst I was talking to a friend, a poor Bulgarian
woman came in with her tale of woe, and, with sobs and cries, asked
my friend to assist her in procuring redress. Her sad story was one
of shameful outrage —of the carrying off of one child, of violence to
another which threatened to end in death. It was a single instance of
what the English public is now familiar with through the exertions of
the correspondents of the Daily News and the Times. When she had


finished her story, my friend turned to me. I saw that he waited to
hear some suggestion from me. “Let us go,” said I, “to Sir Henry
Elliott.” “ Sir Henry Elliott! ” said he ; “ I have tried that before,
and the only answer I ever got was, ‘The English Government
never interferes between the Porte and its subjects.’” “Not even,” I
said, “in such an atrocious case as this?” “Not even in such a case
as this,” replied my friend. “Well,” said I, “what can be done?”
“Nothing,” said he, “unless General Ignatieffwill take it up.” The
poor woman went to General Ignatieff: he listened kindly to her, and
promised to do what he could; and I went away with a feeling of
shame that England should force upon Russia the performance of
the simplest offices of humanity. This it is—this only it is—which
gives Russia influence in these countries. Russia needs not intrigue
with these people: we do that for her. Our inhumanity and compact
with the barbarians of the seraglio and the degraded beings of the
harem, give Russia the influence which she possesses, and stands in
lieu of all intriguing.
G. But when you say that England is losing the respect of these
people—for it comes to that—do you again speak from experience, or
report merely ?
D. More than once—more than twice—l have had almost identical
words used to me in different parts of Turkey. “ What is the reason
that England is always our enemy —always the friend of the Turk?”
When I heard these words for the first time I said, “ I don’t know that
England is your enemy.” “Why, then,” said my interrogator, who was
a priest—“why, then, is it, whenever any act of atrocity is perpetrated,
and a question is asked about it in your House of Parliament, persons
are always getting up to apologise for and defend the Turk?” I felt
that the priest had some right to his conclusion—that England was
a country hostile to the Christian races of Turkey, and the thick-and-
thin ally of the Turks, and that we were acting mischievously as to
our future influence by this indifference to the woes of our suffering
brethren.
G. Of course there are difficulties; though I own I wish that in
such a case as that which you mentioned just now we had interfered.
D. You need not utter your wish: lam sure you feel as every
man with a spark of humanity must feel. It is not the part of
England, it is alien to all her past history, to stand by the side of the
oppressor, to know of her evil deeds, to witness the tortures of the
oppressed, to hear their cries, and to shut its eyes and seal up its ears,
and look complacently, and say, “ It may be all very true that these
people are treated cruelly, but we must maintain all this, lest English
interests should suffer.” The man who says this does not deserve the
name of man. He may have the form of man —he is but a brute.


G. But again I say, What is the remedy ?
D. First and foremost, to understand the Eastern Question in its
simple broad outline. We have a poor oppressed people, under
daily torture : ought we to sympathise with them or with their task-
masters ? We have a wretched race dying out, a subject race
increasing, notwithstanding all its sufferings. Is it even our interest
to ally ourselves closely with the dying race, and to share with it the
hatred felt for it by the increasing race ? I can use no more fitting
words than those of Lord Derby when he was candidate for election at
Lynn in 1864. He then said, “I do not understand, except it be from
the influence of old diplomatic traditions, the determination of our older
statesmen to stand by the Turkish rule, whether right or wrong. I
think we are making for ourselves enemies of races which will very
soon become in Eastern countries dominant races; and I think we
are keeping back countries by whose improvement we, as the great
traders of. the world, should be the great gainers ; and that we are
doing this for no earthly advantage, either present or prospective.”
I ask only that the policy thus sketched should be carried out; but as
yet I see no indications that this is being done. We coldly turn
away from the people, even when we do not, as we sometimes do,
treat them with ostentatious contempt.
G. Have you any reason for using such a strong expression—
“ostentatious contempt?”
D. I was thinking just then of another scene which I also witnessed
a few years ago. I was at Belgrade at the first jubilee, in which the
Serbs celebrated the virtual independence of their country. Elderly
persons there were who had felt the oppression and survived the
barbarities of the Turkish rule: every child had heard from its
parents of the wrongs which at length had driven the people to insur-
rection, and had been the means of procuring their liberty. Many
whom I saw had witnessed the impalement of thirty-seven young men
on the slope of the fortress of Belgrade, of which Ranke speaks, and
had heard the cries of the tortured and dying men, and shared in the
other wrongs which maddened Servia and drove it to renew the war,
which ended happily in its independence. You may therefore imagine
the universal joy which reigned throughout Servia at this anniversary
of the accomplishment of its freedom. All the country flocked to
Belgrade, trade was at a standstill, it was a universal holiday. At the
sound of the cannon which proclaimed the festival, every European
flag was hoisted before the doors of the respective consulates save
that of England. England had no congratulations to offer to a free
people. As though this insult was not enough, the day after, when
Belgrade had resumed its usual state of quietness, and all flags were
struck, the English flag was hoisted in derision, and remained so until,


to calm the excitement of the Serbs at this unmannerly insult, the
Servian Minister sent and requested that it should be pulled down.
Is this treatment which a high-minded people ought to endure? Is
this conduct worthy of England? Is this the way we are checking
“Russian intrigues?” Is it not the way by which Russia is saved the
need of intriguing, even if she desired to intrigue ?
G. I had never heard of this affair of the flags; I am sorry to
know it now. It does seem to me strange and impolitic. However,
you will not deny that Russia does secretly intrigue in these countries?
D. What is done “secretly” can hardly be denied or indeed
asserted with any right. To talk of secret intrigues is to confess that
we are talking about that of which we have no proof, which it is as
easy to assert as to deny.
G. Well, I did not lay stress upon “secretly.” I suppose it is granted
that Russia does intrigue and foster discontent in these provinces?
D. I also will lay no stress on “secretly;” you have, however, only
used a word which some people are ever using. I don’t know anything
about intrigues. It is the nature of an “ intrigue ”to be secret and
clandestine. The French accuse, or did accuse, the English of
perpetual intrigues ; and “ perfide Albion ” has passed into an accepted
form of speech with them. The Russians suspect and charge us with
intriguing; I am not sure that the Americans would not join in the
cry. They may be all wrong; but I know no principle which will
always make foreign nations wrong in their accusations of us, and
we always right in our charges against them. But suppose I grant
the probability of these intrigues, and that Russia does “foster
discontent in these provinces.” To foster discontent implies that
discontent already exists ; you cannot foster what has no existence.
If so, and we were able to remove discontent, would there be any
room for intrigues ? It is the existence of this chronic state of dis-
content which makes an intrigue possible, and if we were to interfere
between the Porte and its subjects so far as to cause the governing
body to remove the grounds, the ample grounds, for discontent among
its subjects, we should provide not only for the well-being of these
poor oppressed people, but effectually check any movement of Russian
aggrandisement and prevent the success of any Russian intrigue.
You cannot persuade a well-governed people that it is ill-governed,
any more than you can make a full person believe that he is
starving from hunger. It is only the wretched misgovernment of
the Turkish provinces which makes it possible for Russia to intrigue,
if she does so. Therefore again I say, if Russia is intriguing in these
provinces, the foreign policy of England is the most strange and
senseless that can be imagined, the most calculated to realise what
we affect to fear, and to defeat its ends.


G. But then, granting the truth of much that you say, you put out
of sight the incapacity of the Christian races for rule, so that we come
back to what we started from. If you put out the Turks, who can
take their place ?
D. Is it true that the Christian people of Bulgaria, Bosnia, and
other provinces are unfit to rule ? I ask you to look at Servia, which
has been at peace, and has made solid progress, ever since its virtual
independence. It has made greater advances in education, relatively
speaking, than we have. A school, well provided with the necessary
school apparatus, is to be found in every village. The children are
well taught. I remember strolling accidentally one day into a school,
to which I was attracted by hearing the hum of the multiplication-
table. My visit was wholly unexpected. A little boy happened to
be standing by the master’s desk, repeating his lesson in geography.
Turning from the actual lesson, the master began to ask the little
village lad questions as to English geography; and I venture to say
that no lad taken at random in an English school could have ap-
proached this lad in his knowledge of geography. Then as to the
fruits of their teaching, I appeal to all who know anything of the Serb
agricultural labourers and they will own their superiority, as a class,
to those of our own country. But I need not dwell on this. They
have proved their capacity for rule, and from them we may fairly
infer that the Serb districts under the Turkish yoke will acquit them-
selves as well when they also are free. Experience warrants us in this
conclusion. I ask you, again, to consider Roumania. There it is
confessed, though the elements of society were far more corrupt than
they are in Bulgaria, yet since the withdrawal of Turkish pashas
and Turkish troops the growth and improvement of the country have
been marvellous. Therefore, judging by the past, I conclude that the
people of Turkey are not so unfit, even for immediate freedom, as
many persons allege. Certain lam that every year they remain under
the degrading yoke of Turkey they are rendered more unfit for
eventual rule. But you forget one thing. Experience is better than
theory; fact is superior to imagination. You don’t think the Bulga-
rians fit to rule. You think Bulgaria free might be a spectacle of
misgovernment ?
G. Others think so. I have had no experience which would
warrant me in saying whether the Bulgarians would be fit for self-
government or the reverse. I can only rely on the judgment of others.
D. But the others who say so—have they experience? Have the
Bulgarians ever failed in this way ?
G. No, for the best of all reasons: they have not misgoverned
their country because they have had no opportunities of governing.
D. And the Turks—have they governed or misgoverned Bulgaria ?


G. Well, I can’t deny that there has been much misrule. I have
said that before.
D. Then it comes to this. You know the Turks have misruled.
You know from the past they do not govern, but misgovern. At the
worst, the Bulgarians could only do the same, and therefore we cannot
change for the worse: but we have no reason to believe they would
be incapable of managing their own affairs. All experience is against
the Turks, no experience is against the Bulgarians; and in such
a matter again I say, “ A handful of experience is worth a wagon-load
of conjectures.” Many faults these people of Turkey no doubt have ;
but in their case the maxim is surely applicable, “ The faults of the
people are the crimes of their governors.” Slavery makes people
cringing; it compels them to lie; it makes them lazy, since they
have no security that they may reap the harvest of their industry ;it
implants and then fosters many evils ; but this is the strongest of all
reasons why slavery should end; and when the material evils of
slavery have been removed, then only may we hope that the taint of
slavery will also be removed from the heart of the slave.
G. Well, you have not answered my question. How are we
driving these people into the arms of Russia ?
D. By our injustice toward them ; by our transparent partiality for
their oppressors. This is doing what you attribute to Russia. We
are prolonging the misery of our fellow-Christians. We encourage
the Turk in his wrong-doing toward them, and that is as unchristian
as it is impolitic. Continue to satisfy the Turk, as we are doing, that
no act of atrocity, however great, will ever induce England to use
coercion, and we shall have, repetitions of Bulgarian and Syrian
massacres. Once satisfy the Christian people, as we have almost
done, that there is no hope for them from England, that we are not
deaf only but dead to their cries, and then they must in their misery
turn elsewhere for help, and may at length get over their repugnance
to Russia, and throw themselves into her arms.
G. But surely you would not have us go to war as the allies of
Russia ?
D. Thank God, the attitude of the English people will not allow of
our going to war as the ally of Turkey. But in reply to your question,
I say the determination to go to war would effectually preserve
peace.
G. Yet the Turks showed by their spirit at the Conference
that they would racist interference, that they would not endure
coercion.
D. They did so, but then the instructions to Lord Salisbury were
that no word as to coercion was to be used, and this the Turks soon
knew. Now tell me what would be the power of a policeman in the


midst of a mob, if it were known beforehand that his power was
limited to persuasion, and that he was forbidden on any account to
use his truncheon or to arrest an offender. The knowledge that if he
sees fit he may use his truncheon and carry off an offender is the best
means by which he is able to keep the peace. It is so with Turkey.
Had they not known that coercion was not to be resorted to, they
would have done what was required, the demands of Europe would
have been deferred to, and the peace of Europe would have been
assured.
Well, said my friend, rising from his seat and folding his news-
paper, I don’t say that you have convinced me, but I own you have
given me something to think about, and that I am not so sure as I
was on two or three points as when you came up. I shall be glad to
talk this matter over again when I have thought more upon it.
D. And in the meantime
G. Well, I’ll think over what you have been saying. I promise
you so much.
And thus our conversation ended.




€f)t ©asitcrn Question Sfestortatiom
PAPERS on THE EASTERN QUESTION.
No. 9.
TURKISH RULE
IN
CRETE.
BY
J. HILARY SKINNER, Esq.,
Author of “Roughing it in Crete''
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION ASSOCIATION,
28, CANADA BUILDING, WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL FETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris «st-» New York .
1877.




TURKISH RULE IN CRETE.
The island of Crete, or Candia, offers an example of the blighting
effect of continued misgovernment and oppression, which may be
profitably studied at the present time. It is an island both picturesque
and fertile, with a splendid climate and with great natural advantages.
The production of wine and of olives in Crete might be enormous
under favourable economic conditions, whilst there is pasturage on
the mountain-sides for numerous flocks and herds, and the mulberry
flourishes so luxuriantly in some of the Cretan valleys that a consider-
able amount of silk might be annually produced with a very small
outlay of capital. All this fair scene, from the rugged mountain-tops
to the beautiful sea-shore, appears destined by Nature to be a garden
of delight and plenty in the southernmost corner of Southern Europe.
But the curse of Turkish rule has been upon it for a couple of
centuries, and Crete has been blighted and impoverished year by year,
instead of making any onward progress, however slow.
Most Englishmen have an idea that Crete was involved in the
ruin of the Byzantine Empire, when Mahomet 11. conquered Con-
stantinople in 1433. The island had, however, passed under Venetian
rule long before the fall of the Greek capital, and for two hundred
years after that event it was bravely defended by the Venetians against
every effort of the Turks to obtain possession of so rich a prize. There
was no great cordiality between the Cretans, who were orthodox
Greeks in faith, and the Venetians, who were zealous Romanists.'
But the vigorous rule of the Italian Republic was a blessing and a
protection to the islanders, compared with what they were afterwards
to endure. They were at least safe from wholesale massacre and ruin
whilst the Lion of St. Mark could hold at bay the fiery hordes of
Islam. Trade and agriculture flourished ; the villages were large and
prosperous, and there were many pleasant villas, built in the more
fertile valleys, whose ruins still attest .the comfort and luxury of that
bygone time. It is not positively known how large was the population
of Crete in the most flourishing days of the Byzantine Empire. Some
authorities suppose it to have Reached as high a figure as a million


and a half; whilst others doubt whether the island ever contained
more than a million inhabitants. This was the approximate number
of the Cretans under Venetian rule, when the island was certainly
very prosperous, and there is no reason to suppose that its population
had greatly diminished up to that period. A million of people then
were saved from Turkish misgovernment so long as Venice could
retain her hold upon Crete. They were in a dangerous position, these
islanders, in the very corner of Europe ; with a threatening cloud of
Asiatic barbarism ever hanging on their eastern horizon, and with the
strong hands that had once been so well able to defend them growing
feebler as years passed by.
It was just a century after the battle of Lepanto that the fatal
moment arrived for Crete of Turkish conquest. In 1669 the city
of Candia, the Sebastopol of its day, was taken by the Turks after
a desperate and protracted defence, in which the Venetians were
aided by five thousand Frenchmen, and in which prodigies of valour
are reported as being performed on both sides. The Turks, who were
in overwhelming force, fired about two hundred thousand shot and
shell into the town, and the besieged garrison made several sorties
to drive the besiegers from their works. So great a siege excited
interest throughout Europe : “ Candia ” was a word on every lip, and
had not the Western nations been too much pre-occupied by their
own quarrels and jealousies, some effectual help would doubtless have
been sent to prevent‘the conquest of Crete. As it was, the Cretans
were warmly pitied and sympathised with by many who could afford
them no material aid. The black cloud that had so long been
threatening their island had now settled upon them in terrible earnest,
and they disappeared from the European family as completely as
though they had been the leeward vessel of some squadron upon a
dangerous coast, which went ashore and perished with all hands.
The island was overrun from end to end. Some villages were
plundered and burned, others were spared for a heavy ransom,
Thousands of prisoners were carried away to Asia Minor to be sold
as slaves. In a word, the Turks were victorious, and used their victory
after their own fashion. But they displayed, besides courage and
ferocity, a gleam of that talent for taking root among a conquered
people and using the converts to Mahometanism to keep down the
unconverted Giaours, which had given them so strong a hold upon
Bosnia, Albania, and other provinces. Very few Osmanlis, or genuine
Turks, ever settled in Crete. Those who did so were absorbed by the
Mussulman population, of Greek origin, and the language of the
island remained entirely Greek,: save for a few devotional phrases
adopted by the converts to Islam, , and for a smattering of Turkish
picked up from the soldiers in the fortified towns. But the “ Cretan
Turks,” though they spoke the language of their Christian neighbours,


and followed the same pursuits, and wore a similar costume, were
elevated to the dignity of a separate caste by the fact of their religious
belief. They stalked through the Christian villages as lords and
masters against whom no one dared to raise a hand, whatever their
conduct might be ; for behind the local minority of “True Believers ”
was the irresistible force of the great Mahometan Empire, which
would stick at no cruelty, however revolting, which would shrink from
no infamy, however disgusting, to stamp’ out a spirit of rebellion. The
Christians had nothing for it but to bear their hard lot as best they
could, and try to live on terms of something like mutual under-
standing with their tyrannical countrymen, whilst the Turkish Pashas
made use of these last as scouts and skirmishers to maintain their
ascendency among the mountains. It was from Constantinople that
all political authority came. The Cretan Turks themselves, though
favoured on account of their religion, and made useful, as above
described, by the dominant race, were mere worthless provincials in
the eyes of their rulers. The haughty governor, whose nod was a
signal of ruin or prosperity to those beneath him ; the garrison of
foreign soldiers to support his sway ; the judges and the higher func-
tionaries of every sort, were Osmanli Turks. The Turkish language
was used in the courts of justice and in all official acts, though
scarcely any one could understand it. Far from trying to improve
the resources of the country, or from spending any of its revenues
upon public works, the sole aim of Turkish administration was to
squeeze as much money as possible out of the Cretans in a given time.
A Pasha who was wise in his generation might soon make a comfort-
able fortune, which he could spend on the shores of the Bosphorus
when his rivals should have procured his recall. Whilst as to im-
provement of the island, it was, indeed, a thankless task. There were
no administrative traditions in that direction. The next Governor
would be sure to undo whatever little good had been done, and the
people, if suspected of having enriched themselves, would only be the
fitter subjects for future extortion.
We can understand the position of modern Crete all the better by
following thus briefly the decline from Venetian protection, with some
exactions and many bickerings, to Turkish conquest with the dead
weight of its senseless tyranny. It is not surprising that trade and
population steadily declined under such a system as that of the Turks.
Instead of a million of inhabitants—the number which Crete is supposed
to have contained in the middle of the seventeenth century —there were
less than three hundred thousand Cretans, Mussulman and Christian,
by the beginning of the nineteenth century. Such roads as there had
formerly been, were now almost impassable, nothing having been done
to keep them in order; and the half-ruined villages, with traces of more
habitations than could now be occupied, showed how woefully the


numbers of the people had shrunk. It was idle to dream of change or
improvement with such a dominant race as the Constantinopolitan
Turks. Those were not days of sham constitutions and of promises
made to be broken, but of downright old-fashioned despotism, of the
“Off with his head!—So much for Buckingham!” kind, and a
Christian dog who did not do as he was bid took his chance of death
or mutilation. Only a few of the most inaccessible villages, like those
of the Sphakiotes, for example, in Western Crete, enjoyed a rough im-
munity from constant oppression, through the difficulty of getting at
them and the danger of driving their inhabitants to despair. The rest
of the Cretans were duly squeezed and harried by one Pasha after
another, until Turkish supremacy was violently assailed by the Greek
Revolution of 1821. The flame, first kindled on the mainland,
soon spread to Crete. The Christian inhabitants of the island rose
against their oppressors, drove the Mahometans into the fortresses,
and there blockaded them so strictly that they were reduced to great
straits by want of provisions. Turkey was in no position to despatch
powerful reinforcements to her army in Crete, and for the first time
since its conquest the island stood almost free—its inhabitants armed
and desperate, its oppressors enfeebled and distressed. The insurgents
had not the means of besieging the fortresses, though they closely
blockaded them by land; and as the Turks were able to throw in
supplies by sea they still retained a hold upon the island. But it was a
more equal struggle than that which has occurred in our own time, for
Turkey was not then supplied with English-built war steamers sailed
under English guidance. She could not then establish a blockade of
Crete so strict and exhausting as that of 1867-8. She established, in
fact, scarcely any blockade at all, for her hands were full of other work
just then, and the swift-sailing Hydriote brigs could easily outmanoeuvre
her clumsy frigates. I have heard old men describe the ease with
which communications with the outer world were kept up in those
days, and speak regretfully of the busy trade in certain secluded bays,
where quite a fleet of small craft would be seen at anchor when the
wind had favoured a voyage from Greece. Italian vessels, also, would
put in to the coast of Crete, to do a profitable though risky business
in native products, which were exchanged for various foreign supplies.
Nor were the lonian Islanders wanting in this kind of enterprise : and
many a cargo was brought by them to the extemporised markets in
quiet nooks upon the shore of Crete.
But though the unhappy island had almost shaken itself free, and
though the intervention of England, France, and Russia had destroyed
the Turko-Egyptian fleet at Navarino, it was destined that the Cretans
should be handed back to another period of servitude. Less fortunate
than their kindred of the present kingdom of Greece, the Cretans were
shut out on the wrong side of the arbitrary line by which that kingdom


was limited. All the bloodshed of the struggle they had made to gain
their liberty, all the sacrifices they had endured, went for nothing.
The European diplomatists who had taken the matter in hand, were
afraid of making Greece too strong—a ridiculous fear, which has
ended in making her far too weak for satisfactory progress—and
instead of rounding off the Greek kingdom with Thessaly, Epirus,
and Crete, they restored these three provinces to Mahometan rule. It
is a proof of the political foresight of the late King Leopold of Belgium,
that, when offered the throne of Greece and somewhat inclined to
accept it, he stipulated, as an indispensable condition, that Thessaly,
Crete, and Epirus should be added to the kingdom which it was
proposed to erect. Alas! for the Cretans, who were thus calmly
consigned to another half century of benighted despotism and to all
the cruel uncertainties which still shroud their future. The tyrant’s
hold upon the island had become so weak that a word from the
Western Powers would have detached it for ever from his Empire.
Driven into their fortresses, pressed by famine and enfeebled by
disease, the Turks would have capitulated at the first demonstration
against them of European war-ships. Crete might have been quietly
joined to Greece, and would have caused from that moment no more
trouble to foreign diplomacy than has the Morea, or Attica, or any
other part of the Hellenic kingdom.
As to the Cretan Turks, they would, no doubt, have suffered the
loss of their invidious privileges by being received within the pale of
civilised Europe. As subjects of King Otho, they could no longer
have lorded it over their Christian neighbours. We may even admit
that they would have stood at a disadvantage, politically speaking, for
some few years, and would have had to sing very small where once
they helped to rule the roost; but they would have escaped from the
Pashas, and been free to profit by the improved condition of their
country. They were often petty tyrants among the Christians, it is
true, and had whatever pleasure that fact might give them ; but they
were almost as often made to feel the weight of authority themselves
when they happened in any way to provoke their alien governors from
Stamboul. Thus it would have been an advantage even to the Cretan
Turks to be annexed to Greece. They would have settled down into
peaceable citizens of a constitutional state, as have the Mahometan
Greeks who remained in Greece after its emancipation. Above all
things, they would have avoided the being put forward more and more
as the champions of a detested rule, and made to sacrifice themselves,
when occasion arose, on behalf of Mahometan ascendency. It is
difficult to ascertain the exact proportion of the Christians to the
Mussulmans in Crete, for efforts have been made by the advocates of
Turkey to exaggerate the importance of the Mussulman minority. The
probable proportion, from the most reliable data, is that of five or six


Cretan Christians to one Cretan Turk, or say in round numbers about
220,000 Christians and 40,000 Turks. There cannot be anything like
an equality of numbers between them, it is certain; whilst the utter
inability of the Cretan Turks to make head against the Christian
insurgents, without the support of regular troops, suggests a doubt
whether even the number which I have given as most probable does
not exaggerate the strength of the True Believers in the island. We
must remember that, besides being better armed and full of martial
confidence, the Cretan Turks are all on the side of authority, and that
the Christians, though they have ventured much and suffered heavily,
have never succeeded in effecting a levy en masse against the Govern-
ment. If, then, we take my suggestion as rather within the mark,
there would have been a minority of less than a sixth of the inhabitants
of the island to be politically assimilated ; and when Greece became a
Constitutional Kingdom the Mussulmans of Crete would have been
powerless for mischief.
It was not merely that the European Powers failed to do their
duty by the Cretans at the end of the war of the Greek Revolution.
They failed also to give Greece a fair chance in her new career. The
little kingdom, shorn of its natural proportions, was exposed to the
danger of a lurking ambition of further extension, which could not but
disturb men’s minds in future years. As Greece became more pros-
perous and civiliSed, her people were certain to look, with longing,
upon those kindred provinces still held in bondage. The provinces, on
the other hand, were tempted by the sight of the comparative progress
which Greece had made. Whilst the smoking ruins which the
Turks and Egyptians left behind them were rising into busy modem
towns and the damages of the war were being steadily made good by
the independent Greeks —whilst population increased, and schools
were opened in every village—the subjected Greeks remained in
dismal servitude. Thessaly, Epirus, and Crete were doomed, by the
selfishness and incapacity of Western statesmen, to give the Turks a
further opportunity of characteristic misgovernrrient. No wonder that
the Turkish provincials looked with envy and with hope to the Hellenic
kingdom. Strange as some of our slow-going Conservatives may think
it, it is, nevertheless, perfectly true, that a weak poverty-stricken realm,
as Greece seems to us, can be regarded as almost a land of promise,
from the standpoint of an oppressed Rayah. Greece had not wealth
or power, in our sense of those words, but she was free from the in-
tolerable yoke of the Turks. She had a National Assembly, and a
national press—her flag was recognised on the seas, and her villagers
could hold up their heads, as men who had neither insult nor brutality
to fear on account of their religion. This is why the provincials looked
to Greece for sympathy and help. There is no need to invent stories
of deep-laid plots and of a wide-spread political propaganda. The


most formidable engines which the Greeks employed against Turkey,
in the thirty years which succeeded their liberation, were the school
and the printing-press. The most dangerous thing possible to the
perpetuity of Turkish rule in the Hellenic provinces was the develop-
ment of a national feeling among the luckless provincials. Every
trader who came among them, with experiences of independent Greece,
helped to spread the idea of national unity. Every young doctor who
had studied at Athens and who afterwards settled in Turkey, was,
more or less, a political emissary, though he might not know it. The
Powers when they established Greece had gone too far, if their wish
was to bolster up what remained of Turkey in Europe to the end of
time, and had not gone far enough to make the Hellenic race content
and united.
In one sense Crete was freed from the Turks at the end of the war
of the Greek Revolution. The island was handed over to Ali Pasha of
Egypt, and received its Governors for several years from Cairo instead
of from Constantinople. But the condition of the people was far from
improving under their Egyptian taskmasters ; and the only peculiarity
of the new system was, that Mussulmans as well as Christians w'ere
now suspected of treason, being no longer bound by their religious pre-
judices to support their actual sovereign. Several hundred prominent
men of both religions were executed, with impartial ferocity, in 1835,
on the rumour of an intended rising; and it seemed as if their brother-
hood in misfortune might give the jarring creeds some ground of
political sympathy. The Egyptian rule in Crete came, how'ever, to a
sudden end. Ali Pasha’s victorious attack upon his master the
Sultan, led to the Treaty of London and to the intervention of the
Four Powers. The Egyptians lost Crete and Syria ; Turkey was once
more rehabilitated, and the Cretans found themselves back again under
their ancient oppressors. They were governed much in the old way,
despite the publication of the Hatt-i-sherif and the Hatt-i-houmayoun.
It was very w’ell to say that all religions were tolerated, and to declare,
by Imperial Decree, that Christian and Turk should be on the same
footing in the eye of the law-—a Cretan who had tried to assert his
equality would soon have found that theory and practice were different
things. Whatever the foreign public might be told, it was not in-
tended by those in power in the provinces that Turkish reform should
be more than skin deep. The dilemma may be briefly stated thus.
A Pasha sent to govern a province looked upon it as an orange to be
squeezed. To squeeze the orange it must be firmly held ; to hold it
firmly the local Mussulmans must be kept in tolerably good humour ;
disagreeable incidents must be hushed up, and troublesome com-
plainants be sent about their business. Therefore the Christians
could not be encouraged to complain and the Mussulmans could not
be checked in any overbearing or tyrannical acts. Add to this, that


Crete enjoyed the full benefit of the clumsy Turkish method of col-
lecting taxes, with its grievous exactions by the tax-gatherers, and you
have a state of things sufficiently uncomfortable. If a Cretan Christian
suffered any outrage or injury from a Turk it was almost impossible to
bring the offender to justice. The judges of the Superior Courts in the
island were foreigners, speaking a foreign language. The law which
they professed to administer was the law of the Koran. A Christian’s
oath could not be received on the more solemn occasions of judicial
decision, and even where it was received it would not be permitted to
weigh for a moment against that of a True Believer. Well might the
Cretans sigh for deliverance from their hard lot, and be willing to run
some risks rather than continue in bondage.
From the time of the exchange of Turkish for Egyptian rule in
Crete, in 1840, until the outbreak of the insurrection in 1866, there was
only one attempt at a rising against the Turks, under a certain Hadji
Michalis, which failed without attaining very formidable proportions.
The people were not content. How could they be? But they were
not sufficiently desperate to stake their all upon the doubtful issue of
a struggle against Turkish power, without some hope of outside help.
Nearly twenty years passed away after Hadji Michalis had failed to
rouse the Island, before circumstances were ripe for another attempt.
During these years the Turks were as objectionable as ever, in matters
of fact, though in theory they had promised good treatment to all. It
was vain to gloss over the real state of things by smooth phrases about
reform, whilst the dominant class was becoming more and more
insolent, and the tax-gatherer more and more extortionate. The very
attempt to civilise Turkey, by giving her a national debt and a fleet of
steamers, made matters worse in the outlying provinces. Money was
so urgently needed at head-quarters that the screw was put on with
increasing severity; until the tax-payers could hardly get a livelihood
out of their land. If the people complained to their Government, as
the Cretans did in 1858, in the form of a humble petition of grievances,
they were put off with the empty promise that everything should be
set right ; and matters went on just as before. If the people remained
doggedly silent, bearing what they had to bear, for fear of worse evils
that might come upon them in case of resistance, it was declared, by
sympathisers with the Turks, that everybody was happy and pros-
perous. So the growing discontent on one side, and the angry
suspicion on the other, became more irreconcilable as years went by.
The promises of 1858 remained unfulfilled, as regarded substantial
reforms, whilst a weak though well-meaning Governor, Ismail Pasha,
put forward his plans for improving agriculture, and even set about
opening schools in some of the villages, for the instmetion of young
Cretans. He came too late to check the current of events, though
he deserves some credit for his personal efforts at conciliation. The


truth was that the Cretans had become almost desperate enough for
war, and a very little outside encouragement was all that was needed
to make them take the plunge.
When the Cretan chiefs met at Omalo in May, 1866, to consider
their grievances and to petition the Porte for redress, there was much
to encourage them in the political situation of Greece. Some four
years previously, a revolution, as sudden as it was bloodless, had
driven King Otho into exile, and Prince George of Denmark had
mounted the Greek throne amid the acclamations of the people.
There was a feeling that the old policy of caution and timidity might
be thrown aside now that the conservative influence of Austria had
received so severe a check. Many Greeks were sanguine enough
to imagine that even England would be more inclined to favour
a young monarch allied to her own Royal House, a Protestant in
faith and thoroughly Constitutional, than she had been to favour
Catholic Otho. Others, who did not go so far as to hope for any
active help from England, were encouraged by the evident revival
of Russia’s strength and by the anxious pre-occupation of Austria in
her quarrel with the Prussian Court. It was evidently a favourable
moment for the Christians in Turkey, when their arch-enemy, Austria,
was occupied elsewhere. I will not stop to discuss the various
theories which have been propounded, as to the exact foreign in-
fluence which induced the Greeks to encourage the Cretans to make
a try for freedom. To those who can see nothing but the hand of
Russia in every move on the Eastern chess board, it is useless to offer
other explanations; whilst, to more reasonable persons, it may seem
an open question whether Bismarck or Napoleon 111. was the more
likely to have set the ball in motion. My own belief is that the
Greeks were not urged on by any foreign Power, but that they
gradually drifted into helping the Cretans through earnest sympathy
with their cause, and traditional dislike of Turkey, whose cruelties,
the elder inhabitants of her some-time province could well remember.
The Cretans did not rise hap-hazard in 1866, on the spur of sudden
provocation, but they took the ordinary steps of prudent men who
desire redress of grievances, yet shrink from the terrible risks of war.
After the chiefs had met at Omalo, a remote spot high up amongst
the Western Mountains, and had prepared their petition, there was a
period of suspense, during which Ismail Pasha tried to persuade the
malcontents to accept his assurance that matters should be set straight
some day, if only time were allowed to the Porte to carry out its
magnanimous intentions. But the Cretans had had enough of empty
promises, and maintained their threatening attitude whilst their
Petition was on its way to Constantinople. It is said that arms were
distributed among the Christian villages, by some of the principal
chiefs, who had managed to obtain a supply from abroad. Others


declare that a certain number of old-fashioned flint-lock pieces had
long been hidden in the island, even from the time of the Greek
Revolution, and that very few rifles of modern make were possessed
by the Cretans until later in the year, when blockade runners began to
arrive from Greece. Certain it is, that the Christian part of the people
was very poorly armed, whole villages being often without a single
fire-lock; and that, had not the men of the mountains been better
prepared than their kindred of the plains, an attempt at insurrection
would scarcely have been possible. The Turks, however, who knew
that their Government was certain to try what terrorism could do
before they made any concession, thought it well to withdraw the
outlying Mussulman inhabitants to the shelter of the fortresses. Such
a measure, not unreasonable in itself, caused serious alarm to the
Christian villagers, who well knew what it portended. Now that the
Moslem families were safe from reprisals, it would be all the easier for
those in power, to organise bands of Cretan Turks to serve as guides
to the regular troops. This calling in of True Believers to the safety
of their ramparts, was an ominous precaution, which boded ill for what
was next to come.
In the middle of the summer of 1866, measures were taken to
disarm the Christians, and a detachment of troops which came to
seize the National Committee was fired upon by the people. This
was like applying a torch to a powder magazine. The angry Turks
treated those insurgents whom they could catch with great brutality.
Villages were plundered, women were outraged, and many wounded
Cretans were hacked to pieces by the yataghans of their Moslem
neighbours. The insurgents, on the other hand, took vigorous
measures to avenge these attacks. Many a stalwart Moslem was
struck down by the unerring bullets of the hardy and patient moun-
taineers. It became a service of danger to go up country on foraging
expeditions, and the Turkish Governor called loudly for reinforcements.
At first the Porte had been incredulous of active resistance, treating
the whole matter with its usual lazy indifference ; but when the news
arrived of actual fighting in Crete, there was a sudden outburst of
rage and energy among the ruling Pashas. The Christian dogs, who
were not content with promises, who dared to resent murder and
violation, and to ask reforms in a threatening way, must be promptly
suppressed. So stern old Mustapha, a man who had taken part
in the war of the Greek Revolution and who had had many a
rough bout with the Cretan mountaineers, was sent to replace his
son-in-law Ismail, and several battalions of Turkish regulars were
despatched in hot haste to the scene of action. Just in proportion,
however, to the increased efforts of the Porte was the increasing
stream of volunteers and munitions of war which flowed from Greece
to the insurgent camp. All the restless spirits of the kingdom were


burning to strike a blow for so holy a cause. Many lads quite inex-
perienced in military matters, forced themselves into the volunteer
bands, fancying that, once on Cretan soil, they should know how to
fight by instinct. Many others, who knew only too much of rough and
desperate ways, sought this occasion of getting out of reach of the
authorities at home. There were some Garibaldian volunteers in the
motley throng, and several officers of experience who had served in
the Greek army—among them, notably, Zimbrakaki, Coroneos, and
Leonidas Petropoulaki. Then, too, there was that grand old figure
Demetrius Petropoulaki, a hero of the Greek Revolution, who,
though bowed by age and wounds, was full of fiery zeal against his
traditional foes. It may be roughly estimated that, during the
autumn of 1866, the insurgents received an accession to their strength
of more than fifteen hundred men in the shape of volunteers from
Greece, including nearly a hundred foreigners, Garibaldians and
others, who cast in their lot with the Greeks. During the same
period the Turks received reinforcements of regulars and irregulars
amounting to nearly twenty thousand men; so that the balance of
physical force was steadily on their side. They could not, it is true,
put down the insurrection, but they could, and did, ravage the country
far and near; making long skirmishing expeditions to burn this or
that village, opposed by the Cretans every inch of the way with a
scattered fire of concealed riflemen, and pursued by the same active
enemy during their return to the fortresses.
Much stress has been laid, in some quarters, on the help which the
Greek volunteers gave to the Cretan insurgents. It has even been
asserted that the insurrection owed its force to these irrepressible out-
siders. Nothing could be more untrue. The insurrection was the
result of Turkish misgovemment, and owed its force to the cruel
measures of repression which made thousands of people homeless and
desperate. Then, too, there was utter want of faith in Turkish pro-
mises—a want of faith which every page of Turkish history amply
justifies. The Cretans who struggled so hard against ovenvhelming
odds knew very well by past experience what promises of good
government would practically amount to. They were not, like the
blinded Turcophiles of Western Europe, living in a world of romance,
with the Thousand and One Nights as their nearest approach to actual
life, and with a fatal facility for high-class constitution-mongering.
To a Cretan insurgent the Turk lacked that poetical gloss with which
his Western admirers are apt to endow him. He was merely a stern
and cruel master, who might be killed or driven away, but who could
not be converted to civilised practices. I have heard it denied that
the Turk has ever had a fair chance in Europe. What, in the name of
common sense, does this mean ? Are not his four centuries of sterile
domination an example of as fair a chance as was ever thrown away


by ignorant brutality? He has had only too much chance, and those-
who laiow him best can best appreciate how completely he has failed.
We seldom get a confession of his past misdeeds except in way of
promises for the future, but these promises of amendment are the most
telling confessions that could possibly be made. What should we
think in private life of a penitent who cheerfully promised to leave off
picking pockets and beating his grandmother ? Yet such is the usual
course of Turkish repentance.
During those anxious bustling days of the Cretan insurrection, it
was sad to see truth and justice perverted at every step for the tyrant’s
sake. Keen Europeans watched every phase of the struggle as men
might watch the writhings of a victim at the stake, willing to seize upon
the slightest word that might betray a less noble character than his
martyrdom demanded. Anglo-Turkish diplomatists minimised the
gravity of the situation in the interest of their friend the Sultan.
Anglo-Turkish consuls were careful to send reports which would be
acceptable at head-quarters, whilst the cosmopolite scoundrels of Pera
advised the Turks how to put their best foot foremost and make the
worse appear the better cause. I am often obliged to ask myself
whether such and such a bygone blue-book or grave newspaper
article can be other than a humourous farce disguised in official lan-
guage, when I look back to insurgent Crete as I remember it, and to
insurgent Crete as it was fancifully sketched for the benefit of Western
Europe. The Turcophiles revelled in damaging disclosures, invented
for their behoof, of divided counsels among the insurgents and of
shortcomings of the Greek committees. To the Turcophile imagina-
tion Crete was a happy contented island, loving the Sultan above all
things, and troubled by a horde of half a million Greek volunteers,
who, despite their ferocity, never succeeded in causing any real dis-
turbance. Now the fact was that there existed as real and as de-
termined an insurrection as could be desired by the most zealous
anti-Turk." Thousands of the Sultan’s soldiery perished in fair stand-
up fighting on the mountain sides, and thousands more were carried
back wounded to the fortresses. A National Assembly, which repre-
sented an immense majority of Cretans, held meetings openly in the
up country, with which meetings no Turk dared to meddle, and a
stranger who had proper passes from the national authorities could go
from end to end of the island without asking the Sultan’s leave or
fearing his displeasure. For these things I can vouch as an eye-
witness, and I may repeat, lest my words should be misunderstood,
that by far the larger proportion of the physical force which resisted
Turkish rule consisted of native Cretan mountaineers, helped and
encouraged, to some extent, by sympathisers from the Hellenic
kingdom.
But why did not the movement succeed when it was so popular


and so determined? The explanation is very simple—Turkey was too
strong for it. Corrupt and degraded as is her political system, she
has brave soldiers to do the Sultan’s bidding and plentiful resources
in the workshops of Europe to supply her troops with arms. . Truly
she has had her full share of outside assistance. The money markets
of Europe were then open to her, and she could coax the Western
public out of its spare cash with marvellous facility. She had an
English-built navy to chase the blockade-runners, and skilful English
mercenaries to direct her operations by sea. The cut-throat work on
shore was done by men armed with English rifles, under the command
of an Austrian renegade ; so the less the Turcophiles say about out-
side help, in this matter of the Cretan insurrection, the better. It was
a pitiful instance of barbarism armed with civilised weapons without
having adopted one civilised sentiment. I have seen the old flint-lock
musket used by the Cretans in the earlier part of the insurrection,
when the well-equipped battalions of Turks were again and again
repulsed by ragged, starving men, whose houseless families cowered
upon the hill-side behind them while the battle raged, and whose once
pleasant villages sent up clouds of smoke to the clear Cretan sky. I
have seen these things, and shall never forget them; but it would take
me too long to dwell upon the details of the struggle, so I must pass
on to speak of its general result.
Lord Stanley’s objection to aid the Cretans,* even indirectly, in
bearing the troubles that had come upon them, was logical from the
point of view which our Conservative Ministry chose to adopt. If
the Cretans were to be left to their fate, it was, perhaps, better to
starve them out at once than to prolong their sufferings by saving the
non-combatants from immediate danger. But I suppose that some of
the Powers were inclined to give Crete a better position, and that
Russian diplomacy would have taken a more decided stand in their
favour had not France and Prussia patched up their quarrel about
Luxembourg in 1867. Be this as it may, the fact remains, that when
Crete had made her protest —a protest of tears and blood—and when
Turkey had successfully resisted every suggestion of inquiry into her
government of the island, there was little to be done but to return to
the old state of things, more or less disguised. Sooner or later the
insurrection must be starved out, and Greece alone, whatever she
• I have purposely abstained from entering at length into the vexed question
of how far it was wise or unwise of foreign powers to carry away the Cretan
refugees, to Greece on board ships of war, whilst they did not, in any other
respect, help the Cretans. Lord Stanley discouraged this limited sort of inter-
vention, after the first English shipload had been taken, by Captain Pym, of
H.M.S. Assurance. But Russians and other foreigners persisted in helping the
refugees to escape from the Turks, until about 50,000 people were said to have
reached Greece ; a very heavy burden, most generously borne by the Greek
Government and nation.


might do in blockade-running, was not strong enough for a single-
handed contest with Turkey. The best that could happen was to reap
as abundant a crop of Turkish promises as possible, in the hope that
some of them might be kept, and to pacify the unfortunate islanders
under the shadow of a sham constitution.
In the middle of the summer of 1867, when Omar Pasha had been
beaten to a standstill by the Sphakiote mountaineers and when his
lying bulletins were announcing the complete submission of the island,
Ali Pasha, the Grand Vizier, went on an important journey to Crete. His
Excellency was considered a reforming Turk, he had ideas much in
advance of those of most of his countrymen, spoke French fluently,
and saw the necessity of concealing the iron hand with a velvet glove.-
Massacres might be all very well as warnings to the refractory, and
village-burning might keep the Bashi-Bazouks in good humour. But
such vigorous measures would not bring in revenue so well as more
common-place oppression. Olive trees once cut down are slow to be
replaced, and a country quite depeopled might prove a worthless pos-
session, unless its indolent masters would turn to and work for them-
selves. So, having failed to terrorize Crete out of hand, the Turks
were now bent on giving the island a constitution. Was not the
Sultan at that time hob-nobbing with Western potentates, and are not
constitutions a speciality of the West ? Of course there must be no
real change, for that would make the possession of Crete useless to
Turkey, at least from the blood-sucking point of view. But there must
be a constitution to throw dust in the eyes of the Franks. Lord
Stanley had made it clearly understood that he thought this giving of a
constitution a desirable form of settlement. He intended it to be genuine
in character though limited in its scope, and hoped much from the
example of the Lebanon. But his lordship forgot that in the Lebanon
there was direct foreign intervention. Foreign soldiers were landed
upon the coast, Turkish malefactors were openly punished for their
misdeeds, and the ruling caste had a lesson which has lasted it in that
quarter for more than sixteen years. With Crete the case was very
different. No foreign intervention was attempted, no guarantees were
obtained beyond empty promises, and all the while that Ali Pasha was
negotiating, Omar Pasha was tightening his grip upon the island. He
could not conquer it as easily as had been expected, or justify the
reports of Turkish victory busily circulated in London and Paris during
the summer of 1867. But he prepared a plan of the campaign, which
his successor, Hussein Avni Pasha, was to carry on against the insur-
gents, and he infused new energy into the Turkish military adminis-
tration. Roads were to be made and chains of block-houses formed
across the island, so that the insurrection might be utterly hemmed in.
Additional cruisers—the swiftest that could be purchased in England
—were to chase the Greek blockade-runners. Everything, in short,


was to be done to compel submission by force of arms and make those
who had resisted pass under the yoke once more, whilst Ali’s cunningly
devised plan of a constitution reconciled European Governments to
abandoning the Cretans to their fate.
There was an armistice during the autumn of 1867, and, by hook
or by crook, another “National Assembly” was got together under
Turkish auspices. The details of its election are almost farcical in their
barefaced roguery. The members were simply government nominees,
the Mahometans doing as they were bid with stolid indifference, the
Christians literally compelled to come in fear of their lives, and having
no more of a representative character than would a lot of passers-by,
caught hap-hazard in Portsmouth and Southampton, have a repre-
sentative character for Hampshire. To this “bogus” Parliament, Ali
Pasha made known the benevolent intentions of his master, and the
“ deputies ” listened in respectful silence and accepted what they were
told as they would have accepted any other order from the superior
authorities. But as to debates and legislation, or even petitions of
grievances, those were things to be prudently postponed to a very
remote future. There was no idea, on the part of Ali Pasha or any
one else at Constantinople, of giving the Cretans political power, and
they did not know enough of constitutional forms in the island to be
amused by playing at local self-government. The great facts of the
situation were the strongly reinforced Turkish army, the increasingly
vigilant Turkish marine, and the lengthening chain of block-houses
which made resistance more difficult to the mountaineers. Those
were the palmy days of Turkish officialism, when a certain aroma
of barbaric simplicity still clung to the Frenchified Osmanli. His
ancestors had been strong enough to speak the truth in their savage
fashion, and though Turkey had now become weak and deceptive he
could still obtain a readier belief for his fallacious statements than
could Greeks or Armenians, who had not the honour to wear the
Sultan’s uniform. If these latter happened to be in Turkish employ,
they were, oddly enough, endowed by Europe with a certain credibility,
perhaps because they were then serving against their own race and
religion. Anything so rude as official inquiries upon the spot, con-
ducted by responsible Europeans, was not to be thought of in 1867-8.
Turkey did not wish it, and her feelings must be respected. Therefore
Lord Stanley was obliged to be content with what our ambassador at'
Constantinople told him of the liberal declarations of Fuad Pasha
or Ali Pasha, with no further guarantee of Turkish good faith than our
being in the nineteenth century, instead of the fifteenth, and the Sultan’s
having tasted champagne at the Crystal Palace. There were plenty
of consular reports, I may be told, and plenty of Greek complaints
against the Turks to balance the Ottomans’ praise of themselves.
But these things form no guarantee such as might have resulted from


a formal commission of inquiry. There was no outside European,
superior to local influences, responsible for seeing the new constitution
fairly started. Turkey had promised quite enough to make a very
important change in the condition of the Cretans, if only her promises
had been brought to book. I need not dwell on the various good things
contained in Ali Pasha’s constitution, because my contention is that
those good things have been quite illusory with regard to every-day
life. The General Assembly for the island, the district assemblies
presided over by Christians, the mixed tribunals with their elective
judges, are alike creatures of Turkish phantasy. The courts of arbi-
tration have yet to be seen at work, and the Christian inhabitants
have yet to find that they can get protection from the law when
Turkish interests stand in the way.
After the armistice had expired hostilities were renewed in a de-
sultory fashion, the Turks being much more cautious than formerly,
and the insurgents having somewhat lost heart through the protracted
hardships of a second winter campaign. Ali Pasha, the “pacificator”
of the island, had returned in triumph to Stamboul, so had Omar
Pasha, the Serdar Ekrem, leaving his lieutenant, Hussein Avni Pasha,
to fight it out with the pacified Cretans. Month by month the block-
houses were advanced, month by month the resources of the Greek
committees became more attenuated, and the burden of supporting the
Cretan refugees was more felt in Greece, as time wore on without
bringing any advantage to the good cause. It became evident that
Europe would not go behind the sham constitution, and that, without
European intervention, the Turks must ultimately win. I visited Crete
again in 1868, and found the National Assembly of the insurgents much
discouraged by the progress of events. They were still masters of the
interior of the island, but were harassed by the necessity of watching
the Turkish block-houses, were more closely shut in by sea, and found
their supply of ammunition running very short. It was a quiet time
in Crete, compared with the fierce and bloody struggle a year before.
The refugees had been shipped off in such numbers that there were no
longer encampments of starving women and children on the mountain
sides. The Greek volunteers were reduced to a few hundred men
stationed in the neighbourhood of Candia; and as to the Turkish troops,
they had completely changed their tactics since the erection of Ali
Pasha’s constitution, behind which they could play a waiting game.
Instead of headlong attacks upon any and every position occupied by
the insurgents, there were now only cautious attempts to hamper them
and shut them in. One might travel far and wide over the mountains,
but those chains of block-houses in the valleys made it constantly more
difficult to avoid running the gauntlet of a Turkish fusillade at certain
points on the road. When I ran the blockade for the last time in the
autumn of 1868, and saw the Cretan mountains fade out of sight behind


me, it was clear to my mind that without foreign intervention the in-
surrection could not last much longer. The Cretans had thoroughly
proved that they were in earnest, if braving death and ruin can prove
anything. They had made a wonderfully good fight of it, considering
their early disadvantages, and had brought Turkey to grant them a
constitution, little as it might be worth. But they could not, unaided
by Europe, achieve complete independence, or that union with Greece
which they desired even more. There was nothing for it, but to
submit to the Turks, to accept such terms as they would grant, and
make the best of a bad bargain. By the end of 1868 the insurrection
was suppressed, the remaining bands of volunteers, with a force just
arrived, at the eleventh hour, from Greece, were obliged to capitulate
to Hussein Avni Pasha, and Turkish authority was completely re-
established throughout Crete.
Cruel and violent as the Turks had been during their contest with
the Cretan insurgents, it is only fair to them to state, that they com-
mitted fewer excesses after their pacification of the island than might
have been expected. The reason for this moderation is not far to seek.
It was the cue of those in power at Constantinople to be moderate in'
victory, for, had they not kept Europe from interfering by their gift of
a constitution to Crete, and were not the eyes of Europe still fixed
curiously upon the island ? At the outset of their struggle with the
Cretans the Turkish authorities had been inclined toward what we
should now call a Bulgarian policy. They let their Bashi-Bazouks
make an example of the rebels, and tried to strike terror into all who
opposed them. But when Crete finally submitted to her fate in the
end of 1868, another policy had been adopted by her conquerors.
Things were to be smoothed over as much as possible, and Europe
was not to be shocked by further cruelties. Therefore, the Turks,
both regulars and irregulars, were, kept tolerably well in hand—a
matter not difficult when their chiefs really mean it, for have they
not unlimited power over the men ? Crete was conquered and slid
back into her old state of subjection. She had made her protest
against an unendurable tyranny, and had made it in vain, save
that a plausible constitution was granted her, as above described.
How much it was worth may best be gathered from the subse-
quent complaints of the people and promises of the Porte. An
assembly in which the large Christian majority has no more represen-
tatives than the small Mahometan minority, and in which the casting
vote is always with a zealous Turk, would not be likely to do much in
way of reform. But I venture to assert that it has done nothing. It
has been a mere pretence, simply kept up to deceive statesmen like
Lord Derby, who, whilst honestly desiring to see the Cretans better
governed, have not been prepared to exact the necessary guarantees
for better government. Without some foreign pressure of a constant


and practical kind it is impossible to secure Parliamentary privileges
to the Christian subjects of the Porte. You may paint your constitu-
tional picture an inch thick and combine the colours of every political
party to make it seem more liberal; but, underneath it all, there is
still the dominant Turk, who views himself as appointed by Heaven
to rule his subject Giaours, and whose real authority rests upon the
fanatical support of a swarm of half-civilised Asiatics. So long as
this authority is paramount in Crete, the local assembly must of neces-
sity be little better than a sham. Its members can only petition
against undoubted grievances at their own personal risk, and its
deliberations can amount to nothing more than humbly listening to
the suggestions of the Governor-General.
The Cretans were promised remission of taxes, but the taxes have
not been remitted. They were promised that the revenue of the
island should be spent in some part on local improvements, but the
revenue has not any of it been so spent. They were assured of
equality before the law for Christian and Mussulman alike, but such
equality has as yet remained in the regions of theory and not descended
to the realm of fact. Certainly they have good ground of complaint
against Turkey, and their case affords a striking example of the futility
of a mere paper constitution, imposed by foreign opinion upon a
despotic government and unsupported by any substantial guarantees.
Would it be too much to hope that the necessity for patching up a
rotten empire like Turkey may some day cease, and that the Cretans
may be united to their kindred of Greece, with the best of all securities
for their political future, in the, absolute right to manage their own
affairs, to govern for the people and by the people, without even the
shadow of dependence upon an Asiatic conqueror, whose predecessors
have done their island nothing but harm and whose final departure
would be a relief to all concerned ?
Temple, E.C.,
February, 1877.


Eastern Question Association,
PAPERS on THE EASTERN QUESTION.
No. 10.
ARMENIA AND THE
LEBANON.
BY
J. W. PROBYN, Esq.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION ASSOCIATION,
sS, CANADA BUILDING, WESTMINSTER ;
BY
CASSELL FETTER & GALPIN,
London, Par's &• New York.




ARMENIA AND THE LEBANON.
The Armenians form an important portion of the Christian popula-
tion under Turkish rule. Armenia itself is divided into three parts,
belonging respectively to Russia, Persia, and Turkey. Four millions
of Armenians live under these three Governments—at least three mil-
lions of them being subjects of the Ottoman Empire. They do not
inhabit Armenia alone, but are scattered over Asia Minor, and the
Eastern shores of European Turkey. While suffering much from
Mahometans, these people have, in past times, found little sympathy
from their brother Christians, who often troubled and vexed them
on account of their religious convictions ; but it is only just to add
that the Russians have been more tolerant towards them than any
other of their neighbours or rulers.
The Armenians have not taken advantage of the present troubles,
which the Porte’s misrule has brought upon itself, to rise in rebellion
against the Government. They have confined themselves to petition-
ing their Turkish masters for the removal of certain abuses. Mon-
signor Nerses, the Armenian patriarch, has always been a good subject
of the Porte. In his charge to the Armenians, issued in July, 1876, he
called on them to be faithful to Sultan Murad V. Nothing could be more
temperate than the petition which the Patriarch and the Armenian
bishops presented to the Grand Vizier in September last. It sets forth
that the greater portion of their people, now living in Asiatic Turkey
under the rule of the Sultan, are occupied in agricultural pursuits, and
are both good and useful subjects. They are, nevertheless, oppressed
and cruelly treated in many districts; those in authority failing to carry
out the laws or to execute justice. The poor people remain without
redress, although the districts in which such cruelties are practised,
and the persons who commit them, have been mentioned to the Turkish
Government by the Armenian Patriarchate at Constantinople. The
Sublime Porte has on several occasions sent strict orders to its officers
in those districts to put a stop to such oppression, and in some cases
Commissioners have been sent to examine into the matter. But no


practical redress has been given ; oppression and injustice have con-
tinued as of old. It having then been proved that the means hereto-
fore adopted have not been sufficient to check the evils complained of,
the Armenians, through their patriarch, bishops, and leading men, pre-
sented in September, 1876, the following requests to Mehemet Rushdi
Pasha, at that time Grand Vizier :
1. The regulation of the land question, which now gives rise to
many abuses.
2. The liberation of the poor villagers from the oppression of the
Ddrebeys, or Mussulmen valley lords.
3. The sending of a Special Commission named by the Porte,
with the concurrence of the Patriarch, which should be
authorised to examine on the spot the cause of the com-
plaints which come from the provinces.
4. The settlement of the question of lands and other property be-
longing to the convents and churches.
5. The promulgation of a special law, which should declare that a
change of religion is only valid when the neophyte is, at least,
twenty-one years old.
6. The institution of a special commission named by the Armenian
Patriarchate, which should make itself acquainted with the
affairs of the Armenian community, and should sit in the
public worship department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
in Constantinople.
7. The admission of the testimony of Christians, up to this time
refused in all provincial tribunals, in mixed civil affairs and in
criminal cases.
The Grand Vizier gave to this petition the stereotyped reply that
the matter would be looked into ; but up to this time nothing has been
done.
The Armenian journal Hairenik (Fatherland) published on the
17th of October, 1876, a correspondence from Trebizonde, containing
the following passage :
“For a month past a Turkish officer, going round the villages of the dis-
trict to collect the tithes, perpetrated the most unjust exactions on the inhabi-
tants. One of the principal men, named Sarkis Hagopian, amongst others,
was tied to a stake and ill-treated, every foul epithet being at the same time
applied to him. On M. Sarkis Hagopian complaining of this treatment, the
officer was replaced by another of higher rank, who, without any regard for
the destitute condition of the poor peasants, surpassed even the barbarous acts
of his predecessor. The working bullocks, sole means of existence belonging
to the cultivators of the soil, were sold for what they would fetch to meet the
demands of the Treasury. An Armenian .priest, Der-Sarkis, of the village of
Shana, for being half an hour late in the payment of a debt which he had
guaranteed, was tied to a stake at the very door of a mosque, after being re


viled for his religion, beaten, and drenched with water. He was only released
by the intervention of the Imam (Mussulman priest) of the village.”
The preceding* statement, which was not officially contradicted,
was reproduced without commentary eight days after by the Armenian
papers, Medjmouai Havadis and the Ararat. This last-named paper
inserted later a second letter, dated also from Trebizonde, confirming
in all respects the statements of the Hair huh.
The editor of the Armeno-Turkish paper, Medjmouai Havadis ,
or “ Collection of News,” received a written summons on Tuesday, 24th
of October, to appear at the office of the Inspector of the Press that
afternoon.
The Sub-Inspector ushered him into the presence of Blacque Bey
(the Inspector). Blacque Bey, in strong terms of reprimand, asked
the editor of the Medjmouai why he published news contrary to
the wishes of the Imperial Government, especially at such a time
when the four corners of Turkey were smouldering and a conflagra-
tion threatening.
The editor of the Medjmouai answered, “Which of the publications
have been contrary to the wishes of the Imperial Government ?”
“ What,” inquired Blacque Bey, “is the import and meaning of
the false and unfounded news which you have published about Asiatic
or Armenian oppressions, which, before Europe, have begun to be
raised into a question, thanks to your mendacity ?”
The editor replied, “ Your Excellency already knows about the
Asiatic oppressions, or the oppression of Armenians in Asia Minor of
which the authenticity has been established by the official documents
which have been addressed to our national administration, and con-
cerning which last time also I gave explanations to your Excellency ;
but we did not know that the act of publishing reports on the oppres-
sion of Armenians and drawing the attention of the Government to
them was against the wishes of the Imperial Government.”
Blacque Bey said, “ Those reports are now false, and no such things
are in existence. Your object is to oppose the Imperial Government, to
slander it before Europe, and to revolutionise the Armenian nation.
The Sublime Porte regards you as revolutionists and as the enemies of
the Government. The person who says this is one greater than I, the
Grand Vizier himself. We shall presently wait upon his Highness:
answer him, and convince him yourself. I have several times recom-
mended you not to publish news contrary to the wishes of the Imperial'
Government, and tending to provoke the Armenians—you would never
listen. We cannot bring you to your senses by suppressing your
papers, for you find means to receive permission to re-appear. You
ought to be imprisoned and banished. Remain here for a moment,
and do not go away.”


At this juncture the proprietor of the Ararat and its editor were
ushered in. To them also Blacque Bey repeated the above, and then
invited them to wait on the Grand Vizier. The editors of the Medjmouai
and the Ararat went with Blacque Bey, each holding in his hand a
copy in Turkish characters of the article on oppressions in the villages
of Trebizond, published in the Medjmouai on the 23rd of October.
The Grand Vizier, after reading the article, asked the editor of the
Medjmouai whence he had received this piece of Trebizond news and
published it. The editor said, “It was published six days before me
in the Armenian Journal Hairhiik [Fatherland] and I took it from
that paper.”
The Grand Vizier, turning to the editor of the Ararat , said, “And
on what authority did you insert it?” The editor of the Ararat
answered, “ I published the report upon reading it in the Haire'nik,.
and upon receiving a private communication from Trebizond.”
“ Do such letters come to you, and do you believe their contents?”
inquired the Grand Vizier. The editor of the Ararat said, “It is the
custom of newspapers to have correspondents.”
The Grand Vizier murmured, “O ye traitors, Oye traitors I” The
editor of the Ararat (Mr. Aivadian) said, “ May it please your High-
ness, what can we do ?”
The Grand Vizier then said to his aide-de-camp, “ Call a few
cavasses.” Immediately more than twenty cavasses entered. The
Grand Vizier gave this command: “Take these two men to the
Minister of Police, and tell him to imprison them ; and there is
a letter from Trebizond—let him inquire into that letter, and let him
also examine the papers that may be found upon their persons.”
Among the cavasses there were present a few policemen also,
who laid hold of both the arms of the editors of the Medjmouai and
the Ararat , and took them out of the room of the Grand Vizier. In
the hall of the Sublime Porte (viz., the official residence of the Grand
Vizier), those who had the editors in custody turned their arms behind
them and bound them with cords. The editor of the Ararat said,
“There is no necessity to bind them ; I will go with entire obedience.”
Upon this they struck the editor of the Ararat with their fists, and he
raised a great cry of “ Help ! help !” in the hall, The cavasses, the
policemen, and with them the guards or aides-de-camp of the Grand
Vizier, searched the persons of the editors of the Medjmouai and the
Ararat; they were then conducted to the Ministry of Police. On the
way, when the editor of the Ararat had no longer the strength to walk,
he was again beaten, and to prevent his cries being heard they gagged
his mouth with a handkerchief. His glasses had fallen off, and his head
was uncovered.
As the Minister of Police was not in his rooms, the editors were


taken to the adjoining room, and two policemen were set to guard each
of them, and their arms were unbound.
Some five minutes later, the second Councillor of the Minister of
Police came in, and commanded that for the cross-examination the
editors should be removed to a particular room. Upon this order two
policemen, holding tightly the arms of the editors of the Ararat and
the Medjmouai , led them to a room, guided by the said second Coun-
cillor. The cavasses and policemen had already gone away, and there
were besides only the two aides-de-camp of the Grand Vizier.
All the letters and other things found on the person of the editors
of the Medjmouai and Ararat were taken ; two interpreters acquainted
with Armenian were called, and also two clerks, and the papers were
read and verbally translated one by one. After these forms were gone
through, the second Councillor said to the aides-de-camp, “ Present
my humble services to the Grand Vizier, and inform him that we have
found nothing from the present researches. What may therefore be
his further commands ? ”
The aides-de-camp immediately left, and the Councillor retired to
his own room, observing to the editors of the Medjmouai and the Ararat
that he awaited the orders of the Grand Vizier.
Two policemen always stood before the entrance, and within were
the two editors, one interpreter, and two clerks.
The countenance of the editor of the Ararat was like that of a
dead person, and his hands shook incessantly. A quarter of an hour
after, an aide-de-camp arrived from the Grand Vizier; at the same time
the subordinate of the above-mentioned Councillor came in. The
aide-de-camp said something in the ear of the Councillor, and left.
Two minutes had scarcely elapsed when the editor of the Haircnik
was brought there with one single cavas from the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs ; but his (the editor of the Hairc'nik's) person was not
searched. They only asked him, “Have you any proof or document
respecting what you wrote about the Trebizond affair?” He answered
that he had a letter from his correspondent, which he produced from
his pocket and delivered to the Councillor. The Councillor immediately
handed that letter to the interpreter who was present, and who, after
verbally translating it, said that it was the exact copy of what had
appeared in the newspaper. Then the said letter was taken and torn
to pieces. Two minutes after, an aide-de-camp came from the Grand
Vizier and said, “The Grand Vizier commands that these editors
should be liberated, and that if it should be found necessary they
should go to Trebizond and themselves investigate the facts contained
in the report published by them.” It was a quarter to twelve o’clock
(sunset, Turkish time). The Councillor then told off one person to
each of the editors, who was to be bail, to insure their attendance in


the event of their being summoned again to the Ministry of Police,
and so they were liberated. .
M. Aivadian, the editor of the Ararat, was taken home ill and
never recovered the injuries he received, for he died on Christmas
Day, 1876. The fact was, that while being searched and beaten (just
after leaving the Grand Vizier’s, Mehemet Rushdi Pasha’s presence)
M. Aivadian was maltreated in so gross and outrageous a
that the injuries then inflicted on his person proved fatal to his life.
Thus two Christian subjects of the Porte, respected by all who
knew them, labouring in the interests of truth and justice (desirous
that nothing should be done to the Sultan’s subjects, contrary to
his wishes, by tyrannical and barbarous agents who abound in the
provinces), were bound, beaten, and outrageously treated in Constanti-
nople itself, within the very precincts of the Grand Vizier’s residence.
If these things take place in such a place, what is not likely to be done
in provinces, more or less remote and but little known to the world
at large ? Yet when like evil deeds are exposed the effort is made to
deny them, and those who relate them are accused of calumny. Often
on such occasions Turkish officials oblige, by menaces and ill-treat-
ment, the poor peasants of outlying districts to sign a paper declaring
that the wrong has never been perpetrated, and so outrage is added to
outrage.
The three papers mentioned above were suppressed, as the Norakitt
had been a month before. Thus four organs of the Armenian Press
have been arbitrarily silenced.
The Armenian community at Constantinople proceeded to send a
Special Commissioner to Trebizond, to investigate the wrongs said to
have been perpetrated in the neighbourhood, in order to test the
truthfulness of the accounts given by the three Armenian papers —
the Hairenik (Fatherland), the Medjmouai Havadis (Collection of
News), and the Ararat.
The Commissioner put himself in communication with the
Governor-General of Trebizond, with the English and Russian
Consuls, with the authorities and leading men—alike Turks, Armenians,
and Greeks—of the villages where the outrages were perpetrated, as
well as with the victims themselves. The result of his investigations
proved beyond doubt that the accounts given by the Armenian papers
of the capital were not only not exaggerated, but fell below the sad
realities of the case. Nothing shows this more clearly than the peti-
tions addressed to the Governor-General. One was drawn up by
the Imam of the village, and signed by all the principal Mussul-
men of the village, by all the members of the Council of Elders, the
Turkish Imam and Moukhtar (chief of the village), also by the
Armenian and Greek Moukhtar, and by five of the leading men belong


ing to each of these two nationalities ; in all twenty-four signatures of
men of high character, and of importance from their social position.
The petition runs as follows:
“We, the undersigned inhabitants, Mussulman and non-Mussulman, of the
village of Samarouk, belonging to the district of Yomra, have the honour of
laying before your Excellency that Mahmoud, Ibrahim, and Ali, mounted
police of Tchuruk Soulou, having been nominated by the Government to levy
the taxes in our village, as well as in the neighbourhood, came lately to
Samarouk to perform their duties. Although our village is duly furnished with
Moukhtars, Imams, and a Council ofElders, besides other honourable persons,
both Mussulman and non-Mussulman, the three collectors mentioned above
did not have recourse to legal means for collecting the taxes. Mahmoud, one
of the three, seized Houssep Oghlou Artin, the Moukhtar of the Armenians,
tied his hands behind his back, and had him severely whipped. This shameful
usage was accompanied with outrageous abuse of his religion, his nationality,
and other matters which men of honour hold in veneration. This Mahmoud
arrested in the same way Halil Oghlou Temel, a most estimable person and
member of the Council of Elders ; he was violently beaten several times, and
insulted by abuse so obscene that it cannot be repeated for very shame. All
this was done to compel these two peaceful men to use their authority over the
inhabitants of our village for the object of hastening the payment of the taxes.
These three gendarmes inflicted besides on many of us horrible treatment for
the same reason. Some they fastened to trees with their hands tied behind
their back ; others they drenched with cold water; while they menaced every-
body in the most fearful manner, and filled the whole village with terror and
alarm.
“ These unheard-of barbarities and abuse of authority cannot surely be
tolerated by the Imperial Government. We humbly beg your Excellency to
be good enough to order an inquiry to verify the above-mentioned facts, and in
case of their being shown to be true, to punish in an exemplary manner the
authors of these misdeeds as they deserve. ”
[Here follow the signatures.]
1293 Sheval 14 (dated).
This petition, which was addressed to the Governor-General, was
drawn up by the Imam of the village of Samarouk, and was signed
by all the principal Mussulmen of the village, all the members of the
Council of Elders, the Turkish Imam and Moukhtar, by the Moukhtars
of the Armenians and Greeks, and five principal men of each of these
two nationalities ; in all, twenty-four signatures of influential and
honourable men.
Another petition was also addressed to the Governor-General, and
signed by fifty-one Armenians and Greeks. It sets forth that Agop
Oghlou Sarkis, the Armenian priest Sarkis, and nine others, whose
names are given, were grossly ill-treated by the three gendarmes
in question. Some were bastinadoed, some bastinadoed and then
drenched with water to the skin ; others were bound with outstretched


arms to resemble crucifixion, and turned towards the east in mockery
of the custom which leads many Christians to turn in that direction
during certain times of their public worship.
Another petition, signed by forty Armenian inhabitants of the
villages of Shana and Samarouk, was addressed to our provincial
Council, begging it to mediate for them with the Imperial Govern-
ment, that those guilty of these outrages should be punished, and
similar outrages be prevented for the future.
The miseries which the Armenians have to endure come from the
Turkish system of government. As long as that system is maintained,
there is no reasonable hope of serious reform. The Porte has, despite
repeated proclamations put forth at Constantinople to satisfy European
public opinion, passed the word to its provincial authorities to hold
the Christians in marked subjection. Thus there has been a total
absence of all effective equality. The non-admission of Christian
testimony, the inadmissibility of Christians to administrative and
political functions (with but rare exceptions), and their exclusion from
military service, sufficiently prove the determination to hold them in
an inferior and subject condition. 4
From Armenia come complaints that all justice is set at nought,
especially in the provinces, where the tribunals are almost always
regulated by the Chdri Courts, in which Christian testimony is not
admitted. Thus the work of spoliation, of which the “ unbeliever ”
is the victim, is facilitated; his material improvement is impeded, if
not prevented, and any hope of emancipation from his degraded posi-
tion is set aside. On one hand the Sublime Porte promulgates, under
European pressure, plans of reform; on the other, none of these
reforms are carried out in the provinces, and none in authority there
are recalled or punished for such negligence and disobedience. Hence
arise those periodical insurrections which have become chronic. Yet
the Turkish Government does not change its course, hurtful though it
be to the general interests of the Empire, and dangerous to the peace of
the world. The Kurds and Tcherkess (Circassians) commit robberies,
violence, and murder, of which the Armenians are the victims, to whom
provincial governors and local courts give no redress. The connivance,
or at best the apathy, of the Sublime Porte in face of such constantly
recurring misdeeds, proves its hopeless weakness or its guilty partici-
pation. The fact is, the Turkish Government sees that from one cause
or another the Turkish race diminishes continually. The idleness,
fatalism, polygamy of the Turks produce ever-increasing misery and
backwardness ; while the Christian races, being far more instructed
laborious, and thrifty, make slow but steady progress (despite every
impediment) towards a better social and material condition. This
rising tide terrifies the Porte, as well it may. So Turkish policy seeks


to repress by injustice the more enlightened portion of its subjects,
while it foments to the utmost every difference of race or religion.
This has ever been the policy of a decaying despotism, seeking to
keep down progressive races unhappily subject to its power. But the
savage and spasmodic efforts to maintain its sway by brute force and
injustice are invariably stained with monstrous cruelties, the sure pre-
cursors of its just and inevitable doom.
Turkish Armenia, like other provinces, has its full share of the
curse which such a policy entails upon°its victims. To the depreda-
tions of the Kurds have of late years been added the robberies and
extortion inflicted on the Armenian cultivators by the Tcherkess. No
legal redress is given. At the same time the Government forbids
the Christians to carry arms, while it permits its Mussulman subjects
to do so, whether Kurds or Tcherkess. The misdeeds of these latter
cannot, therefore, be put a stop to by force, nor are they prevented
by law, as the following facts prove ;—ln 1867, Emir Mouhliss Pasha,
the Governor of the Vilayet of Erzeroum (a portion of Armenia),
arrested the chiefs of the Khurdist tribes notorious for their crimes.
He tried them, and obtained good proof of their guilt. He then sent
his report of all these proceedings to Constantinople. No reply was
given. One month after he was dismissed. The first act of his suc-
cessor, on arriving at Erzeroum, was to set the criminals at liberty !
So long as the property rights of the Armenians are not officially
recognised and sanctioned according to their ancient title-deeds, so
long the agrarian question will continue to be a perpetual source of
misery and discord. That may seem a sufficient reason to the Turkish
Government for not redressing the wrong; but it is also a very suf-
ficient reason for the demand made in the first clause of the Armenian
petition, given at the commencement of this paper, for “ the regulation
of the land question, which gives rise to many abuses.” Another
question, fruitful of injustice, is that of the feudal regime exercised in
Asia by the Ddrdbeys, who have arrogated to themselves seigniorial
rights which reduce those below them to a condition of quasi vassal-
age. The tyrannical influence of these Ddrdbcys is such that, thanks
to the apathy of the local authorities, it has subjected the people of the
country to forced labour and forced subsidies. Woe betide those who
dare to address any complaints to the central authorities against the
abuses of these valley lords. Hence the second article in the petition
of the Armenians asks for “ the liberation of the poor villagers from
the oppression of the Derebeys or Mussulman valley lords.”
Again, the convents, monasteries, and churches of Armenia possess
lands which tend to increase by the communal life which forms the
basis of their institution. They are a kind of advanced post of Euro-
pean civilisation, for they have schools which give a careful system of


instruction to the youth of the country; they possess libraries, most of
which contain ancient manuscripts of great literary and historic value.
The Porte views the prosperity of these communities with an evil eye,
contests their rights of property and succession, while no protection is
afforded against the oppression of Ddrdbeys, and the incursions or
violence of Kurds and Tcherkess. Hence is it that the petition asks
for “ the settlement of the question of lands and other properties
belonging to the churches and convents.”
Another source of wrong is the tax imposed for the exoneration
from military service. According to the Hatti-Humayoun of 1856 this
tax can only be levied on persons between the ages of twenty and forty;
but the police, as a matter of fact, levy it on children still in their
cradles. The assessment of the tax is made as follows:—Each village
has to pay 5,000 piastres for every 180 inhabitants, whatever their age.
Latterly the Government, by way of reply to the remarks addressed to
it by the Greek and Armenian patriarchs, who asked that the Chris-
tians might enter the military service instead of paying this unjust tax,
modified the state of things by decreeing that henceforth the tax should
be levied on all persons between the ages of fifteen and seventy-five,
but maintained, nevertheless, the proportion of 5,000 piastres for every
180 persons.
The abuses of this tax, united to those of the farmers of the tithes,
have so impoverished the population that its increase has been
diminished, and if the Turkish Government dared to take a true census
of its people it would find that their numbers decreased yearly.
The violation of Christian women by the Turkish soldiery, and the
abduction of young girls, who are then forced to embrace Islamism,
are almost daily circumstances in the Asiatic Provinces. These so-
called conversions of children under age are a contradiction both of
the letter and the spirit of the Hatti-Humayoun of 1856, so highly
praised by the admirers of Turkey. But as this decree, although it
enters into the Treaty of Paris of the same year, has never received
any practical application in the provinces, the authorities shut their
ears to the complaints of the parents, and listen only to the testimony
of fanatical Turks. Hence the petition of the Armenians demands
“ The promulgation of a special law, which should declare that a
change of religion is only valid when the neophyte is of age.”
The Imperial Firman of the 12th December, 1875, promulgated
during the reign of Sultan Abdul-Aziz, and drawn up by Mahmoud
N cdime Pasha, decreed that mixed suits, that is suits between Christians
and Mussulmen, should no longer be judged by the tribunals following
the law of the Cheri, but by the civil tribunals. But this important
reform was set aside on the fall of Mahmoud by a decree of Murad V.
and his then Grand Vizier, Mehemmed Rushdi Pasha. In a word,


equality before the law exists as regards the Armenians and other
Christians only on paper. The victims of repeated injustice send in
their complaints to the Patriarch, who presents them to the Grand
Vizier. Whoever this latter may be, he says it shall be seen to.
Possibly he sends a telegram to the local authorities where the wrong
has been perpetrated, and there the matter ends. Thus the Armenians,
whom all admit to be a quiet, laborious, thrifty people, seek in vain
the commonest justice and ordinary good administration at the hands
of the wretched Government which curses their daily existence. It is
no wonder, then, if they compare their unhappy lot with that of their
co-religionists living in Russia, who are happy, prosperous, and occupy
high positions in the army and the civil service. The murders and
outrages daily committed in Turkish Armenian form each year a
frightful total, and hundreds of reports and petitions, almost always
unheeded by the Sublime Porte, encumber the archives of the
Armenian patriarchate.
The deposition of Sultan Abdul-Aziz, and the accession to power
of the party known as “ Young Turkey,” seemed to give some hope
that the deplorable outrages of the past would come to an end. Such
was the expectation of the Armenian patriarch, Monsignor Nerses.
He therefore, while laying before the Porte the wrongs endured by his
people, exhorted them to remain faithful to the Government, and to
look for a speedy cessation of the evils endured for so many years by
the Armenians under Turkish rule. Unfortunately, this hope has
been deceived. The following facts attest how cruelly the Armenians
still suffer from the misgovernment and injustice of Turkish officials.
Writing from Pera, on the 23rd January, 1877, the special corre-
spondent of the Times gives the following account of the actual con-
dition of the Christian people in Armenia :
“ We have now letters detailing some particulars respecting the
conflagration at Van. Those which are printed in semi-official organs
allow that the catastrophe ‘was far more destructive than was at first
supposed.’ More than 500 of the best shops of the Bazaar have been
consumed by the flames ; a good part of the town is in ashes ; business
is prostrate, and ‘ thousands who a few days ago had a competence
are now reduced to extreme poverty.’ These letters avow, though,
with visible reluctance, that ‘the whole affair was the work of in-
cendiaries.’ They add also that the apparent object was plunder.
‘ Thousands assembled, ostensibly to stay the progress of the flames,
but in reality to pillage and help on the conflagration.’ And they go
on to say, ‘Some were engaged in this stupendous crime who, as
soldiers of his Imperial Majesty, should have been the protectors of
the lives and property of his loyal subjects.’
“ This is a sufficiently important admission, coming]as it does from


writers who have undertaken to clear the Government of the Porte of
all participation in the horrors of Bulgaria. But it is not yet the whole
truth, nor am I sure that the very worst will be known even if I sub-
join a narrative which has been evidently written with less regard to
the interests either of the men in power or of those opposed to them:—
“‘On the 30th of November, old style, towards half-past 11 o’clock,
Turkish time— i.e., half an hour before sunset—three soldiers entered the shop
of Dlodian Simeon to buy candles. On leaving they dropped something in
the shop, apparently a coundak (a bundle of combustible matters used by male-
factors in Turkey where incendiarism is only too common), and their deed was
unperceived by the shopkeeper, who was then closing the shop, and who left
immediately after fastening the shutters. Candles had also been bought by
soldiers at other shops throughout the day. The fire broke out at half-past 12,
i.e., one hour after the soldiers’ visit to Sime'on’s shop—and raged till past mid-
night. In six hours more than 600 shops on the ground-floor were a prey to
the flames. Strange to say, it was only towards half-past 2 that the Armenians
within the town—the Bazaar is at some distance outside the walls —were apprised
of the occurrence, and hastened to save their merchandise. They found the
Bazaar invaded by soldiers, by gendarmes, by Turks coming from a spot called
“ the Vineyards” (Aikestan), from Ardamed, and other localties both near and
far, all busy sacking and pillaging, and spreading the conflagration by throwing
burning brands. Vainly did the townsmen endeavour to save their wares and
the money in their tills. They were pitilessly beaten back and compelled to
return empty-handed. The Bishop Eremia and the Priest Boghos strove to
stop the pillage, but they were in their turn terribly beaten by the soldiers, and
it was not without extreme difficulty that they were able to escape with their
lives. Scarcely one in a thousand succeeded in rescuing a package or two of
their merchandise or a small sum of their money.
“ ‘ The inhabitants of “ the Vineyards,” startled, some at daybreak, some at
sunrise, ran to the spot, and beheld the rich Bazaar of Van reduced to a heap
of reeking ruins! They found nothing but half-consumed tatters of thick
linen, scraps of paper, and other merchandise of lesser value, all objects of
price having disappeared. Only the shops of the Turks, Charan Bey, Ghalib
Bey, and others in the central parts of the Bazaar, had escaped total destruc-
tion, and a few jewellers’ shops had had the same good fortune, but only Ghalib
Bey’s stores and some of the Turkish provision shops were not pillaged.
“ ‘The clarions sounded throughout the night. The soldiers thronged into
the Bazaar in the utmost disorder ; they plundered ; they drove back by hard
blows the owners of the shops. The wretched Armenian community would
now with difficulty be able to find the means of subsistence for one day. They
protest that they have been robbed of their gold and their wares by the
soldiers ; that search should be made among them ; and search is being made
—we shall see with what results.
“ ‘ A shoemaker, by name Baghdolmian Kevook, upon attempting to de-
fend his shop, was beaten so cruelly by the soldiers, that he died of the blows
on the morrow. Who knows how many may still die of the consequences of
their wounds ? The desolation of the people is heartrending. The wealthiest
men in Van are now beggars ; at least, fain would they beg did they only know


of whom, but we are all brought to the same mendicant condition. The
schools are shut up, for neither the churches nor the citizens can any longer
supply the means to keep them open. And, as if all that were not enough, our
very lives are threatened. ‘ Giaours,’ they say, ‘be satisfied with what you
have; be thankful that your lives are spared! ’ ”
We are further told :
“ ‘ Unless help is sent, the town of Van will soon be a desert, so far as its
Armenian inhabitants are concerned; for many, despairing for themselves and
their families, are preparing to migrate, and those who cannot follow will have
to starve.’”
Other letters assure us that:—
“ ‘ Shopkeepers who were able to reach their shops and started away with
their money and valuables were intercepted and robbed of their burdens. One
man thus intercepted was so injured that he afterwards died; one other body
has also been recovered from among the debris. The losses of goods and money
alone are estimated at 200,000 ; and if we had the buildings, account-
books, &c., the whole loss would doubtless exceed 500,000 —a crushing
blow for a town of 30,000 to 350,000 inhabitants.’”
“Such is the condition of the Christian people in Armenia. Here
is a clear case of a frightful disorder caused by the men intrusted with
the maintenance of order, and in a province where not only no dis-
turbance, but even no symptoms of disaffection had hitherto been
heard of. It is thus that alarming tidings reached us from Bulgaria
in the months of September and October of 1875, before the slightest
attempt at insurrection had been made. In Bulgaria, besides the
soldiers and policemen, and the Mussulmen of high rank and
authority, the Circassians were the people’s scourge. In Armenia the
ravagers and destroyers are the Koords, a nomad race, hovering on
the frontier of the province, making frequent incursions into its interior,
pouncing upon towns and villages, and spreading havoc and terror
among the industrious and laborious rural population. The impres-
sion among the Christians in Armenia and elsewhere is that the Turks,
jealous of the superior thrift and intelligence of the subject people, and
of the well-being arising from it, and contrasting it with the rapid
decline and disappearance of their own race, wilfully resort to murder
and robbery of the Christians, with a view to 1 keep them under,’ to
prevent their too rapid spread and development. But whatever the
real cause may be, the effect is undeniable. Enmity of race, tyranny,
and anarchy are decimating the Christian population, or, at least,
stunting it in its growth. At the very moment lam writing, the follow-
ing letter, dated December 4, from Dindil, between Sivaz and Caesarea,
addressed to the vicar of Yu gat, and by him to the Armenian
Patriarch in Constantinople, is laid before me :
“ ‘On the 18th of November, old style, about eleven Koords summoned the
notables of the Christian village of Dindil, and claimed 1,500 piastres. One of


the notables was bidden to and he paid that sum, though not without
great difficulty. The inhabitants of the village laid their complaint with the
mayor of the neighbouring Mussulman village of Sighir, but no attention
was paid to them. On another occasion thirty Turks, inhabiting the said
Turkish village of Sighir, set up by Ahmed Effendi, Karamoussa, Oglon,
and Seid Mehemed, these latter both sons of a notable of Sighir, attacked
four Christian villagers of Dindil (whose names are given), and two
of whom were so severely wounded as' to be still in danger of their
lives. These same Mussulman evil-doers, in a more numerous band, again
attacked Dindil, and so ill-treated the inhabitants that fright took possession
of them and the people of neighbouring Christian villages, and hundreds of
families took refuge in glens and mountains, where they are subsisting as they
can without shelter. Many of these families have been urgently recalled by
the authorities ; and by these an inquiry has been set on foot and a Com-
mission appointed ; but hitherto without any result, unless we consider as such
the arrest of many innocent Christians of the village of Dindil, who, with
characteristic Turkish justice, have been taken to prison chained hand and
foot. Agricultural work is at an end till the Government provides better
security for life and property.’
“What is here stated in a letter signed by sixteen honest Chris-
tian villagers is only too much in keeping with a multitude of other
documents of the same nature, some of which have been laid before
your readers in former letters. The first element of all society,
security for life and property, is wanting in Turkey, in a great measure
owing to the impotence and improvidence, but partly, also, to the
ill-will and race-enmity of the Mussulman rulers. Armenians, Bul-
garians, and other Christians are merely a defenceless flock, exposed
to the devouring rage of such wolves as the Koords, Circassians, and
other lawless races, and the Government, whose duty it ought to be
to keep off the destroyers, not unfrequently abets and countenances
them in their ravages, and shares their prey with them.”
Such is the actual condition of the Armenian Christians. Yet it
is twenty years and more ago that the Hatti-Sheriff or Hatti-Huma-
youn of 1856 was put forth by the Sublime Porte. It promised to the
subjects of the Ottoman Empire safety of person and of property,
complete religious toleration, absolute equality before the law, pure,
prompt, and public administration of justice, in a word everything that
a just Government could give. The world knows how these promises
have been kept. Yet there are persons who manage to believe in the
new Constitution issued a few weeks back, whose author, Midhat Pasha,
has, after holding the office of Grand Vizier for some two months, been
summarily dismissed like scores of his predecessors.
Yet amidst the hopeless mass of corruption, injustice, and wrong
which go to make up Turkish rule, there actually exists in Asia itself
a district, subject to the Sultan, where order and content are to be


found. It is the district of the Lebanon, and its recent history is worth
relating. In the summer of iB6O it was the scene of a vast slaughter
of Christians. The Prime Minister of England at the time was Lord
Palmerston, and Lord Russell was Foreign Secretary. Writing on the
23rd July, iB6O, to Lord Cowley, the English Minister in Paris, Lord
Russell states that “besides the numbers killed in actual conflict, 5,500
persons have been the victims of massacre, and 20,000, including the
widows and children of the murdered, are wandering in a state of
famine through the country.” The then Foreign Secretary points out
that Turkish Pashas and Beys were abettors and favourers of these
massacres. The English Government at once joined with the French
in putting a stop to these “ Lebanon Horrors.” Six thousand French
troops were sent to Syria, and 6,000 more were to follow if necessary.
Lord Dufferin went as English Commissioner to investigate the facts
on the spot, see justice done, and unite with the other Powers in
obliging and aiding the Sublime Porte to establish a proper rule in the
disturbed districts. The result was that the Turkish Pashas and Beys,
Achmet Agha, Ali Bey, Ozman Bey, and Mohammed Ali Bey were
shot for abetting and favouring the massacres, as were a number of
other officers of inferior rank. The guilty having been, at least in
these instances, brought to justice, the Commissioners of the great
Powers, united to one named by the Porte, proceeded to consider the
origin and cause of the late massacres, to find the means of allaying
the distress of the sufferers, and prevent the recurrence of like
calamities by pointing out what changes should be made in the
Government of the Lebanon.
All these matters having been very carefully and fully gone into,
the great Powers, viz., England, France, Austria, Prussia, and Russia,
established, with Turkey, a new Government for the Lebanon, which
is still in force.
The Lebanon district extends all along the Syrian coast, from
Tripolis to Sidon, but the three ports themselves (of Tripolis, Beyrout,
and Sidon) are not, however, included in the district. It comprises all
the country inland to the foot of the eastern slopes of Mount Lebanon.
The Governor-General of this district must be a Roman Catholic, that
Christian body being the most numerous in the district taken as a
whole. Each of the sects of the district, Christian or otherwise (the
Maronites, Druses, Greek Orthodox, Greek Romanist, and Mussulmen),
appoint a Councillor and a Judge, who form an administrative body'
called the Medjlis or Council. The Lebanon is further subdivided
into smaller districts, over each of which is appointed a kind of Lieu-
tenant-Governor, who must be taken from the religious sect most
numerous in the district. He is aided in carrying on the administration
by deputies taken from each sect of the district, who form a local


Medjlis or Council. Every village, or group of villages, called a Canton,
possesses an unpaid magistrate for each sect, who adjudicates on
smaller matters, and settles debts to the amount of about £s■ More
important cases go before the Judicial Council of the District, com-
posed of members belonging to the different sects. A yet superior
Court, composed of two members of each sect, tries cases in the last
resort; this Court resides at the seat of Government with the
Governor-General. All the members of these Administrative and
Judicial Councils, without exception, as well as the local magistrates,
are chosen and appointed, after agreement with the notables, by the
chiefs of their respective communities, and are instituted by the
Governor. All mixed causes, that is causes between persons not of
the same religious community, are tried by the Judicial Councils, com-
posed of members taken from different sects ; unless, indeed, the
suitors are agreed to accept (in the smaller class of cases) the decision
of the local magistrate. All testimony is equally received, whatever
the witnesses’ race or creed may be.
There is an armed police in this Lebanon district about 1,000
strong, composed equally of men belonging to all communions and
races. This force is under the orders of the Governor-General,
who is appointed for five years, and whose re-appointment by the
Porte (or whose successor) must be approved by the great Powers
and must be a Christian of the Roman Church. No Turkish troops
are stationed in the district; they are only allowed to pass through it
on their way to Damascus or other places outside the Lebanon. In
case of extraordinary emergency, which has never occurred up to this
time, the Governor, with the consent of his Central Administrative
Council, may call in the regular Turkish troops.
Such was the Government established in the Lebanon by the
armed interference of the great Powers after the massacres of iB6O.
The result has been peace, order, and content throughout this district
comprising over half a million of inhabitants. Religious feuds have
been appeased, and men of very different religious sects now meet
amicably together on public and private matters. Women, and even
young girls, can travel about from place to place in security. The
property and the rights of all are respected. Everybody is allowed to
possess arms ; thus no class is at the mercy of another, as is the case
under the iniquitous system of permitting one portion of the population
to have arms while obliging another portion to be without them. The
Lebanon is covered with various monasteries and churches in which
the religious ceremonies of the various sects take place without
hindrance or disturbance.
At present a good deal of excitement and fanatical feeling are being
displayed by the Mahometan populations of the surrounding countries,


and the Christians settled in their midst are sending their wives,
daughters, and valuables into the Lebanon district, knowing the
security and order which have prevailed there since 1861, and still
continue to prevail.
Such has been the result of establishing in the Lebanon, by a
forcible intervention of the European Powers, a system of just and
orderly administration which gives equal rights and protection to all
races and creeds. Until that wa§ done, under European guarantees,
supported by an armed European force, lawlessness, oppression,
corruption, and massacre had their full swing in the Lebanon
district, as they have to-day wherever the Sublime Porte bears
uncontrolled sway, and rules according to its own sweet will. Thus
a remedy was found for the Lebanon, and a stop put to Turkish
misrule throughout that district. Similar means alone will effectually
stay the ills which, to this very hour, afflict the Armenian and
other peoples still bowed beneath the Ottoman yoke. That yoke
is none the less galling because each passing Sultan and Grand Vizier
is lavish of paper-reforms, and official promises, only made to be
broken, deceiving only those who wish to be deceived, but afford-
ing no relief to the unhappy millions “ handed over as a prey ” to one
of the worst Governments which ever disgraced or oppressed our
common humanity.




€i)t (Eastern Question Sfeisfonatioit.
PAPERS ON THE EASTERN QUESTION.
No. 11.
THE MARTYRS
OF
TURKISH MISRULE.
BY
MILLICENT GARRETT FAWCETT.
WITH A SUPPLEMENT
By MISS IRBY.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION ASSOCIATION,
28, CANADA BUILDING. WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL FETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris in New York.
1877.


govina gives a graphic account of the chronic insurrection in that
province, and he adds, “ Under the rule of the Turk there is never
peace, only a truce between conqueror and conquered.”
It is impossible to believe when people say, as they sometimes
do, that they are tired of horrors, and wish to hear no more of the re-
volting details of Turkish barbarity, that they really wish to shut their
eyes and harden their hearts to the daily and hourly miseries, for the
prolonged continuance of which England is in part responsible. All
authorities seem to agree that the miseries which the peasants of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have so long endured are the normal and
necessary characteristics of Ottoman rule. More than twelve years
ago, our ambassador at Constantinople, a well-known Turcophile, Sir
Henry Bulwer, recorded the following opinion of the permanent
characteristics of Turkish rule “ Wherever the Turk is sufficiently
predominant to be implicitly obeyed, laziness, corruption, and extrava-
gance mark his rule ; and wherever he is too feeble to exert more
than a doubtful and nominal authority, the system of government
which prevails is that of the Arab robber and the lawless Highland
chieftain.”
Seventeen years ago the acting British consul at Serajevo reported
to the English representative at Constantinople as follows : —“ Honest
governors and employes are imperatively required. Possessed of these,
the operations of the Government would be considerably facilitated ;
but while corruption is the rule and honesty the exception—while no
responsibility exists—while punishment does not follow crime, all
hope of improvement is impossible, and justice out of the question.”
Recent travellers, and residents of many years’ standing, in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, express themselves in the same sense. Mr.
Evans* speaks of “the malign and artificial character of the Osmanli
government;” pages might be quoted from the bookt published in
1867 by Miss Irby and Miss Muir Mackenzie, in support of their
assertion that the Turkish government in the Slavonic provinces “is
the very root of evil.” Mr. Stillman, Jas the result of long experience
of Turkish rule in many different localities, speaks of the “demon-
strated incapacity of the Ottoman Government to secure the conditions
of progress, or even of favourable existence, to its subjects.” If more
is needed to show that the misery of Turkish misrule is of no recent
date, and due to no sudden outburst of panic and fanaticism, Miss
Irby quotes the following passage, written at the beginning of the last
century, by Lady Mary Wortley Montague. She was travelling
through Servia when it was as completely under the dominion of the
Turk as Bosnia and Herzegovina were before the recent insurrection; —
* “Through Bosnia and the Herzegovina," by A. J. Evans,
f "The Slavonic Provinces of Turkey in Europe," by Miss Irby and Miss
Muir Mackenzie.
J " Herzegovina and the late Uprising," by W. J. Stillman.


“We crossed the deserts of Servia,” she writes, “almost quite over-
grown with wood in a country naturally fertile. The inhabitants are
industrious ; but the oppression of the peasants is so great that they
are forced to abandon their houses and neglect their tillage ; all they
have being a prey to the janissaries whenever they please to seize
upon it. We had a guard of 500 of them, and I was almost in tears
to see their insolences to the poor villages through which we passed.
. . . . Indeed the janissaries had no mercy on their [the peasants’]
poverty, killing all the poultry and sheep they could find, without
asking to whom they belonged. .... When the pachas travel it
is yet worse.”
These extracts convey some idea of what the normal condition of
Bosnia and Herzegovina has been for hundreds of years. When one
remembers the noble storm of rage, shame, and contrition which swept
over England in the autumn, when the news of the Bulgarian outrages
became known, there is room to hope that a similar feeling will be
awakened when it is known that the events in Bulgaria were but an
exaggerated example of the kind of treatment to which the Christian
inhabitants of the revolted provinces have been constantly subjected ;
for it is now acknowledged by the Government, and fully recognised
on all hands, that England and France are jointly responsible for the
continuance of Turkish rule in these provinces since the Crimean War.
As Lord Salisbury expresses it (Blue 800k —Turkey, No. 2 —1877), the
Western Powers twenty years ago “saved” Turkey “from destruction.”
We are, therefore, in part responsible for the continuation of the
miseries which the Bosnians and Herzegovinians have so long endured;
and it is difficult to believe that, when this has been fully brought
home to their consciences, the people of this country will ever rest
satisfied until a substantial and lasting remedy has been found.
Of the present condition of Bosnia and Herzegovina, much infor-
mation has lately been placed before the public. A correspondent of
the Manchester Guardian , whose name, if published, would be recog-
nised as a guarantee of his competence to speak authoritatively on this
subject, writes thus of the present condition of Bosnia;—“The prospect
of a settlement was never more remote than it is at present. The
refugees, driven forth from Bosnia by deeds of savagery which, though
unreported in the English newspapers, almost surpass the horrors of
Bulgaria, are dying by tens and hundreds in the inhospitable gorges of
the Dinaric Alps Outside Sarajevo . . and in the
country about Travnik-Banjaluka the worst horrors of Bulgaria are
repeating themselves at this very moment.” When to this is added
the fact that over 3,000 villages in Bosnia and Herzegovina are now
blackened ruins, and that more than 200,000 peasants, out of a total
population of very little more than a million, have fled, unprovided
with food, clothing, or shelter, from their ruined and devastated
homes into Servia, Montenegro, and the southern provinces of Austria,


enough will have been said to convince the reader of the unparalleled
misfortunes which the Ottoman rule has inflicted on these unhappy
people.
For on reading the accounts, to which I shall now attempt to draw
attention, of the normal condition of the Bosnians and Herzegovinians
in time of peace, it is impossible to avoid the conviction that their first
duty to God and man is rebellion against their oppressors. The last
degradation is not reached while the spirit of revolt still lives in a
robbed and outraged people. “War and death are not so dreadful
as slavery and corruption.” , The fact that there have been repeated
insurrections against the Turkish yoke is one that should be re-
membered to the credit of the Bosnians and Herzegovinians ; and it
should also be remembered that, after the outbreak of the present
insurrection, they rejected the proposal laid before them by the consuls
of England, France, and Russia, that they should lay down their
arms on receiving a promise from the Turks of a reform of the
grievances they complained of. “ They replied that they had no faith
in the Turks ; they had had the same promises before, and had been
deceived; they dared not and would not lay down their arms, and
could not return to their homes and villages, as they had none left to
return to; all had been destroyed, as they declared, by the Turks”
(Blue Book—Turkey, No. 2 —1876). In a similar manner they re-
jected the proposals for pacification contained in the Andrassy Note
as worthless without material guarantees that Turkey would fulfil the
promises she was so ready to make. The correspondent whose letter
I have already quoted, states that the Bosnian insurgents still hold
2,000 square miles of mountainous country in the south-west angle
of the province, and they also hold a large tract of country in the
Kosara mountains in the north ; he believes them capable of holding
these districts without foreign aid, and that they will form there a new
free state —a Bosnian Montenegro.
These facts make it evident that, notwithstanding all they have
suffered, these people still retain the materials of which a nation ot
free men might be made. Their stubborn resistance, their dogged
and uncrushed spirit under the worst oppression, ought to appeal
strongly to the sympathy of the English people.
It is a mistake to suppose that those who most earnestly desire the
deliverance of these people, suppose them at this moment to possess
all the virtues of free citizens. Five centuries of tyranny must for a
long time, even after freedom is gained, leave their traces in the faults
and vices (such as untruthfulness and alternate timidity and ferocity)
engendered by slavery. Oppression would not be so detestable a
thing if it did not corrupt the oppressed as well as the oppressor. In
reading the account of all these people have suffered, the wonder is
not that they have vices, but that they have any virtues.
The effect of the Turkish system of government on the character


of the Turks themselves is illustrated by the following incident,
recorded by Mr. Stillman “ I made the acquaintance of an army
surgeon who had been attending a Christian boy of thirteen, wantonly
shot in broad daylight by a Mussulman boy of twelve. The young
assassin was carried in triumph around the neighbourhood by his
comrades, and the wounded youth to the hospital. It seems that the
young Turk had had a present of a rifle (army pattern), and had gone
out to try it. Seeing the Christian lad gathering grapes in his
mother’s vineyard, he took deliberate aim, and shot him through the
body, at close quarters The culprit never was molested.”
I think most people who read this will feel that the Turkish child was
as much sinned against as sinning, and that the effect on his character
of the Turkish system was even more injurious than on that of the
sufferer. I would rather be the mother of the boy who was shot, than
of the boy who was ruffian enough to shoot him.
The nature of the oppression under which the Bosnians and Herze-
govinians lived is, no doubt, well known to many ; but, at the risk of
going over old ground, I will try to place before the reader a picture
of the kind of suffering they had constantly to endure. The main
cause of the rebellion in Bosnia and the Herzegovina was the system
of taxation that prevailed. In the first place the proceeds of the taxes
are sold, by the Government in Constantinople, to the highest bidder.
The tax-farmer, having thus paid down a certain sum to the Govern-
ment, recoups himself with heavy interest by wringing as much as he
possibly can from the unhappy peasantry ; in order to do this effectu-
ally he sub-lets the taxes to a class of men who are described as the
very scum of the earth. These men are very frequently Christians of
the Greek Church ; and they out-do the Turks themselves in exaction
and brutality. Their business is to extract from the rayahs the utter-
most farthing that they are able to pay, quite irrespective of the legal
amount of taxation due to the State. Insult, outrage, and torture are
the weapons they employ to gain their ends. They are supported in
their exactions, and in their brutal methods of enforcing them, by the
Zaptiehs (Mahommedan police), and by the officials of all ranks.
Mr. Evans says of these men who gather in the taxes, “They hold an
inquisition on every hearth, and the right which they exercise of in-
truding themselves into the inmost privacy of the rayah, gives them
inconceivable opportunities for outrage.”
A list of the taxes to which the rayah is liable is suggestive of
the condition of the Government under which he lives, even if the
manner in which the taxes are assessed and collected is left out of
account.
First, there is the “ haratch,” or poll tax, which is paid by the
Christians in lieu of military service. This was originally the ransom
which every non-Mussulman paid for his life, and it is now levied
not merely on men who are of the age to perform military service,


but on every male from the new-born baby to the old man in his
second childhood.
Then there are taxes on the rayah’s house, land, and cattle ; every
field planted with a certain plant called Broc, from which a red dye is
made, is taxed; every head of cattle, every sheep, every goat, every
pig, and sometimes even the fowls, are taxed. Besides these imposts,
there is a labour tax, and a most ruinous system of enforced labour
which enables the Mahommedan bey (landlord) to exact labour from
the rayah without paying for it. This tax was legalised about forty
years ago, and nominally limited to two days a week, but in reality the
rayah is obliged to give as many days as the landlord chooses to
claim. The only check on the bey’s demands arises from the fact
that he is part owner of the produce raised by the rayahs on their
own little farms, and it is therefore against his interest to allow these
to be totally uncultivated. As an example of the methods taken by
the Mahommedan landlords to extract from the rayahs more than
they are legally bound to pay, the following passage translated from
M. Yriarte’s book may be quoted : —“ At Gradusac, in the village of
Bok, Rauf Bey demanded from one of his tenants payment of his
taxes in money ; Ivan Kosics offered to pay his in kind, according to
law, pleading his extreme poverty. Rauf caused him to be seized, and
with five other Christians, who tenanted the same field, hung them to
the roof of the cabin, and lighted under their feet a great fire of maize
husks. The six rayahs were only set at liberty half-strangled after
their sufferings had made them promise to give up everything they
possessed.”
This method of torture is a very common one in Bosnia; the
victims are usually hung up with their heads downwards "in the
smoke, until pain and suffocation compel them to give the torturer
all he demands.
The rayah is also compelled to give from four to eight days’
labour a year to the State for making roads : he is never paid, and he
is sometimes sent to a distant part of the country, fifteen days’ journey
from his home. The State also has the right to requisition horses and
mules for transport. Their owners in these cases are obliged to follow
them in order to have a chance of securing their return; and both men
and beasts are subjected on the journey to the most cruel treatment.
But the most oppressive tax of all is probably the tithe or “ dime,”
As its name implies it was originally a tenth, but ten years ago it was
raised to an eighth in order to pay the expenses of the Sultan’s tour,
when fashionable London welcomed him with such great enthusiasm.
It has remained at the higher figure ever since. Even after paying
the tithe, or a sum frequently four or five times in excess of the legal
amount, the produce raised is not free from further imposts. “ The
vine has paid its tithe, it pays again as wine and distilled liquors ;
tobacco has paid the tithe as a plant, but as an industrial product it


must pay again before it can be sold.” The weight of taxation, and
more especially the brutality accompanying the collection of the im-
posts, have led in many cases to resistance on the part of the rayah.
Sometimes the inhabitants of a group of villages would combine to
resist the illegal demands of the tax collector. But in this case the
Porte has placed in the hands of its servants an irresistible weapon with
which to crush the resistance of the rayah. The tax collector takes
care to time his visit just before the harvest is gathered in ; he then
makes his assessment, which, as previously stated, is often largely in
excess of its legal amount. If any hint reaches him that the rayahs
will resist paying what he demands, he replies, “Very well; then your
harvest shall rot upon the ground.” The taxes, which are generally
demanded in money, must be paid before the harvest is permitted to
be gathered in. The alternative before the rayah is either to pay
whatever is asked of him, or else to see the whole result of his labour,
and the chief maintenance of his family, perish before his eyes. In
a case like this it is creditable to the courage of the rayah that he does
sometimes resolve, in conjunction with his fellows, to resist paying an
extortionate and illegal demand. But when this happens a horde of
zaptiehs are let loose upon the miserable peasants. They live at free
quarters in the rayahs’ cottages, and heap indescribable insults on
them and their families. If mere ill-treatment is insufficient, these
zaptiehs resort to torture to gain their ends. In reading of their
fiendish devices one’s heart burns to think that any sentient creature,
Christian or not Christian, man or dog, should be at the mercy of such
savages. I never realised, until I read of their methods of reducing
the rayahs in Bosnia to submission, the complete fitness of Mr. Carlyle’s
expression—“ The unspeakable Turk.” The deeds which blacken the
name of “Turk” in the revolted provinces are truly such as cannot
even be spoken of without injury to those who speak and those who
hear. There is a story, however, related by Mr. Denton and
quoted by Mr. Evans, which is terrible without being revoltingly
loathsome; it will give some idea to English mothers and fathers
what the martyrs of Turkish misrule have to endure:—“ A poor
woman, frantic with agony, burst into the palace of the princess
at Belgrade. She had been assessed by the Turkish authorities
of a village in Bosnia of a sura which she had no means of pay-
ing. She was smoked. This failed of extracting the gold; she
begged for a remission, and stated her inability to pay. In answer
she was tossed into the river Drina, and after her were thrown her two
infant children, one of four years old, the other of two. Before her
eyes, notwithstanding her frantic efforts to save them, her children
perished. Half drowned and insensible, she was dragged to land by
a Serbian peasant. She made her way to Belgrade, believing from the
character of the princess for humanity that she would aid her, Of
course to do so was out of the question,”


The oppression which the Bosnians and Herzegovinians most
deeply and bitterly resent,, is the forcible carrying off of girls and
women to the Turkish harems. When Mr. Stillman was in Herzego-
vina at the beginning of the insurrection in 1875, he questioned the
people as to their grievances : —“ They all said the same thing: the
Turks robbed them, took whatever they wanted—their animals, what
they had in their houses, and even their daughters when they took a
fancy to them, and they never saw them any more. Into this
grievance we inquired most particularly, because it will be found to
be the true tide-mark of Turkish oppression. . . . They all
assured me, both women and men, that it was most common. . . .
One tall, haggard old woman, about sixty, stood listening like a statue
of misery, and the tears began flooding her eyes and running down
her wrinkled cheeks, not a muscle moving, watching my friend who
interpreted, until finally, with the recital of some kindred suffering,
the stone melted, and she buried her face in her ragged robe, and
burst into violent weeping” (pp. 30, 31). Dr. Sandwith, in a private
letter which has been kindly placed with his permission at my dis-
posal, writes as follows on the same subject: “ A poor widow came to
be clothed ; she was a very decent body. Most of the people tell of
the murder of their husbands and brothers with the amount of calm-
ness that people speak of those long ago dead. This poor woman did
nothing but sob. I asked her trouble. She had lost two pretty
daughters. They were loot— i.e., taken by the Turks—and nothing
seemed to assuage her grief. In the dreadful struggle for bare
existence in which so many succumb, many mothers seem quite
reconciled to the fate of those children who have fallen by the Turkish
yataghan; they are provided for, and will never feel cold or hunger
more, but the recollection of girls carried off to the slave market is
an enduring grief.” As to the disputed question whether the Turks
still retain the barbarous punishment of impalement, it can only be
said that those travellers and residents who know the people best, who
speak their language, and who therefore get their information from
other than Turkish sources, affirm positively that impalement is still
practised. The correspondent of the Manchester Guardian states that
he is prepared to supply overwhelming evidence on the point. Miss
Irby is convinced, from long personal intercourse with the people, that
impalement is by no means a thing of the past. Mr. Evans says in
his book that his experience convinces him that the object seen by
Canon Liddon was not a scare-crow nor a bundle of haricot beans, but
that it actually was an impaled human figure. On the other hand, the
British Consul of Serajevo, Mr. Holmes, who admits that thirty or forty
years ago impalement was “ very common,” disputes the assertion that
it is still practised. For twenty years, he says, he has never heard of
a single instance of this old barbarous custom. It must, however, be
remembered that Mr. Holmes relies for his information chiefly on


Turkish sources. He does not speak the Slav language, and he is
believed to be an active and tried friend of the Turkish authorities.
His knowledge of Turkish practices is therefore likely to be limited to
what the Turks themselves choose to tell him. As evidence of the
cordial relations existing between Mr. Holmes and the Turkish
Government, it may be mentioned that on March 15th, 1876, a special
despatch was sent from Raschid Pacha to Musurus Pacha, desiring the
latter to thank the British Government for the “ friendly disposition ”
displayed by Mr. Holmes towards the Turkish Government at the
outbreak of the insurrection, and begging Musurus Pacha “to recom-
mend Mr. Holmes most especially” to the favour of Her Majesty’s
Government.*
It is unnecessary to enter upon the other sources of misery which
oppress the Christian subjects of Turkey. That Christian evidence is
not accepted in criminal cases ; that Christians are not allowed to
own land ; that every reform promised by the Porte is made the cover
for fresh-exactions and new misery ; that the Ottoman minority main-
tains itself by fomenting discord and jealousy between the Greek,
Roman Catholic, and Slavonic forms of Christianity; all these things
are only too well known. They are condemnation enough of the
Turkish system of government; but at this moment they are of com-
paratively minor importance ; they are not matters of life and death,
and the cause in which Bosnia and Herzegovina took up arms was
and is a matter of life and death. M. Yriarte says : “ Most of the
soldiers of the insurrection were Christian tillers of the land, who,
reduced to die on a fertile soil through the avidity of the land-owner,
preferred to die like men, champions of a just rebellion.” The demands
put forward by the Christians on the outbreak of the insurrection
sufficiently indicate the practical and moderate reforms they asked for.
Of the seven demands, without some guarantee for the carrying out of
which they refused to lay down their arms, I quote five only: f—
-1. That Christian girls _and women should be no longer molested
by the Turks.
2. That they should have equal rights with the Turks before the
law. -
3. That they should be protected from the violence of the zaptiehs.
4. That the tithe-farmers should take no more than they were
legally entitled to, and they should take it at the proper time.
5. That no forced labour, either personal or by horses, should be
demanded by the Government; but that labour, when needed, should
be paid for, as was the case all over the world.
No stronger proof can be given of the necessity of the rebellion, if
this expression may be used, than the character of these demands.
That they were considered just demands by Europe is proved by the
+ Evans, p. 340.
* Blue Book, Turkey, Xo. 3, iFyS, p. 47.


fact that they were all—except, apparently, the first—virtually embodied
in the famous Andrassy Note. All the Powers, including England,
have therefore, by presenting this Note to the Porte, recognised the
miseries which led to the rebellion. Much has been said and written
in England to persuade us that the insurrection was the work of the
secret societies ; and that the peasants who support it are fighting for
“ Panslavism,” or some imaginative revolutionary ideal. But when
the leaders of the movement are listened to, the first thing they
ask is for the honour of their wives and daughters, and the second,
third, fourth, and fifth amount in effect to a demand that they them-
selves should not be robbed and murdered. Mr. Evans says on this
point:—
“Nothing shows a more hopelessly wrong conception of the
whole character of the rayah mind, than to suppose that the dull
unlettered peasants of Bosnia and Herzegovina took up arms as the
champions of Panslavism or the ‘ Cosmopolitan Revolution.’ Jacques
Bonhomme, of whatever nationality, is an emphatically practical
being, and a grande idee is entirely beyond his comprehension. Poor
Herzegovinian Hodge did not exchange his spade for a musket to
secure Provincial Autonomy ; he simply wanted to obtain a fair share
of what he earned with the sweat of his brow—to gain security for life
and limb and the honour of his wife and children —to be allowed at
least to live.”
The reality of the sufferings to which the Bosnian and Herzego-
vinian peasants have been subjected will, perhaps, be best brought
home to some minds by the fact that for 200 years wholesale
emigrations from these provinces into the surrounding districts have
taken place. In 1690, 37,000 families quitted their homes and settled
north of the Danube in the southern provinces of Hungary. In 1851,
M. Yriarte states that 16,000 peasants quitted Bosnia, driven forth by
the oppression of their Mahommedan rulers. In 1863, when Miss
Irby and Miss Muir Mackenzie were at Prizren in Old Servia, they
were informed that 500 families had lately emigrated in Dalmatia, and
that the movement was still going on. The refugees who have within
the last two years fled from their blackened and desolated homes
number considerably more than 200,000. More than one-fourth of
the entire Christian population of Bosnia, some say one-third, has
fled, and almost as many have perished either by the sword or by
the famine and pestilence that follow in the wake of war. The
refugees from Herzegovina are estimated at one-half the Christian
population of the province. Notwithstanding the most terrible suf-
ferings, the spirit of these people seems as unbroken as ever. “No
one here,” writes the correspondent from whom I have before quoted,
“no one here dreams of peace.” Whatever Russia may do, no
matter what England says, nor how much Austria may wish the
matter settled, and, above all, no matter how smoothly Turkey may


promise reforms, the insurgents will never laydown their arms till they
have achieved their freedom.
Mr. Stillman describes a visit which he made to some smoky
cabins which were converted into a sort of temporary hospital for the
insurgents. There was no surgeon, and, what was almost more serious,
there was hardly any water —all the water the wounded men could get
was brought a mile on women’s backs. All the wounds were serious.
One young man who had had a ball through his foot was bargaining
for a gun to go back to the war with.
This brave spirit can only be kept up by heroic effort; sometimes
a cry arises almost of despair. A correspondent, a native of Old
Servia, whose letter Miss Irby has translated and forwarded to
England, writing on last Christmas Day, says: “We hear that
peace has been made, but it is only to our ill and infinite harm
and he then describes how, on the day on which he was writing,
the Christians assembled before daybreak to celebrate the birth of
Christ; in the churchyard, men, women, and little children were
shot down by Turks, who had anticipated this gathering as a
favourable opportunity of attacking their foes; twenty-nine men,
sixteen women, and eight little children were slain. The correspon-
dent says: “This is our ‘peace on earth and he adds: “We are
lost. There is help from nowhere—from nowhere is there any one to
save us from the claws of the bloodthirsty dragon that drinks up our
blood like water; nor are there any to care.” No wonder that
the refugees continue to pour over the border, and that nothing will
tempt them to return to the hell on earth which the Turks have made
of the country that was once their home ; their only hope is in the in-
domitable spirit of the peasants, who have taken up arms and who
still hold the mountain fastnesses against the Turk. The impossibility
of inducing the refugees to return to Bosnia while the rule of the
Porte continues there is well expressed in the letter of a well-known
and trustworthy Bosnian merchant, who writes:—
“There is no hope of the return of the Bosnians to their own
land, for daily worse and worse violence is committed in Bosnia. The
Turks are now choosing the worst ruffians in all the towns, forming
them into predatory bands, and sending them into quiet villages to
rob and murder the peaceful inhabitants. A troop of one hundred of
the worst ruffians from Travnik have come to Banyaluka, ravaging
and murdering in the villages with impunity.” He then describes the
mutilations of the victims, and adds : “ What they did to the women
and maidens it would be a shame to write. Many poor wretches have
fled to the woods in this bitter cold. Here is the result of the Turkish
Constitution.”
The farce of the new constitution is fully appreciated in Bosnia ;
the people there have had experience enough to know that Haiti
Scherifs and Haiti Houmaouns containing the finest professions are


generally the preface of greater exactions and viler barbarity. There
are reasons] enough for knowing that the new constitution is more
intended L to throw dust into the eyes of Europe than to conciliate
or deceive the insurgents. In many of the towns of Bosnia the
new constitution was proclaimed in the Osmanli language, which
is about as intelligible to Bosnians as a Greek poem would be to a
village audience in Suffolk; but after this pageant had been gone
through, another proclamation followed in the native language, which
will be interesting to those who wish to know the view taken by the
Turks of the result of the late Conference at Constantinople. “It is
all quite right and very good ; the Turk rules as before, and the rayah
remains rayah. The Sultan, the brother of the Sun, the cousin of the
Moon, comrade of all the Stars, the friend of Allah, the kinsman of
Mahomet, the Son of the Ocean, Emperor of Emperors, King of
Kings, Prince of Princes, and Lord of the Earth unto the Sky, has
commanded the seven subject kings, who came to him at Stamboul,
that they shall drive back into our lands again the rayah dogs who
have fled from their lawful masters ; he has bidden the Swabian Czar
(the Emperor of Austria) to slay all those rayah dogs who refuse to
return, and the Swabian Czar has promised to do his bidding ; and it
is moreover decreed that whoever is not obedient on his return shall
be put to death.”
Perhaps enough, and more than enough, has now been said to prove
that the rebellion in Bosnia and Herzegovina, so far from being a
crime, was a duty forced upon the inhabitants for the protection of
chastity, life, and property ; that the migration of old men, women,
and children in hundreds and thousands was no less necessary for the
same ends ; that the men capable of bearing arms are acting as we
would have Englishmen act under the same circumstances, in re-
fusing all terms that would leave them in the hands of their
oppressors; and finally that while the present state of things continues
it is impossible for the refugees to venture to return to their homes.
It is for the hardships and the misery of these refugees that I now
wish to beg for compassion and help. One says the words, “Two
hundred thousand people are living on charity,” or “Two hundred and
fifty thousand have fled,” without realising what an appalling depth of
agony they convey. Of course these poor people are not congregated
in one locality; they form a fringe all round the desolated provinces;
they are most numerous in the Austrian provinces of Dalmatia,
Croatia, and Slavonia, but they have also fled in large numbers into
Free Servia and Montenegro. It is estimated that there are 54,000
in Servia, 90,000 in Montenegro, and the rest are in Austria. A
large proportion have literally brought nothing with them but the
clothes they w'ere wearing at the time of their flight, but a few have
brought their cattle. M. Yriarte gives a graphic account of a scene
which he witnessed himself of five hundred fugitives crossing the


Unna in rafts and leaky boats, pursued by a party of Bashi-Bazouks,
who fired upon them from the shore; the peasants on the Austrian side,
on their part, doing their utmost to aid and direct the rayahs. Among
these five hundred he could discover not a single man capable of bearing
arms; there were only old men, women, and children ; they en-
camped on the bare ground without warmth or shelter ; he saw them,
lying on the icy earth, happy to have escaped with nothing but their
lives. ,
The following description is also taken from an account sent to
Miss Irby by an eye-witness;—
“Another object of the insurgent bands is the safe conduct, under
cover of their protection, up to the frontier of Austria or Servia, of the
Christians who have escaped from the cruelties of the Turks into the
forest mountains of Bosnia. Sometimes these poor exiles—unarmed
men, women, and children —have been for months hiding in the woods,
until the armed bands could open a way for them through the country
into the neighbouring Christian lands. They were driven from their
homes by savage Mussulman soldiery, who suddenly appeared in their
peaceful villages, murdering and plundering, and then setting fire to
their houses. It is hard to realise the misery of these flights ; the
father loses the son, the mother the daughter; the young and feeble
perish on the way ; weeks and months go by before the scattered
members of a family find one another, and the fate of many is never
known. No property, hardly the bare life, can be saved.”
Then follows a description of the flight of fugitives over the Unna
at Kuljani, protected by a very large body of insurgents against an
expected onslaught of the Turks :
“The miserable exiles this time reached the Austrian shore in
safety in the little canoes of the river. What a scene of wretchedness 1
Hundreds and hundreds dragging themselves along the dusty road—
men, women, and children. In the heavy, despairing countenances
. . . . may be plainly read the hereditary misery of centuries.
Weary women and little children can scarcely crawl along; some of
the sick (for the most part small-pox cases) fall down by the way.
. . . . A few steps further on is another group; here lies in the
last agony a woman who has been wounded—seven wounds on her
body. . . . Here lay some others, slightly wounded, who from
pain and fatigue can crawl no further. Many sink down on the dusty,
hard roadside, to seek on Christian soil the sleep to which for nights
they had dared not yield Some begin to eat the ears of
Indian com which they have brought with them Fathers
of families go away to seek bread in the village. Some have brought
away a few coins, and can pay for it. Now a father returns with some
bread, which he divides among his family; the children watch every
mouthful with longing eyes. Another father returns empty-handed;
a cry of distress bursts forth. Igo and buy bread for those who have


none; the poor women can scarce believe this. I give it them, and
they fall at my feet and kiss my hands.”
The correspondent of the Manchester Guardian , writing from Knin,
in Dalmatia, gives a most terrible picture of the distress among the
fugitives in that district. He estimates their number in and around
Knin, including the mountain districts, at 17,000. Small-pox and
famine-typhus are busily at work to make the number smaller. More
than 2,000 have died since October, near Knin. “Almost all the very
small babies are dead’’ writes Dr. Sandwith. How any children have
survived at all seems a marvel. “ They look,” we are told, “ like little
living corpses; their sunken eyes, drawn lips, and stick-like limbs show
what the continual suffering of hunger is ; . . . only the strongest
survive.” In one hut in Stermnitza eight children died of typhus in
two days. The number of burials in this one village was from thirty
to forty a day. Many of the wretched fugitives have been obliged to
live, for want of other shelter, in mountain caves ; the agony they
have endured here from cold and hunger sickens the heart to read of.
The correspondent from whom I have so often quoted visited the
inmates of these caves, and brought them food and clothing. I will
give the description in his own words :
“Then, indeed, broke upon my sight such a depth of human
misery as it has perhaps fallen to the lot of few living men to witness.
We crossed a small frozen cataract, and passed the mouths of two
lesser caverns, toothed with icicles three feet long and over, and then
we came to the mouth of a large cave, a great black opening in the
rock, from which, as we climbed up to it, crawled forth a squalid and
half-naked swarm of women, children, and old men, with faces literally
eaten away with hunger and disease. A little way off was another
smaller hole, outside which leant what had once been a beautiful girl;
and inside, amidst filth and squalor which I cannot describe, dimly
seen through smoke and darkness, lay a woman dying of typhus.
Others crowded out of black holes and nooks, and I found that there
were about thirty in this den. In another small hole, going almost
straight down into the rock, I saw a shapeless bundle of rags and part
of the pale, half-hidden face of another woman stricken down by the
disease of hunger ; another den with about a dozen, and then another
more horrible than any. A black hole, sloping downwards at so steep
an angle as made climbing up or down a task of some difficulty,
descended thus abruptly about thirty feet, and then seemed to dis-
appear into the bowels of the earth. The usual haggard crowd
swarmed out of the dark and foetid recesses below and climbed up to
seek for alms. A woman seated on a ledge of rock half-way up burst
into hysterical sobs; it was at the sight of ‘old Lazar,’”a Bosnian
refugee of seventeen years’ standing, who had visited these unfortu-
nates before and brought them food from Knin, sent by Miss Irby
and Miss Johnston, To show the thoroughness with which the work


of relief has been done by these ladies, so far as the funds at
their disposal admitted, I am enabled to state that every man,
woman, and child among these poor creatures were twice supplied
with five okes of corn per head—about twelve and a half pounds—
and they also received clothing and blankets. “ They had tasted
nothing then for three days, and would have all died that day, she
said, if he had not come. Then, slowly tottering and crawling
from an underground lurking-place at the bottom of the pit, there
stumbled into the light an old man, so lean, so wasted, with such
hollow sunken eyes, that he seemed nothing but a walking skeleton ;
it was the realisation of some ghastly mediaeval picture of the resur-
rection of the dead! He seemed to have lost his reason, but from
below he stretched out his bony hands towards us as if to grasp our
alms, and made a convulsive effort to climb the rocky wall of his den.
He raised himself with difficulty a few feet, and then fell back
exhausted, and was caught by a girl in her arms. Poor old man ! It
was not hard to see that he would never leave that loathsome den
alive ; nay, I dare not say that those horrible recesses were not cata-
combs as well. Not far off we passed another cave, where the bodies
of some women and children had been found.”
After distributing food to supply their present wants, these good
Samaritans passed on to another mountain gorge, where they found
180 poor creatures crowded in rude and insufficient shelters on the
mountain-side. To these also food was given.
Many of the refugees had no clothing to protect them from the
severity of the terrible winter of those regions besides ragged cotton
shirts. Dr. Sandwith describes the children crowding to him for
clothing, with nothing on them but one cotton garment. It has been
his aim, and that of Miss Irby and Miss Johnston, to supply these
poor martyrs of Turkish misrule and European selfishness with sub-
stantial woollen clothing, and with a sufficient ration of com and
onions to keep body and soul together. Even a penny, it is said, is
enough to give a child food for one day. It is not too much to hope
that England will contribute something worthy of her generosity to wards
relieving the suffering she is partly responsible for. Austria, Servia,
and Montenegro have contributed most liberally to the support of the
unhappy refugees; if it were not that the misery is on so gigantic a
scale, no further help than that they have given would be needed. In
many districts of Servia the inhabitants have given what amounts
to a sixth of their income in the relief of distress. Dr. Sandwith
speaks of one Servian gentleman at Parachin, who was keeping 400
refugees at his own expense. The contributions made by Austria
must be enormous, as an allowance of one penny a day for each
child, and twopence a day for each adult, has been made for every
refugee on Austrian soil; and the relief has now been going on at
this rate for two years. Private societies in England have also


made efforts to relieve the distress; subscriptions of money and
clothes have been forwarded to Miss Irby and Miss Johnston, and to
Dr. Sandwith. The Mansion House Fund has been in part distributed
by them. The Society of Friends has collected and sent out a consider-
able sum of money, which has been expended and distributed by a
gentleman experienced in similar good works. Still much more is
needed, and it may be hoped that it will be given with no grudging
hand. Money for seed-corn is urgently needed. It is most im-
portant that the Bosnians and Herzegovinians remaining in their
provinces should be supplied with seeds of various descriptions, or
the country will be overwhelmed with all the horrors of famine. A
flax and wool fund has also been formed, for the purpose of supply-
ing the women among the refugees with the materials for making
the strong native linen and cloth of which the dress of the peasant
is made. It is the truest kindness to these poor women to give
them employment; it diverts their minds from their misfortunes, and
it mitigates very considerably the demoralising effect of living on
charity. Miss Irby says almost the only smile she saw on the face's
of the women was when she distributed some flax and wool among
them. Their poor neighbours, the natives or settlers in the countries
to which the refugees have fled, are most kind in lending looms and
all the necessary implements for weaving and spinning.
One has only to attempt to realise what must be the condition of
200,000 people who have been burned out of house and home, and who
have fled for their Jives from a pitiless enemy, to see that they must
necessarily be in want of everything that separates the life of a man
from the life of a beast. Homes, clothing, the materials of industry
and agriculture, all are gone ; and through no fault of their own, but
because they had the courage to do their duty, and throw off the
vile yoke of their oppressors. Their own courage is all they have to
rely on to accomplish their ends ; foreign intervention and diplomatic
remedies seem alike hopeless. The one help that every one is free to
offer is to send money, food, and clothes, to keep the old men, women,
and children alive while their sons and husbands and fathers are
fighting against an intolerable slavery.
Subscriptions may be sent to Mrs. Malleson, 29, Queen’s Square,
Bloomsbury, or to Andrew Johnston, Esq., 15S, Leadenhall Street,
E.C., who will also receive for the flax and wool fund, and for seed-
corn.


SUPPLEMENT.
BOSNIAN AND HERZEGOVINIAN FUGITIVES AND
ORPHAN RELIEF FUND.
Directresses.
Miss A. P. Irby. | Miss Johnston.
Hon. Treasurer.
Andrew Johnston, Esq., 158, Leadenhall Street, E.C.
In December, 1875, we left England to bring some aid to the fugitives
on the Austrian frontiers of Bosnia. We had previously, on the out-
break of the insurrection, removed the most promising of the pupils
from our school at Serayevo, in Bosnia, to continue their training
under more favourable circumstances in the excellent school at Prague,
in Bohemia; and we returned to England meanwhile to organise the
Bosnian and Herzegovinian Fugitives and Orphan Relief Fund. Not
one penny of this fund has been spent either on the branch home at
Prague, or the school at Serayevo, but solely among the Fugitives.
We first proposed to confine our aid to children, and chiefly to the
education of the children, but we found it practically impossible to
refuse relief in food and clothing to the wretched and starving fathers
and mothers ; nor, indeed, were we able to establish any school, or to
make any arrangements for orphans, until the month of March. It
was first necessary to feel our way, and, above all, to win the con-
fidence of the terror-stricken rayahs, who from long oppression and
persecution are extremely suspicious. For a long time they could not
believe in any disinterested efforts to help them, and were quite sure
we wanted to kidnap their children and carry them off to England.
But since March, 1876, we have established twenty day-schools, con-
taining over 1,200 children, taught by native Bosnian schoolmasters,
found among the refugees. Eighteen of these schools are in Slavonia
and Croatia, on the northern frontier of Bosnia—viz., at Pakratz,
Kukunevatz, Chaglitz, Rogolje, Golesha, Okuchane, Medare, Petrovo
Selo, Raitz, Rozhdanik, Paklenitza, Novska, Kritzska, Bressovatz,
Lovska, Subotska, Jagme, and Toranje. We find the schools useful
centres of relief, both for gaining knowledge of the people and for


actual distribution. The children all receive a dinner of black bread
the five days in the week they attend school, and we have been obliged
to provide all with needful clothing. The Serb children (Bosnian and
other) are very quick and apt to learn ; they have the advantage over
English children in learning to read, inasmuch as the Serb alphabet
is strictly phonetic, every sign having one unvarying sound. The
only “reading books,” so [called, we use are the New Testament and
the Serb “National Songs.” But we are now forming a “Bosnian
School Library” at Pakratz, for the use of the schoolmasters and
advanced pupils. There are a few very good books for this purpose,
translations or original, in the Croats-Serb language, published at
Belgrade, Neusatz, Pancsova, Agram, Zara, and Ragusa. “Stories
from Bethlehem,” by Rev. McDuff", is translated ; and I wish to get
Smiles’ “Self-Help” published in Serbian. Some young men are
learning to read and write in our schools ; and the apprentice boys
are taught on Sundays.
During our visit to England last summer, and again on our depar-
ture from Pakratz for Dalmatia last December, we left the schools in
Slavonia and Croatia, under the supervision and management of Pro-
fessor Josics, the excellent Director of the Serb Training School at
Pakratz; the money for the schools and for the previously-arranged
relief is in the hands of a rich and much-respected resident and two
higher officials ; the management of the clothing and feeding the
children is in the charge of another professor and a very capable
Croatian lady. Twenty-eight orphans are boarded out to attend
school, and some boys are apprenticed to useful trades. Distributions
of Indian corn and meal are still given among the most needy in some
places on the northern frontier, and a few sick persons in the neigh-
bourhood of Pakratz are supplied with food and medical care. In all
our efforts in this district we have the hearty good-will, or the active
co-operation, of local Austrian authorities, and of the Military Com-
mando at Agram.
The other two schools have been established since January, 1877,
at Gracac, on the southern frontier, and at Plavno, near Knin, in
Dalmatia. In the latter will be lodged,-clothed, and fed twenty little
orphan children. We reached Knin at the moment of the greatest
want, when there had been a diminution, or in many instances a total
cessation, of Austrian relief, and when Indian corn was more than
double its usual price. Happily we had purchased Indian corn at
Fiume, and the arrival of £ 1,000 worth from a distance sent down the
local prices, so that all the poor were benefited. During the months
of January and February we had regular distributions from our house
at Knin, under our own supervision, people coming to receive according
to lists from villages sometimes four hours’ distance; and we esta-
blished a small depot at Stermitza, whence corn was fetched by some
of the poor inhabitants of that district of Bosnia now cleared of the


Turks. The miserable inmates of the caves described by the corre-
spondent to the Manchester Guardian, have received twice, and will
receive again, an allowance per head of five okas of com, that is, twelve
pounds and a half. They have also had blankets and clothing.
Our second visit to Stermitza is thus described by Miss Johnston
in a letter to her brother :
“Knin, Dalmatia, January \6th, 1877.
“ I will try and send you an account ot our day yesterday. It is
quite impossible to describe the scene, and lam sure it will be equally
impossible ever to forget it. We had about 3,000 Bosnians about us,
though we could only distribute linen enough for one shirt to each
child. Over 600 received it, together with sewing thread, and a large
hard biscuit of black bread. As one by one they pressed up to the
window from which we gave out the things, looking in with such
anxious eyes, and stretching out such wasted hands, we could only
long that we had far more for them. It seemed to us impossible that
human beings could be reduced to the objects before us. The sunken,
glassy eyes, the protruding bones scarcely covered, and the deathly
colour of most of them, brought clearly before us what it means —
“death from starvation.” Some of those who received the poor gifts
yesterday must be now beyond the reach of want and pain. Little
dying children were lifted up, but could not put out a hand. Many
were covered with small-pox rash, and stood with chattering teeth, the
cold north wind blowing through their ragged clothes. It was no easy
matter managing the distribution, for the poor creatures—almost
desperate with hunger—pressed and thronged upon each other, and it
was all several stout helpers could do to keep them back. We were
in a shed in a large yard in which the children were assembled outside
an immense crowd of people, many of whom quickly found their way
to the top of the high walls and sheds round, to see what was going
on. We gave pieces of linen from six to nine yards long, according
to the size of the child, and took down each name. After about four
hours’ hard work we came to the last, as we thought, when something
was called out from the road, the great door opened, and in scrambled
about 200 more ragged, famishing children, and mothers carrying
naked crying babies. These had come from a great distance, hearing
that there was something to be got. Happily we had enough of
both linen and bread, scanty as seemed the supply. Some miserable
little faces were lighted up by a bright smile as the children were
kindly spoken to and the presents given, but most wore a look of
patient, hopeless suffering, terribly touching to see in such young
children. The supply of Indian corn we have ordered has just
arrived ; that is the great want —bare food ; for want of it these poor
people are dying every day. The distribution will now begin in
several places.
“ Priscilla Johnston.”


During our necessary short absence in England (a new edition of
“Travels in Slavonic Provinces” being called for), we have left small
depsts of Indian corn at Knin, Stermitza, Obrovazzo, and Otocac.
This corn, together with flax for the women to spin, blankets, and
clothing, will be distributed by three resident Austrian gentlemen and
our trusty old Bosnian, Lazar Kovachevitch, aided by Austrian officials,
and by Countess Jankovic, a lady well known in Dalmatia for her
labours among the wounded, and in whose house at Obrovazzo the
bales of clothing have been stored.
The condition of the fugitives is very much worse than when they
first came over, and from the following causes :—ist. Those who were
able in the flight to bring with them cattle, money, and little stores have
by this time, with few exceptions, spent or sold everything. At first
they would, as a rule, rather starve themselves, or let their cattle starve,
than eat or sell them, always hoping to return to their own land,
driving back with them their chief wealth. I heard many instances in
which, unable to purchase provender or find pasture, they kept on
their cattle, in the vain hope of return, until the poor beasts actually
died of hunger. 2nd. The present dearness in Slavonia and Croatia,
owing mainly to the failure of the local maize crops, from the inunda-
tions last year. In Dalmatia the scarcity is still greater. 3rd. The poor
natives, who have received their exiled brethren with a generous and
beautiful hospitality, sharing with them wretched huts and scanty meals,
are absolutely unable to support the burden of the woe-stricken crowd
who have been thus cast in their midst, bringing small-pox and typhus
among them. The people used to tell us this themselves, speaking pity-
ingly and unreproachfully; indeed never, except from the richer Roman
Catholics, did I hear anything like impatient complaints of the inflic-
tion. The fugitives from North Bosnia belong all to the Orthodox
Eastern Church. The kindness of the poor to the poor is usually
greater than the kindness of the rich : among these poor Pravoslavs,
or Slav Christians of one faith and race, it is a matter of course—it is
very nature. But though unbounded in spirit, it is sadly limited in
means. This winter the natives are less able than they were last
winter to give hospitality. 4th. The clothing which the fugitives
brought over on their backs they have been unable to renew, and it
is now a mass of rags and filth. In most parts of Bosnia the peasants
make their own clothes entirely; their linen as well as their cloth is
home-spun. We find nothing brings a smile to the faces of the poor
women so much as presents of flax and wool, that they may have their
accustomed work, and make the clothes they are accustomed to wear.
Many of them have become crazed and foolish from idleness amid the
bitter memories of loss, suffering, and nameless insult, let alone starva-
tion and exile. The best way to help is to give them the means of
making their own clothes again. We hear to-day, in a letter from


Obrovazzo, that the women are crowding from all quarters, begging
for flax.
Among many grievous instances at Knin, we saw a woman crazed
with sorrow, whose sad tale I could not disentangle amid her sobs
and rapid utterances, until I could call in the aid of her neighbours.
When the rest of the inhabitants of her village fled in haste from the
approach of the Turkish soldiery, she had just given birth to an infant,
and was obliged to stay behind. She showed her hands, which were
scarred with cuts. She told us that, as she lay helpless, a Turkish
soldier cut off her necklace, and the silver coins which are sewed
as ornaments about the jackets of the richer peasants. Trying to
defend herself with her hands, the soldier cut and slashed them with
his knife, and here were the scars. Her husband had been killed and
all her children had died save a girl of twelve, whom she found with
the rest of her village when at last she was able to creep over the
frontier.
In many instances the members of a family were long scattered.
One of our best schoolmasters, who has our little school at Subotska
in Croatia, wept bitterly when we asked him about his parents. He
knew that the village in which they liyed had been desolated by the
Turks, but he did not know whether his parents, brother, and sisters
had perished or had reached a Christian land in safety. When we
went to Dalmatia he implored us to inquire for them. It seemed a
hopeless search, but asking one person and another, we discovered a
day or two before our departure that the inhabitants who had escaped
from that village were stationed at Zermania, four hours from Knin. We
sent a letter to the Austrian authorities at that place, requesting that the
old people, who we were told were alive and well, should be sent to us
immediately. Great was their delight at having tidings of their son.
The poor mother kissed his letter, which we gave her, and placed it in
her bosom. We gave them some clothing, and a goodly quantity of
flax for the old woman and her daughters to spin and weave into linen,
promising a speedy distribution of Indian corn at Zermania.
We are now about to return to Dalmatia, and we entreat fresh
contributions for all the branches of our work, and more especially
for .the following objects: —ist. For the purchase of flax and wool
for the women to make into their own cloth and linen. Both can be
procured at Trieste. 2nd. For the purchase of seed—viz., flax, maize,
oats, and onions—to be sown in the district which is protected
by the insurgents. This district is in the immediate vicinity of Knin
in Dalmatia, Zermania, and Srb, where we shall be able to have little
depots of seed to be fetched away by the peasants according to lists
prepared by the heads of villages.
It is impossible to state with accuracy the actual number of
refugees from Bosnia and the Herzegovina ; but it is certain that over
one-fourth of the whole Christian population have fled across the


frontiers. Mr. Stillman considers this proportion very much under-
stated, estimating the number at over one-third of the whole Christian
population. He informs me that in Montenegro there are 70,000
Herzegovinian fugitives, and 10,000 from the districts of Old Serbia
(now reckoned as part of Bosnia). In Serbia, Dr. Sandwith states
in his letter in the Times of January 6th, from official sources, that
there are 54,951 refugees (Bosnians, Herzegovinians, Serbians, and
Bulgarians), not reckoning two departments, containing large
numbers, of which he was unable to ascertain anything like the exact
numbers. In Austria the lowest official report gives 110,000, but the
number is actually much greater. Within the last few weeks many
more have come over.
As we have been able to find out these means of giving effectual
and productive help, we trust that funds will be forthcoming. It will
be easily understood from the above that it is necessary to have a
sum in hand to secure the maintenance of the schools and orphans,
and that we are therefore anxious to make a special provision for flax
and seed.
Although we have obtained the aid of native Austrian residents of
well-known and unimpeachable honesty, I need scarcely say that we
have never given money from our fund to the Dalmatian or Croatian
committees. We have no expense in salaries, save in those of the
schoolmasters, and the working expenses are not charged to the fund.
March 26th, 1877.
A. P. Irby.
Contributions are received at Messrs. Twinings’ Bank, 115, Strand ;
at the London and Westminster Bank; by Lady Muir Mackenzie,
8, Eaton Place West; and by the Hon. Treasurer.
# # # As these lines are going to press I have received a telegram
from Obrovazzo, date 20th inst., which says:—“ The Austrian
Government help to fugitives greatly reduced. Fresh horrors are
being committed in Bosnia on large scale."


€f)t ©astern (Question 9&on'atfon*
PAPERS ON THE EASTERN QUESTION.
No. 12.
THE BLUE BOOKS,
AND
WHAT IS TO COME NEXT.
BY
SIR GEORGE CAMPBELL, M.P., K.C.S.I.
PUBLISHED FOR THE
EASTERN QUESTION ASSOCIATION,
28, CANADA BUILDING. WESTMINSTER;
BY
CASSELL LETTER & GALPIN,
London, Paris &• New York.
1877.




THE BLUE BOOKS,
AND
WHAT IS TO COME NEXT.
I shall not attempt to describe the Blue Books in detail—that
would be too heavy a task, and not a very profitable one. I shall
only try to summarise the general results in the briefest way, and
to state, as nearly as I can, the situation in which we are placed
by the failure of the Conference.
The general feeling is undoubtedly one of satisfaction, on
reading the Blue Books, to find how well and honestly Her
Majesty’s Government did respond to the wishes of the nation,
and how much they have tried to obtain a solution of the Turkish
Question such as humanity and sound policy demand. In all
candour it must be said, that from the time when in the month of
August they became convinced of the reality of the Bulgarian
atrocities, the Government as a body, and judged by their official
resolutions and despatches, have put forth views and proposals
which should satisfy the most earnest Liberals. And those pro-
posals have been urged by their special ambassador, Lord Salis-
bury, in full accord with the instructions of the Government, in a
way which leaves nothing to be desired.
There is only one radical defect, which underlies all the
proceedings of the Conference. Lord Salisbury and his colleagues


were set to make bricks without straw, when they entered upon
their task without the means of enforcing their decision. The
diplomatic gun was charged, primed, and pointed in the most
admirable manner—yet it was a necessity that it should, as it did,
flash in the pan miserably, for the powder had been forgotten.
It is true the utmost use was made by Lord Salisbury of the only
kind of “moral force” that could be of the least use on the
occasion—namely, the repeated warning that if the Turks did not
yield the Russians would, in all probability, use physical force;
but this did not suffice. Next to the Russians the Austro-
Hungarians are more deeply interested in the question than any
one else; and more in contact with the Turks, they understand
the question better than any one. They, from the first, very
clearly saw that a Conference and European agreement, without
a show of force, would be quite ineffectual. As Count Andrassy
puts it (Vol. 1., No. 207), the Porte might consent to the measures
proposed in Bosnia and Herzegovina “as a man consents to the
amputation of a diseased limb;” but will not consent as regards
Bulgaria, for “no one will consent to the excision of his back-
bone.” In truth, the measures proposed were far too radical and
serious to admit of the hope that they could be obtained by
moral suasion alone. Immediately on receiving Lord Derby’s
proposals, Count Andrassy suggested that the Powers should
agree on their terms first, and then “impose them if the Porte
refused, which could be easily done by a naval demonstration at
Constantinople .” “ Conditions dictated by a combined fleet at Con-
stantinople would be accepted." (Vol. 1., No. 206.) And after the
Austrian Government had accepted Lord Derby’s proposals as
the basis of a settlement, they continued to hold the same
language. See Ncs. 544 and 647. The truth is that, so far as
the Turks were concerned, a Conference with them was of little
use unless they had first accepted in principle Lord Derby’s
proposals—which they never did.
I am inclined, then, to think that there really never was a
good chance of success for the course which the Government


adopted. But taking the thing from their point of view, that
is the hope that their objects might be obtained by the
moral pressure ot united Europe, they seem to have fallen
into several errors, which made their policy more hopeless still.
There seems to have been a sort of double mind in- the
Cabinet, and an occasional retrogression, which was fatal to
success.
First, I think no one who reads the papers can doubt that
when the Government had resolved to take the line they did,
it was a great mistake to keep Sir Henry Elliot at Constan-
tinople. I freely admit that Sir Henry was throughout honest
and consistent in his views, and that he expressed them in a
manly and straightforward way ; but those views were, it is now
patent, diametrically opposed to those which the Government
had adopted, and which Lord Salisbury energetically pressed at
Constantinople. And Sir Henry both allowed his feelings to
carry him away into some statements which it is impossible to
justify, and was unable to conceal the general drift of his opinions
from the Turks and the Turkophiles of Constantinople. Could
we expect that our “ moral force ” would be great when we were
represented by two delegates, one of whom was distinctly opposed
to the proposals which the other made ?
I do not doubt that, when Sir Henry Elliot tardily and, as it
were, against his will, became convinced of the truth of the Bul-
garian horrors, he most earnestly desired to put a stop to such
things. But to the last he has much more indignation against
the vile political machinators who induced an unfortunate
people to rebel and get massacred, than against those who
directed and justified the massacres. His view has throughout
been that the Turks should be induced to reform their adminis-
tration, but that there should be no direct foreign interference
with it—in short, he took absolutely the side of Midhat and the
Turkish reformers. He was for giving them again a fair trial,
and letting them alone till at any rate they had that trial.
The Blue Books are full of passages in which Sir Henry


expresses this view. Even after he was convinced of the truth of
the Bulgarian horrors, we find him expressing his indignation
against the “newspaper correspondents who have sought to
create in England such a strong current of opinion against the
Turks as to oblige her Majesty’s Government ultimately to
abandon the policy which has at all times been followed towards
this country, and to assume the position of protectors of the
Christians against their Mussulman oppressors ” (Vol. 1., No.
172). After the proposals of Lord Derby have been communi-
cated to and accepted by the Powers, he continues to urge, almost
in the very words of the Turks themselves, that the best way is,
that they should be allowed by their own reforms to obviate the
necessity of intervention; that the application of the Midhat
Constitution about to be brought out would give to the whole
empire more than the Powers demanded for the insurgent pro-
vinces alone; and that to the proposal to obtain guarantees
through foreign intervention, and by means of an International
Commission or any other foreign control, there were insuperable
objections (see Vol. 1., Nos. 294, 421, 433, 568, 845, 849, 995,
1,048, 1,056, 1,083).
After the arrival of Lord Salisbury, Sir Henry Elliot was to
some extent practically superseded, and the record shows that he
was altogether absent from the three last meetings of the pre-
liminary conference, doubtless because he could not agree in the
views of his colleagues; but he still remained a member of the
full Conference. We find him corresponding with the Govern-
ment independent of his colleague, and he seems to have ended
with a sort of protest against the decisions of the other representa-
tives of the Powers. His letter to Lord Derby, Vol. 11., No. 203,
of January 5, explicitly states that he thought it right very freely
to express his opinion that the European delegates should show a
willingness to modify their proposals, and especially that “it would
be difficult to maintain that (among other things) the nomination
of the Valee and other officials in the manner suggested, and the
appointment of a Commission with such extended powers as those


to be attributed to it would not seriously impair the independence
of the Porte, which we had promised to respect.” Now there are,
perhaps, many who think that Sir Henry’s views are the sound
ones; but they were just the opposite of those which Lord
Salisbury was urging in the name of the Government, and almost
identical with those expressed by the Turkish delegates. It does
seem hardly the way to carry out a strong diplomatic pressure to
have one British delegate to press and another to repress. Sir
Henry seems to have occupied a position which is pretty well
known to the Government of India, when a well-meaning officer
has been so long at a native court that he has permitted himself
to become identified with them and their views, and takes a line
opposed to that of his own Government. Not unfrequently in
such cases a man is carried away into becoming an advocate of
the cause which he espouses, and his views are discoloured and
distorted. Such was Sir Henry Elliot’s case. For instance, when
the Greeks joined the Turks, he endorsed some of their most
exaggerated statements. It is a small matter, but I mention it as
within my own knowledge, that in his despatch of Dec. 7 (Vol. 11.,
No. 54) he says, “ The town of Phillipopolis is chiefly Greek.” I
went into this myself on the spot, and had it from the heads of the
Greeks themselves that they did not claim to have in the town
more than 800 families (some said 600), or say at most one-seventh
of the population. More serious is the assertion (in the same vol.,
Nos. 83 and 102), “The Christian populations are as unanimously
opposed to Russian aggression as the Turks and again, quoting
a Turkish Minister, who declared that though “ a war with Russia
would be attended with immense danger to the Empire, a special
administration of the Slav provinces would be a slow but certain
poison, and of the two alternatives they should not hesitate to
adopt the first,” he goes on : —“ The sentiment, unless lam mis-
informed, represents the feeling of the entire nation, both Mussul-
man and Christian.” Surely Sir Henry, in talking of “the nation,”
according to the newly-invented phrase of the Turkish reformers,
forgot that by far the most numerous population of Turkey in


Europe are the Bulgarians, who certainly do not object to a special
administration for themselves !
That the general tendency of Sir Henry’s views became well
known is notorious. I stated this on a former occasion, and all
the newspaper correspondence confirms it. There are not
wanting in the correspondence traces that he let his opinion
be known to the Turks. On one solemn occasion he seems
to have let the Sultan believe that the proposal he had the
“most painful duty” of pressing on him were scarcely those
of Her Majesty’s Government. The Sultan bitterly complained
of them, as what might have been expected of Russia. “I
pointed out that it had been necessary for your lordship to get
the concurrence of all the other Powers to propositions that were
to be supported by them ” (Vol. 11., No. 680). And more than
once we find Sir Henry defending himself against the suspicion
of foreign Powers (Germans as well as Russians) that he was
really frustrating the negotiations. Qui s'excuse s'accuse. See
Vol. 1., Nos. 330, 778, and 988.
The second mistake made by the Government was the
separating themselves and withdrawing from the negotiations in
the latter half of October, in connection with the six months’
armistice question, and thereby exhibiting to the Turks both a
spectacle of present disunion and an augury of future disunion,
which they were not slow to seize. The proposals of our own
Government had been perfectly clear and explicit. Our Ambas-
sador was to obtain, if possible, the Porte’s consent beforehand
to the Derby proposals, and if that was refused to press on the
Porte, as an alternative, to grant an armistice of not less than a
month, with this condition —“ It is proposed that a Conference
shall immediately follow ” (Vol. 1., No. 516). The reply to this
is contained in Nos. 611 and 612, telegrams from the Turkish
Foreign Minister to his Ambassador in London. The Porte
offers an armistice of six months, but most explicitly declines the
proposed Conference (see the 3rd, 4th, and sth paragraphs of
No. 612). There is no concealment of the object of these


proposals. Safet Pasha goes on to say : —“ During this time the
work of internal reform would go on; Europe would have the
opportunity of being edified by the serious and practical character
of the promises of the Imperial Government. We should have—
our friends with us would have —facts to oppose to our detrac-
tors.” Was I wrong in saying, as I did, that the six months’
armistice was a mere dodge to get rid of the proposals of Lord
Derby and the Powers, and to substitute the Turks’ plan of
reforming themselves? It was under these circumstances, and
so warned of the object the Turks had in view, that the British
Government “at once accepted the Turkish proposal for an
armistice,” without consulting the other Powers at all. The
Italian Government at once remonstrated, and continued to do
so. The Russian Government, as soon as it heard of the pro-
posal, did the same. The other Governments at first expressed
their willingness to follow the English lead, but when they heard
the Russian objections they admitted the reasonableness of those
objections, and suggested a shorter term. But Lord Derby
retired to his tents. The European concert so happily estab-
lished by him in the preceding weeks was broken, and the
Russians were left to deal with the Turks single-handed. It was
most unfortunate. Only when the Russians had coerced the
Turks by their ultimatum were things brought back to the
former point, and the Conference proposal was revived—not as
before by a spontaneous European concert, but as a sequence of
the Russian action.
Third comes the Prime Minister’s unfortunate speech at
the Guildhall. I speak of it now not as ground of attack on the
Prime Minister, but as a really important factor in the history
of this Question. Whatever Lord Beaconsfield’s intentions were,
his words were universally taken up as a warning to Russia.
They were spoken at the very moment when the Conference
was being launched. Commanding the telegraph, as the Turks
do, everything unfavourable to them is suppressed, and everything
in their favour is telegraphed and blazoned by them in the most


exaggerated shape. Lord Beaconsfield’s words were thus tele-
graphed and published in a shape which produced quite an
excitement, so calculated did they seem to give confidence to the
Turks, and to mean warning, if not menace, to Russia. No
wonder the Turks continued to believe that when they came to
the worst, they would have the support of Lord Beaconsfield and
Lord Derby. The Government could not and did not disown the
words of their Chief, and those words did materially weaken the
position taken by the British representative at Constantinople.
The fourth error of the Government was, that they in-
formed the Turks that they would use no coercion. Although
I throughout held a different opinion, I can quite respect the view
of the Government that coercion was undesirable, and I agree
that if coercion was not to be used, there should not be menaces
of coercion. It was probably, under the circumstances, right,
too, to tell our Allies our real intentions. But if we hoped to
succeed with the Turks, it was surely unnecessary to tell them—
towards them we might have held reserved language. In a quarrel
with one’s neighbour, one may well have a wholesome horror of
the law, and secretly resolve rather to put up with the loss than
go to law about it; but one does not tell that to the unreasonable
neighbour when one makes proposals to him. Yet this is just
what Lord Derby did, and the papers lead me to the strong
belief that in doing so he did much more harm than he was aware
of at the time. The papers on this point are out of order, but
they are to be found. Lord Derby’s despatch of Jan. Bth (Vol.
11., No. 48) relates what happened. On the 19th of December he
says he had a conversation with the Turkish Ambassador, in the
course of which “I informed him that, although Her Majesty’s
Government did not themselves meditate or threaten the em-
ployment of active measures of coercion in the event of the
proposals of" the Powers being refused by the Porte, yet that
Turkey must not look to England for assistance or protection
if that refusal resulted in a war with other countries.” This
conversation was reported by Musurus Pasha to his own Govern-


merit. The reply is given (Vol. 11., No. 87), telegram from
Safet Pasha, dated 24th of December, in his own name and that
of the Grand Vizier Midhat It conveys in almost fulsome terms
the “gratitude” of the Turkish Government—“his Highness has
received this communication with deep gratitude.” “You will
explain to his Lordship, in the name of the Grand Vizier, that the
Sublime Porte reckons more than ever on the kind support of the
Government of Her Britannic Majesty;” and he adds that “the
great wisdom and spirit of justice of Lord Derby form a sure
guarantee for us that he will gladly give us a new proof of his
kindness and valued friendship.” Lord Derby seems to have
been taken aback by these very Oriental expressions, and sought
explanations, but he got nothing beyond a disclaimer of any misre-
presentation of his words (No. 140). I cannot but think that in
reality the Porte, frightened by the attitude of Lord Salisbury,
had become very seriously alarmed lest a refusal might lead to
combined action, and that the assurance that England would not
act against Turkey was such a relief as to bring out the gush of
gratitude which I have just quoted.
So much for the negotiations. I shall next come to the present
situation, as shown by the Blue Books. But before going further,
perhaps I may be pardoned for saying that, having ventured to
submit to the public statements regarding these events, founded
on information which I was obliged to pick up as I best could, I
have looked with curiosity and anxiety to the revelations of the
official papers, and am gratified to think that I have not gone very
far wrong. I hope that, both as regards the general history of
events, the merit which I attributed to the proposals of Lord
Derby, and the criticisms which I felt it my duty to make, the
papers support my statements. I have very little to correct in the
account which I have given of the facts and transactions of the
period preceding the Conference. As respects the practical plans
which I submitted at the same time, I venture to think that in
most cases my views have been confirmed by the conclusions of
the Conference.


It has been sometimes said that the irreducible minima of the
European Powers were so far reduced and whittled away by suc-
cessive mitigations, that in the end they were worthless. This is,
I think, quite an error. Reduced they were, but the most essential
parts were retained; and in my humble judgment, if they had
been accepted or enforced they would have been a very good
settlement.
The proposals which were waived or excluded from the finally
mitigated demands were the following:—
Introduction of foreign troops and restriction of troops of Porte
to garrisons.
Punishment of atrocity Criminals.
Disarmament of Mahommedans.
And the following are the provisions contained in the final
demands of the representatives of the six Powers;—
The Governor-Generals, or Valees of Bosnia, Herzegovina, and
the Bulgarian districts (the delimitation of which was left unsettled)
to be named for five years certain, with the previous agreement of
the Powers.
The Mutessarifs, or Governors of districts, to be appointed
by the Porte, on the nomination of the Valees, for a fixed
term.
The authorities of sub-divisions or cantons, as well as of villages,
to be freely elected by the people of each Commune.
Provincial Assemblies and Administrative Councils for each
to be elected by the Cantonal Councils, and the As-
semblies to have power to control the Provincial Budgets and
other measures, as well as the assessment and collection of all
but certain taxes. The system of tax-farming to be
abolished. A proportion of the revenue to be retained for local
purposes.
Magistrates and judges to be nominated by the local
authorities—in the case of the judges of the highest courts
with the assent of the Powers—and their proceedings to be
public.


The local language to be used in the tribunals and administra-
tion on the same footing as Turkish.
Employment of irregular troops prohibited.
Militia and gendarmerie to be formed of Christians and Mussul-
mans in proportion to population, with officers named by local
Governor-General.
Future colonisation of Circassians prohibited.
Amnesty for Christians condemned on political grounds.
Amelioration of the lot of labourers and farmers in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Freedom of worship and communal instructions.
All the above to be established within three months.
Two commissions of control to be appointed by the representa-
tives of the six guaranteeing Powers (one for Bosnia and Herze-
govina, one for Bulgaria), to superintend the execution of these
regulations.
By far the most important point abandoned at the last was
the plan for introducing foreign troops. In formerly discussing
this question, I had expressed myself against that demand —
with doubt and hesitation, I confess; but still, as it was my
own view, I, at any rate, cannot quarrel with it. I was also
against pushing to excess the disarmament and the demands
for punishment of those concerned in the atrocities. Provided
the Porte had accepted and adhered to the mitigated proposals
in good faith, and had not brought the Mahommedans of the
supervised provinces into collision with the new authorities by
an unfair use of its regular troops (in which case it would have
made a foreign occupation inevitable), I believe that the miti-
gated plan might have answered admirably. The Porte most
strenuously opposed it, just because they saw that its effect
would be to put an end to the domination of the Constantinople
bureaucracy and the tyranny of a Mahommedan minority, and
to establish a system of local administrative autonomy, aided by
foreign supervision at first, but which might soon ripen into
genuine local self-government. Once establish a system of that


kind, and the difficulty will be solved. But without supervision
it cannot be established.
I do, then, venture to express my very strong opinion that
Lord Salisbury, as the leader in all these arrangements, has
admirably performed his part, so far as it was possible for him
to do so. If the Conference had been held anywhere but
at Constantinople it would have been a great success. The
concert established among the European Powers as regards
the best settlement of the Turkish difficulty was complete.
It only remains to see how effect can be given to that
concert.
There is one part of the proceedings of the Conference which
has somewhat taken me by surprise—that with regard to the
delimitation of Bulgaria, the Russians, and, as I understand,
Lord Derby, had demanded administrative autonomy for Bul-
garia—meaning thereby the country of the Bulgarians; and
I had always presumed that the object would be to group
the local administrative divisions- with as much regard as
possible to races. The Turks, on the other hand, desired
especially to avoid any local groupings of the kind; they
preferred to balance one race against another; and, as they
have put it since they developed their new-bom constitu-
tional zeal, there were to be no more Bulgarians, Greeks,
Turks, or anything else; all were to be welded together into
one fraternal Ottoman nation, filled with patriotic zeal for one
Ottoman Fatherland—a pretty picture, which may be realised
in the Millennium.
I never understood the meaning of the two Bulgarian pro-
vinces designed by the Conference till I saw the papers in the
Blue Books, and especially the latter part of Lord Salisbury’s
letter of January 4. The delegates were quite agreed as to the
country really Bulgarian; falsifying, as, of course, they must, the
preposterous assertions of the Greeks, regarding the people south
of the Balkan. But there was a difference as to the grouping of
these districts. Eventually an arrangement, pressed by Lord


Salisbury, was accepted, by which there were to be two Bulgarias.
Of these, one, the Western, was really Bulgarian, stretching from
the Danube at Widdin, almost to the gates of Salonica, and
including Sofia, Nisch, Uskub, Monastir, and part of the Seres
district. The other, Eastern Bulgaria, was formed on different
principles. Three districts, principally Bulgarian, and the scene
of the recent Bulgarian events, viz., Tir-Tirnova, Philippopolis,
and Slimnia (the latter stretching to the Black Sea, south of the
Balkan), were joined to three others with a large Mahommedan
element, viz., Rustchuk, Yama, and Toultcha, the latter being the
Dobrudcha, mainly inhabited by the Tartars. Lord Salisbury ex-
plains that his object was not to give too great and independent
a position, with too great a command of strategic positions, &c.,
to a great self-governing province in which the Slavs (meaning
Bulgarians) would have an overwhelming majority, and he therefore
pressed for this division, by which, while the Western province
would be really Bulgarian, the Eastern province would be so
divided that the Non-Slavs would preponderate. The Mahom-
medans would be very powerful, and the Greeks could be trusted
to act with them against the Bulgarians, so as to establish a clear
majority, to which the traditional supremacy of the Mahommedans,
and the intellectual resources of the Greeks, would give a decisive
character. This Eastern province, so constituted as not to be
really a Bulgaria, would have included a large portion of the lower
Danube and the sea-coast, the passes of the Balkans, and the
approaches to Constantinople, an arrangement which Lord Salis-
bury thought would be for the interest of Turkey. I suppose
it was this plan that enabled Sir H. Elliot to assure the Greeks
(Vol. 11., No. 175) that “there was no question of any Bul-
garia at all.” But he must have forgotten the Western Bulgaria,
which trenched more than the other on the country which the
Greeks would like to rule.
I confess that I have great doubts whether Lord Salisbury’s
plan for the Eastern province would have worked. The Greek
population would have been extremely small. They could only


have had influence by taking, as Lord Salisbury supposes, the part
of the Turks; and, hostile to the Bulgarians, they would have
been an element of discord. The provincial administration would
I fear have been one of discordant elements; and if the
Mahommedans and Greeks would really have had a majority, or,
at any rate, a preponderance of power, would not that have been
again to hand over to their enemies the very Bulgarian districts in
which the late terrible events have led to intervention, and in
which the feelings of the populations have been embittered by
those events ? I incline to think that it might have been better
to allow the Timova district and the greater part of Phillipopolis
and Slimnia to be united to a real Bulgaria, with its centre at
Sofia, and to make a separate province of the eastern districts
in which the Mahommedans really preponderate, to which might
have been confided the defence of the line of the Lower Danube
and the Eastern Balkan. However, the delimitation of Bulgaria
was one of the questions which was allowed to stand over. In
the final proposals of the Powers it was still described only as
“Bulgaria,” without being delimited, and that question must
come up some other day.
One most important result of the discussions in connection
with the Conference is, that we are very distinctly pledged not to
interfere in behalf of Turkey if she is attacked by Russia in con-
sequence of her refusal to accept the proposals of the Powers. It
is hardly necessary to quote passages in support of this statement.
They are to be found in almost every page of the Blue Books.
We have not only told Turkey this in the most emphatic terms,
but we have also directly given this assurance to Russia. I will
merely take, almost at random, one or two of the passages on
this subject. At an early stage of the negotiations we warn the
Porte that, in the event of refusal of Lord Derby’s proposals,
more onerous terms will probably be pressed on the Porte by
force, and the Porte is to expect no assistance from Her Majesty’s
Government against an attack by Russia. —(Vol. 1., Nos. 484 and
511.) This assurance is throughout constantly repeated in every


form of emphasis, and latterly we have this further warning from
Lord Salisbury : —“ I pointed out to him (the Grand Vizier) that
Turkey stood absolutely alone ; that several other Powers might
very probably take part in aggressive operations when the cam-
paign was once begun” (Vol. 11., No. 163). As regards com-
munications to Russia to the same effect, take, for instance, this—
Lord Derby’s letter to the British Ambassador at St. Petersburg
of December 21, 1876 :—“Count Schouvaloff,” says Lord Derby,
“expressed his earnest hope that Her Majesty’s Government
would not give the Porte any hope that in the event of their
rejecting these proposals Turkey would receive support from
England, or be protected from the possible consequence of such
refusal." “ I told His Excellency that Her Majesty’s Government
had already held language to this effect, and would undoubtedly
be prepared to do so again.” So much, then, is a fixed point in
the present situation. Her Majesty’s Government are, I take it,
not pledged to abstain from interference as regards the sick man’s
inheritance when he dies or is dispossessed—if Constantinople is
in question, for instance—but they have absolutely pledged
themselves no longer to protect the wicked and obstinate old
man against—murder shall we call it ?—or rather against a
violent death which he has brought on himself by his miscon-
duct. So long as the Russians confine themselves to carrying
out execution against the Porte they are now quite free to work
their will against Turkey. It is of immense importance to re-
member this part of the situation.
This brings me to one word on our position with respect
to the Treaties of rßs6 and 187 r, on which a discussion has
been lately raised. All are agreed that Europe has not under-
taken to protect Turkey for the sake of Turkey, but only lest
worse evil should befall. The Treaties seem to me to have two
aspects—first, as between the Guaranteeing Powers and the
Turks ; second, as between the Guaranteeing Powers themselves.
As between the Powers and the Turks—the Powers guarantee
the independence and integrity of Turkey, and the Sultan com-
B


municates to the Powers, and undertakes to give effect to certain
measures to ameliorate the condition of his subjects. This
promise is to give the Powers no right to interfere in the internal
administration of Turkey; but, on the other hand, it is the
consideration for the guarantee. Nothing can be clearer than
the way in which that is put by Lord Salisbury in the eighth
protocol. “The engagements were not, and cannot be, unilate-
ral.” If Turkey refuses the terms proposed, her “ position before
Europe will have been completely changed,” and she will incur
“ dangers which will threaten the very existence of Turkey.”
When Turkey, then, is told that under circumstances which have
actually arrived her position is completely changed, and she is
to have no protection whatever against a probable attack by
Russia, and a possible attack by several Powers, by which her
very existence is threatened, it is surely out of the question to
say that we hold ourselves any longer pledged to Turkey to
maintain her integrity and independence. So far the Treaties
have clearly come to an end, or, at least, we have declared that
we will no longer act under them.
But inasmuch as the European Powers have made engage-
ments among themselves, not for the sake of Turkey, but for their
own security, those engagements would not be wiped out by the
misconduct of Turkey. Under the changed circumstances of
Turkey it has become necessary to revise those arrangements,
and accordingly the Powers have met in the best spirit, and have
arrived at a fresh agreement. The arrangements of the Powers
among themselves made at the Conference cover the very ground of
the Treaties of 1856 and 1871, and seem to me to form a new point
of departure, rendering those Treaties altogether obsolete and out
of date.
What are the terms of the new agreement ?
Here they are as stated by Lord Derby—
1. The independence and territorial integrity of the Ottoman
Empire.
2. A self-denying declaration that the Powers will not


seek for any territorial or other exclusive advantages for
themselves.
3. The pressing on the Porte certain terms of pacification of
its provinces, including administrative autonomy and guarantees
against the exercise of arbitrary authority in Bosnia, Herzegovina,
and Bulgaria.
Now if the first of these conditions had stood alone, there
might have been ground for the contention of the Turks that
foreign interference is inconsistent with independence. But as
Lord Salisbury points out, “the independence of the Ottoman
Porte is a phrase capable of different interpretations.” It has
been “ the independence of a power which has depended on the
protection of others for its existence; ” and it is to be' an indepen-
dence which must be construed by the document in which it is
set forth. When the basis of the deliberations of the Powers
consists of three articles, simultaneously put forth, the first of
which specifies the independence of the Ottoman Empire, and the
third sets forth certain administrative measures and guarantees
for their execution to be imposed on that Empire, it is surely
beyond question that, as between the Powers, Article 1 must be
read by the juxtaposition of Article 3, and the independence
must be such an independence as is consistent with the third
Article.
As between the Powers and the Turks, I think that if the
Turks had accepted Lord Derby’s proposals in their most rudi-
mentary form, as telegraphed early in September, and had gone
into the Conference on that basis, it might have been possible
to contend, as the Turks and Sir Henry Elliot contended, that
internal guarantees against maladministration —that is to say,
improved institutions—would in some sense meet the required
conditions. But the Turks never did, in any degree, or at any
time, accept Lord Derby’s proposals; and the Conference com-
menced with those proposals explained and developed. In the
instructions to Lord Salisbury it is most explicitly stated that
the guarantees are to be “ external guarantees for efficient


administration” (page 7, near the bottom); and the same paper
goes on to develop the plan of appointing governors for a fixed
term with the approval of the Potuers, and all the rest of it, very-
much as eventually settled by the Conference. After this lam
at a loss to see how Sir Henry Elliot could, towards the end of
the Conference, contend that the “ nomination of the Valees
and other officials in the manner proposed,” and some other
arrangements, “would seriously impair the independence of the
Porte, which we had promised to respect.”
It has been lately suggested that the Austrians and French
might call on us to fulfil the terms of the separate treaty of
April 15, 1856, by which, between themselves, the three Powers
engage to make any infraction of the treaty guaranteeing the
integrity and independence of the Ottoman Empire a casus belli;
and that circumstances may arise in which Austria would make
such a call on us. Now, first, the term independence must
now be construed in the terms on which the Powers agreed at
the recent Conference—Austria and France included; and no
attempt to impose administrative autonomy and guarantees for
Bosnia and Bulgaria can be treated as an infraction of that
independence. And, second, we, at any rate, have, as I have
shown above, given the most formal notices, both to Turkey
and to Russia, that we will not protect the former Power against
any attack by the latter caused by her refusal to accept the
proposals of the Conference, and we have thus put ourselves
outside the Tripartite Treaty. Her Majesty’s Government know
best how far Austria and France were parties to thus throwing
over that treaty; but considering that they were our intimate
partners in all the proceedings in which we gave so many and
so emphatic warnings that we should not fight for Turkey, one
can hardly suppose them to be in a position to say that we
remain bound to do so. Indeed it is enough to say that the
Plenipotentiaries of Austria and France were present and con-
senting parties at the eighth meeting of the Conference, when
Lord Salisbury, in the name of the six Powers, solemnly warned


the Porte that it had broken the engagements on wnich the
guarantees of the Powers depended, and that, if the proposals
then made were not accepted, the situation of Turkey before
Europe would be completely changed, and she would be
“ entirely isolated,” and exposed to dangers threatening her very
existence. After this, how can Austria or France ever say that
we remain bound to defend Turkey? In every way it seems
to me that the agreements at which the Powers arrived at Con-
stantinople override all previous engagements, and constitute a
new departure from which we must work out the
Perhaps a word should be said of the new Turkish Constitution
as an element of the present situation, though in truth it hardly
affects it. Lord Salisbury’s letter on this subject, No. 222, of 13th
January, is so clear that I need only refer to it. He shows how
little there is in the Constitution, even upon paper, that gives any
security for the objects which the Conference had in view; how
little real check on arbitrary government there is in it; how com-
pletely it is framed to “give an overwhelming advantage to the
Mahommedan population and what an entire absence there is of
any effective provisions for Provincial Administration. The pro-
vision imposing the Turkish language on all representatives and
officials, alone shows the spirit in which the constitution was
framed. As Lord Salisbury points out, it only establishes a cen-
tralised Legislature, which is to pass laws; and laws passed by a
Turkish majority would be less favourable to the Christians .than the
edicts of the Sultan. In truth, the active part of the constitution,
even if carried out, would do little for the Christians; the parts
of it which sound liberal aremerely the general declarations of
equality, &c., which we have had before in 1839 and 1856. In
one respect only did the prospect of reform seem better than in
those years—viz., the personal character of Midhat. If not a man
of genius sufficient for so great an enterprise, he was at any rate
energetic, and a real reformer. As between the Mahommedans
and the Sultan at least, he meant the Constitution to be a reality.
If one may put it so, he was fool enough to believe in his own


Constitution, and we know the result. Lord Salisbury saw the
opening, in his Constitution, for what has befallen him. “ There
is no probability of the appearance of popular leaders who would
work the liberties granted, such as they are, for an unlimited
power of exile is, by a special enactment, reserved to the Sultan.”
Although it required great pressure to bring Midhat into power, I
confess that, after his bold conduct of the Turkish case, and
apparent triumph over the Powers, I thought his position was so
strong that he would have held it for a time, and if permitted
would have tried to introduce some appearance of reforms, such as
to put the Turks in a position to point to them as evidence of im-
provement. But the corrupt party about the Palace had not
patience even for that, and Midhat has been put out as summarily
as in the most Turkish times. It is clear that Turks will be Turks
still. Who is likely to attempt really to carry out reforms after
that? There is an end to any such idea.
If other proof were wanting of the incapacity and unwilling-
ness of the Turks to carry out practical measures to redress the
grievances of the Christians, it would be found in the so-called
trials of the men who were the instruments of the Bulgarian
horrors—those who are believed to have committed the very
worst atrocities. After months of delay they were brought before
a Commission, partly of a political and executive character, and
partly judicial. When I was at Philippopolis, what passed for the
trial of the Batak case was going on there. It had already lasted
for weeks, but, so far as I could learn, had got little beyond some
sort of examination of the accused. However, eventually some
witnesses also seem to have been examined, all in’private con-
clave. Both the judges and the proceedings were so unjudicial in
character that even the local Turkish officials hesitated to call it a
trial. Both they and the members of the Commission told me that
this was merely a preliminary inquiry, with a view to the real trial
before another tribunal—a sort of proceeding before the Magistrates
—before committal for trial. The thing went on in this shape for
many weeks after I left ; then it must have been found impossible


to get up a real trial, for the Blue Books show that eventually
there was substituted, for the trial that was to be, an absurd farce,
before the same Commission which held the first inquiry—that is
to say, this time a summary of the evidence was read over to the
prisoners and to a wretched individual who was now admitted as
their counsel, and the latter was asked what he had to say. His
demand that the witnesses should be produced at this trial, and
confronted with the accused, was rejected as monstrous and un-
reasonable. Finally the Commission, evidently acting as a
political and not a judicial body, sentenced to death Achmed
Agha, of infamous notoriety, whom, not being a Turk, but a
Mahommedan Bulgarian, a Pomak (he hardly spoke Turkish),
they had throughout shown some intention of giving up if hard-
pressed. They reported the proceedings to Constantinople, the
reply from whence induced them to withdraw their sentence
again. For all this see Mr. Baring’s reports, Vol. 1., Nos. 992
and r,oS4, and Vol. 11., Nos. 53, 104, 142, r 74, 210. We have
since learned that Achmed Agha and one other man have been
sentenced to death, and a very few others to terms of imprison-
ment, while the acquittal of one of the most notorious offenders
has led to Mr. Baring’s withdrawal from the pretended inquiry.
We have not yet heard of the sentences being carried out. In
.truth, steeped in blood as Achmed Agha no doubt is, and though
the notoriety of the matter might be ground enough for hanging
him, I should be very sorry to hang a dog on such a trial, if the
case be rested on the trial. lam no excessive admirer of English
criminal procedure. There are circumstances in which something
very different is to be preferred. There are cases of political
difficulty in which even publicity of trial is hardly possible. If
the Commission charged with the Batak case had gone there and
made a vigorous inquisition, rather than held a trial, they might,
perhaps, have better ascertained the truth; but they never went
near Batak—they stayed at Philippopolis, two or three days’
journey off. They neither made an inquisition nor held a trial,
but only in the most dilatory way held a sort of diluted inquiry,


without any ot the vigour or searchingness of an inquisition,
and without any of the publicity, confronting of parties and
witnesses, accusation and defence, which constitute a trial.
Now if ever there was or could be a case in which the Turkish
Government had every possible motive to make some show of
justice, and little motive to abstain from doing so, it was this.
Responsible as they are for the horrible severity with which an
example was made in Bulgaria, one can hardly suppose that in
this one case of Batak they ordered all the nameless horrors per-
petrated on a particularly inoffensive and out-of-the-way place.
Of all the things that had happened this most had horrified and
incensed Europe. Nothing was so likely to appease Europe as
some reparation in this case; probably they were not unwilling to
do something. Yet they have, under all this pressure, entirely
failed to carry out anything that can be called a real trial of the
worst Batak offenders. To appoint a commission (that modem
Turkish panacea for everything), and let it solemnly do nothing,
that is the utmost point to which their reforms can go.
The case of Chefket Pasha was very different from that of the
Batak offenders. In his case the Government not only failed to
do justice, but were determined to protect him. He is one of
the ruling pasha class, and acted under the orders of the
reforming Government. There has never been a pretence of
putting him on his trial. One member of the Batak Commission,
Ishmael Bey, was reported by Mr. Baring to be making himself so
active as a sort of counsel and agent for the defence that he was
withdrawn. This very man was then sent to inquire whether
there were any grounds to make any accusations against Chefket,
and that is the last that we have heard of it to this day! Chefket
remains in high honour, the terrible deeds done under his orders
notwithstanding.
Even if the sentences now standing against a few of the actors
in the Bulgarian atrocities were carried out, compare these
sentences, and the time taken to arrive at them, with the way in
which, after so many thousand Bulgarians had been killed in


their villages, upwards of a hundred were afterwards, after a
Turkish trial,, very speedily hanged as leaders of insurrection.
As in judicial, so in administrative affairs—there is nothing whatever
to be hoped for. The Turks have not the will to reform, and if
they had the will they have no capacity to do so.
The fact is that, as regards all real reforms, they are in the
dilemma which Lord Salisbury puts in his address at the last
meeting of the Conference, speaking of the possibility of a freely-
elected commission for the affairs of Bulgaria :—“ If it were
freely elected it would contain elements fatal to the authority of
the Ottoman Government,” and under the circumstances “a
really free election would be impossible.” So it has been.
Recent accounts show that the elections of deputies to the
new Chamber for the Christian provinces are ridiculous farces.
They are not really elected, but nominated. The old prin-
ciple is followed, half Mahommedan and half Non-Mahom-
medan, and of the latter one for each race without any regard
to population. Thus it appears that for the province of
Adrianople—not the district, but the province, comprising the
Philippopolis and Slimnia districts, and a majority of Bulgarians—
only one deputy out of eight is a Bulgarian, and he an obscure
and safe man of Adrianople, selected by the governor. And it
is the same in other places.
Lord Salisbury put the whole case civilly in his final words
when he said, “It is not to take note of the conciliatory inten-
tions of the present Government, nor to record projects of im-
provement in the central power, that the Conference has met.
Its task is to establish administrative autonomy and effective
guarantees against bad administrations in the revolted provinces.
As soon as a refusal to grant such guarantees has been recorded,
its existence can no longer be prolonged.”
Surely Mr. Hardy must have been curiously neglectful of all
that has been said by several of his colleagues, when the other
night (February 16) he declared that the objects of the Govern-
ment and the Conference were only two—to maintain the peace


of Europe and to maintain the integrity and independence of the
Turkish Empire. He himself showed that we have never sought
to maintain the integrity and independence of the Turkish
Empire, except for the sake of the peace of Europe. These two
objects are therefore really but one. Lord Derby has for months
past frankly and properly avowed that the Government has
sought two objects—the peace of Europe and the good govern-
ment and security of the people of Turkey. After all that has
been said and done at the Conference it is impossible to depart
from that.
The present situation maybe thus summarised: The European
Treaties regarding Turkey have been, if not formally abrogated, at
least superseded by new agreements and declarations of the Powers.
The Powers have again agreed to maintain the integrity and inde-
pendence of Turkey, provided she consents to grant administrative
autonomy to the most important Christian provinces of European
Turkey, and to give sufficient guarantees for the due execution of
that undertaking. They have also agreed that each of them is to
seek no territorial or other exclusive advantage for themselves.
Turkey having so far refused the conditions offered, and the
Emperor of Russia having declared that, either with others or
alone, he will insist on these guarantees, by force if necessary,
England has declared, and it may be taken that the other Powers
acting in conference with England have agreed, that Turkey will
not be protected against an attack by Russia. Russia now, in
effect, asks the Powers to concert further with her what is to be
done. Surely, it is absolutely necessary that something should be
done to come to a settlement. The old settlement has been dis-
turbed, and the new agreement come to has been frustrated by
the refusal of Turkey. If nothing more is done now the whole
question will remain completely unsettled. The Powers seem
at present to be actuated by an excellent spirit. Russophobists
are now satisfied that Russia is not so strong and aggressive as
they had supposed. All thinking men are satisfied that she is not
so weak as foolish Turkophiles would have us believe. There


seems to. be a rare opportunity for a settlement of the Eastern
question, such as may not occur again for many a long day if we
allow events to march. One thing is clear, that, if no further
settlement is arrived at, all our policy of the last fifty years and
more is at an end. That policy was to protect Turkey from attack
by Russia. Now, if nothing more is done, we leave Turkey and
Russia face to face, not only withdrawing from the protection of
Turkey, but declaring that, in case of such attack, Turkey will
have brought it on herself, and is to have no assistance whatever.
There may be various opinions on this situation, but the Russo-
phobists, at any rate, must feel strongly the need for some further
concerted action, in order that things may not be left in their
present position.
Since the Conference, the situation at Constantinople has
considerably changed. The coup d’etat by which Midhat was
seized and sent off, has put an end to all possibility of belief in
the reality of Turkish Constitutional reforms, and has disgusted
not only those who looked for some improvement in the condition
of the Christians, but the Mahommedan reforming party also.
The Softas and the party represented by them were real re-
formers in their way, as between Turkish people and the Sultan
with his palace entourage —and they are evidently quite alienated
by the-event which, it is now clear, was a mere reactionary
movement of this Palace party. The Sultan himself, a weak and
timid man, seems by all accounts to be getting thoroughly frightened
at the situation in which he has placed himself, and alarming
stories about his condition are abroad. The financial position is
telling on all classes. The Turkish people and soldiers are not
sufficiently civilised to understand the advantages of inconvertible
paper-money; they stand that kind of thing far less than do
Europeans,- and if it is forced on them too far, revolution will
result. Altogether the present state of things is more favourable to
yielding on the part of the Turkish Government than when Midhat
was in office. He was at any rate energetic, determined, and
confident in his own plans. He it was who, all through, was the


moving spirit of the policy of resisting, till at least force was
actually applied. As long as he was in power it was certain that
he would not yield till the last extremity. It is hard to say who
is now in power at Constantinople, but there is no reason to
suppose that there is now there any definite policy such as
Midhat’s, which would risk everything rather than make conces-
sions. There are probably those who think half a loaf better than
no bread, and who might succumb to a hard necessity. The
greatest obstacle to such a course is language on the part of Eng-
lish ministers, such as that held by Mr. Hardy, the other night,
when he so strongly declared against coercion.
For myself, I am by no means for committing the British
nation to coercion, or any other difficult policy, as long as there is
the least chance of the Turks giving in, without a breach of the
peace. All I urge is that the Ministry should not, meantime,
pledge themselves that they will not, under any circumstances,
join in any policy of coercion on which the European Powers
may agree. I should like them to hold reserved language. Ido
not, and cannot, expect that, after all that has passed, they should
immediately resort to coercion. But, believing that the Russians
honestly desire to settle the matter without war, I would have our
Government maintain the European concert towards the Turks,
and see whether, as the Turks more fully realise the situation, and
more and more feel the embarrassment of their own position, they
may not, within a moderate time, yield to a little fresh pressure.
My belief always has been that—Midhat, perhaps, excepted—
they would, at any time, have yielded to a sufficient pressure.
I now feel that I need not recede from this view, because it is
shown to be that of the Austrian statesmen, who had far better
opportunities of judging than any one in this country. I have
already quoted the confident opinions of Count Andrassy and
Baron Orczy, that the conditions of the Powers could be “easily
imposed by a Naval demonstration at Constantinople.” That
“conditions dictated by a combined fleet at Constantinople,
would be accepted.” I believe that we have, throughout, been


dealing, not with the Turkish people, but with a mere Government
of Pashas, among whose faults religious fanaticism is certainly
not one, and that the ‘ terrible fanaticism ’ of the people is, for the
most part, only a red rag which the Pashas shake in our faces to
frighten us. I saw no signs of it either at Constantinople or in
the Provinces. If we pressed the Turkish population very hard
—if we treated them with injustice, and allowed an intolerant
persecution of their religion, which might fairly drive them to
a“ J ehad ” —then, I daresay, they would fight to the death. But
I am firmly convinced that the mass of the Turks would infinitely
prefer to yield to the moderate demands of the Powers, for the
partial emancipation of the Christians, rather than submit to all
the hardships of conscription, paper-money, and war. In this,
too, lam fortified by the Blue Books. Lord Salisbury, it seems,
sent two special Envoys to inquire into this very point, viz., the
feeling of the people, and especially the Mahommedans of
Bulgaria, regarding the proposed reforms —one of the most ex-
perienced Consuls, possessed of the greatest knowledge of
Turkey, and an English officer of Engineers. They both
inquired and reported separately. The reports are enclosed in Lord
Salisbury’s despatch of December 25th, No. 136, and exactly tally
with what I learned when I went on a similar errand. Consul
Calvert reports that he has seen all the local Beys or Turkish
landowners. “They every one comment strongly on the wretched
state to which the population at large has been reduced through
Ottoman misgovernment.” “ They insisted that the Moslems are
worse off than the Christians.” They would resist the transfer of
the province to Russia, or their subjection to the Bulgarians; but
the question being put “whether the Mussulman population would
not view with jealousy reforms carried out under foreign auspices?”
The reply was, “ Every man of us would bless the Powers if they
would undertake so good a work.”
This last reply may possibly be a little Oriental; but Mr.
Calvert further bears very emphatic testimony to a view of the
matter which I have, before this, ventured to assert; and as I


did not meet him in Turkey, his testimony is quite independent
of that on which I founded my statements. He says : “ I would
submit, as the general result of my experience, that the power
of the Central Government over the Mussulman population is,
in all civil matters, absolute and unlimited. There is not a
provincial Moslem who is not a dependent or follower of some
bey; and for all special purposes the Central Government
influences the provincial inhabitants through this aristocracy.”
“The power of the beys against the Sultan’s authority was
completely broken by Mahmoud the reformer.” “ I have never
perceived the faintest sign of a disposition to dispute the
authority of the Central Government in any way; and I believe
every consul in Turkey would be ready to confirm the statement
that there cannot be a more hollow plea than that which the
Porte often finds it convenient to put forward, of its inability to
control the Moslem population.” “In a word, nothing can be
more complete than the system of centralisation which has been
established throughout the empire.”
Mr. Calvert adds that the only limitation of the power of
the Central Government is in regard to religious questions; not
even the Government can interfere with the religious law. But
on that subject, he thinks, “the difficulty may be turned.”
The Engineer officer, Captain Ardagh, is, I believe, one of
those who went to Turkey for objects which we have yet to learn.
It is evident enough that he was not unduly prepossessed in favour
of foreign interference. After full conversations with the principal
Turkish gentlemen, he finds that they do not admit that the Con-
ference is connected with internal reforms; they can’t suggest
any guarantee for promised reforms, and they energetically repel
the idea of a Russian occupation. But when asked about the par-
ticular measures proposed by the European Powers, to him, too,
they say, “ The appointment of foreign commissioners, appointed
by the guaranteeing Powers would be acceptable.” “ Several of
them expressed a strong opinion that the presence of such officials
would be an unmixed benefit.” Captain Ardagh himself adds


that, “ In manifesting these views they may not have sufficiently
contemplated the position which these persons would hold in
relation to the guaranteeing Powers ” —but his testimony to the
opinions expressed is all the more valuable. He goes on to say:
“With the exception of one, all the Turkish gentlemen agreed
that whatever measures were proposed by the Conference and
agreed to by the Porte, if promulgated bona fide, would b e received
without opposition by the Mussulman population, provided only
their religion was not interfered with.” “ Without provocation on
the part of the Porte and the official classes, there is every reason
to believe that the lower part of the urban and rural populations,
partly from ignorance, partly from habitual submissiveness, would
accept without a murmur any changes likely to be proposed.”
Captain Ardagh sums up the result of his inquiry thus; “I am
of opinion that there is little or no probability of any outbreak on
the part of the Mahommedan population of internal origin, and
that disturbances Jare only to be apprehended from the action of
exterior influences.”
If there be any truth in these reports, what becomes of the
ground on which the non possnmus of the Porte has been so often
defended ?
I had written so far before the debate in the House of Lords
of February 20th. The tone of different members of the Cabinet
varies so much, that it is difficult to know exactly what they
mean; but I suppose Lord Derby must be taken as the official
exponent of the foreign policy of the Government, and, if so, I
fear that the Government has turned round again, and committed
itself to a reactionary policy. Lord Derby, differing from Mr.
Gathorne Hardy, fully admits that the two objects to be sought
are the maintenance of European peace and the improvement of
the administration of Turkey. But he quietly assumes that if
peace is made between Servia and Montenegro on one side and


the Porte on the other, as the result of the present status quo nego-
tiations, the greatest object will have been gained—“ one-half, at
least, of the objects of the Conference will have been accom-
plished.” Has he forgotten that the Emperor of Russia ever
promised to enforce guarantees for the protection of the
Christian subjects of the Porte? Does he ignore all that his
colleague, Lord Salisbury, tells us of the terrible danger of a
Russian war against the Porte ? Does he call that peace ? Still
more serious is this—Lord Derby, as has been said, admits that
the reform of the Turkish administration must be the next object,
but he drops the significant words about guarantees, which he
himself and Lord Salisbury have shown to be so all-important;
he actually commits himself directly to the opinion that all
question of guarantees may be put off. “ I was much impressed
by a suggestion thrown out by Midhat Pasha that the Porte
should have a reasonable time to consider what had been sug-
gested, and to work out its reforms in its own way; and if
within that reasonable time nothing was done, so far as he was
concerned, the Powers would have a right to demand guaran-
tees.” Why, what is this? is this anything new? It is, to
my knowledge, what Midhat and those about him have been
saying for months past. It is like the boy who is going to be
beaten, and who says, “ Let me off this time, if I do it again I’ll
eat my head.” Recal Lord Salisbury’s words, many times repeated
at Constantinople, and especially his last words. Did he not
most emphatically reject this dilatory plea? “It is not to record
projects of improvement that the Conference has met. Its task
is to establish administrative autonomy and effective guarantees.”
Condone the past, and give us another trial; that is all it comes
to, in whatever shape the plea is put. If these are Lord Derby’s
views and those of the Government—if they really believe that
the return of the Principalities to the status quo is enough to
secure the Porte against a Russian war, if they are really prepared
to give the Porte another trial, why then, certainly, the natural
thing is to send back Sir Henry Elliot, to say they approve of the


views he has held throughout, and disapprove of those of Lord
Salisbury, and let Sir Henry act on them. I should very much
regret such a proceeding, both as bad and most dangerous in
itself, and because it might deprive India of Lord Salisbury. At
any rate, the doing anything that might disturb our arrangements
at home had better be postponed till we see whether the Russians
will suffer such a course. Lord Salisbury evidently has a strong
opinion that they will not. And his renewed expression of his
view, when he speaks of “a hope that Turkey would reform
herself—a sad and long experience proved that Turkey would
not,” shows that he at least has not been converted by Lord
Derby.
Many of the criticisms which I have made on the corre-
spondence, and some of the arguments which I have used, have
been anticipated by the Duke of Argyll and Lord Granville, in
terms much more forcible than I can use ; but in the face of the
attitude now assumed by Lord Derby, I venture to think that
these things cannot be repeated too often. The main question,
however, is what is to be done next, and that involves what Lord
Salisbury calls “picking to pieces” the meaning of “coercion.”
I shall try to do that.
I entirely agree, as I have already said, that we may
even yet hope to bring the Turks to reason without blows,
that the departure of Midhat may facilitate such a result.
When, however, we entertain this hope, no one knows better
than Lord Salisbury, no one has so clearly shown as Lord
Salisbury, that this hope is based on coercion, and on coercion
only. No one, and least of any one Lord Salisbury, has the
slightest idea that if the Turks yield they will do so for any other
reason than because they fear that the Russians will coerce them.
If they continue to resist, it is solely because that coercion—in the
form of threats at any rate—is not sufficient. In only one way can
that form of coercion be made stronger, and the chance of a
settlement greater, viz., by the adherence of other Rowers to the
policy of enforcing the conditions of the Conference. In one
c


very evident way the chances of such a settlement may be, and
are being diminished, viz., by the declaration of other Powers, or
of another great Power, that it will not join in imposing the
terms agreed on. After all, then, it cannot be denied that coercion,
in one shape or another, is now the active factor in the whole
question, put it as we may.
My own opinion is still very decided that the right course
is not to separate ourselves from Russia and the other
Powers, if it be by any means possible to keep them to-
gether—that if this can be done, the united Powers should
add to the coercion in favour of a peaceful settlement on
the terms agreed on, which is now being exercised by the
attitude of Russia, by joining in that attitude. lam very san-
guine that if the Turks could only be brought really to believe
that the Powers are in earnest in a resolution to enforce the terms,
there would be a very speedy settlement. But I quite admit that
if such an attitude is assumed, there must be behind real means
of united coercion, especially since the Turks have had so much
reason to be incredulous about it. I have my own ideas, clear
enough I think, as to what coercion means. I will come to that
soon. But I also admit that the country has not yet “ picked to
pieces ” this question of coercion; does not yet, and cannot yet,
understand its bearing and effects ; and, naturally much disinclined
to war, or anything that great authorities call war, it is not prepared
to insist on a policy of coercion in opposition to the strongly-
expressed views of the Ministers of the Crown, and especially in
opposition to the opinion now expressed by Lord Salisbury, in
whom the country has so much just confidence. The Conserva-
tive party are prepared to support their leader; the Liberal
party would at present be very much divided on this question;
and a definite issue, recommending a specific policy of coercion,
could not be placed before Parliament -with any chance of
success. I feel that there would be many and great objections to
committing this country to an armed coercion (I refuse to call it
war) if the question stood by itself. It is because, after much


attention to the subject, I believe that absence of coercion, or
insufficient coercion, or single-handed coercion by Russia alone,
may probably lead to still more terrible evils, and because I think
that the objections to a united coercion are not nearly so great as
has been supposed, that I want to argue the matter out, to
pick to pieces the question what is meant by a coercion in
which we might join, whither it will lead, and what is likely to
follow if we abstain from coercion. We have been told that the
Russian circular is to be answered, and that the answer is under
consideration. The European concert is not yet dropped; we
have not yet washed our hands of the business. So far so good.
But I confess that after trying persuasion and peaceable means to
the very utmost, as we have, I see no choice between coercion
and washing our hands of it. The only possible escape is that
before we commit ourselves to the “ washing our hands ” policy,
the Turks may yield to Russian coercion; and it is therefore
I earnestly trust the Government will not commit themselves
to a view the opposite of that which they maintained at the Con-
ference, as Lord Derby’s last words lead one to fear they
may'.
If it comes to coercion, 1 see only one mode of coercion in
which we can join—viz., threatening to send, and, if need be,
actually sending, the combined fleets of the Powers to compel the
Turks to accept the terms on which the Rowers have agreed.
For this two things are necessary: first, the consent of all the
Powers; and, second, a good understanding as to the course
which they are to follow.
As regards the consent of the Powers, Russia has repeatedly
offered to postpone her military action to a naval demonstration;
and, seeing the attitude which she has now taken, I should think
there is little doubt that she will be still very willing to do so.
Austria, again, when the question ,was before mooted, much
objecting to a Russian military occupation, expressed, as I have
shown, a strong belief that the alternative course of sending up
the fleets would be easily successful, and offered to join in action


of that kind. It was not merely that such an opinion was thrown
out; it was repeated again and again. The British ambassador,
following the line of the British Government, combated these
views, suggesting all manner of difficulties—the loss of ships
passing the Dardanelles, the horror of bombarding Constantinople,
the disastrous consequences to the Christians, and all the rest of
it; but the Austrian Ministers “thought resistance improbable,
since to oppose the passage of such a fleet would be to declare
war against united Europe” (Vol. I, No. 544); and, undeterred
by the gloomy anticipations of the British ambassador, they
proceeded formally to communicate their views to the Russian
Government—see despatch from our ambassador at St. Petersburg
of 6th Oct., 1876, Vol. 1., No. 647, where he states that the
Austrians had intimated they were “ disposed to participate in the
naval demonstration.” Now that the danger of a conflagration in
her neighbour’s house is again imminent, it seems improbable that
Austria would refuse the course she advocated on the previous
occasion; rather she might be expected to be keen to send the
naval fire-engines to put out the fire.
The Italian Minister, in the early stage of the discussion, did
say that the force to be used would be moral coercion. “The
unanimous will of the great Powers would be imposed on Turkey
only by the moral coercion which such unanimity must of
necessity exercise.” But I suspect that, in this and other
instances in which “moral coercion” is talked of, it means the
fear of physical coercion not actually used. At any rate, the
Italian Government have since been strong for decided measures.
They it was who first so much objected to the six months put-
off. At the commencement of the Conference they “were not
prepared to admit that the Porte would be at liberty to reject
any decision to which the Conference might come ” (Vol. 11., No.
29); and after the failure of the Conference they have taken the
lead (Vol. 11., No. 128) in suggesting another Conference of the
six Powers —to settle what ? It is only a question of coercion
or nothing; and judging from the tone of the Italian Govern-


merit, I think they are not at all likely to refuse any plan of
coercion in which Russia, Austria, and ourselves may agree.
Next come the Germans. Their position is different from
that of the Austrians, inasmuch as they have not objected to
Russian occupation. On the contrary, Prince Bismarck publicly’
said that while they would object to a permanent conquest
injurious to themselves, there would not be any objection to a
temporary occupation, subject to the pledges which the Emperor
of Russia gave. The Germans were for imposing on the Turks
more stringent terms than those of Lord Derby. “ The German
Government were apparently disposed to advocate larger con-
cessions to the insurgent provinces in the direction of autonomy;”
and again, they said, “ Some radical measures must be taken
to rescue these poor people from their wretched condition”
(Vol. 1., Nos. 325 and 383). The suggestion has been made that
the German Government would gladly involve Russia in a
Turkish war, thinking that they would then be more free to do
as they like in Europe; but they have shown themselves very'
■ sensitive with regard to such uncharitable accusations, and it is
hardly to be supposed that, being prepared to sanction military
coercion, they would refuse to sanction naval coercion. The
last words of the German Emperor seem to be quite in accord
with this view. I lake it that the Germans would not employ
any large force, or take any very large part, in coercing the
Turks, but that they would be represented in any naval de-
monstration on which the other Powers might agree.
The French Government has behaved extremely well through-
out, showing no sign of any self-seeking. Indeed, both they and
the Germans and Italians have followed our lead in the matter
with remarkable docility. I can hardly suppose that, if the other
Powers are willing, the French, our old allies in this matter,
would refuse to join in a proceeding which is really the necessary
complement of our joint action in the Crimean War.
Such are the grounds, culled from the Blue Books and the
public prints, on which I found the expectation that the Powers


would agree to a naval coercion. But of course a private indi-
vidual not behind the scenes cannot tell what unseen difficulties
there may be. All I urge is this—try to arrange a concert of the
Powers. If that effort is fairly made, and fails, I, for one, shall
then in no degree blame Her Majesty’s Government for letting
things take their course.
Suppose, however, the Powers do agree to try a naval
demonstration, what is the course to be followed ?
The only part of the Duke of Argyll’s late speech which is
laid hold of by those who take the other side is that in which he
says that there are many modes of coercion—“more modes
than two or three, or six, by which you might have brought
Turkey to her knees ” —but does not specify the particular modes
which he would recommend. I have only seen one mode im-
mediately practicable, but I think perhaps the Duke means that
there are various degrees in the enforcement of that mode. To
some degree I venture to differ from Lord Salisbury’s way of
putting it. He says there are two sorts of coercion—physical
coercion, when you actually use force, and moral coercion, when
you only compel by the threat of coercion. It seems to me that
these are but degrees of one process of coercion ; that generally
the two stages are hardly distinguished by a definite line, one
gradually approaches to and merges in the other. We are every
day of our lives subject to a moral coercion which may become
physical coercion in case of resistance. The greatest duke in
the land cannot drive about London without being continually
coerced by a policeman. If a hint does not suffice, the police-
man threatens force; if that still does not suffice, he uses
moderate force by putting his hand to the horse’s head; if that
were resisted he would soon gather sufficient power to apply
full physical force to the coachman or even to the duke.
There are some things which are more simple in the concrete
than when analysed. Human nature is human nature; and under
certain circumstances moral coercion may be pretty surely
reckoned on. In the case'just mentioned, where the policeman is


ordered to coerce the carriages into a particular line; it is not
thought necessary to pick the term coercion to pieces—to say: What
if a-duke should resist? what if he were to drive over the policeman?
What if he must be tried for murder? The order is given, and
these remote contingencies are risked. In a more serious case: if
a brave man is stopped by brigands in overwhelming force, who
put a pistol to his ear, and demand his purse, and he sees no
probability of resistance, and has no hope that a friend is at hand
who may come to his rescue, he gives up his purse, without
putting k the brigands to the trouble of shooting him. This is
moral coercion of an urgent character hardly to be distinguished
from physical coercion. So it is with regard to the Turk —he
may yield if he knows that not one policeman but six policemen
are about to coerce him. It may be necessary, and under the
circumstances now arrived at it probably will be necessary, to call
out the six policemen. It may be necessary that the six policemen
should go armed, and make a demonstration of coercion ; it may
be necessary that they should put their pistols to his head; but it
is very unlikely that it will be necessary actually to shoot him. It
is in this view that I refuse to call a coercion of the Turks by the
united Powers “ war.” To some degree there must be some sort
of equality to make a fight possible. If one strong policeman goes
to take up a strong rough, possibly there may be a fight; but if
six strong and well-armed policemen undertake the task together,
there can be no fight, and all resistance must be easily overcome.
That is, I think, the position of the Turkish Question; it is one
of International Police, not of war.
At one time, when Midhat was in power, a bold, or at least
loud, resistance had been carried to the utmost, the prospect
of an easy yielding to a combined demonstration of force was
probably less than when, in September and October, the Austrian
Ministers were so confident that the Turks would at once yield to
a combined naval demonstration. But now that the Sultan is
thoroughly frightened, and the Pashas begin to realise the situa-
tion, the thing might be easier again. However, as I throughout


admit, we must be prepared to use actual force, if need be. It
might be somewhat in this wise -.—The Powers would announce to
the Porte that they had come to an agreement to insist—by force,
if necessary—on the Conference terms, and ask for an answer, yes
or no, at the same time arranging the fleets, &c., which are to act
in case of refusal. If the Porte says “ No,” the combined force
would proceed to the mouth of the Dardanelles, knock at the
Porte’s door, and deliver a short ultimatum. If the Porte still
refused, they would force the Dardanelles and appear before
Constantinople. Lord Salisbury says nothing of the Dardanelles.
My impression is that there, and not at Constantinople, would be
any serious difficulty that might arise. I don’t enter into the
naval and military question, because Ido not understand it It is
enough to say that, the forces of the Porte being confronted with
Russia on her European and Asiatic frontiers, it is not likely that
combined Europe would fail to find the means of forcing the
Dardanelles; and, as the question is not raised, I go on to
Constantinople. Lord Salisbury, and the Austrians, and all who
argue the matter, bring the combined fleets there. But then, it is
said, “ When you get there, you must bombard and burn down
Constantinople, overturn the Ottoman dynasty, and land your-
selves in immense difficulties.” Ido not see it. This is just the
case of the pistol put to the head of a man utterly defenceless,
when he must yield. Constantinople is entirely defenceless. All
the Sultan’s palaces, and all the Pashas’ palaces, all the public
offices —everything is on the waterside, and quite unprotected. A
serious bombardment to force the Turks to yield is, I venture to
say, an impossibility. They may desert Constantinople, but they
cannot stand a bombardment there. The city is not even on the
narrow Bosphorus, but on an open site, surrounded on three sides
by deep water.
Lord Salisbury seems to suggest there might be no one who
could treat at Constantinople; neither the weak Sultan, nor the
revolutionary elements about him. I must speak with great
deference on such a subject, but I must say I came away from


Constantinople with the belief that, in the absence of a strong
Sultan, there is a very distinct governing body in Constantinople—
viz., the clique of Pashas who form the bureaucracy, and of which
we have heard so much. The late revolutions —if the recent
changes in the occupancy of the throne can be called revolutions
—were carried out entirely by them, without breach of the peace
or any active use of revolutionary elements. They have treated,
they have resisted, and I believe that they can yield. I have
already given reasons, supported by the revelations of the Blue
Books, for supposing that if they are willing to yield, they can
control the provincial Turks. The belief that the Turks will not
yield, when yielding becomes a necessity, is, I think, founded on
the idea that they are different from other human beings; and
that is taken up by Westerns imperfectly acquainted with Orientals,
who do not understand the way in which Orientals who have
received some Western education habitually use very tall language.
The educated natives of India are adepts at it —but it means very
little. A few years ago the native press in Bengal was a good deal
excited, but then it was the converse of the things that we now
read—it was not the Mahommedans vowing terrible things against
us if we do not support the Turks, but the educated Hindoos who
were annoyed because we had done some things for the Mahom-
medans in the way of education and otherwise, which trenched on
a monopoly of Government employment, &c., which the Hindoos
had almost established. Some very strong things were said in the
native papers. It was the practice to cull the flowers of the native
press in an English abstract circulated for official and general infor-
mation. In this one day appeared an article going even beyond
the usual limits. We were held up to execration, as favouring
the Mahommedans merely from fear of the assassin’s knife, which
had lately been used. And we were told that if we followed such
courses, the Hindoos, whose ancestors had brought us in because
they were dissatisfied with Mahommedan rule, would know how
to turn us out, and to bring in our place the Russians now rapidly
advancing to contest India with us. I thought this rather strong,


but I knew the difficulty of dealing with these things without more
stringent measures than we were yet prepared for. The Viceroy
had also noticed it, and called my attention to it. We made
inquiry, and found that the paper from which this precious extract
was taken was a small lithographed sheet lately started by two
plucked students of the Calcutta University, and most insignificant.
A solemn state prosecution of such people was impossible, and
we were obliged to content ourselves with a private warning,
and a resolve to give less publicity to such obscure prints in
future. But such things go on. In the last Indian paper I see an
extract from a Mahommedan journal of Bombay, w'hich, applaud-
ing the conduct of the Turkish Ministers who say “Death
before dishonour,” goes on, “ Well done, brave Turkey ! If they
say this when they are under present disadvantages, what would
they do if their army was in better order? Doubtless they
would not let one single Christian live in Europe.” The author
of this sanguinary sentiment is probably about the rank of our
Bengalee friends whom I have quoted. The Turkish Pashas
are much more important personages, but perhaps they use tall
language in a not altogether dissimilar sense. It is much easier
to talk of “death before dishonour” than to submit to all the
inconveniences which a practical application of that sentiment
might involve. Are these Pashas such heroic and desperate men
that they will rather submit to be destroyed by the European
fleets and armies than make the moderate concessions demanded
of them ? I think not. As regards personal desperation of
character, perhaps something may be learned from their conduct
when the Circassian assassin broke into the Council of the very
Ministers who had just deposed a Sultan, and so far made a
revolution. There is a very circumstantial French account of it,
with a plan of the premises, &c. &c. The Circassian rushed in,
attacked and wounded, but did not kill, the Minister of War.
One soldierly man among the Ministers, the Minister of Marine,
seized the assassin while he was attacking the War Minister, and
if he had received assistance from others the thing might have


been stopped. But all the others in the room saved themselves
by flight, except one, who fainted; and the Minister of Marine,
unsupported, and finding himself cut and wounded by the knife
of the assassin, let go and saved himself. It was only after the
assassin found himself completely master of the situation that he
followed the wounded War Minister into another room, despatched
him quite at his leisure, and returned to despatch the unfortunate
Minister who had fainted in his seat. Now this Circassian was a
very desperate and dangerous man. I do not blame those who
did not face him. I rather think an English Cabinet would
have run more risk to save their colleagues. Who can say ? But
this I do say, that these Pashas are not so very superior to the
rest of the world in a desperate sort of courage.
What I should suppose to happen on the arrival of the fleets
at Constantinople would be this : —We should say to the Turks,
“You have given us a great deal of trouble in coming here; but
no doubt the pill presented to you was an unpleasant one—our
variations of policy were some excuse for you—we offer you
again the terms previously agreed on by the Powers, with only
such variations as we think necessary to our security and the due
fulfilment of that which you have so long refused. We do not
seek to destroy your empire, we do not seek to touch your
religion, we will do nothing that need really affect your popula-
tions so far as to make them uncontrollable, if you really desire
to control them,_ but our moderate terms we must and shall
have.”
I consider it to be a thousand to one that, under such circum-
stances, the Turks would then accept the proposals. If not, then
we must sequester, or if they force us to it, sink their fleet and
take possession of Constantinople.
Suppose the Turks still do not yield—if that be possible—
that they transfer their head-quarters to Adrianople, and still hold
out. Then they must fight Russia and Austria, with one hand tied
and the other disabled. They will be wholly cut off from Asia,
and from all communications by sea or land a small minority


among hostile populations, they would be meeting all Europe in a
most hopeless combat. They might die, but they could do nothing
else. Does any people carry resistance to that point, rather than
make a moderate concession? Suppose then the almost impossible
case—that they do fight on, upon their stumps, as it were, to the
bitter end. Russia will occupy Bulgaria; Austria, Bosnia, &c.,
and the Greeks will doubtless find their way into Epirus and
Thessaly; while England, France, Austria, and Italy will hold
Constantinople with a naval force, in which we shall be pre-
dominant. The Powers will have met in Turkey, not as enemies,
but as allies. If the Turkish Empire must fall by external
violence, could there be a position more favourable to an amicable
settlement and a mutual relinquishment, in favour of native auto-
nomies, in terms of the solemn agreement already made, than that
which I have described ? I think not. No one Power would
have made so great sacrifices as to entitle her to set aside the
European pact and to defy all the others.
One objection only remains to be dealt with—that which has
been called the massacre argument —that is, the suggestion that if
the Turks are hard pressed they will turn round and kill all the
Christians before being killed themselves. lam sorry to see that
Lord Salisbury gave some little support to ideas of this kind when,
on the opening night of the Session, he spoke of the result of
coercion being “a frightful repetition of those terrible scenes of
which we have heard so much.” But it is hardly to be wondered
at that he should have been somewhat impressed by warnings of
this kind, poured in on him from both sides. If any credence is
to be given to high official authority, that unhappy population of
five million Bulgarians of European Turkey are doomed to de-
struction, whatever happens. The Russian Ambassador and his
belongings are strong in the belief that they will all be killed if
there is not a speedy foreign occupation. The English Embassy
are equally strong in the belief that they will be killed, if there is
a foreign occupation. So the miserable people must be killed
either way. According to the report of Mr. Sandison, First


Dragoman to the English Embassy, “ Before the Powers are in
time to pour in their armies, not a Christian may be found surviv-
ing;” and he goes on to dwell much on the “perils which threaten
the defenceless Christians” in the event of any attempt at coercion.
Sir H. Elliott says there may be exaggeration in these accounts
of the danger, but he thinks it very considerable (see his Letter,
and Mr. Sandison’s Report, Vol. 1., No. 566). He several times
uses it as an argument against pressing our terms too much on
the Turks. He even broadly hints that this disastrous result may
follow the grant of the Bulgarian autonomy, to which he objects,
arid sends the letter of a gentleman to that effect, with the remark
—“The writer does not, I am convinced, exaggerate the danger
which may be at hand” (Vol. 1., No. 673).
Now first I must remark that the way in which the Turks use
this argument is most audacious. “ Three Turkish Ministers of
State ” are Mr. Sandison’s authority. After much very tall lan-
guage, they come to the declaration that “ not a Christian may be
found surviving ” —that is to say, these men who have already
caused so many innocent men, women, and children to be killed,
have the impudence to threaten us that if we press on them
demands unpalatable to them, they will take care that a great
many more are killed. It is difficult to put up with such argu-
ments from them.
And here I would just notice in passing that it is a common
subject of remark in diplomatic circles that, whereas other
countries regularly train their officers for the diplomatic service,
and are especially jealous of their connection with the people of
the countriesdn which they serve, insomuch that one of their staff
who marries a mtive is at once removed, we on the contrary have
nothing of the kind, and are forced to employ in the East
Levantine gentlemen whose views and connections are often very
local.
It is difficult to answer directly so speculative an argument as
the massacre argument, but I do not myself think that it is
sufficient to deter us. In the first place, if we look to historical


precedent, I find none. The Turks have often committed mas-
sacres before in barbarous suppression of the attempt of subject
peoples to obtain liberty or justice, but I know no case in
Turkey or elsewhere in which foreign invasion has been thus
revenged on the defenceless and passive populations. Turkey has
been often invaded before, but I do not find that such results have
happened. Again I say, I have the strong belief that the Turks
are very like other human beings, and will not bring a terrible
fate on themselves by uselessly inflicting it on others.
Then in opposition to the opinions of the people abc the
Embassy in communication with the Turkish Pashas, I uote
Lord Salisbury’s despatch of December 14th (Vol. 11., No. 57), in
which it is broadly stated, in opposition in the “ danger of
massacre ” dwelt on by General Ignatiew and the foreign
Consuls, “We stated that our Consuls did not believe in the
danger.” And this is only slightly qualified by a subsequent
despatch, No. 59, “Blunt tells me arms are being left at
Salonica for the purpose of arming the Mussulmans. Holms thinks
that Mussulmans would rise if disarmament were attempted.
Statement therefore that our Consuls disbelieve in danger ol
massacre must be somewhat qualified.” Yes, but qualified by this,
that the Turkish Government are arming the Mussulmans. That
entirely tallies with the report of Mr. Calvert and Captain
Ardagh, to which I must again beg very particular reference (Vol.
11., No. 136). Again I quote from them —
“ The Porte finds it convenient to put forward its inability to
control the Moslem population.” Except when acting “at the
instigation of the Central Government, the Turkish population is
eminently submissive.” “ Disturbances are only to be appre-
hended from the action of exterior influences,” and much more to
the same effect.
One more point is this ; It is a great mistake to suppose that
the Christians are wholly defenceless. In most of the Christian
country they have great villages of their own, and could do a very
great deal to defend themselves against mere attacks by their


Mohammedan neighbours, if the Mohammedan soldiery were
fully engaged meeting an invasion, and help to the Christians was
at hand; In most cases the Bulgarian atrocities were achieved
not only with the help of Turkish officials, but after resistance
was qvercome by Turkish troops, regular and irregular. Upon
the whole, then, my impression is that massacres in the provinces
would.not result from foreign coercion, unless the Pashas of the
Central Government instigated them, and that if the fleets were
within a few hours of Constantinople, the Pashas dare not do
that. perhaps the greatest anxiety might be regarding some of
the fly-sign residents at Constantinople, if they remain there; just
at the moment of a crisis; but most of them probably would get
away. Besides that, in Constantinople itself, Turks and Christians
really are more united than ever they were in resisting concessions
to the Slavs, the Christians are really very strong on the Chris-
tian side of the Golden Horn, if regular troops are not em-
ployed against them, which again I think the Pashas would not
dare if the European fleets were forcing the Dardanelles. But it
is natural enough that the greatest alarms should come from
Constantinople, where there has already been much panic in the
early part of these negotiations.
I have worked out, then, my idea of the course and effect of
coercion. But, after all, we come back always to this—that the
argument does not rest on the merits of any plan of coercion (that
must be attended with very many evils), but on the difficulty of
finding an alternative. Let us look this in the face. If the Turks
do not yield, and united Europe does not coerce them, what is to N
be done ? I can see but two alternatives, and two only: either
the Russians and the other Powers must give the Turks another
chance of reforming themselves, or the Russians must alone
undertake the task of coercion in a shape that means war, and a
very great war. There is no escaping from one or other of these
alternatives. Let us examine them.
A little time ago, in the face of the declarations made at the
Conference, and especially by Lord Salisbury at its conclusion,


the, first of the alternatives which I have mentioned seemed
impossible; but it is now necessary to examine it carefully, for
there are distinct indications that this is what the Government are
now seeking to obtain —viz., that the Powers should abstain from
all action, and give the Turks another chance of reforming them-
selves, with or without a promise that if they again fail to do so
some one will then interfere. After all that has passed, it is
difficult to realise this proposal. It is simply that, after all our
efforts, the Bulgarian atrocities, and everything else by which the
feelings of the country have been so much roused, and the action
of the Government has been so much shaped, are to go un-
punished ; that nothing whatever is to be done in consequence
for the protection of the Christians in Turkey; that the Turks are
to come triumphant out of the Conference, to have absolutely
and entirely their own way; that the course they have been
striving for is to be submitted to in its entirety; that the only
change is to be that they are left much more uncontrolled than
before.
If it be possible that this solution can be accepted, our position
is indeed humiliating. We must then, confess that the Conference
was throughout a sham and a deception; that we have unsuccess-
fully attempted to deceive and cajole the Turks, and have been
found out by them ; that all Lord Salisbury’s solemn warnings of
the immediate danger they would incur if they refused the terms
proposed, his assurances that their counter-proposals could not be,
would not be, and ought not to be accepted, have been aban-
doned ; that, our accusations of want of sense notwithstanding, it
turns out that they well understood the situation all the while, and
have so far proved much more than a match for us.
Supposing this to be possible, the course of events would pro-
bably be somewhat as follows : The Turks, being at the moment
exceptionally strong, with the army, and navy, and materials pro-
vided with borrowed money, have, after a long and great effort,
succeeded in putting down the rebellion of their subjects and
feudatories, and, especially, they have suppressed all attempts at


rising on the part of their immediate subjects with such tremen-
dous and ruthless severity, and made such frightful examples on
so great a scale, that it will probably be some time before any-
thing of the kind is again attempted. Probably, for a good while,
there will be no occasion for great Bulgarian massacres; and the
past having been condoned, Europe will not, for some years, have
that incontestable ground for interference. Perhaps, for a while,
the Turks will think it prudent to' make some show of making
some small reforms and improvements—of, in fact, pretending a
little to do that which Lord Salisbury has so decidedly told us
they never have done, and never can or will do. They may, just
for a time, apply a little whitewash to conceal their very worst
places. Sir Henry Elliot will go back and give them much
serious and honest advice touching the necessity of managing to
avoid the interference of the European Powers, and improving
themselves. So far as the triumphant result of their last struggle
with those officious, divided, and stupid European Powers will
permit them to think of prudence, they may seek to stave off
another collision. Believing, as in this case they well may, with
the Sultan, that it is the repudiation of the debt, and not the
Bulgarian massacres, that alienated England, they may even take
a leaf out of the book of the Khedive—may make a show of
sending for English financiers, and may condescend to say
that, if we will give them a little more ready cash, they will
pay back part of it by way of interest, and try to keep “ Turks ”
in the market a little longer. But, can any one who has read the
Blue Books—can any one who has read and heard Lord Salis-
bury’s statements —believe that Turkish reform, effected by Turks,
will ever be anything but a mere delusion? Can the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the Turk his spots ? It is wholly impossible.
The most that can happen under the most favourable circum-
stances is, that the rottenness and corruption of the whole fabric
may be, in a very slight degree, veiled for a time. But the pro-
cess of decay will not be arrested; the empire will still approach
its end, by internal weaknesses, which may any day give rise to
D


internal convulsions. The Eastern Question will remain on our
hands more dangerous than ever; it will be always liable to come,
and probably will come on us again, when we are not prepared—
when the circumstances are not favourable to a solution arrived at
by that concert of the Powers which we now happily have, but
which, in the case I am supposing, we are about to throw away.
All that has passed will have resulted in nothing tending, to a
solution of the question, but, on the contrary, this most favourable
opportunity for putting the question in train of solution by
arrangements on which all the Powers have agreed, will be lost.
As it has been expressed, we had got all the Powers into line, and
then, just when the result might be attained, we decline to face
the task which we have undertaken, and leave this most burning
of questions to drift into the uncertainties of the immediate future
—a very fire-ship let loose on Europe, wholly cut adrift, even
from the rotten tackle which has hitherto held it.
In all this I have, like Lord Derby, put the Russians out of
sight, as if they had no special interest in the matter, any more
than the other Powers. But we know very well that this is not
so. If the present triumph of the Turks must be humiliation to
us, how much more must it be so to the Russians ! Their posi-
tion is such that it is most difficult for them to retreat, if they
would. Assuredly they cannot do so, frankly and freely. But it
is possible that they may have their own good reasons for being
willing to delay the crisis if they can. The concert of all Europe
which is so advantageous to us and the other Powers, is not so
much so to them. It means that they are to be debarred by that
concert from any territorial or other exclusive advantage resulting
from the immediate conquest of Turkey. They not unreasonably
dislike that they should be left alone to do all the work, and incur
all the expense and loss, and at the same time be told that they
are to have no profit or compensation for it all—nothing but the
“idea” of doing an unselfish benefit to their fellow Christians,
and setting up autonomies for which they may not care. If they
can find a more convenient season, when they can go to work


without a European concert, when divisions in Europe may make
improbable a concert to coerce the Russians (a more difficult task
than to coerce the Turks), that may be better for them than the
one-sided concert which has been offered to them. As they are
situated, I believe they are sincerely anxious for a concert which
shall relieve them of the task of coercing Turkey alone; but if
they cannot have that, they may naturally prefer to undertake the
work when they are hampered by no self-denying agreements.
Moreover, the Russians feel that, from a military point of view,
the present is the most unfavourable time they could choose.
The Turks, triumphant over their own subjects, have just at this
moment the greatest force they ever have had or ever can have.
Their Navy gives them complete command of the sea, as against
the Russians alone. The last of the money they have been able
to scrape together, by issuing paper-money and such devices, has
been used to get rifles and cartridges from America ; though their
armies are wretchedly officered—very poor indeed for offence —
they are probably capable of a good defence in good positions.
But their money, or rather other people’s money, has come to an
end. There is no possibility of their being able long to maintain
their present state of preparedness. Their dynastic and internal
affairs are such as give promise of very early and very rapid
paralytic strokes. A waiting policy may very well be a good
policy for their enemy. A little self-restraint and patience, and
an easy victory may come before long.
For these reasons I believe it to be just possible that if some
one will build a golden bridge for the Russians they may be
willing to go back a little, with a view to a better advance. But
of this I feel certain, that they will never do so under any con-
ditions which will preclude that fresh advance. They will but be
watching their opportunity from day to day and month to month.
Suppose they agree to delay on the condition that the Turks
themselves make sufficient reforms, and that they are to be at
liberty to interfere if this condition is not fulfilled. Under no
circumstances will they accept, or can any one ask them to


accept, conditions less than that. Well, then, who is to decide
whether the conditions are being fulfilled, or at what point- the
non-fulfilment is so palpable that interference becomes justifiable ?
Suppose next year the Russians find themselves ready for war,
and see that the Turks, unable to pay or feed their soldiers, have
sent them home, and have not the means of bringing them
together again; suppose the European concert is not then so
complete as at present, or that the concert of the emperors is
too complete—what will then happen? Take the most favourable
circumstances. Suppose there has been no very special con
vulsion in Turkey, that Sir Henry Elliot is able to point to one or
two sham reforms, to one or two very subservient Christians or
mild Turks appointed to considerable offices, to a few more
decrees or acts of the Turkish Parliament, couched in language
of ambiguous philanthropy, but, as Lord Salisbury shows of the
constitution, carefully providing for Mahommedan predominance,
and not yet carried into effect; to the absence of very salient
outbreaks and terrible reprisals since the last—he will doubtless
contend that Turkey is being reformed, and that Russian inter-
ference is utterly unjustifiable. The Russian ambassador, on the
other hand, will show the hollowness and want of reality of the
pretended reforms; he will use just the language regarding them
which Lord Salisbury has used; he will point to grievances on a
smaller scale than the Bulgarian atrocities, but many and real;
he will seize on everything that may occur to show that Turkey is
not improving but going down. If Russia wishes to interfere,
she will never be without reasonable pretext for doing so.
She will do so at the time when it may be most convenient to
her. When that is so, our Turkophils will, perhaps, have a better
ground for denouncing her than they now have. They will raise
their heads and their cries again; they may drag us into war
after all. I deliberately say, that if Russia is to be left in this
position, I would much prefer that she should coerce the Turks
now than that she should be left to do so at some future period
of her own choosing. That she will not sit down quietly under


such a rebuff, that sooner or later she will retrieve the game, I
look on as an absolute certainty.
Whether, then, we now have war or a false peace worse
than war, to war it must come in the end. In the absence
of united coercion to prevent war, there must be war between
Russia and Turkey either now or before very long. What will
then happen ? I should think it cannot be doubted that after a
war more or less prolonged, and with sacrifices more or less
great, Russia will conquer Turkey. At best, that must be a very
great and bloody war, involving terrible loss of life and great
calamities painful to think of. And then? Will Russia, after
all her efforts, all her sacrifices, and all her expenditure, consent
to act the philanthropist only?—to return without payment of
costs or any other compensation, after setting up Christian auto-
nomies ? They must think Russia more virtuous than any people
that the world ever saw who think that probable—unless, indeed,
the Russians are then compelled by force. It is possible that
in Europe Germany and Austria may compel them; but Lord
Hartington did a great service in putting clearly and forcibly, as
he did, that there are no such forces to compel Russia to recede
in Asia. All are agreed that one of the first steps of the Russian
advance will be to occupy Armenia; and “Armenia” is a some-
what vague term, which may be stretched very large. She will
there find a very fine Christian population very much oppressed.
What more natural than that she should protect them ? Even if
she has bound herself to seek no territorial aggrandisement, what
more likely than that she should keep Armenia as security for a
bill of costs that can never be paid ? If she keep Armenia, that
country is so much mixed up with the Kurds, and so constantly
suffers from Kurd depredations, that the occupation of the Kurd
country on the upper waters of the Euphrates and Tigris will be
a necessity. Then the wild Arabs will have been let loose; some
one must keep order in Mesopotamia, and Syria will not be far
off. I am no Russophobe, but I have always looked on the
advance of Russia in Asia as a question of time and opportunity


so long as Russia herself holds together. I have thought that
Russian ambitions in Europe might rather turn the current from
Asia; and, on the other hand, if a strong breakwater on the
European side turns it on Asia, so much more rapid will be the
advance there. If Persia is completely enveloped by Russia,
down even to the Persian Gulf, or even if a tract there is given
to Persia to hold of Russia, no doubt the Russian advance will
be very considerable. Let the Russophobes look to it. If the
policy now followed brings that result, they will be sorry for it,
and so shall I. But in my view, we should have no sufficient
cause to interfere, under such circumstances as I have described,
to prevent such an advance, and no sufficient force to do so if
we had just cause, unless we strained all the resources of India
and England in a very great war, quite regardless of expense. But
no doubt there would again be a cry for war to check Russia,
and very great fear that we might be led into it.
One very great danger of our being dragged into war is the
absence of sufficient restraint on the Anti-Russian party among us
from promoting what Prince Bismarck called an “unofficial” war,
that is, a private support of Turkey by Englishmen fighting with
the Turks. No assertion is so common or so popular with those
who take that side as this, “If the Turks had only English
officers they would beat the Russians any day;” and we have
constant statements in the papers that Hobart Pasha or ex-
Colonel Baker are enlisting English officers for the purpose. I
cannot suppose that under present circumstances the Government
would give formal permission to officers to enter the Turkish
service—but do they take any means to prevent their doing so ?
It now turns out that Captain Hobart entered the Turkish service
without the permission and contrary to the rules of his own
service, and that he was therefore struck off the British service;
but that after doing some good service to the Turks he was
restored, and permitted to obtain retired pay, to which he was not
entitled when he left the service, even if he had not broken its
rules. But further, the rules are now such that not only can an


officer at any time get from the Government regulation and over-
regulation prices for his commission on the over-liberal terms
conceded to the army, without any check on his future conduct,
but there is another great and unnecessary facility afforded.
Officers who are entitled to retired or half-pay on giving up active
service in the British army are still subject to considerable obliga-
tions, the consideration for the pay and privileges they retain, and
are subject to the restraints and rules of their own service. They
are now, however, by a recent indulgence, permitted to obtain the
full pecuniary value of their allowances in a lump sum, calculated
by actuaries as representing the value of those allowances when
treated as a life annuity; and having thus received full value, they
are released from all their obligations and from all control for the
future. Nothing is easier, then, than for an officer who wishes to
join the Turks to apply for, and immediately obtain in a lump,
the value of his allowances, and then go off to Turkey. The
Government have so far refused to do anything to check this, but
it may have the most serious consequences. If in a Russo-
Turkish war Englishmen were found playing the same part that
Russians did in a Turko-Servian war, is it not ten to one that we
should as a nation become involved in the matter ? Ido trust
that attention will be given to this subject.
So much as regards a war between Russia and Turkey. But
beyond that is the terrible and pressing danger of wider and
greater wars to which the dissolution of Turkey under such
circumstances would be too likely to give rise. Nothing can be
more emphatic than the solemn warnings of such dangers which
have been uttered within the last few days by several of Her
Majesty’s Ministers. They tell us that dangers are imminent and
terrible if war once breaks out. I am sure they are right, and
after the forcible way in which they have put the danger I need
not attempt to repeat the warning in feebler language. But
surely the moral is that Europe ought to coerce the Turks in
such a way that there can be no real or prolonged war. In
every point of view a war between Russia alone and Turkey


would be most disastrous in the present and most dangerous in
the future.
The idea that coercion of the Turks might lead to a disas-
trous extension of war of another kind—to a mysterious combina-
tion of the Mahommedan world to do terrible things—has, I think,
pretty well exploded and evaporated of itself. No one has told
us where all these terrible Mahommedans are to come from. Go
over the Mahommedan countries of the world, and you do not
find any of [them in particular who are likely to render aid to the
Turks in this juncture, though you find several who are likely to
take opportunity to attack the Turks. It is true that in Central
Asia, if the Turkoman tribes have any fight left in them, they
might take the opportunity of a Russo-Turkish war to give local
trouble to the Russians there —not because they care a fig for the
Sultan, or very much for the Mahommedan religion—merely because
they would naturally like to regain their own liberty and establish
their principle of free trade in slaves; but that these people
should cross the Caspian and give material aid to the Turks in
Turkey is totally out of the question.
In India the shallow and fictitious agitation got up by a few
Anglicised Mahommedans and Pro-Turkish Englishmen seems
also to have collapsed of itself. We heard of great sums that
were going to be sent to replenish the Sultan’s exhausted
treasury, but of very little actually sent. When the thing was
put in that shape the supposed zeal seems to have evaporated.
The twenty, or nearly twenty-one, million Mahommedans of
Bengal, said to be so enthusiastic in the cause, are said to have
subscribed among them a good deal less than any one of several
of the most zealous English subscribers to the same cause, and
we have not heard whether even that money has been paid and
sent. Somewhat larger sums set down in Bombay (whether paid
or not we know not) principally represented subscriptions other
than those of native Mahommedans of that Presidency. It is,
then, hardly worth while to deal any more with that subject, but
I will append to this paper an extract from a speech to my con-


stituents delivered before the meeting of Parliament, in which I
summarised my views regarding it. I also let stand in the extract
a summary of the views which I then held as to the probable
course of events, because I venture to think that they are still
applicable, excepting only so far as they are affected by the
expulsion of Midhat, which I did not then anticipate. If that
expulsion has on the one hand rendered more probable an easy
yielding of the Turks to a decided policy of united coercion, on
the other hand it has rendered far less probable that there should
be any decent pretence of practical improvement in the Turkish
administration. It has rendered intervention both more easy
and more necessary, and has so far much strengthened the views
which I held.
Mr. Hardy alluded to a suggestion of mine regarding the
difficulty of disposing of the Turkish dominions in Asia, which I
threw out, but did not solve. Just so. My view is that if we
apply a discreet coercion to the Turks now, we may leave their
power in Asia intact, so far as we are concerned. I hope that in
their natural element, as it were, they may do much better
than out of their element in Europe. It is in case a war with
Russia leads to a breaking up of the Turkish Empire, that I
anticipate very great difficulties in Asia which I have not attempted
to solve.
As to the house and cabbage-garden in Europe which the
Turks got from the last of the Greek emperors, and to which their
uncontrolled rule there may possibly be restricted, no doubt if
that stood alone it would be as untenable a position as it was
when the Greeks held it; but united with a great Asiatic do-
minion the position might not be impossible, for a time at least.
The result of all the arguments which I have ventured to put
forward is to suggest that the difficulties in the way of a united
coercion may be found to be much less than has been supposed,
and that the difficulties and dangers attending any other course
are much greater than the country has yet fully realised. For the
rest, I cannot pretend to judge of the exact facts regarding the


dispositions of foreign Powers, which are known only to Her
Majesty’s Government; but I do earnestly desire that no want of
sufficient moral courage to take action in a direction contrary to
the effete political traditions of this country should deter the
Government from acting courageously for the best, for ourselves,
for Europe, and for humanity. If they do the right in the end, I
am sure we shall gladly drop all charges of inconsistency.
March 1, 1877.
G. C.
Extract from a Speech of Sir G. Campbell, at Kirkcaldy,
delivered January 26, 1877.
There is another bugbear much talked of, and which may
possibly have some influence with our Government—the idea of
a union of all the Mahommedans to assist the Turks, and of our
Indian Mahommedans taking part in such a Crescentade. Now,
that is a subject of which I may be supposed to know something,
and regarding which I have already said a good deal in pretty
decided language. I have said two things. First, a plain asser-
tion of fact, that there has never been any direct religious con-
nection whatever between the Indian Mahommedans and the
Sultan of Turkey; secondly, an expression of opinion that there
is very little sympathy between the Indian Mahommedans or any
other Mahommedans and the Turk. Now, first as to the matter
of fact, to which I pledge my credit. I have watched narrowly a
great many statements by people who set out by saying that
they are going to contradict me, but I have not found that any
one really has ventured to contradict me in this matter of fact.
No, doubt a good many excellent and worthy men have talked a
good deal in a big way about Mahommedan solidarity and Mahom-


medan fanaticism; I find even that some very good old Indians
take this line; some from political prejudice; some because
they are very zealous Christians, who perhaps do not look very
charitably towards Mahommedans. Now, to such men I have said
this—“ You have been forty years in India; you have known
the people intimately; if you will tell me that in all that
time you have heard one Indian Mahommedan speak of the
Sultan as his Caliph and religious head, I will admit that I am
so far wrong.” Not one of them can say anything of the kind;
they all admit they cannot say that. I may say then, the fact that I
have stated- is quite beyond doubt. The only people who have
said anything to the contrary are a few recent agitators who pre-
tend to represent the forty million Mahommedans, and say that
these forty millions look to the Sultan as their Caliph. I say that
is wholly false. Those Mohammedan petitions from India are
most ridiculous affairs. You have seen the principal one in the
Times. I will venture to say that not a word of it is written by
any Mahommedan. It is palpably and notoriously written by an
English partisan of our present ministry. lam told by those who
know better than I do that they can trace the hand that did it.
No doubt, by agitation a certain sympathy for and possibly a
pretended allegiance to the Sultan may be got up amongst a
certain class in India, the more so as these movements are
very much promoted, or at any rate furthered by the chief
native officials of the Government, who think that they are
acting with her Majesty’s present Government, and take the same
line as do people in England at Aylesborough banquets and Staf-
ford House meetings. I hope that now such proceedings in India
will not be encouraged by any one connected with the Govern-
ment. The French say, as I do, that the Sultan is no Caliph of
their Mahommedan subjects in Africa, but still they think it well
to stop agitation and prohibit the Turkish inflammatory news-
papers. We might do the same. But perhaps it is not worth
while to alter our free system, for that, at any rate. The move-
ment is very contemptible, after all. As to any general sympathy


and union of Mahommedans, that is a matter of opinion, and
every one has a right to his own. My own opinion is very decided
that there is nothing in it. I believe that the mass of the Turks
themselves are not really fanatical, though it is 'the fashion to say
so. They may be as zealous in their religion as we are in ours,
but if properly governed and not used for the purpose of an
Asiatic tyranny, they might be a very tolerably quiet, decent
people. The ruling class of Turks are not fanatical or very par-
ticular in their religious tenets, though they are always using the
fanaticism of the people as a bugbear to’ frighten us. They are
only very vain and conceited, and for the most part believe only
in themselves. If you have ever read Lady Duff Gordon’s letters
from Egypt at the time of the insurrection in Crete, you will form
some idea of the sympathy of the Egyptians for the Turks. She
reflects the feelings of the real Egyptians amongst whom she lived,
and those feelings showed nothing but loathing for the Sultan,
hatred at the conscription, and a hearty wish that the Christians
might be let alone in Crete, and the Mahommedans in Egypt. I
should say that there is not more but less solidarity among Mahom-
medans than among Christians. My belief is that if the Turkish
Empire were engaged in war, so far from getting aid from other
Mahommedan Powers, the Persians would attack and try to seize
Mesopotamia, with their sacred places; the Arabs would revolt and
throw off the Turkish yoke; and we should, in fact, have more
difficulty in dealing with the disorganised Turkish dominions in
Asia than in Europe—in the latter we could probably settle matters
well enough.
Perhaps you will ask me my opinion as to what is likely to
happen now. I will answer you frankly, as best I can. They say
Ignatieff is still trying to get the Pashas to meet his terms. If he
can frighten them into accepting the plan of the Conference I shall
be heartily glad, but I think the Pashas have now got so much
rope that they will hang themselves. I think the Russians will
first try to get all Europe to act with them in carrying out the
matured plan proposed by the Conference. If that is refused,


then they will try to return to an arrangement with the three
Emperors—to the Berlin Note, in fact—leaving us out in the cold.
If that also they cannot effect, then I think they will act for them-
selves, in order to enforce the plan which has been already
sanctioned by Europe, and which Europe having practically
pressed upon the Turks, with the threat of Russian coercion
hanging over them, cannot object to the Russians enforcing. In
that case, no doubt, the Russians, being left to bear the burden
alone, will be fully entitled to look at their own interests, and to
make their own attack in their own way, and at their own time.
Their difficulty is that the Turks at present happen to have a large
navy, which is a kind of accident due to the money lent them by
us, and which they cannot maintain long, now that no one will
lend them any more money. The Russians, left to act for them-
selves, may attack the Turks sooner or later, but attack they will.
If they do not think it prudent to do it at once, they will steadily
watch their opportunity; and the Eastern Question, instead of
being well settled now with our co-operation, may at some not
distant day be ill settled without us in a way that we shall
not like, but of which we shall hardly be in a position to
complain. If the Russians delay, I think that Midhat Pasha
will make a show of working his sham Constitution, with
sham councils, and a sham Chamber of Deputies, a Mussul-
man majority, and a subservient Christian minority of his own
creatures. In reality the provincial Christians would have less
chance under the rule of a Mussulman majority at Constantinople
than under despotic Pashas, whose religious prejudices at least
are small. Midhat may possibly appoint to considerable offices a
few safe Christians more Turkish than the Turk, and apparently
he will try to make friends with the Mammon of the City of
London by false promises of payment of the Turkish bonds, if he
is allowed to squeeze and ill-use the unhappy people of Turkey at
his discretion. He will take good care not to localise the
Christian provinces, and to rule by dividing the Christians. Most
of the Christian speeches in his favour in his packed Council are


impudent shams. Only one Christian people are for the lime a
good deal with him, many of their leading men almost fiercely so
—I mean the Greeks, actuated apparently by a bitter jealousy of
the Bulgarians. I may say that I think the conduct of the Greeks
very bad ; they have a right to reclaim in favour of their own
liberties, but the attempt to establish their right to the Bulgarian
country south of the Balkans is most impudent and unfounded.
Eloquent address of Greeks published in England might deserve
our sympathy if they kept to truth, but regarding the ethnology of
this Bulgarian country they simply publish unblushing falsehoods,
trusting to our ignorance. I cannot answer for the exact correct-
ness of my ethnological map in every particular, but this I can
say, from my own personal knowledge and observation, that
the Greek one is wholly false, and Lady Strangford, who
knows the country much better than I do, has said the
same thing. The fact is that Lord Derby’s plan of local
government is just and necessary, because the Christian
peoples of Turkey are separate and disunited, and must govern
themselves separately. It is the disunion of the Christians that
is the raison d'etre of the Turkish Pashas ; they know how to play
the divide ct impera game not unsuccessfully. About the farce of
this new constitution nothing is so ridiculous and unreal as the
talk of union for the cause of the “ Ottoman fatherland.” The
Ottoman fatherland is nothing whatever but a union by force of
Bazi-Bazouks, and such expressions borrowed'from Europe are
the merest mockery. Under the Constitution, matters will go on
very much as before. There may be a little eyewash for a time,
but it will have no reality, and the Russians will have constant
grounds for interfering whenever they are ready to do so. If
there is delay Russia will become better organised and stronger,
and get up a fleet, which we would rather she had no occasion to
get up ; while the Turks, with no more foreign loans, will exhaust
their resources, and become weaker every day. The longer a
settlement is delayed, the more favourable it will be to Russia, and
the less favourable to us. My opinion is that the sooner we get


it settled the better, and I only wish that the people of the country
would prompt a Government, which has shown itself amenable to
popular opinion, to propose a European compact and settle the
matter offhand. In conclusion, Sir George especially warned the
country against the unofficial war which would take place if men
of the stamp of Colonel Baker were allowed to enlist men of their
own kidney,in this country to assist the Turks, and if Hobart
Pasha were allowed to do the same thing. If the Government
took an undecided course this would certainly happen, and these
men would involve the country in a base war. He would insist
in Parliament that a summary stop should be put to such pro-
ceedings.
