



THE HORRORS OF
CONVICT LIFE


THE HORRORS OF
CONVICT LIFE
— m —
JOHN FROST
SULLIVAN’S COVE, Publisher
HOBART 1973


TWO LECTURES
delivered in the
Oddfellows’ Hall , Padiham
August 31ST, 1856
By MR JOHN FROST
MR PLACE, OF PADIHAM, IN THE CHAIR
AFTERNOON LECTURE
Mr Frost, who was loudly cheered on presenting
himself before the audience, spoke as follows:
Mr Chairman and friends, I should have been a very
bad judge of human nature had I entered upon a task
such as that in which I am now engaged with the
expectation of finding it a bed of roses. Every one
who attempts to deprive bad men of power must
expect to meet with the hostility of those men whom
he assails, and we all know perfectly well that the
worse use they make of power the more do they
desire to retain it. It is now forty years ago since I
commenced my political career. In 1816 and 1817 I
first became acquainted with the political state of our
country, and from that time to the present I have
consistently advocated the principles of the Charter,
believing from my soul that they are the only sound
principles upon which good government can be
based, and that unless they can be brought into
practical operation we shall never have the House of


6 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
Commons filled with good men. As our chairman has
already stated, we want men in whose honesty and
integrity we can place confidence: we do not want
men who endeavour to obtain that power with which
the law invests them for the purpose of making it
subservient to their own peculiar aims. Those of us
who are acquainted with the history of the House of
Commons know that from the time of Edward the
First, when that house was first established, until the
present day, it has been, not an institution for the
good of the people, not an assembly of delegates
endeavouring to obtain for the people that which
belongs to them, to procure for them the possession
of their rights, but an engine in the hands of great
men to take from the people that which they should
call their own, and to apply what they have thus
acquired for their own benefit, and to the injury of
the community. We have a great battle to fight—l
do not mean a physical battle, for we must proceed
cautiously, yet firmly and boldly. We have to contend
with great powers, and we must take our measures
accordingly. I have this morning received a letter
from Wales, in which I am informed that the press,
almost without exception, are attacking me hip and
thigh. Their object, I am told, is to put me down;
but they have not put me down yet, and I doubt
whether they ever will put me down. (Cheers.) We
know that we are in the right, that we are only
asking for that which belongs to us, and all we have
to do, as men of principle, is to proceed with caution,


and success, in my opinion, must in a very short
period crown our elforts.
The subject on which I mean to address you on
the present occasion is one that was commented upon
in the Manchester Guardian on Thursday last. I
come before you as a public character, and I believe
that if my character were to be strictly examined it
would stand the test of inquiry. I wish you, I wish
my countrymen generally, to believe that I am
actuated by a desire for their good; that I seek for
that which belongs to them, and not for anything
that I can gain. I have got nothing by agitation, I
can assure you; nay, I may say that I have lost a
great deal; but that will not deter me from pursuing
the same course I adopted years ago, and which I
have adhered to throughout in the belief that that
course is the right one. As I have said before, an
article upon my proceedings appeared in the
Manchester Guardian of Thursday last, and I do not
think I could better engage your attention than by
reading a portion of that article, and making a few
observations thereon, with a view of showing the
nature of the charges that have been preferred against
me, and that they are not founded on the principles
of justice. But before doing this, I would point
attention to the fact that not a single charge is made
against my character, and that nothing has been said
which will have a tendency to lower me in the
estimation of any thinking man. I have been accused
of ingratitude to the Government, I have been told


8 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
that I am a shameless man, and other charges of that
description have been brought against me; but
nothing has been advanced to show that I have ever
made use of any power I may have possessed with a
view to my own gain, improperly: the accusations
that have been levelled at me are of that description
that cannot be well disproved or defended, because
they are merely based upon individual opinions. The
editor of the Manchester Guardian says:
‘Among the blessings which the conclusion of the
Russian war has conferred upon the country must
be reckoned the restoration to English and Irish
society of a number of individuals who had, at
various times, been deported from their native shores
for political offences. The term by which we
describe the delinquency of these exiles is, indeed,
inadequate for the purpose; for, if the crown had
confined its favour to abbreviating the doom of
simply political offenders, it must have looked in vain
for an object appealing to its clemency.’
Now, the English and Irish exiles might have
returned many years ago if we had gone on our knees
and solicited such a favour of the English Govern-
ment. Mr Smith O’Brien, and the rest of the
compatriots, refused indignantly even to acknowledge
that they were wrong. They said they had not done
wrong in endeavouring to show the country the
oppression under which it laboured, and not-
withstanding all the intimidation, threats, and even
promises that were made by the English Govern-


ment, not one of the Irish exiles uttered a single
sentiment that could be construed into an apology.
The Government attempted the same thing with me,
but they found me quite as firm as the Irish gentle-
men, and if I had continued in Van Diemen’s Land
all my days—though I am bound to England by near
and very dear ties, having a large family here—and
had never been permitted to see my family any more,
not a single sentence should ever have escaped my
lips that any Chartist in the kingdom would deem
dishonourable. (Cheers.) I did not begin the contest
with a view of begging and praying for anything they
could afford me; I began it from a conviction that I
was doing my duty, and I will adhere to the course I
have hitherto pursued so long as health and strength
are vouchsafed to me. Beg for my return! Why, I
would not beg my life at the hands of those men; and
surely it can hardly be expected that I would beg for
anything that would have the effect of restoring me
to England by a sacrifice of principle on my part.
Now, this does not seem to have pleased the editor of
the Manchester Guardian , who seems to think that
if we had been a set of crawling, creeping reptiles,
who would have disgraced ourselves and our cause
by making apologies to such a set of men as those
who constitute the Government of the present day,
we should have exhibited a proper spirit. But we did
not act upon any such principle; we bore oppression,
we suffered every punishment that was inflicted
upon us, and we were determined not to do anything


10 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
that would have the effect of disgracing our cause.
The article in the Manchester Guardian goes on to
say;
‘Whatever may have been the rigour of the adminis-
tration in times past, there can scarcely be now alive
a British subject who has been consigned to punish-
ment for hostility to the government of the day,
except where that hostility has been expressed in
actions which involved open danger to the property
and lives of his fellow subjects. Peace, however, is
the parent of forgiveness, and there is no one who
questions the grace or the policy of the decision
which has allowed all ranks and orders of these
misguided persons to return, unmolested and pitied,
to the country which they quitted with so little
honour to themselves.’
There is no one, I think, who understands the
English Government of the present who will sup-
pose that they were actuated by any motives of
clemency in giving us our pardon. It was no such
thing; it was a matter of policy on the part of the
Government, and nothing more. In 1853 a number
of Irish representatives petitioned Lord Palmerston
for the return of Smith O’Brien. He told them he
would take the matter into consideration. He did so,
and just as the session was about to close he gave
those gentlemen a denial, promising to take the
matter into consideration against the next meeting of
Parliament. In 1854 a large meeting of the inhabit-
ants was held in Newport, and a petition was sent up


to Government praying for my restoration to my
native country. That petition was treated with
contumely, and thrown aside as unworthy of notice.
In the same year the Irish gentlemen came forward
again, and as Lord Palmerston then wanted the votes
of the Irish members, it became a question whether
the Irish exiles could be pardoned and the Chartists
left in Van Diemen’s Land. I was there eight years
longer than Smith O’Brien; my companion Jones
received his pardon six years, and Williams eighteen
months, before me. I suppose they were so fond of
me out there that they did not wish to lose me; but
whatever the motive, they kept me longer than any-
one else, and at one time Lord Palmerston actually
told some friends of mine in the House of Commons
that I was the only obstacle to the return of Smith
O’Brien. However, from some motives which I can-
not think were other than political motives, they did
pardon me, and I am now here in my country for the
purpose of showing the good people of England what
sort of rulers they have so far as the penal colonies are
concerned. So far from my having made use of any
apologetic or conciliatory language towards Lord
Palmerston or the English Government, I will read
you a few extracts from a pamphlet which I published
in America, and when you have heard them, it will
be a matter of surprise on your part that Lord
Palmerston should ever have suffered me to return to
England. There could have been no other reason for
permitting my return than that the Government


wanted the votes of the Irish members, many of
whom were determined that if he did allow the Irish
gentlemen to come back, and would not extend the
same act of justice toward the English Chartists,
they would secede and leave him in the lurch, which
he would most certainly have been in had they
abandoned him. You will agree with me when I read
these extracts that no language proceeded from me
that might not have proceeded from any honest
minded and consistent man.
‘Every reader of history must be well aware that the
aristocracy of the British Isles were, and are, a curse
to the world. The power of the lawgiver, in their
hands, has been used for purposes destructive of
everything which virtuous men would prize.’
I do not think you will call that bending to the
aristocracy. The pamphlet from which this is taken
was, as I have already intimated, originally published
in America, copies of it were sent to Lord Palmerston
and the other ministers, they all read it before
pardoning me, and I do not think that the language it
contains is such as would have been likely to induce
such a man as Lord Palmerston to permit my return,
if he had not been actuated by motives of a political
nature.
‘Wherever freedom attempted to raise its head,
whether at home or abroad, there the power of the
Parliament was exerted to destroy it. Insatiable and
mean in the pursuit of wealth, the aristocracy were
like a raging lion, seeking whom it might devour.


Not satisfied with public property, such as crown
lands, church lands, charity lands, school lands,
tithes, &c., &c., they contracted a debt a little short
of a thousand millions of pounds, no small part of
which they have received, and while thousands, and
hundreds of thousands, are in a state of the greatest
destitution, these haughty and base descendants of
the Normans are wallowing in wealth received from
the taxes paid by those who want the common
necessaries of life. Suppose for a moment we cast our
eyes to France at the commencement of the revo-
lution of 1789.’
Now these are matters which I think ought to
engage the attention of every well wisher to his
country. The only thing we have to do at such times
as the present is to show the consequences that
resulted from the exercise of the power wielded by
the aristocracy. There are thousands of persons who
in all probability would not act upon the principles
they entertain, with reference to the Charter, if they
were not shown the use their rulers make of the
power given to them—how they tax the people and
how they appropriate the money they have raised by
those taxes, the payment of which occasions great
distress among the people upon whom they are
levied. There are, also, thousands who would be
ready to engage in an agitation, having for its object
the reduction of taxes, and who at the same time
might think very little about the principles of
Chartism s


14 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
‘Did any country in the world suffer more than
France, at this period, from the operation of laws
made by haughty and corrupt men, whose will was
subject to no restraint? Were not the leaders of the
French Revolution wise and good men, whose
object was to raise their country to happiness by
removing those customs and laws by which France
was oppressed and impoverished? Who prevented a
consummation so desirable?’
It is well known that there never was a set of
wiser men than were assembled at that period in
France. Who were they then, what prevented the
French legislature from passing laws that would
have been for the benefit of the people of France ?
‘The English aristocracy !! They knew well that if
a proper form of government were established in
France, the example would be followed in England.
They went to war with France for the purpose of
restoring the tyrants and tyranny. They subsidised
the despots of the Continent. They spent the money
of the people of England to perpetuate their slavery.
They crushed the spirit of liberty in their own
country by tyrannical edicts, upheld and enforced by
a standing army, and in doing so they contracted a
debt, the lamentable, the direful effects of which
extend their ramifications to every family in the
kingdom. For what purpose is the present war under-
taken by the English Government ? Lord Palmerston
told the inhabitants of Melbourne that the war was
against tyranny! Against tyranny undertaken, too,


by Lord Palmerston. That man who can look at the
conduct of the late Emperor of Russia without
horror can possess but little humanity. In the pursuit
of his ambition, or the gratification of his passions,
he was indeed a merciless man; and one whose name
should be held in detestation; but, on my conscience,
I believe that he was not a worse man than Lord
Palmerston (‘Hear ! Hear!’), and I believe, too, that
my readers will be of the same opinion before they
finish this letter; the difference between these two
men was in their power not in the disposition to
exercise it! lam of the opinion, that opinion formed
by much reading and thinking, that there is no
cruelty, which the most ferocious of men could
perpetrate, that would not be practised by the
aristocracy to uphold and perpetuate their power,
among the most prominent of whom is Lord
Palmerston.’
Now I do not think that this sort of language was
likely to induce Lord Palmerston to suffer me to
come back to England, unless there were some
powerful reasons in favour of my being pardoned. I
have read this to show that during the whole of the
time I was in Van Diemen’s Land, and during the
period I was in America, not one word escaped me
tending to show that my disposition and principles
were changed, or that I ever condescended to beg or
make use of what I should consider improper
language, with a view of procuring my pardon. I am
called ungrateful; the writer in the Manchester


l 6 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
Guardian accuses me of ingratitude because I have
not gone home and remained with my family,
leaving political matters to other persons. It strikes
me, however, that I am only performing my duty in
going through the country for the purpose of showing
in what manner our countrymen in Van Diemen’s
Land are treated, and the state of society in that
remote region. Never, in my opinion, in any age or
country, has society existed in so depraved a state as I
have witnessed in the penal colonies, produced, too,
by laws not equalled in severity in any part of the
civilised world. They tell me that I am ungrateful to
the English Government. I will endeavour, so far as
my abilities will permit, to show you the con-
sequences of their rule. I have with me a paper
published in America, and in it is a report of a
meeting of the British residents in Broadway, held
for the purpose of congratulating me on my arrival
in that country, and to petition the Queen for my
restoration to England. In that is given a short
history of the conduct of the English Government
to me after the jury had found me guilty, and when I
was entirely dependent on the mercy of the Govern-
ment for my life. I will relate the circumstances.
We were in the condemned cell, awaiting the
time fixed for the executions, when one of the three
appeared very anxious that we should commit
suicide—that we should defeat the object of the
Government by taking our own lives. He thought it
would be a most disgraceful death, if we were to


allow ourselves to be hung, and afterwards to have
our heads cut off and our bodies quartered, though
the latter part of the sentence probably would not
have been carried into effect. The subject was
discussed night after night, and at that time, I
should tell you, we had very little hope of receiving
a remission of the death sentence. We were not
aware of the agitation that was taking place out of
doors; everything was kept secret from us, and it was
when we were thoroughly persuaded that we had no
hopes of being suffered to live, that one of my
companions introduced the suggestion that we
should commit suicide. I was opposed to that
suggestion from the commencement. I thought it
would be acting a cowardly part indeed for men
placed in our situation to take away our own lives,
for by so doing I conceived that we should be merely
playing the game of the Government; that that
would have been doing the very thing they wanted
us to do. After a great deal of discussion on the
subject, two of us came to the conclusion that we
would await the event in preference to doing that
which in my opinion would have suited the purposes
of the Government. Now, mark the steps they took
to induce us to do that which would of course have
prevented my being here to address you today. The
condemned cell was in one of the towers of the gaol,
secured by a strong gate. There was a very small
room in which we lived during the day, and when
night came we were shut up in the tower. When we


l 8 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
were locked up together little did we think that the
turnkey was lying within six feet of our beds and
listening to every syllable of our conversation.
Some time after the period I refer to a young man
from Newport was sent to Monmouth gaol for three
years for having been concerned in the affairs of
1839. I afterwards met him in America, and found,
from what he told me, that while we had been
discussing the question of suicide, the turnkey had
been listening to all that we had said. From the
conversations related to me by that young man, I
was convinced that this must have been the case,
because there were no other means of acquiring a
knowledge of our discussions than listening at the
door. No doubt, so soon as the turnkey became
acquainted with what had passed between us, he
reported what he had heard to the Governor of the
Goal, and the Governor in his turn reported to the
Police Magistrate, who was in constant com-
munication with Lord Normanby, the then Secretary
of State for the Home Department. We were to
have been hanged on the Saturday, and on the
Thursday previous we received a letter from the
Sheriff of Monmouthshire, of which I will read you
a copy:
To the High Sheriff of the County of Monmouth.
Sir,—l am to signify to you the Queen’s command
that the execution of the sentence of death passed on
John Frost, Zephaniah Williams, and William
Tones, now in the gaol of Monmouth, be respited till


Thursday, the 6th of February; but the prisoners are
to be distinctly informed that the sentence of the law
will then be assuredly carried into effect.
Now that was received on the Thursday evening,
two days before we were to be executed. On the
Friday evening, our turnkey came into the cell and
said, ‘I have just returned from the post office, and
have met Ford, the gaoler, and he is very low—
indeed he seems as low as the grave. He has received
a letter from the Secretary of State, and that has
made him quite low.’ Ford came into the condemned
cell on the same day and read us a letter he had
received containing almost the same language as that
I have just read, and containing a direction from the
Secretary of State that he should read it to us, in
order, I suppose, ‘to make assurance doubly sure’.
Well, just as we were going to bed, Ford came into
the room and said, ‘Frost, I have come here for the
purpose of having a little conversation with you.’
‘Well,’ I said, ‘what is it? I shall be glad to hear
anything you may have to say.’ ‘What’, he then
asked, ‘would you like to have done with your
bodies after you are dead ?’ Rather a pleasant subject
to introduce to men in our situation ! (Laughter.) It
was a very gloomy evening, and the place in which
we were, the condemned cell, was anything but
pleasant quarters, I can assure you, without saying
anything of the prospect before us. I looked at him !
‘I understood’, was my reply, ‘that the sentence was
that our bodies were to be placed at the disposal of


20 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
our most gracious Majesty. Have you received any
orders from her transferring the power which the
law gives her to me or to my companions ? Because if
you have received no authority to that effect, your
question amounts to nothing.’ He could not say that
he had received such authority, because if he had
said so we should have asked for it at once. He there-
fore evaded the point as well as he could, but I
endeavoured to keep him to it. However, he
continued to talk about cutting off our heads and
quartering us, and everything that he thought might
have a tendency to excite fear on our part. At last I
said to him, ‘Mr Ford, what does all this amount to ?
You know that you have no authority for putting
the question you have put to me, and you know
perfectly well that were I to direct you or any one
else how to dispose of my body, the authorities would
prevent my wishes being carried into effect. Besides
that, you know perfectly well that we have friends,
who would not suffer our dead bodies to remain
above ground for want of someone to inter them.’
Now, what was the object of all this on the part of
the gaoler? What object had Lord Palmerston, and
probably my friend Lord John Russell, in sending a
communication of the description I have read, when
at the same time it was determined that we should
not be hanged ? They knew what our conversations
were, they knew that the subject of suicide had been
discussed in the condemned cell, and they thought
that by holding out no hope they would induce us to


do that which they themselves were afraid to do. I
think this must be perfectly clear to everyone who
takes the matter into consideration. Ought I, then,
to be grateful to a Government who were capable of
committing so base an act as that ? Am I to go upon
my knees and thank them for saving my life when
they did all in their power to induce me and others to
take away our own lives? I think that no wise or
honest man would say I ought to be grateful for
conduct which, had it succeeded in frightening us
into the commission of suicide, would have had the
effect of disgracing ourselves and of injuring our
cause more than anything else that could have
happened.
Now I come to another matter. When they had
got us into the convicts’ hulk they nearly starved us.
I really believe that in the ten or twelve days I was
in the hulk I was reduced 20 lb or 30 lb in weight.
They gave us no food but bread and water, or at least
none that I could partake of save bread and water.
After a little time, when we had complained of the
treatment we had received, they gave us better food,
and by that time my stomach had become so weak it
would scarcely retain anything. When the period for
my removal arrived, I was weaker than I had ever
been in my life. They put us on board a barge. The
weather was very cold, as cold as it generally is in the
month of February, and we were clad only in our
prison dress—a little jacket and a little thin waistcoat.
In order, I suppose, to show some commiseration,


22 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
they threw a piece of old tarpaulin over my shoulders,
to prevent me from perishing of cold. When we got
on board the transport ship, I was put into the
hospital. During the evening I was lying down,
rather low—indeed more dispirited than I had been
during any period of my incarceration. I had
forgotten myself for a few minutes in a very uneasy
kind of sleep, when I was awakened by hearing
some one say, ‘This, sir, is John Frost.’ I looked up,
and then found the hospital full of military officers.
An old gentleman came up to me and said, ‘I have
not come here, Mr Frost, for the purpose of re-
proaching you; I have come here to give you a little
advice. I am the Governor of Portsmouth, and I
think you will do well to take my advice.’ ‘Well, sir,’
I replied, ‘I am ready to listen to you.’ ‘lf’, he
continued, ‘there should be the slightest commotion
in this ship during the time she is on her voyage
hence to Van Diemen’s Land, the officer in com-
mand of the troops has strict orders to act with the
greatest promptitude.’ ‘Would it not have been
better’, said I, ‘that our lives should have been taken
according to law, than that they should be taken on
our passage to Van Diemen’s Land? And do you
mean that that promptitude will be evinced if I or
any of us have nothing to do with any commotion ?’
‘I have nothing further to say to you, sir,’ was the
reply.
When we had got within a few days’ sail of the
Cape of Good Hope, a letter was brought to me by a


prisoner. In that letter I was asked whether I and my
companions would engage in an attempt to take the
ship from the authorities, and the writer assured us
that if we would engage in such an attempt, and
were successful, he would ensure that we should be
obeyed. Now that letter put me into an embarrassing
position. If the surgeon superintendent had been
aware that I had received a letter of that sort, and
had not disclosed it to him, he would have called it
treason, or misprision of treason. But I did not like to
betray the man who had written thus, supposing him
to be honest in his intentions; I therefore showed the
letter to one of my friends and he seemed inclined, I
thought, to make the attempt suggested. I then said,
‘Let us examine the matter fairly; we have made one
mistake, do not let us make another. Suppose we
make the attempt and fail; our death will not be a
very honourable one, for if we should not be killed at
once, but taken prisoners, we are sure to be hung.
There is no one to save us here; no agitation to keep
the matter alive and frighten the Government out of
their intentions. In the next place, suppose we should
succeed, what are we to do with the 2 1 2 prisoners on
board? In two hours they would be masters of the
ship, and if we attempted to prevent their doing that
which they would be sure to do first thing, procure
drink, they would throw us overboard. For my part I
shall have nothing to do with it.’ I then put the letter
into the fire and said nothing more about it. Now
comes the question, was that letter the act of the


24 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
prisoner or was it the act of the Government, or of
the Government authorities on board the ship, for
the purpose of entrapping me and my companions
into something which would give them the op-
portunity of taking away our lives? That prisoner
would not have obtained writing paper without the
knowledge of someone in authority on that vessel,
and as for finding the opportunity of writing a letter
unobserved in a convict ship, that was quite out of
the question. When we got to Van Diemen’s Land,
the doctor, as he was about leaving the ship, said to
me, ‘Frost, I am happy to bear testimony to your
good conduct since you have been under my
authority, and let me tell you,’ and as he said this, he
looked straight at me and put his finger to his nose,
‘you have said nothing, you have done nothing since
you have been in this ship with which I have not
been made acquainted.’ If that were so, he must have
been acquainted with that letter, and must have
known that it was a trap to take away our lives. Here
then is another act of the Government, for which I
think I have no reason to be grateful. Just look at
these two things. The Government have possession
of three persons who are convicted of a certain
offence, and endeavour to induce them to take away
their own lives. Failing in this, an attempt is made on
board the convict ship to induce us to get up a mutiny,
whereas they would have been well prepared to repel
every movement of ours, if we had been foolish
enough to fall into their trap, and the result would


have been that we should have been hung. Now, I
think it would be impossible for anyone bearing the
name of a man to act a more disgraceful part than the
Government have acted; and yet the editor of the
Manchester Guardian tells me that I ought to go on
my knees to the Government, and thank them for
suffering me to come back to my own country.
When we arrived at Van Diemen’s Land, we
were sent down to Port Arthur, a penal settlement,
for the purpose of being placed in certain situations.
I was put into the office of the commandant, Captain
Booth, to fill the situation of police clerk. My
companion Williams was sent to the coal mines, and
Jones was sent to the boys’ establishment at Point
Puer. I certainly do think that the wise men made a
great mistake in putting me into the commandant’s
office. I had not been there many days before I was
completely horror struck by the cruelties committed
by the Government authorities, and the sad con-
sequences that resulted from a convict code not
equalled in severity in any part of the civilised world.
A short time after I had got into the office, I asked
the commandant if he would permit me to write a
letter to Mrs Frost. ‘Certainly,’ he said, ‘by all means,
but you must be aware that no letter can be sent from
Port Arthur, or any other place on Tasman’s
Peninsula, without it has been first submitted to me.’
‘I will do nothing contrary to your regulations,’ an-
swered I. ‘I am here, and will make the best of my
situation. I will give you no trouble and shall feel


2b HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
very glad if you will think so.’ I then wrote the letter.
That letter was put into the hands of Captain Booth;
he read it and told me that he saw nothing objection-
able in it. The letter was sent home and, though no
act of mine, was published in England. There was
something in it that was displeasing to Lord John
Russell and orders came back to remove me from the
commandant’s office. The commandant came to me
one day after he had come from Hobart Town and
said, ‘I have orders to remove you from the office.’
‘For what?’ I asked. ‘Have I conducted myself in a
manner that is displeasing to you ?’ ‘No,’ said Captain
Booth, ‘you have given satisfaction.’ ‘And where are
you going to put me?’ inquired I. ‘Why, I must put
you in the gangs.’ ‘ln the gangs, for what? Do you
mean to put me in the gangs without trying me?’
The gangs, you should know, are awkward places to
be put into; for when there, you have to associate
with men who are not the most pleasing characters,
and whose manners, habits, disposition and language
are such as to form the worst part of transportation.
They have a space of about eighteen inches to lie
down in, twenty or thirty lying in a hut. Taking me
out of the office and putting me into the gangs with-
out having committed any offence, shows that the
motives of justice in reference to myself were any-
thing but the right ones. I was turned out of the
office and put into the gangs, and that was an act
which I think every rational man will say was most
unjust and cruel. I had submitted the letter to the


Commandant, he read it, and approved of it, and if
there had been anything in it that was wrong, I think
it was his duty to have pointed it out to me, so that I
might have altered it, or have written another letter.
But nothing of that sort was done. I was kept in the
gangs for two or three years, and subject to the very
hardest kinds of labour that any man could endure.
But all this did me no harm, it only raised my spirit,
and I think that I was actually a stronger man after
working in the quarries and carrying logs than I had
been before. The exercise only added to my health,
increased my strength, and increased my desire to try
whether I could not be of some service to my fellow
countrymen, if ever I should be permitted to revisit
England.
I now wish you to listen with a little attention to
the state of society in Van Diemen’s Land and the
consequences resulting from a convict code, which
Sir William Molesworth has stated ‘is not equalled in
severity in any part of the civilised world’. Nothing
can be more detestable than for a lawgiver possessing
power over men to make actions, innocent in them-
selves, offences, and to punish the persons ‘offending’,
with merciless severity. One of the greatest crimes
that a man can commit in Van Diemen’s Land is to
walk through a settlement with his hands in his
pockets. There is a crime ! A man puts his hands into
his pockets, such an act is against the regulations, he
is brought up, tried, convicted and flogged. I knew a
young man, a very decent well-behaved voung man,


28 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
who was standing at the door of his hut one day,
when an old drunken vagabond of an overseer came
by. In those places they always choose the worst men
they can find to fill the Government situations.
Humanity is a quality that would exclude any one
from power in Van Diemen’s Land, for in the penal
colonies humanity is the greatest offence that an
officer could be guilty of. The overseer spoke to the
young man in a most authoritative and impudent
manner. The young man looked at him and said
nothing. ‘Take your hand out of your pocket,’ said
the overseer, and went off to the superintendent.
That young man was put into the cells; three days
afterwards he was tried by the commandant and
sentenced to receive thirty-six lashes. I saw him
flogged; and what effect had that punishment upon
him ? It made him one of the worst men in the station.
He became an entirely different man, and from that
time was continually receiving punishment, oc-
casioned solely by the degrading manner in which he
had been treated. Would any man who reasoned
upon the subject suppose that those persons who
were possessed of authority were subject to no re-
strictions in its exercise? When men possess power,
are they justified in making use of it as they please?
I think not. And this is one of the evils of which I
complain. We say that the power of the lawgiver
ought to be limited, and that he ought to be respon-
sible for its exercise. This would be the case if the
people had the power of choosing the men who make


the laws. Lawgivers should be responsible for the
exercise of their power; and why should it not be so ?
They ought to be responsible in their persons and in
their property if they abuse the power entrusted to
them. What are the effects likely to follow, and
which have followed, such conduct as I have already
drawn your attention to ? Let me read to you an in-
stance given in the pamphlet from which I have
already quoted, and thus show you how the laws en-
forced in the penal settlements are contrary to the
principles of justice and of human nature, and what
effects are produced by their severity.
‘While I was police clerk at Port Arthur [I was
police clerk for twelve months, and during that
period the books passed through my hands] two
sawyers were brought to the office and charged by the
superintendent with breaking a saw. They pleaded
guilty to the charge of breaking, but denied that it
was done wilfully. The commandant, always dis-
posed to reverse the maxim, which it is said should
prevail in all courts of justice, that innocence should
be presumed till guilt be proved, pronounced them
guilty, and sentenced them to receive six and thirty
lashes each. Now let me describe a Port Arthur
flogging.’
I am speaking in reference to human beings, your
own countrymen, and it is not impossible that some
of those with whom I have been acquainted may be
relatives or friends of persons who are now present. I
know that a large number of persons, especially boys,


30 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
were transported from Manchester while I was in
Van Diemens’ Land, and some of them were treated
in a manner the mere description of which would be
sufficient to shock human nature. To proceed, how-
ever, with my description:
‘The flogger at this time was one of the most power-
ful men on the settlement, and one who, like his
master, felt a gratification in inflicting and witnes-
sing human misery. There were many prisoners who
would bear any punishment rather than complain; I
am certain that they would have died at the triangle
rather than utter a groan. It was a contest between
the parties: the flogger using every means in his
power to break the spirit of those who suffered, and
the sufferers determined to sustain the punishment
unflinchingly; the authorities looking on. It may be
supposed what the sufferings must have been when
the operator was influenced by such feelings. The
knout was made of the hardest whipcord, of an un-
usual size. The cord was put into salt water till it
was saturated; it was then put into the sun to dry; by
this process it became like wire, the eighty-one knots
cutting the flesh as if a saw had been used.’
And this punishment was also inflicted on men
for the offence of putting their hands in their
pockets!
‘lt may be judged what sort of a state the back must
have been in after a flogging by such a man and with
such an instrument. When taken from the triangles
the chest would be quite black,’


The back, I should remark, would be in such a
State that no one could ever see anything like it who
had not lived in the penal colonies. Twenty-five
lashes at Port Arthur, inflicted, as I have said before,
for trifling offences, produced more suffering than
three hundred would have produced as they are in-
flicted in the army.
‘Yet the commandant would often witness this
punishment with as much indifference as if he were
looking at some philosophical experiment. The next
day the superintendent came into the hut to me and
said, “Frost, you remember the sawyers yesterday?”
“Yes, sir.” “I will now show you the sort of men
we have for masters. When I came to Port Arthur as
superintendent, I gave every man that I could task-
work ; among these were the sawyers. I gave them a
fair day’s work, and if they finished the quantity
within time, they might employ their spare time for
their own advantage. I gave each a small piece of
land to cultivate for himself. Many of them would
work late and early, and would often finish their
work by middle day Friday; they would then work
in their gardens, or go fishing; and as fish abound in
the bays, they would catch enough for the whole
settlement; and as we had, at that time, scarcely
anything but salt meat and very little vegetables, we
found the fish very acceptable. The men, with the
view of pleasing me, would often do more than their
allotted task, and the work would be much better
done than it is at present, and very rarely was a saw


32 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
broken. The men were in much better health, better
behaved, better tempered, and many of them were
very industrious men. There was scarcely any flog-
ging, very little punishment of any sort and the feeling
between the officers and prisoners was of a kindly
nature.” ’
During the time I was in the office at Port Arthur,
it used to be my duty to read the regulations to the
prisoners. One day I was engaged in reading the
regulations to about thirty or forty persons standing
before me in the dock when I noticed a very tall
powerful looking man, who was built like a Hercules.
Just as the prisoners were leaving the dock, he said
something to the commandant, complaining of the
treatment he had been under. He had been trans-
ported, I learnt, for some offence against military
discipline. The commandant paid no attention to the
man’s complaint, and a few days afterwards the same
man was brought up charged with having assaulted
his overseer. The overseers are always the worst men
to deal with, and he was charged with assaulting one
of them. The man told the commandant that it was
impossible for any one living, who had any spirit, to
bear insults such as he had received from the over-
seer before he struck him; but this did not avail, he
was sentenced to receive one hundred lashes—one
hundred Port Arthur lashes, and fifty of them in the
breech. When he heard the latter part of the sentence,
he said, ‘I hope not, sir. If I am to be flogged, let me
be flogged like a man, and not like a boy. I have been


a soldier, sir, and you have been a soldier; treat me
like a man.’ ‘By heavens,’ said the commandant, ‘you
shall be flogged according to your sentence.’ He was
so flogged, and in a very short time he was brought
up again. Never did I see a man who felt more
acutely the agony of his situation. He was, as I have
said, a powerful man. When he was tried a second
time, it was for not having treated the commandant
respectfully, and all that he had said was what I have
just narrated. For this he was sentenced to fourteen
days solitary confinement on bread and water, his
ofFence having been no more than a remonstrance on
the cruelty of his former sentence. And what effect
did all this punishment have upon him ? After he had
served the fourteen days on bread and water—a very
small quantity of bread—he was taken out of his cell
and put before the door, heavily ironed, with a large
chain about his waist, fastened to another chain run-
ning along the causeway. In that position he worked
for some time. One day I heard a cry of‘Murder ! he
has killed a man.’ I ran to the door, and there saw
the man who had been so cruelly treated, standing
with two or three others, and a man lying on the
ground before him nearly dead. It seemed that he had
determined to abscond, and had made a confident of
another person who was working with him. This
person had, he believed, betrayed him to the authori-
ties, and in a moment of irritation he struck the other
a blow on the head. The wounded man was taken to
the hospital and in two or three days died. The


34 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
offender was brought up and examined. I took down
an account of the examination before the magistrates.
The prisoner was as firm a man, probably, as ever I
saw in my life. He said but little during the exami-
nation, and was committed to Hobart Town for trial,
where he was found guilty, sentenced to be hanged,
and he was hanged. Now here were two lives lost,
both of which might have been spared by anything
like humane treatment. But the overseers in Port
Arthur are the very worst men that can be found,
and unless a man is a stock or stone, it is almost im-
possible for him to remain in the gangs without
offending some one of the overseers, and getting
mercilessly punished.
I now come to a subject to which I will crave your
serious attention, for it is very important that we
should consider the effects produced by the admini-
stration of bad laws by bad men. It is said by philo-
sophers, and I believe the saying is a true one, that
injustice and cruelty destroy the reflecting faculties
and leave no thought or wish but for the immediate
gratification of the sensual. In such cases no moral
feelings can restrain men from the commission of
the very worst acts that can be committed, and these
results I have witnessed in Port Arthur to an extent
probably not equalled in the world. I would avoid
these subjects if I could, but I am anxious that the
people of England should know what is the real state
of society in that part of the world, with a view that a
change should be brought about for the better. With-


In this year 1200 men have been sent from England
to the penal colonies of Australia, and I will venture
to say that one half, if not more, have already been
destroyed, if the commission of the worst crimes that
man can perpetrate be destruction. The state of
society in Van Diemen’s Land when I left there was
not equalled even in the worst days of the Canaanites.
I say again that I would avoid these subjects if I
could, but I do believe that the duty I owe to my
countrymen requires that the matter upon which I
am about to speak should be fairly brought before
them, and in such a way that it cannot be mis-
understood.
Sir William Molesworth stated to the House of
Commons, no one contradicting him, ‘that the con-
vict code was not equalled in severity in any part of
the civilised world; and that the depravity in the
penal colony was unequalled’.
Having requested females to withdraw, Mr Frost
proceeded: Some years ago a report upon the then
condition of Norfolk Island was made by the officers
there, in which the resident Chaplain made use of
this language:
‘Blasphemy, rage, mutual hatred, and the unre-
strained indulgence of unnatural lust are the things
with which a short residence in the prison-wards of
Norfolk Island must necessarily familiarise the con-
vict. What solemn feelings must arise in the breast of
every thoughtful man in reading the 19th chapter of
Genesis; and how must these be intensely increased


36 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
by the continual discoveries which are made, proving
the truth of the historical part of the Bible.’
There is no fact in history sustained by stronger
evidence than the destruction of the Cities of the
Plain and the causes which produced that destruc-
tion. When I was coming from Hobart Town to the
United States, we went first to Callao. About fifteen
years ago a great part of that district was destroyed by
an earthquake, and the spot on which it formerly
stood is now a beautiful and extensive bay. It is a
common thing in fine weather, when the ships are
sailing by, for those on board to see the tops of the
houses which formerly were a part of Callao, and
discoveries have been made within the last twenty
years proving to demonstration the truth of the 19th
chapter of Genesis. While engaged in Van Diemen’s
Land in looking over my memoranda and manu-
scripts relating to the conduct of the authorities and
the moral state of the prisoners, while considering
how I could most effectually make known to my
countrymen the condition of the prisoners, I was
lent an English newspaper called the Guardian. This
paper contained, to me, the most interesting and
important information I ever had met with. I insert
what I copied from the paper.
Discovery of the Site of the Cities
of the Plain by M. De Saulcy,
Member of the French Institute.
‘M. De Saulcy’s arguments seem to us demonstrative,
and if so, the discovery is one of the most striking


within the whole range of biblical antiquity. The
disinterment of Nineveh is, as a matter of feeling, a
small matter compared with the discovery of Sodom
and Gomorrah. We do not remember to have read
anything of a more thrilling interest than this portion
of M. De Saulcy’s volumes. There is something so
strangely awful in the idea of these living monu-
ments of divine vengeance yet remaining, after
thirty-six centuries, with the actual marks of the
instrument of their overthrow still visible on their
blasted ruins.’
I was at Port Arthur and on other stations on
Tasman’s Peninsula for three years and half, and
during this time I was a most anxious observer of the
conduct of the authorities, and of the effect of their
regulations on the morals of the prisoners. I was in
the daily habit of conversing with prisoners, men of
almost all grades of society, transported for different
offences. Among these were men of family, some of
rare talents and great acquirements. I was made
acquainted with the early history of many of them,
and I saw with deep regret how thoroughly depraved
many of these highly gifted men, under the influence
of circumstances, had become. Some of the most
talented men I had ever known in my life I met with
in Port Arthur, and they were some of the most de-
depraved I had ever seen. People talk of education.
The best educated men I ever met in the penal
colonies were the most degraded and debased. If you
educate a man, if you add to his knowledge without.


at the same time, improving his natural disposition,
you do injury rather than good, and nothing can
more strikingly exemplify this fact than the state of
the colonies in Van Diemen’s Land.
‘There are crimes of a certain nature which so
thoroughly debase the human character that it is
beyond repentance. In many cases, after a long career
of vice, the heart is softened, and the repentance is
sincere and lasting. But the crime of Gomorrah is of
that nature, and so appalling in its consequences, it
brings the heart to such a state that it is dead to every
renovating influence. It hardens the heart to such a
degree that the only relief it finds is in inflicting
torments on others. Not ten men could be found in
the Cities of the Plain uncontaminated by this crime.
It is evident that the inhabitants could not be
purified, therefore they were destroyed; and the
account is handed to the world in sacred writ; and
there lie the remains of what was once the most
beautiful spot on the globe, as a warning; yes, as a
warning to governments and to nations. I am now
about to describe scenes, the description of which
will, in all probability, excite different and powerful
feelings.’
You must recollect that in what I have just read I
was writing to the people of America, and some time
or another I shall have much to say on the state of
that country in this particular.
‘I would avoid this were it possible with the per-
formance of the duty which I owe to God and my


country. There is no other mode of remedying the
monstrous evils, and of bringing the perpetrators to
justice, but by a description of the offences them-
selves, and of the lamentable consequences which
flow from them. Few things would give me greater
pain than, unnecessarily, to put upon paper a sentence
calculated to exite the anger of an American mother.
Is there an American mother who would condemn
me, were her sons subject to a system, the effect of
which I am about to describe ? I believe not. There
are English mothers, and these not a few, whose sons
are at this moment in situations infinitely worse than
death. I will go farther and say that to my knowledge
there were, and probably are, sons of American
mothers in similar situations, and subject to the like
consequences. Where could I go except to America
to make these things known?’ There is no fact in
history sustained by stronger evidence than that of
the destruction of the Cities of the Plain, and of the
cause which produced it. Has the English nation
nothing to fear? Does not the same all-powerful
Being exist ? Has He not the same hatred of the crime
as He had in the days of Abraham? Can I ask the
people of England questions of greater importance ?
Before any one condemn me, let him ask himself this
question : Is the writer doing anything displeasing to
the Almighty? Were he, at this moment, to be
placed before the tribunal of God, and this charge
made, would he be condemned ? I will rest my case
on the answer to this question. I had not been in the


40 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
office of Port Arthur many days, when a man was
brought there, charged with this offence, committed
under horrible circumstances.
Mr Frost here detailed the circumstances.
This first excited my suspicions. There was at
that time a young man with whom I was in constant
intercourse, who well knew Port Arthur. From him
I received information as to the great extent of this
crime. He pointed out to me men who were in the
practice of committing it; and he convinced me, too,
of the total indifference with which it was regarded
by the authorities. ‘There is a young man in the
carrying gang,’ said he, ‘just arrived from Hobart
Town ; the men are after him from all quarters. You
will have him in the office soon; the traps [con-
stables] are looking out.’ On the 9th September
1840, about five weeks after I was placed in the
office, this young man and another were brought to
the office and charged with this offence. Let me
claim your attention to this statement, for by it you
will perceive the truth of what I now assert, that the
authorities of Van Diemen’s Land were indifferent
to the commission of this great offence. I will prove
to your satisfaction that the feeling of the English
Government was of a similar kind, and I will prove
to you, in some future letters, that in the estimation
of the English and colonial authorities smoking was
deemed a greater offence than that of Gomorrah,
and punished with greater severity. It will be recol-
lected that I was present at this trial, and that my


description was taken from the record book at Port
Arthur. When a prisoner was brought to the office
and placed in the dock, the witness stood forward to
give his testimony; he informed the commandant of
the nature of the offence; the commandant after he
had heard the statement, directed the police clerk
what name to give to it. The witness, on this occasion,
was a very well-informed man, one who had seen
much of life. ‘Well, what have you to say against
these men?’ said the commandant. ‘Myself and my
fellow constables were in the bush, watching the
carrying gang. We had heard that abominable
practices had been carried on by some of them. We
saw these men in the act of committing an un-
natural crime.’ ‘What name shall I give it?’ said the
clerk. ‘Gross misconduct,’ said the commandant. It
was entered on the book as gross misconduct. The
constable was sworn: ‘My companion and myself
were in the bush, watching the carrying gang. We
saw the two prisoners in the act —’ ‘Stop!’ said the
commandant; ‘you witnessed a disgusting scene?’
‘We’, said the constable, ‘witnessed a disgusting
scene.’ The prisoners were sentenced to twelve
months’ hard labour in chains.
From i 840 to 1845 about half a dozen were tried
for this offence before the Supreme Court, found
guilty and sentenced to be hanged; not one was, I
understand, executed. In 1845 two men were tried
for this offence, committed under the most horrible
circumstances; they were found guilty and executed.


42 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
The power of a magistrate does not extend to try
men for felony; but he did try them; he did assume
the power, and he gave these men a less punishment
than if they had been charged with ‘having tobacco
in possession’. Instead of committing these two men
to Hobart Town, to be tried by the Supreme Court,
he gave the offence another name, in order to bring it
under his jurisdiction, and, by doing so, ‘he smothered
the thing’. Again, look at his conduct to the witness !
He stopped him, put words into his mouth, in order
to prevent the real crime from appearing ! Why was
this course pursued? The commandant knew that
the authorities at home, and in the colony, ‘wanted
to conceal the state of society among the prisoners’;
and he was aware that if he had committed these men
to be tried by the Supreme Court, ‘he would not have
pleased his masters’!
Let us now lay before America, and Great
Britain and Ireland, the state of society among the
convicts, ‘never forgetting’ that the cause was, and is,
a code ‘not equalled in severity in any part of the
civilised world’. During the administration of Sir
Eardley Wilmot, it was commonly reported in
Hobart Town that a great number of prisoners who
had just arrived from the Peninsula were in a
wretchedly diseased state. A Dr Lilley, the leading
Presbyterian minister of Hobart Town, went to the
Governor to inquire as to the truth of the matter.
You shall hear the result in the doctor’s own words.
In a few days, after the interview with the Governor,


a meeting of the Presbytery was held. On addressing
the meeting, the doctor uttered this language: ‘Sir
Eardley Wilmot permitted me to see the report of the
medical men from the mines. This account was of
the most revolting nature. There were eighty cases
of disease consequent on this horrible crime.’ In the
year 1854, just before I left Van Diemen’s Land, I
was talking to Dr Lilley; the suject was the state of
the prisoners. I asked him if he recollected what ap-
peared in the newspapers as to the interview between
him and the Governor. ‘Perfectly well,’ said the
doctor; ‘it was quite correct. Why do not you, who
have seen so much, publish an account of the state of
the prisoners?’ My answer was, ‘The proper time
has not arrived.’
There were in Van Diemen’s Land men from all,
or nearly all, countries, subject to the same brutal
treatment, and too often followed by the same effects.
It requires a person to pass through the different
gradations of punishment, such as was administered
in the penal colonies, to be sensible to what a state
men may fall under the influence of circumstances.
This state of things shows, too, clearly, what men
possessed of power are capable of when subject to no
restraint—when far removed from public observation
and censure. This state of society, in a greater or
lesser degree, has existed in the penal colonies for
more than half a century and as the depravity in-
creased, the penal code increased in severity. May it
not be said that the Almighty is slow to anger ? The


44 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
state of society described by Sir William Molesworth
existed previously to 1840. The number of prisoners
subject to the code of Norfolk Island and Port
Arthur was small, compared to the number of
prisoners within the colony. In 1840 a new system
was introduced by Lord John Russell, called the
Probation System, which increased the punishments
and the depravity in a tenfold degree. Every prisoner
to Van Diemen’s Land was sent to a probation party
for one, two, three, and sometimes four years before
he was assigned to a master, and in these places sub-
ject to a code similar to that of Norfolk Island and
Port Arthur. What were the effects of this new
system? This system, the work of a reformed
Ministry and a reformed Parliament? Each pro-
bation station became a Gomorrah, full of crime,
misery and disease! Yes, and this state was well
known to the Ministry and the Parliament, yet
thousands were yearly sent to these places, princip-
ally young men and boys, to a fate worse than death.
Just about this time I saw an extract from an
English paper; I insert a copy. ‘The Duke of
Richmond gave notice that if there were no remedy
for the fearful evils existing in the colony of Van
Diemen’s Land, as to the state of the convicts, he
would move for a committee of inquiry, for in no
country calling itself Christian was there a worse
state of depravity.’ There was not a member of
Parliament who was not well aware of this fearful
state, and yet not one man could be found to properly


expose it, and to trace the evil to its cause, that cause
being irresponsible power in the hands of vicious
men.
In addition to the fearful state which I have partly
described, there was another evil well known to the
authorities. It was almost impossible for a good-
looking youth to be sent to any of these places with-
out falling a victim to the hellish system, for if other
means failed he would be forced. A youth was sent
to the coal mines, in which were so many diseased
men. He resisted all attempts on his person. One day
in the mines six men laid hold of him, threw him
down, and four held him while two violated his
person. Attempts were made to hush up the matter;
he would hear nothing of the sort. The six men were
apprehended, committed to Hobart Town, tried by
the Supreme Court and found guilty. Two of them
were executed; I saw them hanged. The other four
were sent to Norfolk Island, there to carry on the
same practices.
Were I to stop here, I think I have made out a
case which must excite the indignation of every
honest man, to whatever nation he may belong; but
this forms a very small part of the charges which
might be brought and satisfactorily proved against
the aristocracy. Under the government of Colonel
Arthur an establishment was formed on Tasman’s
Peninsula, called Point Puer, to which boys of a
certain age were sent from Great Britain and Ireland
to be taught trades, to be reformed, to be made useful


46 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
members of society. Here were scenes which threw
Norfolk Island and Port Arthur into the shade!
Scarcely a boy ever left that place, among the many,
many thousands who were sent there, who did not fall
a wretched victim to the system. Here, too, the
authorities placed me in a situation to see the system
naked, for the records of the trials at Point Puer
passed through my hands. I was one day talking to a
very intelligent man, who had been at Point Puer for
a considerable time; he had acted as an overseer, and
saw much of the iniquity of the place; the subject
was the moral state of the boys. ‘Something happened
one evening at the Point,’ said he, ‘which distressed
me more than I can describe; I shall never forget it.
There was an exceedingly nice lad at the Point; he
had been well brought up. The big boys made many
attempts to reduce him to the same state as the rest;
they had, however, failed. One night, just before the
boys were locked up, several big boys got hold of him
and took him to some distance from the station; we
heard his cries, and they went to our hearts. “Help,
help, murder, murder, mercy, mercy, oh God, oh
God!”’ ‘What did you do?’ said I. ‘What did you
do?’ ‘Nothing, we could do nothing; if we had at-
tempted anything, the big boys would have killed us.
They succeeded. He is now grown to be a fine young
man; I meet him often in Hobart Town, but never
do I see him without thinking of that night. The
authorities in the colonies knew these things as well
as we did. Many a time have we urged on Captain


Booth the necessity of a different arrangement,
particularly as to the mode in which the boys sleep.
What we said amounted to nothing. The big boys
and the little ones slept in the same room, and I need
not tell you what followed. But’, said he, ‘it would
be unfair to throw all the blame on Captain Booth.
A plan was sent to the Home Government, by which
much might have been avoided; the answer was,
“the Home Government disapproved of the alter-
ation”.’
For three years and a half I was on Tasman’s
Peninsula; for twelve months I was in the office, and
during this period I was a most attentive observer of
all that took place, of the effects of prison discipline
upon the morals of those who were subject to it. It
appeared as though the authorities were determined
that I should see the thing in its most hideous aspect,
for after I had been in the police office twelve
months, and had acquired all the knowledge neces-
sary to lay the state of things before my countrymen,
they sent me from place to place throughout the
whole Island, and almost everywhere I went I
found the same practices prevailing, the same cruel-
ties and the same moral degradation. I do not think
that any other place in the world ever produced so
much misery as has arisen from the prison discipline
of Van Diemen’s Land. What is to be done to cure
this evil ? Will the people of England submit to such
things ? We talk of taxation, and very properly so, we
talk of the conduct of the authorities on various


matters, we hold their conduct in contempt, and we
scorn the actions of men who really deserve our
scorn; but what are all these things compared with
the terrible state of society which I have just des-
cribed ? What can be the cause of this I cannot con-
ceive, unless it arises from the same thing that has
brought you here this evening—the fact that the men
in the House of Commons have no feeling for the
people. I do believe that if the authorities were con-
vinced that every man sent as a prisoner from
England would be reduced to the state I have just
described, it would not occasion on their part one
moment’s regret. For many years I have been a very
attentive reader of the Bible; during the time I was
in Van Diemen’s Land, I was a very assiduous
student of that work, and the result of my investi-
gations has been a thorough belief of its contents.
We hear and read of things that have taken place
thousands of years ago, we have works handed down
to us from the times of the Greeks and the Romans,
the works of Homer, Demosthenes, Cicero, and no
man who is acquainted with the nature of testimony
can doubt the statements relative to the origin of
those works; yet there is nothing in the testimony
confirmatory of many of those old writers that can
carry with it half the weight of that which has been
discovered in corroboration of the state of society
among the Canaanites as described in the Old
Testament. The subject upon which I have been
addressing you is with me an all-engrossing one; I


can scarcely talk about anything else but the horrible
state of society in Van Diemen’s Land, and the
terrible consequences resulting from the severity of
the punishments inflicted on the prisoners. Are we, I
ask, to submit to this ? Is it a matter of indifference to
us that our countryment should be sent out, some-
times for the most trivial offences, to places where
they are treated worse than brutes, and where such
moral degradation as I have described arises from
such treatment ?
The course that I mean to pursue is this: On
coming to London, I called upon Mr Duncombe,
and put into his hand the pamphlet from which I
have been reading to you. I described to him many
things that are not mentioned in the pamphlet, and
he was perfectly horror struck. I mean, when
Parliament meets, to be up in London. I mean to
prepare petitions. I will take care that those petitions
contain such evidence as will satisfy every reflecting
man as to their truth. I will put these into the hands
of Mr Duncombe, and I have no doubt that he will do
his duty as on other occasions. We shall then see what
the wise men will do. Some time ago, after I had put
the pamphlet into the hands of Mr Duncombe, he
handed one to a gentleman who has taken an active
part on the transportation question. He sent down to
me for twenty-five or fifty copies, stating that he
wanted to place them in the hands of a committee of
the House of Lords, and a committee of the House of
Commons, in order that they might see the state of


50 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
society in Van Diemen’s Land and, if possible, do
something to alter the present system. But the com-
mittee of the Lords, notwithstanding the pamphlet
placed in their hands, have recommended that trans-
portation shall be again resorted to at some place
distant from the Australian colonies, and no doubt
with the same discipline and the same effects result-
ing from their policy. If a man, a father, a husband,
can hear and believe the truth of these statements
without having his best feelings excited, he scarcely
deserves the name of a man. I hope they will make a
proper impression upon you, and that in your
different circles and localities you will talk the matter
over; and should you be in need of a stimulant to in-
duce an endeavour to obtain a real reform in the
House of Commons, I believe you will find it in
what I have stated to you. No man can consider these
matters attentively without being anxious for a
change in the present system. If there be any truth in
revelation, and I dare say that most of those around
me believe there is, the system, unless changed, is
certain to produce the same results that were brought
about thousands of years ago in the most beautiful
cities in the world.
What are we asking for now as Chartists? A
change in the mode of electing members of the House
of Commons; and is not the present mode sufficient
to induce any man to take a part in bringing about a
reformation? In the year 1847 I was Mayor of
Newport. An election took place, two wealthy men


were candidates, and I will venture to say that more
than ,£20,000 was spent in bribing the different
electors. The present state of the elective franchise in
England is one, I think, that cries aloud for a change.
Just think for one moment of the sum of ,£20,000
being spent in an election for a small borough con-
taining probably 26,000 inhabitants, and all this to
induce men to come forward and vote for candidates
whom they believed in their consciences were unfit
for the position they sought. But there was one man
at that election whose name ought to be held by his
countrymen in veneration. He was a working man.
The contest was very close, and he was applied to by
the blues—they were the Tories—for his vote. The
person who applied to him took £2,00 out of his
pocket and laid it upon the table. ‘There,’ said he, ‘I
will give you that £2OO if you will vote for us.’ ‘No,’
said the man. But his wife was standing by him at the
time. I have generally found that there is most de-
pendence to be placed on the woman, but in this case
the wife said, ‘Take the money. Just think of the
consequences that would result to your family from
that £2OO. You know how poor you are, and what
good that will do you.’ The husband looked at the
money and said, ‘I know that it would do me a great
deal of good at present, but it would ultimately be a
curse to me. It is the wages of sin and, as such, I will
not take a farthing of it.’ (Applause.) Now, that man
is one in a thousand. I saw him in America, where
he died about six months ago. You will scarcely be


52 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
able to find another man in his situation in life,
perfectly sensible of the advantages that would result
from the possession of such a sum of money, but who
would nevertheless put it aside, despite the persuasion
of his wife, and refuse to take it.
A few words more, and I have done. When you
go home to your families, you will probably talk
these matters over, but will it end in talk ? Will you
not endeavour to reform the system that is productive
of such a state of society as I have described ? I trust
you will, I hope you will, as men, as Christians, as
fathers, do all in your power to change a system
which is a curse to the world, and I pray God that
he will impress on your hearts the necessity of
exertion on the part of each and all of you to realise
so desirable a result. (Cheers.)
EVENING LECTURE
The Chairman having announced that Mr Frost’s
lectures would be published, Mr Frost said:
I do not think a more effectual method of helping
forward the object we have in view could be adopted
than to place the truth before the people of this
country, and I am therefore very glad to hear that it
is intended to lay before the community some of the
scenes that have been described today. Sometimes a


powerful impression may be made by talking, but
when you have a book before you, when you read it
and go over it again and again, the impression is
much more likely to be permanent and lasting. It
may not be uninteresting to you to hear something
of my companions in misfortune—Williams and
Jones. They are both in Van Diemen’s Land.
Williams is engaged in seeking for coal mines, and
Jones keeps an hotel in Hobart Town. Williams
has every prospect of making a good fortune, but I
do not think Jones has been quite so lucky. Some
time ago Williams found coal in Hobart Town. As
soon as he had begun to seek for coal, the wise men
out there came to the pit where he was at work and
did all in their power to induce him to give up the
attempt. They said there was no coal there; but
Williams is not the sort of man to be easily dissuaded
from such an attempt as he was then making, and he
at length succeeded in obtaining coal. If he had re-
mained there I think he might have done better than
engaging in a larger undertaking. However, he sold
his moiety of the discovery for £BOO, and with that
capital is now engaged in seeking for coal at a place
near Launceston. If he finds it he will soon make his
fortune.
I remember one day, while I was in the office at
Port Arthur, a signal-man came to me and said, ‘I
have bad news, Frost; very bad news.’ ‘What is the
matter?’ asked I. ‘Williams has bolted.’ ‘What,’ I
exclaimed, ‘Zephaniah Williams?’ ‘Yes,’ was the


54 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
answer. This intelligence gave me a great deal
trouble, for I well knew the consequences of bolting
in Van Diemen’s Land. No one who has not been
there can have seen such miserable things as the con-
victs would risk their lives in for the purpose of
escaping. In the course of a few hours news came
from the commandant that it was Zephaniah Wil-
liams who had bolted; I had had some doubt at first
whether it could be him. He and three others, it was
stated, had a canoe made, then left the mines, and
got to the opposite shore on Forrest’s Peninsula. It
was their intention to have gone on board some ships
that were lying at a distance—American whalers. It
is no very uncommon thing for convicts at Van
Diemen’s Land to escape to the whalers, and some of
them have borne sufferings which you might sup-
pose human nature incapable of enduring in their
attempts to get away. Two young men were once
brought to Port Arthur. They had been for several
days on board a whaler, concealed in an oil cask. The
authorities searched the ship all over, and at last they
made use of bayonets, one of which, being thrust
through the cask, struck one of the poor fellows on
the head. This made him sing out, and his place of
concealment being thus discovered, he and his com-
panion were seized. They were taken to Hobart
Town, before the Governor, and I will now relate a
fact to convince you that all the convicts in Van
Diemen’s Land are not so bad as they are generally
supposed to be; indeed, I believe that bv very far the


greater part of those men, if properly treated, might
eventually become very useful members of society.
But the mode in which they are treated drives them
to desperation, and their very worst passions then be-
come excited. Sir John Franklin, the Governor, said
to those two men, ‘ You have been on board a certain
ship, and you have been found in that ship; now, if
you will come forward and give evidence against the
captain of that ship, so that he may be convicted, he
shall be fined in a penalty of /500, and you shall
receive a moiety of that penalty, in addition to which
one of you shall have a ticket of leave, and the other
a conditional pardon.’ This was one of the greatest
temptations that could have been held out to men so
circumstanced, particularly the offer of the ticket of
leave and the conditional pardon; and yet those two
men refused the offer: they would not come forward
and betray the man who had treated them kindly.
This shows that there are some men out there who
are not entirely lost to virtue, and I do believe that
the opinions entertained of the convicts generally are
not just. Some of the worst men are to be found out
there; but they are not all bad men; for lam thor-
oughly persuaded that if all the innocent men who
are sent out to Van Diemen’s Land were placed to-
gether, they would form a goodly number. One
time an old superintendent of a probation station
said to me, ‘I was talking today with one of the swell
mob, and he told me that he committed an act at one
time in England which weighed heavily on his mind


56 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
at that moment. “In fact,” said he, “there is not a
day passes over me that I do not feel the conse-
quences of the great sin I have committed. I was a
pickpocket, I do not mean to disguise the fact, and
was well known to the police. One day I was in a
crowd, and picked a gentleman’s pocket of a pocket-
book; but he missed the book almost immediately
and gave the alarm. Some of the police, who were at
a distance, saw me and were making towards me. I
knew perfectly well that they were aware I belonged
to the swell mob, so I slipped the pocket-book into
the pocket of a person standing before me. When the
policemen came up and were going to lay hold of me,
I pointed to the other man, who was searched, and
the book found in his pocket. I went before the
magistrates and gave evidence that I saw the man
take the pocket-book out of the gentleman’s pocket.
The man was tried, convicted on my evidence; he is
now in Van Diemen’s Land, and has been here for
the last two years. Some time after that I was lagged
for committing an offence of a similar kind, and here
I am; but not a day passes over my head that does not
bring me great grief to think that I should have been
the means of sending to this place an innocent man
who was guilty of no offence at all.” ’
I can assure you that there is no small number of
innocent persons sent out there. I knew a young
woman in Hobart Town, at whose house I lived for
some years; she was then married. A more virtuous
woman I believe never left England. She had lived


in London years before, and was about to be married
to a young man who was foreman in a cooper’s shop.
Apartments had been taken and the young woman
and her relations had gone to the apartments pre-
paratory to the marriage, which was to have taken
place in two or three days. Her intended husband
purchased some knives of one of the men in his
employ; but he did not know that they had been
stolen from a gentleman’s house, whither some of the
coopers had been sent to do some work. The foreman
gave the parcel to the landlady of the house where he
and his intended wife were to live. It was a brown
paper parcel, and that was put into one of the rooms.
The young woman never opened it, nor did she
know what the contents were. One of the persons
who had stolen the knives gave information to the
police as to the party who had bought the knives. A
policeman went to the house where the young
woman was and said, ‘I have come to search this
house.’ ‘Well,’ said she, ‘my house is open to you.’
‘What is this?’ said the constable. He laid hold of the
parcel, opened it, and found it to contain the very
knives of which he was in search. The young woman
was tried, convicted and sentenced to seven years’
transportation, she knowing no more of the circum-
stances than I did, who was in England at the time.
These facts will be sufficient to convince you that
there are many in Van Diemen’s Land who ought
not to be there. What are we to think when we find
that persons who are charged with offences of which


5b HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
they have never been guilty are sent out there and
treated in the manner I have already described? I
know a man there who was what is termed a ‘cracks-
man’. During the time I was there I was very
anxious to converse with these men, and to obtain as
much information as I could relative to their former
mode of life, and how they had become the degraded
characters that many of them were. The young man
I have just alluded to was formerly one of the first
‘cracksmen’ in London. The word ‘cracksman’
means housebreaker. He told me of circumstances
that convinced me of the innocence of a person who
had been transported to Van Diemen’s Land for a
robbery that had been committed in the city. ‘l’, said
the cracksman, ‘was suspected, and a policeman in
plain clothes was sent to apprehend me. I was in the
habit of frequenting a certain house, and the waiter
came to me one night and told me that a person
wanted to speak to me. I went to the door and found
a well-dressed man. He asked me if my name were
and I told him it was. He then
put his hand into his pocket and said, “I have a war-
rant for your apprehension.” “Oh !” said I, “well,
I’ll come.” As we were going along in a lonely street,
I took out a life preserver which I always carried
with me, and struck the policeman as hard a blow as
I could strike. He fell, apparently dead. He was ill for
a long time and his life was despaired of. Another
person of similar description to myself was ap-
prehended and tried for the offence. The policeman


Swore to him, and he was transported. A few months
afterwards as I was going along Regent’s Park, I met
the policeman with a handkerchief round his head. A
superintendent was with him. Our eyes met; I was
satisfied he recognised me and I made off.’
But to return to my companion Williams; after
he had absconded, he was apprehended, or rather he
gave himself up at a place called Richmond. He was
brought back to Port Arthur and tried. Two persons
who absconded with him proved that he did not go
voluntarily, but that they forced him to accompany
them, and yet, notwithstanding this, the command-
ant sentenced him to two years’ hard labour in
chains, a punishment which he expiated before the
door of the office, breaking stones from a stone heap
under the eye of a very watchful overseer. But the
worst of it was that he was put into what are called
the ‘cells’. These cells are about seven feet long by
four feet in width. They are quite dark, and the oc-
cupant is not allowed even a knife to eat his food
with. They throw in to him in the dark, as they
would a dog, a little food, and there is nothing but an
old rug for him to lie upon. If he is wet he is obliged
to remain in his wet clothes till the following morn-
ing, and I believe the treatment that Williams re-
ceived on those occasions weakened his constitution
very materially. Before that time he was a hearty
man, but when I left Port Arthur he was not so
hearty as I am now.
A shocking circumstance occurred in connection


60 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
with two men, Hill and M’Kay, who bolted with
him. Hill was a fine young man. He had been a
constable in Hobart Town and became attached to a
young woman. He petitioned to be allowed to marry
her; but the petition was refused. He became desper-
ate, committed some offence, and was sent to Port
Arthur. When Hill and his companion had got upon
the main island, M’Kay, who had received a great
injury from a sawyer working some distance from
where he then was, fell in with his enemy, and
murdered him. Hill was not present at the time.
They afterwards broke into a gentleman’s house,
and a large reward was offered for their apprehen-
sion. After the murder, the two went to the hut of
some sawyers, with whom they had some rum. When
they went away they promised to return next day,
but in the interim the sawyers had seen the placards
offering £IOO for their apprehension, and a free
pardon to anyone giving the information, if he were
a prisoner. They therefore seized the fugitives on
their return to the hut, and those men were eventually
hanged.
Mr Frost went on to remark that in his belief
nine out of ten of the offences committed by convicts
were created by the severity of the laws and the
cruelty of those who administered them. There was
no place in which justice was less understood or less
practised than in the penal colonies. The authorities
had no notion of justice; they did not consider the
difference between innocence and guilt, but were as


ready to punish an innocent man as a guilty one.
There was a magistrate whom he knew, who was a
most corrupt fellow. The only way to gain a point
with him was by a bribe, for he was always ready to
receive presents of any description. It was no un-
common thing for anyone having an assigned ser-
vant who had done anything that displeased his
master, to send him to the police magistrate with a
present and a letter. In the letter the servant’s of-
fence was set forth, and the magistrate, without try-
ing the man, would order him to be flogged and sent
home. On one occasion, however, a police magistrate
made a trifling mistake. A servant was sent with a
letter and a present, but as he suspected something
wrong, he persuaded another man to be the mes-
senger. The result was that the wrong man was
flogged, and the injured person, who happened to be
a freeman, took proceedings against the magistrate
that were only compromised by the payment of a
very large sum of money.
On another occasion a shepherd, who was an
assigned servant, was driving some sheep, when he
was met by a man of some distinction, moreover a
military man—and in his (Mr Frost’s) opinion they
were the worst men to whom power could be given.
They brought into the civil service the same spirit
which actuated the military service, and any de-
parture from what they considered the respect due
to the officers was in their opinion a high crime. The
convict shepherd was subsequently taken up on a


62 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
charge of having passed a magistrate without touch-
ing his hat. He was tried by the very magistrate to
whom he had failed in respect, and that functionary
at once assumed the somewhat singular position of
accuser, witness, and judge combined! The result
was that the shepherd received thirty-six lashes, and
when liberated after his flogging he discovered that
he had lost a portion of the sheep he had previously
been tending. On reporting what had occurred to his
master, the latter, instead of pitying the man for the
treatment he had received, caused him to receive
another 36 lashes for having lost the sheep! On
another occasion a ticket-of-leave convict dunned a
magistrate for money owing to him. The method of
payment resorted to was unique. The magistrate had
the man closely watched, and after a time the poor
fellow was brought up on a charge of breaking some
one of the government regulations, convicted, and
sent to Port Arthur for two years. Whatever prop-
erty that man possessed would all have been taken too,
by the crown or by that magistrate, and he dare say
kept by him, for when persons of that description got
hold of property they generally stuck to it and did not
like to let it go.
The mode of administering justice in Van Die-
men’s Land, independent of the cruelty he had
spoken of, was the strangest he had ever known. All
his (Mr Frost’s) hearers had read of Sir John
Franklin. He knew Sir John well and could affirm
that a more brutal man probably never existed, nor


one less fitted for the situation in which he was
placed. A constable who lived some distance from
Hobart Town had a wife who, besides being a
woman of some education, was possessed of great
personal attractions. A police magistrate residing in
the same district attempted, though unsuccessfully,
to seduce this woman, but she repelled him with
indignation and scorn. The husband, when informed
of this outrage, wrote a letter to Sir John Franklin,
who was at that time the Governor of Van Diemen’s
Land, but as the letter was, and very naturally so,
somewhat strongly worded, Sir John was thrown
into a violent passion—not at learning the conduct of
the magistrate, but because of the language made use
of by the constable in describing his wrongs. Sir John
Franklin was enraged to find that the constable had
spoken in disrespectful terms of his superior officer,
and in the end, although he dismissed the magistrate,
he dismissed the constable also.
Only yesterday the statue of a great man, or of a
so-called great man, was fixed in a conspicuous part
of Manchester—the statue of the late Duke of
Wellington. Probably, said Mr Frost, there never
lived in this world a more unjust man than the Duke
of Wellington. He acted upon a principle which it
will be sufficient for me to lay before you in order to
convince you that he deserved the character I have
given him. Never, in the whole course of his life,
from the very moment he possessed power as a
military man, did he nor would he listen to the


64 HORRORS OF CONVICT LIFE
complaint of an inferior officer against a superior. I
have no doubt that those who are acquainted with
the conduct of the Duke of Wellington will admit
this statement to be true. Never did any man in the
world discover a want of justice, morality and right
feeling more than he who could conduct himself in
this way, and yet that man is held up to the vener-
ation of mankind, and thousands were yesterday
assembled to witness the inauguration of a statue to
perpetuate his memory. Is there any prospect of a
sound political change in this country while men are
thus ever ready to worship whatever is possessed of
power? I can see no difference between the putting
up of that statue in Manchester and the conduct of
the Babylonians in worshipping the golden image.
While men are ready to act in this manner, while they
continue to submit to those who are possessed of
power, regardless of the way in which that power is
exercised, it is useless for us to talk of the Charter.
In the case I have mentioned, Sir John Franklin
found fault with the constable because he had spoken
in disrespectful terms of his superior officer. A
gentleman who happened to hold a high official ap-
pointment in the colony, and who was with Sir John
at the time said, ‘But consider the matter a moment
before you decide. What would have been your
situation if any one had attempted to take liberties
with your wife? Would you not have felt and acted
as this man has done under similar circumstances?’
‘Oh !’ answered Sir John; ‘but that is no justification.


He should have spoken in respectful terms of his
superior officer; that is what I blame him for not
having done.’ ‘But’, rejoined the other, ‘how is a
man to be respectful towards a man who has attemp-
ted to commit the greatest outrage that can be
perpetrated against a married man ?’ But Sir John did
not see the matter in that light and he said, ‘Well, I
will discharge them both.’ When that constable
afterwards applied to be restored to his appointment
and set forth how badly he had been used, Sir John
Franklin said to him, ‘I think I have acted with the
greatest justice; I have discharged you for speaking
of your superior officer in disrespectful terms, and
dismissed the magistrate for ill-treating your wife.’
That was the Governor of Van Diemen’s Land ! His
conduct from the beginning to the end was of a
similar kind.
Mr Frost then went on to argue for the necessity
of a change in the government, and having gone at
some length into the doctrines of Chartism, he
resumed his seat amid loud applause.


Set in 11-point Monotype Caslon,
leaded one point.
Printed at the Nag’s Head Press,
Christchurch, New Zealand, in an
edition of 150 numbered copies.
This is number
