

Health Act 1890. —Section 122.
THE BUBONIC PLAGUE.—REGULATIONS FOR
PREVENTION OR MITIGATION.
THE provisions contained in section 122 of the Health Act 1890,
having been directed by the Governor in Council to be put
in force in Victoria, the Board of Public Health, by virtue of
the powers conferred by the said section, and of every other
power enabling the said Board in this behalf, doth make the
following Regulations for preventing or mitigating the epidemic
infectious or contagious disease known as the bubonic plague,
that is to say ;
I. The Regulations made by the Board of Public Health on
the sth September, 1900, are hereby revoked ;
IT. The owner, agent, master, or person in charge of any
vessel arriving in any waters of Victoria from any place pro-
claimed as plague-infected or any place which may hereafter
be so proclaimed, hereinafter called the suspected vessel, shall
observe, do, or carry out, or cause to be observed, done, or
carried out, all the matters and things following, namely:—
_ f■ He shall keep the suspected vessel off from the wharf or
pier by a distance of at least 4 feet by means of fenders sub-
stantially constructed (preferably of wood), and shall prevent
listing towards the wharf or pier, and shall place all fenders
directly opposite mooring posts or piles.
2. He shall apply and keep applied to each end of every hawser
and rope connecting the suspected vessel with the wharf or pier-
fa) tar kept constantly in a sticky condition by repeated apnli-
cations, and—(6) either a funnel, at least 12 inches in diameter,
or a stout metal disc at least 12 inches in diameter, and so con-
structed and so placed (one at each end) as to prevent transit of
rats, the application of tar being made just beyond the side of
the suspected vessel and just above the end attached to the
wharf or pier, the tar being applied over a length of at least
1 foot at each end of each hawser and rope, and the application
of the funnel or disc being made at each of the two tarred
portions of the hawser or rope. The tar may be applied on
bagging fixed round the hawser or rope.
3. He shall tar the fender and the fender-slings on such parts
as to prevent migration of rats, and shall keep the tar in a sticky
condition by repeated applications.
4. He shall not use any net between the suspected vessel and
the wharf or pier, whether in connexion with the gangway or the
hatches, unless the central part of the net for a width of at least
18 inches be thoroughly tarred, or be effectually covered with
thoroughly tarred material, and the tar be kept in a sticky con-
dition by repeated applications, and shall remove any such net,
though tarred, between Seven p.m. and Six a.m., except only in
case cargo is being discharged or delivered during that time.
5. He shall draw up and keep drawn up all gangways from
the suspected vessel when not required for the discharging or the
receiving of cargo from Seven p.m. until Six a.m., and shall apply
tar to each gangway while down over a length of at least 1 foot at
each end, just beyond the side of the suspected vessel and just
above the end resting on the wharf or pier, and shall keep the
tar in a sticky condition by repeated applications.
6. He shall suspend over the side of the suspected vessel along
the wharf or pier four sets (or more if required) of electric or
other lights, distributed so as to afford thorough illumination fore
and aft along the whole length of the side of the suspected vessel.
7. He shall supply one watchman by night, shall furnish
him with a stick, and see that he constantly parades on
wharf or pier alongside the suspected vessel from stem to stern,
and that he takes all practicable measures to prevent the passage
of rats between the suspected vessel and the wharf or pier. He
shall supply the watchman with a pot of tar and a brush, and
see that he renews the tarring of gangways, nets, hawsers, and
ropes, so as to keep the tar in a sticky condition.
*. He shall completely obstruct all pipes, ports, cabin scuttles,
and other holes in the side of the suspected vessel next to the
wharf or pier, and shall keep the same obstructed while the
suspected vessel is alongside, in order to prevent both ingress and
egress of rats.
9. He shall prevent any refuse matter from being discharged
from the suspected vessel into the river.
10. He shall not allow any vessel or any lighter alongside
the suspected vessel unless precisely the same conditions are
observed on the lightering side of the suspected vessel as set
out above on the wharf or pier side of the suspected vessel.
11. He shall not allow the landing of any rags, or of any old
cordage or second-hand clothing or bedding, or of any used or
returned produce-bags whatever from the suspected vessel.
12. He shall tar the wharf the whole of the length of the
moorings of the suspected vessel to a width from the edge of
I foot, and shall keep the tar in a sticky condition by repeated
applications.
111. The owner, agent, master, or person in charge of any
lighter or vessel going alongside any suspected vessel as herein-
before defined, shall observe, do, or carry out, or cause to be
observed, done, or carried out, all the matters and things
following, namely :
1. He shall keep the lighter or vessel from the suspected
vessel by a distance of at least 4 feet by means of fenders sub-
stantially constructed (preferably of wood), and shall prevent
listing towards the lighter or vessel.
2. He shall apply and keep applied to each end of every hawser
and rope connecting the lighter or vessel with the suspected
vessel—
(а) Tar kept constantly in a sticky condition by repeated
applications, and
(б) Either a funnel at least 12 inches in diameter or a stout
metal disc at least 12 inches in diameter, and so con
structed and so placed (one at each end) as to preven'
transit of rats, the application of tar being made jus*
beyond the side of the suspected vessel and jusi
beyond the side of the lighter or vessel, the tar being
applied over a length of at least 1 foot at each end of
each hawser rope, and the application of the
funnel or disc being made at each of the two tarred
portions of the hawser or rope. The tar may be
applied on bagging fixed round the hawser or rope.
3. He shall tar the fender and the fender slings on such parts
as to prevent migration of rats, and shall keep the tar in a sticky
condition by repeated applications.
4. He shall not use any net between the suspected vessel and
the lighter or vessel, whether in connexion with the gangway or
the hatches, unless the central part of the net, for a width of at
least 18 inches, be thoroughly tarred or be effectually covered
with thoroughly tarred material, and the tar be kept in a sticky
condition by repeated applications, and he shall remove any
such net, though tarred, between Seven p.xn. and Six a.m.,
except only in case cargo is being discharged or delivered during
that time.
h. He shall draw up, and keep drawn up, all gangways from
the suspected vessel when not required for the discharging or
the receiving of cargo from Seven p.m. until Six a.m., and shall
apply tar to each gangway while down over a length of at least
1 foot at each end just beyond the side of the suspected vessel
and just beyond the side of the lighter or vessel, and shall keep
the tar in a sticky condition by repeated applications.
6. He shall supply one watchman by night, shall furnish him
with a stick, and see that he constantly parades the lighter or
vessel from stem to stern, and that he takes all practicable mea-
sures to prevent the passage of rats between the suspected vessel
and the lighter or vessel. He shall supply the watchman with
a pot of tar and a brush, and see that he renews the tarring of
gangways, nets, hawsers, and ropes so as to keep the tar in a
sticky condition.
Any person who fails to comply with any of these Regulations
or is guilty of any neglect or disobedience thereof, is, by section 326
of the Health Act 1890, thereby guilty of an offence against that
Act, and is liable to a penalty not exceeding Twenty pounds
and to a penalty not exceeding Five pounds nor less than Twenty
shillings for each day during which such offence is continued
besides any expenses which may be incurred in remedying his-
default.
Dated at Melbourne this 6th day of March, 1901.
By order of the Board of Public Health,
J. W. COLVILLE,
Secretary.
By Authority: Robt. S. Brain, Government Printer, Melbourne.


