

THE DEATH OF THE
LORD’S SAINTS.
A SERMON BY THE
EEV. ANDREW GARDINER, M.A.,
Delivered in the Glebe Presbyterian
Church, Sydney, on Sabbath Morning,
23rd April, 1876.
SYDNEY:
JOHN liUTTON, PRINTER, 257, RILEY-
STBEET.


HYMN CCXCYI,
3 As Jesus died and rose aga
Victorious from the dead
So His disciples rise, and r
With their triumphant 1
4 The time draws nigh, wher
Christ shall with shouts <
And the last trumpet’s awi
Tire heavens and earth si
5 Then they who live shall cl
And they who sleep shall
The graves shall yield their
And earth’s foundations
6 The saints of God from de
With joy shall mount oi
The heavenly hosts with p:
Shall meet them in the s
7 Together to their Father’s 1
With joyful hearts they g
And dwell for ever with the
Beyond the reach of woe.
8 A few short years of evil p
We reach the happy sho;
Where death-divided Men
Shall meet to part no mo


W '/rfgZ%
yy sieir,jvnon^r.
BY THE REV. ANDREW GARDINER, M.A.
“ Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of His saints - Psalm cxvi. 15.
Is there not much inconsistency in the
nay we Christians mourn for our dead ?
We believe in the resurrection of the body
and the life everlasting We know that
our dying friends who are rrnited to Christ
are entering into this glorious and endless
li F e. We know, moreover, that death is
the end of sorrow and sin here as well as
the beginning of infinite happiness here-
after. Yet how do we deport ourselves
when loved ones in Jesus are taken?
Most strangely indeed believing thus.
The room of death is for the most part a
place of bitter and hopeless grief. And
at our funerals and in all our mourning
how little there is to remind us that death
is gain—that it is far better—that it is to
be with Christ. Nay, we often speak of
the death of the saint as if it were a
great loss. When we see one cut'down n


the midst of his days and usefulness;
sorrowfully we speak of the great calamity,
and the mysterious ways of God, and
think how much better it might have been,
if he had been spared. Now is all this
right? I am sure it is not. Notice I
speak not of “the natural tears we drop ”
over the ravages of death ; but of the un-
mixed grief that will not be cmforted.
This is wrong and inconsistent in Chris-
tians. Ah, if we had the faith in God and
in His Book which we profess, 1 think
there would be more of g’adness and less
of sorrow at a Christian's death. The
thought of the future would stay our
bowing tears and we should be able sin-
cerely to say, “Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord.” Why should w'e
lament as w r e do those who have gone to
happiness and glory ? The old Puritans
did better who carried the coiHu on the
shoulders of the saints, and sang a Psalm
as they went to the grave. In
heaven there is gladness when a good
man dies. W hile we are weeping below,
all above are rejoicing, for another re-
deemed one has come safely home. So in
our text we read, “ Precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of His saints.”
Friends, let such thoughts as these in-
fluence ns. In all our mourning for our


beloved, let us never lose sight of the
bright, and happy future. Let us not
doubt, or repine, or speak hardly of what
the Lord has done. Be sure it is well.
There is more cause for joy, than for
sorrow if we knew all. ‘ ‘ Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of His
saints.”
I. We shall first speak of the charac-
ter DESCRIBED IN THE TEXT. “ THE
Lord’s Saints.”
The Lord’s saints! A peculiar ex-
pression. It describes a peculiar people.
You know the term “ saints ” signifies
“holy ones;” and who are they
who in such a world as this wear such
a name? All of us have come into the
world sinners and not saints. By
nature our hearts are evil, and by
practice we have wandered far from God.
Sin has spoiled all our thoughts, and
words, and actions. We a;e not saints
of the Lord by birth, and certainly we have
not become such by any efforts of our
own. Poor human nature, for thou art not
only thus vile, but thou art helpless! We
have not only got far away from God,
but we cannot return. A sinner cannot
make himself a saint. And yet we read
of the “ Lord’s saints,” and we know that
the're are men and women in this w> rl I


who deserve the name. In what nystori mis
way have they come into their good
estate of holiness ? By the power of the
Gospel under the graci us influence of the
Holy Sridh To every shin r God comes
with an oTer of pardon. He makes this
offer on the sure ground of the sac ifico
and mediation of Jesus Chr'sh Though
man is a sinner—a sinner doomed—he
may be stv. d. For the Son of God has
taken his place, > orne his sin, and suffered
his doom. The Holy One having taken
our place every claim of justice has
b en satisfied, and for Christ’s sake the
sinner who believes in Christ is .fully for-
given and regarded as holy. This is the
Gospel, and this Gospel comes to every
man —to you and to me. B lieve and Jive,
Christ has suffered, and we need not suffer
if we accept Him as our substitute. Our
.substitute Ah, the whole Gospel is in
that one word. “The Lord hath laid on
Him the iniquity of ns all.” “The
blood of Jesus Christ His .Son cleauseth
ns f om all sin.”
But, my de>r friends, here is a strange
thing to which I believe most who have
accepted Christ can testify. The Gospel
thus offered is at (i st rej. There is
something repellant in the thought «.f
salvation by the death of the Son of God.


The natural heart is enmity against such a
Gospel. No, the sinner dees not Ihe
God’s way of peace. He had much rather
it had been some other way than ibis way of
mercy and of blood. He had much rather
it had been by woiks. Ch, what wou.d
he not have done, what would he not
have given, what would he, not have
'suffered if that had been the way. It is
thus Ihat the sinner usually treats the
Gospel when it is first presented to him.
He stands and looks at it finding many
faults with it. He often stands there
long. Too often, God help him, he never
gets any farther than this. Eut if he
does get farther, it is by the aid of God.
What is it but the spirit of God tl at
leads a man to accept God’s offer. It is
no spiirit of ours—it is God helping ns,
and so from hi ginning to end, it is all
of grace. Thus by the power of thejSpirit
lie accepts the Gospel, and finds joy, and
peace in believing, lie is a Christian now,
but w'e do not yet call him a saint,
though doubtless in a blessed sense he is
one of the Lord’s holy ones. He is
accepted in Christ, and in that acceptance
he is safe. He has passed ov<r to the
Lord’s side, and the battle with sin just
begin*. There arc evil tendencies to bo
oiC.come within; old temptations have


not lost all their power ; and the world
has still many attractions. So the fight
begins. It is hard work. He who
says it is easy to be a Christian do°s not
know much about it. It needs courage
and strength and much watching, for the
devil does his best against a follower of
the Lord. The Christian is not able for
such an adversary, who can attack him at
every point. But again and always the
Spirit of God comes to His aid. With
that Divine help he is able by little and
little to drive the evil out. But even thus,
who will not say that it is hard fighting.
Often the Christian almost despairs when
he thinks of his poor success. Ah, that is
when we forget about our Leader and lose
our Divine help. Coir age, Christian, the
power of God is with thee. Jesus,
thy mighty Saviour, is with thee. He is
more than all that can be against thee.
Trust in Him. On, on, on, success will be
yours in the long run. Down with selfish-
ness, and sloth and envy, and hatred, and
pride, and every sin that meets us on the
way to God. Hold fast all the graces of
the Gospe'—faith, virtue, knowledge,
temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly
kindness, charity. He will help you as
you go. Every step nearer Him : every
day more like Him. In God's time you


will be owe of those to whom our text
gives the most honourable name of the
“ Lord’s saints.”
11. The event referred to in the text—•
“The death of the Lord’s saints.”
, Death is an enemy whom we have all to
meet—saints and sinners. That is a
truism, but it is no less solemn truth,
needing much to be uttered, for but fcw of
us realise to purpose the truth of our
mortality. Death has passed on all men.
The enemy is inexorable ; he cannot be
entreated by promises or prayers. He is
inevitable; we cannot escape him by
flight, nor avoid him by concealment. We
must all meet him—young and old, weak
and strong, saint and sinner.
“To every man upon this earth
Death comctli soon or late,”
To some of you the thought of death
is terrible ; what must he the reality ?
It will come And if it come to you as
you are, you will not stand before it. It
will carry you away into the region of
everlasting despair and sorrow Ah,
death to the wicked is terrible, teriblr,
but not to the good man -the saint of
the Lord. Doubtless, it is ever solemn,
but'for good reasons the Christian can
contemplate it wi’hont terror, and can lie
down to meet it confidently, calmly,


gladly. Here are two of these reasons—■
1. It is appointed by the Lord. So
indeed is the death of every man, but the
thought cannot minister consolation to the
man who lias God for an enemy. But to
the man who knows that In's God is a
Father reconciled to him in Christ, it is a
source of the greatest confidence that his
death like his life is ordered of the Lord.
Oh Christian, death will not harm yon
which comes from Him. It is appointed.
He knows all. Death may come suddenly,
and surprise you and many weeping
friends, but it will not surprise Him. It
may come to you in some lonely place,
away from every human eye, but He—
your Father—God will see you there. It
may be of some mysterious malady of
which the physician knows but little,
but He understands. Appointed by the
Lord ! When we remember this we can
say with the saints of old—“ All the
days of my appointed time will I wait
till the change come.” Brethren, let ns
trust God more, and we shall fear death
less, and when our time comes we shall
he able, like many of His holy ones
to sing with triumph the familiar lines —
“Yea, though I walk in death’s dark vale,
Yet will I fear none ill;
For Thou art vith me and thy lod
And staff, me comfort still.”


2. Fut here L the other reason why a
(Christian may meet death w ithout terror.
r l'o him death'is gain—great gain. For a
saint to d e is lo exchange weakness for
s rength, temptation for security, misery
for happiness, time for eternity, and earth
for heaven. Our Saviour’s resurrection is
the pledge of ours ; in Him death was
conquered, and in Him we shall rise.
“ Thanks be unto God who giveth us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Yes, He has taken the terror from the
grave ; and to death He has given names
not full of fear but bright with hope.
It is not death—it is only change, it is a
sleep, it is to be wdth Himself, it is far
better, it is the going down of stars or
sun.
“ There is no death! the stars go down
To rest upon some fairer shore,
And bright in heaven’s jewelled crown,
They shine for evermore.”
Oh death ! death ! I trust in Christ and
T fear not thee. Thou art hut a servant
of my Lord, obeying His commands, and
thy coining but 1 akt sme to Him. ‘‘ My
life is hid with Christ in God, and when
(Jirist who is rny life shall appear, then
shall I also appear with Him in glory.”
111. The statement of the text regard-
ing this event— “ Precious in the sight
oi the Lord is the death of His saints.”


Ts that not a somewhat strange expres-
sion? Though we believe as we have
spoken regarding the death of the
righteous, yet we wonder at the phrase,
“precious death.” To us it is not pre-
cious. Death is tenible, and with fear
and awe we bury our dead ones out of our
sight. But His thoughts are not as our
thoughts, and this strange text is trim,
“ Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of His saints. ”
The saints are precious to the Lord in
death, because they were precious in life.
“ His saints.” Has He not called them by
many an endearing name ! They are His
own—His loved ones. They are His
jewels. 'They are His friends —His
children ; and all through life He has led
them with a Father’s care; Time does not
make alteration in His love ; He loveth to
the end. He is faithful unto death and in
death. Oh unchanging One, we bless Thee
for the words, “Precious in the sight of
the Lord is the death of His saints.”
But again, the death of the saints is
precious because in death most precious
graces flourish. Then it is that a man s
religion is put to the test. It is easy to
trust God in the day of health, and iu the
sunshine of prosperity, but in weakness


and pain, and death how difficult !
When a mm is lying on a dying bed, his
faith must be strong and true. But blessed
be God, the fai ; h that is in Christ never
faileth then. In death it grows stronger
and stronger. Oh what joyful confidence
we find in dying Christians ; and in
the room of death how real God and Christ
and heaven and eternal glory become.
But the other day one whom we are this
day mourning said confidently, though
suffering and weak, “ Though He slay me
yet will I tiust Him.” Oh precious death
that exhibits such precious faith ! And
this is not the only grace that death
attests. There are love and Christian
joy. As death draws near Christ becomes
more and more ; and the dying one fondly
utters words that speak of His love—“My
Beloved is mine and lam His. He is to
me the chiefest among ten thousand, yea,
He is altogether lovely.” And have you
not been surprised at the joy which many
Christians manifest in death —a joy so
common that we often hear the phrase—
“a happy deathbed?” Indeed I believe
there are not a few who have been hap-
pier in death than ever they have been in
life.' Yes, there is bliss in dying to those
who know the Lord. And when we lie-
hold death revealing such Christian graces


we ureter:-tancl better the word of God,
“ Precious in the sight of the Loul is the
death of llis saints.”
Put another reason. “ Prec'cus in the
sight of the Lord is the death of His saints”
because in their death God's way of salva-
tion is honoured. Christ is every thing, self
is nothing ; and the simple Gospel satisfies
and supports the dying ones. Oh. how
evangelical men grow as they approach
death. Many questions of doctrine which
before they had deemed all important a 1 e
forgotten now, and Christ the Saviour is
alone remembered. His death is the
source of their confidence, their love, and
their joy. The simplest Gospel texts are
the texts that give comfort and consola-
tion. “He loved me and gave Himself for
me.” “The Lord hath laid on Him the
iniquity of us all.” Sometimes it is a verse
of a familiar hymn which dying ones
repeat, but it is always a verse full of the
Gospel. Think of this. Almost the last
thing good old Eabbi Duncan of Edinburgh
did was to ask a friend to repeat to him
six times in succession the verse in “Peek
of Ages” beginning “Nothing in my
hands I bring.” Oh how true it is that, in
death the crucified Saviour is honour* <1
and glorified. Every good work is for-
gotten except the glorious work of Christ


for poor sinners, and every thought and
aspiration find centre in the cross. So we
do not wonder now at the declaration of
our text, “Precious in the sight of the
Lord is ihe death of His saints,”
But, last of al’, the death of the Lord’s
saints is precious because, of the many pre-
cious wor.ls that have been uttered at the
time of death. Sometimes does it not
seem as if the dying one had caught a
glimpse of the glory and tried to tell ns
what he had seen. Oh what strong brave
words Chris! ians have uttered as they
passed into the valley, and took a look be-
hind. I have gathered a few of these
dying utterances. Listen to John Knox.
“ Live in Christ, live in Christ, and the
flesh need hot fear death ; ’ and to John
Wesley, “The best of all is, God is with
ns, farewell, farewell.” Hear his brother
Charles, “I shall be satisfied with Thy
likeness, satisfied, satisfied !” Humboldt
—the sun shining brilliantly into the room
in which he was lying—said as he passed
away, “ How grand these rays ! they seem
to beckon earth to heaven. ” Beautiful is
expression of the dying poetess, Mis.
Hemans, “ I feel as if I was sitting with
Mary at the feet of my Redeemer, hearing
the music of His voice, and learning of
Him to be meek and lowly.” Listen to


this strong word of Robert Hall, “I have
an humble hope in Christ which I would
not exchange for the wide universe.” I
have read of an American officer who was
wounded in the late war. At first it was
thought he would recover, but after a few
days he got worse. Just before his death
he was asked if he had any message for
his wife who lived far away in the north ;
he was asked to speak quickly, for he had
but a few moments to live. He looked up,
his face shining like an angel’s, and said,
“Tell my wife that there is not a cloud
between me and Jesus.” Lately I received
intelligence of the death of an aged minis-
ter of Christ whom I met frequently when
I was a student, and who did me, as he
did others, many a kindness His was a
happy death, in which the glorious Gospel
was honoured and Christ was all. Scholar
and divine though he was, he found much
comfort in repeating to himself simple
verses full of saving truth. This was often
on his lips—
No righteousness hut Christ’s I own,
No merit but His blood alone,
Whilst on the Father’s name I call,
My faith pleads Christ my all in all.
Just before consciousness failed him, his
friends about bis bed heard him say —


“ Teach me some melodious sonnet
Sung by heavenly hosts above,
liaise the mount, oh fix me on it.
Mount of God’s unchanging love.”
Thus happily, triumphantly Christians can
die. Yes, “ Precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of His saints.”
I have been led to choose this text, and
preach this sermon because during the
past week death has come twice into this
congregation. The first taken was a much
loved boy. His childlike faith and his
composure in the hour of death were
beautiful. “He was not afraid to die,”
he said, “he would see his brother
Archie.” He is with Jesus now. r lhe
other taken during the week was an
esteemed lady, * a member of onr church,
to whom we have already made reference
in this sermon. For many years she had
stood on the Lord’s side, and in various
ways she had been enabled to do good
work for the Master. As she had lived
in Christ, so she died trusting Him to the
last. Hers was a full—a joyous assurance;
and hers also was a happy death. In her
departure we experience the first break in
the congregation, for her name is the first
to he taken from our communion roll.
* Mrs. Huberts, mother of the llev. Arthur
Aspiuall, of Forbes, who died at the Glebe,
Sydney, 20th April, 1870.


But it is written in the book of life, and
she, too, is with Christ in full communion
with the Church abo' 7 e. May the assuring
thought come with consolation and
strength to her weeping children. . May
they hear a voice saving unto them,
“Blessed are the dead which die it the
Lord,” “ Precious in the sight of the Lord
is the death of His saints.”
In conclusion, What if death had come
to you during the past week ? Would it have
found yon unprepared ? Then your death
would not have been precious but terrible.
And death might have come to you ; it is in
God’s mercy that you have been spared. Do
not let this new Gospel offer pass unimprov-
ed. The dead are speaking to-day to you.
“Mortal, mortal, prepare to meet thy
God.” Do this one thing which some of
yon have left so long undone. Prepare.
How ? Repent, believe, live. Turn from
sin to Christ thy Saviour, and by the help
of the Spirit give thyself to God. Look to
Christ thy Substitute, for He alone will
give thee comfort in the hour of death.
Do this now. Let nothing hinder thee.
Now, now is the day of salvation. Believe
and live.
May God add His blessing, Amen.


HYMN CCCXCIX.
How bright these glorious spirits shine !
Whence all their white array ?
How came they to the blissful seats
Of everlasting day ?
Lo ! these are they from sufferings great,
Who came to realm* of light,
And in the blood of Christ have washed
Those robes which shine so bright.
Now, with triumphal pa’ms, they stand
Before the throne on high,
And serve the God they love, amidst
The glories of the sky.
His presence fills each heart with joy,
Tunes every mouth to sing ;
By day, by night, the sacred courts
With glad hosannas ring.
The Lamb which dwells amidst the throne
Shall o’er them still preside ;
Feed them with nourishment divine.
And all their footsteps guide.
’Mong pastures green he’ll lead his flock,
Where living streams appear ;
And God the Lo v d from every eye
Shall wipe off every tear.


