

1874 FIJU 1929




THE
COLONY OF FIJI.






A FIJIAN WOMAN OF RANK.
Photo by S. Bach.


THE
COLONY OF FIJI
1874—1929
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY:
J. J. McHUGH, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. SUVA, FIJI,
1929.


The Photographs reproduced in this Handbook,
unless otherwise noted, are the property of the
Government of Fiji, and are copyright .
Second Edition , Revised and Edited by
Arthur Alban Wright,
Assistant Colonial Secretary .
First Edition - - July, 1924.
Second Impression - October, 1924.
Third Impression - November, 1925.
Second Edition - August, 1929.


CONTENTS .
PAGE
i General Description .. .. .. • • • • 1
ii Early History .. .. .. • • • • • 4
in Constitution .. .. .. . • • • • • • • 13
iv Courts of Justice .. .. .. .. • • •• 19
v Population .. .. .. .. . • • • • • 20
vi The Fijians .. .. .. .. .. • • • • 22
The Legend of the Vilavilairevo .. .. • • 34
vii East Indians . .. .. .. . • • • • • 36
viii Health Conditions .. .. .. .. • • 46
ix Roads .. .. .. .. .. • • • • • • 50
x Lands and Land Tenure .. .. .. .. • • 55
xi Education .. .. .. .. .. • • • • 35
xii Trade of the Colony .. .. .. .. • • 39
xiii Customs .. .. .. .. .. •• •• 71
xiv Wharf and Harbour Accommodation .. .. .. 72
xv Production of Sugar .. .. .. .. • • 73
xvi The Copra Industry .. .. .. .. 79
xvii Bananas .. .. .. .. .. •. • • 85
xviii A Revival of the Cotton Industry .. .. .. 88
xix Pineapples .. .. .. .. .. . • •• 92
xx Citrus Fruits. . .. .. .. .. .. •. 96
xxi Coffee .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 97
xxii Cacao .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . • 97
xxiii Rice .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • • 98
xxiv Para Rubber . ... .. .. .. .. .. 99
xxv Sisal Hemp .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
xxvi Oil Seeds .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
xxvii Vanilla . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 104
xxviii Minor Products .. .. .. .. .. .. 105
xxix Beche-de-Mer . .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
xxx Trocas Shell.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
xxxi Dairying .. .. .. ~ .. .. .. 108


PAGE
xxxii Stock .113
xxxiii Horses
xxxiv Sheep .. .. .. _ ..115
xxxv Goats 115
xxxvi Pigs 116
xxxvii Timbers 117
xxxviii Coral Reefs and their Fauna 120
xxxix Sea Fishing 128
xl River Fishing .. .. .. .. 134
xli The Rising of the Balolo 135
xlii Birds .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 136
xliii Geology and Mining .. .. .. .. .. 143
xliv Missionary Efforts . .. .. .. .. 149
xlv Diary of an English Tourist 153
xlvi Fiji’s Contribution to the Great War .. .. 167
xlvii Rotuma (A Dependency of Fiji) . .. .. .. 172
xlviii Passenger Routes 177
xlix Sport .. 180
l Meteorological .. .. 182
li General Information .. .. .. .. .. 186
lii Bibliography 193
Map .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1
CONTENTS — continued.


INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.
BUILDINGS— PAGE
EUROPEAN—
Ba, Railway Bridge .. .. .. .. 73
Lau, Methodist Church .. .. .. .. .. 150
Lautoka, Sugar Mill .. .. .. 72
Suva, Boys' Grammar School .. .. .. .. 65
„ Business Portion .. . .. .. .. .. 68
„ Central Medical School—
Dormitories and School; Tutor’s Quarters .. 48
Laboratory Work; Demonstration in Dissecting 49
„ Colonial War Memorial Hospital ..46,47
„ Fire Station .. .. .. 15
~ Girls’ Grammar School Hostel. . .. .. 66
~ Government House .. .. .. 2
„ Government Printing Office .. .. 191
Grand Pacific Hotel .. .. 69
~ King’s Wharf .. .. .. ..70,71
„ Triangle .. .. .. ..14,54
Tailevu, Settler's Home. . .. .. 63
NATIVE—
A Chief's House .. 139, 155
Bau, Council House .. .. .. ... .. .. 6
„ Interior of Chief’s House .. 10
House Rafts .... .. .. .. 22
Mountaineer’s House .. .. .. .. 106
Village, Namosi .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Village, Ovalau .. .. .. .. .. 190
Village, Sigatoka Valley .. 135
CEREMONIES—
A Native Dance .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Council of Chiefs .. .. .. .. .. 11
Fijian Dancers .. .. .. ~ 107
Fire Walking .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
Food Stacked for Presentation .. .. .. 30
Making Yaqona .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 27
Offering Yaqona .. ..Cover
Preparing for Feast . .. .. .. .. ~ .. 158


CULTIVATION-
BANANAS— PAGE
Bunches .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 86
Loading for Export .. .. .. .. .. .. 96
Packing Station .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 87
COPRA—
A Coconut Palm . .. .. .. .. .. .. 81
A Coconut Plantation, Taveuni .. .. .. .. 80
Cutting .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 82
Drying .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 88
Loading at Vuna .. .. .. .. .. .. 72
COTTON—
Experimental Station .. .. .. .. .. .. 90
Experiments in Ratooning Kidney Cotton .. .. 90
Sea Island and Kidney Types of Cotton . .. .. 91
Type of Single-seeded Kidney Cotton .. .. .. 91
PINEAPPLES—
A Pineapple Nursery .. .. .. .. .. .. 98
Indian Pineapple Growers .. .. .. .. .. 39
Pineapples . .. .. .. .• 94
Pines Packed for Export .. .. .. .. .. 95
RUBBER—
Tapping a Rubber Tree .. .. .. .. . • 99
Waidoi Plantation .. .. .. 42. 64
SUGAR—
Cane Cultivation .. .. .. .. • • • • 43
Lautoka Mill .. .. .. .. .. • • 72
Loading at Lautoka .. .. .. .. .. • • 77
Railway Bridge, Ba .. .. .. .. •. 73
Steam Ploughing . .. .. .. . • • • • 75
Stacking Raw Sugar .. .. .. .. • • • • 72
Tavua Estate .. .. .. .. • • • • • 74
Transporting Cane to Lautoka .. .. .. 76
TIMBER—
Hill-grown Kauri .. .. .. .. . • ..118
FISHING—
A Rock Cod .. .. .. .. .. • • • • .. 131
A Trout Stream .. .. 130
Marine Life .. .. 1 26
Native Collecting Crabs .. .. .. .. •• ..126
Native Spearing Fish .. .. .. .. • • • • 31
Native with Eel on Spear.. .. .. .. •• •• 1 22
II
INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.


INDIANS— face
An Indian Bazaar .. .. .. .. .. • • • • 38
An Indian Farm .. .. .. .. .. . • • • 43
Indians bringing in Latex . .. .. .. .. .. 42
Indian Pineapple Growers.. .. .. .. .. •• 39
LANDS—
Alluvial Flats, Vitilevu .. .. .. .. .. ..138
Andesitic Boss, Namosi .. .. .. .. .. .. 146
Makuluva Island .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 122
Reef and Palms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 154
Soapstone Country, Tavua.. .. .. .. .. .. 147
Suva Botanical Gardens .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Wakaya Island 55,97,167
NA LIVES —
A Fijian 2, 151
Fijian Dancers .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 107
Fijian Defence Force .. .. .. .. .. .. 166
A Fijian Girl 23
Fijian in Gala Costume .. .. .. .. .. .. 7
A Fijian Spearing Fish .. .. .. .. .. .. 31
A Fijian Woman of Rank .. .. .. .. .. Frontispiece
Fire Walkers, Beqa.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 35
Native Girls .. .. .. .. .. .. . . .. 14
Native Children .. .. .. .. .. .. 67, 159
Native Women .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
Travellers' Tree and Native Police .. .. .. 18
SCENIC—
Beach Scene, Wakaya Island .. .. .. .. .. 97
Botanical Gardens, Suva .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
Canoe and River .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 103
Coast Scene, Wakaya Island .. .. .. .. .. 55
Lami River .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 134
Model Yacht Racing, Makogai .. .. .. .. .. 65
Port of Levuka .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Reef and Palms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 154
Suva Botanical Gardens 19
Town and Bridge, Sigatoka River .. .. .. .. 51
Victoria Parade, Suva 119
SPORT—
Albert Park and Tennis Courts, Suva.. .. .. .. 180
Bowling Green, Suva 180
Bowling Green, Levuka 180
Recreation Ground, Levuka .. .. .. .. .. 181
Swimming Baths, Suva 180


STEAMERS— pace
R. “Aorangi,” First Class Lounge .. .. 178
„ „ First Class Dining Saloon .. .. 179
S. “ Makatea ” .. .. .. .. .. 50
R.M.S.S. “ Niagara ” 50
STOCK—
A Dairy Herd, Navua .. .. .. .. .. 62
A Mountain Stream on Sheep Run .. .. .. .. 138
Cattle on Coconut Plantation. Taveuni .. .. .. 59
Dairy Cattle .. .. .. .. .110
Hospital Dairy Herd, Makogai .. .. .. .. 64
Polled Angus Cattle, Rewa .. .. , . 58
Sheep 114, 115, 138
Soldier-Settler's Dairy Farm, Tailevu . .. .. .. 11l


FIJI.
[f I could woo my muse aright,
To Fiji I’d some lines indite,
And lilt her praise wT a my might
That each may ken .
Vouchsafe, oh muse, a little light,
And guide my pen !
When sturdy Tasman found Fiji,
He little thought, in days to he,
Here Scots would come their weirds to dree
A gift from heaven !
And spread abroad in this braid sea,
Their precious leaven ;
And teach a race o' graceless loons,
The art o' using porridge spoons,
dead them in claith frae Scottish touns —
For they'd nae breeks !
The lassies—they just wore festoons
O' native leeks /
Waes me, nae heather fires the hills,
Nae speckled trout sport in the rills,
At gloamin' fa' nae lapwing shrills
Above the corn :
And—worst of a'—nae whiskey stills
The glens adorn !
But here are shining sapphire seas,
Soft sunlight and the green of trees,
And over all, the sea-borne breeze
Croons out its song'.
Nor frost, nor snow the senses tease
The whole year long .
So, tho’ we sing o' auld lang syne.
And how we pu'ed the gowans fine,
Fiji ! a wallie waught, in rhyme,
We raise to thee !
Tho * heatherless, may gifts divine
Thy portion be !
DRABA VERNA.


GOVERNORS OF FIJI.
1874 October . Sir Hercules Robinson, K.C.M.G.
1875 September The Hon. Sir Arthur Gordon, G.C.M.G.
1880 January . Sir G. W. Des Voeux, K.C.M.G.
1887 January . Sir C. B. H. Mitchell, K.C.M.G.
1888 February Sir J. B. Thurston, K.C.M.G.
1897 March ... Sir G. T. M. O’Brien, K.C.M.G.
1902 September Sir Henry M. Jackson, K.C.M.G.
1904 June ... Sir Everard F. im Thurn, K.C.M.G., C.B.
1911 February Sir Francis Henry May, K.C.M.G.
1912 July ... Sir Ernest Bickham Sweet-Escott, K.C.M.G,
1918 April ... Sir Cecil Hunter Rodwell, K.C.M.G.
1925 February Sir Eyre Hutson, K.C.M.G.
1929 June ... Sir A. G. M. Fletcher Kt., C.M.G., C.B E.






I. GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
THE COLONY OF FIJI is situated in the Southern Pacific Ocean
between latitude 15° and 22° south, and between longitude
177° west and 175° east.
The group comprises about 250 islands of varying sizes, the
main island being Vitilevu, with an area of 4,053 square miles. Other
large islands are Vanualevu (2,128 square miles), Taveuni (166 square
miles), and Kadavu (165 square miles). About eighty of the islands are
inhabited. The total area of the Colony (including the islands of Rotuma)
is 7,083 square miles, or nearly the size of Wales. Suva, the capital,
with its suburbs has a population of 13,000 and is situated on the island
of Vitilevu, distant 1,743 miles from Sydney, New South Wales, and
1,140 miles from Auckland, New Zealand. Vitilevu measures about
96 miles from east to west, and about 63 miles from north to south,
while the island of Vanualevu, situated north-east of Vitilevu, is 114
miles in length and averages in breadth some 26 miles. Other islands
of economic importance are Taveuni, Kadavu, and the smaller islands
of Rabi, and the Yasawa, Lomaiviti, and Lau Groups. The Colony is
situated midway between the Tongan or Friendly Islands and the
French Colony of New Caledonia.
The question as to whether Fiji is founded on the site of an
exceedingly ancient continental area or has been built up from ocean
depths by volcanic action is one on which geologists are not agreed.
Although much evidence has been put forward in favour of the former
theory, it is certain that the two main islands and the great majority of
the remainder owe their present form to intense and long continued
volcanic action. Several of the smaller islands, particularly in the
Lau Group, are upraised coralline formations.
There have been no active volcanoes in Fiji for very many centuries.
Thermal springs, which occur in several islands, particularly in Vanua-
levu, represent the only active evidence of the intense volcanic action
of the past. The best known and hottest of these springs is situated
near the sea beach at the east end of Savusavu Bay in Vanualevu.
The interiors of both of the main islands are rugged and moun-
tainous, with correspondingly fine scenery. Mount Victoria, which
is situated in the northern part of Vitilevu, at the head-waters of the
main river systems, rises 4,341 feet above sea level and is the highest
altitude in the Colony. Other prominent mountains in that island are
Mounts Pickering, 3,528 ft., Muanivatu, 3,709 ft., Evans, 3,921 ft., and
Korobasabasaga, 3,960 ft. The highest peak of Vanualevu is Batini,


3,437 feet; and of Taveuni, Uluiqalau, 4,072 feet. The greater parts
of the mountainous areas are densely wooded, but in the drier zones,
on the western and northern slopes of the two main islands, large areas
of reed and grass country occur.
The forests of Fiji, although as yet but lightly explored, yield useful
timber, both hard and soft, in considerable quantity, and it is more than
possible that a scientific survey of the mountain ranges would reveal
the existence of much that is of considerable commercial value. Through-
out these mountain areas, traversed as they are by native paths, the
scenery is notable for its grandeur. Innumerable mountain streams
of clear rushing water make their way through cleft and gorge, finally
to meet one or other of the main rivers, which they join in the rush to
the sea.
The islands of Fiji are girt by coral-reefs, over the seaward edge
of which the Pacific breakers curl and pitch with an unceasing boom.
Inside the barrier the calm waters of the lagoon lie in peaceful contrast
to the rolling seas outside. They provide an intricate though a safe
seaway, under the waters of which in many places spread beautiful
subaqueous gardens, a delight to the traveller, and a haven for the
myriads of multi-coloured fish which inhabit them. Passing through
these protected waters a variety of landscape unfolds itself; the luxuriant
and cheerful beauty of the lowlands gives place to the gloomy grandeur
and the unbroken solitude of the mountains; and mangrove borders
alternate with stretches of beach, with succeeding narrow vales beyond.
The direction of the prevailing trade winds varies from E.N.E. to
E.S.E., and the aspect of the weather side of the main islands, or what
is known as the wet zone, differs essentially from that of the lee side.
Each zone is distinctly marked by the nature and density of its vegetation.
In many places throughout the larger islands the change from the forest
lands of the wet belt to the reeded country of the dry is so abrupt as to
cause a dividing line visible for many miles.
On the lee side, instead of dense jungles, a grassy country, dotted
here and there with screw-pines, graceful Casuarinas and other tropical
trees, presents itself. On the northern and western sides of Vitilevu
and Vanualevu this character predominates. Reeded slopes rising from
the sea to the top of undulating hills which fringe the shore indicate
a fertile soil which provides for the natives a constant and an almost
inexhaustible source of wild indigenous root foods of high nutritive
value. From the hill-tops of these fringing ridges a pleasant view
unfolds itself. Rich valleys, intersected by winding streams, are either
uncultivated or are interspersed with cultivated clearings, but in either


A FIJIAN .




GOVERNMENT HOUSE, SUVA.


NAMOSI VILLAGE.
Situated near the source of the Waidina
River, among the picturesque mountains
of the island of Vitilevu.


case brilliantly verdant. In many of the smaller islands the beauty of
the scenery, though different in character, is equally impressive, the
charm of volcanic irregularity being exhibited in a more marked degree.
Here, too, are found the softer features of rich valleys studded with
stately palms growing in unchecked luxuriance, and forming, with the
wild winding reef, its beating surf, and the stretching ocean beyond,
pictures of distinctive splendour.
The main islands of the Colony are well watered by rivers, which
form the chief means of internal communication. The more important
of these rivers are, on Vitilevu, the Rewa, Sigatoka, Navua, and Ba;
on Vanualevu, the Dreketi, the Wainunu, and the Labasa. On other
islands the rivers are little more than rushing mountain streams with
rough and stony beds.
The Rewa River, which is the largest in Fiji, rises on the eastern
slope of Mount Victoria and, traversing the greater distance of the
island’s breadth, flows for many miles parallel to the coast, being
generally separated from it by a distance of not more than ten miles.
In its course it is joined by several rivers of importance and finally
reaches the sea by several mouths. It is navigable by small craft up
to 60 miles from its mouth, and like those of other rivers throughout
the Colony its basin is enriched by a deep deposit of alluvial soil. It is
about ninety-five miles long and there are more than 200 native villages
situated on its banks.
The next in importance of the rivers of Vitilevu is the Sigatoka. It
has its source on the western side of Mount Victoria and flows for 75
miles to the coast through the central and western ranges.
The Rewa and the Sigatoka Rivers are the chief means of access
to the interior of the island.
The Navua River which rises on the south-east slope of Mount
Gordon follows a course of some 40 miles to the southern coast and is
noted for its scenic beauty.
The Dreketi River on Vanualevu is 40 miles in length. It is
perhaps the deepest in Fiji and is navigable for small steamers for 18
miles from its mouth. It passes through large tracts of fertile country.


II. EARLY HISTORY.
ABEL JANSEN TASMAN is generally credited with the discovery
/A of the Fiji Islands in the year 1643. There is no doubt that
he did come unexpectedly upon a few islands in the northern
part of the Group; but there are very strong reasons for believing that
one or more of the old Spanish navigators were here before him. The
actual discovery is at present under consideration by research students,
and until their investigations are complete the matter must be left in
a state of uncertainty. Tasman’s experiences among the reefs in the
north of the Archipelago were so unhappy that, after the publication of
his journal, navigators appear to have avoided the Group for over 130
years. Captain Cook made a survey of the Island of Vatoa and the
neighbouring waters in 1774. Bligh and Captain Wilson made import-
ant discoveries at a later time, and D’Urville made a fairly comprehen-
sive though somewhat inaccurate chart of the islands and a few of the
harbours of the Archipelago in his two voyages in 1827 and 1838. Com-
mander Wilkes, who was in charge of the United States Exploring
Expedition which visited the Group in 1840, completed a more reliable
chart of its islands, reefs and harbours and published the results of his
investigations a few years later. But, of necessity, there were many
hidden dangers in those coral strewn waters which could only be revealed
later by men-of-war visiting the islands for survey purposes, and by
traders plying between ports in different islands of the Group. The
latest discovery of a hidden shoal was made by H.M.S. “ Laburnum ”
in September, 1928.
Towards the close of the eighteenth century and the beginning of
the nineteenth, vessels from the East Indies began to visit Fiji in search
of sandalwood and beche-de-mer for the Chinese market.
Early navigators have recounted very little concerning the Islands
of Fiji and their inhabitants, but it is assumed that the state of early
society was much the same as that which existed at the time when
first accounts were written. Although there are no historical records
of the race prior to the arrival of European visitors some informa-
tion is to be gathered from the songs of the people by which tradition
was handed down to succeeding generations. These songs relate to
the coming of the Fijian from a country in the far west under the leader-
ship of ancestral gods whose canoe, the “ Kaunitoni,” was driven ashore
on the west coast of Vitilevu at or near the site of the native village
called Viseisei. From this point the leaders made their way overland
while others, having set out on a voyage of discovery, reached the Yasawa
Group, and losing their way in returning, landed at Malake, an island


on the northern coast of Vitilevu, where they fell in with their leaders
and, proceeding inland, settled in the hills of the Kauvadra Range.
As time went on and their numbers grew, the original inhabitants
settled in small villages, each having little or nothing to do with
the other; hence probably the gap in history until some 300 years ago
when evidence points to a migratory movement to the coast by way
of the watercourses of the Rewa and the Sigatoka Rivers. From this
movement there gradually sprang up several powerful confederacies,
the first two of which were those of Verata and Rewa, situated respec-
tively near two of the mouths of the Rewa River. The third state to
come into being was that of Bau, whose people, fleeing from their tradi-
tional home in the hills as the result of wars, took up their abode first on
the mainland and later, about the year 1760, on the Island of Bau itself,
which lay close to the marches of the states of Rewa and Verata.
Another confederation arose at Nadroga amongst the people who had
migrated from the Kauvadra by way of the Sigatoka River, and in
addition there were formed several intertribal amalgamations, such as
those found at Kadavu and elsewhere, who lived outside of the sphere
of influence of the larger confederations and were powerful enough to
hold their own borders. There were also many semi-independent
communities mainly in the interior who in war combined under a common
leader for their mutual protection. In addition to these divisions of
the people the whole of the eastern or Lau Group formed a confederacy
which was to rise to considerable power through Tongan influence.
During all this time Tongan settlers were arriving in Fiji, and under
their influence also there were formed on the Island of Taveuni the
important states of Somosomo and Vuna, between which there was
continual fighting.
Such was the state of affairs when individual Europeans began
to take a part in tribal wars. They assisted the states of Verata and
Bau as well as Rewa —the last-named state having for a long time been
allied to Bau—and were a deciding factor in the conquest of Verata
by Bau, which thus became the premier state.
About the year 1808 there was wrecked on the reef off the Island
of Nairai the American brig “ Eliza," with 40,000 dollars from the River
Plate. The greater part of the crew escaped, but two of them took
passage in native canoes which happened at the time to be in the
vicinity of the wreck. One landed at Bau and the other at Verata.
The former, a Swede named Charles Savage, acquired great ascendency
in the state of Bau, where he taught the natives the use of fire-arms,
thus affording them a considerable advantage in intertribal warfare.
Other foreigners, for a similar reason, soon acquired a welcome in the


several states which were then struggling for supremacy. An Irishman
named Conner attained in Rewa a similar position to that of Savage
in Bau. Savage died in March, 1814, near Wailea on the Island of
Vanualevu, where he carried on a war with the natives for the purpose
of procuring a cargo of sandalwood for an English trading vessel, the
“ Hunter ”of Calcutta. Together with some of his crew he was killed
and eaten, his bones being converted into needles and distributed
amongst the people as a memento of victory. Conner’s fate was less
tragic. He paid less heed to the affairs of state, and even when, after
the death of his royal patron, misfortune overtook him, he was able
to resort to the proverbial humour of his race and preserve to some
extent the goodwill of the Rewa natives by the narration of tales for
their amusement. It was upon this faculty that he depended for a
livelihood rather than upon the rearing of pigs and fowls for barter with
the people.
The Bauans soon conquered the Islands of Lomaiviti and brought
to subjection all the tribes of the eastern and northern coasts of Viri-
le vu as well as the people of the eastern parts of Vanualevu; and while
Bau was gaining power over Vitilevu, Somosomo was engaged in a
similar task on Vanualevu. Having conquered Vuna in 1840, Somo-
somo with the aid of Bau attacked in 1846 the people of Natewa and
subdued the whole of the territory which now forms the Province of
Cakaudrove. In the meantime the Bauans, forgetting the aid which
they had received from their allies, attacked and conquered the Rewans,
so that by 1852 their power was so great that Cakobau, their Ruler,
came to be regarded by foreign Consuls as the King of Fiji. But that
power was not to remain for long, and in 1855 the decline of Bau com-
menced. Cakobau’s conversion to Christianity in 1854 led to a war
with the Rewans who were still heathen and who were joined by all
the heathen tribes on the south-east of Vitilevu. In this war Cakobau
was aided by the King of Tonga without whose help the Bauans would
certainly have suffered defeat; but on the 7th April, 1855, the Rewa
forces were so severely defeated by the Tongans at Kaba that war
practically ceased, and the people became Christians. During this
last campaign almost the whole of the fighting was done by the Tongans
and the prestige of Cakobau suffered accordingly.
Reference has been made to the power of the Lauan Confederacy.
A new epoch in the history of Lau was marked by the arrival and rise
to power of Maafu, who was the son of Leamotua, a king of Tonga.
There are various stories as to his reasons for coming to Fiji. The
Lakeba people say that a friendly custom existed between the families
of the king of Tonga and of the Tui Nayau (the supreme chief of Lakeba,


NATIVE COUNCIL HOUSE, BAU.
This stands on the site of an old heathen temple.
6


FIJIAN DANCER IN GALA COSTUME.
The club shown is one of the types used
in ancient warfare.


who was himself of partly Tongan extraction) by which a young chief
of each family lived with the head of the other as a courtier, and super-
vised the ceremonial making of the chief’s yaqona, and acted as his
envoy to convey commands to subject chiefs. Others say that Maafu
left Tonga in anger as the result of a family quarrel, and came to Fiji
in the hope of obtaining a following, and really intended to raise forces
with which to overthrow the king of Tonga, and that his ultimate
ambition was to conquer Bau as well and thus become master of both
Tonga and Fiji. Maafu soon achieved great influence and strength
and in 1858 was about to attack Bau when the first British Consul
arrived in the country and was able to prevent him; but the Consul left
again at the end of that year and Maafu conceived fresh plans for the
conquest of Bau. He had made himself the ruler of the people of
Macuata, in whose quarrels he had intervened, and by their aid he pro-
posed to effect his object. He took his fleet of war canoes to the Island
of Beqa which he made his headquarters, and the forces from Vanua-
levu proceeded to the main island and, landing at Rakiraki, in the Ra
Province, prepared to march overland to Bau. By this time, however,
the British Consul had returned to Fiji, and was able to dissuade Maafu
from his purpose by warning him that if he attacked Bau he would
attack territory which practically belonged to Great Britain. Sub-
sequently Maafu signed a deed giving up all claim to chiefly power in
Fiji. Not only thus was Cakobau’s power challenged: he was beset
by financial difficulties which were causing him great embarrassment.
In 1859 the British Consul at Fiji, being impressed with a con-
viction that it could be made a great cotton-producing country, exerted
himself in directing attention to its advantages as a field for European
settlement, and two years later the European population numbered 166
adults, and, the impression having gone abroad that the British Govern-
ment had determined to take possession of the islands, new arrivals
from New Zealand were frequent. Some brought with them small
cutters and remained in the group to trade, but the majority of the
newcomers, on discovering that the Imperial authorities had declined
the proffered cession of the islands, returned.
The circumstances which led Cakobau to desire the British Govern-
ment to take possession of the islands were as follow;—On the 4th July,
1849, while the American Consul was celebrating his national anniversary
by the firing off of cannons and letting off of squibs on the small island
of Nukulau where the Consulate was situated, his house took fire and
was burnt to the ground. Subsequent to these events complaints were
made against Cakobau, and numerous losses were ascribed to him.
Claims for damages in respect of alleged losses were made by American


settlers through their Consul, and Cakobau was saddled with the whole
responsibility, although he had not been instrumental in causing
the losses complained of. After preliminary investigation on the part
of the United States Government, Commander Boutwell was sent to
Fiji, in the year 1855, to inquire into the claims; the result was that
the American citizens were awarded a sum of £9,000. Cakobau being
quite unable to satisfy this demand, offered in 1858 to cede the
sovereignty of the islands to Her Majesty Queen Victoria, on condition
that he should retain the rank and title of Tui Viti (King of Fiji), which
had been accorded to him by the American Government, and that in
consideration of his ceding 200,000 acres of land, Her Majesty’s Govern-
ment should pay the American claims for him.
A deed of cession, signed by Cakobau and the leading Chiefs, was
accordingly conveyed to England by the British Consul in the early
part of the year 1859. Great interest was felt in the neighbouring
British Colonies in the proposed cession, and an effort was made to
induce the British Government to entertain the proposition favourably,
as good proof had just been obtained of the capabilities of Fiji as a
cotton-growing country, while the supply of that staple from other
sources for the home market had been greatly diminished. Some
months later Colonel Smythe, R.E., was appointed to proceed to the
islands as Commissioner to inquire into the state of affairs and report
as to the advisability of accepting the proposed cession. At the same
time military difficulties in New Zealand were causing very serious
embarrassment to the Imperial authorities who, having quite enough
to do with one native war on hand, were in no humour to accept the
responsibility of managing Cakobau’s unruly subjects. The Commis-
sioner's report, as might have been anticipated in the circumstances,
was against the acceptance of the offer. It was accordingly declined,
and Cakobau being once more in danger of attack from Maafu offered
Fiji to the United States of America who, however, being engaged in
civil war, sent no reply to the offer.
From this time forward various attempts were made, at the
instigation of European residents, to establish a regular form of Govern-
ment, they being disappointed that the result of Colonel Smythe’s
mission had been unsuccessful. From one cause and another, however,
but principally in consequence of the mutual suspicion and hostility of
the leading chiefs, every such attempt failed.
In the early part of 1871 a more ambitious effort was made.
Cakobau, with the assistance of several European settlers, made an
attempt to form a Government for the whole group, and delegates of
both races were invited to meet in congress in order to discuss and


frame a constitution. In August, 1871, these delegates met in formal
convention, and after much deliberation, agreed to a constitution for
the " Kingdom of Fiji,” and to regulations and conditions under which
the Government of the Kingdom should be carried on. The House of
Delegates having performed its functions, it was in due course dissolved;
Returning Officers were appointed, and writs were issued for the election
of members to serve in the Assembly of Fiji. These elections were duly
carried out, and the first Fijian Parliament met in 1871.
The Constitution Act framed by the House of Delegates provided
for a Government of the whole group, and the establishment of a Con-
stitution from and after Ist October, 1871. It also provided that the
form of Government should be Executive, Legislative and Judicial; the
Executive to consist of the King and the Ministry; the Legislative of a
Privy Council and House of Representatives. The Judicial side was in-
vested in a Supreme Court, consisting of a Chief Justice and two Associate
Judges, one of whom was to be a native, whose decisions were final.
The Privy Council was composed of the native Governors of the provinces
into which the Constitution Act directed that the Kingdom should be
subdivided. The House of Representatives was formed of members
returned by the electoral districts proclaimed throughout the islands.
All measures passed by the House of Representatives were to be sub-
mitted to the Privy Council, which had not, however, the power of
vetoing any measures not meeting with its approval, but simply of
returning them to the Assembly from which they originated for recon-
sideration. The number of members was fixed at not less than twenty
nor more than forty. The qualifications of an elector were the due
payment of taxes, six months' residence, and that he should be a male
subject of the Kingdom, not a minor. Without entering too much
into detail, it may be stated that such a system of Government was
utterly unsuited to the conditions of the country. It was cumbrous,
expensive, and placed all political power in the hands of white settlers,
leaving the natives, who numbered ninety-nine hundredths of the entire
population, with the merest shadow of influence. Moreover, the
Assembly and the Ministry were in constant disagreement, and the
first half of each session of the Assembly was taken up by efforts on the
part of the leaders of the Opposition to change places with Ministers
of the Crown. The most serious difference, however, arose upon the
question of electoral franchise, the settlers arguing that the franchise
was confined to Europeans solely, and Ministers disputing the point.
Matters soon came to a crisis through the King refusing to accept
the resignation of Ministers who had been defeated " constitutionally ”


by a large majority, and the Assembly consequently was dissolved in
the middle of 1873.
A new Constitution was then framed by the Government, conferring
upon the natives a large share of power, and providing for a Legislative
Assembly, consisting partly of nominee and partly of elective members.
It was, however, though assented to by the King, never put in force,
as it was strongly opposed by Commodore Goodenough, and Mr. Consul
Layard, who arrived in Fiji at the close of 1873, with instructions to
inquire into the condition of the islands with regard to annexation, in
response to a proposal made by the Fijian Government to re-open
the question of annexation to Great Britain. It was agreed that,
pending the question of cession to Her Majesty, the status quo should
be observed. The Commissioners addressed a letter to the King on
the 17th January, 1874, telling him the object of their mission, visited
several of the islands, and collected a mass of information, which, on
being laid before the Imperial Parliament, was severely criticised by
the late Mr. W. E. Gladstone. At the end of February it was announced
that the King and Chiefs were about to summon a great meeting to
decide upon the question of ceding the country to Great Britain. At
this meeting, at which the Commissioners attended, the King and Chiefs
decided against the cession, whereupon Ministers resigned in a body,
and, immediately afterwards, when another attempt was made to form
a Ministry, every obstacle was put in the way. The Commodore
and Consul proclaimed the bankruptcy of the King’s Government,
warned all British subjects against giving the Government any credit,
and threatened with the penalties of the Foreign Enlistment Act any
of them retaining posts as officers in the Armed Constabulary. This
completely paralysed any further attempts at self-government, and,
acting upon the principle that an honourable capitulation was pre-
ferable to the destruction of a weak garrison, the King’s advisers
strongly recommended a reconsideration of the question of annexation.
Cakobau thereupon reassembled the Chiefs, and on the 20th March a
formal offer of cession was made, together with a number of conditions
which, when considered by the Imperial Government, were pronounced
to be unacceptable. On the 17th July, in the House of Lords, Earl
Carnarvon, the Secretary of State for the Colonies, stated that the
Cabinet had resolved upon deputing Sir Hercules Robinson, K.C.M.G.,
Governor of New South Wales, to proceed to Fiji and acquaint the
King and Chiefs that if they wished for annexation, it must be uncon-
ditional. Sir Hercules Robinson arrived at Levuka on the 23rd
September, 1874, and, on the 10th October, 1874, after several inter-
views of a most satisfactory nature with the King and Chiefs, the latter


INTERIOR OF A CHIEF’S HOUSE, BAU.
The cross-beams, ties, and wall-plates are covered with
sinnet, plaited in various designs and colours. The
screen on the back wall is of native “ masi,” a cloth made
from the bark of the “ Paper-mulberry,” and the design is
printed with native dyes. The floor is covered with mats
plaited from the leaves of a species of pandanus. The
table in the centre is that on which the Deed of Cession was
signed.


THE GREAT COUNCIL OF CHIEFS, BAU.
His Excellency the Governor inspecting the Guard of Honour.


made a formal and unconditional cession to Her Majesty Queen Victoria
of the sovereignty of the islands. The personal qualities of Sir Hercules
Robinson inspired the chiefs with a confidence that had previously
been wanting, as it did also those who had been trying to form a
Government. At the time of the cession a Provisional Government
was in operation. Arrangements were made by Sir Hercules Robinson,
after the formalities connected with the transfer of the sovereignty had
been completed, for the temporary government of the islands until
the arrival of a Governor appointed by Her Majesty. These arrange-
ments were the appointment of an Executive Council under the Presi-
dentship of Mr. Consul Layard, and the creation of the offices of Colonial
Secretary, Treasurer, and Secretary for Native Affairs. Among these
offices was distributed the supervision of all the administrative and
judicial departments of the Government. He further appointed an
officer to discharge the duties of Judge of the Central Court and Chief
Magistrate of the Colony, in the room of the Chancellorship and Justice-
ship formerly existing, and also four European Stipendiary Magistrates,
whose duties included the trial of European and mixed cases throughout
the group. For the efficient administration of native affairs he next
divided the islands into twelve provinces, over each of which a pro-
vincial chief—styled Roko—and Native Stipendiary Magistrates were
appointed. These provinces were subdivided into eighty-two districts
in charge of Bulis, each Buli being placed in the first, second or third
class, according to the number of villages under his control. The
authority of these native officers extended to natives only. These
provisional arrangements on the whole worked well, though the colonists
naturally looked forward to the arrival of Sir Arthur Hamilton Gordon,
K.C.M.G., who, soon after the receipt in England of Governor Robin-
son’s despatches, was appointed by Her Majesty the first Governor of
the new Colony.
Sir Arthur Gordon arrived at Levuka in H.M.S. “ Pearl ” on the
24th June, 1875, and landed officially on the following day. It was
expected that His Excellency would at once assume the administration
of the Government; but as the Chief Justice, the Attorney-General,
and other officers appointed to be members of the Executive were absent
from Levuka, and the immediate promulgation of the Royal Charter
erecting the islands into a British Colony would, without the concurrent
enactment of several legislative measures, have produced much con-
fusion, the provisional state of affairs was for a short time continued.
The delay, however, was not of long duration. On the Ist
September, 1875, the administration of the Government of the Colony
was formally assumed by the Governor, and the Charter of the Colony


and His Excellency’s Commission were read in the presence of a large
concourse of people assembled at Nasova. The interval between His
Excellency’s arrival and his assumption of office had been fully occupied.
One of the first steps taken in June was to send off medical succour to
the natives of the outlying districts still suffering from the effects of the
fatal visitation of measles, introduced on the return of the ex-King from
Sydney, and which had carried off approximately 40,000 of the native
population. Much useful information was also acquired by the
Governor during this period as to the state and condition of the country
before commencing the detailed duties of administration.
The peaceful course of events was, however, soon interrupted. The
heathen tribes of the interior of Vitilevu had for some time indicated
symptoms of disquietude, and, as in the old days prior to annexation,
were threatening with aggression the more peaceful and Christian natives
of the coast.
On the 12th April, 1876, four or five defenceless villages on the
borders of the Nadi and Nadroga provinces were suddenly attacked and
burnt. At the same time an attack was made upon Christian villages
situated on the Sigatoka River. In these forays peaceful and well-
disposed natives were attacked and killed. These outrages were but
the precursors of others still more violent, and by the end of the same
month a formidable combination of the heathen mountain tribes had
been formed. But measures were promptly taken for the suppression
of this violence and the restoration of order. A native force was rapidly
enrolled and placed under the command of Captain L. F. Knollys, the
Governor’s aide-de-camp and after a brief and arduous campaign, in
which he was ably assisted by public officers and other civilians, the
aggressors were entirely defeated and disarmed. A permanent station
was then formed on the hills at a place called “ Fort Carnarvon,” which
for some years subsequently was occupied by a small force of armed
native constabulary. Resident Commissioners were appointed to the
mountain districts, which for executive convenience were divided into
the two Provinces of Colo East and Colo West. The prompt and suc-
cessful manner in which this perplexing and dangerous situation was
met and disposed of, gave confidence and satisfaction both to settlers
and the civilised natives of the Colony. From this time onwards,
apart from spasmodic outbursts of unrest which were easily dealt with,
the native race settled down in a truly remarkable degree to the new
order of Government. To-day the Fijian is a law-abiding and peaceful
citizen who, in numberless ways during the late war, gave practical
evidence of his loyalty to his King.


III. CONSTITUTION.
THE Government of Fiji is administered by a Governor, who is
advised by an Executive Council; the Letters Patent provide
also for a Legislative Council, the Governor being President of
both. Prior to 1904 the Legislative Council consisted of six official
members, who were public officers, and four unofficial members who
were nominated by the Governor with the approval of the Secretary of
State for the Colonies. The Constitution was altered by Letters Patent
dated the 21st March, 1904, which provided for triennial Legislative
Councils consisting of ten official members, six elected members and
two native Fijian members. The new Constitution directed that the
elected members should be elected as follows:
(1) Three members by electors not engaged in the cultivation of
land and residents of the Municipalities of Suva or Levuka;
two of such members to represent Suva and one to repre-
sent Levuka.
(2) Two members by electors engaged in the cultivation of land,
of not less than 100 acres in extent, other than for the
production of sugar.
(3) One member by electors being directors or managers of com-
panies engaged within the Colony in the production or
manufacture of sugar.
Certain of the provisions of the new Constitution were found in
practice to be unworkable; amendments were made, and finally the
Constitution was consolidated by the Letters Patent of the 31st Janu-
ary, 1914 and the 20th July, 1916.
These Letters Patent provided for a Legislative Council consisting
of the Governor as President, not more than twelve nominated members,
seven elected members, and two native members. Of the twelve nomi-
nated members, eleven were required to be persons holding public offices
and one might be a British subject not holding any such office. During
the period 1916 up to 1929, when new Letters Patent were passed, a
member of the Indian community held the twelfth nominated seat, but
there was no special provision made for the election of Indian members
or for the grant of the franchise to Indians.
The Colony was divided, for the purpose of electing the seven elected
members, into six electoral divisions, each of which, with the exception
of the division comprised by the Suva Municipality, which elected two
members, elected one member as its representative in the Legislative
Council. The native members were selected by the Governor from


names submitted by the Great Council of Chiefs. The method of selec-
tion, which has not been varied by the Letters Patent of 1929, is more
particularly described later in this article.
From 1916 onwards the question of the extension of the franchise
to the Indian settlers in the Colony became one of increasing promin-
ence. It was finally decided that the material and political progress of
this class had reached a stage, which justified the grant of a moderate
measure of direct political representation to Indians in the Legislative
Council.
On the 9th February, 1929, new Letters Patent revoking those of
the 31st January, 1914 and of the 20th July, 1916, and providing inter
alia for the registration of Indians as electors and for the representation
of the Indian community in the Council passed the Great Seal of the
United Kingdom. The new Letters Patent were brought into force in
the Colony on the Ist May, 1929. On the same date as that on which
the new Letters Patent were passed, new Royal Instructions also were
passed. These provide inter alia for an Executive Council consisting
of the Colonial Secretary, Attorney-General and Colonial Treasurer of the
Colony (the last-named not previously having been an ex officio member),
styled ex officio Members of the Executive Council, and of such other
persons as were, on the date of the passing of the Letters Patent, Mem-
bers of the said Council, or as may thereafter from time to time be
appointed. Every Member, other than an ex officio Member of the
Executive Council is required to vacate his seat in the Council at the
end of five years from the date of the instrument by which, or in pursu-
ance of which, he is appointed; or at such earlier date or at the end of
such shorter period as may be provided by such instrument. Provi-
sional appointments to fill vacant seats are provided for, and the Gov-
ernor may suspend any person from the exercise of his functions as a
Member, reporting such suspension forthwith to the Secretary of
State.
The suspension may be removed by the Governor or disallowed by
His Majesty through the Secretary of State. The Governor shall
attend and preside at all meetings of the Executive Council, unless pre-
vented by illness or other grave cause, and, in his absence, such Member
as the Governor may appoint, or in the absence of such Member, or if
no such Member be appointed, the senior Member of the Council
actually present shall preside. The principal difference between the
constitution of the Executive Council under the Royal Instructions of
1929 and the Royal Instructions of 1914 is found in the provision by
which Members, other than ex officio vacate their seats at definite periods.


14
NATIVE GIRLS.


Above; THE TRIANGLE, SUVA


Below: THE PORT OF LEVUKA, OVALAU ISLAND.


15
FIRE STATION, SUVA.


The new Letters Patent brought into force on the Ist May, 1929,
provide for a Legislative Council consisting of the Governor as President,
not more than thirteen nominated members, six European Elected Mem-
bers, three Native Members and three Indian Elected Members. The
nominated members must be public officers. The native members are
nominated, in the first instance, by the Great Council of Chiefs (consti-
tuted by Native Regulation No. 3 of 1927) which submits the names of
not less than four and not more than six of its number who are able
to speak and understand the English language, and from these the
Governor selects three to be members of the Legislative Council.
In respect of European representation the Colony which had pre-
viously been divided into six electoral divisions is divided into five
electoral divisions, each of which, with the exception of the Southern
Division which elects two members, elects one member as its representa-
tive in the Legislative Council.
(1) Southern Electoral Division comprising the Provinces of Rewa
(inclusive of the Municipality of Suva), Namosi, Serua, Naita-
siri, Colo East, Tailevu, and Kadavu. (The Municipality of
Suva had previously formed a separate Electoral Division.)
(2) Eastern Division, comprising the Provinces of Lomaiviti and
Lau and the island of Rotuma and its dependencies. (Rotuma
had not previously been included in any Electoral Division.)
(3) Vanualevu and Taveuni Division, comprising the Provinces of
Macuata, Bua and Cakaudrove.
(4) Northern Division, comprising the Provinces of Ra and Colo
North and Ba.
(5) Western Division, comprising the Provinces of Colo West,
Nadroga, Nadi and Lautoka.
No person is qualified to be a European elected member unless he—
(1) is qualified to be registered as a European elector; and
(2) has been continuously resident for two years in the Colony;
and either
(3) (a) possesses and has possessed for at least twelve months
next before the election, in his own right or in right of
his wife, freehold property in the Colony of the clear
value of five hundred pounds, or of the annual value of
fifty pounds over and above all charges and incum-
brances affecting the same; or
(6) has been in occupation for at least twelve months next
before the election, in his own right or in right of his wife,


of freehold or leasehold property in the Colony of the
extent of five hundred acres; or
( c) rents and has rented for at least twelve months next before
the election freehold or leasehold property in the Colony
of the yearly value of one hundred pounds; or
(d) is possessed of a nett annual income from all sources of
not less than two hundred pounds.
These qualifications which are the same in all Electoral Divisions
are identical with those which European elected members representing
Suva and the Eastern Electoral Division were required to possess in acord-
ance with the Letters Patent previously in force. The qualifications
under the previous Letters Patent had been slightly varied as regards
the other Electoral Divisions.
For the purpose of Indian representation the Colony is divided into
the following three electoral divisions:—
(1) The Provinces of Rewa (inclusive of the Municipality of Suva),
Namosi, Serua, Naitasiri, Colo East, Tailevu and Kadavu.
(2) The Provinces of Ra, Colo North, Colo West, Nadroga, Nadi,
Lautoka and Ba.
(3) The Provinces of Lomaiviti, Lau, Macuata, Bua and Cakaudrove,
and the Island of Rotuma and its dependencies.
No person is eligible for election either as a European or Indian
representative who is in receipt of a salary payable out of the public
revenue of the Colony.
All questions which arise as to the right of any person to be or to
remain an elected member of the Legislative Council are referred to and
decided by the Supreme Court of the Colony.
No person is qualified to be registered as a European elector unless
he—
(1) is the son of parents of European descent, or, being the son or
lineal descendant of a European father, can read, write and
speak the English language;
(2) is a British subject by birth or naturalisation having effect in
the Colony;
(3) Is of the age of twenty-one years or upwards;
(4) has been continuously resident in the Colony for twelve months;
and
(5) is possessed either—
(a) of freehold or leasehold property, or both, within the Colony
of the total yearly value of twenty pounds over and above
all charges and incumbrances affecting the same; or


(b) of a nett annual income, from all sources, of not less than
one hundred and twenty pounds.
Provided that no person who is in receipt of salary payable out of
the public revenue of the Colony shall be capable of being a European
elector.
These qualifications are identical with those required of electors
under the Letters Patent previously in force.
No person is qualified to be an Indian elector unless he—
(1) is the son of parents of Indian descent;
(2) is a British subject;
(3) is of the age of twenty-one years or upwards;
(4) has been continuously resident in the Colony for twelve
months;
(5) can read and write a simple sentence and sign his name in
any one of the following languages to the satisfaction of the
registration officer—
English,
Hindi,
Urdu,
Tamil,
Telegu,
Gurmukki; and
(6) has, for a period of not less than six months immediately pre-
ceding the date on which the Electoral Roll is closed, either —
(a) been in possession of freehold or leasehold property
in the Colony of a total yearly value of five pounds
over and above all charges and incumbrances thereon;
or
(b) been in possession of a nett annual cash income of
seventy-five pounds; or
(c) been and remains the holder of a Government or Muni-
cipal licence issued under any Ordinance, the annual
cost of the licence being not less than five pounds.
Provided that no person who is in receipt of salary payable out of the
public revenue of the Colony shall be capable of being an Indian elector.
The Letters Patent do not confer the franchise on females.
The Letters Patent also provide that the Governor may at any time,
by proclamation prorogue or dissolve the Legislative Council, and that
he shall dissolve the Legislative Council at the expiration of three years
from the date of the return of the first writ at the last general election
if the Council shall not have been sooner dissolved.


Every member of the Council has the right, after giving notice, to
propose any Ordinance or resolution provided that it does not impose
any tax or dispose of or charge any part of the public revenue of the
Colony. All legislation dealing with taxation or the disposal of public
funds can be introduced only by the direction or the express sanction
of the Governor.
It may be added that the native Fijians retain a large share of self-
government. Their District and Provincial Councils, constituted under
Native Regulation No. 3 of 1927, have powers to make and pass resolu-
tions, subject to the approval of the Governor, for the good government
and welfare of the native population of their respective districts and
provinces. The Great Council of Chiefs, already referred to, meets
from time to time under the presidency of the officer who is charged
with the direction of native affairs. It is an advisory body with special
powers laid down in Native Regulations No. 3 of 1927, and is opened
and closed by the Governor in person.
The Native Affairs Ordinance of 1876 provides for a Native Regu-
lation Board, consisting of the Governor, two members of the Legis-
lative Council and such other persons, European and native, as the
Governor may nominate. This Board has powers to make regulations
with regard to the marriage and divorce of natives, succession to pro-
perty, the jurisdiction and powers of native courts and native magis-
trates in matters of civil and criminal procedure, and also in regard to
such other matters as have reference to the well-being and good govern-
ment of the native Fijian population.


18
“ TRAVELLERS' TREE " NATIVE POLICE .


19
IN THE BOTANICAL GARDENS, SUVA .


IV. COURTS OF JUSTICE.
THE constitution and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of Fiji are
laid down in Ordinance No. 4 of 1875, which provides for a Chief
Justice, appointed by Letters Patent under the Public Seal of
the Colony by the Governor in accordance with the instructions of the
Secretary of State for the Colonies.
The Supreme Court, within the Colony, has the same jurisdiction
as His Majesty's High Courts of Justice in England. The Common
Law, Rules of Equity and Statutes of general application which were
in force in England prior to the 2nd of January, 1875—the date on
which the Colony obtained a local legislature—extend to the Colony,
but only in so far as the circumstances of the Colony and its inhabitants
and the limits of the Colonial jurisdiction permit, and are subject to
any Ordinance passed by the Colonial Legislature. In addition other
Imperial Acts may be specifically applied to the Colony by local enact-
ment. Right of appeal from the Supreme Court in its Civil Juris-
diction lies to the Privy Council.
Q The Colony is divided into districts, to each of which is assigned a
District Commissioner, with limited jurisdiction, who is, ex officio, a
Commissioner of the Supreme Court. Appeals against the decisions of
District Commissioners are determined by the Supreme Court.
District Courts are held by Native Stipendiary Magistrates, whose
jurisdiction is limited to adjudge minor infringements of Native Regu-
lations which apply only to native Fijians. Right of appeal lies to the
Provincial Court of the province in which the offence was committed.
All graver breaches of Native Regulations are dealt with by the
Provincial Courts, at each of which a District Commissioner and a
Native Stipendiary Magistrate preside. Appeals from the Provincial
Courts, in their primary jurisdiction, are decided by the Supreme Court.


Class of Population.
1921 Census.
Estimated,
31/12/28.
Increase.
Per Cent.
Europeans
3,878
4,591
713
18-38
Half-castes
2,781
3,194
413
14-85
Fijians..
84,475
91,028
6,553
7-75
Polynesians
1,564
2,230
666
42-58
Indians
60,634
70,996
10,362
17-09
Rotumans
2,235
2,260
25
112
Chinese
910
1,352
442
48-57
Others
789
1,142
353
44-74
Totals ..
157,266
176,793
19,527
12-41
v. POPULATION.
THE estimated population of Fiji and Rotuma combined on the
31st December, 1928, was 176,793. Of this number 91,028
were Fijians and 70,996 were Indians, comprising 51*50 per
cent, and 40*15 per cent, respectively of the total population. The
remaining 8*35 per cent, was made up of 4,591 Europeans, 2,260 Rotu-
mans, 2,230 Other Polynesians, 3,194 Half-castes, 1,352 Chinese, and
1,142 others.
These figures compared with the 1921 Census Returns show that
the population has increased during the last seven years by 19,527
persons, which is equal to an aggregate rate of increase of 12*41 per
cent. The following is a table showing the estimated increase of popu-
lation since the last Census taken in 1921:
The population of Native Rotumans although showing a slight
increase, may be said to be stationary. These interesting Polynesian
people live in a small self-contained group of islands, some 220 miles
north-north-west of Fiji. The sex constitution of their population shows
a more satisfactory balance than that existing in Fiji, and the numbers
of the population have varied little during the last fifty years. The
estimated number of Rotumans on 31st December, 1928, shows that the
total decrease since the date on which the first Census was taken (1881)
amounts to 192. Rotuma lies well outside the established trade routes and
consequently its population is not appreciably affected by migration.
The distribution of the population on the 31st December, 1928, was
Fiji, 174,391; Rotuma, 2,402. There were 23-50 persons to the square
mile in Fiji and 171-57 persons to the square mile in Rotuma. The
average birth-rate per thousand of the total population for the year 1928
was 33-05, and the average death-rate per thousand of the total popu-


Class of Population.
Birth-rate per 1,000.
Death-rate per 1,000.
1924.
1925.
1926.
1927.
1928.
1924.
1925.
1926.
1927.
1928.
Europeans ..
33-81
16-68
18-16
24-78
17-42
10-44
9-08
9-32
9-60
7-62
Half-castes
24 06
29-65
31-91
23 08
32-56
4-40
7-33
12-69
7-37
9-39
Fijians
34-42
32-29
33-95
32-53
33-36
22-70
22-75
2309
22-98
24-95
Indians
34-32
3314
32-65
27-72
34-0
5-80
7-25
8-26
9-42
10-80
Rotumans ..
44-49
56-97
48-95
50-47
52-21
42-20
64-38
28-29
36-29
51-77
Class of Population.
1924.
1925.
1926.
1927.
1928.
Europeans
24
28
38
34
47
Half-castes
33
22
14
16
41
Fijians
701
857
708
760
906
Indians
182
174
195
254
276
Rotumans..
39
23
37
28
11
lation for the year 1928 was 18-65. The following table shows the
average birth- and death-rates per thousand for the years 1924 to 1928
inclusive: —
The following table shows the number of marriages registered
during the last five years:—


VI. THE FIJIANS.
ALTHOUGH the Fijians have a wonderful wealth of tradition
and folklore, much of which has not yet been exploited, few
of the tribes that inhabit the many beautiful islands which
go to make up the Colony can trace their descent beyond seven or eight
generations.
The vestiges of a mere handful of startling, or unusual, events
have been preserved in rhythmical chants which have been passed on,
with such embellishments or suppressions as the fancy of succeeding
generations suggested—a fate common to all oral traditions in countries
where the art of writing was unknown.
Some of these fragments tell of the arrival in canoes of the pro-
genitors of the race, driven by gales from somewhere to the west of
Fiji; others tell of the mythical wars that took place in the sacred
mountain ranges of the Kauvadra, wars which, like so many mighty
issues, originated in a seeming trifle—a squabble over the ownership of
a domesticated jungle fowl; others again speak of “ stranger ” diseases
brought by shipwrecked European mariners who, by the rigid quaran-
tine customs of the country, were slain and eaten —for no man “ with
salt water in his eyes ” was allowed to climb their beaches.
The early Fijian was undoubtedly a ruthless savage, a stark fighter
whose pastime seemed to be war. In this he spared neither woman
nor child and, in the treacherous methods resorted to for overcoming
an enemy, he showed diabolical cunning. As a cannibal he took first
place in the world’s history, his country becoming known to early navi-
gators as the “ Cannibal Isles of Fiji.” Yet, side by side with these
barbarous practices, he evolved a wonderful social culture and a
ceremonious code of customs far ahead of any of his Melanesian
brothers. As a craftsman he stood alone among them, his houses
and huge sea-going canoes being unrivalled. As a potter he showed,
in the South Seas, unsurpassed dexterity, although the principle of the
potter's wheel was unknown to him.
We reach the threshold of his tribal traditions, and the gradual
rise of custom, in the old village communities known as the Yavutu,
beyond which no Fijian can trace custom. From this small social
unit the tribe sprang.
The respective founders of these settlements, although men of
common clay, became venerated by succeeding generations as '‘ancestor”
gods, who still watched over the destinies of their people. To them
the first cup of yaqona (known generally in the Pacific as kava) was


FIJIAN HOUSE RAFTS.
Used for conveying produce to market .
23


A FIJIAN GIRL.
Photo by L. N. Anderson
23


poured out as a libation, and the food crops were never harvested until
the first fruits had been presented at their shrines. Their spirits
were believed to become manifest in the form of some animal which
became the sacred totem of the tribe—never killed or eaten, even in
times of dire privation. In the mountain districts of Vitilevu bird
totems seem to have predominated, but as yet no intensive study of the
subject has been undertaken.
The reigning chief was always the member of the tribe who was
nearest in descent from the “ ancestor ” god. In his veins ran the
precious blood in its purest form. He dwelt within the pale of his
great ancestor’s tabu and, as a consequence, his person was sacred. It
was an offence against the strict rule of custom for any common person
to touch him or any of his personal belongings. He was the sole
arbiter of all disputes, against whose decision there could be no appeal.
But there is a rare instance in the traditions of Vitilevu where an
outsider, not of the sacred blood, peacefully usurped the chiefly position
and founded a new dynasty. It occurred in Nadroga about the middle
of the 17th century. At that time two tribal groups, who had come
from the sacred fastness of the Kauvadra, had established themselves
on the Sigatoka River. There was some controversy as to which of
them should supply the common ruler of the joint settlement; but
apparently someone was selected, as a party was sent to the coast to
fish for the installation feast. Wandering along the deserted shores
the fishermen discovered on the seaward face of a small island a
stranger sitting on the rocks. He was a man of striking appearance,
tall, and light-skinned. He had the demeanour of a chief, and to the
astonished fishers he seemed to have been miraculously sent to be the
ruler of the new settlement. So they forgot their time-honoured
custom of slaying all men “ with salt water in their eyes ” and took
the stranger to their village, where he was accepted by all, and
formally installed as chief with the title of Kalevu, the “ Great One.”
This man who, in defiance of custom, stepped into the place of honour,
was probably some sturdy Polynesian castaway —the survivor of a
wrecked canoe caught in the great north-west drift. His descendants
founded one of the most powerful confederations in Fiji, one of them
being a signatory to the deed which ceded Fiji to Great Britain.
The inhabitants of these old village communes seem, in the earliest
times, to have been divided into two distinct branches. Vestiges of
this primal separation can still be traced, particularly among the
mountain tribes of Vitilevu. As time advanced the need for special-
isation set in and the community gradually resolved itself into a


series of separate units of population, each with a distinct status and
carrying out separate functions in the body politic. These, although
having different names, were bound together with the bond of kinship,
speaking a common dialect, and known collectively by a distinctive
generic name. Thus the tribe slowly emerged in Fiji from the small
unit that was its progenitor. But in the evolution the tribal bond
still remained one of kinship rather than of common territorial rights.
A special word may be said of that branch of the community
who specialised as carpenters. Pages could well be written about the
patience and manual dexterity of the ancient Fijian craftsman. His
outfit consisted mainly of fire and a few stone and shell implements.
Strips of coral rock from the reef served as rasps and his polishing
medium was but a few handfuls of sea-sand. With his meagre equipment
he felled large forest trees and fashioned them into huge double canoes,
capable of carrying upwards of three hundred persons and making
long sea voyages. The principle of nailing, as we understand it, was
barely known to him, but he scarfed and mortised timbers with
admirable skill. Unfortunately there is now no specimen of these
double sea-going canoes in existence which we can examine. But
there still remain with us some well preserved old yaqona bowls, made
by the “ stone age ” carpenter, long before the introduction of iron
tools. Some of these are at least four feet in diameter, perfectly
circular in shape, and standing on four or more equally spaced legs—
not made separately and joined on, but cut as an integral part of the
bowl.
When we remember that these tanoa, as they are called, were
laboriously carved with the primitive tools at his disposal out of solid
blocks of Vesi (Afzelia bijuga, Gray), one of the hardest and most
durable woods of the world, we can have nothing but admiration for
the old Fijian artist who fashioned them.
A distinctive badge of a tribe was its death-cry—it could hardly
be called a war-cry; for, unlike the Scottish Highlanders, the Fijians
did not rush into battle with a slogan on their lips. Indeed, frontal
fighting was barely known in their warfare. The cry was only used
after the Fijian warrior had clubbed his enemy. He then threw back
his head and screamed the death-cry the strain of which ended in a
blood-curdling falsetto yell, known as the Kaila. Even in these days
of placid peace to hear these piercing yells, at some of the wonderful
war dances still performed on special occasions, is startling and awesome.
It served the double purpose of apprising the killer’s friends of his victory
and his foes of the death of an adherent. This unhappy cry usually


consisted of a single word, a place name such as a tarn, or hilltop, near
the old Yavutu —in some cases it was the actual name of the tribe.
The tribal lands were naturally bounded in extent by the tribe’s
ability to hold its marches, and were divided roughly into what had
been brought under cultivation, and the forest or virgin land. From
the latter additions to the larder were obtained in the form of wild
yams and other edible roots. It also supplied all the materials neces-
sary for housebuilding, and the timber from which canoes and house-
hold utensils were fashioned. It was therefore as material to the
existence of the tribe as the planting lands.
It would unduly prolong this article to attempt to set out the
customs which gradually came to govern the ownership of land. But
it may be said that they were not complicated, nor was their signi-
ficance obscure. They were such customs as would naturally emerge
from the needs of a people, living under a patriarchal form of govern-
ment, unaffected by migration, travelling along a line of social and
economic evolution to a higher culture.
Probably through family feuds, insufficiency of lands necessary
for the needs of a growing people, or other causes, overflows from the
original settlement took place. These off-shoots continued to branch
and found new settlements, each carrying with it the tradition of the
old “ ancestor ” god and his sacred totem. Although in the march
of events and the vicissitudes of savage life the ramifications of their
descent from the parent Yavutu became blurred, or entirely lost, the
knowledge of, and veneration for, the common “ ancestor ” god
remained.
Through this arose a peculiar relationship-custom that is some-
what difficult for an alien mind to grasp. The basic principle under-
lying this strange custom was the right of each member of a tribe to be
considered an owner-in-common of the property of another tribe to
whom he was related through a common “ ancestor " god, be it ever
so remotely. The custom came to have far-reaching consequences,
and under British rule has been prohibited by law. Villagers were
liable to be spoiled by far-off relations, with whom probably no inter-
course had taken place for generations, who could stay as long as they
wished as honoured guests and on their departure carry off whatever
booty they listed. Their hosts could make no protest; the custom
was sacred, and for the time being their relations had the “ freedom
of the city." The custom had the advantage, if such it can be called,
of being reciprocal. The people who had stood by while their plan-
tations were ravished, their pig-styes emptied, and even their houses


stripped bare, had the melancholy satisfaction of knowing that some
day they could return the visit and loot the land of their spoilers.
Succession to all hereditary titles generally followed along the line
of brotherhood. Thus, when a chief died, the position was held in
turn by each of his surviving brothers in order of seniority, and, on
the passing of the last brother, the title reverted to the eldest son of
the eldest brother. This rule was not invariable, for anyone who was
a weakling or inefficient was passed over and the brother with the
more forceful character selected. Such a system of succession was well
suited to the conditions under which the early Fijians lived, as it
ensured the tribe having the man of ripest experience as its head in
times when its welfare, and even its existence, depended on having a
cunning and capable fighter as its leader. That the Fijian had
advanced well in social evolution is gathered from the fact that with
him succession was strictly agnate. In parts of Vanualevu the sister’s
son was sometimes brought in, but this was rare and resorted to only
in cases of dire necessity.
The chief was installed with more or less ceremony. Although the
formalities of the installation rite differed among the many tribes of Fiji,
the “drinking in” portion was universal; it was, in fact, the essential
element of the whole performance. This simple formality consisted
of a cup of ceremoniously-prepared yaqona being presented to and
partaken of by the chief in the presence of all the headmen of the tribe.
The yaqona bowl was placed opposite, but some distance from,
the chief elect, and between him and the bowl was stretched out a rope
of plaited sinnet about six or more feet in length—often fancifully
ornamented with white cowrie shells—one end of which was fastened
to the bowl. After this was done it would have been to court sudden
death to cross in front of the chief. The yaqona was made to the
accompaniment of an ancient song, portions of which resembled the
sonorous strains of a Gregorian chant.
When the yaqona was made the sinnet rope was quickly coiled up,
and the cupbearer, after performing several genuflections and pos-
turings which required good muscles and training to execute with any
degree of adroitness, carried the cup of yaqona to the chief. While
he drank a continuous clapping of hands was kept up, and on finishing
he threw down the cup—a coconut shell —with a deft turn of the wrist
that set it spinning like a top, and a great shout arose: “It is empty.’’
At Levuka, shortly after Cession, a similar ceremony was accorded
to the present King while a midshipman on H.M.S. “ Bacchante,
and recently to the Prince of Wales at Suva while on his Empire tour


26
A FIJIAN DANCE.


MA KING YAQONA (“ KAVA ”).
The bowl is carved from a single block of hard wood.
The kneeling man holds the bamboo “ water-bottle
27


in H.M.S. “ Renown.” The “ drinking in ” ceremony is performed to
all Governors at a representative meeting of Fijian Chiefs shortly after
arrival in the Colony.
The plant from which the beverage is made is the Piper methysticum.
It is widely spread over the South Seas, and much has been written
about it. It is better known to Europeans under the Polynesian name
“ kava .” The root is the portion used. In the old days it was first
chewed by boys into a thick viscid mass from which the drink was made
by dilution with water, but the root is now pounded or grated. It is
strained by an ingenious process of passing a wisp (made from the
bast fibres of a native species of Hibiscus) through the fluid. The
strainer is wrung out and the gritty particles adhering to it are shaken
off. This is repeated until the beverage is cleared. An excellent and
detailed description of the movements gone through in straining yaqona
is to be found in “ Mariner’s Tonga.”
To attempt to describe the taste of yaqona would be to rob the
uninitiated of a new experience; far better that it should remain, like
“ Yarrow stream,” an anticipation—a pleasure yet to be realised.
The Fijian showed extraordinary devotion to his Chief, and
willingly sacrificed his life to save the sacred person. There is a well
known story of a chief who was wrecked off the Serua coast, which
like most of the Fijian waters is infested with sharks. His men formed
a ring round him for his protection and, as one by one they were dragged
down in crimson swirls, the remnants of the band closed up the gaps with
their bodies, until only three of them reached the shore alive. Many
similar acts of devotion could be cited. Such happenings serve to give
us a cross section, as it were, of the whole system of ancestor worship
and a glimpse of the tabus which hedged the sacred chief.
When the Fijian chief visited one of the outlying villages of his
domain, or some other tribe living under his protection, the people
swam off to his canoe and presented him with whales’ teeth —the sacred
currency of Fiji—before he landed. It was an act of homage and,
although few w T ords were uttered, the simple phrases used in making
the presentation implied propitiation and fealty. It was probably the
most sacred custom the Fijian knew of and was only performed to the
high chief, the descendant of the old ,f ancestor ” god. This picturesque
and impressive ceremony, now usually performed on land, is always
accorded to the Governor of the Colony. To people of lower rank a
freshly dug root of yaqona is presented as a formal welcoming.
Coming to the internal or domestic customs of the early Fijian
settlements we find that marriage was marked by a distinct paucity


of ceremony. It had no religious significance and the heathen priests
had no part in it. In the case of the chiefs, marriage was a judicious
political arrangement, so as to keep up the balance of power among the
tribes with whom they intermarried, for a custom prevailed by which
the children had extraordinary privileges in their mother's tribe; a
custom common to many races outside the limits of the Pacific.
The chief’s daughter as a rule was betrothed while she was but a
child by the mutual interchange of presents between the families. The
presents sent by the friends of the bride-elect in acceptance of the pro-
posal were known as “ the knotting of the bride’s girdle.” Until she
reached the age of puberty the young chieftainess went about unclothed,
and to preserve the texture of her skin she was not allowed out of doors
until after sunset. The badge of virginity was her temple locks, which
were allowed to grow and hang down over her shoulders in finely plaited
strands. On marriage these tresses were shorn off by the bridegroom.
With all his savagery the Fijian showed a delicacy in his marriage
customs sadly lacking in the more cultured Polynesian tribes, among
whom the public ascertainment of the virginity of the bride was a neces-
sary part of the ceremony. A somewhat naive but detailed description
of this, to say the least, frank custom, as it prevailed among the early
Rotumans, a purely Polynesian people, may be found in M. de Rienzie's
" Oceanic.”
Another divergence in custom between the Polynesians and Fijians
was the latter's invariable custom of tattooing women. The Poly-
nesians were, and are, the most expert tattooers in the South Seas,
but their art is lavished entirely on the men; their women, save for a
few ornamental and inconspicuous dots, are clear skinned.
The Fijian women on the other hand were elaborately tattooed,
but the ornamentation was confined to that portion of the body which
always among Fijians was strictly clothed. Thus arose the expression,
" woman’s hidden decoration.” The parts tattooed were from a line
below the waist, round the body, and downwards to a line round the
thighs, about two inches below the fork of the body. The whole of
this area was closely pigmented by a series of linear reticulations
enclosing many clear untattooed lenticular spaces.
The implements used were of the simplest description, and needed
but little skill to manufacture. A portion, about eighteen inches in
length, was cut from the leafstalk of the Giant Arum, a plant common
in Fiji, with a huge leafstalk at least two inches in diameter, and nearly
circular in section. Along the long axis of this were embedded four
thorns of the wild lemon tree, arranged in two equal rows with the sharp


points projecting about a quarter of an inch and the same distance
apart. When dry this made a serviceable tattooing instrument,
flexible and easy to manipulate. The mallet was simply a portion of
the thick footstalk of a banana cluster, and the pigment used was made
from the candle nut.
A woman was tattooed at two stages of her life. For obvious
reasons she was partly tattooed while still young and subsequently the
ornamental girdle was completed, usually after her first child was
weaned.
It was customary on the marriage of a chief’s daughter for her
people to present her with the use of a small piece of land as a dowry,
described, somewhat fancifully, as her “leaf plucking place.” It was
an antique method of presenting a dinner service, for these primitive
people used leaves instead of plates. The young bride was thus assured
of a plentiful supply of vegetable platters on which to place her husband’s
food after it came out of the native oven. These old-fashioned ovens,
still in use, were bowl-shaped pits, about four feet deep, and sometimes
as large as fifty feet in circumference. The method of heating was to
fill the oven with a large stack of firewood, about four feet in height,
covered with a quantity of stones. As the firewood burned away the
highly heated stones fell to the bottom of the pit. The remains of the
charred wood were removed and the stones raked out evenly over the
bottom of the oven. The food was then filled into the glowing pit,
covered with a thick layer of leaves, and finally mounded up with earth
so as to conserve the heat. The carcases of pigs were usually stuffed
with hot stones to ensure thorough cooking. Fish, or prawns, were
wrapped in leaves before being placed in the oven, while native pud-
dings, of which there are many varieties, were tied up in what has come
to be known as “ The Macintosh of Fiji ” —young banana leaves warmed
over a fire to make them pliable and waterproof. The oven remained
covered up until it was considered that the food was sufficiently cooked,
it was then opened and the food removed.
The Fijian delighted in feasts, and when he had to entertain a
friendly tribe, he aimed at lavish profusion—and it may be said that
his descendants to-day have the same hospitable instincts. The mis-
sionary, Williams, who lived in Fiji close on a hundred years ago, gave
some graphic descriptions of feasts he witnessed. In describing a
wedding banquet at Bau he said: “As in other native feasts, so here
it is easier to specify the good cheer by yards and hundred-weights than
by dishes. When Tanoa gave his daughter to Gavidi, the Lasakau
chief, there was provided for the entertainment of the friends assembled


a wall of fish five feet high and twenty yards in length, besides turtle
and pigs and vegetables in profusion. One dish at this feast was ten
feet long, four feet wide and three deep, spread over with green leaves
on which were placed roast pigs and turtles." Truly a gargantuan feast !
After the ovens were opened the food was placed in large circular
baskets lined with leaves and piled on the village green, close to the
gable end of the chief's house; never in front, for that part was sacred
and reserved exclusively for the chief and his immediate relations.
There was but one way by which a commoner could gain access to his
chief's house and that was by the gable door. No rule of etiquette was
more strictly observed and enforced and, in spite of many changes, it
is still punctiliously followed to-day.
After the feast had been ceremoniously presented the chief gave
the order for its division. The greatest care had to be exercised in
attending to the niceties of this ceremony. There was nothing the
Fijian watched more jealously, nothing he was more prone to take
umbrage at, than some slip, however unintentional it may have been,
from the strict rules that govern the division of a feast. But, supposing
a rule be broken, silence would still reign and no “ murmurs " (the
Fijian word means much more) would be heard at the time. But the
insult rankled and, although the offended ones had to nurse their wrath
in silence, it lost nothing in intensity by the suppression. When the
opportunity came these insulted feelings would burst out with renewed
vigour. Many of Fiji's most ruthless wars, in which scores of villages
were sacked and hundreds of people slaughtered, had their origin in
some supposed slight at the sharing out of a feast. To the present-
day Fijian it is still an event of more than passing importance. An
onlooker cannot but be struck with the keen, interested look on the
faces of the ring of silent watchers while the native masters of ceremony,
whispering among themselves, wrestle with the problem of making
suitable division. But as soon as the different shares are proclaimed
the tension is broken, and conversation and cheery badinage break out
as each party goes to carry off its share of the spoil.
Turtle was sacred to the chiefs and was eaten by them only. The
flesh was sometimes cut in small pieces and, with some of the green fat,
tied up in a banana leaf and baked in the native oven. This was, and
still is, a deservedly-prized dish. In some parts turtle tripe was regarded
as a great delicacy. After being cooked it was rolled up in balls, and in
the division of the feast this was measured off “by the yard."
Snakes —none of which are venomous in Fiji—were also specially
reserved for the chiefs' consumption. They were often preserved in


FOOD STACKED FOR CEREMONIAL PRESENTATION.
Note the whole roast pigs placed at intervals
on top of the stacks of cooked taro and yams.
30


FIJIAN SPEARING FISH.
Photo by L. N. Anderson.
31


pits and fattened up for some special event, when they were rolled in
banana leaves and roasted in the oven.
The Fijian had little need to hoard or preserve food against a lean
season. His country was blessed with a soil which, with but little
cultivation, yielded abundant crops; his lagoons swarmed with many
varieties of delicious fish, there was also a profusion of wild food to be had
in the jungle for the digging, while the coral reefs were a never-failing
source, which he could draw upon from day to day, of additions to the
larder. Nevertheless, at certain seasons, he had on his hands large
quantities of excellent but perishable food, in the form of breadfruit,
which he preserved. His method was to dig a pit, about four feet deep
and fifteen in circumference, and line it well with leaves; into this the
breadfruit was placed. The top was covered with a thick layer of
leaves and heavily weighted down with stones. In about two months
time the contents of the pit became a homogeneous mass, not unlike
soft cheese in colour and consistency, with a highly distinctive odour
not pleasant to European nostrils. The pit was opened from time to
time as required, and portions dug out and washed, kneaded into slabs,
and roasted or boiled. This method of preserving food is still in use,
chestnuts, plantains, and other vegetables being dealt with in the
same way.
The Fijian system of relationship is classificatory, a system which
regards consanguinity from a point of view extremely difficult for a
European to grasp. The late Dr. W. H. R. Rivers, in his monumental
work, “ Melanesian Society,” pointed out that the essential distinction
between such a system and our own is that the former is founded on a
social group, bound together by a belief in a common descent from some
ancestor, or the common possession of a totem, while the latter is founded
entirely on the family unit. It thus denotes relationships rather than
relatives, and has produced a bewildering array of different terms of
relationship and forbidden degrees for which our language has no
equivalents. The subject is too complex to be more than glanced at
in an article such as this. But one aspect, in which the Fijian differed
entirely from the Polynesian and the Indo-Polynesian tribes of the
Pacific, may be looked at, that is the marriage of “ cross cousins.”
With us consanguinity depends solely on the kinship of the
parents; the terms “brother” or “sister” can only be applied to the
children of the same parents; the term “cousin” to the offspring of
parents more or less closely related, irrespective of sex. The Fijian
on the other hand based his distinction upon the sex rather than upon
the degree of kinship of the parents. With him “ brother ” and


“ sister ” included all first cousins whose fathers were brothers, or whose
mothers were sisters, and marriage between them was rigidly pro-
hibited. But in the case of cousins whose respective parents were
brother and sister he saw a wide difference. The question of sex in
the parents not only broke down the barrier of consanguinity but con-
stituted the children of the one the marital complement to the other.
Thus the young male Fijian from his birth was regarded as the natural
husband of the daughters of either his father’s sister or his mother’s
brother. The females could make no choice, they were born the pro-
perty of their male “ cross cousin ” if he desired to take them.
A form of what may be called animistic spiritualism was exten-
sively practised by the early Fijian. The procedure and nomenclature
varied in different parts, but in principle there seems to have been but
little difference. Generally the coastal tribes believed that the spirits
were lured from the sea or watercourses. One method only of “ spirit
catching ” need be mentioned here. A band of youthful would-be
mediums would select some likely place, in full view of the sea, and
beautify the spot by removing all unsightly undergrowth and dead
leaves. Clean, smooth stones would then be built round the roots
of the trees and the place festooned with garlands of greenery. Some
of these spots can be seen to-day and the natural beauty of their
setting at once appeals. Here the youthful band worked them-
selves into ecstasies by chanting invocations to the “ little gods ”to
come to them.
This might have continued for days. Sometimes the spot was
abandoned, a new one selected, and the performance started de novo.
The coming of a spirit was made known to the medium by a feeling of
weight on his shoulders, as though a body had perched itself there.
Then he trembled and subsequently shook violently. When one of
the party had such a seizure the others knew that the “ spirit was upon
him ” and waited silently for " the little god ”to speak. He started by
announcing his name and the mana (that untranslatable word common
throughout the Pacific) he had conferred on his medium. When the
seizure had passed the others explained to the favoured one the name
of his “ familiar ” and the powers bestowed on him. When a sufficiency
had been initiated in this fashion the al fresco meetings were given up
and a " lodge ” was started in the village.
When a Fijian of rank died some of his widows were strangled to
his manes, his male relations chopped off the first joint of the little
finger of their left hands, and the women’s heads were shorn as marks
of mourning. His ghost then passed along the great " Spirit Path ”


where it encountered many strange and startling adventures. It
ultimately reached the great “ jumping off ” place—which points due
wes t —thence it departed to somewhere out in the western ocean where
the Fijian elysium lies.
The great " Spirit Path ” of Vitilevu is a mountain range, known
as the Tuileita , that delights the eye with the beautiful varying colour
effects with which it is clothed. It starts from the western coast
about seven miles south of Lautoka, and visitors to Fiji can get an
excellent view of it in the train journey from Lautoka to Nadi. The
sacredness of the Tuileita to the Fijian of Vitilevu lies in his tradition
that it was along this mountain range that the storm-driven mariners,
who were the great pioneers of the race, travelled in search of a settle-
ment. In fact the name “ Vitilevu ”is said to have arisen out of an
action performed by one of the party on the journey inland. Although
every tribe has its own local " spirit path,” sooner or later these all
converge into the Tuileita and the shades of all departed Fijians follow
in the footsteps of their great progenitors on their way to the common
” jumping off ” place.
Space forbids further reference to the many customs of these highly
interesting people who are undoubtedly one of the finest of the native
races. As a race they have travelled far along the path of development
during the fifty years they have been under the British rule.
To-day they are a contented and industrious people living at peace
with their neighbours and enjoying many of the refinements of civilisa-
tion. They exercise a large measure of self-government and many of
their chiefs occupy positions of considerable responsibility in the Admin-
istration. Native doctors in charge of hospitals look after the health
and physical well-being of their kinsmen, and native magistrates
administer the law in affairs relating to the social system under which
they live. Many native clerks are employed by the Government and
by the commercial houses, and native carpenters and artisans assist in
building and engineering work. Many of the younger generation attend
boarding schools under the direction of European masters and a keen
interest in all branches of progress is taken by the Fijian people. The
visitor to Fiji who has the time to wander amongst their picturesque
villages will find a happy and courteous people alert and eager for
development and progress.


THE LEGEND OF THE VILAVILAIRVO
( Fire-Dance of the Natives of the Island of Bengga, Fiji).
By J. W. DAVIDSON —All Rights Reserved.
In days of old, a fabulist—
None knew from whence he came—
Made night more jocund far than day,
And Draindray was his name.
Encyclopaedia gossip stale
You will not find the same,
For reason that this worthy was
Of purely local fame.
But Nakauema 1 knew him well,
And warmed with life and light
When filled with village folk, who came
To hear him yarn at night.
And every villager, in turn,
Of Navakaisese, 2
The story-teller’s due reward
Right courteously would pay.
So Tooing-Galita, one morn,
Went, as he had agreed,
And thrust his arm into a hole —
To seek the poet’s meed —
Wherein abode an eel, perdu,
Which eel no man did see,
No man save ’GMita alone,
Wherefore well pleased was he.
But prize so good some toil may claim,
As ’Galita perceives,
So he must dig, anon to find
A few hybiscus leaves.
But on he dug, and dug, and dug,
And when at length he spied
Fragments of masi, 3 in his quest
More eagerly he plied.
And deeper still he delved, and deep
He plunged his arm of length,
And clutched a hand and gript it tight,
And hauled with all his strength.
With might and main he tugged and strained
And, resolute as warm,
Unearthed a living animal
Fashioned in human form.
The creature, thus unearthed, sat down
And shiver’d sore, and shook,
And clapt its hands to show respect,
And wore a frightened look.
While all amazed the other gazed
Nor any speech found he
Till that strange, trembling dwarf proposed
His god of war to be !
“ My tribe, Naivilangata call’d,
Are warriors of Sawauf
Make other suit, puissant elf,
I seek no war-god now.”
“ Your god of Tingga 5 if I he
All shall your skill applaud
“ I have no rival in that game
“ Well then, your sailing god ? ”
* “ Vilavilairevo,” means fire-dance. .
1 “ Nakauema,” the name of the bure (or house) used as the village town hall, in the village of Navakaisese.
2 “ Navakaisese ” the name of the village.
3 “ Masi” (also malo) native cloth, made of the bark of the paper-mulberry (Broussonetia).
4 “ Sawau,” the name of the district in which is the village of Navakaisese.
“ Kai Sawau,” the inhabitants of Sawau.
5 “ Tingga,” a game in which the competitors hurl reeds weighted at one end with the bean of the walai,
or wataqiri, the bean or fruit is called ai Cibi and ai Lavo.


34
FIRE WALKERS ON THE HOT STONES.


FIRE WALKERS ON BEQA ISLAND.
There is only one tribe in the Colony who perform the
mysterious fire-dance. A broad, shallow pit is dug in the
ground, and a large fire of logs, covered with stones, is
built therein. After heating for some hours the stones
are levelled off, the performers advance from cover, walk
once round over the heated stones and, after leaves are
thrown in, sit amidst the smoke and steam, chant a song,
and retire.
35


" A big stone in my village lies
And, be it known to you,
That stone is call’d, derisively,
The Kai Sawau’s canoe.
“ A landsman I," said ’G&lita,
“ On sea I never stir:’’
“ Then, per adventure, I may be
Your god of women, Sir,
“ And all the fair of Bengga shall
Your beck and call attend:’’
“ That is a Chieftain’s privilege
Which Heaven from me forfend.
“ What may thy name be, libertine ?
Methinks a rogue I spy
The dwarf he sighed and then replied,
“ Tui Namoliwai "
” Namoliwai, Namoliwai,
Now, harken unto me,
I sought an eel, but thou this night
Mine offering shalt be.
“ The clubbing and the baking whole
Will follow in due course :
But these are items of detail
Which call for no discourse."
Namoliwai he clapt his hands
In reverence, as before,
“ Oh, Sir," said he, respectfully,
“ Pray hear me speak once more—
“ In aftertime, the Kai Sawau
Masdwe 6 roots shall bake,
To found a famous practice, Sir,
Let us twain undertake.
“ Four nights, together, you and I
Shall bake, with store of roots ;
Such power I own and may confer,
What time occasion suits."
“ Such power to me," said 'Galita,
"If truly thou canst give,
Thy life is safe, Namoliwai,
Make proof of it and live.
" But harkee, friend, no stratagem
Some devilry to conceal!
When those four nights of baking end.
How shall we look and feel ? "
“ E’en as we at this moment he
In breath and flesh and bones."
So then a spacious oven was dug,
And fuel brought and stones.
Within the oven great logs were piled
On stones, arranged below,
And when the live logs were removed
The stones were all aglow.
The dwarf upon the red-hot stones
Stept nimbly, to and fro,
And bade his captor follow him,
But that good man said “ No.
“ Now tempt me not, Namoliwai,
You wish me burnt, I see."
“ You spared my life," the dwarf replied,
“ Fear not, but follow me."
Then ’GMita upon the stones
Trod without injury,
And baked four nights 'mid strange delights.
And learnt the mystery.
As Vilavilairevo known
And, for the teacher’s sake,
The fiery, trodden stones are used
Mas&we roots to bake.
6 “Masawe,” the Dracaena, the roots of which are roasted and eaten, and the myth alleges that the
practice originated with the discovery of fire-walking, as related in the verse.


VII. EAST INDIANS.
EMIGRATION from India, for the purpose of providing plantation
labourers, dates from the beginning of the 19th Century. From
the year 1800 and onwards labourers left their homes in India
and crossed to the Straits Settlements to work on sugar, spice, tapioca,
and coconut plantations, and this intercourse between the two countries
continued for many years without regulation. The first officially
recorded instance of genuine labour emigration occurred in 1830 when
a French merchant carried some 150 emigrants to the Island of Bourbon,
and in 1834 the abolition of slavery in the British Colonies gave the
first great impetus to emigration. Sugar planters of Mauritius at once
turned to India, and between 1834 and 1837 obtained some 7,000
recruits from Calcutta. This led the Government of India to take
such legislative measures as would secure the well-being of emigrants.
Under the resulting Act emigration was permitted during 1837 to
Mauritius, British Guiana, and Australia, but owing to agitation in
England regarding the abuses to which the system was liable, emigra-
tion was shortly afterwards suspended. In 1842 emigration from
India was prohibited except to Mauritius, and in 1844 it was allowed
to Jamaica, British Guiana, and Trinidad. In 1858 emigration was
opened to St. Lucia, and in 1860 to St. Vincent, Natal, and St. Kitts,
in 1869 to Grenada, and ten years later to Fiji.
Between the years 1860 and 1877 before the advent of Indian
immigration about 8,500 labourers were introduced into Fiji from the
Solomon Islands, the Line Islands, and the New Hebrides. Of these
some 6,000 had been returned to their homes, and half of the remainder
were due to return, when in 1877 the Agent-General of Immigration
was despatched to India with a view to securing, under the auspices
of the Government of India, a small but regular supply of labourers
for employment on sugar, coconut, cotton, and coffee plantations, and
as domestic servants.
Contracts between employers of Pacific Island immigrants and their
labourers had been well kept as a general rule, but a fall in the cotton
market created financial difficulties for many planters who were thus
unable to pay off their labourers or to repatriate them, and when, in
1874, Fiji became a Crown Colony, the Government, realising that the
credit of the Colony was at stake, paid all wages due and bore the cost
of repatriation in all cases where the employer was unable to do so.
Before the arrival of immigrants from India there had been intro-
duced a number of Indians from the French Colony of New Caledonia


who arrived in January, 1879, and engaged for service with which,
owing to its nature, they soon became dissatisfied. These engage-
ments were shortly afterwards cancelled and those of the Indians who
desired it were granted passages to Sydney. Others, pleased with
local conditions as compared with New Caledonia, elected to remain
and soon found congenial employment.
Under the scheme for the introduction of Indians, which had been
accepted by the Government of India, labourers were to be engaged
directly by the Government of Fiji and allotted under Government
supervision. The Government of the Colony paid all costs and charges
and recouped itself of two-tbirds of such charges from employers, the
balance being regarded as a grant in aid.
The inception of the scheme was marked by misfortune. The
first immigrant vessel to arrive was the “ Leonidas,” a sailing ship
which reached Levuka after a passage of 72 days. The immigrants
on board numbered 481, and much consternation was caused on shore
when it became known that during the voyage there had occurred an
epidemic of cholera and that there were on board several cases of small-
pox. There existed in Levuka no facilities for quarantine, but it was
decided to permit the vessel to anchor some distance to the leeward
of the town. In endeavouring, however, to reach the selected anchorage
an accident occurred which seemed likely to render the danger of infec-
tion imminent. The ship sailed past the appointed station and went
aground on the reef, giving rise to a period of intense anxiety to those
on shore who, remembering the horrors of the measles epidemic of 1875,
when approximately 40,000 of the natives of the Colony died, were
able to appreciate the gravity of the situation. The ship was built
of iron and had it gone to pieces there would have been no possibility
of preventing contact with some of the 500 infected persons on board.
Fortunately, however, just as high tide was reached the ship floated
and shortly afterwards came to anchor. For communication between
ship and shore and the supply of stores an ingenious arrangement was
extemporised by the local medical authorities. Trestles of hardwood
were placed on the reef for the support of a moveable table so con-
structed as to be washed off and cleaned by the sea at each high tide
but serviceable during an hour before and after low water to carry all
that might be required. Subsequently these unfortunate immigrants
were transferred by the ship’s crew to the small island of Yanuca Lailai
where they remained in quarantine for over two months. In order
to prevent approach between the non-infected and the infected in a
narrow passage so frequented by small craft as that between Levuka


and Yanuca, guards were posted and these were permitted the use of
firearms, and it is sure that contact would have occurred in many
instances but for warning bullets, a considerable number of which were
required on occasion to prevent the too close approach of exhilarated
seamen returning to the “ Leonidas ” after having deposited their load
of passengers on the island. The ship finally left the Colony for San
Francisco on the 7th July, 1879. The Indians on the island were
released on the 9th August, and a dire calamity had been avoided.
What would have been the result of the escape of the disease from
quarantine may be estimated from the fact that the Fijians in many
places on learning the evil news at once gave way to despair and began
to prepare death feasts and burial clothes. The Fijian is a fatalist.
He regarded this new danger as the white man’s plague, as indeed he
had regarded the measles. He was again to be victimised; but he became
impressed with the idea of vaccination—it was the white man’s " cure ”
for this new disease. He complied readily with the wish of the Govern-
ment and thus, in a short space of time, the Fijians throughout the
group became a well-vaccinated community. The disease had failed
to make an entry and the white man’s “ medicine ” was to him a
marvellous thing.
The next immigrants to arrive came by the sailing ships “ Berar ”
and “ Poonah,” which reached Suva, the new capital, on the 29th June
and the 17th September, 1882. Both vessels proved to be free from
disease and were admitted to pratique a few days after arrival, but
so as to be able to meet the necessity for quarantine there had, in the
meantime, been acquired the island of Nukulau, some seven miles from
Suva, on which adequate preparations were made for the reception of
immigrants. In order, however, to enable the erection in time of the
necessary buildings, Government contracts then proceeding in Suva
for the erection of public buildings and Government House were
suspended.
The “ Poonah ” came again to Fiji in June, 1883, and on the voyage
out her passengers were attacked by cholera. She was followed two
months later by the “ Bayard,” and at the end of that year there were
2,308 Indians resident in the Colony.
In 1884 more than usual energy was displayed in making arrange-
ments for the extension of the sugar industry, and one of the results
of this activity was an increased demand for field labourers and mill
hands, and the requirements of the year involved applications for
1,790 new labourers. In response to the call in India 2,091 immi-
grants embarked at Calcutta for Fiji. Four ships were engaged for


38
AN INDIAN BAZAAR.


INDIAN PINEAPPLE GROWERS.
Packing the fruit for export.
39


the conveyance of these immigrants; three were sailing ships which
proceeded as usual by the South of Australia, and the fourth was a
steamer —the first to be so employed—which came by the more direct
route via Torres Straits, and yet another year was to be marked by
misfortune.
The voyage of the “ Syria,” the first immigrant ship of the year,
terminated almost within sight of her port in a calamitous shipwreck,
but otherwise the voyage was a prosperous one of unusual celerity.
The vessel struck the outer edge of the reef at Naselai where now the
iron bows of the ship lie in the vicinity of a lighthouse the erection of
which was due to the wreck of this ill-fated vessel, which struck during
a dark night and in boisterous weather. It was only with the utmost
difficulty and by help of energetic assistance from Suva, fourteen miles
away, that most of the immigrants were ultimately rescued, and after
every possible exertion, carried on during no less than fifty-eight hours,
439 out of 494 on board, together with all the crew, were safely landed.
At the subsequent muster 55 were found to have been lost in the wreck.
The survivors from the wreck became in 1885 the recipients of a hand-
some sum of money and numerous articles of clothing raised by private
subscription in the Colony. This was divided amongst them pro rata
according to the severity of their sufferings, and was an undertaking
conducted independently of the Government of the Colony. Besides
employers of immigrants, Government officials and other Europeans,
many old immigrants contributed goods and money to this end.
The “ Syria ” was followed by the ” Howrah ” and the ” Pericles,”
on both of which vessels the immigrants were unlucky enough to experi-
ence outbreaks of cholera during the voyage. On the last named
vessel 35 cases were recorded of which 20 were fatal.
The fourth and the last ship of the year was the “ Newnham,”
a steamer of 1,296 tons, which took 38 days to reach Fiji. The high
rate of mortality which occurred on board this vessel, coupled with the
additional risk, owing to the shortness of the inter-tropical course of
the voyage, of fostering variolous or choleraic infection and of thereby
introducing those diseases into the Colony, gave rise to the opinion
that it would be inexpedient to repeat the experiment, and so it was
that for many years sailing ships continued to be employed in the
service.
When the system of immigration had been in force for ten years
7,135 immigrants had been introduced, and at the end of the year
1888 the immigrant population working on estates throughout
the Colony numbered 6,370. Indians introduced under the system


were entitled to a free return passage to India after ten years residence
in the Colony, and in May of 1889 the first repatriates left the Colony.
Of the 481 immigrants who arrived by the “ Leonidas ” and their
children born in Fiji 217 took advantage of the free return passage.
Of that number 69 were children born in the Colony, but in all 400 souls
left Fiji, of whom 137 were returned as invalids in accordance with the
provisions of the law and 46 paid their own passages and left under
passport. The return voyage was a satisfactory one, there being but
4 deaths in spite of the large number of invalid passengers.
From this time onwards immigrant vessels continued to bring
Indians into the Colony and to take away those who, being entitled to
it, desired to be repatriated. Many returned to India and came again
to Fiji on the same conditions as those under which they originally
entered the Colony. After the lapse of another ten years the immi-
grant population had risen to 12,397 and the number repatriated was
3,679. During these years a marked feature of Indian life was the
increasing birth-rate (excluding still-births) from 2-60 per cent, in 1890
to 6-53 per cent, in 1899, and a decreased death-rate in respect of those
years of from 2*85 per cent, to I*ol per cent.
From the year 1900 onwards great expansion was made in the sugar
industry. A new mill was erected at Lautoka and large additional
areas were brought under sugar-cane cultivation. Many Indians became
independent planters and were exceedingly prosperous. Between the
years 1901 and 1911 Indian immigrants were introduced at an annual
average rate of 2,084 and were repatriated at the average rate of 482
per annum. An annual average of approximately 250 Indians
continued to arrive as settlers. These people paid their own passages
to Fiji and many of them had been in Fiji before; others came from
Mauritius, British Guiana, Trinidad, and other colonies to which they
had previously migrated.
The system of immigration of Indian labourers ceased in 1916,
between which year and 1911 there were 16,615 introduced and 10,017
repatriated, so that the annual average of additions to the Indian
population for the ten years ending 1921 fell to 660 a year. The total
number of Indians introduced into Fiji up to the end of 1923 amounted
to 62,837 and the total number repatriated up to the end of the same
year was 24,665.
The Census Return for 1921 gives the Indian population as 60,619
(males, 37,001; females, 23,618). Fifty-two thousand nine hundred and
six are recorded as Hindus, and 26,810 as born in the Colony. The
number of Colonial born Indians increased by 16,000 between 1911 and


1921. The great majority of the Indian born population originates
from Northern India—l9,ooo from the United Provinces of Agra and
Oudh. Most of these come from the Eastern Divisions of the Provinces.
The Madrasis number over 9,000. According to the latest estimates
the total population at the end of 1928 was 70,996 and in spite of a
certain amount of loss by repatriation each year, partly made good by
fresh airivals, it is increasing rapidly, with a birth-rate of 3-4 per cent,
and a death-rate ot 1-08 per cent. Of late years there has been a fairly
constant influx of immigrants paying for their own passages, and
arriving chiefly on the outward voyage to Fiji by the repatriation
vessel. A considerable number of these come out to join friends and
relations in Fiji who have remitted the passage money to them in India.
The small but enterprising and, therefore, important Punjabi element
is increasing quite rapidly in this way.
The last ten or twelve years have seen considerable changes in the
general condition of the community. Only a small minority, even
among the agriculturists, now remains in the ranks of unskilled labour.
The total number of labourers of all sorts recorded at last Census was
just over 5,000, against 15,000 persons recorded as agriculturists, culti-
vators and planters.
The growing of field crops is almost entirely in Indian hands. The
sugar industry is controlled by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company,
but less than a third of the area planted is cultivated now by the Com-
pany’s own staff. Out of a total area of approximately 80,000 acres
under cane, nearly 30,000 are worked by independent cultivators, and
24,500 more by tenants of the Company settled on sugar farms. These
sugar farms have become very popular and are keenly sought after
when new areas are thrown open. The Company exercises a certain
amount of supervision over the cultivation and rotation of crops, but
this is in the best interests of the tenants themselves, as a high standard
of cultivation is thereby maintained. The probability is that in the near
future the Company will only retain in its own hands a sufficient area
to maintain the standard and for experimental purposes, and certain
low-lying flats on which drainage works on a large scale are necessary.
The other main crops grown by Indians are rice, approximately
10,000 acres; cotton, 2,000 acres; and maize, 1,500 acres. Small
areas of Arhar dal (lentils) are to be seen in every Indian settlement,
also various pulses and root crops, and in some localities kava and pine-
apples are grown. A somewhat decreased area is under bananas.
Poultry and dairy cattle are kept universally by Indians. In fact
the low infant mortality among Indians in comparison with Fijians is


perhaps partly attributable to the plentiful supplies of cow’s milk used
in Indian households. In comparison with Indian prices, cattle and
horses are cheap to buy and keep, and to the newcomer from India one
of the surprises of the country is the number of fine animals kept on
even small farms.
The Colony is not, however, yet self-supporting in the production
of important Indian staple foods. Rice, the pulses, ghee and edible oil
have still to be imported in considerable quantities, and the quality of
the last two commodities is poor. Outside the sugar areas, the popu-
lation has settled more or less at haphazard on the land, and though
small quantities of rice are grown by almost every farmer, production
on the bigger flats is not altogether satisfactory, owing to lack of co-
operation and of control of the surface water. The Colony has still to
find a satisfactory edible oil palatable to Indian taste, and it is to be
hoped that it will prove possible to render the important lentil crop
more immune from the ravages of pests. The production of ghee (clarified
butter) on a commercial scale might well be taken up by the Indian
community. The imported commodity is now so largely adulterated
that traders have ceased to sell it as ghee at all.
The actual area held by Indians cannot be given with any accuracy,
but it is estimated that, apart from the area held by tenants of the
Sugar Company—24,soo acres, there are about 7,500 Indian holdings
of all sorts. Conditions of land tenure in Fiji preclude the possibility
of freehold ownership on a large scale, although the system of leasing
that exists provides remarkable security of tenure. Nearly all the land
in Fiji belongs in detail to Fijian owners, and Indians hold the great
bulk of their land as tenants for a term of Fijian landlords, but the
actual leasing and assessment of rent is controlled by the Government,
and although leases cannot be given or renewed without the consent of
the owners, approval of a lease is rarely withheld and a tenant cannot
except in very exceptional circumstances be evicted at the end of his
term without compensation for permanent and unexhausted improve-
ments. It is an uncommon occurrence for the Fijian owners to object
to renewals, and in nearly all such cases, where the value of improve-
ments is assessed, the owners fail to provide the monetary compensa-
tion for improvements.
Relations between Indian settlers and their Fijian neighbours, who
are often their landlords, are generally speaking, very friendly. The
Indian readily picks up the Fijian language. In fact, his own vocabulary
frequently contains numbers of Fijian words. Each seems in some way
to supply what the other lacks —the Indian with his steady industry


ON THE WAIDOI RUBBER PLANTATION.
Bringing in the latex, drawn from the trees, for
treatment and conversion at the factory into sheets of
pure crude India-rubber for export.
42


ON AN INDIAN FARM.
Sugar-cane cultivation.
43


and frugality and the Fijian with his lighthearted freedom from care.
It is curious to note how Fiji-bred Indians have managed to imbibe
something of this temperament.
Progress in other directions has been marked. Though Chinese
traders are now competing keenly in the retail store business, the num-
ber of Indian storekeepers steadily increases and there were at the end
of 1928 1,517 Indian traders and storekeepers, and considerably over
1,000 Indian holders of hawkers’ licences. The most raipd develop-
ment in recent years has been in the motor car business. There are
now 434 Indian-owned motor vehicles in the Colony and 1,554 licensed
drivers. The “ taxicab ” business is practically an Indian monopoly,
and taxicabs are numerous wherever there are any roads available for
vehicular traffic. Unless the Indian community loses the long lead it
has gained, it seems likely that, as communications improve, motor
transport of the Colony will be entirely in Indian hands.
As to the social condition of the people, it was remarked in former
accounts that the caste system does little to hamper intercourse in Fiji.
“ Its disintegration began with the immigrants at the emigration depots
at Calcutta and Madras. There Hindu and Moslem, the high-caste
Brahman and the Chamar or Pariah met together and fraternised as
they had never done before. They had a common purpose and were
bound by a common desire to cross the seas and test their fortunes in
other lands. They were ship-mates bound for a distant shore and they
threw aside the ideas of caste superiority. They came in constant
contact with one another; they ate together and otherwise obeyed the
rules which had been made for them by persons not concerned with
caste. But to some extent there remained upon arrival a vestige of
the Brahman’s superior standing. The term * Maharaj,’ as it is com-
monly used in Fiji in respect of a Brahman, was and is constantly heard,
but in practice the real distinction has disappeared since the Brahman
in Fiji will marry a woman of a lower or the lowest caste.”
That this disintegration was beneficial is undoubted. It saved the
women from all risk of being subjected, as circumstances improved, to
the purdah system and enforced widowhood, and it resulted in the
comparatively small but heterogeneous body of immigrants coalescing
and joining in each other’s social and religious functions in a way that
is unknown in their native country. Compared with other colonies
conversions to Christianity have been comparatively few, but marriages
between members of different religions are common, and relations are
cordial, though among some sections there have been a few signs recently


of that tendency, which appears, unfortunately, inevitable, to focus pro-
gress in the first instance in the political and sectional fields.
The benefit was not, however, altogether unmixed. The abandon-
ment of caste restrictions, the low caste of a high proportion of the immi-
grants and the disparity between the sexes due to the system of recruit-
ment, has led to some weakening of respect for the marriage tie, and even
now customary marriages not infrequently remain purposely unregis-
tered and invalid in the eyes of the law. The moral feeling of a section
of the Indian community now strongly favours compulsory registration,
which has not been enforced hitherto.
Nor has the community yet managed to replace caste cohesion by
communal co-operation on any effective scale. Much still remains to
be done both in the educational field, in which the community is back-
ward, and also in other directions, such as co-operation for agricultural
and credit purposes, upkeep of roads and communications, of special
importance to Indian settlements, and the opening of markets for Indian
produce.
The progress made in meeting Indian educational requirements is
dealt with in a separate article, but the Indian community generally is
greatly indebted to the Government and to the various Christian religious
bodies for their pioneer work in this field, and to the educational institu-
tions of New Zealand for the accommodation given by them to Indian
pupils from Fiji.
A fully equipped Government hospital, primarily for Indians, has
been erected at Lautoka, a smaller hospital has been opened at Nadi,
and a third is in course of erection at Penang. There are free Govern-
ment dispensaries for Indians in all centres where there is any consider-
able Indian population, and Indians are now admitted to all Provincial
hospitals which were originally established for the treatment of Fijians.
The Methodist Mission has a fully equipped hospital for Indian women
at Ba with a resident lady doctor, and the same Mission is opening a
dispensary for Indian women at Suva with a lady sub-assistant surgeon
in charge. There are three Indian medical practitioners, locally trained,
in the Government service, and three Indian medical pupils in training
at the Colonial War Memorial Hospital. At the Ba Indian Women’s
Hospital Indian girls are trained as nurses, obstetric and general.
On the whole, though this is not perhaps sufficiently recognised in
some quarters, the Indian community, considering the origin of the
great bulk of it, has prospered greatly. It has been said of British
Guiana that “ to those familiar with rural life in the congested districts
of the United Provinces and the difficulties in the way of the material


and social progress of the lower classes the change is striking. The
same remarks apply with much greater force to Fiji. The country is
fertile and healthy; the climate is equable. There are few large scale
problems of drainage and surface water control to be dealt with. There
is abundant room in the undulating well-watered country behind the
developed tracts for further agricultural development, and the grazing
of herds and flocks. Bare subsistence can be gained for practically
nothing. No poor law organisation is needed, and there are never more
than two or three derelicts in the headquarter’s pauper ward. The
great bulk of the population lives in a condition of moderate but sub-
stantial comfort. The immigrants themselves are certainly healthier
and sturdier than their brethren in India, and their descendants in their
turn are to a noticeable extent of finer physique and greater intelligence
than their parents.
Considerable numbers still retain the right of repatriation, and under
the system at present in force about 1,000 return to India each year, but
it seems evident that the great majority have long since made up their
minds to make the Colony their home.
That Indians in Fiji will develop into a permanent element in the
population seems clear. So far as can be foreseen their presence is
essential to the prosperity of the Colony. It seems not improbable
that they will develop individual characteristics of their own, different
from those of the classes whence they spring, but their retention of their
religion makes it unlikely that they will lose touch entirely with their
mother land, and India is not likely to forget her Indian colonists over-
seas.


VIII. HEALTH CONDITIONS.
FIJI, lying far out in the Pacific Ocean, had a very limited variety
of disease germs when it was discovered by Europeans. In the
neolithic stage of civilisation, the people had well-developed
sanitary and hygienic customs. Although mainly of Melanesian stock
their pathologic flora was Polynesian, like their language.
Leprosy, filariasis, yaws and ankylostomiasis they certainly had,
tuberculosis perhaps, but it is doubtful whether dysentery, amoebic or
bacillary, was present. They had none of the ordinary specific infec-
tious fevers, such as measles, influenza, whooping cough or chicken-pox.
They were without venereal disease. They had no cholera, plague,
small-pox, yellow fever or malaria.
At that time the population was perhaps a quarter of a million.
With a fertile volcanic soil, abundant rainfall and tropical climate,
want was unknown. Heavy losses during tribal warfare no doubt
kept the population within the bounds of the means of sustenance.
In most of the Pacific islands there are traditions of the disastrous
epidemics that followed the appearance of the white man, and there
can be no doubt that new varieties of disease germs when first intro-
duced were very fatal to the natives.
It was probably in part as a preventive measure that mariners
shipwrecked on Pacific islands were generally killed and eaten.
In Fiji the natives suffered severely on their first contact with
Europeans. The Rev. John Hunt writes, in 1843:—‘The first white
people with whom the Fijians had any intercourse were four or five
shipwrecked mariners. The vessel was wrecked on a reef near Oneata
and the party were killed at Oneata or Lakeba, and, I fear, eaten also.
Shortly after their death a dreadful distemper scourged the natives.
It appears from the description given of it to have been a very acute
dysentery or form of cholera. Its progress through the Group was
dreadfully rapid and destructive, in many places it was with the greatest
difficulty that persons could be found to bury the dead. Those who
were seized died in the most excruciating agonies.” This epidemic
occurred about 1803. There are records throughout the Group of another
epidemic ten years earlier, also following on the arrival of Europeans.
It was called the wasting sickness, but its exact nature cannot now be
ascertained. It was as fatal, probably, as the one described above.
Until cession of the islands to England in 1874 there was no further
exceptional epidemic, but dysentery at any rate had become a disease
constantly present.


THE COLONIAL WAR MEMORIAL HOSPITAL.
View looking North.
46


THE COLONIAL WAR MEMORIAL HOSPITAL
View looking West.
47


In 1875, in connection with the cession, several Fijians visited
Sydney. The King’s son and his servant returned suffering from
measles and introduced the infection among those assembled to
welcome them. The disease rapidly spread throughout the Group
and 40,000 of the population of 150,000 died. Thirty years later
there was a second epidemic of measles with a severe mortality, but
since then the disease has occasionally been introduced without any
serious harm resulting. The other epidemic disease that has dis-
astrously affected Fijians is influenza; from it five per cent, of the
population died in 1918.
The British Government, from the beginning, recognised its duty
to take every step practicable to preserve the native Fijians from
extermination. They were confirmed in the ownership of their lands,
a local Government largely based on their own customs was instituted,
careful quarantine of arriving vessels was set up, and Government
Medical Officers were engaged to supervise sanitation and treat the sick.
For many years the results were disappointing. Pacific islanders
have theories of causation of diseases and their treatment in which
they have great confidence. They thought that our treatment might
be good for us but that it could hardly be expected to be good for
them. However, when many native physicians had unavailingly tried
many remedies on a sick person he would sometimes submit himself
for a few days to the European doctor and would then return home to
say that European medicine was a failure. No doubt the native
medical vested interests encouraged the apparently hopeless case to
seek aid from the European rivals.
European civilisation also upset native custom, and much of the
native custom was of importance in hygiene and sanitation.
The disappearance of the despotic rule of native chiefs, the security
for life and limb and property against neighbouring tribes, and the
quasi communal economic system caused an enervating indolence.
Despite quarantine precautions such diseases as whooping cough
and influenza gained entrance from time to time and greatly increased
the infantile death rate.
As years went on, however, conditions improved. With the
development of industries the finances of the Colony improved; educa-
tion tended slowly to lessen the power of superstition; the new diseases
lost their virulence as the means of treating them became known and
perhaps because the people’s bodies became fortified against them.
A native medical school was started at the Colonial Hospital, Suva,
in 1884. From it are sent out Native Medical Practitioners who work


among their own people, not only treating the sick but also forming a
bridge for the conveyance of European medical thought to the native
mind.
In several of the provinces hospitals for the use of Fijians have
been opened, and in each of these is a native medical practitioner
either in sole charge or acting as house surgeon under the European
District Medical Officer.
For several years, with the exception of 1918-19, the influenza
years, there has been an increase in the Fijian population, and it seems
reasonable to hope that the native population has reached its lowest
point and will henceforward increase.
Besides the provincial hospitals for Fijians there are general
hospitals for all races at Suva, Lautoka and Levuka, a public lunatic
asylum in Suva, and a leper asylum where all lepers are segregated.
During the last few years much progress has been made in the
treatment of ankylostomiasis throughout the Colony as a consequence
of the efforts of Dr. S. M. Lambert, of the Rockefeller Foundation, and
his assistants, who have conducted a well-organised campaign which
has resulted in great benefit to the native and Indian populations.
With the assistance of £19,500 subscribed by the public for a War
Memorial, the Colonial War Memorial Hospital was built, and com-
pleted at the end of 1923. This is controlled by the Government and
there are two resident medical officers. The main buildings are of
ferro-concrete, and contain an out-patient department, administration
offices, ward accommodation for twenty-eight Europeans and eighty
natives, kitchen, laundry, operating-room, X-Ray-room, clinical labora-
tory, nurses’ home, and lecture-room. The hospital is fitted throughout
with hot and cold water, electric light, telephones and a water carriage
sewage system. There is a staff of seventeen European and ten native
nurses.
The Native Medical School is attached to this hospital; there were
twelve Fijian, three East Indian, five Samoan, and four Gilbert Island
students in training in 1928.
The new Medical School has recently been completed with accommoda-
tion for forty students. In addition to receiving Fijian and East Indian
students from Fiji the school provides instruction for students from
Samoa, Tonga, the Cook Islands, and the Solomon Islands. These
Administrations contribute towards the capital expenditure and annual
cost, and the Rockefeller Foundation also is subsidising the school.
Lepers are compulsorily segregated on the island of Makogai.
The Asylum also receives all persons diagnosed as suffering from leprosy


Dormitories and School Building.
Bungalow for permanent Tutor.
48
CENTRAL MEDICAL SCHOOL


Laboratory Work in Physiology.
Demonstration in Dissection.
CENTRAL MEDICAL SCHOOL.
49


in New Zealand, Samoa, Tonga, and the Cook Islands. The island and
Asylum are under the control of the Resident Medical Superintendent.
Part of the island is occupied by the lepers and the rest is used as a
farm for the asylum. The male lepers live in villages—Fijian, Indian,
Melanesian, Samoan, &c. The cottages in these villages are of Euro-
pean design and material and are all fly proofed. Each village has a
headman who is responsible for the immaculate cleanliness of his village.
The villagers are supplied with rations which they supplement with
food grown on land allotted to them. The Roman Catholic Nursing
Sisters who have devoted their lives to this work of mercy visit each
village daily to dress the wounds and ulcers that are so apt to occur in
the disease.
The women live in large wards and are constantly under the eyes
of the Nursing Sisters who spend the whole day with them encouraging
them in work and amusement.
In the same portion of the asylum is the hospital where are those
who require more care than can be given in the villages.
The amusements of the patients consist of cricket and other games,
fishing, model boat sailing, a cinematograph and a gramophone. Owing
to the constant care of the Nursing Sisters and the prospect of recovery
from their disease as a result of Chaulmoogra oil injections, the atmo-
sphere of the asylum is cheerful and most of the cases admitted during
the past two years have been volunteers. There are 409 patients now
in the Asylum; 49 were discharged during 1927 and 20 in 1928.
Although the Fiji Islands lie within the tropics the temperature
is never very high, all of the islands being within the trade-wind belt.
Sunstroke is unknown. During the summer the climate is moist and
enervating, but in the cool months dry and not unpleasantly hot.
By their situation they are well protected from the most dangerous
diseases prevalent in the tropics. Communication with the outside
world is almost entirely by vessels from Australia, New Zealand,
Honolulu and Europe via the Panama Canal. In all of these the
precautions against introduction of disease are vigorous and successful,
and Fiji is thus screened from the deadly tropical diseases of Central
America, Asia and Africa. From the diseases native to Fiji, Europeans
have been almost exempt. Of those introduced from outside, dysentery
has almost disappeared during the past few years, typhoid fever is not
more prevalent than in many European countries, and the danger from
the others is less than in Europe. The death-rate among Europeans is
7*6 per thousand, the death-rate for all races 18*5 per thousand.


IX. ROADS AND COMMUNICATIONS.
THE total length of metalled roads in the Colony is approximately
150 miles, but with gravelled roads and certain unmetalled
roads in the dry zone the total length of roads capable of being
used by motor traffic in fine weather is about 468 miles. Of this length
about 98 miles is unsuitable for motor traffic during the wet season.
Roads that have been proclaimed as public roads are maintained
at the expense of General Revenue. Bridle tracks linking up native
villages and isolated estates are interlaced throughout the principal
islands. They are weeded and kept in order by the natives communally,
and are so numerous as to make all centres readily accessible to the
traveller who is prepared to walk or ride on horseback, and the going
is easy since one may stop or rest at any of the numerous native villages
that border the track. There is always a village not far away, there
is always at hand a place where the traveller is welcome and where
at the hands of a good-natured people he will find a generous hospitality.
But the interior has not yet been sufficiently opened up for road
traffic to become highly important, although with a view to its future
development a road-construction scheme is proceeding. There are
several formed roads which are open to motor traffic. One reaches
from Suva to Rewa and beyond to Bau some 20 miles away from the
capital. Another stretches from Penang on the north coast of Vitilevu
to Nadi on the west, a distance of approximately 100 miles.
Steamers of the following lines, namely, the Canadian-Australian
Royal Mail Line, the Union Steamship Company of New Zealand,
Limited, the Matson Navigation Company, the Australasian United
Steam Navigation Company, Limited, and the New Zealand Shipping
Company, Limited, convey mails regularly between Fiji, Canada, Hono-
lulu, Australia, New Zealand, and England. Inter-island communica-
tion is carried on by the Government vessel H.M.C.S. “ Pioneer,” the
t.s.s. “ Makatea,” owned by Burns Philp (South Seas) Company, Limited,
several other small steamers owned by the Fiji Shipping Company, and
a considerable number of auxiliary vessels and cutters.
Passage routes and fares from the United Kingdom will be found
on page 177.
The following is a summary of steamer fares in the Pacific by
steamers of the Union Steamship Company of New Zealand, the
Canadian-Australian Royal Mail Line, the Matson Navigation Com-
pany, and the Australasian United Steam Navigation Company.


Canadian-Australasian Royal Mail Liner “ Niagara ” in Suva Harbour.
Burns, Philp’s Inter-insular Steamer “ Makatea.”


TOWN AND BRIDGE, SIGATOKA RIVER.
A delightful tourist resort.
51


From Sydney, four steamers monthly:—
Fares —Single from ... £lO 00 to £25 0 0
Return from ... £2O 0 0 to £5O 0 0
From San Francisco and Vancouver, three steamers monthly:—
Fares—Single from ... £24 00 to £6O 10 0
Return from ... £4l 0 0 to £lOO 10 0
From Honolulu, three steamers monthly:—
Fares —Single from ... £l7 10 oto £39 0 0
Return from ... £3O 0 0 to £65 0 0
From Auckland, two steamers monthly:—
Fares —Single from ... £6 00 to £l2 10 0
Return from ... £l2 0 0 to £25 0 0
Time.
Sydney to Suva Five days.
Auckland to Suva ... ... Three days.
Vancouver to Suva ... ... Fourteen days.
San Francisco to Suva ... Fourteen days.
Honolulu to Suva ... ... Seven days.
As regards inter-island communications, the “ Makatea ” makes a
long trip, covering 1,000 miles and taking 12 to 14 days at a cost of
£ll the round trip; deck cabins cost 10 per cent, extra. She also makes
a short trip of 500 miles in 8 to 10 days, the fare being £6 with extra
charge for deck cabins. These two trips are made monthly.
The “ Malake,” a Burns, Philp Line steamer of 736 tons gross main-
tains a service between Fiji and the French possessions of Wallis and
Futuna, approximately every eight weeks. Between voyages she is
sent round the Fiji Group at the discretion of her owners.
The “ Adi Keva ” makes a weekly trip from Suva to Lautoka and
back, calling on the outward and inward journey at Levuka and
Ellington. Time, 5 days; return fare, £6 ss.
The “Sir John Forrest” makes two trips monthly to the Vanua-
levu coast, calling on the outward and return trips at thirteen ports.
She takes 10 days for the journey, travelling about 400 miles each trip,
and the return fare is £9.
The “ Adi Rewa ” makes a trip every week from Suva to Ba via
coastal ports, calling at Ellington both way. Time 4to 5 days, fare £6.
In addition to the five vessels mentioned, a number of smaller ones
capable of carrying from 4 to 25 passengers sail in various directions
about the group.


The “ Endeavour ” can accommodate 10 passengers, and makes
trips to Rotuma, Vanualevu and Taveuni. Information regarding
dates of sailing may be obtained from the owners, A. M. Brodziak,
Limited, Suva.
W. H. Terry & Son, of Suva, are the owners of the auxiliary ketch
“ Helena,” which sails three or four times each month to Taveuni.
Dates of sailing and other particulars may be obtained from the owners.
The same firm are also owners of the motor ship “ Adi Cakau,” a vessel
of 25 tons and licensed to carry about 40 passengers. She travels
entirely inside the reef, leaving Suva on Sunday in each week, returning
on Friday, calling at several ports including Ellington, Tavua, Ba, and
Lautoka.
The Fiji Shipping Company run the “ Adi Rewa ” to Nausori and
back daily, and the “ Adi Taufa ” to Navua and return three times
per week.
From Nausori, W. Hill & Company provide a daily launch service
to and from Viria, and from Viria to Vunidawa.
Michael & Company sail cutters weekly to and from Sigatoka.
Dates of sailing and other information may be obtained from the agents.
Brown & Joske, Limited, Suva.
The natives of Kadavu provide a cutter service to their island. No
regular time-table is kept. The Department of the Secretary for Native
Affairs will furnish information regarding this service.
A number of cutters and launches are available at Levuka for trips
to the islands within easy distance of the old Capital.
A mail subsidy, at the rate of £5,000 per annum, is paid to the
Canadian-Australasian Royal Mail Line, a condition of the contract being
that the vessels remain in port for six hours daylight after arrival at
Suva. A subsidy, at the rate of £1,600 per annum, is paid to the Fiji
Shipping Company, Limited, in respect of the steamer service between
Suva and Labasa via coastal ports provided by the “ Sir John Forrest.”
For the maintenance of the interinsular steamer service by the “ Maka-
tea ” for a period of five years commencing from the Ist May, 1927, an
agreement has also been entered into between the Government and
Burns, Philp (South Seas) Company, Limited.
The towns of Suva and Levuka, situated 54 miles apart and on
different islands, are connected by a telegraphic and telephonic system,
of which 11J miles is by submarine cable. The main island of Vitilevu
is intersected by an overhead telephone line which passes through
Nausori, Vunidawa, Nadarivatu, and Ba, and terminates at Suva and
Lautoka. The total distance covered by this line is 125 miles, the


section between Suva and Ba being the joint property of the Govern-
ment, the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, and the Union Steamship
Company of New Zealand. The Government interest in the line
terminates at Ba, though, by arrangement, hours have been allotted
to the public for the use of this section. The Colonial Sugar Refining
Company have also extended their private line from Lautoka to Sigatoka.
Government telephone services are established in the towns of
Suva and Levuka, and in the districts of Nausori, Navua, and Taveuni.
During the year 1927 a telephone service was established in the district
of Savusavu. The total length of the line is about 66 miles. Up to
the present 21 subscribers have been connected with the system. In
addition, the Colonial Sugar Refining Company has established private
services at Ba, Lautoka, Nadi, and Sigatoka, which connect with the
main overland line to Suva, and at Labasa, in Vanualevu, which con-
nects with the wireless station. In 1929 a further fine will be con-
structed between Nadarivatu and Tavua in the district of Colo North
and Penang, Ellington and Nanukuloa in the district of Ra.
At the principal settlements in the islands outside Vitilevu, viz.,
Labasa, Taveuni, and Savusavu, which are not otherwise in communi-
cation with the capital, wireless stations have been established by the
Government. From the Ist January, 1928, these were handed over to
the control of the Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited, which
Company has undertaken to instal a completely up-to-date system of
wireless telegraphs, to improve inter-island communications, to provide
direct communication with Australia, and to reduce wireless telegraph
rates. As soon as funds will permit, it is hoped that a wireless tele-
graphy service or wireless telephone service will, in addition, be estab-
lished with the Lau Group of Islands, the Island of Rotuma, Lautoka,
and other centres.
The first experiment in Broadcasting from Suva Radio Station was
carried out on 31st December, 1928, when His Excellency the Governor
and certain leading members of the Legislative Council delivered New
Year messages to listeners-in. The experiment proved a complete
success and it is hoped in the future to give occasional concerts by this
medium and to relay programmes from New Zealand and Australian
wireless stations.
Direct cable communication exists between Fiji and Canada,
Australia, and New Zealand, through the Pacific Cable Board, whose
office is situated in Suva.
There is a Light Railway, approximately 90 miles in length, which
extends from Rarawai (Ba) to Kavanagasau (Colo West), and which follows


the coast between these terminal points. This is the property of the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company, Limited, and by agreement between the
Company and the Government, a limited but regular service of passenger
trains, on which no fares are chargeable, is maintained.
Captain Kingsford Smith, in the Southern Cross, the first aeroplane
to fly from America to Australia, chose Suva as the landing place for
his machine at the conclusion of the second stage of his Trans-Pacific
flight. A successful landing was made on the Albert Park ground, but
in order to secure a longer run for the take-off on the third and final
stage of the flight the machine was flown to Naselai beach and there
reloaded with the heavy store of petrol required for the completion of
the flight to Australia.
Suva was thus shown to possess possible landing grounds for aero-
planes, and if seaplanes and flying boats are utilised in the future for
trans-oceanic flights the sheltered waters inside the reef should furnish
excellent natural anchorages for these aircraft.


“ THE TRIANGLE” SUVA.
The obelisk commemorates the
first land sales held in Fiji.
54


A COAST SCENE, ISLAND OF WAKAYA.
55


X. LANDS AND LAND TENURE.
PRIOR to the British occupation of Fiji, European settlers had
acquired large areas of land from the native chiefs. After the
Cession of the Fiji Group to the British Government was effected
in 1874, Crown grants for land were issued on claims substantiated before
the Lands Commission. In this manner 414,615 acres of land out of
the total area of the Colony, namely, 4,581,500 acres were alienated.
In 1875 further sales of native land were prohibited and the only tenure
granted was leasehold for a period not exceeding 21 years. This short
term of lease did not conduce to rapid settlement, for in the following
twenty years only one hundred leases were issued for a total area of about
13,000 acres of which 7,000 acres were taken up for sugar-cane cultiva-
tion and 4,200 acres for timber.
Under the provisions of the Native Lands Ordinance 1905, settlers
were able to acquire leases from the natives for periods up to 99 years
subject to the approval of the Governor in Council. Sales of native
land were also permitted under the Ordinance, and from 1905 to 1909
20,184 acres of land were purchased by settlers, bringing the total area
of land held on freehold title up to 434,799 acres. Subsequent to 1909,
no further sales of native land were permitted and the Native Lands
Amendment Ordinance 1912 prohibited sale except to the Government.
Settlers desiring to obtain land by purchase can do so by negotiation
with the holders of freehold titles obtained prior to 1909.
Prior to 1916 difficulty was frequently experienced in obtaining
renewals of leases of native land about to expire through effluxion of
time. The native owners of the land frequently declined on trivial
grounds to agree to any renewal. In order to provide greater security
of tenure, the Native Lands (Leases) Ordinance 1916, which is now
consolidated with the Native Lands Ordinance 1905 was enacted, and
this Ordinance provides that, in the event of the native owners declining
to surrender control of the land the subject of a lease about to expire, and
no valid reason for such refusal being advanced, the Governor in Council
may decide the value of the permanent and unexhausted improvements
on the property and require the native owners of the land to pay the
assessed amount within a stipulated period, or in the alternative, to
agree to the surrender of control of the land to the Government for
approval of a renewal of the expired lease. In the event of negotiations
for renewal being prolonged beyond the period of expiry of the lease,
the lessee is deemed to be a tenant of the land on a year to year basis
on the terms and conditions contained in the expired lease.


In June, 1915, the Native Lands (Leases) Regulations were made
defining the method by which leases of native and Crown lands may be
obtained and the terms and conditions applicable to such leases accord-
ing to classification.
The total extent of land alienated to settlers is about one-fifth of
the area of the Colony. About three-sevenths of the land of the Colony
is of a mountainous character, unsuited for commercial cultivation, and
in any case a considerable proportion of it will be kept as forest reserva-
tions, while another two-sevenths is mountainous but suitable for grazing
purposes. The bulk of the unalienated land of the Colony is owned by
the natives, and may be leased from them on terms varying up to 99
years according to the class of lease.
The method of obtaining such leases is for the settler to select the
block he desires, ascertain its native name and the name of the native
tribe which claims it, and then to lodge with the Commissioner of Lands
an application, on the prescribed form, to lease it, giving full parti-
culars of the land, a description of its boundaries, and if possible, a
clear sketch of it. The Government then invites the native owners in
their District Council to place the land at the disposal of the Govern-
ment in order that it may be leased or otherwise dealt with on behalf
of the owners. If control of the land is surrendered by the owners,
the terms and conditions of the proposed lease are considered by a
Native Lands Leases Board who submit their recommendations for the
approval of the Governor in Council. If the lease is approved the
lessee is at liberty to enter into possession on payment of the first half
year’s rent in advance and of the fee for survey of the land.
Realising the difficulty, especially for prospective settlers not
resident in Fiji, of obtaining land in the manner above outlined, the
Government holds “ open to settlement ” some 180,000 acres of land
in different parts of the Colony, which have been in many cases sur-
veyed and classified, and which can be divided into smaller lots to suit
settlers, provided that the leasing of the balance of the block is not
thereby prejudiced.
A list and a short description of those lands is given below, but it
might be well here to describe generally the several classes of land in Fiji.
First in quality and highest in rental value are the alluvial flats,
which are rich and fertile, and ready for cultivation by the draining
spade and the plough after comparatively small expenditure in clearing
the reeds or light scrub covering them. This is the land usually planted
in sugar, bananas, &c., and rent varies from ss. to £1 per acre per annum,
the lower figure prevailing in the more remote parts and the higher for


small lots in favoured localities close to the bank of a navigable stream
or to a sugar-cane railway.
A different class of agricultural land is coconut land close to the sea
coast, not necessarily flat, but not exceeding 500 feet above sea-level.
Much of this may be as fertile as the banana or sugar lands above
referred to, but not being near a cane railway or near a port of shipment
for bananas it does not command such a high rent. The rent usually com-
mences at 6d. to Is. per acre for the first five years, and thereafter rises
every fifth and tenth year to a maximum of 45., 55., or even 6s. per acre.
Another class of agricultural land, while not necessarily unsuited
for coconuts, is low hilly land in the rainy zone and usually covered
with bush. This class of land is well suited for such products as
rubber, cocoa, coffee, kava, and the minor products which form useful
catch crops while the slow maturing crops are being cultivated. Such
lands usually command a rent of 6d. per acre rising after five years
(when the slow maturing crops are expected to approach the bearing
stage) to Is., Is. 6d., or 2s.
The pastoral lands of the Colony fall within two different zones—
the forest zone and the reed or grass zone. The bush lands often form
the “ back block ” of a coconut estate, but being too high above sea-
level for a profitable coconut block, they are cleared of bush and planted
with grasses, and on such estates the profits from the sale of stock
materially assist to cover the cost of cultivating and harvesting the
crop of nuts. These lands when properly sown with grasses such as
Paspalum, Guinea, Para, &c., carry as much as one beast to from one
and a half to two acres. Cattle can be grazed on land planted with
coconuts over eight years old.
The reed or grass lands of Fiji, covering about one and a half
million acres, chiefly in the dry zone (rainfall 50 to 70 inches), form
the other class of pastoral land which is gradually being taken up by
pastoralists. These vary in elevation from sea-level to 2,000 feet, and
but little of such land is of ploughable slope.
In their natural state, covered with a heavy growth of reeds in the
best lands, light reeds and grasses in the medium lands, and with fern
in the poor red lands, they carry stock at the rate of from one to four
to every ten acres, but if the pastoralist hopes for permanent success
he must not depend for long upon this class of feed and must pursue a
vigorous policy of grass planting, either dibbling or sowing, for the reed
dies out under continual grazing. Pioneer pastoralists have proved
the suitability of such fodder as Para, Paspalum, and Guinea grasses;
while experiments with Rhodes, Mission and other grasses promise well.


Name.
Area
(acres.)
Situation.
Province.
Island of Vanualevu.
1. Bua
4,600
On Bua River
Bua.
2. Tiliva
8,060
On Bua River
Bua.
3. Koroinasolo
2,180
Rukuruku Bay
Bua.
4. Dalomo ..
6,060
On Bua River
Bua.
5. Nakavakea
4,747
North-west Coast
Bua.
6. Burenitu ..
7,400
North-west Coast ..
Bua.
7. Dreketi ..
50,000
East of Dreketi River
Macuata.
8. Wainunu .
20,000
Wainunu
Bua.
9. Korolevu .
7,000
Wainunu
Bua.
Island of Vitilevu.
10. Tuva East and West,
44,574
Nadroga
Nadroga.
Waqaliqali and Loma.
11.
4,400
Nailaga District
Ba.
12. Namau
7,000
Upper Ba River
Ba.
13. Koro No. 2
1,247
Tavua District
Colo North.
14. Waidalici .
5,000
Tailevu
Tailevu.
Island of Taveuni.
15. Ravilevu ..
10,000
Taveuni East
Cakaudrove.
With proper grasses it is estimated that the carrying capacity of
this class of land can be raised to a beast to three acres. The lands
are well watered by perennial streams, and it would scarcely be possible
to fence in 500 acres without including permanent water. The weed
pest is not a serious one, for this class of land in its natural state is
remarkably free from noxious weeds, but the pastoralist must vigor-
ously check any encroachment of the guava scrub after stock are
placed on the land. None of the other weeds are difficult to cope with,
the Clidemia hirta which is such a problem in the wet zone not having
found a footing in the grass lands.
The following is a list of the more important areas of lands held
open to settlement. They are all in an “ unimproved ” state:—
Blocks Nos. 1 to 6 are generally undulating to hilly, from sea-level
up to 1,000 feet. Rainfall, 60 to 80 inches. They have frontage on
the sea-coast or on navigable streams near the coast. Five to fifteen
per cent, of their area is suited for coconuts, and they are now covered
with reeds, grass and ferns, and on the higher parts with bush, so that
there should be no difficulty in procuring fencing posts.


58
POLLED ANGUS CATTLE, REWA.


TAVEUNI ISLAND.
Cattle on a coconut plantation.
59


Those lots should form useful mixed farms, with coconuts on the
better lands of ploughable slope, and cattle on the remaining parts.
The rent is as follows:—Grazing lease: 21 years with option of renewal
for a further 21 years, at Id. per acre for first 5 years and 3d. per acre for
next 16 years. Agricultural lease: About 77 years, 3d. per acre rising
every fifth year by 3d. increments to Is. per acre. Re-assessment in
30th and 60th years as hereinafter explained.
Block No. 7 is a tract of native-owned land open for leasing by the
Government for periods up to 99 years, subject to reasonable reserva-
tions being made for three native villages. It is estimated to contain
upwards of 10,000 acres of arable land of medium quality, suitable for
coconuts, &c. The fiats and gently undulating arable areas are inter-
spersed by low hills of poor quality. The block should be well suited
for the establishment of a Pineapple Cannery, provided that sufficient
capital be available for the construction of means of access by road or
railway to navigable water on the Dreketi River, a distance of approxi-
mately three miles.
The land has no frontage to the sea coast, but it is bounded on the
south-east for a long distance by the Dreketi River, beyond tidal influence
and unnavigable except by light punts. There are no roads within the
area at present suitable for vehicular traffic. The annual rainfall is
probably about 80 inches.
Blocks Nos. 8 and 9 are in the wet zone with 120 to 150 inches of
rainfall, close to the Wainunu Tea and Rubber Estate. They have
frontage on the sea coast, or come within one mile of the sea with easy
access to the coast. The land rises from sea-level to 500 feet, and
though none of it is flat much is of ploughable slope, while the soil is
good. It is perhaps the finest rubber block in the Colony, but is
suitable for coconuts, cocoa, kava, or the catch crops usually planted
with these.
The rent is:—Agricultural lease: To 99 years, 3d. per acre for first
five years rising by 3d. increments every fifth year to Is. per acre, then
Is. 6d. per acre for 13 years. Usual re-assessment in the 33rd and
66th years as hereinafter explained.
Block 10 is typical reed, grass and fern pastoral land as described
above. There is not even enough timber for fencing posts, which
would require to be imported from the forest country at a cost of about
Is. 6d. each. Fencing with live posts can be done for as little as £4O per
mile, but with hardwood posts it may be as high as £BO. This block
has two outlets, one on the east to the Sigatoka River and one on the
south to the Tuva River, and other coast outlets could be arranged, as


it is at places only four miles from the sea. The rainfall is about 60
inches, and there are many perennial streams through the block. It is
estimated to be able to carry in its present state one beast to seven acres,
but with proper grass planted its carrying capacity could be materially
increased. The rent is, for a pastoral lease, £lO per 1,000 acres for the
first 10 years and 4d. per acre for the next 11 years, with renewal for a
further 21 years at a re-assessed rental. The terms for an agricultural
lease of 99 years are: —3d. per acre for the first 5 years rising by 3d.
increments every fifth year to Is., and then Is. 6d. per acre for 13 years
subject to re-assessment in the 33rd and 66th years.
Block 11 is composed of steep ridges rising from the Varaciva creek
on the north, along which there are small flats, to the crest of a ridge of
upwards of 1,500 feet in height on the south. The land is only suitable
for grazing purposes and is situated about five miles south-west of the
Rarawai sugar mill. Rent of land for grazing purposes, 2d. per acre.
Blocks 12 and 13 are situated in the hills about ten miles south-
east and east respectively from the Rarawai sugar mill, are of the same
class as block 10, and rise from 100 to 1,000 feet above sea-level, but
are not so favourably situated with regard to outlet and are therefore
offered on grazing lease terms at a rental of Id. per acre for the first
10 years and 2d. per acre for the next 11 years, with renewal for a fur-
ther 21 years at a re-assessed rent.
Block 14. —This block is the remainder of a considerable area
situated on the east coast of Vitilevu, 45 to 50 miles from Suva by
water. The Returned Sailors and Soldiers dairy farm settlement and
butter factory is located in the vicinity, and most of the available allu-
vial river flats have been taken up for dairying purposes. A limited
amount of low-lying flat remains and a considerable area of hilly land
which is chiefly covered with reeds and bush, the soil being generally of
good quality. The hilly land, though only rising to about 300 feet in
elevation, is generally too steep for ploughing. A considerable area of
flat and hilly land, now held under leasehold tenure by private individuals,
is available for settlement purposes subject to satisfactory terms being
arranged by negotiation with the lessees. Much of the land is very
well suited for dairying purposes. Communication with this block is
by water, about 45 to 50 miles to Suva and about 30 miles to Levuka.
Loaded barges of produce are taken by these routes regularly. A
motor launch maintains communication between Suva and the Butter
Factory once a fortnight and the weekly motor coastal launch has a
calling place on the coast a few miles from the settlement. A motor
road is about to be constructed to give direct communication with Rewa


District.
Freehold
(acres.)
Leasehold
(acres.)
Island.
Tailevu ..
200
5,868
Vitilevu.
Navua
6,588
....
9 9
Ra
19,339
82,547
9 9
Rewa
4,340
856
99
Dreketi ..
11,807
—
Vanualevu.
and Suva by land. The rent for the land held by the Government
is:—For an agricultural dairying lease of 99 years, ss. per acre for flat
land, and 6d. per acre for hill land for 33 years, subject to re-assessment
in the 33rd and 66th years.
Block 15.—A very fine block of land on the east coast of the rich
island of Taveuni but, unfortunately, there is no sheltering shore reef
and no safe anchorage. The land is all under light forest and rises
from sea-level to 2,500 feet. Rainfall 140 inches or more, but soil is
light and porous overlying volcanic lava and scoria. The lower slopes
are suited for coconuts, while the higher slopes would make very rich
fattening paddocks for cattle. The great drawback is the lack of a
really good outlet, and only a planter or company with a large amount
of capital could afford to make a road to the south coast, eight miles
distant, or erect a small breakwater for a port for use in fair weather.
The rent of this land is as follows:—A grazing lease for 21 years
with option of renewal for a further 21 years on re-assessment, 6d. per
acre for first 5 years, 9d. per acre for next 5 years, Is. per acre for next
5 years, 2s. per acre for next 6 years. An agricultural lease for 99
years: 6d. per acre for first 5 years, Is. per acre for next 5 years, 3s. per
acre for next 10 years, 4s. per acre for next 13 years, with re-assessment
in the 33rd and 66th years.
In addition to the lands held by the Government open for settle-
ment, various owners of freehold and leasehold properties, suitable for
agricultural and pastoral purposes, are prepared to consider applications
by intending settlers for the purchase or lease of improved and unim-
proved properties held by them. The terms and conditions of purchase
vary and are dependent on negotiations between the applicant and the
owners of the land. Applicants desiring information respecting such
lands will be placed in communication with the owners.
The approximate aggregate areas in several districts are as follow:
Inquirers should endeavour to make their queries more or less
definite and should specify, as far as possible, what their requirements


are, in order that replies may be made that will convey the required
information. A knowledge of the amount of capital at the disposal
of the applicant, and whether single or married, and previous agri-
cultural experience, if any, is helpful in giving a reply to requests for
information.
The regulations for the leasing of Crown and native lands provide
that all land leased under the regulations shall be classified as (a) building
land, ( h ) agricultural land, (c) grazing land, ( d ) garden land. Building
land is defined as land required for the erection of business premises and
need not be considered further here.
The method of securing leases of native lands has already been
described. In cases where conflicting applications for the same portion
of land render the decision in favour of any one of the applicants
difficult, the Governor in Council may order that the lease be sold
by public auction. All leases of Crown lands, except in special cases,
are necessarily submitted for sale by public auction, as required by
the regulations governing the leasing of lands in the Colony. Bids at
the sale are confined to the upset price or premium on the lease and do
not affect the rental of the land which is fixed prior to the auction.
The sale of any lease is advertised for a period of six weeks and the
upset price (the minimum bid acceptable) is, in the case of unimproved
land, usually fixed at a figure calculated to be sufficient to cover the
cost of advertising.
Briefly stated, the terms and conditions usually endorsed on leases
of agricultural land are as follow:
(a) The period may be for any term up to a maximum of 99 years.
( b) The rent is subject to re-assessment in the 30th and 60th or
the 33rd and 66th years, according to the maximum period of the lease,
to a maximum amount not exceeding five per centum of the unim-
proved capital value of the land at the time of re-appraisement. Rent
is payable half yearly in advance.
Ic ) In the event of a lessee refusing to continue in possession of the
lease, the lease shall at the end of the current period be deemed to be
determined and the value of any unexhausted improvements on the
land shall be payable by the incoming tenant (if any) to the lessee.
The amount so payable shall be assessed by the Government and shall
be based on the value of the improvements to the incoming tenant at
the date when his tenancy begins. If within twelve months of the
determination of the lease, no tenant is willing to take up the land with
the improvements, the outgoing lessee shall thereupon surrender all
claim to the said improvements.


62
A DAIRY HERD, NAVUA


TAILEVU DAIRY SCHEME.
A soldier-settler’s home.


(i i ) Should the land leased be used for the erection of buildings not
incident to agriculture, the part so used may be assessed as building
land and additional rent be required accordingly.
{e) One-fifth of the land suitable for cultivation must be planted
with crops within the first five years of the lease; two-fifths within ten
years, and three-fourths within twenty years, and thereafter maintained
in good order.
(/) Any stock kept on the land must be adequately fenced in.
On grazing land: —
[а) The maximum term of a lease of grazing land is 21 years
renewable on re-assessment of rental for a further period of 21 years
so that the rent payable shall not exceed five per centum per annum
of the unimproved value of the land. The provisions relating to the
re-appraisement of rental and the assessment of the value of unexhausted
improvements in respect of agricultural leases are deemed to refer also
to grazing leases.
(б) Land used for the erection of buildings not incident to the pur-
poses of the lease may be assessed as building land and additional rent
be required accordingly.
(c) The lessee of land held under grazing lease conditions is not
allowed to cultivate any part of the area held by him except for use of
the produce on the premises. If the land is used for the production of
crops for sale, the land so used is liable to re-assessment of the rent as
agricultural land and the land is subject to re-entry in the event of the
lessee refusing to accept such re-assessment of rent.
(d) All stock on the land must be adequately fenced in.
(e) A minimum of ten head of cattle or fifty sheep to the square
mile must be placed on the land within the first five years and twenty
head of cattle or one hundred sheep within ten years. The land must
thereafter be kept stocked accordingly.
On receipt of an intimation from the Government of the provisional
approval of a lease, the applicant is required to deposit the amount of
estimated survey fee before the lease is finally approved. Upon pay-
ment of this fee the applicant receives final intimation of approval, and
is permitted to occupy the land. The Government thereupon arranges
for a survey to be made, and upon its completion and the preparation
of lease plans the actual amount of survey fee payable is computed and
an adjustment of the amount already paid by the applicant is made.
If the estimated survey fee is not paid within six months from date of
notification of the provisional approval of lease, the approval may be
cancelled. The fee payable conforms with a scale of survey fees laid


down by the Government. The lessee is required to execute the lease
documents within six months of date of notification that such documents
are ready for execution. Failure to fulfil this condition renders the
approval of the lease liable to cancellation.
Intending settlers who come to the Colony should apply in the
first instance to the Commissioner of Lands, who will give them ready
access to the plans of all blocks open for settlement, as well as advice
as to the means and cost of transport to the localities where the lands
are situated. From the Agricultural Department they will obtain
reliable information in respect of the various classes of land in the
Colony and their respective suitability for agriculture or grazing
purposes. This Department also publishes periodically agricultural
bulletins containing reliable technical information of interest to stock
owners and agriculturists.


HOSPITAL DAIRY HERD. MAKOGAI.


i ft
MODEL YACHT RACING, MAKOGAI.


PARA RUBBER PLANTATION, WAIDOI.


BOYS’ GRAMMAR SCHOOL, SUVA .
65


XI EDUCATION .
IN the year 1926, His Excellency the Governor of the Colony set up
a Commission on Education which, in the same year, made a
very thorough investigation of the condition and efficiency of the
Education provided in the Colony and of the problems arising therefrom.
The report of the Commission, presented in the same year, made many
valuable and important recommendations for the further development
and improvement of the education of European, Fijian and Indian and
other non-European children.
In accordance with these recommendations the Education Depart-
ment has been reorganised. A Director and an Assistant Director of
Education have been appointed and the Board of Education has been
reconstituted. These changes took effect at the end of the year 1927
and the new administration has since been engaged in readjusting or
remodelling those parts of the system that in its judgment and that of
the Education Commission are in need of amendment, or of extension.
A new Education Ordinance has been passed and awaits the approval
of the Secretary of State. This, together with a projected Ordinance
for Education Rating should enable the whole system to be placed on
a firm foundation and ensure that some of the most pressing needs,
particularly of Fijian and Indian education, may be provided for in
whole or in part.
Considerable advancement has been made in recent years with
regard to the education of European children living in the Colony. In
Suva the Government has established two separate Grammar Schools
for boys and for girls, to each of which a boarding establishment is
attached for the accommodation of country pupils. These schools were
originally staffed by teachers recruited in England, but, under an
arrangement made with the New Zealand Government, the Education
Department of the Dominion now supplies Fiji with male and female
teachers trained and certificated there. The curriculum of the New
Zealand public schools is followed and special provision is made for senior
pupils to take secondary subjects up to the Matriculation Standard. The
general standard of primary education is somewhat similar to that
prevailing in the London and County schools.
An annual inspection of the schools wholly or partly staffed by Euro-
pean teachers is made by an Inspector sent specially from New Zealand,
and as many as possible of the qualifying New Zealand examinations are
held in Fiji. These qualifying examinations consist of the Civil Service,
Matriculation, and Solicitors’ General Knowledge Examinations.


The boarding fee charged by these schools is £5O yearly; a special
reduction is made in cases where more than one member of a family are
in residence at the same time.
There is also a Government primary school for boys and for girls in
Levuka conducted on the same lines as the Suva schools. The fees,
inclusive of boarding, are £32 yearly, subject to a deduction of one-
fifth when more than one of the same family attend school.
St. Joseph’s Convent, Suva, and the Sacred Heart Convent, Levuka,
both have an excellent boarding school for girls. The former also
prepares pupils for the Trinity College Musical Examinations which
are held annually at Suva.
St. Felix College, under the management of the Marist Brothers
of Suva, is for boys only. There is a good boarding establishment
attached to this school for the convenience of pupils from the provinces.
In all these institutions the ordinary primary school subjects are taught,
and in addition some secondary and technical education is provided on
subjects suitable for the local requirements. Candidates are also trained
for the Cambridge Local Examinations now held yearly in the Colony.
At all the sugar mill centres small primary schools for European
children have been established, the majority of which are maintained
or subsidised by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, Limited.
The Education Department has recently inaugurated Correspond-
ence Classes so as to provide for the education of European children
living in the remoter parts of the Colony who are unable on account of
distance or otherwise to attend a school for European children.
Many of the planters living in the country districts send their
children for advanced education to New Zealand or Australia, where
children have the benefits of a cooler climate in addition to the many
educational advantages offered. The Shipping Companies assist this
plan by carrying children at specially low rates so that their vacations
can be spent with their parents in Fiji.
Fijians receive their first education at the village schools. These
exist in almost every village and are under the management of the
religious bodies operating in the Colony. In these primary schools
children are taught to read and write their own language and such other
subjects as elementary arithmetic and geography; naturally the extent
of the education meted out to the pupils depends on the acquirements
of the native teacher, who is usually the village Pastor. A grant in
aid is made by the Government to any such school which can satisfy
the requirements of the Primary or Vernacular Schools Regulations.


Block by courtesy, “Auckland Weekly News."
GIRLS’ GRAMMAR SCHOOL HOSTEL, SUVA.


NATIVE SCHOOL CHILDREN.
67


The Government has established six provincial boarding schools for
Fijian boys, each school being capable of accommodating sixty to eighty
boarders and a few day pupils. All of these schools are under Euro-
pean headmasters, assisted by a trained staff of native teachers. Fijians
now contribute to the maintenance of these provincial schools, which,
it is intended, will be increased in number from time to time. In addi-
tion to this, the Government subsidises a few provincial schools which
are with one exception entirely staffed by native teachers.
The Queen Victoria High School was established at Nasinu, some
five miles from Suva, in 1906. It is beautifully situated, with ample
playing fields and planting lands, overlooking Laucala Bay. It pro-
vides higher education for selected pupils and has produced excellent
results—several of the scholars have made good passes at the Cambridge
Local Examinations. To the first Headmaster, the late J. V. Thompson,
8.A., Cantab., much of the success of the school is due.
So as further to provide for the higher education of Fijians the
Government has adopted a scheme for granting four scholarships to
enable promising Fijian lads to be sent outside the Colony for special
education. At the time of the writing of this article three youths are
studying at the Wanganui Technical College and one at the Teachers'
Training College, Auckland, New Zealand, under this arrangement. In
addition a special scholarship has been awarded to one youth who is
taking a Medical Course at the University of Otago, New Zealand.
Supplementing the higher Government schools the Missionary Bodies
in the Colony have established several excellent schools and training
colleges whose curricula include various branches of technical instruction.
Attached to the Colonial Hospital, Suva, there is a Medical School
where native Fijian (and recently a few Indian) students are trained in
the practice of medicine. These students are selected after competitive
examinations in reading, writing, and arithmetic. The method of
teaching is by lectures and clinical instruction in the Colonial Hospital.
After a three years course the students who pass a qualifying exami-
nation in anatomy, physiology, materia medica, medicine, and surgery
become Native Medical Practitioners and are given employment under
the Government in the free treatment of natives in the country districts
and outlying islands; or as dispensers or anaesthetists at the Colonial
Hospital, or the Levuka Branch Hospital.
The education of the East Indian immigrants living in the Colony
is a somewhat complex problem, presenting many difficulties, which
have yet to be overcome before a satisfactory solution is reached.


Not the least of these difficulties is that of language—there are
at least four quite separate and distinct Indian languages used by the
different sections of the Indian communities in Fiji. To this difficulty
there have to be added the differences in the religious beliefs of the people
and their general scattered condition throughout the Colony.
The policy of the Government so far has been to assist by giving
grants in aid to all approved schools established by the different Indian
bodies or communities, or by the Indian Missions. Under the Primary
and Vernacular Schools Regulations sixty-eight schools are so subsi-
dised, some of which receive, in addition to the Government subsidy,
monetary assistance from the sugar companies.
In 1918 the Government opened a school for Indian boys at Lautoka
where all pupils are given instruction in English as well as the verna-
cular. This school has been quite successful and has an average daily
attendance of over fifty pupils. In July, 1929, there will be opened at
Lautoka a Government Teachers’ Training School, at which it is intended
that a considerable number of young Indian teachers, as well as Fijians,
will be trained. The resulting increase in the number of trained teachers
available will permit of considerable extension in the educational facilities
provided for non-European children.
The Methodist Mission has done good work by establishing orphan-
ages for Indian boys and girls, and a limited number of Indian youths
are trained at the Mission District College, Davuilevu, as teachers.
At St. Felix College, Suva, Indian youths are trained by the Marist
Brothers for the Cambridge Local Examinations.


6S
A CORNER OF THE BUSINESS PORTION OF SUVA.


A CORNER OF THE GRAND PACIFIC HOTEL, SUVA.
69


Exports.
Year.
Imports.
Produce of the
Colony.
Other.
Total Trade.
1919
£
1,060,314
£
1,822,037
£
49,025
£
2,931,376
1920
1,673,121
2,804,178
92,270
4,569,569
1921
1,509,732
2,457,851
83,607
4,051,190
1922
946,063
1,787,892
75,280
2,809,235
1923
989,060
1,461,518
91,721
2,542,299
1924
1,066,594
1,452,215
56,719
2,575,528
1925
1,271,135
2,107,014
49,243
3,427,392
1926
1,480,945
1,647,364
93,063
3,221,372
1927
1,223,303
1,930,208
67,166
3,220,677
1928
1,483,169
2,633,238
68,013
4,184,420
XII. TRADE OF THE COLONY.
THE following table shows the value of the imports, exports and
total trade of the Colony during the 10 years 1919-1928: —
Imports.
Although the value of imports in 1920 and 1921 exceeded the value
of imports in 1928, the volume of goods imported during 1928 was much
in excess of that during the two years mentioned. The high prices
ruling during 1920 and 1921 for all classes of goods unduly inflated the
import figures for those years.
The import trade of the Colony is increasing at a satisfactory rate.
The tendency has for some time been for more trade to be done with
the United Kingdom, except in respect to particular lines such as fresh
food-stuffs, coal, timber and motor cars. These are for the most part
imported from Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the United States
of America.
The trade with the United Kingdom is materially assisted by the
direct line of steamers running regularly between the United Kingdom
and Fiji, and by the Tariff Preference given to goods of British Empire
origin or manufacture.
During 1928 the value of imports from the United Kingdom was
£404,718, from Australia £621,396, from New Zealand £140,697 and
from Canada £70,262. Bullion of the value of £17,631 and £lO,OOO was
received from Australia and New Zealand respectively.
The main sources of supply of goods of foreign origin are the United
States and Japan. From these countries the value of goods imported
during 1928 was £131,994 and £28,811 respectively.


Exports.
The main exports of the Colony are sugar, copra and bananas; the
principal minor exports being molasses and trocas-shell. The largest
export of sugar in the history of the Colony was made in 1928 when
120,683 tons of a value of £1,827,095 were shipped from the Colony.
The bulk of this sugar is shipped to Canada, the balance being shipped
to New Zealand and a small quantity to the United Kingdom. Our
main market until a few years back was New Zealand, but it has lately
been found more profitable to ship to Canada. For several years, due
to the shortage of labour, cultivation of this crop was curtailed, but by
the introduction of labour-saving machinery the output of late years
has been materially increased.
The production of copra has shown a steady increase for many
years, but it is not expected that a marked increase will be effected in
the immediate future. This increase of production is largely the result
of the successful efforts made by the Agricultural Department to des-
troy the moth Levuana iridescens which has, since a date prior to
Cession, prevented coconut trees on the large island of Vitilevu from
bearing. The ravages of this moth are well checked by parasites, and
the trees which have never borne before are now coming into full
bearing. Small areas of fresh land have also been planted up by
natives and these in due course of time will increase production. The
export in 1928 was the greatest of any year and 27,947 tons valued
at £567,254 were exported. The greater part of the copra produced
is exported to the United Kingdom and to Continental ports. A small
quantity is exported to San Francisco. This amounted to 2,418 tons
in 1928.
An export trade practically confined to re-exports is done with
Samoa and Tonga. It amounted in 1928 to £27,106.
Since the imposition of a high duty upon bananas imported into
Australia the very valuable trade done in that fruit with Australia has
ceased. Nevertheless it is expected that with better methods of culti-
vation and packing it may be again possible to gain a footing in that
market. At the present time the New Zealand market is the only
one open to Fiji for bananas.
The cultivation of cotton gives promise of being an industry of
some value, and in 1928, 75,366 lb of lint were exported. The dairying
industry also gives every indication of being firmly established, and
besides local demands being met during 1928 a surplus of 33,992 lb of
butter was exported.


70
KING’S WHARF. SUVA (looking North).


71
KING’S WHARF, SUVA (looking South).


XII. CUSTOMS.
THERE are three ports of entry in Fiji: Suva, Levuka and Lautoka
respectively. Powers are invested in the Governor of the Colony
to declare by proclamation other ports where shipping may be
entered and cleared.
Customs sheds are provided at all ports of entry for the receipt of
cargo. There are also bonded-warehouses for the bonding and inspec-
tion of goods.
The Customs tariff provides mainly for an ad valorem duty assessed
on the value of the goods, f.0.b., but specific duties are levied on several
commodities. Articles of luxury, such as wines, spirits and tobacco,
are subject to specially high Customs duties. The local industries of
rice cultivation, dairy farming and meat canning are temporarily pro-
tected by high specific duties on all imported rice, butter and beef.
Restrictive regulations govern the importation of such narcotics as
opium.
The tariff provides for the preferential treatment of all articles
which are the produce of, or are manufactured in the British Empire.
Foreign goods, which are subject to ad valorem assessment, are charged
rates of duty which are 15 per cent, higher than the rate charged on
British goods of the same description. In the case of commodities on
which specific duties are levied, the duty on those of foreign origin is
50 per cent, higher than the duty on similar articles of British manu-
facture.
The general rate of duty on British goods which come under the
ad valorem rates is 20 per cent., but machinery and agricultural imple-
ments, of British manufacture, divided into two classes are admitted at
15 per cent, and 10 per cent, respectively. A general Port and Customs
Service Tax of 1 per cent, ad valorem is levied on all goods imported
into the Colony, including those exempt from Customs duty.
The principal articles exempt from Customs duty are coal,
manures, seeds for propagation or cultivation, live animals, bags, sacks
and other containers for the export of produce. In the majority of
these cases the exemption only applies when the importations are of
British origin.
Exportations of trocas-shell and beche-de-mer are subject to
export duty, and a tax is imposed upon all copra and bananas exported.
The revenue derived from the tax is earmarked to defray both the cost
of research work in connection with diseases of coconut trees and also
of the inspection of fruit before shipment.


Shipping.
The following table shows the number of merchant vessels entered
from overseas at the three ports of entry in the Colony during each of
the last five years:—
Year.
Steam Vessels.
Sailing Vessels.
Total.
No.
Tonnage.
No.
Tonnage.
No.
Tonnage.
1924
123
402,672
6
4,331
129
407,003
1925
151
586,561
23
5,981
174
592,542
1926
174
675,001
16
7,696
190
682,697
1927
165
637,820
11
3,656
176
641,476
1928
189
678,765
2
593
191
679,358
XIV. WHARF & HARBOUR ACCOMMODATION.
SUVA wharf is 1,400 feet in length, of which 900 feet is available
for vessels of 32 to 34 feet draught, and 500 feet for vesssels of
22 to 32 feet draught. The entrance to the harbour has a
minimum width of 530 yards and a minimum navigable depth of 30
fathoms at low water, ordinary spring tides.
Levuka wharf is 616 feet in length with a minimum depth of 30
feet at low water. The entrance to the harbour is 300 yards in width
with a minimum navigable depth of 7 fathoms.
The wharf at Lautoka has berthing accommodation for vessels up
to 400 feet in length, and a loaded draught of 24 feet. The minimum
width of the harbour entrance is 930 yards, with a navigable depth of
11 fathoms at low water. The approach channel to the harbour is from
400 yards to 5 miles wide, with a navigable depth ranging up to 15
fathoms at low water.
The wharves are connected with the local water supplies for the
convenience of shipping.


STACKING RAW SUGAR, LAUTOKA MILL
72


Above: THE LAUTOKA MILL OF THE COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING CO. LTD.


Below: LOADING COPRA AT VUNA, TAVEUNI.


73
RAILWAY BRIDGE, BA RIVER.


XV. PRODUCTION OF SUGAR.
THE sugar industry in Fiji dates from the early seventies of last
century, when a small mill was erected by Messrs. Brewster and
Joske in the neighbourhood now occupied by Suva, the capital
of the Colony. This pioneer venture was not a commercial success,
but the price of sugar then obtainable led to other plantations being
established on the Rewa and Navua Rivers, on the mainland of Viti-
levu, and on several of the smaller islands. Some of these enterprises
maintained an existence for a number of years, but the majority of them
succumbed in the crisis of 1884, when there was a direct and sustained
fall in the value of sugar of £lO per ton.
The only mills that long survived that ordeal were those of the
Fiji Sugar Company at Navua, of the Penang Company on the Ra
coast, and the Colonial Sugar Refining Company. The first named
was later on acquired by the British Columbia Sugar Refining Company
under the name of the Vancouver-Fiji Sugar Company and was run
by them for a number of years until it finally closed down in 1922. The
Penang Mill after changing hands once or twice in its early history also
closed down in 1922, but was reopened by the Penang Company in 1925
and was taken over in 1926 and has since been carried on by the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company, so that the industry at the present time is
represented by the five mills of the latter Company and the plantations
and farms which they serve. The history of the industry, in so far as
it is of interest at the present time, is thus largely a history of these
five mills, but it will be instructive to consider at a later stage the con-
ditions that led to the recent stoppage of operations by the other two
companies and that threatened the continued existence of the industry.
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company is an Australian company
whose operations date back eighty-five years, but their connection with
Fiji did not begin until 1880 when they undertook the establishment
of plantations and the erection of a large mill (Nausori) on the Rewa
River. The mill commenced work in 1882, in which year the output
was 1,801 tons of sugar. The outlook then being favourable, it was
decided in 1883 to open up the Ba River district on the dry side of Viti-
levu, and Rarawai Mill was built. It is doubtful whether this extension
of operations would have been undertaken had the debacle of 1884 been
foreseen, but being already committed to the enterprise the Company
determined to meet the situation by adopting modern methods of culti-
vation and scientific control of the manufacturing processes, with the
result that they were able to hold their own, and in the early nineties


further expansion took place by the erection of Labasa Mill on the
Island of Vanualevu, followed ten years later by Lautoka Mill on the
main island, the last being one of the largest sugar factories south of
the equator and capable of turning out 40-45,000 tons of sugar in a
season of reasonable length.
On the Rewa River—one of the earliest settled districts in Fiji—
about 10,000 acres of land are cultivated, consisting exclusively of the
alluvial soils of the river valley. These are generally of good quality,
but the humid climate and deficiency of sunshine are not conducive to
high sugar contents in the cane, and for this reason all later develop-
ments have taken place in the drier zone on the north-west side of the
island, where the rainfall—ranging from 60 to 90 inches—is in ordinary
years sufficient to produce good crops without the aid of irrigation.
The greater part of the rain falls in the wet season from January to
April, but during the remainder of the year there are occasional showers
which keep the crops growing, while the warmth and sunshine help to
produce a cane of high sweetness. In the Ba and Lautoka districts,
extending from the Tavua River to the Sigatoka River and covering
about 130 miles of coastline, the sugar lands—aggregating about 54,000
acres —lie chiefly on the banks of the numerous rivers and creeks, but
they include extensive areas of undulating and even of hilly land. At
Penang there are at present about 4,000 acres under cultivation. At
Labasa the 10,000 acres cultivated are for the most part low alluvial
flats on the banks of a series of rivers extending over about 35 miles
of coastline.
The fertility of the hill lands has been maintained and even
increased by the system of cultivation followed, upon which depends
the ability of the soils—including even those in the alluvial flats—to
continue producing a crop so exhausting as sugar cane. The main
features of the system lie in the building up of the humus contents of
the soil by ploughing in the trash or dead leaves from the cane crops,
also green manure crops grown during the fallows, supplemented by the
application of artificial fertilisers; but, even with these aids to produc-
tion, it has been necessary to go far afield to secure the areas required
to provide full supplies of cane for the factories. Some of the planta-
tions are as much as eighty miles from the mill at which their crops are
crushed.
The carriage of cane has thus been a serious problem entailing a
very large outlay for transport in the shape of light railways, locomo-
tives and rolling-stock, or of floating-plant (launches and lighters) where
water carriage has been resorted to, the figures relating to which are as


74
A SUGAR-CANE ESTATE, TAVUA.


THE SUGAR INDUSTRY.
Ploughing by steam power.
75


follow: 372 miles of permanent line for locomotive traction, 162 miles
of portable line for horse or bullock haulage, 45 locomotives, 5,638
trucks, 61 punts, 7 steam launches. In addition to the above there
are large numbers of trucks and lighters for the conveyance of sugar,
molasses, coal, limestone, ballast and general cargo.
In each district, except Penang, the Company has a number of its
own plantations, mostly on leased lands, but from the commencement
of operations in 1880 it has been their policy to encourage the produc-
tion of cane by Europeans or other growers whose crops are purchased
under contracts providing for a price per ton that fluctuates in accord-
ance with the sugar contents, as determined when the cane is crushed.
For many years the Company leased out estates to former employees
whose operations it financed. Some of these men prospered, but owing
to the uncertainty as to labour supply after the indenture system was
abolished and the increased cost of labour, the majority were no longer
able to grow cane profitably and the estates fell back to the Company.
In a large measure the lands vacated by European planters have
been cut up into small blocks of about ten acres each and leased to
Indian farmers, of whom there were already many in occupation of
native leases, and who now to the number of several thousand are pro-
ducing more than two-thirds of the total tonnage sent to the mills.
These Indian farmers, who in most cases themselves work in the
fields, can cultivate small blocks with the aid of labour supplied by
their own families, relatives and neighbours. The majority also culti-
vate their own crops of rice, maize, and other food products, and keep
sufficient cattle for their household needs and for agricultural purposes
on their farms.
In the production and transport of the cane and the manufacture
of sugar, the labour employed, with the exception of a small European
mechanical staff and about 1,000 Fijians, is wholly Indian. At the
outset, the Company employed Pacific Island labourers recruited from
the neighbouring groups of islands, but soon after operations were com-
menced they found employment for some natives of India who had
been introduced by the Government for other purposes, and as these
proved more suitable than the Islanders it was not long before more
Indians were engaged and the industry came to rely on these men as
their main labour supply.
The conditions under which these Indians were engaged and intro-
duced, also those under which they were employed after arrival, were
laid down in detail, and from time to time amended by the British
Government acting through the Colonial and India Offices; indeed, the


recruitment and transport were wholly carried out by the Government,
while the conditions under which the immigrants lived and worked,
also the provision of hospital accommodation and medical attendance,
were supervised by Government officials under clearly expressed and
strictly enforced regulations. In the year 1917, however, the Indian
Government adopted the view that lengthy contracts of service under
indenture were undesirable, and emigration of labour under indenture
from India came to an end in that year. The system was finally
abolished on Ist January, 1920, when all existing indentures were can-
celled. Negotiations were entered into with the Government of India
to permit voluntary immigration of Indians into Fiji, who would land
free of obligation to work; but agreement was not arrived at in the
matter and immigration for the time being virtually ceased. For some
years past a large number of repatriated Indians who had served inden-
tures, and many of whom had been in occupation of leased lands, have
been clamouring to return to Fiji, and in 1928 the Fiji Government
paid the passages of a number of families, aggregating about 350 souls,
from among these people, but it remains to be seen whether the high
cost of introduction can be justified by their value to the Colony as
producers.
In the past the greater number of Indians, as their agreements
expired, preferred to take up land rather than to continue working for
wages. A shortage of labour, in consequence, resulted. This factor,
coupled with the fall in the price of sugar in the latter months of the
year 1921, to some extent temporarily dislocated the industry. The
owners of the mill at Navua, a district in which, owing to the heavy
rainfall, sugar contents in cane had always been poor, finally decided
to close down. The Penang Sugar Company came to a similar decision,
although during the year 1923 planting operations in that district
were recommenced. For the same reasons the output of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company was reduced in 1923 to about one-third of its
normal proportions.
The offer in 1923 by the Company of a minimum price for cane for
a period of three years, provided that the British preference was main-
tained in the United Kingdom, led to extensive planting, more parti-
cularly by Indian growers, and an offer in 1926 to continue the bonus
so long as the preference remained, coupled with the leasing of consider-
able areas of estate lands in ten acre blocks to Indians, further stabilised
the industry and brought the mills back to full production.
The draught power employed on the estates consists of a large
number of livestock —mules from America, horses from Australia and


THE SUGAR INDUSTRY
Transporting cane to the mill at LautoRa
76


LOADING SUGAR AT LAUTOKA.
The C.S.R. Co.’s s.s. "Fiona ” at the wharf.
77


Value of
Exports.
Year.
Sugar.
All other Exports.
T otal.
1918 ..
981,018* ....
642,210 ....
1,623,228
1919
1,014,240* ....
807,797 ....
1,822,037
1920
.. 2,092,990f
711,188
2,804,178
1921
.. 2,053,405f
404,446
2,457,851
1922
1,342,874
445,018 ....
1,787,892
1923
866,287 ....
595,231
1,461,518
1924
768,110 ....
674,105 ....
1,442,215
1925
.. 1,371,267 ....
735,747
2,107,014
1926
808,195
839,169 ....
1,647,364
1927
.. 1,125,215 ....
804,993 ....
1,930,208
1928
.. 1,827,095 ....
874,156 ....
2,701,251
New Zealand, and bullocks locally bred—but there are also several
steam ploughing sets of Fowler’s make and a large number of tractors
of various types.
The varieties of cane cultivated are Malabar (Yellow Caledonia),
Badila from New Guinea, and a number of seedlings of local and other
origin. In the breeding of the new varieties and the control of methods
of cultivation, manuring, plant diseases, &c., the Company maintains a
technical and scientific staff and an experimental station with results
which are held to justify the expense.
The capacity of the mills in a normal season may be stated as:
Nausori, 12,000 tons; Rarawai, 30,000 tons; Lautoka, 43,000 tons;
Labasa, 15,000 tons; Penang, 6,000 tons, or say, 106,000 tons of sugar
annually. The maximum output in any one season was 112,000 tons
in 1916, with an average of about 85,000, but for reasons already
explained there was a great reduction after the cancellation of indentures
in 1920, which reached low water mark in 1923 when the output was
only 35,562 tons. In 1928 the output was 94,283 tons.
As illustrating the relative value of the sugar exports as compared
with the exports of other industries, the following figures are instructive: —
* Drought years.
t High prices.
The Company has given great attention to the increase of the yield
in the field and to the reduction of waste in manufacture. Many varie-
ties of cane have been introduced from other countries, some of the
best from native gardens in New Guinea; frequent visits by experts
have been paid to Java, Hawaii, America, West Indies and Mauritius,
and to the beet producing countries of Europe.
Capital to the extent of three millions sterling has been spent in
the establishment of plantations, factories, transport and plant.
In order to earn an adequate dividend on a capital of this magni-
tude in proportion to the output of sugar it was necessary for the costs


of production of sugar to be kept down, and for the Company to encour-
age the production of cane by Indian farmers, as referred to above, and
to fix the price for cane at a level that would enable it to produce sugar
at a cost which would leave a reasonable margin of profit on the capital
expended in spite of the competition of other countries more advantage-
ously situated as regards labour and concentration of area under culti-
vation. In this competition it had formerly no fiscal protection. Its
sugar—or the bulk of it—went to supply New Zealand, where it had to
be sold in direct competition with the product of Java, the only advant-
age it had being a slight difference in the cost of transport. Of late
years a preference has been afforded by the provisions of the British
and Canadian Tariffs, and in 1928 of the 120,683 tons of sugar exported
by the Company from Fiji 79,485 tons were exported to Canada.
There is now also a protective duty on imported white sugar sold
in competition with that refined in Auckland.
The Company now possesses a monopoly of all sugar mills in the
Colony, and all growers must therefore sell their cane to the Company.
The price offered by the Company, though not sufficient to enable
European planters to produce sugar-cane at a profit, is as stated suffici-
ently high to enable Indian farmers to extract a good livelihood from the
cultivation of cane, and the Company has thus been able to maintain
its normal level of output of manufactured sugar.
In fact it has more than held its own, has continued annually to pay
good dividends and add very substantially to its reserves, and its opera-
tions are capable of further expansion under suitable labour conditions.
The conditions under which Indian immigrants live and work in
Fiji are favourable. After serving periods of indenture under the
immigration system now abolished, large numbers of Indians have
settled on land, and have become prosperous through cultivation of
their areas. The climate is extremely healthy, malaria being unknown;
while the soil is fertile, and good water plentiful. The general conditions
of life are said to compare favourably with those in other Colonies to
which emigration from India has been permitted.
Of the 78,000 acres under cultivation for sugar cane, approximately
55,000 acres are worked by 4,550 Indian farmers. Of these some 2,000
men with their families have been settled on 21,000 acres within the last
four years by the Company. Probably nowhere else in the world have
such extensive settlements been made by a Company in so short a time.
There is still room for considerable expansion on these lines, but
the extent to which this can be carried out is limited by the number of
suitable Indians available.


XVI. THE COPRA INDUSTRY.
COPRA is a Hindu word for the dried flesh of the fruit of the coco-
nut palm. How and when this palm found its way to Fiji is
shrouded in mystery that perhaps will never be solved, but it is
probable that the coconut palm became widely diffused throughout the
tropical world at an earlier period than man himself.
The rapidity of natural dispersion is indicated by the fact that one
can hardly travel a few miles close to the shore of any of the South Sea
Islands without noticing in the water a nut floating off to sea at the
mercy of wind and tide. Such nuts are capable of germination on
reaching solid land even after several months, and no island however
small is without its coconut trees. The paucity of distinct varieties in
the islands of the Southern Pacific that would be expected from long isola-
tion further attests to the constant exchange of coconuts in the beach
drift. This natural distribution has undoubtedly been aided to some
extent by natives who carried the nuts with them in their migrations
and planted them in some cases far from the sea-board and on hills.
Nowadays coconut trees are everywhere in the South Seas. Their
natural habitat is the fringe of flat sandy land behind the white coral
beaches. Though Europeans and others have planted coconuts suc-
cessfully in very different kinds of soil, it is probably true to say that
nowhere does the coconut tree fruit so prolifically as in the immediate
vicinity of the sea on a soil largely composed of coral sand. Indeed,
the native Fijian hardly regards any other kind of soil as worth planting
with coconuts, which fact has been more than once proved when a
benevolent Government, seeing the increased commercial value of the
coconut, and anxious to improve the Fijian’s economic position, has
ordered each taxpayer to plant so many nuts. The Fijian obeyed, but
instead of breaking new land, he proceeded to plant his quota of seed
nuts in between the already over-crowded rows of his old plantation
along the beaches. Few groves of native-owned coconuts appear to
have been planted out by hand. Where a nut fell there it germinated
and, if strong enough to force its way through the undergrowth, grew
up amongst its fellows. The product of such haphazard growth was
sufficient to meet Fijian needs until the arrival of the commercial age.
It must not, however, be supposed that the Fijian makes other
than a large and varied use of the coconut tree. He drinks the milk
from the young nut—on a few low islands he has in time of drought
little else to drink—and in hot weather few youngsters fail to drink the
milk of several fresh nuts every day of their lives.


The trunk of the coconut tree is useful for important timber work
in the interior of houses, and is the usual material for those round and
slippery single trunk bridges across creeks along which Fijians love to
see the unversed European pass, in constant expectation of seeing him
fall—harmlessly, but dirtily, into the muddy water below.
From the leaves all kinds of thatch and basket ware are fashioned,
and a rough matting is also made. From the husks comes the sinnet
with which the Fijian—“ the best house builder in the Pacific ”
fastens the roof-beams of his thatch house so securely that without nail
or screw a well built Fijian house will stand up against a hurricane
almost as well as the European built sawn timber house.
The fresh flesh of the nut the Fijian uses as a pleasant ingredient
of many dishes. From the dried flesh he makes oil which he uses to
anoint his body. Human skin needs protection against the tropical
sun; the European secures that protection from clothes and hats, the
South Sea Islander, whose etiquette and abundance of hair alike prevent
the use of hats, secures it from unguents. The Fijian, while in health,
anoints himself after every one of his many baths. Of all native
unguents coconut oil is the base. Oil scented with some favourite
flower is very highly valued by the Fijian even to-day, and a small
bottle of it is the favourite gift of guest to host or of lover to his
loved one.
In former times coconut oil in relatively large quantities was a
favourite form of tribute to exact from dependent serfs in lieu of rent
on land. It is only a few years ago that a high chief of Bau secured,
before a Native Lands Commission, a large block of land on the evid-
ence that yearly supplies of coconut oil had been sent from time
immemorial to his predecessors from the inhabitants.
When Europeans first began to settle in Fiji, the value of the coco-
nut for export at once became apparent. In early years coconut oil
obtained from copra by rude native methods was first exported. This
mode of exportation lasted in gradually dwindling quantities up to
1881, between which date and 1922 there is no record of any export
of locally-prepared oil. In the latter year a crushing mill with modern
machinery was set up and the export of oil on a small scale recommenced.
Difficulties, however, were experienced, and it seems likely that the
bulk of the exports will continue to be made in the form of copra and
not of oil.
The importance, therefore, of the coconut tree to Fiji has lain in
the dried flesh of the nut exported as copra. Export figures have
been as follows over quinquennial periods:—


80
A COCONUT PLANTATION, TAVEUNI.


81
HEAD OF COCONUT PALM


Period,
Total Copra
shipped.
Total value.
Value per
ton.
tons.
£
£
s.
d.
1877-81
33,474
457,776
13
13
6
1882-86
27,782
312,213
11
4
9
1887-91
22,322
195,056
8
14
9
1892-96
34,827
309,543
8
10
11
1897-01
50,571
492,603
9
14
10
1902-06
50,083
621,799
12
8
3
1907-11
69,884
1,122,076
16
1
3
1912-16
60,040
1,057,058
17
12
1
1917-21
91,193
2,294,517
25
3
3
1922-26
121,286
2,345,205
19
6
8
In 1927, 26,560 tons were shipped of a total value of £534,416, the
value per ton being £2O 2s. 5d.; and in 1928 the corresponding figures
were 27,947, £567,254, and £2O ss. lid.
That “ Coconuts are the Consols of the East ” is a very old and
well-known saying. The owner of consols between 1900 and 1920, and
the coconut planter who saw copra values drop from £55 to £23 in
London during the post-war slump may perhaps be pardoned in
doubting whether the compliment was a very true one. But it is pro-
bably correct to say that few tropical industries show so steady a pro-
gress and have suffered so little during periods of depressed trade. New
uses have continually been found for coconut oil—it has proved most
adaptable for the manufacture of vegetable butters; its free lathering
properties have made it an almost essential ingredient of good quality
soaps. The result has been that it is only on rare occasions that the
market has been glutted, and the industry has, unlike so many tropical
industries, always been able to effect sales.
While the stability of the coconut industry is undeniable, and while
the crop occupies, and is likely always to occupy, a position of prime
importance in the economic structure of this Colony, and while existing
coconut plantations owned by Europeans are generally in a sound
financial position, yet it is open to question whether planters, even if
they possess the necessary capital, can, if they lack local experience,
come to Fiji and open up a plantation de novo from the bush and obtain
an adequate financial return.
The original coconut estates in Fiji that have been successful were
planted when a labourer was obtainable for £6 per annum and his food,
whereas the present wage is about two shillings per day and food.


The following figures of production costs that may be of interest
to intending settlers were given to the writer by a successful coconut
planter of long and wide experience in this Colony.
The all inclusive cost of purchasing the land, clearing, planting,
weeding and bringing into bearing can be estimated at £35 per acre.
Buildings including a very modest dwelling house may be set down
at £l,lOO the items being—dwelling £350, accommodation for 20 labourers
£250, a copra shed £2OO, vatas for drying the copra £3OO.
The average yield per acre—which is greatly exceeded on some
estates—is one ton of dry copra from three acres of trees in full bearing
or 6-6 cwt. per acre.
The fee simple of suitable land would cost at the present time from
two to three pounds per acre.
An estate of 500 acres would require twenty units of labour.
Copra at the plantation to-day is worth about £lB per ton.
Some coconuts come into bearing at four years of age, but as a rule
a new plantation is not in full bearing until the fourteenth year, the
stages being as follows:
at 8 years of age the yield is about l / 6 full,
at 9 do. do. Vs Ml,
at 10 do. do. V 2 Ml,
at 11 do. do. 2 / 3 full,
at 12 do. do. 5 /e full.
It does not usually pay to commence collecting the nuts until the tenth
year.
Besides the costs mentioned above there must be considered the
risk of hurricanes and the toll of disease. The writer is advised that
the expectation of hurricane damage may be estimated as one hurri-
cane per eight years. As a few trees are generally killed and as the
bearing of the plantation does not fully recover for three years it is
prudent to set aside as a hurricane reserve an amount equal to 15 per
cent, of the net income commencing with the tenth year. As regards
diseases the prospects of the Colony are now greatly improved owing
to measures taken by the Government in combating the ravages of the
Purple Moth and other pests. On the largest island, Vitilevu, the
caterpillars of this Purple Moth have in the past devitalised the trees
and prevented the proper development of nuts by eating strips the
width of their bodies from the lower side of the leaves. The existence
of this trouble was recognised before Europeans commenced to develop
large plantations, with the result that such operations were not attempted
on that island. For forty years or more the moth was confined to


MAKING COPRA.
A few dexterous cuts with the point of a
knife remove the kernel of the coconut in
slices which are then dried for export.
82


COCONUT PLANTATION, TAVEUNI.
Drying copra.
83


Vitilevu and the islets of its periphery, but about 1920 in some unknown
way it succeeded in getting established on some two or three adjacent
islands which, though relatively small, were largely dependent upon
copra for revenue and were almost completely fringed with flourishing
coconut areas. With a more consolidated food supply the Purple
Moth quickly bred up in countless thousands, completely destroying the
copra supply, and making people fearful for the industry throughout
the Colony should the moth succeed in further extending its territory.
In this emergency the Government first offered a prize of £5,000
for an economic remedy, but later decided to apply available funds to
securing the services of technical advisers, in this case a staff of entomo-
logists with a special knowledge of the habits of insect parasites. The
story of that campaign against the Purple Moth, Levuana iridescens, is
too long to insert here in a general consideration of the copra industry.
It is perhaps sufficient to record here that a two-winged parasitic fly,
Ptychomyia remota , was imported from the Malay States where it
attacked a caterpillar similar to but by no means identical with Levuana,
which is found at present in no place in the world except this small
part of Fiji. This fly changed its diet to Levuana caterpillars and
attacked them with such avidity that within eighteen months the Purple
Moth was so reduced in numbers as to become a very rare insect indeed,
and at present (the end of 1928) one may search far and wide without
discovering so much as one, unless directed to the few pockets where it is
able, on account of unusual conditions, still to eke out an existence in
limited numbers.
Fiji is fortunately free from the Coconut or Rhinoceros Beetle ( Cryctes
rhinoceros ) and such other pests as are known, namely, the Coconut
Scale ( Aspidiotus destructor), the Leaf Mining Beetle of coconuts (Pro-
mecotheca richer), and the Coconut Spathe Moth [Tirathaha sp.) have
hitherto been considered of small importance, but the success of the
Levuana campaign has encouraged planters and legislators to hope that
losses from these sources too can be diminished, and the Committee
which controlled the Levuana campaign was authorised to import
enemies of the pest considered to be next in importance as regards its
capacity for damage, namely, the Coconut Scale. Accordingly, six
species of lady-bird beetle, which prey upon this species of scale else-
where, have been imported and it is hoped that this will reduce the losses
from this source. Later, search will probably be made for possible
enemies of the Spathe Moth.
Though the figures given above show that the cost of establishing
new plantations is greater than formerly, and that there is practically


no revenue for ten years from the beginning of operation, nevertheless
the Levuana campaign has given the industry an added sense of security
and has opened the possibility of developing plantations on Vitilevu,
where the sporadic coconut trees are now looking healthy and green,
with full crowns of leaves and a moderate load of fruit, despite a life-
long struggle with their insidious enemy.
The writer has purposely represented an average case, and is well
aware that there are individual planters of vision, courage and energy,
who, by a tactful treatment of labour, by the careful selection of seed
nuts, by planting in the most approved way, by encouraging the young
trees to come to full bearing at the tenth instead of the fourteenth year,
and by the adoption of an up-to-date method of drying, may in practice
more than double the paper returns above suggested.
Very occasionally “ established ” coconut plantations are available
for purchase, and when the price asked is reasonable the investment is
likely to be a sound one. Many planters, who would hesitate in
establishing a new plantation, find that it pays to extend an existing one.


XVII. BANANAS.
THE banana is to-day, through an increasing demand for this
popular fruit, grown commercially in almost every tropical
country, the extent of the areas cultivated being determined
by suitability of climate and soil and facilities for transport. Fiji
possesses without doubt two of these three features all of which are
necessary for the successful cultivation of the plant and for marketing
the fruit, viz., ideal climatic conditions and excellent soil, and while
shipping facilities leave a great deal to be desired there is fortunately
at present sufficient accommodation on two steamers which ply between
Suva, the capital, and Auckland, New Zealand, to carry bananas to
meet the requirements of the New Zealand market.
As has been unfortunately the case in many other countries where
bananas are grown on an extensive scale, production in Fiji has been
affected to a considerable extent by loss from disease and insect pest
troubles and particularly on account of the ravages of insect pests. A
still more serious handicap to the industry in the Colony was the dis-
continuance in 1919 of the fruit steamer service between Suva and
Australia, where the greater part of the fruit was shipped.
Production reached its peak in 1914 when 1,715,766 bunches were
shipped to Australia and New Zealand markets. A temporary set back
through violent windstorms affected the output in 1915 to the extent
of 700,000 bunches, but the following year saw the industry again on its
feet with a yield approaching that of 1914. From then to 1919 ship-
ments well over the million mark were maintained. In 1919 strikes
in Australia so seriously affected shipping in that country that steam-
ship owners were compelled to discontinue their fruit steamer service
between Australia and Suva. The service was not renewed, and the
loss of this valuable market through lack of bottoms in which to trans-
port fruit resulted in a serious blow to the industry. Since 1919 the
average export has been somewhere between 500,000 and 600,000
bunches shipped in cases—each case containing the fingers or single
fruits of two bunches —to New Zealand, where the Fiji-grown fruit is
very popular and where it commands a high price. The shipments to
New Zealand represent an annual value to growers of approximately
£65,000.
The greater part of the fruit exported is now grown by natives,
but there is reasonable assurance that, were direct fruit carrying steamers
to Australia available, many European growers who have neglected and
in some cases abandoned their fields, partly on account of the various


pest troubles, would again become interested and cultivate along more
scientific lines. In this they would have every assistance through
advice from the Department of Agriculture. The Department, it
might here be mentioned, has now in operation a scheme, marked so
far with a certain degree of success, to clean up all native plantations
in an endeavour to minimise the ravages of the borer (Cosmopolites
sordidus), which is the greatest menance of all insect pests in the fields
to-day.
Banana growing is highly remunerative, providing that the grower
gives the necessary attention to his fields, and at the prices paid for the
fruit by the local buyers very handsome returns can be obtained through
an investment of a comparatively small amount of capital. The
following figures might be of interest to agriculturalists who are already
established in other branches of agriculture in the Colony, and who,
while they may have a sufficient area of uncleared land available and
suitable, have not yet given serious consideration to the possibilities of
banana growing.
Expenditure.
Cost of clearing, planting and bringing into bearing
in 15 months, 20 acres at £ls per acre £3OO
Revenue.
Return from sale of fruit, 300 bunches per acre
= 6,000 bunches or 3,000 cases at ss. per case ... £750
The profit for subsequent years would be substantially increased, as
operations would then be confined to cleaning of the fields, pruning of
the trees, circling and forking around the trees and cutting and delivering
the fruit at a packing station or at the wharf at Suva. The cost of these
operations would not exceed in all £5 per acre. The above figures are
not applicable in the case of new settlers who, in addition to the cost of
planting, would have to consider a further capital expenditure of approxi-
mately £7OO for house building, tools, &c., and still another outlay for
the rental of land, which can be had on lease for 10s. an acre per annum.
Intending settlers, however, would be well advised first to study local
conditions and methods of cultivating before embarking on an enter-
prise such as banana growing, which requires a considerable amount of
technical as well as practical knowledge.
To get the best results, planting operations should be commenced
in the early spring and be completed in the course of that season of the
year. Three varieties of banana are grown in the Colony—the “ China ”
[Musa cavendishii) , “ Gros Michel,” and the “ Veimama, ,, the first


BUNCHES OF BANANAS.
Showing the two varieties exported from Fiji.
86


UPPER REWA RIVER.
A banana packing station.
87


mentioned being the most popular both on account of the hardy nature
of the plant and its habit of early maturity.
Large stretches of choice lands, principally native-owned, through-
out the Fiji Group of Islands still await development, and, as these
lands can be leased at a very nominal rent, an opportunity presents
itself for any large company interested in the fruit trade to enter the
industry and develop banana growing on an extensive scale.


XVIII. A REVIVAL OF THE COTTON INDUSTRY.
PERHAPS no plant of economic importance has engaged so much
public attention during the last fifteen years as Cotton. The
traditional policy of Lancashire has been to depend chiefly upon
the Southern United States for supplies of raw cotton. During, and
immediately after the war, however, this supply diminished and became
so high in price that the Lancashire spinners made representations to
the Home Government which resulted in the encouragement of cotton
growing throughout tropical parts of the Empire. A semi-official
organisation known as the Empire Cotton Growing Corporation came
into being for the purpose of giving direction and sometimes financial
encouragement to the efforts made by various Governments and
Administrations. Further, the British Cotton Growing Association
continued its traditional policy of assisting cotton growing within the
Empire by acting as a clearing house for cotton so grown and in giving
such helpful criticism as to the value of various types. As a result of
concerted action a considerable quantity of cotton representing a wide
range of types is now being grown in various parts of the Empire.
Concurrently with this development, conditions in the Southern United
States have greatly improved and record crops are being produced, so
that for certain types at least there is at present an over production.
The improvement in America is partly due to general prosperity following
the war, and partly to the fact that an economic remedy for the Mexican
Cotton 801 l Weevil appears to have been discovered in the distribution
of an arsenical dust from aeroplanes. At the present time, therefore,
cotton growing within the Empire is being encouraged with caution;
and, in order to prevent the low prices that follow upon over production,
there has in certain countries such as the West Indies and Egypt been
an actual curtailment of production.
During the American Civil War, Fiji produced a considerable
quantity of Sea Island Cotton of excellent quality that sold for very
high prices. With the revival of the cotton industry in recent years
it was natural, therefore, that Fiji should commence with the Sea Island
variety. Seed was obtained from Barbados, and, for the two or three
years that prices remained high, growers made large profits. At the
best of times, however, the demand for this finest of all cotton types is
small, and as Europe made a very slow recovery during the post war
period, the demand for this cotton became so weak that prices fell to a
level that was uneconomic from the European planters' point of view, and
that has not proved highly attractive to native and East Indian growers.


Owing to the uncertainty of the demand for Sea Island Cotton,
which in the past has varied with the demand for lace, an experimental
station was established two years ago by the Government in co-opera-
tion with the Empire Cotton Growing Corporation for the purpose of
testing varieties of cotton other than the Sea Island variety. At the
present time a single seeded kidney type is being tested, and it is esti-
mated that eight hundred acres of this strain has been planted in 1928.
The value of lint will be only two-thirds of that for Sea Island, but on
the other hand, while the tree is equally prolific, about twice as much
seed cotton can be picked in the day, and the yield of lint from seed
cotton is considerably higher. The new type lends itself to ratooning
for at least one season, and this, although generally admitted to be
bad practice under continental conditions, is nevertheless practised
successfully in the nearby islands of New Caledonia and the New
Hebrides. The uncertainty of the weather conditions in November,
which is the best planting month, provides one of the most expensive
hazards in cotton growing in Fiji, and the possibility of ratooning is
therefore being explored with considerable interest.
The cotton industry in this Colony is therefore still in the experi-
mental stage. So long as sugar cane is a payable crop large cotton
plantations are out of the question, as the labour supply is not sufficient
to allow any new industry to develop very rapidly. Providing a readily
marketable and paying type of cotton can be found however, there
appears to be no reason why cotton exports should not reach five
thousand bales in the near future, most of the cotton being grown by
natives and East Indians in plots of about an acre in size.
In addition to maintaining a cotton experimental station out of
General Revenue, the Government has further assisted the industry by
ginning and marketing the crops at cost.
Two ginneries are in operation, one at Lautoka and the other at
the mouth of the fertile Sigatoka River valley. These serve the two
main areas suitable for cotton on the Island of Vitilevu, and it is unlikely
that further ginneries will be established unless, and until, the cotton
position considerably improves.
In the past, the practice has been to pay the grower an advance of 4d.,
3d., 2d., or Id. per lb according to grade on delivery of seed cotton at a
ginnery and to make a second payment after deducting ginning and mar-
keting costs at a much later date when sales of lint and seed have been
completed. The delay in making the final payment has been inconvenient
to growers, and the Government now proposes to purchase the seed cotton
outright as it is received at a ginnery and in the case of a considerable


Seed Cotton.
1923-24 Crop,
1924-25 Crop.
1925-26 Crop.
1926-27 Crop.
1927-28 Crop.
Total.
1. Quantity received ...
131,6131b
248,543 lb
196,3931b
1,271,2831b
56,707 lb
2,414,903 lb
2,414,9031b
2. Quantity ginned
131,1281b
249,028 lb
196,3931b
1,268,8901b
569,464 lb
3. Advances made
4. Average advances per
£1,073 0 6
£2,690 6 2
£2,896 9 4
£16,079 19 3
£7,418 14 2
£29,727 18 6
It) of seed cotton ...
l-96d.
2-59d.
3-54d.
2-95d.
3-14d.
2-95d.
5. Final payments
6. Average final pay-
ments per lb of seed
cotton
7. Average return to
growers per lb of
seed cotton. Ad-
vances and final
£1,604 10 1
2-93d.
£3,613 1 8
3-49d.
3*l4d.
£5,217 11 9
5*2d.
payments)
4-88d.
6-09d.
3-54d.
2-95d.
3-47d.
Cotton Lint —
8. Manufactured
34,022 lb
62,875 lb
49,342 lb
329,9161b
142,401 lb
618,5561b
9. Exported
101 bales
180 bales
136 bales
598 bales
391 bales
1,406 bales
10. Exported, nett weight
33,072 lb
61,1991b
48,083 lb
213,6641b
136,6891b
479,707 lb
Sabs—
11. United Kingdom
33,072 lb
61,1991b
34,598 lb
213,664 lb
136,6891b
492,222 lb
12. Fiji
13 On band
9501b
1,6761b
1.2591b
13,4851b
3,670 lb
112,5821b
801b
5,632 lb
7,635 lb
131,6991b
Total
34,022 lb
62,875 lb
49,342 lb
329,916 lb
142,4011b
618,5561b
1923-24 Crop.
1924-25 Crop.
1925-26 Crop.
1926-27 Crop.
1927-28 Crop.
Total.
1. Ginning percentage ...
25-9%
25-25%
25-12%
26%
25%
25-61%
2. Average selling price of
lint, including seed
sales
24-9d.
35-33d.
♦26-64d.
♦23-95d.
23-41 d.
25-54d.
£51,797 1 8
3. Turnover, lint seed &c.
£3,530 6 8
£9,255 14 7
♦£3,980 12 5
♦£21,691 7 11
£13,339 0 1
4. Ginning expenses and
overhead charges ...
£1,654 14 2
£2,368 3 5
£2,487 16 11
£7,060 9 7
£4,185 9 10
£17,756 13 11
5. Ginning expenses and
overhead charges per
Th oi lint
ll-66d.
9-04d.
12-10d.
5-13d.
7*05d.
6-89d.
profit or loss to adjust the purchase price in the following year. The price
for seed cotton ginned in 1928 has been set as follows: A grade, 4Jd. per
lb; B grade, 3Jd. per lb; C grade, IJd. per lb; D grade, Jd. per lb.
Statistically, the history of the recent cotton development may be
shown as follows—but the reader should note that the lint shown on
hand for 1926-27 as at 30th April, 1927, was finally sold at a price
sufficient to make a further distribution to growers of approximately
IJd. per pound. It will be noted that sales of lint since 1923 have
yielded approximately £63,000.
A comparative statement of the profit and loss account figures for
the years 1923-24, 1924-25, 1925-26, 1926-27, and 1927-28 is given
below:—
♦ Actual sales, does not include value of stock on hand.


A general view of the Cotton Experimental Station in the SigatoRa Valley.
Experiments in ratooning Kidney Cotton.
90
CULTIVATION OF COTTON.


Type of Single Seeded Kidney Cotton
from New Guinea.
CULTIVATION OF COTTON.
Sea Island and Kidney Types
of Cotton.
91


£
s.
d.
1.
Advances on Crops including Peanuts
30,167
13
10
2.
Final Payments
5,217
575
11
9
3.
Profit Reserved
19
0
4.
Ginning Expenses and Overhead
19,046
12
Charges
0
5.
Working Account Cotton Experimen-
tal Station
1,549
7,163
3
9
6.
Nett Profit
12
9
£63,720
13
1
£ s. d.
1. Sales of Lint, Seed, &c 63,472 13 0
2. Sales of Peanuts 3 13 10
3. Value of Lint, &c., on hand 244 6 3
£63,720 13 1
The result of trading operations from the commencement of the
industry to 30th April, 1928, may be shortly stated as under:—


In 1925 exports from Hawaii to
other countries were approxi-
mately as follows: —
United Kingdom ...
270,000 cases
Germany
... 120,000 „
France ...
... 60,000 „
Canada
60,000 „
All other Countries
... 100,000 „
Total
... 610,000 „
XIX. PINEAPPLES .
THE pineapple has been naturalised for so many years in Fiji that
it now occurs generally throughout the Colony even in remote
and inaccessible places, but its original home was in Central
and South America where its native Brazilian name was Nanas. The
Portuguese explorers’ variant of this name, Ananas, has been perpetu-
ated in botanical literature as the name for the genus of plants in which
the pineapple falls. Had proof been needed that the pineapple was
exotic in Fiji it would have been found in the name first given to it by
the Fijians “ Balawa ni Vavalangi,” ix. y the foreigner’s screw pine,
though now they mostly know and use the English name.
There are two varieties of pineapples in Fiji known locally as the
Ripley and the Smooth Cayenne. The former has leaves with sharp
spines along both edges, and has a fruit with deep eyes and firm flesh
that is a delicious table fruit and that can be transported long distances
without spoiling. The Smooth Cayenne has leaves that are serrated
only at the tips, has a barrel-shaped fruit with shallow eyes, and very
juicy flesh. This does not carry well and is not especially esteemed
as a table fruit, but for canning purposes it is second to none and forms
the basis of a great canning industry in Hawaii.
For many years fruit of the Ripley variety has been grown by
East Indians settled near Suva and small quantities have been exported
to New Zealand and Australia. In the last few years, however, atten-
tion has been drawn to the Cayenne variety largely as a result of the
phenomenal success of the pineapple canning industry that has been
achieved in Hawaii, where production in 1926 reached the astonishing
total of 8,800,000 cases each of twenty-four tins, the value of which in
Hawaii would be little less than £7,000,000. A curious feature of the
Hawaiian industry is that the product has found such favour in the
protected market of the United States that in the same year 1926, that
market absorbed 93 per cent, of the output.


The Straits Settlements have now become important producers of
tinned pineapples. The quality is said to be much inferior to that of
the Hawaiian product, but the article is produced so cheaply that ready
sales are effected at a profit in the cheaper markets of the world. In
1925 production was estimated at 900,000 cases. In 1922, -23 and -24
production averaged approximately 800,000 cases distributed approxi-
mately as follows:
United States 9,000 cases
United Kingdom ... ... ... 680,000 ~
Canada 22,000 ~
Other Countries ... ... ... 89,000 ~
British South Africa now exports small quantities of tinned pine-
apples, chiefly to the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand.
Australia also produces about 200,000 annually, but mostly for home
consumption.
Such places as Cuba, Porto Rico, the Bahamas and Brazil are also
said to produce small quantities of pineapples that are canned either
locally, or in the United States, or in Canada.
In the face of so much competition it might be supposed that the
Colony of Fiji would be very bold indeed in attempting to develop the
industry. A closer analysis shows, however, that of all the places men-
tioned Fiji appears to have natural advantages surpassed only by those
in Hawaii. There, the soils and climate have proved to be peculiarly
suited to the Smooth Cayenne variety, but the soils and climate of Fiji
are closely comparable with those of Hawaii, and it has long been known
by a few individual planters that this variety grows equally well in Fiji.
The labour available in Fiji is probably not quite as efficient as that in
Hawaii, but the ruling wages are so much lower that the advantage
appears to rest with Fiji. Then again, land values in Hawaii are many
times those in Fiji, and whereas most of the suitable lands in Hawaii
have now been taken up for pineapples, there are in Fiji some thousands
of acres of suitable lands lying idle. The one signal advantage pos-
sessed by Hawaii as compared with Fiji is a home market capable of
absorbing over seven million cases of these fruits annually, the market
being protected by a high tariff wall. Fiji would, however, receive sub-
stantial preferential treatment as compared with Hawaii, in Canada
and New Zealand, and it is thought in some quarters that with cheaper
land and labour, Fiji could compete in London and Europe with Hawaii
on an equal footing.
With a visible market of at least two hundred thousand cases
annually, it was felt that the matter was worth putting to the test, and


a joint experiment was arranged two years ago between the Govern-
ment and Canadian Canners Limited, under which a sufficient number
of pineapples could be grown and canned to test the several markets.
The Government undertook to arrange for growing the pineapples, and
the Company to make arrangements for canning the fruit and selling
the product.
Agreements were made with several planters who wished to have
their estates tested as to suitability for growing pineapples. These
planters undertook to deliver fruit to the factory at £5 per ton by weight
and each was limited to five acres. For the main source of supply
the Government established on the Tova estate three plots containing
19, 10 and 8 acres respectively. A cannery for the experiment was
established in the old Customs Buildings in Suva, and, although the
machinery installed was of a somewhat old-fashioned type, the factory
was capable of dealing effectively with the produce arranged for.
In the first year of operation approximately 125 tons of fruit were
canned and in the second year 200 tons; some eight thousand cases of
tinned pineapples in all were produced and distributed to New Zealand,
Canada and London in those two years. In 1928, 152 tons were canned.
The small tonnage in 1928 was due to the fact that on account of trans-
port difficulties no fruit was used from the experimental plots at Tova.
The prices obtained were only a shade less than those ruling for the
best grade of Hawaiian, which was considered to be satisfactory in view
of the fact that the distributors had no previous experience as to the
merits of the Fijian article, and no doubt considered that they were
taking a certain risk.
The experiment proved that the locally grown pineapple compares
favourably in quality with the Hawaiian, which has long been recog-
nised as the finest produced in any country. On this point Mr. W. R.
Drynan, the Vice-President and General Manager of Canadian Canners
Limited, says in his final report on the experiment: —
“ The experiment has demonstrated that the quality and the
“ appearance of the Fiji canned pineapples are quite equal if not
“ superior to the Hawaiian, and there should be no difficulty in
“ maintaining this superior quality if sufficient care is taken in
“ the canning process.”
On the agricultural side the experiment has shown that pineapples
of the right size and quality can be produced on a wide variety of soils
and climates within the Colony. On very rich flat lands the individual
fruits become too large for economical canning, and the best lands are


94
RIPLEY-QUEEN PINEAPPLES


95
PINEAPPLES PACKED FOR EXPORT


what might be called second class undulating cane lands situated in the
dry or semi-dry belts of any of the several larger islands in the Colony.
It is clear that there are many more acres of the most suitable land
available for pineapple development than could possibly be needed for
many years.
Finally, the experiment indicates that the costs of production in
Fiji would compare well with those in Hawaii, and that there is a suffi-
cient margin between those costs and the selling price of the manufac-
tured article.
As a result of the success of the experiment, a Company was formed
which has registered in New Zealand under the name of the Fiji Pine-
apple Company, Limited, and this Company took over the factory that
had been used during the two years of the experiment, and commenced
operation in 1928. This Company has lands on the island of Ovalau,
and contemplates transferring the factory from Suva to a site on Ovalau.
At Nadi, on the north-west side of Vitilevu, a second pineapple
company has been formed under the name of the West Coast Pines (Fiji)
Limited, and while this Company is not yet in a position to operate a
canning factory, a considerable area of land has already been planted
with Smooth Cayenne pineapples.
In November, 1928, a delegation from the Hawaiian Pineapple Com-
pany, Limited, of Honolulu, visited the Colony, and inspected various
areas which were considered to be suitable for the growing of pineapples
on a large scale. As a result of this visit a provisional agreement was
arranged between the Government and a local resident, acting on behalf
of the Company. Under this agreement, the Company will carry out
experiments in the cultivation of pineapples extending over a period of
three years, with a view to testing the suitability of the soils on certain
areas situated in the Dreketi and Lekutu districts on the north coast of
the Island of Vanualevu. The result of these experiments will assist the
Company in arriving at a decision whether it will commence operations
on a large scale in this Colony.


XX. CITRUS FRUITS.
ALTHOUGH all classes of Citrus fruits grow well in Fiji, they have
r\ never been systematically cultivated on a commercial basis,
and are mainly grown by Fijians round their villages.
The Fiji Mandarin is a particularly choice fruit both in colour and
flavour. A few cases of Mandarins—purchased from the native
growers—are shipped annually to New Zealand, but as there are many
restrictions placed on the importation of Citrus fruits into the Dominion
this market may be considered as negligible.
The Tahitian Orange was introduced into Fiji many years ago.
It is a fine fruit, thin skinned, delicious in flavour and with but few
seeds. It closely resembles the Jaffa Orange so well known and prized
in England. The fruit has the additional advantage of being a good
carrier.
The Lisbon Lemon, Seville Orange, Lime, and Grape Fruit all
thrive well in Fiji, and are good croppers.
The native Shaddock (Citrus decumana, L.) grows largely on river
banks but does well almost anywhere. It is a handsome tree and
bears a profusion of large fruit. The thick rind makes an excellent
crystalized peel of a good flavour.
The Moli Karokaro (Citrus vulgaris) is the most common of indigenous
Citrus trees. The fruit is very juicy and makes an excellent substitute
for lemons.


FRUIT FOR EXPORT.
Loading punt for transport to Suva.
96


97
BEACH SCENE, WARAYA ISLAND


XXI. COFFEE.
A PROMISING start in planting Arabian Coffee was made in Fiji
some fifty odd years ago, and for a time the venture showed
every indication of developing into an extensive and profitable
industry; but in 1880 the devastating leaf disease, Hemileia vastatrix,
was introduced—probably with seed imported from Ceylon. This
notorious pest ran riot through the coffee plantations and brought
about their destruction and abandonment.
More robust varieties have since been introduced, such as Coffea
liherica and C. robusta. But although both these species, wherever
planted in the Colony, have shown that they can hold their own and
are heavy croppers, their cultivation, so far, has not gone beyond the
experimental stage. Their beans lack the fine aromatic flavour of
Arabian Coffee and the market price is consequently much lower.
XXII. CACAO.
THE cultivation of cacao has been tried on a small scale in the
wet zones of Vitilevu and Vanualevu. Samples of the pro-
duce, sent to the Imperial Institute and examined by experts,
were classed as equal to the best Trinidad cacao.
Fiji is admirably suited for cacao culture; many of the diseases
that affect the plant in other countries are unknown in the Colony,
and, by the restrictions now placed on the indiscriminate importation
of seeds and living plants, there is little likelihood of these diseases
being introduced. The plant requires a good deal of attention, but
the work is not laborious, and a small plantation, well attended to,
should yield adequate profits. In the neighbouring island of Samoa,
where conditions and climate are almost identical with those in Fiji,
cacao of a very high quality is one of the principal exports.


XXIII. RICE.
RICE has been grown in Fiji by East Indians for many years, and
although it is usually grown without regard to water control,
“ it does well.
In 1919, through the dislocation in shipping and the increased price
of the grain in rice producing countries, the cost of imported rice became
almost prohibitive, and the Government undertook to foster the local
industry by establishing a rice mill. Up to this time all the locally
produced rice had been hand milled in a primitive and picturesque
device, the use of which entailed the wastage of much labour, and it
was hoped that the existence of a proper mill would save this wastage.
These hopes have only been partially realised however, as the ancient
hand mill is still in general use and the rice mill does not obtain as much
paddy as is desirable.
However, the mill has paid its way and has since 1922 produced
over three thousand tons of rice. Some production figures are available
as follow:
Year ended3lst December, 1922... 293 tons
Year ended 31st December, 1923... 728 ~
Six months 30th June, 1924 ... 811 ~
Year ended 30th June, 1925 ... 402 ~
Year ended 30th June, 1926 ... 480 ~
Year ended 30th June, 1927 ... 183 ~
Year ended 30th June, 1928 ... 509 ~
The example of this mill has also caused an enterprising European in
Suva to establish a small mill and has caused two smaller Indian owned
mills to come into existence.
Droughts in 1926 and 1927 caused a setback to the industry and
imports to rise. In this connection the following statistics of imports
of rice in hundredweights over a period of six years may be of interest:—
1923 4,111 cwt.
1924 13,158 „
1925 2,983 „
1926 47,808 „
1927 15,143 „
1928 24,380 „
The actual quantity of paddy grown in the Colony is not known,,
as there are no reliable statistics dealing with the hand milled rice.
Sales through shops are known to be not less than 2,400 tons per annum
and total production is known to be much in excess of this figure.


PINEAPPLE NURSERY NEAR SUVA.
Field of “Smooth Cayenne."
98


RUBBER PLANTATION, WAIDOI
“ Topping ” a Para rubber tree.
99


Cheap rice is considered to be essential for the prosperity of the
Colony, as rice is the chief article of diet of the East Indians who con-
stitute the chief source of labour, and because it is growing in favour as
an article of diet with the Fijian race.
Paddy is usually worth £7 10s. per ton more or less according to
type and quality. It grows best on land that is too wet for other crops,
and under good conditions one and a half tons of paddy to the acre
would be considered a fair average crop. This average would be
greatly increased, and indeed the security of the rice crop from year to
year would be much improved, if the water supply in important rice
growing centres could be brought under control.
XXIV. PARA RUBBER.
THE exact date of the first introduction into Fiji of rubber plants
for commercial purposes is doubtful. The cultivation of rub-
ber on a commercial scale may be said to date from 1906, when
rubber seedlings were imported from Ceylon through the Department
of Agriculture. Previous to this date small consignments had been
introduced by the Government and been distributed free of cost, and this
accounts for the fact that isolated groups of rubber trees now occur in
various places in the Colony. One of the first plantations was that of
Captain Robbie, situated in the wet zone of the Island of Vanualevu.
On this plantation tapping commenced generally over the original area
in 1914. In 1906 and 1907 the Government established a small plan-
tation of about two acres at the old Experimental Station at Nasinu.
Towards the end of 1907 several large blocks of land on the south-east
coast of Vitilevu were obtained by private individuals or companies
and rubber planting was commenced actively. Up to 1919 approxi-
mately 2,000 acres of rubber had been planted and this would probably
have been considerably increased had it not been for the war intervening.
Very little, if any, rubber has been planted since 1914.
In establishing the plantations, seedlings, stumps, and seeds were
all imported, but the last-named were found to be more satisfactory.
During the boom in 1925 a considerable amount of interest was
evinced by outside capital and one or two rubber estates changed hands.
Apart from this, however, there has been nothing to stimulate the pro-
duction of rubber in Fiji since 1914.


Rubber trees (Hevea braziliensis) thrive in the climate and soils of
the wet zones in Fiji. The rate of growth and yields compare favour-
ably with those in other rubber-producing countries. The wet or wind-
ward zone extends from the sea to the mountains and covers half the
area of the islands. In this area the rainfall is heavy being in the
neighbourhood of 113 inches per annum. The soil is good and the
climate hot and moist, the mean temperature in the wet zone being
about 72°F.
Tapping is done by East Indians, the usual rate of pay being 2s.
per task of 350 to 400 trees. Work commences in the early mornings
and is completed in the forenoon. Weeding is carried out in the after-
noon by the tappers and this overtime brings their wages to 3s. per day.
Daily tapping is the rule and the usual method employed is one cut on
the quarter girth. The average number of tapping days in the ordinary
year is about 290.
Up to the present time there has been no great difficulty in obtaining
labour for the rubber plantations, and as the work on a rubber planta-
tion is of a somewhat lighter nature than that on cane or coconut estates
it may be expected, therefore, that any shortage of labour would be felt
on the latter estates before being felt on rubber plantations.
As to diseases of rubber trees, Fiji has fortunately so far occupied
a favourable position. On one plantation only has any serious disease
been reported and this is now being investigated by the Department of
Agriculture. In this particular case it is thought that the disease has
been transmitted from old cocoa stumps which remained from the time
when cocoa was interplanted with rubber.
At the moment of writing, the rubber market is extremely weak,
the price being quoted at 9Jd. per lb, and at this price it does not pay
planters in this Colony to tap. As to the future prospects, these will
be governed entirely by the price of the commodity. When the price
of rubber in London fell to Is. 3d. per lb the plantations in this Colony
continued to produce, which seems to indicate that the “ all in cost
of production in this Colony compares not unfavourably with that in
the Federated Malay States. If the price improves to any considerable
extent it is quite possible that additional rubber plantations will be
established, as there are many acres of suitable land in the wet belts
of the larger islands awaiting development. In spite of the present
slump in rubber prices the rubber industry is more stable than it used
to be on account of the fact that scientific research work, carried on
particularly in Ceylon and the Federated Malay States and extending
over many years, has smoothed the path of prospective planters. Pro


duction can now be greatly increased by the use of selected stock, by
“ budding,” and through the recognition of the chief factors effecting
an increased latex yield.
The following export figures for the Colony of Fiji in respect of
rubber may serve to convey an idea of the present state of this
industry:—
1922 9,142 lb
1923 89,753 „
1924 159,995 „
1925 144,313 „
1926 233,990 „
1927 221,238 „
1928 94,661 ~


XXV. SISAL HEMP.
THE cultivation of this plant has been virtually abandoned in Fiji,
as prices received in recent years for the fibre have been unsatis-
factory. The variety of hemp which has been planted is Agave
rigida var. sisalana. The plant thrives best in a comparatively dry
climate and on medium land; grown on rich well-watered soil the leaves
develop much cellular tissue and poor fibre. It is thus best suited for
the dry zone of Fiji, where many acres of land well adapted for its culti-
vation may be obtained at a low rental value.
The Sisal plant takes from two to three years to produce leaves
suitable for cutting, thereafter it continues producing until the flowering
spike appears. After flowering the plant dies. The length of the
profitable cutting period varies considerably—it is affected largely by
climate and class of soil—and in Fiji it may be placed at about five
years.
After plants are about twelve months old they commence to give
off suckers round the stem and to throw out under-ground runners
from which shoots are thrown up here and there. The plant is pro-
pagated by these suckers and shoots.
The fibre is extracted by running the leaves through specially
designed decorticators.
A fair yield of cleaned fibre ranges from 8 to 12 cwts. per acre of
600 plants. There is a good demand for Sisal Hemp for binder twine
and cordage; the price varies from £3O to £35 a ton. The expense
of cutting, decorticating, baling, and marketing may be set down at
£7 10s. per acre; thus, on an average yield of 10 cwts. of saleable fibre,
a net return of about £8 per acre may be expected. The industry is
not likely to be revived unless the market price of Sisal improves con-
siderably.


102
NATIVE WOMEN.


RIVER SCENE AND CANOE.
103


XXVI. OIL SEEDS.
AMONG the oil-bearing seeds may be mentioned Candle Nuts,
r\ Castor Oil and Peanuts. The candle-nut tree {Aleurites triloba)
** •*“ grows wild in Fiji and does well almost anywhere. From the nut
kernels China oil is extracted which is largely used in the manufacture
of paints, &c., and is of a high commercial value. As the kernel adheres
to the thick woody pericarp of the nut there is a difficulty in extracting
it. Natives heat the nuts over hot stones and then sluice them with
cold water. This causes the kernels to shrink away from the shells,
which are then cracked with stones and the oily kernels picked out.
Another way is to expose the nuts for days in strong sunshine before
cracking. With a labour-saving mechanical device which could suc-
cessfully extract the kernels, it is possible that an industry could be
developed on the basis of these nuts.
Castor Oil.— The castor oil plant was introduced into Fiji many
years ago and now grows profusely on waste lands, particularly in the
dry zone. Samples of seeds submitted to experts have been reported
on as first class and rich in oil, but, so far, no attempt has been made
to cultivate the plant commercially.
Peanuts or Ground-nuts thrive well and produce heavy crops in
light soils in some of the drier parts of the Colony which are singularly
suited for the successful cultivation of this plant. At one time large
quantities of peanuts were exported from Fiji to Australia, but this
remunerative trade was completely extinguished by the latter country
imposing a high import duty on the commodity. As peanut oil has
increased in value and is being put to more uses every day there seems
no reason why a profitable market could not be found in Canada, where
preferential treatment is given to British produce. At present peanuts
are only grown in the Colony for local consumption. It is believed
that peanuts might be grown economically in conjunction with cotton.


XXVII. VANILLA.
VANILLA was at one time cultivated in Fiji and produced excellent
crops of superior quality which, in the English market, realised
prices equal to the best Reunion beans. It has been found, by
analysis, that Vanilla grown in the South Sea Islands contains a higher
proportion of the active principle, Vanillin, than the Reunion and
Mexican Vanillas.
The cultivation of the plant in Fiji on a commercial basis was
discontinued as a result of the fall in the price for the cured beans, due
to the manufacture of a synthetic vanilla essence. This article was
placed on the market at a fraction of the cost of the natural product.
Since the culture of Vanilla was abandoned, restrictive legislation
regarding the sale of synthetic food-products has come into force in the
United Kingdom and the principal British Possessions. Consequently,
genuine Vanilla has advanced considerably in price, and there seems to
be no reason why the commercial cultivation of this valuable plant should
not be resumed.
The plants require some attention if good results are to be obtained;
the flowers have to be fertilised by hand every morning during the
flowering season, for the reason that there is no insect in Fiji or in most
other places to which Vanilla has been introduced capable of pollinating
the flower naturally.
Care is necessary in the curing of the bean so as to produce a first-
grade product realising the best price, for it will be found that differences
of as much as five hundred per cent, exist between the prices of inferior
and high grade production.
Being a climbing species of orchid, the plant is grown on tutors
especially grown for this purpose and has to be supported on some form
of trellis. Branches, cut from an indigenous tree known as “ Wiriwiri,”
planted in rows, readily take root and give the necessary support and
shade required by the Vanilla vine.


XXVIII. MINOR PRODUCTS.
TOBACCO grows luxuriantly in almost every part of the group.
It is one of the standard native products and is mainly grown
and cured by them for their own use. There are a few Indian
cigar-makers who manufacture cigars for local consumption.
Tobacco cultivation is one of the least arduous forms of tropical
agriculture; one native labourer can easily look after three to four
acres. Fiji offers a promising field for an experiment in tobacco
growing as its soils are rich in potash and humus. But it would be
useless to embark on such an enterprise unless scientific and up to date
methods were employed. There can be no question of market—Great
Britain alone consumes 250,000,000 lb annually and offers preferential
treatment to the British grown leaf.
Maize.— This does well in the drier parts of the Colony. There is
a considerable local demand for the grain for horse and cattle feed. As
maize is not used as a staple article of food, either by the native Fijians
or the East Indian settlers, there is little hope for its extensive cultiva-
tion in the Colony. As it requires good land on which more profitable
crops can be grown with success, its cultivation on a commercial basis
for export appears to be unlikely.
Starches.— The cassava, or tapioca plant (Manihot sps.), was
introduced many years ago and is now widely grown by Fijians as an
article of food. The mature roots are boiled or roasted, or made into
native bread. Cassava is one of the cheapest known sources of starch,
of which it contains 25 per cent. The plant takes from twelve to fifteen
months to come to maturity and, if planted on good land, produces
from five to ten tons per acre. Cassava has been successfully grown
in other parts for the production of power alcohol, but so far its com-
mercial cultivation has not been attempted in Fiji.
Tacca pinnatifida is indigenous to Fiji and produces one of the
finest arrowroots, of distinct medicinal value. As an invalids' food it
is equal to the best Bermuda arrowroot. The plant grows prolifically
on light soil, principally in the dry zone, and produces an abundance
of tubers, from which the arrowroot is made by grating and repeated
washings. Quantities of arrowroot are made annually for local use,
but the plant has never been cultivated for export.
Citronella Oil.— The lemon grass [Andropogon schoenanthus) from
which citronella oil is made by distillation grows luxuriantly in Fiji.


The oil is heavily perfumed and is largely used in the manufacture of
scented soaps, &c. Natives make use of the plant for scenting coconut
oil, with which they anoint their bodies. They make also a tea from
a mixture of lemon grass and lemon leaves, which is fragrant and
stimulating. Samples of citronella oil have been reported upon
favourably, but the industry has not been exploited.
Spices.— Ginger, pepper, pimento, cloves, cinnamon, &c., have
all given good crops on an experimental scale and would be worth
attention and further trial in suitable situations. Turmeric (Curcuma
longa) grows abundantly and is much used by Indian settlers in the
preparation of curried foods. Capsicums also do well. The small
birds’ eye chilli (C. frutescens), from which an excellent cayenne pepper
can be made, grows freely in many parts of the group.
Dal or pigeon pea (Cajanus indicus var. bicolor), the taller variety,
is grown largely by Indians for food. But, so far, a sufficiency has not
been produced to supply the local demand, and a considerable quantity
of dal, of which there are several varieties, among which the dwarf Urd
or Mung is also cultivated, is imported from India, where it is extensively
grown. In mixed farming the plant is valuable for the heavy green
crop of nutritious cattle fodder it produces, and it has the added advan-
tage of being an excellent soil restorative.


106
A FIJIAN MOUNTAINEER’S HOME.


107
FIJIAN DANCERS.


XXIX. BECHE-DE-MER.
THERE are several species of the large sea-slug, Holothuria,
commercially known by the names Beche-de-mer or Trepang.
Beche-de-mer fishing is almost entirely done by native Fijians.
The process of curing is simple; the slugs are first boiled for about 20
minutes, split open and gutted, preparatory to being dried. The usual
method of drying is to place the clean slugs on reed trestles over a
fairly brisk fire. As the gelatinous bodies of the slugs are highly
hygroscopic they must be thoroughly dried before shipping to prevent
decomposition. The most sought after and highly priced species is
the “ teat ” Beche-de-mer, so called from the rows of ambulacral feet
on the under surface of the body. Well-cured parcels of this variety
realise as much as £9O a ton, but the price varies with the market
requirements. The “ teat ” Beche-de-mer is chiefly found on the
reefs that lie off the Yasawa Islands and the main fringing reefs north
of the islands of Vitilevu and Vanualevu. Other varieties are the
black, red-bellied, and white. There is a large demand for Beche-
de-mer in China and Japan, where it is considered a food luxury.
XXX. TROCAS SHELL.
THE Trocas shell of commerce, Trochus niloticus, one of the
sources of mother-of-pearl, is of general occurrence on the reefs
of Fiji. Although of a much lower value than the well-known
pearl oyster, the expense of collecting the shell is considerably less. It
is found on the main reefs, at depths varying from a few feet to about
two fathoms. The collecting is done almost entirely by the native
Fijians. They locate the shell in the deeper water by means of a
primitive form of water telescope—made by inserting a sheet of glass
in a small wooden case frame—a contrivance now locally known among
Fijians as a “ submarine/' Diving spectacles are also used. The
Trochus seems to breed in the deep water, outside the sea face of the
reef, and is carried on to the reef floor by the incoming tides. There
seems, therefore, little fear of the supply being seriously affected by the
native method of fishing.
The shell is used largely for the manufacture of “ pearl ” buttons,
and the price ranges from £l5 to £5O a ton, according to size and
quality. About 450 tons are exported annually from the Colony,
mainly to Japan and France.


XXXI. DAIRYING.
IN times past the lack of an abundant supply of clean cows’ milk
has been one of the great obstacles to the well-being of the white
race in tropical countries. Great changes have occurred, however,
in the last twenty years, and most European communities living within
the tropics are now able to purchase daily supplies of good milk at
reasonable prices. The success of the dairy type of cow in the tropics
has indeed been so marked that in recent years a few tropical countries
have attempted the experiment of producing creamery butter not only
for local consumption but for export. It is with this attempt in Fiji
that the present article deals.
For many years prior to 1918 butter was made by individuals in
Fiji, some of which was excellent. There was also a considerable
experience showing that cattle, including several dairy breeds, did well
in Fiji on the natural pastures. It was also known that there was a
local market for at least 60 tons of butter. On account of these facts
public sentiment had been inclined towards making a definite attempt
to establish a dairy industry, and as soldiers returned from the Great
War were looking to re-establishment in a civil occupation, it was
natural for the experiment to be made in the form of a returned soldiers
settlement scheme.
Under this scheme some twenty returned men took up land, taken
over by Government for the purpose, at Tailevu. The 6,000 acres of
land was virgin bush, and as there was no possibility of any revenue for
the first few years, a living allowance was advanced to each settler. In
due course roads were made, houses built, bush was cleared from the
flat lands and fences were erected. As soon as pasturage became avail-
able dairy cattle, obtained from a number of sources, were distributed
among the farms and in due course cream became available for the
manufacture of butter. Concurrently a small but fully equipped butter
factory had been built at a central point and in 1922 the first pound of
creamery butter was made in Fiji.
There was a ready sale for the butter locally, but the fine quality
of the butter was not fully appreciated mttil 1923, when a sample box
from the ordinary factory run was sent to the Agricultural Show at
Auckland where it was classed as “ choice ” and awarded 91*2 points.
This indication that the young industry could be developed into an
export industry with reasonable prospect of obtaining prices in London
comparable with those obtained for the best New Zealand butter, gave
the dairy scheme a considerable impetus.


Readers will naturally be interested to know whether the ordinary
breeds of dairy cattle do well in the tropics. Dairy breeds of cattle
have all been developed in temperate climates, and if one looks at a
map of the world showing butter production, tropical countries scarcely
come into the picture. On the other hand if one looks at a map of the
world showing distribution of cattle one finds that one of the areas of
greatest density is the valley of the Ganges River; in 1922 there were
144 million cattle in India as against 65 million in the United States.
The fact is that cattle have been used as draught animals in tropical
countries from time immemorial and that their use in temperate climates
for milk and beef production is a comparatively modern development.
It is not surprising, therefore, that even the dairy breeds of cattle do well
when transplanted into tropical countries.
The stock used to start the Tailevu dairy scheme was drawn from
a local herd in which Hereford blood predominated. Pure bred and
good grade bulls of various breeds were imported from New Zealand
and Australia, as well as some pure bred Jersey and Holstein cows and
calves. Shorthorns have also been imported. All the breeds enumer-
ated have done well and each has its advocates. While the dairy
industry is seldom carried on with pure bred herds it is always necessary
to procure well-bred bulls from milking strains for herd improvement,
and it may be of interest to intending settlers to know that several
small herds of registered, pure bred dairy cattle have been established
by enterprising settlers, so that it should soon be possible to purchase
breeding stock locally.
The Tailevu dairy scheme was the forerunner of two private enter-
prises, the Rewa Co-operative Dairy Company and the Fiji Pastoral
Company at Navua, so that there are at the present time three butter
factories in the Colony, the output from which is increasing steadily.
As local production increased imports of butter steadily declined
and butter now shows regularly in the list of exports. The following
figures are of interest;—
Imports. Exports.
1922 150,633 lb
1923 82,238 „
1924 53,800 „
1925 34,113 23,856 „
1926 23,554 58,800 „
1927 9,274 54,208 „
1928 11,528 34,992 „
The effects of the severe drought are revealed in the 1928 figures.


Figures of local production are as follow:
1920 m
1921 13,104 „
1922 23,785 „
1923 59,219 „
1924 143,219 „
1925 168,844 „
1926 247,727 „
1927 302,513
1928 313,655 „
The original basis of the pastures at Tailevu was False Thurston
grass, so called because it resembles a much better grass that was intro-
duced many years ago by Sir John Thurston, but which flourishes only
in the dry parts of these islands. The analysis of False Thurston grass,
Paspalum conjugatum, is not particularly good, and the plant becomes
wiry and unpalatable if not kept closely cropped. Even so, however,
it provides food all the year round and is not without value.
On the flat lands this grass has now been largely replaced by Para
grass, Panicum barhinode, the fields being ploughed up and replanted
from time to time. This grass gives a great yield of succulent fodder
much relished by stock and its use has enabled local dairymen to improve
very greatly the yields from their cows. An objection to this grass is
that the culms or stems are very weak and that in consequence cattle
trample more of it into the ground than they are able to eat. For
hand feeding or for use in silage the grass would be admirable, but these
things are for the future. Despite the drawback however, this grass
on suitable land will maintain a beast to the acre in fair condition, and
it has the advantage of being very easy to plant.
Another grass that does well in Fiji but that is much more difficult
to establish is Paspalum dilatatum. This does well on the low hill lands
at Tailevu and when once established it appears to resist the encroach-
ment of other grasses. From a nutritional point of view this is a better
grass than either of the two mentioned above and it is likely to occupy
a position of increasing importance in the local development of the
dairy and cattle industries.
As to Leguminous plants there are several species of tropical Desmodium
or trefoil but the value of these does not appear to be considerable.
The only Legume of proven value is the Sensitive plant, Mimosa pudica.
This does extremely well in the wet parts of the Colony in which the
dairy industry is located and has already come to occupy a position of
considerable importance. Originally the plant was considered to be a


no
DAIRY CATTLE. FIJI.


11l
SOLDIER-SETTLER’S DAIRY FARM, TAILEVU.


somewhat pernicious weed both on accont of the fact that many cattle
would not eat it and because the prickles made it difficult for bare-
footed labour to work in it. The labour difficulty can be overcome by
the use of footwear. Furthermore it has been found that all cattle
can be induced to eat the tender and nutritious terminal shoots of this
plant if depastured on it as young animals. The analysis of these
shoots compares favourably with that of the best clovers and once the
taste has been acquired they are eagerly eaten. Although there are
still planters and dairy farmers who consider that the good qualities
of Mimosa do not compensate for its prickles, the plant is being used
to an increasing extent, and some people now consider it to be the most
profitable fodder plant yet introduced into the Colony.
Private planters and the Department of Agriculture have experi-
mented with many forage plants, and are still doing so, but the plants
already enumerated are the only ones that have become of any con-
siderable economic importance. The grasses and clovers of England
and Canada and New Zealand have all been given a trial, but none are
able to withstand the tropical conditions prevailing.
An article on dairying in Fiji would not be complete without refer-
ence to the bush Clidemia hirta that is a serious obstacle to the main-
tenance of pastures. This plant was introduced many years ago from
South America and thrives so well in the wetter parts of Fiji as to con-
stitute a serious weed problem. If left to its own devices on suitable
land it forms impenetrable thickets and does particularly well on lands
suited for dairying. It cannot stand cultivation, however, and ceases
to be a pest on lands that are ploughed occasionally. On the hill lands
the only practical remedy known is to get Paspalum dilatatum estab-
lished as rapidly as possible. Between ploughings on the one hand,
and during the establishment of Paspalum on the other, it is necessary
to weed vigilantly with the cane knife, cutting just below the soil surface
the plants that may appear.
It is essential to have an adequate supply of labour on a dairy farm
and most people experience no difficulty in maintaining the supply.
East Indians are used chiefly for milking and ploughing, while natives
are excellent for weeding and fence work.
Milking machines are not in general use. The usual experience
seems to be that the man with thirty cows can use a machine profitably
if he attends to the cleaning of it personally, but that otherwise he is
better off without one.
Many of the initial difficulties have now been overcome or are in
the process of being overcome. Cold storage facilities at the factories


and in Suva are now adequate for present needs, and a cold storage
chamber for the carriage of export butter has been provided on the
s.s. “ Tofua.” Herds and pastures have been greatly improved and
equipment in the factories has been modernised. There still remains
much to be done, particularly in the matter of improving herds and
pastures. Though there is no large amount of land available, that which
is available can usually be obtained at a fraction of the cost of similar
land in New Zealand.
In addition to returned soldiers, most of whom are connected with
the Tailevu Scheme, there are now a number of local agriculturists
engaged in dairy farming, and their number is growing. The fact that
so many of the local agriculturists within distance of a butter factory
have expressed their confidence in dairying by engaging therein seems
to indicate that the young industry has reached the end of the experi-
mental stage. As indicating the same thing, one progressive local
agriculturist recently went to the expense of importing from New
Zealand seventy-three head of good grade stock as the basis of a dairy
herd. A few New Zealand farmers have also come to Fiji recently to
engage in dairying, and as these have brought sufficient capital to tide
them over the uneconomic period, have had the necessary experience
in dairying, and are not afraid of work, they constitute a small but
valuable addition to the dairying community.


XXXII. STOCK.
FIJI is in many respects an ideal country for live-stock. With an
equable temperature all the year the animals never require
shelter from heat or cold. With an abundant and fairly evenly
distributed rainfall they never lack drinking water, and are seldom, or
never, short of herbage. In an exceptional year and on the dry or lee-
ward parts of the islands, periods of food shortage have been known,
but are rare. Though, as in most tropical regions, the species of native
grasses are few, these and the many introduced ones which have been
acclimatised, yield good fodder even under range conditions. Of the
many native and introduced legumes at least the sensitive plant, Mimosa
pudica, and probably the Desmodiums, add much to the quality of
pasturage wherever they occur. It is estimated that in the dry zones
(rainfall 60-80 inches per annum) one to four cattle may be run on each
ten acres of unimproved land. In the wet zones (100-150 inches per
annum) from about five beasts to ten acres, seven beasts to ten acres
in the better districts, and in alluvial Para grass land, by careful manage-
ment and sub-division, as much as a beast per acre. Sheep do not
thrive on the rough reed country in its natural state, but when cattle
have broken down the reeds, and natural and sown grasses have estab-
lished themselves, the sheep are able to move about and do very well.
Diseases of live-stock are almost nil in Fiji, and a careful system
of inspection and quarantine is maintained in the interest of keeping
animals free from them. Tuberculosis is, if anything, less common
here than in other countries, an average of only 1 per cent, being turned
up clinically and at abattoirs. Contagious Abortion of cattle has been
confined to only three small districts and is rapidly being stamped out.
Horses have neither infectious nor contagious diseases. Pigs are
remarkably free from both worms and tuberculosis. Sheep have no
diseases, there being very little foot-rot in the dry zones where the sheep
ranges are, and their only enemies are the dogs which tend to become
wild from the same conditions which favour these domestic stocks. So
favourable are conditions, indeed, that cattle and goats have got out of
hand in some parts of the Colony, and Red Deer are so well established
on Wakaya that they interfere with the planting of more coconuts. Pigs,
though not strictly native, had made themselves at home in the bush
some decades before any white men were tolerated. Horses and sheep
remain strictly domesticated.
Of the various animals mentioned above, cattle doubtless occupy
the most important place in the internal economy of the country, not


withstanding the fact that their products are only beginning to show
on the export list as a few thousand pounds of butter. All thoughtful
Europeans acknowledge the importance—nay, almost the necessity—of
the cow to their domestic economy and the healthful development of
their children. The East Indians pay tribute to this importance by
making the cow a sacred animal. That infant mortality is so much
less among these two non-native races than among the Fijians them-
selves must be ascribed largely, perhaps entirely, to that birthright of
dependence on the domestic cow.
The first herds of cattle in Fiji seem to have been developed from
stock imported to Lautoka and Ba. Twenty-eight years ago a further
importation of some Aberdeen Angus stock formed the nucleus of a
beef-producing herd. A shipment of Durham Shorthorns which arrived
a few years later are probably responsible for the Shorthorn type which
can be recognised as characteristic of the many hundred nondescript
cattle owned by Indians and small planters. Of more recent intro-
duction are the Zebus and Red Polls, and in the last two years there
have been several shipments of Herefords.
The recent establishment of a meat canning factory, which produced
52,000 lb of canned meat in 1928, should add stability to the industry.
As a by-product we have already the export of hides, which at present
command the satisfactory figure of 6-9 pence per pound. The canning
factory has installed a plant for manufacturing blood and bone
manures, and it is hoped to commercialise these further by-products.
The fact that 30,000 pounds sterling have been invested annually in
importing preserved meats in late years, is a good augury for the success
of the meat canning venture. Besides supplying the bulk of the local
market there is hope of securing a large share in the export trade to
surrounding groups of islands. The locally produced canned meat is
already attracting orders from Samoa and Tonga.
At present there are four large cattle stations in Fiji, but with a
good market opening up, many small land-holders and plantation
owners may be encouraged to improve the quality of their stocks, kept
heretofore as draught animals and for breaking down the undergrowth
about palms. For draught purposes cross-breeds from Zebu stock are
most useful in the tropics, and applications have been received for sup-
plying pure-bred Zebu stock to Australia. The Government is assisting
the improvement in types by preventing the use of unsuitable sires and
by offering a bonus of £7 per head on importation of pure bred animals,
which sum is roughly half the average cost over and above purchase
price of importing such animals from New Zealand and Australia.


114
TYPES OF FIJIAN SHEEP.


MUSTERING SHEEP IN FIJI
Typical Sheep country.
115


XXXIII. HORSES.
HORSES are bred with success in all parts of Fiji and are now in
common use all over the Colony, even to some extent among
the natives themselves. Thoroughbred stallions have been
imported by individuals from time to time, and by this means as well
as by a Stock Improvement Ordinance, a good standard in hacks has
been maintained. As for years to come there is a bad outlook for
wheeled traffic in the hinterlands, where there is but a great network of
bridle- and foot-paths, worn by generations of bare Fijian feet, hacks
will continue to command a fair price. Three or four Clydesdale
stallions and at least one Percheron have been imported for breeding
draught animals, but increase of mechanical traction and use of bullocks
by small holders will very narrowly delimit the market for such stock.
XXXIV. SHEEP.
SHEEP raising in the Colony is in an experimental stage only and
is represented by two small flocks in the dry zone. Both these
flocks are doing well, however, and feed the year round on natural
pastures. Though one wonders whether they really acquire a heavy
fleece in Fiji the average weight is 6 lb, and wool sent last year to Sydney,
unskirted and ungraded but simply put in sacks, realised 2s. Bd. per
pound, equal to the highest price obtained at that sale.
We therefore believe that sheep farming has a wonderful future on
the rolling hills of the dry zone of Fiji if only men with the necessary
experience and capital are impelled to undertake it. Besides the wool—
equal to the best in Australia—there is a local market for animals on
the hoof, now supplied by importation of some 1,500 head per annum.
The Romney Marsh breed has given excellent satisfaction here, and
Corriedales and Rylands are to be imported and tried this year.
XXXV. GOATS.
WITH the exception of a few plantation owners who raise goats
for eating purposes, the breeding (if it can be called such) of
these animals is practically limited to East Indians. As
their flocks are constantly in-breeding the types seen are poor. Never-
theless they are healthy and reproduce rapidly, appearing to suffer no


disease except occasional digestive derangements. The only market
for these animals is among the Indians themselves and the supply nearly
equals the demand at about ten shillings per head. The raising of
Angora goats for Mohair has never been attempted in the Colony, though
one settler at Thuvu, Sigatoka, has imported a few of this breed. Owing
to the heavy rainfall it is doubtful whether Mohair production would
become profitable.
XXXVI. PIGS.
WITH the exception of semi- or totally wild jungle fowl, pigs have
had the longest association with Fiji and Fijians of any of
our domestic creatures. They hold a place in legend, story
and native domestic economy, not yet accorded to the more recent
importations. Just how and when the pig came here cannot now be
exactly determined, but the local name of " Vuaka ” and its variant
of “ Puaka ” used in some other nearby island groups suggests that
they reached this part of the world, though not necessarily Fiji itself,
in an English vessel whose crew designated the animals as “ Porkers.”
From the appearance of the local animals one may judge that the pro-
genitors were probably Tamworths. At any rate the “ Vuakas ” seem
quickly to have made themselves at home in the fields and the affections
of the Fijian race, and who shall say that these humble animals had no
share with the missionaries in converting them from cannibalism ?
No effort has been made until recently to breed pigs scientifically,
natives and Europeans alike merely allowing them to run, without
attempting hygiene or sanitation. Lately a big company has begun
to breed on scientific lines with excellent results, and within the last
two years boars of Berkshire, Tamworth, Middle York and China Black
breeds have been imported by various individuals. Well-pigmented
breeds seem to thrive better than white kinds, which are adversely
affected by the strong tropical sun.
Pig farming is a useful, and should be a profitable sideline to dairy
farming, for local butchers imported some 485 pigs in 1926. Sucking
pig is a delicacy well appreciated locally, and before the sucking pig
and pork market is glutted, a bacon factory might be contemplated in
connection with the butter factories. Later on, too, pigs may be wanted
by the canning factory.


XXXVII. TIMBERS.
THE well-wooded windward faces of all the Fijian islands produce
many useful and durable timbers which are a distinct asset to
the Colony. These are used locally for house-building, boat
building, and the manufacture of furniture; but it is anticipated that,
with better transport facilities than now exist, overseas markets will
be opened up in countries where such classes of timber are rare. The
following are a few of the most important varieties:—
Damanu (Calophyllum burmanni) —familiarly known as “ Island
Mahogany.” This is eminently suited for furniture making and for
fine cabinet-making work. Trial shipments sent to America have
been classed as equal to the best Honduras mahogany. The tree
grows plentifully in Fiji and logs suitable for sawing may be obtained
from 4 to 6 feet in diameter.
Dakua (Dammara vitiensis) is almost identical with the famous
New Zealand kauri, one of the finest timbers found in the Southern
Hemisphere. It is a beautiful, close-grained, easily worked wood,
extensively used for house-building and the manufacture of all classes
of furniture. As the New Zealand kauri is growing scarcer and con-
sequently higher priced, the Fijian kauri must in the near future be-
come more valuable. The tree produces a gum resin similar to the
New Zealand ” kauri gum,” locally known as “ makadre.” Native
Fijians do a little gum digging, and from time to time parcels are
shipped from the Colony.
Yaka ( Dacrydium datum). —In texture, grain, and markings this
may easily be classed as one of the finest furniture woods in existence.
It is easily worked and takes an exquisite polish. When the suita-
bility of this beautiful timber for veneering becomes better known,
Yaka is likely to be exported to such countries as Canada, where indi-
genous veneering woods are scarce. The tree grows to a good size
and is fairly plentiful in some parts of Vitilevu and Vanualevu,
growing both on hill sides and in valleys.
Vesi ( Afzelia bijuga). —This well known timber is one of the most
durable woods of the world. It makes a first class builder’s hardwood,
whether in the ground or exposed. It is used locally for ground-plates
and joists of houses, also for bridge building and railway sleepers.
Buabua (Guettarda speciosa ) —is the most durable of all Fijian
woods. Buabua house-posts may be seen in old native buildings
which have been in use for upwards of 100 years and are still sound.
The timber resembles boxwood in colour and texture, and is largely


used for house blocks, but it is suitable also for heavy furniture and
turnery.
Bauvudi.—This wood is somewhat similar in appearance and
character to cedar. Being light and easily worked it is an excellent
timber for cabinet-making.
Rosawa.—A tough durable wood which bends without splitting
and stands a heavy strain. For some purposes a better timber could
not be found. It is unsurpassed for boat-planking, as it stands much
rough usage. It has been successfully used also in coach-building.
There is a good local demand for Rosawa but the quantity available
is not great.
Dilo ( Calophyllum inophyllum). —A striking tree, usually found
near the sea coast. It is easily distinguished by its massive habit of
dark-green leaves and white flowers. The timber is close-grained and
red in colour. From the peculiarity of its branching it is largely used
for boat knees and crooks. From the Dilo nuts a heavy green oil is
extracted, which is esteemed as a valuable liniment for certain forms of
rheumatism.
Yasiyasi (. Eugenia effusa). —A good builder’s hardwood, strong and
durable, much used in the Colony for bridge-building and for the keels
of vessels.
Sagali ( Lumnitzera ccecinea). —This timber stands immersion in salt
water better than any other Fijian wood. It is the best local timber
for jetty and wharf piles.
Dogo ( Bruguiera gymnorhiza). —This is the most important of the
species growing in the mangrove swamps of Fiji. It furnishes the
greater part of the firewood supply of Suva, and its timber being very
hard, heavy and durable, is suitable for piling, houseposts, spokes,
felloes, axe handles, flooring-studs, and other purposes. The bark
contains from 25 per cent, to 35 per cent, of tannin figured on the dry
weight.
Yasi ( Santalum yasi). —This is the famous island sandalwood. It
is almost entirely confined to an area in the province of Bua (Vanua-
levu), which lies in the dry belt. The heart wood is close-grained and
fragrant and is highly prized by the Chinese for burning for incense.
As a rule it may be said that the deeper the colour of the wood and the
nearer the root the stronger is the perfume. This is due to an essential
oil which is easily extracted and used both in perfumery and in medicine.
The wood is an excellent one for carving.
Dambi (Xylocarpus spp.) is found in the mangrove swamps away
from the sea face. The timber closely resembles Mahogany and takes


118


119
VICTORIA PARADE, SUVA.


a beautiful polish and is an excellent wood for furniture. It is often
used for the knees of boats and for firewood.
Vaivai (Serianthes myriadenia). —This timber is tough and hard and
is extensively employed in house and ship building. It is found from
the sea beach and the back of the mangrove swamp up to elevations of
about 2,300 feet in the centre.
There are many other excellent timbers growing in Fiji which
could be cited, but the ones mentioned give some indication of the class
of woods to be found in the Colony.
In addition to its hardwoods Fiji has several close-grained soft
timbers, similar in appearance to New Zealand white pine, which is
so largely used for the manufacture of butter boxes. These soft woods
of Fiji have been favourably reported on for toy-making. Being practi-
cally odourless they will doubtless be largely used locally for the casing
of butter when the dairying industry has developed. At present they
are almost exclusively used for making banana crates.
The forests of Fiji cover an area of 51*6 per cent, of the total area
4,581,500 acres of the Colony.


XXXVIII. CORAL REEFS AND THEIR FAUNA.
By Professor C. C. NUTTING, University of Iowa, U.S.A.
EARLY in the last century, the Fiji Islands were visited by the
Wilkes Expedition from the United States. Professor Dana,
one of the civilian naturalists, reported on the corals and coral
reefs, producing one of the most sumptuous and brilliantly illustrated
publications ever made on that subject; and he remained one of the
world’s authorities on corals until the time of his death. He says that
the Fiji Group is “ one of the grandest regions of growing corals in the
world.” Hence, these numerous and extensive reefs which fringe
many of the more than two hundred islands of the Fiji Group may
be considered one of its most characteristic and outstanding features.
While the interest of the present writer is primarily that of the
marine zoologist, he cannot refrain from pointing out that the reefs
around the main islands of the Fiji Group, particularly Vitilevu, are an
asset of no little economic importance. That island is most fortunate
in being nearly surrounded by coral reefs, a mile or so off the coast,
which act as an efficient breakwater and protect the shore from constant
erosion and the consequent shifting of the coast line. They protect
the mouths of the rivers from the huge breakers, that spend most of
their force on the outlying reefs. An inside passage for small steam-
boats and coastwise sailing vessels permits of intercommunication between
the coastal towns in comparative comfort and safety. Deeper channels
afford easy entrance to Suva Harbour for the largest steamers. More-
over, the reefs are an important element in securing the stability of the
entrance to the beautiful harbour upon which the prosperity of the
Colony’s capital so largely depends. The quiet waters between the
reefs and the mainland afford good fishing grounds where the natives
with spears, fish-traps, and nets secure the excellent fish which constitute
an important element in their dietary. The men of Lasakau, Bau, for
instance, are noted fishermen, skilled in all the arts of their craft, and
physically an exceptionally fine set of men. The reefs off the mouths
of the Rewa River are of vital importance to them, and have resulted,
moreover, in the formation of a delta containing some sixty square miles
of rich land.
Our party of six naturalists, from the State University of lowa,
was assigned headquarters by the Colonial Government of Fiji on the
island of Makuluva, situated only a few miles from Suva. Here we
found an ideal place to carry on scientific work of investigating the reef
fauna. This little island had been used, and is still occasionally used


when necessary, as a quarantine station. The neat buildings afforded
excellent living quarters, dining room, kitchen and laboratories for our
party and the three servants whom we engaged at Suva. There were
few mosquitoes or other troublesome insects of any kind, little rain
during our visit, and the cool sea breezes tempered the heat and enabled
us to work in real comfort.
The island is almost encircled by reefs of living coral, and, at low
tide, extensive fiats afforded excellent collecting grounds where all
sorts of marine invertebrates were found in abundance and taken to
the laboratory, where they were studied and roughly classified before
being placed in preservatives for more thorough investigation in the
laboratories of lowa.
A catalogue of the species of coral found on the Makuluva reefs
would be of little interest in such a brief account as is here presented.
From what can be learned from Professor Agassiz’s work on “ The
Reefs of Fiji,” and other books, the assemblage of forms on this island
is a typical sample of the reefs in general—a sort of epitome which we
were able to study in the delightful surroundings furnished by the
Government of Fiji.
There is one shallow bit of water between the outlying flats and
the southwest shore of Makuluva where a wonderful display of living
corals was spread out almost at our very door. The first thing
that strikes the naturalist whose main work has been in the tropical
Atlantic is that the corals of the Fiji reefs belong very largely to the
same genera as those in the Atlantic, particularly the West Indian
region. Acropora, Forties, Orhicella , and other well known genera are
found in both oceans. Interspersed with these are many delicate
specimens of Pocillopora and other characteristic Pacific forms, while
an occasional Organ-pipe coral (Tubipora), shows its dull red colour
through the clear water. But while the genera are often the same as
are found in the tropical Atlantic, the colours are strikingly different
and in general more brilliant than their cousins of the West Indies.
Delicate, profusely branched, stag-horn corals {Acropora), are there in
such luxuriant growth as to delight the naturalist. These are of a
soft grayish-brown colour in the main, but the tip of each branch and
branchlet is an exquisite pink with a bluish tint; sometimes a remark-
ably pure lavender. The effect is wonderfully beautiful, with the bright
tips of the countless branches in sharp contrast to the modest colour
of the branches below. It seems almost as if they had been dipped in
a vivid dye, so bright and conspicuous are they; but alas, their delicate
hues disappeared when dried and little of the exquisite beauty of colour


remained when they were unpacked. Here also was found a large
rounded head of one of the massive corals, probably an Orbicella, which
furnished the finest display of expanded coral polyps that the writer
has ever had the good fortune to see. They were deep umber brown
in colour and stood out on slender stems, two or even three inches long,
over the whole upper surface of the corallum, so thickly as to resemble
densely matted moss. Each slender pedicel was surmounted by a
graceful crown of tentacles, appearing like the petals of minute flowers;
but these tentacles, unlike petals, were in constant motion, gathering
small particles of food from the crystal clear water and conveying them
to the mouths in the centre of the tentacle whorls. To those who have
seen only preserved specimens of coral, the sight of such superb colouring
is in itself almost worth a voyage to Fiji.
Many of the corals, particularly the profusely branching kinds,
are the refuge of gaily coloured fishes that are so abundant near the
reefs. We noted a small exceedingly active and alert species that was
coloured the most intense blue one could well imagine—a blue that can
only be compared to the wonderfully vivid, semi-translucent blue of
stained glass. These are so intimately associated with the corals as
to suggest a symbolic relation between the two —a sort of mutual benefit
association, the details of which are unknown to us.
Closely allied to the corals and belonging to the same phylum,
Cczlenterata are of many forms of beauty and of great scientific interest.
On the extensive flats, inside the outer reefs, literally acres of rocky
floor were carpeted with compound anemones, each colony consisting
of hundreds and even thousands of individual polyps, each closing its
mouth over its indrawn tentacles when the tide was out and resuming
its customary activities when again covered by the sweep of the incoming
surf. But these were the lesser folk among the anemones. In the
shallow water where the living corals were seen, we came across giants
of their kind, some at least eighteen inches in diameter, a most vivid,
nile-green in colour above, the body being orange-red, with thousands
of finger-like tentacles grouped round a gaping mouth several inches
long. These monster “ animal flowers," however, served but to tanta-
lise the collector. No matter how cautiously approached, the gentlest
touch caused them to “ fold their tents and silently steal away, dis-
appearing in unbelievably small crevices in the flint-like reef rocks
until not a vestige remained in view. I suppose they might have been
blasted out with dynamite and at the same time blasted to fragments.
At any rate we could find no way to collect these giant anemones and
they remain to us merely gorgeous pictures on memory’s walls


1. A FIJIAN MAN WITH EEL ON SPEAR
2. THE AUTHOR AT MAKULUVA.
3. OUR QUARTERS AT MAKULUVA.
Photographs by C. C. Nutting.
122




One of the most marked differences between the reef fauna of the
tropical Atlantic and that of Fiji and the South Pacific in general, is
the absence in the latter of the great assemblage of Gorgonacea or
“ flexible corals ” which form so conspicuous a feature in the West
Indian reefs and add materially to the composition of the reef itself.
In the Pacific, the place of the Gorgonacea is taken by the flabby, broad-
leaved Alcyonacea of which several species are abundant on the Makuluva
reefs. One is peculiar in having the power to retract its many branches
at the approach of danger in much the same fashion as the anemones
retract their tentacles. When fully expanded, this species resembles
Plexaura, one of the flexible corals, but has no axis cylinder. Upon
being touched, the branches quickly contract into foliaceous masses
and then into dense rounded clumps with a finely modulated surface.
It also turns from a brownish to a pallid, almost white, colour on account
of the retraction of the densely aggregated brown polyps. In other
words, this remarkable alcyonarian responds to the approach of danger
by first shrinking away and then turning pale, much to the amazement
of the investigator.
Bright blue hydrocorallines dot the surface of the flats with brilliant
splashes of colour. This bright blue is exceedingly rare in the tropical
Atlantic but prominent on the reefs of Fiji. Large, intensely blue
star-fish are common, and, with the bluish pink of the tips of coral
branches and the vivid blue of certain reef fishes in the tide pools, add
to the general occurrence of this colour.
The flats at low tide are marked here and there with upstanding
masses of coral rock, riddled by the action of boring molluscs, sea-
urchins, &c., and giving refuge to countless crabs, Echini, and even
small brightly coloured reef fishes, some of which find concealment until
the rising tide again immerses them.
Working on these tide flats is no child’s play for the collector.
Near its outer edges, he is in constant danger from the huge rollers
which break in roaring surf upon the reef and swirl over the flats, some-
times with terrifying power. If taken unawares, the naturalist may be
overthrown and rolled and scoured over the flinty, uneven surface of
the flats, much to his discomfort and possible injury. And this is by
no means the only danger to which he is exposed. Here and there
lurk the giant clams ( Tridacna ), possessing a devilish contrivance for
trapping the unwary visitor. These large bivalves lie on their backs
with their heavy, vice-like, gaping valves upermost. In walking over
the partly submerged flats, an incautious step may place the foot
squarely in the opening between the valves which are instantly clamped


together. Their edges are scalloped and sharp, and fit together so
closely that they can grip anything from a leg to a lead pencil, and
the great adductor muscles are so strong that the frantic struggles of
the victim are utterly useless. Indeed it would be difficult to pry
the valves apart with a crowbar. The under, or dorsal, side of the
shell is so securely anchored to the rocks below by the rope-like bissus
that even a small one, eight inches in length, cannot be pulled off with
the hands, and we always had to use a small crowbar to break them
loose. Sometimes in feeling underneath the rocks the fingers are caught
in this ghastly vice, and more than one case has been reported where
the captive man or woman was held fast until the rising tide put an end
to the victim’s suffering. Another danger lurks in the shape of a little
fish with poisonous spines on its head. On one occasion the writer,
while feeling cautiously under the edge of a rock, received a slight cut
on the little finger resembling an incision made by a sharp scalpel. It
was insignificant in extent but the resulting pain was so severe—even
excruciating—that I feared the loss of consciousness and contemplated
the possibility of falling and being drowned in scarcely more than a foot
of water. The maximum of suffering was passed in a few minutes,
however, and no further consequences followed except a determination
to be more discreet in future. The animal that inflicted the wound was
not seen, but my Fijian reef man assured me that it was a little fish
no larger than my finger, specimens of which we afterwards secured.
Apart from these incidental dangers, working the flats and reefs
involves downright hard labour. Loaded with his collecting parapher-
nalia, the investigator trudges for miles, stumbling over the uneven
surface of the flats, sometimes waist deep in water, lifting rocks with
a crowbar to reveal the creatures lurking beneath. Constant bending
to scrutinise the reef fauna makes the back ache, and the tropical sun
strikes through the thin shirt. Walking back laden with spoil, hastening
to avoid the rising tide, he may be excused a sigh of relief when the
cool quarters are reached and he sits down for a dinner with an appetite
that, as the famous John Ridd says, " Makes a man glad for the room
there is inside him.” But in the afternoon as he works over the morn-
ing’s harvest, he glories in an embarrassment of riches with a joy known
only to the enthusiast in a veritable naturalist’s paradise.
But to return to our observations on the fauna of the flats and reefs.
Here, as elsewhere, the Crustacea are represented by a host of strange
forms. They are in every little tide pool, under every rock, and in
almost every cranny. Large “ pistol-crabs,” mottled green and whitish
with sides and pincers touched with purple, are common. These crabs


have a curious habit of using their heavy chelae as fists and often
administer a thumping blow on the finger of the collector, much to his
astonishment. One of the strangest forms was a very slender-legged
macrouran, almost pure white with blood-red bands around the body
and legs, the latter being beset with very long slender spines. Many
of the crabs are fine illustrations of protective colouring. For instance,
a blue crab is parasitic on a blue starfish. Many green forms are found
on green algae and others are mottled in various ways to assimilate
in colour with the rock surfaces of the flats. A big hermit crab bearing
a large gastropod shell was a rich crimson in colour. Great spiny lobsters
or “ crayfish ” lurk in the recesses of the rocks. They are hunted at
night by torchlight and are excellent eating. The list of Crustacea,
however, is almost endless, and their curious adaptations to environ-
ment constantly arouse the wonder and admiration of the collector.
The mollusca, also, are here in almost unending profusion. Beauti-
ful Cyprea with their finely polished surfaces; Tritons, so often seen in
exhibition cases; the showy Cassis, or cameo shells; heavy Turbos,
often used in manufacturing buttons, are all to be found. The smaller and
less conspicuous forms are more apt to be of interest to the naturalist
than the large ones frequently on sale at curio shops and hence better
known. Among the nudibranchs, or so-called “ sea-hares," were
gorgeously coloured creatures that are the despair of collectors because
their colours vanish in preservative fluids and their delicate forms shrink
to almost unrecognizable masses. One of these was a brilliant scarlet
and white. Another very large one, a brilliant crimson and white,
was kept for some time in a large pan of sea water and we were much
interested in the undulating movements by which it swam about. One
can get no idea of the grace and beauty of these exquisite forms unless
one is so fortunate as to see them alive in tropical waters. Then there
were the rock-boring Lithodomns, beautiful Murices, and the long-
spined Pteroceros, one of the common forms found in collections. An
occasional small Octopus, or “ devil-fish," was seen scuttling along the
bottom of the shallow tide pools and made to throw out its "smoke
screen" in the form of an inky fluid that effectually covered its
retreat.
The Echinodermata were very abundant in individuals though not in
the number of species. The sea-urchins were mostly of widely distributed
species. Ehinometra lucunter was remarkable for its colour variations,
ranging from almost w r hite spined individuals to very dark purplish
brown. The spines of many were barred white and brown. The
common Diedema or " black sea-egg " was occasionally seen. Another


allied form had very delicate spines barred with purplish white and
chocolate brown. In places the surface of the flats was thickly strewn
with serpent stars of various kinds, mostly Ophiocoma which were
difficult to secure without breaking off some of the slender rays. Every
one of them had an arm or two thrust into narrow crevices in the rock
and with these “ anchors to windward *■ held on so tenaciously that
they could not be secured entire.
Among the holothurians, or “ sea-cucumbers " were many forms
of interest. These are the creatures from which the Chinese make the
“ trepang "of commerce. One big black fellow more than a foot long
was declared to be good eating by our Fijian reef man, “ Alfred."
Always ready for gastronomic experiments we told our cook to serve
one for dinner. The body wall is pure white under the dark skin and
about a third of an inch thick. It looked a good deal like the “ meat "
of dried coconuts and could be cut into pieces with a table knife quite
easily, but when we tried to spear the pieces with a fork, we met with
a most laughable surprise. The tines of the fork penetrated easily
enough, but when we tried to raise them to our mouths they popped
off as if propelled by a spring. Again and again we tried to impale
and carry the meat to our mouths but it slid off the fork as soon as pres-
sure was released. It was impossible to manage it in this way and we
were forced to give up the attempt amid shouts of laughter from our
companions. When fingers were used, we were more successful although
the result was hardly worth the effort, the boiled sea-cucumber being
tough and almost tasteless.
Some of the holothurians were very slender, worm-like creatures,
translucent and very active, wriggling through the shallow water like
snakes. They probably belong to the genus Euapta, described at
length in my narrative of the Barbados-Antigua Expedition of 1918.
They are particularly interesting in showing the beautiful “ anchor "
and “ plate ” spicules in wonderful perfection. These spicules furnish
an external roughness that aids the animal in making its way through
narrow crevices in the rocks and also over the bottom.
Near the edge of the flats against which the great rollers pound
unceasingly and with terrific force, are wonderful tide-pools of crystal
clear water, each a superb natural aquarium, with overhanging rocks,
margins fringed with green seaweed, brilliant corallines, corals,
anemones, and alcyonarians of many kinds. The fishes are most
startling in their colourings. The vivid blues, reds, and yellows, give
kaleidoscopic effects of constantly shifting colours that delight and
bewilder the observer. “ Butterfly fish," “ Parrot fish," “ Trigger


1. NATIVE BOY COLLECTING CRABS.
Photograph by C. C. Nutting
2. SERPENT STARS.
Photographed under water by R.B. Wylie
3. LIVING CORAL.
Photographed under water by R.B. Wylie
126




fish ” and scores of other kinds glide through the clear water and into
the rocky caverns which are often carved into the similitude of castles,
towers, and pinnacles of fantastic shape.
Fijian fishermen are expert in the use of the spear and our “ Alfred "
secured many a specimen for our collection and addition to our larder
through his skill in the use of this primitive weapon. The morays,
big eel-like fish with a formidable battery of teeth, slither across the
shallow pools and vanish into surprisingly small fissures. Several of
these were transfixed by “ Alfred's" iron-pointed spear. On one
occasion he made a fine throw at a five-foot shark with sharply con-
trasted black tips to its fins. The water was well over the surface of
the flats and was quite rough. To impale a rapidly swimming fish
thirty feet away was no easy matter, and there was a lively fight before
it was finally beaten into quiescence by the hooked iron crowbar that
we always carried on our reef excursions. The Fijian said that the
shark was good to eat, but that it was his “ devil " and therefore “ taboo "
to him. The Indian cook declared that it was not edible, but we told
him to serve the devil shark for dinner and found it as good as the
ordinary table-fish and not at all like other sharks in texture and flavour.
Several Porcupine fish of extra large size were secured and some flounders
which were excellent eating.
Those days on the Fiji reefs will never be forgotten by any of the
party from lowa. Makuluva is so conveniently situated with Suva as
a base for supplies; its climate is so delightful, with much less rain than
on the adjacent mainland of Vitilevu; mosquitoes and other pestiferous
insects are so few, that the writer, who has had some experience with
marine biological laboratories, cannot refrain from suggesting that the
Colonial Government, aided perhaps by the scientists of Great Britain,
could confer a lasting and ever increasing benefit on the naturalists of
the world by establishing a marine biological laboratory on the beautiful
island of Makuluva. The nearest biological station with adequate
facilities is at Honolulu, nearly three thousand miles away and on the
other side of the Equator. Surely Fiji would be a strategic point for
such a station.


XXXIX. SEA FISHING,
By “GONEDAU."
THERE are few parts of the Group in which disciples of Isaac
Walton will not receive a full reward, should they pursue the
monsters of the deep with proper baits and tackle. Fishing
in Fiji waters possesses attractions dear to anglers.
First, the scenery is unsurpassed. Picture a sea of magic colour
shading from sapphire to amethyst, from turquoise to emerald, dotted
here and there with small islands, with glittering white sand and palm
trees, a background of rugged mountains, and the scene is typical of
Fiji. Add to this a line of white breakers, curling and smashing on
the seaward edge of the reef, and your immediate surroundings cannot
be surpassed.
Secondly, the sea is generally calm and, except in most unusual
weather, the angler need not fear that distressing malady peculiar to
the sea; for most angling is done in sheltered waters protected by
barrier reefs, and the best sport is often obtained either at the mouths
of rivers, or cruising along the leeward side of reefs, or in deep water
passages connecting inner lagoons with the ocean.
But the third and greatest attribute is the uncertainty of the catch.
It is no exaggeration to state that there is a possibility of catching fish
from one or two pounds to several hundreds of pounds on the same
bait. Small “ Ogo ” (Barracouta), “ Saku ” (Garfish), “ Donu ” (reef
grouper of all colours) will rush at a bait little smaller than themselves,
while in the next few minutes a “ Saqa ” (Cavalle) or a “ Walu
(Albacore), up to 80 lb, or a giant Barracouta, shaking its ugly head
to free the hook, may be the victim. Shark too, often take the fish
used as bait, occasionally hooking themselves into the bargain; and an
ever-constant danger to tackle exists in the possibility of striking a
giant cod or grouper, running to several hundreds of pounds. Out-
side the main reef, dolphin and bonito are sometimes captured, and
sword-fish exist. The latter have never yet been systematically fished
for, as in St. Catalina and New Zealand, but occasionally they are hooked
and captured. Recently, on a calm day, two venturesome fishermen
from Suva trolled a Tarporeno bait from a small launch outside the
main reef. Some fish kept tapping the bait, not disclosing its identity.
Thinking it some small fish unable to get the bait into its mouth, the
fisherman suggested the slowing down of the launch to give it a chance.
Almost instantly he received the surprise of his life. With long grey-
hound leaps a sword fish, full ten feet long, broke the water, and at times
racing on the surface, standing as it were on its tail, the monster headed


seawards. For almost half-an-hour he fought him, and fondly imagined
that victory lay ahead. Then the reel fell off, the line jammed, and
the inevitable break followed, leaving our two friends in a nerve-
wracked condition, with many phases of life to reflect upon—“ If we
had only, &c., &c.”—but that is another story.
After these preliminaries, let me take you, reader, sea fishing with
me in Fiji. We will select two days, one near Suva, and one off the
northern coast of the Island of Vanualevu. They will be typical of
others in many places. We will first examine our tackle.
The uncertainty of what may be captured necessitates careful
examination of wire traces. They should be not less than six feet in
length, because it is common tactics for large Saqa and Walu to attempt
to cut the line with the tail. Traces should bear no speck of rust, and
the fastenings to the swivels should be minutely tested. In a damp
climate such as Fiji traces should invariably be kept well vaselined.
Of lines, none are superior to the 24-cord cutty hunk line. Two hundred
yards is the minimum required, and a spare line or two should be carried.
After a battle with a fish near a coral reef, it is good policy to examine
the line to see that no portion has been chafed by touching the coral.
Such marks are generally easy to see. To those who can afford them
expensive reels such as the Vom Hofe American reel and other geared
reels, are a desirable luxury. Not all fishermen, however, are able to
afford them, and ample sport can be obtained using cheaper reels. A
six feet trolling rod, with a single butt joint, with sufficient strength
to “ lift ” a heavy fish, completes the outfit, except for the bait, a
matter for each particular fisherman. What fisherman has not his
own favourite ? What fisherman will not argue its merits against all
others ? And do two fishermen ever agree on this knotty question ?
Never. So one gradually is forced to the conclusion that probably
one spinning bait is as good as another, and that size is the thing that
matters. At the same time, a new comer should ask the advice of old
local hands, and he won’t go far wrong in accepting it from any of them.
Some, for instance, prefer a natural dead bait, some a Knowles Auto-
matic striker, some a Gibbs-Stewart spoon. But give me the last named
for preference; it catches fish of all sizes; it comes immediately to the
surface if it catches weed; and it need not be wound in after every
strike as is necessary with an automatic striker.
So, with a 24 ft. launch, a roomy cockpit aft, a reliable launch
driver, a gaff, and sacks to put our fish in, we will start. But wait a
moment, we have forgotten something. The sun in Fiji can be very
fierce and some skins will not stand it. We will take a pot of bismuth


ointment prepared by chemists in Suva (the best specific against sun-
burn I have been able to find) and smear it over exposed parts. This
preparation has saved delicate skins many blisters and much pain.
Our objective is eight miles to the eastward of Suva, where lies a
low sandy point formed by the delta mouths of the Rewa River, known
by the name of Laucala Point. Opposite, about a mile away, lies the
quarantine island of Nukulau, exceedingly beautiful to view. Laucala
Point can be reached by a passage inside the reef always moderately
calm. When the Rewa River is in flood the Point is a favourite place
for heavy fish, which congregate presumably to chase the smaller fish
washed out of the river by the current. To this spot in a certain
January I and a friend wended our way, equipment complete, in an
eminently suitable launch, and with a launch driver, himself a fisher-
man, who knew instinctively when to stop, when to go ahead, and when
to go astern, in order to give the angler the best chance of landing his
fish. The muddy water from the river lay only on the surface, as the
propeller churned up clearer water beneath, and the sea was dotted
with miniature islands of water hyacinth, banana trees, and debris
washed out of the river. The day was dull and cloudy but without
rain. On nearing the point the launch was slowed down to four knots,
rods were brought into play, I using a No. 7 Gibbs-Stewart spoon and
my friend an automatic striker. We trolled close in shore. The
first time past the point resulted in a terrific strike, a shout to the
launch driver to stop, and the rush of a mighty fish straight at the stern
of the launch. It passed the launch not four yards away; the line
went slack, and for a moment it was feared that the fish was lost. Almost
immediately, however, the line tightened and whizzed out until almost
150 yards of the 200 had gone. The launch started in pursuit and
line was gained. Never was such a fish hooked before ! The water
at no place was excessively deep, 8 fathoms at the most, and it never
sounded to weary one’s arms by having to resort to the pumping process.
Backwards and forwards, round and round we went, following its rushes.
Miles must have been covered. Once or twice the end of a large tail
showed for a second above the surface trying to feel for the line and to
cut it. Excitement reigned supreme, and instructions shouted at the
launch driver to vary his engine were issued with such force and incon-
sistency that at times even he became somewhat bewildered; the fisher-
man showed evident signs of being “ rattled ” by the excitement of
the fight. The sympathetic driver, however, grasped the situation and
only once was he moved mildly to expostulate that no human agency
could enable any launch to go ahead and astern at the same moment !


A TROUT STREAM IN THE MOUNTAINS.
The boy is holding a fish trap made of split bamboo.
130


Fish of this size aye not unusual in Fiji.
131
ROCK COD.


And after an hour of the struggle victory was won, a splendid Saqa
showed himself on the surface, was gently guided to the launch and
gaffed. It turned the scale at 64 lb.
On again drawing near to the Point commotions in the shallow
water were observed. Mullet up to 20r3 lb weight threw themselves
wildly into the air, and where they fell a huge swirl appeared, the water
was lashed into foam, when instantly the mullet leaped out again. More
and more feeble became those frantic leaps till, unable through fatigue
to clear the water, these smaller fish met their end in providing a meal
for their cannibal cousins. There was something gruesome in those
gastronomic efforts, but they showed the presence of a school of large
Saqa, and that sport was to be expected. To rest tired arms, I relegated
the honour of fishing to my friend, and before long a fish of great
power and determination was struck. Clearly it was a monster, and
knew its own mind. After some preliminary rushes, it decided that
the open sea was its proper place and headed for a passage through the
main reef some mile and a half away. The line kept cutting through
the water, the launch keeping level with the fish about 30 yards distant.
Every now and then it would stop, indulge in some minutes of violent
head shaking and small rushes, and go off again in the same direction.
For an hour and ten minutes it fought, gradually getting nearer to the
passage, when it appeared to be yielding slightly. The launch had
stopped. So near did it come to the boat that my friend decided it
would be good tactics to go ahead and clear the line from its immediate
vicinity. But those tactics were wrong and ended in disaster. As
the launch started, the fish rushed under the boat cutting the line on
the propeller. No word was spoken (you may believe this or not), and
a launch of mourning returned to the Point.
A 12 pounder and a 33 pounder followed each other in rapid suc-
cession into the cockpit, the latter giving my friend 20 minutes of the
best. Then he hooked a heavy fish, which broke him at the end of
nearly 200 yards of line. But we were destined to have a novel and
strange fishing experience. I struck a fish and called for the launch
to stop. A second after my friend struck and the lines crossed. Our
diagnosis of the situation was that two fish had crossed and fouled the
lines. We fought a co-operative battle, sometimes one rod taking the
full strain, sometimes the other. At the end of a quarter of an hour,
victory was won and to our astonishment we gaffed a single Saqa of 31 lb.
hooked by both. The baits must have been exactly level and the
fish must have rushed them both, striking the second before it had
time to realise the flavour of the first. Several more fish were added


to the bag, and we returned home weary, but with that feeling of triumph
that is only really known to the killer of big game on sea or land.
Within the next day or two, before the river flood subsided, great
sport was again obtained at Laucala Point. Saqa of 56 lb, 50 lb.
several between 40 lb and 50 lb, and numbers of lesser weight were
captured. Many monsters broke many lines, and many tales were told.
The scene is changed. A tropical river, placid and quiet, its banks
lined with waving coconut palms crowned with clusters of nuts, indicate
a well cared for coconut plantation. Cattle graze amongst the regularly
planted rows of palms; the homestead bungalow, surrounded by a
prettily planted flower garden, stands on a gentle hill in the middle of
the plantation. Here children are seen playing merrily, while the mother
attends to household duties, and the father, the plantation owner, is busy
in the field. The picture is one of peace. No fear of malaria worries
the parents as in most tropical countries; no venomous snakes exist;
no ticks or leeches or other dangerous tropical insects need be feared;
no lions or leopards or tigers have their lairs in the neighbouring jungles.
A small wooden wharf juts into the tidal waters of the river whence
copra is loaded into punts and towed by a launch to the sea, and trans-
ferred to a small steamer to find its way to market. When I viewed
that launch at anchor, I saw that it was an eminently suitable one
for fishing purposes; and so, after a pleasant evening at the homestead,
it was decided that work should be abandoned on the following day,
and that the seas near Lekutu should be thoroughly investigated. An
early start was made, rods and tackle complete, the plantation owner, an
expert at the job, to control the launch engine, and a Fijian to steer.
What more could be wanted to ensure a splendid day ?
The breathless stillness of the morning, and the beauty of the river
gave one the thought that the throbbing of a mechanical engine con-
stituted almost an offence against nature. On either bank coconut
palms gradually gave place to low jungle, and on nearing the river
mouth, to the übiquitous mangrove. As the launch cleared the river,
there opened a scene overwhelming in its magnificence. The morning
sun in his brilliance turned the reed covered mountains of Vanualevu,
rising in jagged outlines beyond a foreground of vivid green, to the
colour of delicate pink. Here and there where the red earth was
exposed on the hillsides appeared patches of blazing terra-cotta. The
sea was like glass, frosted with jewels. Numerous islands were dotted
in the midst of this shimmering iridescence. On some stood picturesque
Fijian villages, with an odd cutter or two riding pleasantly at anchor
in the roadstead. Palms and flowering trees added grace to these


islands, while seaward, low-lying belts of mangroves, growing on isolated
coral reefs, with deep intersecting channels, the home of innumerable
great fish, were visible. Conditions were perfect, and the sudden strike
of a fish came almost as a rude shock to our powers of contemplation.
And what a fish ! It was all over the place, at times the launch
going ahead in pursuit, at times chasing it astern, at times stopped
altogether. For forty minutes the fight lasted when a Saqa of 50 lb
was brought to gaff; in the nick of time too, as, on lifting him into
the launch, the hook fell out of his mouth. Strikes were frequent
and fish were added steadily to the bag. Sometimes we struck simul-
taneously. Once a simultaneous strike resulted in the landing of two
" Ika damn,” 12 lb and 15 lb respectively. This large scaled red fish
of almost vermilion hue is verily a gorgeous creature, and don't they
pull ! Donu of all colours were captured, a poor fighting fish, but a
wonder to gaze upon. Imagine a red-brown fish, dotted with spots
of turquoise blue, with pathetic red eyes, surmounted by “ eyelids ”
which for all the world resemble solid pieces of sky-blue porcelain, and
you may picture some of the catch of that never-to-be-forgotten day.
Walu, Saqa, Ogo, added to the variety of species, and several times
tackle was sacrificed to heavy fish. Shoals of splashing Bonito were
investigated, but could not be tempted to take the bait.
Glassy calms gave place to light breezes, and passing over sunken
reefs the fairyland of the deep became open to view as if by magic.
Branching coral, violet-tipped, brilliant sea anemones, made a memor-
able setting to a natural aquarium where small reef fish of every vivid
colour imaginable darted to and fro. Once we came unexpectedly
upon a small sunken patch of growing coral rising from impenetrable
depths. It was literally alive with fish of all sizes. A school of large
Saqa, some Ogo, and myriads of small reef fish, seemed to constitute a
happy swimming family in this palace of coral, but cruising ominously
on its outskirts was a shark some 8 feet long to spoil the harmony of the
scene. So unsophisticated were these fish, that some of the Saqa actually
came to the surface and swam behind the launch investigating the wash
of the propeller. As our baits crossed the patch we both struck, and a
small Donu and a Saqa of 22 lb were added to the bag. We returned
to the spot and again struck simultaneously. Winding in a small fish,
the shark rushed at him, and a “ worry " reminiscent of a terrier with
a rat, appeared to be in progress. “ Let him have it " shouted my friend
and reel brakes were released and the line allowed to run. Some
30 yards had gone and I judged the moment propitious to strike. A
rush, a weight like a boat, led me fondly to believe he was hooked.


Some 50 yards spun out, the line went slack, and the head of a small
cod was wound up to the boat, a pathetic sight indeed. I had struck
too soon, but in the meantime, my friend had added another Saqa of
19 lb to the catch.
And so home, with between 300 and 400 lb of fish on board (a fine
feast for the Fijian villagers indeed), with the glow of the setting sun
rendering, if possible, the scenery more exquisite than even his morning
effort had achieved, and with that sense of contentment that only
perfect sport and perfect conditions can really give to the heart of man.
And what can man want better than such a day as this ?
XI. RIVER FISHING.
IN most Fijian rivers good sport can be obtained with indigenous
fishes known as “ Ika Droka ” and “ Sakelo,” the former up to
3J lb weight and the latter about half a pound. In the middle
and lower reaches of the main rivers “ Damn ” and “ Saqa ” are found.
Both of these fish are most abundant in tidal waters, but are tolerant
of pure fresh water and may be taken up to 5 lb or more in weight many
miles above tidal influence.
Travellers in Fiji, who are fond of fishing, will be well advised to
take with them a small trout rod and the requisite tackle and to try all
likely-looking streams. The “ Ika Droka ” and “ Sakelo ” rise readily
to a trout fly, more especially in fast-running water. They are strong
fighters and the tactics of the former are reminiscent of the Grayling
in English waters. Small spinners, grasshoppers and crickets are good
baits. In the still-water reaches, spinning from a moving punt or canoe
is best. The use of one inch Devons, half inch flash-spoons, or similar
moving baits is recommended. Suitable sized hooks for using grass-
hoppers and crickets are Nos. 1,4, and 6. Fishing the lower reaches
of rivers for “ Damn,” &c., is best done by spinning from a propelled
boat, using the above-mentioned baits, or somewhat larger ones. More
fish will be obtained by keeping near the banks, rather than in mid-
stream, but by so doing, the angler must be prepared to lose more baits
as the fish are very apt to make for cover when struck.


134
A SCENE ON LA MI RIVER.


NATIVE VILLAGE, SIGATOKA VALLEY.
135


XLI. THE RISING OF THE BALOLO.
ALITTLE-known and rather mysterious phenomenon in some of
the Pacific Islands is the swarming of the halolo. Twice a year
in October and November, masses of small spinach-green worms
rise to the surface at certain parts of the reefs, and are eagerly gathered
by the natives, who count them a great delicacy and who carefully
calculate the date on which they are due to appear.
These “ worms ” are the lower portions, or egg-sacs, of a small
annelid, Eunice viridis, which become detached from the main body and
rise to the surface. There they open, dispersing ova from brownish
sacs and sperm from green sacs. The fertilised ova sink back to the
reef and develop, while the emptied ovisacs are collected by the natives
or devoured by swarming fish. For some time after the halolo rising
several species of fish, usually edible, become highly poisonous.
Though few Europeans acquire the taste for raw halolo , when cooked
it makes a palatable dish, rather resembling whitebait.


XLII. BIRDS.
By CASEY A. WOOD, M.F., LL.D., Chicago , U.S.A., Member of the British
Ornithologists' Union and of the American Ornithologists' Union ; Fellow of the
London Zoological Society, &c.
DESPITE the depredations of the imported Indian Mongoose, that
I eats the eggs, young, and often the adults, of those birds that
nest on or near the ground, and of the introduced Mynah, whose
claws and beak are against the smaller native avifauna, and despite the
activities of both Europeans and coloured folk, who cut down the forests,
drain the swamps, bum over the cane and brush country and drive off
the feathered inhabitants, Fiji still possesses a great variety of bird life.
If we include introduced —mostly Indian and Australian —and
migratory birds, the Colony can boast at least 115 species. No doubt,
when the Islands have been completely surveyed from the standpoint of
the ornithologist, these figures will be substantially increased by the dis-
covery of new species. If one counts only indigenous birds, the number
is reduced to about a hundred. Still, the latter figure embraces some of
the most interesting and beautiful birds in the whole world, even a
partial description of which would occupy many pages —more than is,
for the moment, at our disposal.
This wealth and diversity of bird life are probably due to the fact
that the larger islands are well supplied with fresh-water rivers of con-
siderable size and length. These streams penetrate many miles into
the interior to the jungle-clad mountains, affording shelter and pro-
tection, growth and distribution to many kinds of land birds; while
thousands of miles of coast and innumerable reefs furnish the requisite
environment for sea and shore birds.
Of the more important birds of prey, these Islands are well supplied
with Hawks, some of them suggesting types well known in other parts
of the world. The largest of these, a magnificent bird with a wing-
spread of almost four feet, is allied to the Eagle-Hawk of Australia. It
bears the appropriate native name of “ Tuivucilevu ” or <f Monarch of
the Marshes.” Two Harriers, a Black Falcon (F. lunulatus) and a
beautiful Goshawk (Astur rufitorques) complete the list. In these
Islands the last-named rarely kills small birds but subsists mainly on
lizards, large insects, shrimps and other small crustacese. On the
whole, he is not an enemy of the planter, although his character of hawk
places him without the pale in the estimation of all farmers.
Two Owls are found throughout Fiji, one of them that splendid
creature, the White Owl (Strix Candida ), quite common on the larger
islands, and the rarer Cinnamon Owl [S. delicatula), much smaller and


with less attractive plumage. The Group furnishes at least three races
of Kingfishers. These useful and picturesque birds vary chiefly in the
colour of collar and breast; the white-fronted species with no trace of
colour on his snowy breast is known as Halcyon sacra , or Wood
Kinghunter. He, like the other Fiji Kingfishers, feeds, not on fish but
on caterpillars, beetles, locusts, small lizards and, occasionally, on little
crabs. .
Of the three or four swallow-like birds commonly found in Fi]i,
the best known and the most useful is the graceful little Swiftlet
(Collocalia spodiopygia) , that is continually darting about and above
one’s head, especially towards evening, hawking mosquitos and other
noxious small insects. He builds, in a convenient cavern, a semi-
edible nest; this swiftlet is, indeed, first cousin to the bird that constructs,
mostly with his own saliva, that Chinese luxury, the “ edible swallow’s
nest.” There are several caves within a radius of ten miles from Suva
where these little birds live and build thousands of nests.
Fiji is noted for Honeyeaters, ranging from the tiny little Sunbird
(Myzomela jugularis ), with hummingbird habits, to the largest of them
all, measuring over eleven inches in length, and called, in consequence,
“ Kikau.” The latter justifies its Fijian name by calling, in a voice
that can be heard for half a mile, “ kikau-kikau-kikau,” repeated a
dozen times or more.
The Honeyeater furnishes Fiji’s most tuneful warbler, the charming
Wattled Honeyeater (Ptilotis carunculata) , which breaks into a sustained
song both at sunrise and at sunset.
A very well-known bird is the White or Silver Eye {Zosterops), a
bird that is busily engaged all day long in helping to keep in check the
abundant insect life that threatens to overpower the other forms of
tropical life. This pretty little bird derives its name from a ring of
glistening white feathers that encircle the eye.
To the order of Flycatchers belong some nine or ten species—most
of them studies in colour that never fail to delight the eye. Among
them is the Fijian Redbreast [Petroeca pulsilla) who looks so much
like his English prototype that if one were to meet him in Kew Gardens
he would certainly pass for a British Robin, perhaps a little off-colour.
There are about the same number of Shrikes in the various islands
of the Colony, including four Thickheads. The writer heartily agrees
with Dr. Leach, the Australian ornithologist, that it is a libel and a
misnomer to fasten such a disagreeable name to such a useful, industrious
and beautiful genus, and warmly seconds the proposition to change
the designation to Whistler. Anyone who has seen a busy little


Pachycephala vitiensis going his daily rounds, clearing verandahs, cor-
ridors and outhouses of noxious moths, will agree that such a prettily
decorated and intelligent creature deserves a more becoming English title.
The Kandavu species is a wonderfully coloured bird, whose insectivorous
habits should protect him from harm.
A fine study in black and white is the Wood Swallow, Artamus
mentalis. He is generally seen flying high in air when he is not hunting
insects nearer earth; a fearless bird, he, that often follows closely the
traveller through the forest, catching the insects that are disturbed
from underfoot.
One of the commonest and most attractive of small birds is the
so-called Firetailed Finch ( Erythrura pealei), allied to the Australian
species of the same name. The brilliant red on the crown and tail of
this true finch is not so marked in the female.
The Parrots of Fiji are renowned among ornithologists, and they
have often been described in the literature of natural history, even if
they are not quite as popular among Colonial planters because of their
love of such forbidden fruit as bananas, coconuts and pawpaws. Surely,
however, something can be forgiven such lovely creatures. Perhaps
the most elaborately decorated of them all is the Yellow-breasted Parrot
(Pyrrhulopsis personatus), twenty-two inches in length. He is now
much rarer than he was twenty years ago.
The writer was unable to locate a single caged specimen among
the hundreds of pet parrots to be found on the various islands, although
he inserted a request in the local newspapers asking owners of the
Yellowbreast to allow him to see their pets. In several instances he
discovered that this fine bird had been caught and tamed but had died
after a caged or confined life varying from five to fifteen years. Their
places were not filled because no young parrots were on the market.
It is quite different with the Crimson-breasted species from Kandavu,
a large island happily free of the mongoose and but little cultivated by
whites. Here the beautiful Pyrrhulopsis splendens, although unpro-
tected by law (on account of his fruit-eating propensities) easily holds
his own in spite of the large numbers captured and sold by the natives
to tourists and others.
Although not as elaborately decorated as the Yellowbreast,
P. personatus, it is a very attractive species, whose length is 18 to 20 inches,
with the head and all the upper surface crimson; across the nape a
wide, deep-blue band; back, rump, upper-tail coverts and wings bright
green; primaries and their coverts, as well as the outer secondary
feathers, blue; lastly, as a striking contrast, the eyes are deep orange.


A MOUNTAIN STREAM.
A Fijian Sheep Run
138


RICH ALLUVIAL FLATS ON THE WAIDINA RIVER, VITILEVU.
Razor-hacked ranges of andesite are seen in the background.
The scenery in these ranges is very rugged and striking




A CHIEF'S HOUSE.
139


It is a question whether this species was not at one time confined to
Kandavu and whether the individuals found on Viti Levu, for example,
were not introduced from the former island. Be that as it may, wild
examples are rare outside Kandavu. This one of the four Pyrrhulopses
is the favourite cage-bird in the Colony, not only because of the
abundant supply of young birds but because of their talking powers,
their display of affection and intelligence and because they practically
never scream nor make other disagreeable noises when in captivity.
Although their rather shrill monotone is a common sound in the
Kandavan forest, they seem to abandon loud notes when in captivity.
They are fair talkers and whistlers, but in exhibiting these accomplish-
ments do not make themselves a nuisance to the neighbourhood, as do
some of the other large parrots.
Some years ago the Samoans were in the habit of making excursions
to Fiji to shoot “ Kakas ” and other birds of bright plumage, that they
might weave the feathers into their mats. It is also said that they
were not averse to trapping or buying live birds that they might pluck
regular crops of feathers from the unfortunate parrots. This cruel
practice continued until the arrival in the Colony, as Governor, of that
sympathetic and well-known naturalist, Sir Everard im Thurn, who
put an end to the scandal.
The large Fijian parrots build their nests in hollow trees, and gener-
ally 20 or 30 feet from the ground. The writer discovered one nest in a
decayed stump less than five feet high. The central hole was eight
inches across and the nest was a very primitive affair, consisting only
of the debris that had accumulated in the bottom of the excavation.
There were three, nearly round, dirty-brown eggs which, when cleansed,
became uniformly white. They measured one and three-sixteenths
by one and three-eighths inches.
The other species of this interesting genus are peculiar to (or the
types hail from) Taveuni, Vanua Levu and Koro respectively. They
differ from the Kandavan variety mainly in the amount of blue on the
nape of the neck, it being entirely absent in the first mentioned and
seen only as an inconspicuous streak in the other two.
In about one per cent, of the long-tailed Fijian parrots, cases of
what is called heterochrosis occur; that is, the red, green and blue
feathers in the birds’ plumage to a greater or less extent change to yellow
and white. Although this colour alteration is abnormal it frequently
is seen in perfectly healthy subjects of great intelligence and vivacity.
Moreover, the alterations often result in colour combinations far sur-
passing in attractiveness the plumage tints of the normal parrot.


Quite as attractive as and more gorgeously arrayed than the large
parrots is the beautiful Fijian " Kula ” or Parakeet, Calliptilus solitarius .
Just imagine a little creature not quite eight inches long, with yellow
eyes and beak, a brilliant ultramarine cap, emerald green neck and tail,
the rest of the body deep scarlet and green, the back partly concealed
by a flowing, feathery mane ! Here, too, confined to one or two islands
is to be seen one of the smallest parrots in the world —the baby Lorikeet,
with a systematic name almost as long as itself — Hypocharmosyna aurei-
cincta. This pretty little parrot is quite unknown to the vast majority
of Fijians and has been rarely collected by naturalists in Fijian territory.
The Islands are well supplied with Cuckoos, the largest of which,
the remarkable Long-tailed Cuckoo, is said to emulate the example
of her sisters throughout the world by laying her eggs in the nest of
another bird, in this instance choosing the Noddy Tern. This Cuckoo
is also known to snatch an occasional small bird from its forest home
or a chicken from the plantation farmyard when opportunity offers.
Hence it is often spoken of and treated as a “ hawk.”
The chief glory, however, of Fiji’s avifauna is her wild Fruit Pigeons
and Doves, several of which are found only on the islands of the Group.
Limited space forbids more than a passing mention of two of the
larger Pigeons —the Nutmeg Pigeon (so-called from his favourite diet),
Globicera pacifica, with an iridescent, wine-coloured plumage and a
remarkable stomach lined with bony spines to grind off and pulpify
the arillus or “ mace ” from the wild nutmegs on which he subsists;
and the equally beautiful Chili Pigeon or “ Ruve,” that flourishes on
red-hot capsicums.
Of the wonderfully feathered Little Fruit Doves much has been
written; indeed it is impossible adequately to describe their gorgeous
colouring. They must be seen to be appreciated. Male and female
are quite differently feathered in all the species, the male Golden Dove
(Chrysoenas luteovirens), for example, having an olive-yellow cap fringed
with yellowish, the remainder of the body being mostly clothed in a
covering of lovely, separated, glossy, lanceolated, golden feathers. He
has a yellow-green tail; while the female is greenish throughout—
indeed, goes under the name of the Green Dove. Then, there is the
Crimson-capped Dove ( Ptilopus pevousei ) that looks white as it flies,
but is really a remarkable study in dark purple-red, bronze-green and
white, the first and last colours predominating. This beautiful Dove
sports a crimson cape, and the white feathers of the breast are split at
their ends, the resulting points being tipped with red. The female is
less elaborately adorned but is yet extremely attractive. Still more


wonderful in its truly flamboyant attire is the far-famed, though rare,
Flame-coloured or Orange Dove ( Chrysoenas victor) whose flight through
the forest has been aptly likened to “ the passage of a rocket on a dark
night.” The male bird has a velvety, olive-coloured cap with a bright
yellow border, the rest of the body-covering, both above and below,
being composed of closely applied, hair-like feathers of a brilliant, glossy
orange-red; “flame-coloured” describes it more accurately. The
entire plumage of the female is rich green, yellowish-green on the head
and throat. The writer has never seen a more impressive study in
feathered monochrome than is presented by this beautiful little dove.
Finally, one of the most attractive of these Columbidse is the Fijian
Ground Dove (Phlogoenas stairi ) intermediate in size and, perhaps,
beauty between the smaller Doves and the larger Pigeons. The general
colouration of this species is dark brown with bronze and purple reflec-
tions. He has a genuine “ coo ”as his call note, and is still to be found
in those localities that are free of the mongoose. In Viti Levu some
individuals still survive. They have learned to avoid ground feeding
as much as possible and to build on the small branches of high trees to
which the enemy cannot climb. A noticeable character of some of
these Fijian Columbidae is their “ barking ” notes. In the deep jungle
one is often startled by a succession of clear or hoarse dog-like sounds,
so familiar that, if one does not know their origin, they are readily attri-
buted to a lot of dogs that have strayed from home.
The Rail family is well represented by several species. The best
known of these in Fiji and Australasia is the Purple Gallinule (Porphyrio
vitiensis), plentiful on the islands not yet invaded by the mongoose.
Ratu Pope, grandson of King Cakobau, has a preserve of these beautiful
and interesting water fowl, from which he allowed the writer to take
several specimens. Mention may also be made of the “Mu” or Little
Corn Crake; also of the Pectoral Landrail, probably as widely distributed
as Porphyrio.
The only Fijian Pheasant is the Polynesian Jungle Fowl (Callus
bankiva), whose Asiatic cousins are the ancestors of our barnyard Cock
and Hen. On Beqa, where a party of us spent several days in quest
of this interesting bird, it was almost uncanny to listen, on the jungle-
covered hills, to dozens of “ roosters ” crowing and “ hens ” cackling
all around us, and difficult to realise that they were not bantam fowls
escaped from nearby farmyards.
Most of the Shore Birds seen on the coasts of Fiji are migrants,
although some of them nest on the Islands. To this family belong
the Godwit (Limosa uropygialis) , the Lesser Golden Plover ( Charadrius


dominicus fuscus ), Turnstone {Arenaria interpres) and several other
visitors, well known to ornithologists in other parts of the world, that
enliven the coral flats along the island shores.
The Green Bittern ( Butorides stagnatilis ) and the graceful Reef
Heron ( Demiegretta sacra), white, dark-slate and mixed white and slate,
are both found on almost every coast, the latter, with its curious colour
phases, by far the more common.
Fifty years ago the Black Duck ( Anas superciliosa) was found on
the larger islands in flocks, but European hunters and the mongoose
have sadly diminished their ranks. The Whistling Duck ( Dendrocygna
gouldi) also nested and lived in Fiji, but nothing has been heard of it
in recent years. Oceanic avifauna is not so common as in other seas,
but several species of Terns are found in Fijian waters, among them the
Crested Tern (Sterna bergii) and the Black-naped Tern, seen along the
coast lines, perching on beacons and reefs or fishing in the waters. Gulls,
on the other hand, are conspicuous by their absence, and are rarely if
ever encountered.
Now and then one sees a Tropic Bird—and three species visit the
Fijian coasts —or the Great Frigate Bird ( Fregata aquila), but the former
is relatively rare throughout the Group. Gannets and Petrels, especially
the latter, are fairly plentiful in the Koro Sea and towards the Lau
Archipelago; indeed, a journey to the atolls of Lau will well repay the
naturalist or the visitor who desires to see the chief attractions of
these charming Pacific Islands.
The Colonial Government has adopted an Ordinance protecting its
useful and ornamental birds, and since the imported coloured races as
well as the native Fijians are rarely allowed the use of guns, shooting
birds of any kind is reduced to hunting them by the white population.


XLIII. GEOLOGY AND MINING.
NO systematic geological survey of Fiji as a whole has yet been
made, though several geologists have made somewhat rapid
and general examinations of the various islands. The evid-
ence from which the geological history of the Colony may be deduced
is consequently somewhat meagre and inconclusive, but Dr. W. G.
Woolnough, D.Sc., F.G.S., as a result of his investigations in Vitilevu
island in 1901 and 1905* concluded that, in very ancient geological
times, Fiji was part of a continental land-mass, possibly connected
with New Zealand and New Caledonia.
The great objection to the continental theory is the depth and
extent of the ocean between Fiji and the nearest considerable area
of continental land, but this objection is, in part, answered by the fact
that there are numerous instances in which the earth’s crust can be
proved to have undergone movements sufficient to account for the
great depth of water. As an instance, the Mozambique Channel
separating Madagascar from Africa, with a depth in parts of over 2,000
fathoms, has been proved to be the result of a series of trough faults.
The occurrence in Fiji of numerous species of flora and fauna, which
cannot pass wide stretches of deep ocean, tends to confirm the
continental theory.
Vitilevu Island, Area 4,053 Square Miles.
The great extension of the occurrence of granitic and slaty rocks
in Vitilevu, their base-levelling to form a peneplain, their relatively
great age, as proved by the occurrence of very heavy systematic faulting,
all lead towards the conclusion that Vitilevu, and therefore probably
the whole of Fiji, has been a land mass for enormous periods of time,
even reckoned geologically. It has had sufficient magnitude and
durability to permit of earth-movements competent to produce schists,
and it has existed so long as a land surface that large rivers have had
time to reduce it to base-level. These facts constitute the essentials
of any continental area.
The geological formations of Vitilevu are divisible into two main
groups. The first of these includes continental rocks of high but
undetermined geological antiquity. The second includes tertiary to
recent formations of volcanic and sedimentary origin. Between these
there is an enormous hiatus. The area must have been below sea-
level during early geological time for the deposition of the material of
•From the Proceedings of the Linnean Society of New South Wales 1903, part 3, and 1907 part 3.


the quartzites of Nasava and the slates of Nalaba, if these are marine
in origin. Then came an extensive elevation by which the formations
were brought above sea-level, plicated, metamorphosed and weathered.
This period too must have extended over an enormous period of time
during which the land was denuded to its very roots, so that plutonic
masses of granite and quartzdiorite were laid bare. Most of the sedi-
mentary formations were completely swept away. Then probably
followed the separation of the outlier from the main continent. An
extensive subsidence of the Fijian area took place as is proved by the
occurrence of fossiliferous tuffs at Nadrau (1,290 ft.) and Nasoqo
(800 ft.). Since then there has been an oscillation in the sea-level,
but on the whole with a tendency towards a general upward movement
of the land. As the top-most beds of level-bedded soapstones reach
well over 4,000 ft. in the vicinity of the summit of the island, and are
certainly marine beds, we thus have evidence of a positive movement
of the land, during Cainozoic time, amounting to well over 4,000 feet.
Further investigation is necessary to trace completely the stages of this
elevation which was certainly a differential movement.
The greater portion of the island of Vitilevu is covered by a thick
series of level-bedded “ soapstones ” which are believed to be marine
redistributed tuffs. In places, as in the Nadarivatu district, thick
flows of lava are interbedded with the soapstone. Elsewhere, as at
Suva and at Tawaleka, interbedded fossiliferous limestones, certainly
of Tertiary age, occur. These rocks form what may be termed, some-
what loosely, the " lower series.” They lie unconformably upon a
much older series amongst which granitoid rocks predominate. With
these are associated extensive areas, with highly perfect and very com-
plex slaty cleavage developed in them, which have proved to be in most
cases of metamorphosed volcanic materials. That they are much
older than the newer series is proved by the very marked lithological
differences, by their universally inferior position and by the occurrence
of pebbles of granite and other rocks in massive beds of conglomerate
in places at or near the junction of the newer with the older series. At
Nasoqo and Nadrau fossils have been found which show that the
beds in question belong to some part of the Tertiary era, though their
preservation is not good enough for specific determination. We have,
nevertheless, the very important conclusion that basal conglomerates
of a great Tertiary series rest unconformably upon, and contain pebbles
of, an enormously older series made up of granitoid and slaty rocks.
So widespread is the newer series that it is only where extensive
denudation has removed it locally that the older series is exposed to


view. The older rocks are therefore chiefly met with in the bottoms
of the narrow, young river valleys. Their existence as a basement
has been proved over an area of at least 35 miles X3O miles. It is
inferred that their surface was, prior to Tertiary time, reduced to the
condition of a peneplain.
The most recent rocks (excluding the present day river alluvials
and the coral reefs) appear to be a series of andesitic volcanic rocks
varying from pyroxene andesite to hornblende andesite. It is probable
that of the two those of the hornblendic facies are the older. These
andesitic rocks form lofty mountain masses and yield magnificent
scenic effects. They have, in part at all events, been extruded along
major fault planes which have had a dominant influence on the
structural features, and even on the very existence, of the island of
Vitilevu and of the Fiji Group as a whole.
The basal beds of the newer series reach an altitude of 1,350 feet
above sea-level at Nadrau; the granitic rocks attain about the same
level at Navunitorilau. The top-most beds of the level-bedded soap-
stones, which are certainly marine beds, reach well over 4,000 feet and
probably the rocks (limburgites and tuffs) forming the highest summit
of the island (Mt. Victoria 4,341 feet) are members of the same series.
The rivers are all in a condition of youthfulness. They are for
the most part still engaged in sinking deep narrow canyons in the
surfaces of otherwise level plateaus. In the case of the Navua River
the drainage system is so immature that its tributaries do not meet
it at grade, and the smaller ones form veritable hanging valleys. This
immaturity is partly due to the hardness of the rocks through which
the beds have been sunk as compared with those in the Rewa and
Sigatoka valleys. Both of the latter streams have progressed con-
siderably towards maturity. The “ falls-line ” on the Rewa has
receded a very long way and the stream has, within the present cycle,
built a large delta.
There is abundant evidence, particularly in the Rewa valley, that
the earth-movements have been chiefly positive and that they are
probably still in operation. There are remains of older delta deposits
about the head of the present delta and about 200 feet above its level.
Vanualevu Island, Area 2,128 Square Miles.
Dr. Guppy, M. 8., F.R.S.E., who examined much of this island
in 1897-9, disagreed with the theory of continental origin so far as it
was concerned. He concluded that it had been formed by the union
of a number of smaller volcanic islands during a long protracted period


of emergence and was essentially an oceanic island built up from great
ocean depths.* In support of this theory he pointed out that Vanua-
levu, unlike Vitilevu, displayed but a small development of plutonic
rocks. Dr. Woolnough considered that the absence of granitic or
slaty rocks might possibly be explained by the fact that its rivers,
not being so powerful as those of Vitilevu, have not as yet succeeded
in reaching and laying bare the basement rocks. It is possible, too,
that in Vanualevu these have been covered by a greater depth of
volcanic materials during the, apparently, more intense and recent
volcanic activity in that island.
The plutonic rocks, as stated above, are very scantily exposed in
Vanualevu, and they are not displayed at all in the western half of the
island. The more basic eruptive rocks, the olivine basalts and basaltic
andesites are mainly confined to the western half, that is, west of
Naduri on the north and of the Drekeniwai River on the south.
Basaltic flows, in places covered by submarine deposits, form the
extensive low plains on the north side of the island which constitute
the basins of the Sarawaqa, Dreketi, Wailevu, and Labasa Rivers.
Ordinary augite andesites occur also in the western half and are found
over most of the rest of the island, excluding the north-east portion
east of Labasa and Tawake, where quartz porphyries, oligoclase-trachytes
and acid pumice tuffs prevail.
The acid andesites, including the hornblende and felsitic ande-
sites, are best represented in the Dradramea district in the midst of
the basic rocks. They occur in the isolated peaks of Nararo and
Vatukasia and in one or two other localities. These peaks of acid
andesites, as in the instances of Vatukasia and Solovelevu, are in places
partly overwhelmed or surrounded by basaltic flows. This singular
feature of bosses of acid rocks in the midst of basaltic fields offers a
point of resemblance between Iceland and Vanualevu. In fact Vanua-
levu with its extensive palagonite formations, its basaltic tablelands
and later basaltic flows, its high mountain ridges and its evidence of
submergence more closely resembles Iceland than any other area.
Thermal springs have been found in 23 localities in Vanualevu
and are very generally distributed. The best known are those of
Savusavu, Wainunu, Nukubolo, Batinikama, and Nakama on the
Wailevu River. Most of the remainder are insignificant and with a
temperature far below boiling point. They are confined to the areas
of the basic rocks, always occur at low altitudes and are older than
the streams and rivers along which they are so frequently found. About
* (< The Observations of a Naturalist in the Pacific,” 1896-1899—V01. No. 1.


ANDESITE BOSS IN NAMOSI VALLEY.
Typical scenery in the mountain districts on
the head-waters of the Waidina River, Vitilevu.
146


SOAPSTONE COUNTRY, TAVUA, VITILEVU.
Typical grazing land on hills, and a fertile alluvial valley.
147


a third of the known springs emerge on the sea coasts, between the
tide marks, and usually rise through the reef flat.
The mountain types vary considerably, the ridge-mountains, how-
ever, being most characteristic of the island. The leading feature of
the western end of the island is the great basaltic mountain of Seatura
(2,764 feet) which occupies a large part of Bua province and largely
determines the form of the western extremity of the island. It is of
the Mauna Loa type, its long eastern slope descending gently at an
angle of three or four degrees for about ten miles to the mouth of the
Wainunu River. In its deeply eroded valleys and gorges and in other
respects it is not unlike the island of Tahiti.
The peaks of acid andesite are the necks and stumps of volcanoes
dating back to the prebasaltic period of the island. The mountain
ridges of Batini (3,437 feet), Cikeva (3,139 feet), and Mariko (2,890 feet),
&c., in the central portion of the island, form the most typical features
of the internal topography. They are now more or less covered over
by submarine deposits of foraminiferous tuffs and clays and represent
lines of submerged vents following major fault planes. They have
been subjected at different periods to marine erosion and in later ages
to subaerial denudation.
The age of the more recent of the deposits, the fossiliferous tuffs
and soapstones, cannot be very different from that of the same deposits
in other parts of the Group, since it is apparent that the same general
movement of emergence has affected both of the two larger islands.
There is no evidence that coral rocks existed during the early
stages of the emergence of Vanualevu to be obtained from the sub-
marine formations found on the higher levels 1,000 to 2,500 feet above
the sea. The conditions for reef formation evidently did not exist
in that early stage of the island's history, when the foraminiferous tuffs
and clays were being deposited on the sea bottom. It is remarkable
that the uplifted masses of reef-limestone so characteristic of the
islands of the Lau Group, are here very scantily represented. The
few examples occur at or near the coast at elevations not greater than
300 feet.
In the Lau Islands volcanic outbreaks have taken place since the
last upheaval. At Mango and other islands the cliffs of limestone
form inkers in flows of andesitic lava. In the history of these islands
there was probably a period of calcareous deposits, then followed a
period of volcanism during which masses of volcanic materials were
erupted along the axis of elevation. Alternating epochs of upheaval
and stable equilibrium ensued, during the last of which the reefs grew


outwards and formed the terraces now so characteristic of the profiles
of the islands. After the last upheaval the volcanic forces again
became active, gradually subsided, and were followed by quiescence and
exceedingly slow elevation which has lasted to the present day, during
which the existing barrier reef formations were built up.
From the foregoing it is evident that a vast amount of geological
research in Fiji will be required to settle, definitely, the interesting
question of the geological origin of the Group, which also involves the
theory of the permanence of ocean basins, namely, that the general
tendency is for the ocean basins and the continental areas to become
more marked.
Mining.
Mining in Fiji is still confined only to prospecting operations, which
have been carried on somewhat spasmodically for the past half century.
In 1909-11 considerable activity was displayed, but it gradually sub-
sided, and comparatively little is now being done to investigate the
Colony’s possibilities as a mining country. No deposits of any metal
have yet been found to occur in payable quantities, but it should not
be taken for granted that such payable ore bodies do not exist. By
far the larger portions of the two main islands are mountainous and
covered with tropical forest and vegetation, rendering prospecting
operations difficult and expensive. Walking and canoeing are the chief
means of locomotion in the interior and the “ roads ” are often mere
native paths crossing hill and dale with a supreme disregard of grade.
Gold, silver, and copper are the principal metals sought for.
Asbestos of short staple has been reported as occurring near Suva.
Little more than traces have been found of lead, tin, zinc, nickel, and
iridium. A deposit of silicious clay exists in Kadavu Island which
is said to be suitable for the manufacture of good quality firebricks.
Oil and coal indications so far discovered have not appeared to be of a
sufficiently promising character to justify the expense of test bores.
Deposits of calcium phosphate occur at Vatoa, Ogeadriki, and
other islands of the Lau Group, but were not demonstrated to be of such
quality and in such quantities as to justify actual working of the
deposits for export.
The concensus of opinion of several mining experts who have
examined certain prospecting areas in Vitilevu and Vanualevu islands
is that the geological and other indications appear to justify more
systematic prospecting operations than have hitherto been made.


XLIV. MISSIONARY EFFORTS.
ONE of the important landmarks in the history of Fiji was set
up on the 12th October 1835, by the arrival at Lakeba of the
Wesleyan Missionaries, William Cross and David Cargill. They
came from Tonga in a sailing vessel named the “ Blackbird " and were
accompanied by a small party of christianised Tongans.
Tradition runs that prior to this a few native Roman Catholic
teachers from Tahiti came to this same island, Lakeba, but they were
slain and eaten by the orders of the chief.
Although no opposition was offered to Cross and Cargill it can
readily be believed that these early pioneers encountered many adven-
tures and endured much hardship. Quickly acquiring a working
knowledge of the Lakeba dialect they set themselves to grapple with
the formidable task of converting a race of heathen cannibals to the
truths of Christianity. One of the first duties Cargill undertook was
that of reducing the native tongue to writing—admittedly no easy
task. He arranged an alphabet to suit the phonetics of the language
and, when a sufficiently large vocabulary had been acquired, a catechism
and some primers were translated and printed by the small hand press
which the party had brought from Tonga.
In 1838 Cross and Cargill were joined by several other Missionaries,
and it became possible gradually to extend the good work to other
islands. Subsequently the small island of Viwa became the head-
quarters of the Mission. This island, which lies about six hours
journey from Suva, has long since been abandoned by the Mission for
ampler and more central quarters, but its name must ever be
inseparably associated with the pioneer work of the Missionaries. Here,
in 1853, the first version of the New Testament in the Fijian language
was printed. Here, also, John Hunt, one of the devoted band who
arrived in 1838, is buried. A simply inscribed stone marks the spot,
and a Melia tree, planted by the kindly hands of natives, showers its
lilac blossoms on his grave.
Native converts were trained as teachers to help on the good work.
The chiefs at first fought shy of the new religion, but they did not
openly oppose the Missionaries. The inevitable, however, gradually
happened and one by one they were brought into the fold; cannibalism,
the strangling of widows, and other barbarous practices slowly faded
out, and Fiji became Christianised from end to end.
Attached to every Mission Station was a school where children
were taught to read and write their own language. The Mission soon


became able to send out a growing number of educated native teachers
who, in turn, set up village schools until gradually there were but few
villages of importance that did not have a church and school-house,
albeit they were but native buildings.
Although nothing but unstinted praise is due to every one of these
early Missionaries, who left all to carry the torch of religion into the
heathen darkness of Fiji, we are specially indebted to two of them
whose names are imperishably connected with these islands.
To David Hazelwood we are indebted for a dictionary and
scholarly grammar of the Fijian language, which, published in 1850,
has never been superseded.
To Thomas Williams we are indebted for a description of the
manners and customs of the early Fijians while still living in the state
of cannibalism. Unfortunately his book, “ Fiji and the Fijians,” was
not published in its entirety. The manuscript was considered by the
Missionary Society too frank for publication, so it was ruthlessly
“ edited.” But even the mangled remains stand out as the work of
a keen natural observer who was content to describe things as he saw
them, and although much has been lost the book is a veritable treasure
house of valuable first hand information.
No account, however short, of the work of the Wesleyan Mission
in Fiji, would be complete without mention of the name of Thomas
Baker, the only European who fell a victim in the struggle against
heathenism. This intrepid missionary penetrated far into the interior
of Vitilevu, where he was clubbed and eaten by the mountaineers.
In a necessarily short article such as this it is not possible to detail
the rise and progress of the work so unostentatiously, but surely,
started by Cross and Cargill. Such an account would embrace the
names of many self-sacrificing men and women who gave up the com-
forts of civilisation to suffer privation and hardship—difficult for us
to realise to day—to lift a heathen race to higher things. That they
succeeded is evidenced by the many churches and institutions now
established throughout the Colony.
The headquarters of the Mission (now known as the “ Methodist
Mission ”) are situated at Davuilevu, about twelve miles from Suva,
easily approachable by motor car. Here, on a commanding eminence,
stands the Davuilevu District College; a fine concrete building with
a surmounting tower. In this institution native students receive
religious and secular education. There are, also, separate schools
under capable European instructors for technical instruction, where
lads are taught the useful crafts of cabinet-making and carpentering.


150
METHODIST CHURCH AT LAU.


A FIJIAN.
151


With the laudable object of trying to give native youths a still
further equipment in life, the Mission has recently taken up tropical
agriculture and dairy farming. This new venture —of which much is
expected—has been made possible by the Government placing at the
disposal of the Mission, rent free for ten years, a self-contained block
of first class agricultural land, containing 800 acres, conveniently
situated on the Rewa River about three miles above the District College.
It is intended to work the farms under European supervision on a
co-operative basis so that the native students may reap some of the
reward of their industry.
The Mission has not neglected the native Fijian girls. In addition
to a central school at Suva several institutions for their education are
maintained throughout the provinces where girls are taught the
elementary principles of hygiene and the useful arts of cooking, needle-
work and laundering. One of the first established of these girls'
schools, “ Matavelo," in the province of Ba, maintains a high standard
of work and is well worthy of a visit by anyone interested in the
education of natives. The Mission has also done much good work among
the East Indian immigrants living in the Colony by the establishment
of schools and orphanages. But, so far, these efforts have not extended
beyond the limits of the main island of Vitilevu.
Among its other activities the Mission runs a printing press at Suva,
where a 10-page crown-quarto monthly magazine is printed in the
vernacular. This publication, which disseminates information of a
general as well as of a religious character, is popular among natives
and a powerful auxiliary to the Mission. Its pages are interesting,
as they frequently contain articles by native writers, some of whom
evince distinct literary skill.
There were other early workers in the Fijian field of missionary
enterprise. As far back as 1844 the Roman Catholic Society of Mary
established a Mission at Lakeba under the direction of Fathers Roul-
leaux and Breheret. The former resided about four years in the islands
and on his departure Father Breheret took over the entire control of
the Marist Mission in Fiji. More priests and brothers of the Order
arrived from time to time and the headquarters were moved to Levuka,
where Father Breheret became a force for good among the small popu-
lation of adventurous Europeans who had drifted there. He was a
man endowed with rare natural gifts, and with wide sympathy for his
fellow men, white or coloured. With equal tact he won over the
hardened beach-comber and the proud, suspicious native chief, who
had seen in the new religion an infringement of his privileges.


The Marists, true to the traditions of their Order, built many beauti-
ful churches. The Priests were their own architects, and the buildings
—mostly of stone and concrete —were slowly raised with the assist-
ance of native converts. They stand to-day as striking monuments
of the industry and zeal of those early workers.
The Mission was erected into a Bishopric in 1887, and the Right
Reverend Julian Vidal was installed as the first Bishop of Fiji. In
1894 the foundation stone of the beautiful cathedral in Suva was laid.
All the stones used in the building of this church were imported from
Australia.
The Mission has established many schools throughout the group
for the education of natives, and at Suva and Levuka excellent
boarding schools for European children.
To conclude it may shortly be said that to the stout-hearted
pioneers sent out by the Wesleyans of England and the Marists of France
is due the credit of bringing the consolations of Christianity to Fiji.
By their zeal and self-sacrifice they succeeded in raising a magnificent
native race from the slough of heathenism to a higher plane of
civilisation.


XLV. DIARY OF AN ENGLISH TOURIST.
SUVA, July \Sth. —I am not doing much beyond soaking myself
in the atmosphere of this place, literal and metaphorical. As
to the former, I am astonished at myself by the easy, nonchalant
way one has got into of standing or sitting about without thinking of
the weather. All yesterday afternoon I sat on the wharf waiting for
a boat (the “ Adi Keva ”) from Levuka, which did not come. Yet
there was a cold southerly wind, and I had no underclothing. To-day
it is not hot, but just pleasant; yet my total array of three garments
(apart from shoes and socks) is not too little nor much. I can under-
stand the statement that the climate is very suitable for Europeans,
who show here the lowest death-rate in the world. The natives, on
the contrary, have shown themselves very susceptible to disease.
Measles, for instance, on its first introduction, killed 40,000 of them
at a swoop. lam quite alone now, the captain of the “Alert,” and
the London clergyman, who have been at my table at McDonald’s
Hotel, having left for Vancouver. I went to see them off on the
“ Niagara,” a very fine vessel of 13,000 tons. A Fijian brass band
played several selections before the boat got away. As I watched
each one of them reading the printed score allotted to his instrument,
I wondered at the change which education had brought about in these
grandsons of cannibals only two generations removed from savagery.
To-night, being Sunday, I took a chance of studying them at their best,
and for that purpose repaired to a native Wesleyan church. The
service was entirely in Fijian, but with a native hymn-book every word
of the singing could easily be followed. In fact, I sang through one or
two hymns, joining in with bass voices near me, but without under-
standing what it was about. The men’s voices were especially musical,
more so than the women's —I don’t think I have heard a richer tone
anywhere.
July 1 6th. —There is a Canadian Pacific liner in the harbour from
Vancouver, the R.M.S. “ Aorangi.” It is a mere incident now, the
coming and going of ships. As I stroll out, hatless, with hands folded
behind, or stowed carelessly in the side pockets of my trousers, I can
smile benignly on those blooming tourists who are here for a few hours
only, and, in their gaping wonder, display a pitiful ignorance of our (!)
Fijian affairs.
This afternoon, I joined a car party in a drive to Nausori, twelve
miles out, on the Rewa River. We passed rice fields, but with the
harvest cut and gathered; sugar-cane, bananas, tapioca, taro, bread


fruit, and many other growths unfamiliar to an English eye. Pine-
apples, for instance, fancy forgetting pineapples ! Fields and fields of
them, growing up out of the ground like swedes.
July 17th. —There is a Carnegie Library here, which is very use-
ful when one is at a loose end. It has been interesting to-day to see
the English magazines, including dear old “ Punch,” in a number so
recent as 13th June. I feel quite near to England. But I have
far more excitement on the 21st, having secured a place in a Govern-
ment yacht, the “ Pioneer,” which is going on a twelve days’ trip
round the lighthouses. There will be fourteen or fifteen breaks in the
journey, which ought to yield a good deal of interest. I looked over
the vessel this morning, and find her a very jolly craft. Though full,
there will be only about twenty passengers, which will make it like a
family party. The yacht is very commodious and beautifully fitted
up, which will be understood when I say that it was built for an
English millionaire for his own use. But he never got hold of it,
as it was snapped up by the Imperial Government for war purposes
When I come to strut about the deck I must practise the airs of
a millionaire.
July 21 st. —A fear of paper shortage has saved home readers from
three days’ chat about nothing in particular. Fortunately, one cannot
renew Walker’s Loose Leaves in this remote place, so the “ hanging
round ” can be taken as read. I might, however, say that last night
1 went to a Samoan “ meke.” There is a colony of Samoans here,
and they keep up their distinctive customs. The folk songs were,
in the narrow compass, characteristic of native singing, but were
melodious. They were always accompanied by rhythm of move-
ment, mostly of the arms, for the greater part of the programme was
given whilst sitting cross-legged on the ground. In the dances, how-
ever, the paces quickened, until the native audience was worked up to
feverish excitement. Probably they were stirred by the theme, for
the dancers sang all the time. Hand clapping kept them together,
also the dull thuds from a pair of sticks, with which one proud,
excited fellow whacked a roll of matting. Amongst the women, one
favoured one displayed a gorgeous head-dress, beloved of the Samoans.
She was the best dancer, and, astonishing to relate, the head gear held
together in spite of the vigour of her evolutions.
But lam on His Majesty’s Colonial Ship “ Pioneer.” We have just
been taking soundings, for great care is necessary amongst the coral
reefs. And now we have pulled up opposite Naselai lighthouse, on
the reef surrounding the main island of Vitilevu. We cannot get


REEF AND PALMS.
Photo, by L. N. Anderson.
154


155
A CHIEF’S HOUSE , NAMOSI.


nearer than a couple of miles, but a ship’s boat has made one trip with
provisions, and now has to go again with a supply of water, which was
running short. lam sitting in my luxurious cabin, at a knee-hole
writing desk, with drawers down each side —an unheard of thing for a
cabin. I have never dreamt even of such a thing as the armchair in
which lam sitting. There are two berths, both lower ones on opposite
sides. The spaces under the berths are fitted with wide drawers.
There is a double-doored wardrobe, half of it fitted with shelves, and
the doors are each fitted, outside, with a full length mirror. There
is a mirror also above me at the secretaire, and another behind me at
the toilet stand. There are two portholes, three electric lights, and
sundry minor fittings, like pegs, shelves, and electric fan. But the
touch that makes it homely is the clock ! And the carpeted floor ! !
On inquiring the reason for the presence of a massive iron safe, I found
it was for the use of the Governor’s Aide-de-camp, so I am in the latter’s
stateroom. But the Governor and suite are not on board. Soon
after dark we reached Levuka, the old capital, on the Island of Ovalau.
There is a narrow ledge of shore, on which the town stands, and behind
that high hills rise abruptly. Here we anchored for the night.
July 22nd. —The walk on shore (at Levuka) revealed the usual
Pacific scenery, with coconut palms predominating. Apart from
nature, the feature was a grand war memorial. It struck one’s
imagination to find, in so remote a corner of the Empire, a structure
more imposing than many important memorials in England. It was
on a piece of rising ground, jutting out into the sea, and was approached
by two flights of stone steps, converging into a central flight, which
led to the platform, a spacious area, from the middle of which rose the
obelisk. At the four corners of a well-shaped concrete balustrade
was an electric light, and at those four lamps I had an interesting, if
solitary, half-hour, bottling moths and flies.
Before breakfast to-day there was amusement in watching young
sharks disporting themselves, training as future body snatchers ! But,
leaving them and Levuka at 8.30, we got under weigh for Savusavu,
on the island called Vanualevu. We passed a number of small
islands, and, as the day developed, we entered the ideal of sea conditions:
warm weather, with a pleasant breeze of the zephyr type, which pro-
duces no waves, but, under a brilliant sun, sets up millions of sparkles,
so that the water seems to be strewn with glittering diamonds.
Lazily watching these dancing points of light, disturbed by nothing
more than an occasional shoal of flying fish, one drops into a pleasant,
dreamy mood, the condition favourable to the casting of spells by


fairies. They seem to be dancing around the diamonds, and strange
transformations ensue. The gems are all dissolved, and the whole
mass of water becomes one molten sheen. From my seat I had no
human being in sight. A Fijian “ boy ” finds me from behind, bringing
the eleven o'clock cup of tea, and wakes me up to more vigorous scenes,
for, walking across to port, I find whales, or black fish, as the captain
called them. But they spout like whales, though I don't know that
whales can behave like these creatures, which jump out of the water,
and flop down so as to knock off their sucking parasites. Later on,
we come in sight of our island bourne, and, after rounding a point at
a respectable distance, owing to coral reefs, we enter the wide Savusavu
Bay, with scraps of islands dotted about, some of them big enough to
carry half a dozen palms. In landing, the men can jump ashore from
the ship’s boat, but the ladies are carried, and seem to like it ! After
sitting a while under a lemon tree, bottling midges, I followed a track
which led to hot springs. Here I was joined by two fellow passengers,
who offered to collect flies, and were much entertained when I handed
over to them my net and bottle. Before dusk, we all set off for a walk
through the country, and when the moon was up it became fascinating
as we picked our way through continuous groves. On returning to
the beach there was no native boat, so we shouted “ ship ahoy,” but
the “ Pioneer ” was too far out. So we walked round to a nearer point,
and, after more shouting, heard a boatswain’s whistle in response.
Soon a boat appeared, and, walking down a beach, which was very
hot (with the overflow from the springs), we mounted swarthy backs,
and were carried a good distance before reaching the boat.
July 23rd. —Soon after leaving Savusavu, we came into “ dirty ”
weather. We cannot expect an unbroken run of good luck. But
one learns things, even in such matters as the placing of a deck chair.
I was pitched out of mine this morning because it was lengthwise,
instead of athwart the vessel, and so easily rolled over. The yacht
is only 400 tons, so it cannot be as steady as the “ Balranald.” We
are making for an island called Taveuni, where, at Vuna Point, we have
to drop the Government Veterinary Surgeon, my cabin mate. It
is a run of forty-three miles out of our way; but, never mind, it adds
to the interest. The other laps have been Suva to Naselai, 26 miles;
Naselai to Levuka, 28 miles; and Levuka to Savusavu, 64 miles. So
they are easy stages, and passing so many islands we are never out of
sight of land. Of course, I must land at Vuna Point, though the rowing
boat won't stand still. It is lifted up by the waves and dropped again,
and in stepping oil the gangway one has to match watchfulness with


nimbleness. I get only one leg in the water, but the other secures
safely, and it all adds to the fun. A half hour is the extent of our stay,
sufficient to show that this beach yields many types of the pretty shells
one sees in shop windows. On returning, the chief officer says it is too
rough to board from the weather side, so we come under the lee, and
clamber up the best way we can, with a foot in a porthole, and so on.
Our next stage (42 miles) brings us to the Island of Koro, which
we reach at dusk. There is nothing here but a lighthouse and a hut.
It is entirely a native island, and we only visit one point on it for the
purpose of lighthouse inspection. It is a weird experience clambering
up a zig-zag path in the dark. After attaining a considerable height
we come to the foot of a tall lighthouse. We are the second party, and
the official visit is over, but we venture to open the door. There is a
hand over hand iron ladder just discernible in the dark. The elderly
lady of the party declines it, but the elderly gentleman grips the perpen-
dicular and mounts sixty steps, twelve inches apart, till he comes
through a trap door into light. I thought there would be a good catch
of flies or moths, but there was no sign of a single specimen. It was
either too high or too windy. I got on to the outside gallery and
walked round the dome several times, but without result; though, of
course, it was immensely interesting to be right up against the huge
revolving mass of plate glass hoops, intricately arranged to serve the
law of optics. Like the landing, our return to the boat was by pick-a-
back; most of the islands having no more facilities than Captain Cook
found on his first visit.
July 24th. —Only once in our twelve day trip, I understand, do we
travel at night. The captain is a very cautious man, and is naturally
afraid of reefs and patches. He tells me that he has to trust to local
knowledge, the Admiralty chart being at times unreliable. But, having
a stretch of open sea, our longest stage (84 miles), from Koro, was
taken last night, and to-day we find ourselves at the Island of Cicia.
This is our first island in the Lau Group, but as there is no anchorage,
we do not stay longer than is necessary to pick up a lady with three
children and a native nurse, after landing some cargo. For the new-
comers I give up my cabin-de-luxe, which I had to myself for one night,
but I have another, a single-berth one, which is very comfortable. Our
next call, twenty-three miles north of Cicia, is Mago (Mango), where
the colours in the lagoon showed up beautifully in the midday sun.
Then, still north, another twenty-one miles, and we come to Nabavatu
for the night’s anchorage. This is the name of a station belonging to
a coconut planter. It is on the northern horn of a crescent-shaped


island called Vanuabalavu, largest of the Lau Group, and the most
beautiful we have yet seen. Like all the islands out here, there is a
coral reef a mile or two miles from the shore. Finding a gap, we get
inside, and follow the long crescent coast, with continually repeated
peeps at tiny sandy beaches and pretty little inlets, all flanked with
graceful palms, which flourish right down to the edge of the high water
line. All around us, and underneath us, is a natural picture in water
colours, a lively picture, in which turquoise and emerald, each with
an attendant train of varying shades, move to one another under
sportive zephyrs, softening human hearts, the while their own sun-
kissed ripples melt into each other. And those humans, borne by a
millionaire’s yacht along these enchanted waters to those Isles of Bliss,
feel it good to be “in the picture," a picture which almost encircles
them, for the upper and nether tips of a deeply scooped crescent are
nearly linked by islets in the haze of a far horizon. And right through
the picture runs a curved line of pure white foam, marking the barrier
reef, against which the waters of trouble beat in vain; are, in fact,
but converted into a beauteous set-off to a peaceful scene. Here
surely, is a habitat for some Paul and Virginia to repeat the story of
a natural life, youth clothed only in innocence, growing into union,
with nature and with each other. Here is a living with but little
emphasis on the getting, for the land yields food in abundance, with
scarcely any cultivation, and the harvest of the sea can be gathered
in mere play. In this way, indeed, the natives live, though the “ drive "
of civilisation has begun in this paradise of Vanuabalavu, for there are
four whites on the island: a planter, a doctor, a district commissioner,
and a storekeeper. Arriving at Nabavatu, we find a charming little
bay, surrounded by high, peaked hills, which seem to play at being
mountains. We, too, play at pick-a-back through the water, and
thus reach shore. Following a mere suspicion of a path, we rise up
and up until we come to the only house on all this end of the island:
an island large enough to require a day to steam round it. Here, in a
delightful situation overlooking the bay across the grassy slopes in front
of the house, the bachelor-planter entertained us to afternoon tea, in a
lounge room which was nearly all windows. We then roamed about
at wall, and some of us found, on the other side of the island, which is
quite narrow here, a specially fine view—a bay of islands which spread
out before us like a school-boy’s map, in which the shires are delineated
in coloured chalks. But it gets dark by six o’clock, so we have to
repair to the “ Pioneer ” for dinner, along a way which suggests but
another trail of the serpent in Eden. The day closed with some excite-


158
PREPARING FOR A NATIVE FEAST.


159
NATIVE CHILDREN, NAMOSI


ment in the news of a dismasted schooner lying in trouble round the
corner of the island, and table talk ran on salvage and rescue work.
July 25th. —This morning broke serene and calm, and our position
is just ideal for the enjoyment of serenity. A boat put off early
to fetch fresh milk for our baby passenger, and brought back the
plantation owner to join us at breakfast. We are in no hurry to move
on, the schooner being safe for the time being, so we are rowed and
carried ashore, where we watch out for turtles, said to be abundant,
and, failing them, find amusement in the antics of hermit crabs. There
is time for a walk, so I crept up to the lookout over the Bay of Islands
and took a snapshot, while some others were lying about on the lawn.
The day wore on to noon before we weighed anchor and set out for the
other side of Vanuabalavu. The channels are marked only in a primi-
tive way by sticks, some carrying a kerosene tin, but we have on board
the owner of Naitaba Island (twenty miles off) and with his local
knowledge the captain feels his way round the coast whilst some of us
are engrossed with the coloured jelly fish, shoals of which we pass
through, just below the surface of the sea. By two o’clock we are at
Lomaloma, a large native village, and the afternoon is spent amongst
people and scenes still untouched by the veneer of civilisation. One
cannot get this view of things in a town like Suva. For instance, I
could not have been discovered in Suva, as I was (quite unaware) at
Lomaloma, sitting on a log with a beautiful native girl, the belle of
the village. The elderly lady who came upon us thus had observed
us looking straight into each other’s eyes, pointing at each other in a
mysterious way, and further, had noticed that I held the girl’s arm
in both hands. It looked a mimic show, similar to shadows on a
blind. But my elderly fellow passenger seemed to understand when
she found the girl was pretty as well as sweet and twenty. What
happened was that I sat down to attract mosquitoes and was popping
a killing bottle over them as they settled on leg or arm. This action,
so strange to a native, attracted something finer than an insect, for
through the trees came a dark-hued woodland nymph, to whom I
explained by dumb show what I was doing. She sat down artlessly
beside me and watched the proceedings. Soon she was helping by
pointing out the quarry and once held up her bare arm which I held in
one hand whilst the other manipulated the bottle. Of course I had to hold
it some time whilst the mosquito was being settled. Afterwards I was
myself attacked in the forehead, so, handing the bottle to the beauty, she
deftly covered the creature and held on for quite a nice long time. Yes, I
can imagine that these actions would look strange to a distant observer.


The rest of the afternoon was spent roaming about “ on my own ”
away from the landing party. Having secured a bag of lollies from
the only store on the island, I had an escort of kiddies wherever I went.
The features of the country were similar to those in other places des-
cribed, including what I have not mentioned before, an enormous
number of holes in the ground made by land crabs. At night, a
number of our party landed again, and we visited some of the huts,
squatting on the ground with the occupiers who thronged in. Some
accepted the proffered Kava, but my fancy did not run that way. At
last, in one large hut, we prevailed on the natives to sing, and when
wound up it was an hour before they could stop themselves. After
all this, I think I might say “ and so to bed,” only what about that
schooner without a mast. Well, she had been towed in by a launch
before we came up, and here she lies in harbour not far from the
“ Pioneer.”
July 26th. —Again a fine morning broke out at six o’clock and up
came our anchor. Reversing our passage along the coast, we covered
practically the same fourteen miles back to Nabavatu, where we dropped
the planter who had come with us to Lomaloma. Such few whites as
are found in these outlying islands take these infrequent and only oppor-
tunities of moving from point to point. We have picked up and
dropped in this way various officials, lighthouse-keepers, traders, and
planters, as well as Fijians. There are only three principal men pas-
sengers doing the whole round trip and they are known as the Treasurer,
the Major, and the Professor; the latter a courtesy title, his only claim
to which lies in being the father of three professors and the owner
of a net and killing bottle. “ Now Professor,” says the Major as an
ordinary introduction to some topic of conversation. “ Where’s the
Professor ? ” says the Captain as a large moth settles in the saloon. We
are indeed so few, even including the ladies, that the saloon has
become the home of a family party.
But we must get on to Naitaba, our next island, thirty-four miles
north-west of Lomaloma. In approaching it, we pass through a lagoon
of the same ravishing colours as are seen so often in these waters.
Whilst rowing ashore I was delighted to see a turtle crossing our bows
and swimming away at a great rate just under the surface of the water,
I fancy a hare would find in a turtle a keener competitor for a race than
in a tortoise. And certainly lam more doubtful than ever of the
Louis de Rougemont trick of riding on the back of one. Well, we
landed in some excitement owing to rough seas, one of the party (the
purser) being rolled ashore by the waves into which he had fallen prone.


The whole island of 3,000 acres belongs to a planter, who came aboard
at one of the calls and is leaving us here. We took morning tea on his
lawn, surrounded by tropical vegetation, and then indulged ourselves
in the delightful way I have called “ roaming round." “As ithers see
us ” would reveal a staid old paterfamilias from Hitchin standing under
a high uplifted tuft of swaying palm leaves, his eyes upturned to the
palm-shaped sun, whilst with two hands he holds to his lips a huge
green coconut from which he is taking a long deep draught of cool
refreshing water, not clouded with milkiness, but clear and sweet. The
end of the nut had been opened with three sharp blows from a long
knife by a native with enormous knees, evidently a case of elephanti-
asis. After this, I came to another sight familiar in most of the islands,
long tables covered with a spread-out layer of coconut cut in sections,
just as it comes from the shell. When dried, it becomes the article
of commerce known as “ copra," the chief product of the Pacific. This
copra is the source of glycerine as well as other by-products useful to
man. A ramble along the beach brought me to a cage containing
two fine turtles, recently captured. Here they could be reached and
refreshed by high tide whilst awaiting their final fate.
We have to regain the “ Pioneer " by one o'clock, and as our
ocean home is outside the reef, we find a way as best we can. As we
near the rolling surf the ladies scream —and cling, how tenaciously I
can judge by a bruise on my knee. Of course we got through. If
people would remember that they always do come through it would
be better for their nerves. Throughout life, long or short, it can only
be once—once only !—that we don't pull through.
Whilst plowing our way to the next call, I found an interest in the
“ wireless" room, where the operator provided me with a pair of
listeners (a spare set) and I imagined all sorts of things in the tap,
tap, tap, tap-a-tap that came along other, and I suppose, quieter waves
than those which rise and fall below our keel.
And now in the early afternoon we make another landing, this
time at Wailagilala, twenty-three miles north-east of Naitaba. This
is the island we saw only in the distance on the “ Tofua " and which
attracted us by the shimmering greens and blues of its waters. I had
no idea then I should actually set foot on it, but it has turned out quite
as beautiful as it looked. It is, however, very small, the whole island
being under view from the top of the lighthouse, which was reached
by a spiral of eighty-one deep steps. The only inhabitants are con-
nected with the lighthouse service—a white man with his wife, and two
Indian keepers. The keeper's wife we brought back with us after


her holiday taken in relief of ennui. The keeping of fowls and pigs
seemed to be the only variation from trimming the lamp, though there
were wild creatures which might claim attention, for I saw a flying
fox (dead) nailed with wide outstretched wings against a shed. Then
there would be fishing, at which I hope the inhabitants are more suc-
cessful than some of our party who tried their luck on the island.
They did indeed hook a fine fish, but just as they were landing it up
came a shark and snapped it off the line, which brought to shore a
fish’s head ! I might say here that we have been kept supplied with
fresh fish from the deck of the “ Pioneer ” where I saw landed a rock
cod which turned the scale at 28 lb. But this was only one of several
triumphs.
From Wailagilala we turn back on our course and at daylight on
the 27th we shape for Udu Point, a run of sixty-seven miles north-
west. (Amongst the home folk I wonder who do pronounce this name
right. To the one producing the best nasal twang on the “d”I should
say “ you do.”) Udu Point is on the extreme north-east of Vanua-
levu the second largest island in Fiji. It is the turning point of a very
large bay which has never been charted. We stood out six miles from
the Point, so had to let down our tiny motor launch which took the
life-boat in tow, and off we went on a somewhat adventurous journey.
I was in the launch with the Captain and Chief Engineer and could see
the intricate threadings by which we wound our way in and out and
around a continuous stretch of patches covered by a few inches of
water and scarcely discernible till we approached them. Only twice
we bumped, but the Captain swore more times than that. What I
enjoyed was the extended opportunity of looking into the clear sea-
water, noticing the coral formation at the bottom and watching the
movements of the marine inhabitants. Also, on lifting one’s eyes,
there was the usual feast of colour stretching away for miles and
seeming alive as the water moved bodily under the shining sun. On
the way we came upon a sailing boat which hove to and furled its sail
whilst we manoeuvred to take it in tow, for it contained the lighthouse
keeper who, not knowing when to expect us, had set out for another
point on the coast. When at last we landed there was not much to
do for those without business there, but a fine view was obtained from
a little hill. One small incident I shall remember. Plucking a green
chilli from a bush I was passing, I put it between my teeth, and just
cautiously bit through one end of it. lam glad I did no more than
that, for the red chillis from an English grocer’s shop are mere diluted
mildness compared with the hot stuff straight from the tree. It was


some minutes before I conquered the throat cough set up by the
irritation. With better results, we gathered up a quantity of fallen
green coconuts, and threw them into the boat, so on the long return
journey our Fijian crew were kept busy breaking up the nuts which
the passengers both drank and ate. In the evening, the Captain
brought the shock-headed darkies on deck, where, squatting in two
lines facing each other, they entertained us with songs in both English
and Fijian. A full moon was shining down on us, revealing a distant
coast, a nearer thin white line of surf, and the broad ocean. " And
this is the Pacific ” said C.L.E. to himself, from the floor of the deck
with chin resting on clasped knees, “ and these the South Sea Islands.
July 2 8th. —A short run of eighteen miles brought us this morning
to an island called Rabi. Here there was no mail to take up or deliver,
nor passengers to land or board —and this notwithstanding that the
place is visited only five or six times a year. So we were soon away,
and in another sixteen miles touched mainland again at Buca Bay.
This w T as quite a lovely spot with fine commanding hills round a more
than crescent inlet, the entrance to which was guarded by a beautiful
island of considerable size, causing two channels, one on each side of
it, and these were the only means of ingress or egress. We had an
interesting couple of hours here, during which morning tea was served
to us by the only family of white folk, in accordance with the hospi-
tality which seems to be the vogue where the meeting of fellow
countrymen is scarce. I noticed how fine many of the palms were, with
great clusters of big fruit reachable by a ladder. I think these would be
young trees, for in time they all no doubt lift up their feathery crowns
on those tall bare stilts which are so characteristic of the region.
Still moving on, we cross the fifteen miles of sea that separate
Vanualevu from Taveuni, one of the important islands of Fiji, and
touch shore at Mua, where we pick up more passengers. Then,
keeping along the coast another seven miles we arrive at Waiyevo and
anchor for the night. And perhaps I had better pull myself up too, for
at the seventeenth port, or rather place of call, it is time I left the
“ doings ” to be taken as read by the imagination.
July 29th. —One more call in fertile Taveuni, at Vuna Point,
touched at before on the outward journey, and then we strike straight
across to Savusavu, forty-three miles away. We are now doubling
back on our tracks. Arriving at four o'clock, I spent the time before
dinner in a quiet lonely stroll.
At daylight on the 30th, we set out for a seventy-seven-mile voyage
to Levuka, through rough seas, which account for the spell of quiet


ness which has fallen on board. On the 31st, we make for Wakaya,
only twelve or fifteen miles out from Levuka. This is a beautiful
island with noticeably beautiful waters in its lagoon. The Govern-
ment wants to sell it, and the Treasurer of the Colony has offered it to
me for £15,000. I have gone into the matter fully, making careful
inquiries as to land tax and native rights, and behaving generally
more like a millionaire than many real ones. My earliest recollection
reached back to babyhood when I remember sitting on a floor playing
with buttons. And now here is the baby’s image with the same
inbred characteristics, only reclining on a lounge chair swinging on the
bosom of an expansive ocean and playing with Pacific Islands. The
two aspects show a distinction without a difference. I did not
pocket the buttons, which loomed into life before pocket age, and I
have not annexed Wakaya, which comes on the scene at a time when
for me the pocket nexus has been and gone. But what matters. Play
on, Macduff!
But there is more serious play by the Captain and Mate who have
rowed to the lighthouse on the reef. There they had such a bumping
and straining that some of the boat’s timbers are smashed. We
therefore hark back to Levuka and anchor in harbour for the night,
leaving the last stage of our journey for another day and another month.
August ls£.—We have now pulled out from our last call, the only
one of the score that is just a wee bit “ towny.” At anyrate, our
departure was less romantic than from yesterday’s island, where the
caretaker’s daughter stood by the beach as we were going pick-a-back
to our rowing boat. And as we pulled away from the unhampered
crescent shore there in the middle of it stood the feminine figure, and
by her side a graceful fawn. It had been captured from the herd of
deer (which are thrown in with the island for the £15,000) and it follows
her everywhere like the lamb and the classical Mary. Well, well, how
one does digress. I was saying that we draw off from the town of
Levuka in a matter of fact way. And, as a matter of fact, all nonsense
was soon knocked out of everyone of us, for we ran into heavy weather.
However, the round trip has been safely accomplished and we
are " home ” again in Suva. It has been a fine opportunity of visiting
places of interest not accessible in an ordinary way. The “ Pioneer ”
is a Government yacht, intended primarily for official business, but
a few passengers and a limited cargo are admitted. Though the dis-
tance has not been great (a little under 800 miles) it has spread over
twelve days and has furnished a variety of incident new to a European,
right up to the last, when, to-day for instance, there was an extra


ordinary number of flying fish. This time they came up out of the
water singly and continued such long flights that they deceived one
into the thought that they were birds.
August 6th. —l am passing over days that are settling down into
ordinary normal Fijian life. And to-day, being August Bank Holiday,
to take an excursion seems the ordinary thing to do by English as well
as local standards. The difference is that here we are not jostled in
crowds, and, more extraordinary difference, railway travelling is
FREE !! ! There is perhaps no other country in the world having
a similar privilege. And yet the railways are not State owned, they
have been built by the Colonial Sugar Refining Company (commonly
known as the C.S.R.) the largest corporation in the Colony. But it
was not a railway excursion that I took to-day, for the railways do not
come in to the Capital, they are all on the other side of the island. It
was by ferry boat that a party from the hotel reached Nukulau, an
island about an hour’s steam away. It is used, when required, as a
quarantine station, but when not thus in use it is opened to picnic
parties. A sandy beach runs round it and tropical vegetation runs
over it. We had lunch under a tamarind tree, the time for which was
announced by the usual Fijian drum. A man played a tattoo on it with
two clubs, and then gave twelve hearty strokes which boomed the arrival
of midday. Except for walking twice round the island, it was a time
for lazy sprawling with nothing more important at hand than countering
the movement of a land crab. It was amusing to see him push his eyes
out from his head for a quarter inch when taking stock of his position.
On the journey back to Suva we sighted Beqa (Mbenga) where
the “ fire-walkers ” live. They are a tribe, and the only tribe, who
practice walking barefoot on bricks or stones heated by fire to the highest
temperature they will take.
August Sth. —And now I am coming to the eve of departure from
a country which with its interesting seas stretches for hundreds of
miles N. & S. and E. & W. but which to English eyes occupies a
microscopic position on the map of the world. One sets out from
home with a mental conception vaguely defined, but covered by one
phrase—South Sea Islands. As they come into nearer vision, they
fall into well marked groups: Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, &c., each palpitating
with its own separate national life, something beyond a mere map
reality. Then, coming to closer quarters with one selected group,
say Fiji, one finds further differentiation in its couple of hundred islands,
and an amazing interest in particularising its magnificent flora, its
wonderful fauna, and its strange ethnology. It is a great play


ground for hobbies or sport or science, especially the latter, for the
naturalist would find here a practically unworked field.
But in exploring holes and corners in unknown Fiji, which was
not regarded as having anything so interesting as holes and corners
beneath an unmeaning map name, I have lost my own particular iden-
tity. I started from home, I thought, an Englishman. Away on the
journey I became British. When well over “ the line ” I was smoothed
out into a European, and now here in Fiji lam simply “ a white.” The
tables are turned, and to Melanesians and Polynesians it is England
that is a spot on the map, a microcosm of another world, in which its
strutting pride has to be content to walk as only one with others under
the general name of “ whites.”
With regard to this division of the human race it seems to me that
the one is of interest to the other, but in character they will remain apart.
The Fijian as a type does not enter into work for work’s sake. He is
content that an hour’s work a day will suffice to earn all his wants, and
with no need for money himself he cannot understand the " drive ” of
whites. It will be long before he rises above the “ bread alone ”
existence more than the one step in aesthetic culture—singing and
dancing. On the other hand, perhaps the white can learn from the
black a needed lesson in reposeful quietude, a lesson which, according
to Lord Northcliffe's spook reporter, came to him too late. And one
of the best ways of learning the lesson is to take a holiday in Fiji, which
is only a month from Europe.


FIJI DEFENCE FORCE.
Fijian Platoon and Native Military Band.
166


NUKUTUBU BAY, WA KAYA ISLAND.
It was in this hay that Graf von Luckner, of the German
raider “ Seeadler,” was captured on 21 st September, 1917.
167


XLVI. FIJIS CONTRIBUTION TO THE GREAT WAR.
FIJI lost no time in answering to the call sent out in 1914 to every
part of the Empire on the outbreak of war. At first it was
considered that the Colony could best assist the Homeland by
making contributions in money to the various war funds, and by making
every attempt to guard her own door-step against the probabilities of
foreign invasion—for this gateway of the Southern Pacific is a place of
undoubted strategic importance. Suva is one of the landing places
of the Pacific Cable which connects the Dominions of Canada, Australia
and New Zealand with the United Kingdom and any interruption in
this link at the beginning of the war might have had serious consequences.
But the preparations made to guard the Port of Suva were never put
to the test, and latterly Fiji was well protected by the Australian Naval
Squadron and the warships of our ally Japan.
On the sth of September, 1914, the Governor of the Colony, Sir
Bickham Escott, K.C.M.G., invited the colonists to subscribe to the
fund then being raised by His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales,
“ for the relief of persons in the British Isles who were dependents of
men at the Front, and of those who suffered from unemployment
caused by interruption and dislocation of trade and industry, or were
otherwise plunged into poverty and distress in consequence of war."
Within a little over a month a sum of close on £6,000 was voluntarily
raised and despatched to London as a first contribution to the fund.
During the same month Lady Escott made an appeal to the women
of Fiji to assist by making warm garments, against the incoming winter,
for the comfort of the men at the Front. This appeal touched the heart
of every woman in Fiji, and as a result many shipments of warm clothing
and knitted garments were sent away from time to time. It is pleasing
to record that many native Fijian women of rank, both by labour and
money contributions, materially assisted in this good work.
Following the lead of several of the West Indian Colonies and the
Falkland Islands, the Legislative Council, on the 12th November, 1914,
voted £lO,OOO from the accumulated surplus balances of the Colony as
a contribution to the Prince of Wales’ Fund.
But Fiji was not satisfied with the passive teaching that “ they also
serve who only stand and wait," and shortly after the declaration of war
young men started to leave Fiji, some to go to Australia and New
Zealand for enlistment in the Expeditionary Forces that were being
raised in those Dominions, and some direct to the Mother Country
to join the Colours there.


This call for active participation in the war found voice in speeches
in the Legislative Council, where it was strenuously advocated that the
Colony should raise and equip a force of picked men for active service
at the Front, and a resolution that the Governor be requested to obtain
the permission of the Secretary of State for the Colonies to raise such
a force was unanimously agreed to. The Secretary of State for the
Colonies gave his consent and a first contingent of 56 men (exclusive
of the officer in charge) left Fiji on the 31st December, 1914, and
enlisted in England on the Ist February 1915. Further contingents
and reinforcements were regularly sent, also a corps of transport
workers composed of 101 native Fijians and 7 Europeans.
The total number of men known to have left Fiji for the purpose
of taking part in the war, including the contingents and reinforcements
was 788, made up as follows:
First Contingent 57
Second Contingent 64
Third Contingent 61
First Reinforcements 20
Second Reinforcements 20
Third Reinforcements 28
Fijian Transport Corps 108
Enlisted in England 100
Enlisted in Australia 210
Enlisted in New Zealand 120
Of these 131 are known to have been killed in action, or to have died
of wounds or from other causes. Over a hundred received Commissions
and 34 received decorations, which included the D. 5.0., M.C., D.F.C.,
D.C.M., M.S.M. and M.M. These volunteers from Fiji were engaged
in practically every theatre of the war from Mesopotamia to the North
Sea, and also in the African Campaign.
The Colony also sent out two Nursing Sisters, one of whom served
in hospitals in England and France, and the other was attached to the
West Middlesex Hospital.
Of the local incidents and episodes of the war none perhaps con-
tained greater dangers for the lines of communication in the Pacific,
and none certainly had a more dramatic ending, than the appearance
and capture of Von Luckner, the Commander of the German raider
“ Seeadler,” in Fijian waters. The “ Seeadler,” after having been
hounded out of the Atlantic, rounded the Horn to prey upon Allied
shipping in the Pacific. In this object she was only partially success-
ful. She was then beginning to feel the effects of many continuous
months on the High Seas, and soon after entering the Southern Pacific it
became clear that the vessel was in dire need of cleaning, if she was
to maintain the speed necessary in a raider.
Von Luckner made for an isolated, uninhabited island in the Society
Group; he reached his destination, but there fortune deserted him, for
the “ Seeadler ” was driven on the reef by a storm. The ship s company


and prisoners (of whom there were several) made a camp on the island.
The ammunition, stores, &c., were salved, a dynamo was taken ashore
in sections and a wireless apparatus erected. Von Luckner, finding his
position desperate, determined upon the daring course of making Fiji
in an open motor boat with a handful of chosen men, leaving one of his
lieutenants in charge of the camp. Armed with bombs and a machine
gun, he doubtless calculated that one of the vessels trading to Fiji would
fall an easy victim to his frail but well-armed craft. After a trying and
dangerous passage he reached Wakaya, an island lying nine miles north-
east of Levuka. Here he found two trading cutters sheltering on
account of stress of weather. The captain of one of the craft, by a ruse,
succeeded in getting away and, in spite of the gale then raging, made
full sail for Levuka and reported the presence of the German launch.
The “ Amra,” of 500 tons, then trading in the islands, was at once
commissioned to go in pursuit. This vessel was fitted as a cattle
carrier: forward of the bridge were rows of cattle-pens, and amidships
were large square port-holes for the ventilation of the cattle below.
These peaceful fittings were the “Amra’s ” salvation, for, as she entered
the bay at Wakaya, the weary German sea-rovers assumed that the cattle-
pens were lines of gun emplacements and the large port-holes concealed
artillery. Resistance against such odds seemed worse than folly. And so
Von Luckner, of Jutland and many other sea fights, surrendered his men
and himself, his bombs and machine gun, to a posse of local police.
Among other things captured was a diary kept by one of the party,
which gives a graphic account of the hardships and privations these
hardy sea-raiders endured. Huddled together in an open boat, but
26 feet over-all and 7 feet in the beam, they travelled over 2,000 miles
of open sea and were often in desperate straits; but for their undoubted
courage and powers of physical endurance, it is unlikely they would
have ever reached Wakaya.
The cost of raising, equipping and transporting the First and Second
Contingents and the First Reinforcements was borne by the Govern-
ment. All expenses in respect of the Second Reinforcements were
defrayed by Messrs. Morris, Hedstrom Limited, who, in addition, pre-
sented a fully-equipped motor ambulance for the use of the Red Cross
workers. An anonymous donor contributed the funds to cover all
costs in connection with the Third Contingent and the Third Rein-
forcements, and Mr. Henry Marks, C.8.E., on behalf of himself and his
Company, guaranteed up to £IO,OOO to meet the expenses of equipping
and transporting the Fijian Labour Corps and of providing separation
allowances for their dependents.


British Red Cross Society
Prince of Wales’ National Relief Fund (including £10,000 voted
£64,609
by Legislative Council)
Fiji Day Fund: To alleviate the sufferings of the sick and wounded
men of the Fiji Contingents, to afford relief to those disabled,
23,055
and to the dependents of those who lost their lives
Fiji Contingent Fund: To assist in meeting the cost of the deferred
16,385
pay of members of the Fiji Contingents
9,010
Lord kitchener Memorial Fund
3,291
King George’s Fund for Sailors
1,061
Purchase of Aeroplane
Other Funds:—Indian Wounded, £1,385; Australia Day Fund,
£509; Belgian Relief Fund, £343; Belgian Self Denial Fund,
£296; Fund in Aid of Widows and Orphans of British Seamen
1,500
lost in naval battle, 31st May, 1916, £171; total
Expenses of equipping, transporting and maintaining Contingents
2,704
and Reinforcements borne by the Government
40,000
War Loan subscribed in the Colony
439,162
£600,777
The native Fijians subscribed most generously to all the war funds.
The two native members of the Legislative Council volunteered to raise
a fighting force from among their countrymen, but, for many reasons,
this offer had reluctantly to be declined. The natives of the province
of Rewa purchased an aeroplane for the use of the Royal Flying Corps,
while the provinces of Lau and Lomaiviti purchased three motor
ambulances for the British Red Cross Society and subscribed periodic-
ally for their maintenance. The province of Cakaudrove also provided
funds to purchase, equip, and maintain a cot at the Star and Garter
Home for disabled soldiers and sailors, recently handed over to Her
Majesty the Queen. These are but examples: native Fijians in all parts
of the Colony co-operated loyally in the various schemes inaugurated
for raising funds, and one province alone subscribed close on £lO,OOO.
The contributions made by the Colony, exclusive of the cost borne
by private persons or companies for equipping and transporting con-
tingents and native labour corps, were as follows: —
The work of the local branch of the British Red Cross Society calls
for special mention. The unceasing efforts throughout the whole period
of the war of Lady (then Mrs.) Hutson, the local President, and her
assistants, not only in raising funds but in making clothing and com-
forts of all kinds for the war hospitals, received the special commenda-
tion of the London Headquarters of the Red Cross Society.
The Colony is also under a special debt of gratitude to Sir Everard
im Thurn, K.C.M.G., K.8.E., C. 8., a former Governor, who unsparingly
devoted much of his time to work in connection with the members of the
Fiji Contingents, and all others who left the Colony, whether as members
of the Expeditionary Forces sent out by Australia and New Zealand.


or as independent volunteers for the Front. Many of these men were
entire strangers in England, and in Sir Everard im Thurn they found a
very sympathetic friend who kept in touch with them wherever they
were quartered. For his services in connection with the war he was
created a Knight of the Order of the British Empire.


XLVII. ROTUMA : A DEPENDENCY OF FIJI.
ROTUMA is the name of the principal island of a small group
about 220 miles to the N.N.W. of the northern sea reef of the
Fiji Group, lying in Latitude 12° 27' 18" South and Longi-
tude 177° 7' 34" East. It is about 1\ miles long and has a width of
from a couple of hundred yards at the isthmus at Motusa up to nearly
3J miles. It is mountainous and rugged, with fine sandy beaches
covered with coconuts. Lying some four miles to the north of the
western end is the island of Uea, rising to the height of 860 feet. To
the west of Uea lie two islets, one of which deserves particular notice.
From its singular formation it has been called Split Island; at is as if
a violent convulsion had rent the island in two, and it looks as clearly
divided as if it had been separated by an axe; and when the island
opened, it appears as though its rocky summit toppled into the chasm,
preventing its closing again; for there it remains midway. In calm
weather a small boat can be taken through the passage. This island
is uninhabited and is the home of large numbers of sea-birds who use
it continually as a breeding ground. The birds are so curious and
tame that they will fly within very easy shot of the boats which occa-
sionally visit this island. The out-lying islands are very difficult to
land on, though Rotuma, which is almost entirely surrounded by a reef,
has several small boat passages. Everything larger than a pulling
boat or small launch must anchor outside the reef. Owing to the
south-east “ trades," which blow steadily from about April to October,
vessels anchor on the northern side of the island where they may lie
safely. But during the remaining months, sudden heavy squalls from
the north-west are likely to render these anchorages dangerous except
for vessels under power.
From the sea Rotuma has the appearance of being two islands,
and on close inspection this would appear to have been originally the
case; the two islands being gradually joined first by a coral reef and
on top of that by a bank of sand on which now stands the village of
Motusa.
The group is of volcanic formation. There are several extinct
craters on the main land, the soil of which is composed largely of scoria
and volcanic ash, the latter being also the principal constituent of the
islets on the surrounding reef. Volcanic activity must have long ago
ceased, as there are no legends or other records of any such phenomenon
taking place nor do there appear to be any hot springs. Earthquakes
are seldom if ever experienced.


It is probably owing to the large quantity of boulders, et cetera,
thrown out by the volcanoes that there are no surface streams on the
island, for the rainfall is considerable. From appearances on the sea-
shore at low tide it would seem that the rain sinks through the loose
soil and boulders until it reaches the original surface of the island and
then flows underground to the sea where it percolates through the sand
and coral. With its groves of palms extending from a white sandy
shore back to the lower slopes of the rugged, tree-clad hills, Rotuma
is perhaps one of the most beautiful of the Pacific islands. It is
healthy and extremely fertile.
In August, 1791, Captain Edwards, on the “ Pandora ” frigate,
discovered Rotuma and named it " Grenville Island.” In September,
1797, it was visited by Captain Wilson of the Missionary Ship “ Duff ”;
but it was not until the Ist May, 1824, when M. Duperrey, in the
" Coquille,” visited the island, that any attempt seems to have been
made to record a description of the island and the habits and customs
of the people. When M. Duperrey approached the island he was visited
by several canoes full of natives, amongst whom were four English
sailors, deserters from the “ Rochester.” One of these sailors (William
John, of Northumberland, a cooper by trade) appears to have been an
observant man and of some education. Having grown tired of his
life on the island he was granted a passage, and it was he who supplied
a very interesting account of the manners and customs of the natives
at that time.
The King, or Sau, used to be elected at regular intervals, and it
appears that on one occasion, previous to the arrival of the sailors
from the ” Rochester,” this title was conferred on an African negro,
a convict who escaped from New South Wales on the brig “ Macquarie.”
Although Rotuma was only discovered in 1791 it would appear
that it very soon became a favourite resort for convicts and run-away
sailors, for in 1871 there was on the island a European who had landed
there from a whaling ship over forty years previously, and who states
that, at the time of his arrival, there were over seventy Europeans on
the island, all, with scarcely an exception, run-away convicts. But as
the result of fights amongst themselves and with the natives there was
not one who escaped a violent death.
The next to visit Rotuma was Captain Dillon, on the Ist October,
1827, shortly before he went in search of La Perouse. In May, 1828,
M. L. de Tromelin called at the island. On the 21st July, 1841, the
island was visited by George Lucette, who also wrote an interesting
account of the inhabitants.


About this time religious bodies began to interest themselves in
the South Sea Islands, and the Roman Catholics and Wesleyans both
started missions on the island. Later a series of wars broke out
between the adherents of the respective missions, and it was partly
in order to put a stop to these that the Chiefs, at the end of 1879, visited
Fiji and approached the Governor, Sir Arthur Gordon, with an offer
to cede the island to Great Britain. The offer was finally accepted
and Rotuma was annexed on the 13th May, 1881.
From the earliest time the natives have been noted for their peace-
able nature and hospitality to strangers. By the early voyagers they
are described as belonging to the Polynesian race in all its purity, and
bearing a striking resemblance to the Tahitians. By their organisa-
tion and language they were considered as belonging to the same race
as the Maoris. They have, however, no history or legend in any way
indicating their origin, beyond the fact that they have at times claimed
to be of the same race as the natives of Niouha. They undoubtedly
had knowledge of many islands in their neighbourhood before they
were visited by Europeans, and used to visit Fiji, Tonga, the Gilbert
and Ellice Islands, and the New Hebrides.
On 2nd December, 1829, a Chief of the Sandwich Islands set sail
for the New Hebrides to establish a colony. On his way he called in
at Rotuma and took away with him as settlers one hundred and eighty
of the natives. At an early date Rotumans were much sought after
as crews of vessels trading in the Pacific, and later were in great demand
as pearl-divers in the Torres Straits. They became great travellers, in
fact it became necessary to make regulations to prevent a too rapid
exodus, and to-day Rotumans may be found settled in England, Italy,
America, and other distant lands.
The only industry of any importance was mat making. These
finely-plaited mats took years to make and were valued in other
islands much as an Indian shawl is valued in Europe. Mats are still
made, although perhaps not in such numbers, and are much sought
after by Europeans as well as natives.
The Rotuman population is approximately 2,000, and has remained
at about this figure for some years. According to old accounts it was
originally from 3,000 to 5,000; but these figures are only an estimate
and it is probable that the population was never very much greater
than it is to-day.
The staple industry is copra. In former days copra traders used
to visit the island, and many of them settled on it. Each trader was
required to take out a licence from the local chief and also pay him


six shillings per ton export duty. This of course ceased at the annexa-
tion, and trading is now subject to the same laws as prevail in Fiji.
About 1,500 tons of copra are exported per annum, but this by no means
represents the crop of nuts, large quantities of which are used for feeding
the numerous pigs, and for drinking. It is estimated that one-third of
the total nut crop is used for drinking, &c., one-third is made into copra,
and the remainder is allowed to rot on the ground.
The island, since annexation, has been under the jurisdiction of
a Resident Commissioner, and is subject to the laws of Fiji with the
exception of certain laws such as the land laws, for which special
Ordinances have been passed applying to Rotuma only.
Land is held by individuals and families and may be disposed of
amongst themselves subject only to the consent of the Commissioner.
No land may be disposed of to non-natives except by way of a lease
for not more than twenty-one years.
Rotuma seems to be practically free from hurricanes, for, with
the exception of five gales and hurricanes referred to in the eighties,
and two gales in the early nineties, there is no record of any excep-
tionally heavy weather being experienced in this group.
One of these hurricanes appears to have affected the fish in some
way, for it is reported that after the “ blow ” in February, 1884, many
fish formerly edible became poisonous. The fish were first noticed
to be poisonous at the north-west end of the island, while the same
kinds were for some time quite wholesome to eat on the opposite side
of the isthmus facing south-east, and although almost all the different
kinds of fish became, in a short time, more or less poisonous in the
waters surrounding the whole island, they were always much more
deadly on the north-west sea coast. The greatest force of the hurri-
cane and the greatest sea came from the north-west. Great numbers
of dogs and cats, which fed on the entrails of these fish, died from the
effects of poison and this not improbably suggests that the entrails
were more poisonous than the flesh. Not a few natives died from the
effects of the poison after a lingering illness. All fish gradually became
less poisonous and in about twelve months were again fit to eat. There
appears to have been no similar occurrence either previous or subse-
quent to the above instance.
The fishing in Rotuma is inferior to that in Fiji, but on the other
hand turtle are numerous, and good sport may be had by spearing
turtle from a launch.
Rotuma is an attractive island from the point of view of the tourist.
It is well off the beaten track and remains unspoiled and unexploited.


A characteristic feature of the island is the large number of graveyards,
with their array of elaborate tombstones. The Rotuman has an almost
Chinese reverence for his dead and will spend large sums on these
memorials.
An excellent highway encircles the island and there are a number
of motor cars and motor lorries in use. The Rotuman Sports Club is
a flourishing institution. It possesses a large airy club house complete
with bridge tables, a tennis court and an excellent 9-hole golf course.
Prior to 1928 golf was quite unknown to the Rotuman but since its
introduction it has attained great popularity and it is to be feared that
an 18-hole match between two rival chiefs excites even more interest
than a meeting of the Rotuma Council of Chiefs.
There being no port of entry at Rotuma, all vessels proceeding to
Rotuma must first call at one of the ports in Fiji. Communication
between Fiji and Rotuma, which is irregular, is carried on by trading
schooners and occasional visits by Government vessels.
Note.— The “Makatea” now includes Rotuma in the regular itinerary of her monthly
long trip [see page 51).


XLVIII. PASSENGER ROUTES.
PASSENGERS can proceed from the United Kingdom to Fiji by a
number of interesting routes. They may leave Southampton,
Liverpool or Glasgow by any of the Atlantic services and pro-
ceed across Canada by either the Canadian Pacific Railways or Canadian
National Railways to Vancouver where the Canadian and Australasian
Royal Mail Line Steamers “ Niagara ” (13,415 gross tons) and “ Aorangi ”
(17,491 gross tons) leave alternatively once a month for Suva, calling
at Honolulu en route and proceeding from Fiji on to Auckland and
Sydney.
The minimum fares by this route are: —
Single. Return.
First Class ... £llB 10s £220 Os.
Second Class ... 87 Os 160 10s.
Third Class ... 62 5s 118 11s.
If a passenger lands at New York he can of course proceed to
Vancouver via Canada or via San Francisco. He has also the choice of
several rail routes across the United States and from San Francisco
can travel by either the “ Tahiti ” (7,898 tons) or “ Makura ” (8,075
tons) of the Union Line to Wellington, New Zealand, calling at Papeete
in the Society Islands and Rarotonga in the Cook Islands, en route
across the Pacific. The passenger then proceeds by railway to Auckland
and there connects with either the “Niagara” or “Aorangi” of the
Canadian-Australasian Line, which leave Auckland for Vancouver via
Suva and Honolulu once a month, or he may connect with the
“ Tofua ” (4,345 tons) which leaves Auckland for Suva every twenty-
eight days and proceeds on to the Tongan and Samoan Islands and
returns to Suva before proceeding back to Auckland.
Alternatively from San Francisco the passenger for Fiji may travel
by the steamers “ Ventura,” “ Sonoma,” or “ Sierra ” of the Matson
Line calling at Honolulu and Pago Pago. The fares charged from the
United Kingdom to Fiji, by this route are the same as those on the route
via Canada by the Canadian-Australasian Royal Mail Service steamers
from Vancouver via Honolulu, viz.:—
Single. Return.
First Class £llB 10s £220 os.
Second Class ... 87 0s 160 10s.
Third Class ... 62 0s 118 10s.


The fares to Suva via New York, San Francisco, Union Line to
Wellington, rail to Auckland and on to Suva would total:—
Single. Return.
First Class ... ... £134 10s £252 Os.
Second Class ... 100 10s 187 10s.
Third Class ... 70 10s 135 os.
Another route to Fiji is by the New Zealand Shipping Company’s
and Shaw, Savill & Albion Company’s steamers from Southampton to
New Zealand via the Panama Canal. The minimum fares by these
lines to New Zealand are:—
Single. Return,
First Class ... ... £lO2 £179
Second Class ... 72 126
Third Class ... 37 66
Passengers then connect with the Canadian-Australasian Royal
Mail Line steamers or “ Tofua ” at Auckland and proceed to Suva.
The fares for this latter stage would be:—
C. & A. Line. “ Tofua.”
First Class ... £l2 10 0 £ll 10 0
Second Class ... 10 00 600
Third Class ... 6 0 0
The return fares being double the single fares.
Another very interesting route is from London to Sydney via Suez
Canal on the Peninsular and Oriental or the Orient Company’s steamers.
At Sydney connection can be made with the Canadian-Australasian
Royal Mail Line steamers which proceed on to Suva via Auckland once
a month. The fares by this route are: —
Single. Return.
First Class £137 £246 os.
Second Class (n S^t n Liaer 103 184 10s *
Third Class 51 93 os.
Passengers may proceed from Sydney to Suva direct by the
Australasian United Steam Navigation Company’s “ Moeraki ” (4,421
tons), a vessel for which the Union Steam Ship Company of New Zealand
Ltd. are also joint agents. The fares in this case would be:—
Single. Return.
First Class ... ... £l2B £228
Second Class ... 98 175
Third Class ... 48 88


R.M.M.S. “Aorangi,” 1st class Lounge.
178
R.M M.S. “Aorangi."


R.M.M.S. “Aorangi,” 1st class Dining Saloon.
179


All these Shipping Lines will issue Around the World Tickets with
an itinerary that calls for a stop at Suva.
There is another route from London to Suva via Sydney calling at
Capetown and Durban, minimum fare to Sydney, Blue Funnel Line:
First Class, £92 single (no other class); Aberdeen and Commonwealth
Line: First Class, £92; Third Class, £37 (no Second Class); and then
by the “ Moeraki ” or by the Matson Line from Sydney: First Class,
£l6 to £l4; Third Class, £lO. No direct booking is possible and pas-
sengers must rebook at Sydney for Suva.
There is also a Direct Service by passenger-carrying cargo vessels
from London via Panama to Suva about every ten weeks. Limited
accommodation only, is available, and this is not guaranteed. Fares
range from £65 to £75 single, one class only.
The Messageries Maritimes also provide a service between Marseilles
and New Caledonia, via Tahiti and Suva. Fares are approximately the
same as those charged on the direct service from London. First and
second class accommodation is provided, and the Company is about to
place large, modern and up-to-date vessels on this line. The voyage
between Suva and Marseilles takes about eight weeks. Fares by this
line in francs are as follow: First, 11,000; Second, 5,250; Third, 3,625.
The present exchange value of the franc is approximately 125 to the
pound sterling.
The fares quoted above are based on current rates and should be
confirmed by application to the nearest Agent of the Steamship Line
by which the passenger desires to travel. Other necessary information
regarding passports required, &c., can then also be obtained.


XLIX. SPORT .
THERE are many facilities for sport in Fiji, especially in Suva,
the capital. Cricket, lawn tennis, football, hockey, golf, and
bowls are all played. A list of the various local clubs appears
on page 189. At Suva and Levuka there are spacious recreation
grounds which are kept in excellent order by the respective Municipal
Councils. The Suva ground, known as Albert Park, is about eighteen
acres in extent; the intense green of its level, well-trimmed turf and
the natural beauty of its situation combine to make it a highly attrac-
tive sports ground. A portion of the Suva recreation ground is set
apart for the Suva Lawn Tennis Club, and six courts are provided and
maintained.
Lawn Tennis is one of the most popular games in Fiji; the climatic
conditions are such that it may be played practically all the year round.
Well-kept club courts are to be found in the more closely populated
country districts, and many residents have private tennis lawns in their
grounds.
Situated on the higher lands, overlooking Suva and commanding
fine views of the surrounding country, is a nine-hole golf course with
well-constructed greens and a comfortable club house. Visitors on
introduction are permitted to play over the course on the payment of
the usual green fees. There are also golf courses at Lautoka, Ba, Nau-
sori, Savusavu, Labasa, and Rotuma.
There is a swimming bath at Suva, the property of the Government,
and a Municipal baths recently opened on the sea front.
Cricket is well patronised, not only at Suva and Levuka, but in
some of the country districts. Fijians are enthusiastic cricketers and,
although they delight in “ Harrow hits,” many of them develop into
capable players. Some years ago a native Fijian team toured Australia
and Tasmania; prior to this a mixed team of Europeans and Fijians
visited and played matches throughout New Zealand. Representative
teams of Australian cricketers have played on the Albert Park ground
when passing through Suva on their way to and from the United
Kingdom.
During recent years Rugby football has become a highly popular
game in Suva and Levuka not only with Europeans but also with
Fijians, Special portions of the recreation grounds are set aside for
the latter. Australian, New Zealand, and Canadian footballers, including
the famous “ All Blacks,” have also played on the Suva ground.


180
TENNIS COURTS. ALBERT PARK, SUVA.


Municipal
Suva Bowling Club Green,


Sing Baths, Suva
Block by courtesy, “Auckland Weekly News.”
Levuka Bowling Club Green ,


RECREATION GROUND, LEVUKA.
181


Matches are usually arranged between local teams and teams from
the warships that call from time to time at Suva.
There are five European Rugby Football Clubs in Suva, and several
Fijian teams. The game is controlled by the Fiji Rugby Union.
Horse racing is a popular sport. There are race-courses at Suva
and at various country centres. Race meetings are held about four
times a year in Suva, and although no big prizes are offered, excellent
racing is to be witnessed. There are a number of keen owners, and a
large number of thoroughbred horses of high standard, both imported
blood-stock and locally bred animals, figure at the meetings. The
totalizator system of betting is adopted, and clean sport is provided.
An article will be found on sea fishing in another portion of this
Handbook, and a short reference to the fly-fishing that is to be had in
some of the rivers, where a species of bass, known to Fijians as Ika dr oka,
affords excellent sport.
There is but little shooting to be obtained in the Colony, but, during
the season, pigeon, duck and plover are to be obtained. Clay pigeon
shooting has recently been introduced and a Gun Club established in
Suva. Visiting sportsmen are welcomed at meetings of the club.
Bowls has been established in Fiji for many years and has become
a popular feature throughout the group, as owing to the comparatively
equable climate, it can be played throughout the year. The Suva green
was opened in 1925 by His Excellency the Governor, and it is already
proving a considerable attraction to Australians and New Zealanders,
especially during the winter months, June to November. A Bowling
Carnival, extending over three weeks, is held annually in July and is
largely attended by bowlers from the Commonwealth and the Dominion.
There is an excellent Rifle Range at Suva, and competitions and
matches are frequently arranged. The Fiji “ Bisley "is usually held in
May, and many valuable prizes are offered.
Persons coming to Fiji are strongly recommended to bring out
with them all necessary sporting requisites, as there is only a limited
supply available in Suva.


Months.
Monthly
Means.
Highest
Recorded.
Date.
Lowest
Recorded.
Date.
January ..
//
29736
29-879
2nd
29-583
14th & 15th
February
29-817
29-953
8th
29-652
1st
March
29-783
29-974
24th
29-601
18th
April
29-864
30-003
28th
29-737
3rd
May
29-877
29-976
4 th
29-706
25th
June
29-918
30-029
6th
29-769
10 th
July
29-894
30-040
13th
29-641
20th
August
29-996
30-130
10th
29-815
26th
September
29-940
30-069
19th
29-786
4th
October ..
29-902
30-064
11th
29-785
24th
November
29-886
30-030
3rd
29-685
21st
December
29-783
29-893
2nd
29-709
13th
L. METEOROLOGICAL .
Pressure.
THE mean pressure for the year taken at 2030 and 0330 Green-
wich Mean Time and reduced to 32 degrees Faht. 45 degrees
Latitude and Mean Sea Level was 29-867 inches; the highest
recorded being 30-130 inches on 10th August, and the lowest 29-583
on 14th and 15th January.
The following table gives the mean pressure for each month of the
year, together with the highest and lowest readings and the dates of
their occurrences: —
Air Shade Temperature,
The mean temperature for the year was 77*5 degrees Faht., the
highest recorded being 94 degrees on Ist January, and the lowest 62
degrees on 24th July.
Humidity.
The mean percentage of relative humidity for the year was 77, the
greatest, namely, 100 per cent., being recorded on the following dates:
28th February and 19th December. The lowest recorded was 44 per
cent, on Ist November. Humidity of 44 per cent, is exceptionally low
for the tropics. A drought was experienced in Fiji generally from the
last few days in May up to 13th December, when the drought broke
definitely. Conditions with regard to the water supply were at times
acute.
The following table gives the mean monthly temperature and
absolute highest and lowest temperatures, and the dates of their regis-


Temperature in Shade.
Humidity (100=Saturation).
Months.
Mean
High-
est.
Date.
Low-
est.
Date.
Mean
High-
est.
Date.
Low-
est.
Date.
January ...
O
81-6
O
94
1st
O
72
17th, 22nd
0/
/o
75-6
0/
/o
95
13th
0 /
/o
59
21, 22
February ..
80-2
91
27th
71
4th
79-8
100
28th
60
12th
March
81-3
92
13th
73
28th, 31st
82-6
99
1st
56
11th
April
78-5
86
27th
72
13th,21st, 22nd, 30th
86-3
95
11th, 25th
67
20th
May
77-5
87
7th, 17th, 28th
68
7th
83-2
96
11th
66
30th
June
74-5
86
10th
63
15th
74-0
98
20th
58
5.8
July
73-4
85
3rd,30th
62
24th
73-8
97
2nd,9th
55
17th
August
73-0
84
1st, 7th
64
18 th
77-4
97
8th
49
31st
September .
76-1
90
4th
65
1st
74-1
96
13th
55
1st
October
77-2
92
31st
67
11th, 25th
70-4
93
2nd
47
9th
November .
76-2
85
1st, 2nd
65
8th
69-9
96
17 th
44
1st
December ..
80-6
91
26th
71
2nd,3rd
77-2
100
19th
60
7th
Months.
Rainfall.
Weather. Number of days of
Total.
Max.
Date.
Rain.
Hail.
Thunder-
storms.
Clear Sky.
Overcast.
Gales.
January
9-65
1-75
8
24
2
8-30
1
3-30
8-30
11
3-30
13
February
12-87
3-58
16
22
1
2
13
14
March
16.39
5-62
23
24
1
i
13
14
April
17-10
4-16
12
27
15
18
May
13-64
4-79
25
21
i
4
4
8
16
June
2-17
0-68
19
11
4
2
8
9
July
5.56
2-21
9
20
i
6
5
8
6
August
7-18
2-16
10
20
2
1
13
20
September
4-15
1-14
12
15
i
9
9
October
1-57
0-40
20
13
2
‘5
7
9
November
6-14
2-97
19
16
1
3
13
12
December
17-41
4-37
21
20
4
11
13
Year
113-83
••
233
••
10
23
21
129
153
tration, together with the mean percentage of relative humidity, and
the highest and lowest recorded, together with the dates of their occur-
rences during each month of the year.
Rainfall, Winds, &c.
The attached table gives the rainfall for 1928 at Suva, together with
the number of wind observations, hailstorms, thunderstorms, gales, &c.,
for each month of the year. The total amount of rainfall for October,
viz., 1-57 inches, during the period of drought is 6-71 inches below
normal. This, however, does not constitute the least amount of rain
ever recorded for October, this being 0-51 inches recorded in the year
1884.
The following table gives the rainfall at different stations in the dry
and wet districts of Fiji for the year 1928, together with the average
rainfall over a period of years as stated in columns 1 and 6;—


Months.
Wind.
Number of Observations of
N.
N.E.
E.
S.E.
S,
S.W.
W.
N.W.
Calms.
8-30
3-30
8-30
3-30
8-30
3-30
8-30
3-30
8-30
3-30
8-30
3-30
8-30
3-30
8.30
3-30
8-30
3-30
January
1
2
2
6
9
8
13
5
6
4
1
1
4
February
5
3
11
4
7
12
3
4
2
1
3
3
March
7
2
7
8
5
11
1
5
2
1
1
1
10
1
April
2
3
11
4
9
17
1
1
1
1
2
3
4
1
May
1
1
9
8
3
5
2
6
1
1
1
15
1
Tune
5
1
5
5
2
12
3
3
3
6
1
3
1
3
7
,.
July
7
3
4
6
7
13
2
4
1
3
1
2
1
1
7
..
August
2
7
3
9
16
4
5
1
3
1
1
9
1
September
7
2
7
5
6
17
2
5
1
7
1
October
1
2
2
14
19
3
6
2
2
3
..
1
5
2
November
1
1
4
3
13
13
4
10
2
2
1
5
1
December
7
3
12
7
7
17
2
1
4
2
Year
44
23
81
53
88
161
32
64
15
24
12
10
5
2
9
6
80
13
WET DISTRICTS.
(1)
No.
of
Years,
(2)
Station.
(3)
Province.
(4)
Average
Yearly
Rainfall,
(5)
Rainfall
1928.
49
Wainunu
Bua
14854
117-34
22
Valeci ..
Cakaudrove
102-78
91-79
9
Vuna
Cakaudrove
116-89
98-23
22
Waiyevo
Cakaudrove
98-96
104-48
24
Rabi
Cakaudrove
143-79
115-55
16
Vunidawa
Colo East
142-19
136-44
28
Nadarivatu
Colo North
128-81
106*62
12
Naitonitoni
Serua
12913
117-66
3
Wainivesi
Tailevu ..
164-40
, .
34
Nausori
Tailevu ..
114-50
128-49
24
Rotuma
Rotuma
138-90
131-48
2
Navuso ..
Naitasiri
122-68
126-43
44
Suva
Rewa
117-02
113-83
12
Buca Bay
Cakaudrove
95-72
. ,
34
Levuka ..
Lomaiviti
91-09
66-53
1
Devo
Cakaudrove
, ,
99-90
9
Mua
Cakaudrove
108-90
94-94
11
Nabouwalu
Bua
105-84
104-48
11
Salialevu
Cakaudrove
213-20
• •


DRY DISTRICTS.
(6)
No.
of
Years.
(7)
Station,
(8)
Province.
(9)
Average
Yearly-
Rainfall.
(10)
Rainfall
1928.
34
Rarawai
Ba
8178
78-77
28
Lautoka
Ba
68-34
62-25
33
Munia ..
Lau
70-09
72-98
5
Nabavatu
Lau
77-60
5
Lakeba
Lau
78-91
99-97
27
Navo
Nadi
64-25
69-42
15
Richmond
Kadavu..
67-46
64-94
22
Lawaqa
Nadroga
69-02
85-29
13
Makogai
Lomaiviti
81-63
1
Gau
Lomaiviti
7010
7010
44
Penang ..
Ra
81-90
88-61
2
Sigatoka Cotton Station
Nadroga
76-26
7803
34
Labasa ..
Macuata
81-49
76-32
Thus the wet district average is 126-73 inches and the dry 77-24
inches, but it must be taken into consideration that the heaviest rain-
fall takes place during the hurricane season, viz., November to April
both inclusive. During these months the precipitation in 1927 was
62 per cent, of the total rainfall for the year. For the dry district the
heaviest rainfall is also within the same period but the precipitation is
greater, being in 1927 equal to 72 per cent, of the annual fall. It will
be readily seen, therefore, that the difference between the season is much
more distinctly marked in the dry district, with the consequence that
the planters vary considerably their methods of cultivation in the two
districts.


LI. GENERAL IN
Local Administration.
The Municipalities of Suva and Levuka were established by law in 1909.
Municipal Councils elected by the ratepayers have jurisdiction over sanita-
tion and public health, markets, slaughter-houses, traffic regulations, building
construction and the control of places and streets within the towns. Their
revenues are mainly derived from Government grants, licences, and rates.
The Central Board of Health, which is composed of official and unofficial
members appointed by the Governor, administers the Public Health Ordi-
nance of 1911, and is empowered to make regulations in regard to the carrying
out of the Ordinance. The Colony is divided into urban and rural sanitary
districts in which local authorities, subject to the control of the Central
Board of Health, administer the Public Health Ordinance in their respective
districts.
The Board of Education appointed by the Governor directs the policy
in regard to education, and is authorised to make regulations on all matters
pertaining to education within the Colony.
The Central Road Board, composed of official and unofficial members,
is responsible for the maintenance of existing roads and for new construction,
and is assisted by local Road Boards appointed in each district.
Fire Brigade.
A Fire Brigade service is provided for the town of Suva. The station
is situated in the centre of the town and comprises an up-to-date plant
including a latest pattern Dennis turbine motor engine.
Museum.
In the Fiji Museum located at Suva there is a representative collection
of specimens relating to Fijian culture.
Library.
The Carnegie Library in Suva is supported by the Suva Municipal
Council, and together with the Reading Room is open to the public without
subscription.
Fiji Publicity Board.
The Fiji Publicity Board, composed of representatives of the Govern-
ment, Suva Municipal Council, and the Suva Chamber of Commerce is
responsible for the policy and control of the Fiji Tourist Bureau. The
Board has been successful in the development of Tourist Traffic. The Board
publishes " The Fiji Tourist Gazette ” and various booklets and folders
which may be obtained free on application to the Secretary of the Board at
Suva.
Newspapers.
The “ Fiji Times and Herald ” is issued daily, the “ Pacific Press,” and
the “ South Seas Weekly ” every Saturday, at Suva. The “ Polynesian
Gazette ” is issued weekly at Levuka. There are also the monthly
publications, in Fijian, “ Na Mata ” and “ Na Viti,” and, in Hindustani,
“ Vriddhi.”


Currency and Banking.
The only coin in circulation in the Colony is British Sterling, which
with the Government Currency Notes, is the legal tender of the Colony*
Two Banks operate in the Colony: the Bank of New Zealand with
branches at Suva and Levuka, and the Bank of New South Wales with
branches at Suva, Levuka, and Lautoka.
In addition there is a Government Savings Bank with branches through-
out the Colony. The rate of interest paid to depositors is 3J per cent, on
deposits up to £5OO, and 2J per cent, on deposits exceeding £5OO up to a
maximum of £l,OOO.
The Currency Note Guarantee Fund, under which Government Notes
are issued, showed on the 31st December, 1927, a surplus of Assets over
Liabilities as follows:— Liabilities —Notes in circulation, £367,399. Assets —
Coin Reserve, £73,481; Securities, £306,718; Depreciation Fund, £25,931;
Surplus, £38,731.
Weights and Measures.
British weights and measures are standard throughout the Colony.
Local Industries.
In addition to the manufacture of sugar, a number of local industries
are carried on in the Colony. Among the most important of these are the
manufacture of biscuits, soap making, and tortoise-shell working.
An experiment with Government assistance in pineapple canning has
also been undertaken, and more recently a meat canning factory has been
established. It is hoped that pineapple and meat canning will shortly be
flourishing industries in the Colony, and that considerable export trade in
these products, in addition to sugar, butter, copra, bananas, and other fruit,
trocas-shell, and rubber, will be built up.
Insurance Companies.
The following Insurance Companies are registered and conduct business
in the Colony:—Pacific Insurance Co., Ltd.; Yorkshire Insurance Co., Ltd.;
Queensland Insurance Co., Ltd.; Liverpool, London, and Globe Insurance
Co., Ltd.; Union Assurance Society, Ltd.; New Zealand Insurance Co., Ltd.;
Royal Insurance Co., Ltd.; Employers Liability Assurance Corporation
Ltd., of Sydney, New South Wales; National Mutual Life Association of
Australasia; Australian Mutual Provident Society.
Hotels.
Suva Grand Pacific Hotel . . 20/- .... 50
Club Hotel . . . . 12/6 .... 35
McDonald’s Hotel .. 12/6 .... 30
Melbourne Hotel .. 12/6 .... 22
Pier Hotel . . .. 12/6 .... 60
Levuka Royal Hotel .. 12/6
Polynesian Hotel .. 12/6 ....


There are also Hotels at Ba, Lautoka, Navua and Rewa, where terms
generally are 10s. 6d. per day; and at Savusavu the Hot Springs Hotel has
recently been opened. All these hotels are fully licensed.
Boarding Houses at Suva.
Waimanu Boarding House. . 10/- .... 45
Waverley Boarding House . . 10/- .... 36
Wentworth Boarding House. 10/- .... 46
Viti House .. .. .. 8/- .... 55
Miramar .. .. .. 8/6 .... 35
Bay View 8/- 20
Mrs. Webster .. . . 10/6 .... 7
There are also Boarding Houses at Levuka and Lautoka and Govern-
ment Rest Houses at Taveuni, and at Nadarivatu and Vunidawa,
Social Clubs.
Suva. —Fiji Club, membership, 80; Defence Club, membership, 110;
Young Men’s Christian Association, 60, with a Country Branch of 40 (Indian)
members; Roman Catholic Young Men’s Society, 60 members.
Societies.
The Fijian Society is composed of members interested in historical,
literary, scientific and kindred matters relating to the Colony. It has a
large membership which has gradually increased since the foundation of the
Society in 1908, and publishes annually in its transactions papers read before
the Society during the year.
The Fiji Planters’Association, with a membership of 40, aims at promoting
the interests of planters, agriculturalists, graziers and others residing in any
part of the Pacific Islands.
Masonic Lodges.
Freemasons are represented by the following Lodges:—Lodge Poly-
nesia, 562 S.C., Levuka; Lodge of Fiji, 1931, E.C., Suva; Lodge Viti (of
Rewa), 2238, E.C., Nausori; Lodge Lautoka, 3354, E.C., Lautoka; R. A.
Chapter, Loloma, 281, S.C., Suva; R. A. Chapter, Lautoka, 463, S.C., Lautoka.
Boy Scouts Association, Fiji.
Scouting in the Fiji Islands was commenced in 1914, under the leader-
ship of the late Rifleman S. F. Marlow, and was officially recognised by
I.H.Q. in 1915, when the first local Association for Fiji was registered.
Rifleman Marlow enlisted with the Fiji Contingent in 1916 and was killed
in action the same year, after which the Movement seems to have lapsed
for a period.
Through the untiring efforts of Governor Sir Cecil Rodwell, the Chief
Scout, and Mr. W. N. Norton, Scout Commissioner for Fiji, the Scout Move-
ment was revived in September, 1922, when three European Troops were
formed in Suva, comprising a total of 84 Scouts.
Since then steady progress has been made, and Troops have been
established in all the important centres of the islands, including Indians,


Fijians and Half-castes, and to-day all sections of the Movement, numbering
about 500, are represented, viz.: Cubs, Scouts, Sea Scouts, and Rovers,
the last named principally amongst Fijians.
The Hon. T. E. Fell, Acting Governor of Fiji, succeeded Sir Cecil Rod-
well as Chief Scout in 1924, followed by Sir Eyre Hutson, K.C.M.G., in
1926, who holds that position to the present day, and who is also now Chief
Scout of the Gilberts and Solomon Islands. During the latter’s period
of office, Mr. Clifton Pearson succeeded Mr. W. N. Norton as Scout Com-
missioner for Fiji, which post he held till he left the Colony in 1926. It
was during his term of office that the Rover section of Scouts was intro-
duced in Fiji.
Mr. L. H. Collins, as Acting Commissioner, succeeded Mr. Clifton Pearson
in 1926, and in 1927 the first great Scout Demonstration was held in the
Botanical Gardens, Suva, at which at least 350 Europeans, Fijians and
Indians gave displays of Scout activities.
Mr. J. Caughley, M.A., Director of Education for Fiji, is the newly-
elected Commissioner, with Mr. F. Reay as Assistant Commissioner.
Mr. Reay has held the position of Scoutmaster since the inception of the
Movement in Fiji.
Sports Clubs, Suva
Suva Cricket Association. —Consisting of five playing teams, member-
ship, 90.
Rugby Football Union. —Consisting of European teams, 5; Native
teams, 5; membership, 150.
Association Football Club. —Membership, 30.
Regatta Club. —Membership, 15.
Hockey Club. —Ladies teams 4, membership, 50; men’s teams 5, mem-
bership, 75.
Tennis Club. —(Six Courts), Ladies, 40; men, 60.
Fiji Golf Club, Suva. —(Course, nine holes), Ladies, 42; men, 95.
Gun Club. —Membership, 30.
There are Golf Links also at Lautoka, Ba, Nausori, Savusavu, Labasa,
and Rotuma.
Fiji Bowling Association. —Three Clubs at Suva, Levuka and Ba, with
membership respectively of 90, 40 and 30.
Religious Bodies.
The following Christian Religious Bodies are established in the Colony:
Church of England, Roman Catholic Mission, Methodist Missionary Society
of Australasia, Presbyterian Church, Seventh Day Adventist Mission.
Income Tax.
Residents (rates of Tax for Individuals) . —Unmarried persons, widowed
persons without dependent children and persons who are not supporting
dependent brothers and sisters under the age of eighteen years, or parents
or grand-parents. In the £: —First £250, nil; next £4,750, Is.


Other individuals: First £5OO, nil; next £4,500, Is.
All persons: Next £5,000, 25.; next £5,000, 35.; next £5,000, 45.;
next £5,000, 55.; balance (over £25,000,) 6s.
An exemption is allowed of £5O for each dependent child under 21, or over
21 and incapacitated by infirmity. The deduction is made from portion
of income taxed at lowest rate.
A further exemption is allowed up to an aggregate maximum of £5O
for insurance premiums paid to British Companies on life of taxpayer, his
wife or children, or for annuities for wife or children, or for a fidelity
guarantee.
Absentees. —First £l,OOO, Is.; next £4,000, 25.; next £5,000, 35.; next
£5,000, 45.; next £5,000, 55.; next £5,000, 65.; balance (over £25,000), 7s.
No exemptions or deductions as in the case of residents.
Rates of Tax for Companies. —Non-Fijian Insurance Companies: 6d. in
£ on excess over £l,OOO received in premiums.
Non-Fijian Shipping Companies: 3d. in £ on total outward freight
and passages earned.
Other Companies: 5 per cent, on total net profits, whether distributed
or not.
There is no tax on the income of Life Insurance Companies.
The question of the revision of the Income Tax is now under considera-
tion.
Residential Tax.
An annual tax not exceeding £1 a year as may be determined from time
to time by the Legislative Council, payable by all males between the ages
of 18 and 60 years.
Exemptions. —
(a) Native Fijians.
( b) Persons detained as patients in any Lunatic or Leper Asylum.
(c) Persons who satisfy the District Commissioner of their district
that they are permanently incapacitated from work by
physical disability.
(i d ) Persons approved by the Governor who are undergoing a
system of training or instruction at any school or Mission.
( e ) Such other persons or classes of persons as the Governor may
decide to exempt from the payment of the tax either in whole
or in part.
Municipal Taxes.
Suva. —Rates, levied as follows, are based on the unimproved capital
value of land: General, 3| pence in the £; Loan Rates, 2| pence in the £;
Education, 1J pence in the £; Fire Brigade, J penny in the £; Sewerage,
2 pence in the £; total, lOf pence in the £.
Levuka. —Rates levied on the annual value of property: General,
2 shillings in every £; Education, 9J pence in every £.


VILLAGE SCENE. ISLAND OF OVALAU.
190


GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, SUVA.
View of machine section, where this hook was printed.
191


Trading Licences.
Agent for a foreign firm or firms .. .. .. £3O 0 0
Architect .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 0 0
Auctioneer .. .. .. .. .. .. 20 0 0
Hawker general (country) .. .. .. .. 3 0 0
Hawker of pigeons or other wild birds (country) .. 10 0
Insurance company .. .. .. .. .. 40 0 0
Photographer (town) .. .. .. .. .. 1000
Photographer (country) .. .. .. .. .. 400
Surveyor .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 0 0
Waterman. .. .. .. .. .. .. 400
Every incorporated company with or without liability
carrying on business as such in Fiji—For every £lOO
or fraction of £lOO of the capital of such company
either subscribed for or issued in payment of services
rendered rights acquired or otherwise .. .. 0 0 6
but in no case shall the amount exceed £lOO.
Aerated water or cordial manufacturer .. .. 10 0 0
Baker (town) .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 0 0
Baker (country) .. .. .. .. .. .. 400
Bank or banking company .. .. .. .. 60 0 0
Butcher (town) .. .. .. .. .. .. 20 0 0
Butcher (country) .. .. .. .. .. 400
Chemist and druggist .. .. .. .. .. 40 0 0
Cinematograph theatre (town) .. .. .. .. 20 0 0
Cinematograph theatre (country) .. .. .. 10 0 0
Commission agent . . .. .. .. .. 20 0 0
Distiller spirits .. .. .. .. .. .. 100 0 0
Keeping store wholesale and retail (town) .. .. 30 0 0
Keeping store wholesale and retail (country) .. .. 20 0 0
Keeping store retail (town) .. .. .. .. 1000
Keeping store retail (country) .. .. .. .. 5 0 0
Keeping public billiard table .. .. .. .. 1000
Keeping shooting-gallery .. .. .. .. 2 0 0
Keeping house of refreshment resort and entertain-
ment .. .. .. .. .. .. . . 10 0 0
Pawnbroker .. .. .. .. .. .. 50 0 0
Tailor (town) .. .. .. .. .. .. 10 0 0
Tailor (country) .. .. .. .. .. .. 500
Average Rates of Wages.
The following shows the prevailing average weekly wages paid to
artisans:—
Carpenters and Cabinetmakers—
Europeans .. .. .. .. .. £5 14s.
Other than Europeans .. .. .. £3 10s. to £4 4s.


Blacksmiths—
Europeans .. , . . .. £5 10s.
Other than Europeans .. .. .. £2 to £4.
Boatbuilders and Shipwrights—
Europeans .. .. .. .. . . £6.
Other than Europeans .. .. .. £2 to £5.
Tinsmiths—
Europeans .. .. .. .. £5.
Other than Europeans .. .. .. £3 15s.
Painters—
Europeans .. .. . . .. £4 4s.
Other than Europeans .. .. .. £1 2s. 6d.
Plumbers .. .. .. .. .. £6.
Turners and Fitters, Motor Mechanics, Electricians £5 13s.
The main sources of the supply of coloured labour are the native Fijian
and East Indian populations. Fijian agricultural labourers cost about
£5O per annum; this includes food, lodging and transport. Indian field
labourers receive from 2s. to 2s. 6d. per day and supply their own food.
In the case of Indian labourers employed by the Colonial Sugar Refining
Company wages are paid at the rate of Is. Bd. per task, averaging six hours,
plus a bonus of 6d. per week of 5J days. They are housed, and allowed
the privilege of purchasing foodstuffs at landed cost. This, based on the
statutory ration, is equal to Is. 6d. per week.
The wages of coloured domestic servants vary according to skill and
experience. Indians may be obtained from £3O to £6O a year with food
and house accommodation; and Fijians from £3O upwards with similar
privileges.
The average monthly wages of coloured labourers employed on ships
are as follows: Sailors, £4; Firemen and Greasers, £5; Stewards, £5; and
Cooks, £6.


LII. BIBLIOGRAPHY .
A
Adams, Emma H., Jottings from the Pacific, Oakland. Calif., 1890.
Agassiz, A., Tertiary Elevated Reefs of Fiji, 1898, Am. Jour. Sci., 4th Series,
Vol. 6.
Agassiz, A., Coral Reefs of Fiji, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., Harvard Coll.,
Vol. 33, 1899.
Alexander, Gilchrist, From the Middle Temple to the South Seas, London.
1927.
Allen, P. S. (Editor), Cyclopedia of Fiji. Sydney, 1907.
Allen, P. S., Stewart s Handbook of the Pacific Islands. Sydney (Annually).
Anderson, J. W., Notes of Travel in Fiji and New Caledonia. London,
1880.
Andrews, C. F. and Pearson, W. W., Report on Indentured Labour in Fjii,
Pioneer Press. Delhi, 1916.
Andrews, E. C., Limestone of the Fiji Islands, ibid, Vol. 38, 1900.
Andrews, E. C. and Sawyer, 8., Notes on the Caves of Fiji, Proc. Linnean
Soc. N.S.W., Vol. 26, 1901.
Angas, G. F., Polynesia : An Illustrated Description of the Pacific Islands,
Edwards. London, 1866.
Arthur, W., What is Fiji. London, 1859.
Aylmer, F., A Cruise in the Pacific. London, 1860.
B
Bahr, P. H., Filariasis and Elephantiasis in Fiji. London, 1912.
Belcher, Sir E., Voyage Round the World in the “ Sulphur,” 1836-1842 and
1843.
Bligh, W., Voyage to the South Seas . ... in H.M.S. “ Bounty.”
London, 1792.
Boddam, Whetham J. W., Pearls of the Pacific. 1786.
Bolitho, H. Hector, The Islands of Wonder.
Bonwick, J.. Resources of Fiji. London, 1886.
Brady, H. 8., Notes on the so-called Soapstones of Fiji, Quart. Tour.. Geol
Soc., Vol. 44, 1888. J
Brenchley, Julius, Jottings during the Cruise of H.M.S. “ CuraQoa,” among
the South Sea Islands. 1873.
Brett, H., Guide to Fiji. Edited by H. C. Thurston. Auckland, 1881.
Brewster, A. 8., The Hill Tribes of Fiji. London, 1922.
Brierly, Sir Oswald. Brief Geographical Sketch of the Friendly Islands.
1857, Bensonsan.
Britton, H., Loloma, or Two Years in Cannibal Land; a Story of Old Fiji.
London, 1884.
Britton, H., Fiji in 1870. Melbourne, 1870.
Brock, R. W., Sketch of the Geology of Vitilevu, Trans. Roy. Soc.. Canada.
Third Series, Vol. XVIII, Section IV.
Brooke, Rupert, Poems, with a Memoir. Sidgwick & Jackson. London,
1925.


Brummitt, R., .4 Winter Holiday in Fiji. Epworth Press.
Burnett, F., Through Tropic Seas. London, 1910.
Burton, J. W.. The Fiji of To-day. London, 1910. Also Call of the Pacific.
London 1912.
C
Calvert, James, Geschichte der Christlichen Missionen auf den Fidsche-
Inseln. Bremen. 1860.
Carpenter, Frank G., The South Sea Islands.
“ Ceres.” The Fiji Islands. With Maps. Melbourne, 1869.
" Challenger ” Expedition. 1885.
Chapple, W. A., Fiji—lts Problems and Resources. Auckland, 1921.
Cheynes, A., Description of the Islands of the Western Pacific. 1852.
Cochrane, N. D., Rocks of Fiji. Leg. Co. Paper No. 15, Suva, Fiji. 1911.
Collinette, C. L., Sea-Girt Jungles. 1926.
Cook, Captain James, Voyage to the Pacific Ocean in H.M.S. “ Resolution ”
and “ Discovery .” London, 1784.
Cooper, H. S., Coral Lands. Two Vols. London, 1880.
Cooper, H. S., Fiji—lts History, Progress, and Resources. London, 1882.
Cooper, H. S., The Islands of the Pacific. London, 1888.
Coote, D., Wanderings, South and East. 1882.
Coote, W., The Western Pacific. London, 1883.
Gumming, C. F. G., At Home in Fiji. Two Vols. London, 1881.
D
Deane, W., Fijian Society. London, 1921.
Des Vceux, Sir G. W., My Colonial Service. 1903.
Dewar, Captain J, C., The Voyage of the “ Wyange." 1892.
Dillon, Chev. P.. Accounts of a Massacre at the Fiji Islands. 1829.
Dix, William G., Wreck of the “ Glide," with an Account of Life and Manners
at the Fiji Islands. Boston, 1846.
Douglas, A. J. A. and Johnson, P. H., The South Seas of To-day. 1926.
Duclos, D., Trots Mois a Fiji. In four parts. Loreto, Fidji, 1904.
E
Endicott, William, Wrecked among Cannibals in the Fijis. Eight Vols.
Thirteen Illustrations. 79 pp. Salem, Mass., 1923. (Wreck of the
“ Glide”)
Erskine, John Elphinstone, Captain R.N., Journal of a Cruise among the
Islands of the Western Pacific including the Feegees in
H.M.S. ‘ Havannah." London, 1853.
F
Fanning, Voyages and Discoveries in the South Seas. 1792-1832 by Captain
Edmund Fanning. He narrowly escaped death at hands “of the
Savage Islanders at Fiji and the Marquesas.” Eight Vols. Thirty-two
Illustrations. 355 pp. 1924.
Featherman, A., A Social History of Races of Mankind. 1887.
Festetics de Tolna, R., Chez les Cannibales. Paris, 1903.


Fison, Lorimer, Tales from Old Fiji. London, 1907.
Forbes, Litton, Two Years in Fiji. London, 1875.
Foster, Harry L., A Vagabond in Fiji. Dodd & Mead & Co. New York.
Foye, W. G., Geological Observations in Fiji. Proc. Amer. Acad, of Arts
and Science. Vol. 5, No. 1. Sept., 1918.
G
Gaggin, J., Among the Man-Eaters. London, 1900.
Girard, J., La Colonisation Anglo-Saxonne aux lies Fidji. Paris, 1874.
Goodenough (Commodore), Journal of ... . in the “ Pearl." 1878.
Gordon, Sir A., Letters and Notes. Two Vols. Edinboro, 1876.
Great Britain Parliamentary Papers, Report of Commodore Goodenough.
London, 1874.
Greenbie, S., The Pacific Triangle. 1921.
Grimshaw, Beatrice, From Fiji to the Cannibal Islands. London, 1907.
Guppy, H. 8., Observations of a Naturalist in the Pacific. London. 1903.
H
Hazelwood, D., A Fijian and English and an English and Fijian Dictionary
and a Grammar of the Language. Fiji, 1850.
Henderson, J., The Yanawai Goldfield, Fiji. Leg. Co. Paper No. 4. Suva,
Fiji, 1925.
Henley, Sir T., Fiji — The Land of Promise. Sydney, 1926.
Horne, J., A Year in Fiji. London, 1881.
Horne, R. H., The South Sea Sisters, a Lyric Masque. 1883.
Hutton. J.. Missionary Life in the Southern Seas. 1874.
J
Jenson, H. L, Note on an Occurrence of Copper in Andesite near Lautoka, Fiji.
Jour. Roy. Soc., N.S.W. Vol. 41. 1907.
Joske, Adolphe 8., The Manga of Viti-Levu. Internationale Archiv fiir
Ethnographic. Bd. 11. 1889.
K
King, A. G., Islands Far Away. London, 1920.
King, G., The Balolo — A Monograph. Fiji, about 1920.
Kleinschmidt, Th., Reisen auf den Viti-Inseln. Jour, des Mus. Vol. 5.
Godefroy, Hamburg, 1879.
Knox, Thomas W., The Boy Travellers in Australasia. Adventures . . .
in . . . the Sandwich, Marquesas , Society, Samoan and Feejee Islands
New York, 1889.
Laborde, E. D., School Geography of Fiji. Sydney, 1918.
Lady, A (Mrs. Wallis), Life in Feejee. W. Heath. 1851.
la Faroe, J., Reminiscences of the South Seas. London, 1914.
Lambert, C. & S., The Voyage of the “ Wanderer." 1883.
Lawry, W., Friendly & Feejee Islands. London, 1850.
Lee, Miss, Third Voyage of Bligh.


Lessons, R. P., Vile de Rotuma. Paris, 1825.
Lockerby, W., Journal of William Lockerby, Sandalwood Trader in the Fijian
Islands during the years 1808-1809. Printed for the Hakluyt Society,
1925. Includes also Samuel Patterson’s Narrative of the wreck of the
‘‘Eliza” in 1808; Journal of the Missionaries put ashore from the
“ Hibernia ’’ on an islet in the Fiji Group in 1809; and Capt. Richard
Siddon’s Experience in Fiji in 1809-1815.
Lucas, T. P., Cries from Fiji. Melbourne, 1915.
Lucett, E., Rovings in the Pacific. 1851.
M
McCaw, G. T., Report of the Trigonometrical Survey of Vitilevu. London
1916.
McCaw, G. T., Report of the Trigonometrical Survey of Vanualevu and Taveuni.
McClure, H. R., Land, Travel and Sea-Faring. 1925.
MacDonald, Dr. J. D., Proceedings of the Expedition for the Exploration of
the Rewa River. 1857.
McLennan, J. F., Studies in Ancient History. 1896.
M.A.T.E., Fiji of To-day. Sydney, 1886.
“ Marin, Aylic ’’ (Edward Petit), En Oceanic. Paris, 1888.
Martin, K. L. P., Missionaries and Annexation in the Pacific. London,
1924.
Matley, C. A. & Davies, A.M., Geology of Vitilevu. Geological Mag. Feb-
ruary, 1927.
Meade, The Hon. Herbert (R.N.), A Ride through the Disturbed Districts
of N.Z. with some account of the South Seas Islands. 1871.
Melville, Hermann, Moby Dick. New York, 1892.
Month in Fiji, A. 1868.
Morrell, Captain Bering, Narrative of Four Voyages to the Pacific. 1832.
Moss, F. J., A Planter's Experience in Fiji. Auckland, 1870.
Moss, F. J., Through Atolls and Islands in the Great South Sea. London,
1889.
N
Nutting, C. C., Fiji-New Zealand Expedition. lowa, 1924, (University of
lowa Studies in Natural History. Vol. X, No. 5.)
P
Palmer, G., Kidnapping in the South Seas. Edinboro, 1871,
Parr, W. F., The Bane of Sir Arthur Gordon s Disingenuous Utterances.
Sydney, 1883.
Patterson, S., Narrative of the Adventures and Sufferings of Samuel Patterson
experienced in the Pacific Ocean .... with an account of the Feejee
and Sandwich Islands. “ From the Press in Palmer. 1817.’’
Pechey, W. C., Fijian Cotton Culture. London, 1870.
Peripatetic Parson, A. (J. Eykyn), Parts of the Pacific. 1896.


Pitman, Emma Raymond, Central Africa, Japan and Fiji. Story of Mission-
ary Enterprise. London, 1882.
Pritchard, W. T., Polynesian Reminiscences or Life in the South Sea Islands.
London, 1866.
Puxley, W. L., Green Islands in Glittering Seas. 1925.
R
Reclus, Elisee, The Earth and its Inhabitants. 1890.
Reed, W., Wanderings in Fiji. London, 1888.
Reeves, E., Brown Men and Women. London, 1898.
Renard, A., Rocks from Kandavu, Fiji. Report of Challenger Expedition.
Physics and Chemistry. Vol. 2, Part VII. 1888.
Ricci, J. H. de, Fiji. London, 1875.
Ricci, J. H. de, How about Fiji. London, 1874.
Rivers, W. H. R., The History of Melanesian Society. Two Vols. Cam-
bridge, 1914.
Romilly, H. H., A True Story of the Western Pacific in 1879-80. London,
1882.
Romilly, H. H., Letters from the Western Pacific, &c. London, 1893.
Ross, C. S., Fiji and the Western Pacific. Geelong, Vic., 1909.
Rowe, G. S., Life of John Hunt. London, 1859.
Rowe, G. S., James Calvert of Fiji. London, 1893.
Russell, M., Polynesia. London, 1853.
S
St. Johnston, A., Camping among Cannibals. London, 1883.
St. Johnston, T. R., Islanders of the Pacific. 1921.
St. Johnston, T. R., South Sea Reminiscences. 1922.
St. Johnston, T. R., The Lau Islands. London.
Schanz, Moritz, Australien und die Sudsee. Berlin, 1901.
Scholefield, G. H., The Pacific, Its Past and Future. London, 1919.
Scholes, S. E., Fiji and the Friendly Isles. London.
Seddon, Right Hon. R, J., Right Hon. R. J. Seddons Visit to Tonga, Fiji,
Savage Island and the Cook Islands. Wellington, 1900.
Seem an, 8., Viti. Cambridge, 1862.
Seeman, 8., Flora Vitiensis. London, 1865-73.
Sherlock, R. L., The Foraminifera and other Organisms in the Raised Reef
of Fiji. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. Plarvard Coll. Vol. 38. 1903.
Shipley, Lieut. Conway, Sketches in the Pacific. 1851.
Shoberl, F., The South Sea Islands. 1824.
Smith, W. R., In Southern Seas.
Smythe, Mrs. W. J., Ten Months in Fiji Islands. Oxford and London, 1864.
Spencer, H., Illustrations of the Principles of Sociology.
“ Sundowner ” (Herbert Tichborne), Rambles in Polynesia. London, 1897
“ Sundowner ” (Herbert Tichborne), Noqu Talanoa. London, 1896.
T
Thomas, Julian, The Vagabond Papers. 1878.
Thomas, Julian, Cannibals and Convicts. 1886.


Thomson, Basil, The Fijians. London, 1908.
Thomson, Basil, South Sea Yarns. London, 1904.
Thomson, Basil, The Indiscretions of Lady Asenath. London, 1898.
U
Union Steam Ship Co., A Cruise in the Islands — Tonga, Samoa, Fiji. 1895.
L t nion Steam Ship Co., Three Wonderful Nations—Tonga, Samoa, Fiji. 1910.
V
\ernon, R., James Calvert, or From Dark to Dawn in Fiji. London, 1889.
Verschur, G., At the Antipodes — Travels in Australia, New Zealand , Fiji,
Islands, the New Hebrides. Maps and Illustrations. Original Ed. Paris.
1891. Cheaper Ed. London, 1900.
W
Wales (Princes Albert, Victor and George of), The Cruise of H.M.S.
" Bacchante .” 1886.
Walker, H. W., Wanderings among South Sea Savages. London, 1909.
Waterhouse, Rev. Joseph, Va-ta-ah : The Feejeean Princess. 3rd ed.
London, 1867.
Waterhouse, J., The King and People of Fiji. London, 1866.
Watsford, J., My Life and Work in Fiji and Australia. London, 1901.
Webb, A. J., The History of Fiji. Sydney, 1885.
Whetham, J. W. 8., Pearls of the Pacific. London, 1876.
Wilkes, C., Narrative of U.S. Exploring Expedition. Philadelphia, 1845.
London, 1852.
Williams, T. and Calvert, J., Fiji and the Fijians. Two Vols. London,
1858.
Wilson, Captain James, Voyage to the South Pacific Ocean. 1799.
Wood, C. F., A Yachting Cruise in the South Seas. London, 1875.
Woolnough, W. G., The Continental Origin of Fiji. Proc. Linnean Soc.,
N.S.W. Vol. 28, Part 111. 1903.
Woolnough, W. G., A Contribution to the Geology of Fiji. Proc. Linnean
Soc., N.S.W. Vol. 32. 1907.
Wrecked in the Fijis. Experience of a Nantucket Man, the sole survivor
of crew of Whaleship “ Oeno," who lived for nine years—from 1825 to
1834 —among Cannibals of South Pacific.
Wright, C. H., Soils of Fiji. Bulletin 9 Agricultural Dept. Suva, Fiji,
1916.
Y
Young, Rev. R., The Southern World. 1854.
Note. —ln addition to the above, reference may be made to the annual
Blue Book of Fiji, published by the Fiji Government, (55.), and to the
Colonial Annual Report published by His Majesty’s Stationery Office,
London, W.C.2, and to the Fiji Times Year Book (Is.), 1928, 2nd edition.


INDEX.
A
Page
Administration Local 13, 186
Agriculture 73-112
Area, Fiji .1. 143
Arrowroot 105
Asylum, Leper . .48-49
Lunatic .. .. 48
Avifauna . . . . . . 136-142
B
Balolo, The Rising of the . . 135
Bananas .. 85-87
Banking Facilities 187
Bau .. .. 5-7
Beche-de-Mer .. .. 107
Bibliography .. 193-198
Birds .. 136-142
Boarding Houses .. .. .. 188
Bowls 181-189
Boy Scouts Association, Fiji 188
Broadcasting . . 53
C
Cacao .. .. .. .. .. 97
Candle Nut 103
Cassava .. .. .. 105
Castor Oil Plant 103
Cattle 113
Cession of Fiji .. .. 8
Churches .. .. .. 189
Citronella Oil 105
Citrus Fruits .. 96
Climate .. 182
Clubs and Societies .. .. 188
Coconut Cultivation 79
Coffee .. .. .. .. ~ 97
Colonial Sugar Refining Company .. 73
Communications, Internal ..50-54
Steamship .. 50
Telegraph .. 52
Wireless .. .. 53
Constitution .. 13
Copra .. .. .. 79
Coral Reefs and their Fauna 120
Cotton .. 88
Council, Executive .. .. 13
Legislative .. .. .. 13
Courts of Justice .. .. 19
Cricket 180
Currency .. ~ .. 187
Customs .. .. .. .. 71
D
Page
Dairying .. 108
Description, General.. 1
Dhall .. .. 106
Diary of an English Tourist in Fiji .. 153
Diseases 46
Duties, Customs .. .. .. 71
E
Education .. .. .. .. 65
Electoral Divisions .. .. .. 13
Executive Council .. 13
Exports .. .. .. ..69,70
F
Fauna of Coral Reefs .. 120
Fijians .. .. .. .. 22
Fire Brigade .. .. 186
Fire Walking .. 34, 165
Fishing, Sea .. .. .. 128
River 134
Flight, Trans-Pacific 54
Folk Lore 4,22,23
Forests, Timbers from .. 117
Fruits 92-96
G
Geographical .. .. .. .. 1
Geology and Mining .. .. 143
Goats .. .. .. 115
Golf 180, 189
Government Savings Bank .. .. 187
Governors, List of . . .. face page I
Great War, Fiji's Contribution to 167
H
Harbour .. .. .. .. 72
Health Conditions .. ~ .. 46
Hemp, Sisal .. .. .. .. 102
History, Early .. ~ ~ 4
Horses .. .. .. .. 115
Horse Racing .. ~ ~ .. 181
Hospitals ~ .. ~ .. 46
Hotels 187
Hurricane Season .. .. .. 185


I
Page
Imports .. .. .. 69
Income Tax .. .. ~ ~ 189
Indian Immigration .. ..36-45
Indians, Education .. .. .. 67
Population .. .. .. 40
Vital Statistics .. .. 40
Industries, Local .. .. 187
Information, General 186
Insurance Companies .. .. 187
J
Justice, Courts of 19
K
Kadavu .. .. 1,5,52,139,148
Kava (Yaqona) .. .. 22,26
L
Labour, Recruitment of .. 75
Land, Agricultural .. .. 56
Alluvial Flats .. .. 56
Forest 2,117
Pasture .. .. 57
Rent of .. .. ..56-62
Lands and Land Tenure .. 55
Lau Group .. .. 1,5,6,147
Legend of the Vilavilairevo .. .. 34
Legislative Council .. .. .. 13
Leper Asylum .. . .48-49
Levuka . . .. 10, 11
Hospital ~ .. .. 48, 67
Port and Shipping .. 51, 71
Schools .. .. .. 66
Municipal and General .. 186-190
Library .. .. .. 186
Licences, Trading .. .. .. 191
Local Administration .. .. 186
Lunatic Asylum .. .. 48
M
Maize .. .. .. .. 105
Map of Fiji .. .. .. face page 1
Masonic Lodge .. .. .. 188
Measures, Weights and .. .. 187
Medical School .. .. .. 47
Meteorological . . . . 182
Mining .. .. .. .. 143
Minor Products .. .. .. 105
Missionary Efforts .. .. .. 149
Museum .. .. .. .. 186
N
Newspapers .. .. .. .. 186
o
Page
Oil seeds .. .. .. .. 103
P
Para Rubber .. .. .. .. 99
Passenger Routes .. .. 177
Peanut Plant .. 103
Pigs 116
Pineapples .. .. .. .. 92
Population .. 20
Ports .. .. .. 71
Preferential Tariff .. .. 71
Publicity Board, Fiji .. 186
Q
Quarantine Precautions . .37-39, 46, 49
Station .. .. .. 120
R
Railway .. .. .. 53, 74, 165
Rainfall, Winds, &c. 182
Reefs, Coral 120
Relationships .. .. 31
Religious Bodies 189
Rice .. .. •. 98
River Fishing .. .. 134
Rivers.. .. .. .. 3
Roads .. .. .. .. 50
Rotuma .. .. • • 172
Rotumans .. .. .. 174
Rubber, Para . . .. .. .. 99
Rugby Football .. 180,189
S
Savings Bank .. .. 187
School, Medical .. 47
Sea Fishing .. .. .. .. 128
Sheep .. .. .. •• H 5
Shipping 69-72, 177-179
Shooting .. .. .. •• 181
Sisal Hemp .. .. .. .. 102
Social Clubs .. .. .. •• 188
Societies and Clubs .. .. .. 189
“ Southern Cross, ” Flight of .. 54
Spices .. . • • • • • 106
Sport .. .. • • • • 180
Sports Clubs .. .. . • 189
Starch .. .. .. .. • • 105
Statistics, Vital .. • • •. 20
Steamship Companies .. 50,177
Stock .. .. .. •• ..113
Sugar, Production of .. .. 73
Sugar, Recruitment of Labour for .. 75
Suva 1,47-50,180-190
Swimming .. .. . • • • 180


T
Page
Tapioca .. •• •• 105
Taveuni .. •. • • • • 1
Tax, Income .. • • • • • • 189
Municipal .. • • 190
Residential .. • • • • 100
Telegraph Communications .. 53
Temperature and Humidity .. 182
Tennis • • 180
Thermal Springs . . • . .. 1, 146
Timber .. .. •• H 7
Tobacco .. .. • • • 105
Trade . . . . .• •• •• 09
Trading Licences .. •• 191
Trocas Shell . . • • 107
V Page
Vanilla 104
Vanualevu Island . . . . 145
Vital Statistics . . • • • • 20
Vitilevu Island 143
W
Wages, Rate of .. . . . . 191
Weights and Measures .. .. 187
Wharf . . .. • • • • 72
Wireless Communications . . 53
Y
Yaqona (Kava) .. •• ..22,26
Yasawa Group .. •• •• 1










