

he Ware Wizard
Vi
.. --A '■ ■
’’V*-** -; • ■ v*..
■ "
a 'if"' • "v-
«*sf ‘U iSi
mtij
TIL
22/.
4m/i
IffipmiS'. V*.’ * X'!'‘ ’ ■• '•'


,i f
C#i
I
\
WM 4
f 1 i
USSSTf,


r M
S *


••
I


'
THE WITTY
wi z\i i) of
mUEANEYTE
A MAGICAL HOUR
IN FAIRYLAND
FRANCES CHAPMAN
ILLUSTRATED BY
Published by Boobook Productions, Melbourne
Text and Illustrations copyright in Australia and British Dominions
Printed in Australia by Morris and Walker Pty. Ltd., Melbourne.
Registered, at G.P.0., Melbourne, for transmission through the post as a book.


“ NOW THEN, SAUCY ; NONE OF YOUR BACK-CHAT ! ”


CHAPTER I.
MEET SCRUMPTIOUS SALLY
M HAPPY LITTLE GIRL was pretty Sally Sealake at all times,
but she was particularly bright just now, because Uncle Dogsbody
and his family had taken the house opposite for the summer
holidays. That meant that Sally would have lots of company,
for during most of the year there were not many children of
her own age living handy to her home, nestling snugly, but
rather lonesomely, half way up the hill to Sassafras.
Camphoretta the Cat and Ponsasinorum the Pup followed
her down the back yard as she went to feed Hannah Orpington
the Hen, and Gertrude Gobbler, the Turkey. These two austere
creatures were deep in a discussion about their own importance,
and Sally could not but notice their earnest expressions.
“Well, girls,” Sally said cheerfully as she emptied the bowl
right at Gertrude’s front door, “ what’s cooking ? You both have
a guilty look, you know; have you been talking politics again?”
Now, being rather a lonely soul, Sally had developed the habit
of speaking her thoughts aloud; naturally she didn’t for a moment
suspect that her feathered friends would understand what she was
saying; nor was she prepared for what happened immediately the
words left her mouth; and you can imagine how she jumped
when Gertrude threw out her speckled chest and said haughtily:
“I don’t know what you mean by ‘politics’; am Ito under-


stand that this is no longer a free
country?”
“Goodness!” squeaked Sally.
“You ARE touchy, aren’t you?
I was only joking - and anyway,
how was I to know you’d under-
stand —my gosh! you’re actually
talking ENGLISH! However did
you learn so quickly? When I
spoke to you this morning about
the size of your last egg you didn’t
say anything!”
“Some remarks are best left
unanswered,” said Mrs. Gobbler,
with a far-away look in her eye;
“you surely can’t expect me to
“ WELL. GIRLS, WHAT’S COOKING ? ”
put all my best goods in the window, so to speak, with prices
as low as they are and Ministers and such-like trash threatening
to bring them lower yet! Besides, I’ve been on the job without
a break without even breaking an egg since Easter Saturday;
and one can’t expect to be one hundred per cent, efficient, ALL
the time; even Jove nods.”
“Who’s‘Jove’?” Hannah put in quickly. “Ishe the big white
rooster who’s just come to live with the Dogsbody people over the way?
You haven’t wasted much time, have you ? ”
“ Hannah,” Sally rebuked her. “ Please remember that the people
you’re talking of are related to me— it’s my Uncle Dogsbody and my
Auntie Macassa. They’ve got a dinky farm at Malvern, but they have
come up here for the hols., and my cousins and I are going to have pots
of fun, let me tell you.”


I
Abashed, Hannah dropped her tail feathers and waddled
thoughtfully back to her own nest, where, in a fit of absentminded-
ness she proceeded to lay a double-yolked egg, forgetful of the fact
that she’d already done her good deed for that day.
Meanwhile, Sally had said good-bye to the turkey and wandered
back to the verandah, still puzzled and not quite certain that she had
not been dreaming, and not being anxious to undergo a gentle “ leg-
pull ” by her mother, she decided to say nothing of the occurrence until
she’d had it confirmed. This turned out to be as simple as kiss - your -
hand. Early the following morning she trotted down the cinder-path
with a saucerful of canned sweet-corn, a delicacy of which
Gertrude Gobbler was extremely fond, and hardly had Sally
called out a merry but dubious “Good morning”
than the buxom turkey popped her head out of doors and
gurgled a cordial salutation
in an unmistakable “Conver-
sation - by - correspondence -
in - twelve - easy - lessons”
type of voice.
Pleased as Punch, Sally left
the sweet-corn with Gertrude
and sped back to her bedroom,
her bonnie eyes alight with
joy and her regular white teeth
—which she cleaned twice daily
with a stiff brush and common
salt gleaming like snowcaps
on Mount Macedon!
And that was how it all
began I
SALLY WOULD TICKLE UNCLE DOGSBODY’S SHIN


CHAPTER H.
BUMBLEPUMP FINDS THREEPENCE
f|UNT STAMPEDA wasn’t looking the larder was unguarded.
So Uncle Dogsbody grabbed a plateful of cookies, some fruit and sand-
wiches, and trundled his fat, cheery body to the dell, where the tree-
ferns made a fairy bower over the rippling, sparkling waters of the
creek that came tumbling down from Olinda, babbling softly over
smooth pebbles and cascading tunefully over rock and crevice. Here
he was always sure to find his niece Sally, his own children, Sulphur-
etta, Manganese and D— Hannah the Hen, Gertrude Gobbler, Pon-
sasinorum the Pup and Camphoretta the Cat all listening for the
first sounds of Uncle Dogsbody’s arrival.
Once in the fairy-ring which the kiddies and their animal friends
had made their summer picnic resort, Uncle Dogsbody would pass
round the plateful of cookies, light his old pipe, sit back against a
fallen log and wait for the inevitable appeal. This was usually made
by Sally, who would lean forward and softly tickle the piece of bare
shin just visible between her uncle’s sock and the turn-up of his
trouser-leg. Uncle Dogsbody would pretend to be asleep for a
second or two; then he would scratch gently at the ticklish spot
and make a sudden snatch at the twig Sally was prodding him with.
This caused everybody to go off in shrieks of laughter every-
body except Gertrude Gobbler —of course SHE was far too well-
bred for that, and generally contented herself with a subdued


■mtm
BUMBLEPUMP ESPIES THE OLD GERMAN GUN
“Quark” that began on a high note and dropped down down, down
below the middle of her chest and Sally would start the ball
rolling by asking, “What about our story, Uncle Dogsbody?” You
know you promised.”
“Promised, did I? When, may I ask?”
“ Las’ night, Daddy ? ” his children screamed in unison,
wriggling like fat koalas as they did so.
“ Umph! Praps I did promise, then,” Uncle Dogsbody would
grunt; and first making certain that his pipe was well alight, he would
run his fingers through his tousled hair and get on with the job; for if
there was one thing that made him so refreshingly DIFFERENT from
other uncles, it was the number of wonderful stories he could remem-
ber. It would have sent a thrill through an onlooker to have been able
to stand well outside that group and watch the eager, rapturous
expressions on each face as they waited for the story to commence !
“Now,” says Dogsbody, “Did I ever tell you about the little
old man who lived in the German gun at Canberra?”
“ German gun in Canberra ? ” the children chorused; and
Hannah the Hen raised a polite but incredulous claw to her beak.
“Yup, German gun all right. It’s mounted on a big truck just
as it was when we captured it in France or Flanders in the last
war; all painted over with camou —cam—”


“I know,” screamed Manganese,“ Camphorated oil, eh Daddy?”
“Camphorated oil? Of course not. I mean camouflage that is,
it is painted all over with streaks of green and grey and dabs of putty
shade and what-not, to make it invisible from the air, you know Well,
as I was about to tell you, this little old man had been a clever bottle-
blower in his youth, but from ‘BLOWING’ ’em he learned to ‘EMPTY’
them; and as he grew older without growing wiser, he lost most of his
trade. By and by he found himself without either skill or customers,
so he sold what few tools he hadn’t already pawned and with a
pound or so in his pocket he set off on a hike all round Australia.
He got as far as Canberra, saw the old gun, and being rather
smaller than a grig, managed to clamber inside the long barrel.
“My!” was his first utterance, “ This might very well serve as a
temp’ry home for your humble servant, Simon Bumblepump!”
As the sun sank behind the old Church of St. John’s, Simon
nipped up the barrel and dropped down to the breech, inside. He
unpacked his belongings and filled up the chinks beneath him with
his tattered overcoat; he unrolled the sheets of cigarette-paper in
which he had wrapped his butter-ration, and his last quarter-ounce
of tea. This done, he lighted a smoke his pipe was a pencil-
stub with the lead centre removed took off his shoes and
tucked his feet into his armpits. When he had smoked his pipe
down to the last draw he uncoiled himself and began to prepare sup-
per. It was rather dark in his new home by this time, so he lighted his
lantern and set it atop one of his boots, where it glowed so cheerfully
that a glowworm who’d made the gun-barrel HIS home for a few
nights thought it was day already and put out his own lamp.
On a matchbox-table our man spread a small square of gum-leaf
for a cloth, laid out his meal, and after saying grace enjoyed his first
supper in Canberra.


‘ ‘TREASURE TROVE ! ” CHORTLED BUMBLEPUMP
Afterwards he tidied away everything, blew out his lantern to
save fuel-oil, and snuggled down in his bed. It was not long be-
fore our little fellow was snoring happily, and next day being
Sunday he “slept-in” for a while. Then, after a light breakfast,
he cleaned up and went aloft; that is, he sat in the bright sun-
light, straddling the top of the gun - barrel, and would not have
exchanged his new home for the finest apartment in Government
House.
While he was seated there, enjoying the warmth and watching
the wreath of blue smoke from his pipe weaving in the gentle


summer breeze, he spotted something shining from beneath a ti-
tree bush a few yards from the gun-carriage.
“Treasure-trove!” he chortled, and gripping his
pipe firmly in his teeth, slid backwards down the barrel, fetching
up at the bottom with a bump that jarred his spine. Only
pausing to regain breath, he tumbled from breech to truck, and
from truck to wheel rim; thence sliding down one of the steel
spokes, he landed on the rusty section of rail beneath. From
here it was a hop, a skip, and a jump to the bush— and there,
blinking up at him was a bright, new threepenny piece. It
must have fallen from the pocket of a boy or girl or an elderly
Scotsman going to kirk, and rolled away to the ti-tree.
—SNUGGLED DOWN TO BED


/ *
I , IK'S* * .
V. ;:-* v ,.~v ; * ,
;
7 / kv# ">I4 •
i f y
a
\ I*. . I>7
■'V^'
CHAPTER 111.
THREEPENCE GOES A
LONG WAY
T HAT’S A FIND! ” Bumble-
pump cried, excitedly; “Now I
can get something special for
Sunday’s dinner. I DO hope
there’s a cafe or something
open today.”
Stuffing the silver coin in
the waistband of his trousers,
he set out towards the Civic
—TURNED INTO A DIMINUTIVE WITCH
Centre, Lest the piece of money should drop, he was forced to walk a
hit stiff-legged; but, bless you ! with enough cash in hand to purchase
a real Sunday dinner, he didn’t mind that.
Fortunately for Bumblepump, there WAS a shop open, and
waiting until there was no customer in the place, he slipped inside,
hoisted himself on to a chair, and hopped on to the counter from
the top ledge of a glass case containing biscuits.
You can imagine the fright he gave the girl behind the counter.
She found herself gazing down at a manikin less than ten inches in
height.
“Mercy on us!” she squealed. “Am I seeing things, or is it real ? ”


Vv
PsS' ?ypL
'nvv J/{ '
II 1 a / > / J6 J J f
THERE WAS A “ SWISH-SWISH ! ” FOLLOWED
BY A RUSH OF COOL AIR
“ I think you’re a nice girl,”
sif/ said Bumblepump, gallantly;
“ Do you think I might have a
little bit of something for din-
ner I can pay, you know.”
“ I bet you can. What with,
big hoy ? ”
“ Why, with this,” said Mr.
Bumblepump, turning his
back on her for a moment,
as he released the coin from
his waistband, and rolling
it to her hand as he faced
her again. “ It’s real money,
I assure you.”
“Maybe,” said the girl, “but
what on earth do you think you are going to get for threepence-half
a ham and a bag o’ potatoes?”
“Not altogether,” said Bumblepump, “but perhaps a slice or so,
and one or two scraps of gravy I’m partial to gravy, my dear.”
“Ah well,” said the waitress, her kind heart forbidding refusal
of the little man’s request; “Come round to the back and be quiet, for
goodness’ sake.”
Very obediently Bumblepump climbed down from the show-
case, but not without first returning his little silver coin to its
hiding place on his tummy. He reached the floor safely, and he
trotted behind as he had been told. There he took refuge in a
box of ice-cream cones; but hardly had he climbed over the side
of the case when the silver piece fell from his waistband and rolled
well under the counter.


—WITH ONE GIGANTIC HOP, WAS STANDING ON THE WING OF THE PLANE


m
“Jiminy Creepers!” cried
the manikin; and like a shot
he was off the box and after
the coin. It had barely stopped
spinning before he was reach-
ing out for it; then, just as he
clutched it by its rotating edge
it ceased gyrating, and right
before his startled eyes turned
into a diminutive witch, with
piercing eyes that bored Mr.
Bumblepump through and
through and through.
“ Good day, ma’am,” he had
sufficient manners to stammer;
WOULDN’T HAVE ANYTHING TO DO WITH a J had nQ j dea ”
THE LOCAL BOYS.
“That’s the worst of you male creatures,” piped the witch,
digging him in the ribs with the sharp end of her besom, “you
never do have any ideas worth mentioning. But now that you
have spoilt my Sunday —what are you after?”
“I’m afraid I don’t understand, ma’am. How could I have
spoiled
“How, indeed! What do you think I was lying out there in
the sun for? Only to have a human girl-child pick me up and
give me a nice ride in her glove ? I may be a fairy, but I’m not a
stick-in-the-mud* and I like going places.”
“Then you turned yourself into a threepenny-bit on purpose?”
said Bumblepump, and flinched in alarm as the fairy-woman lunged
at him with the broom.


“Of course I did, stoopid. Now, because I was once helped by
a boy scout I swore never to let a single day go by without doing
at least one good deed. You’re my good deed for today; so what do
you want?”
“I’m n-n-not wanting anything at the moment, thank you,
ma’am; at least, there’s my dinner that—you—were going to pay
for.”
“ Oh, that!” replied the fairy, “ That’s OK. You can pay for
your food with me; sooner or later today I’ll be given out in change,
then I’ll call on you. Where did you say you lived?”
“ I—l—didn’t say, ma’am; but as a matter of fact I’m in resi-
dence in that German gun over by the station. You know, where
I-er-picked you up.”
“ Don’t be vulgar,” the fairy retorted. “ Very well, then, I shall
do you the honour of calling on you any time you may require
my aid.”
“B-b-but how will you know that I n-n-need your aid?” stam-
mered the little man.
“ I’ll know all right,” the old dame said grimly; “ I will be
about somewhere, and before you can say ‘peterpiperpickedapeck-
ofpickledpeppercorns’ you’ll find me at your elbow. Here’s your
waitress. Grab me tight!”
And quicker’n lightning she was a silver coin again, leaning
heavily against Bumblepump’s leg.
“Ah, there you are, big boy!” cried the girl, as he came from down
under. “ Here’s your lunch. Where’s the money?” No pay —no eats!”
She knelt down and laid a small package at the manling’s feet.
He sent the coin spinning to her out-stretched hand, watched her


grasp it, rise to her feet, ring
up 3d. on the cash-register,
and send the fairy coin head-
long into a compartment con-
taining a collection of pennies,
half-pennies, sixpences, and
other “treys”.
“ Now, be off with you, big
boy!” said the girl, looking
down at Bumblepump.
Thanking her very politely,
Bumblepump struggled and
hoisted until he had settled
the parcel across his should-
ers; then, gripping it firmly
“ SNUFF, SNUFF ; DID YOU SAY ‘SNUFF’?”
with a hand on either side,
called out a grateful “Thank you, and a very good day,” and staggered
out into the bright sunshine.
But his luck was dead out! Walking with head bent and shoulders
bowed, he missed seeing a strand of loose wire hanging from the fly-
screen door. Hooking in the pocket-top, this strand jerked Bumble-
pump sharply back. His hold was loosed, and the parcel fell to the
step, to burst asunder and spread itself across the sidewalk.
Sitting down limply, the manikin closed his eyes and began to cry.
In his worry he didn’t notice a customer enter the shop; nor did he hear
the ’ting-a-ling of the cash-register; in fact, he was still weeping noisily
when someone tapped him on the head. Looking up indignantly, he was
amazed to see standing before him, the fairy whom he had last observed
being shut into the dark cash-register drawer, disguised as a 3d. bit.


“You ARE in a mess,” said the threepenny-fairy, “ but blubbering
won’t help. It looks as though you’ll need my assistance sooner than we
expected. What would you like me to do, hefty boy?”
Bumblepump dried his eyes on the back of his hand and began to
think. He thought so hard that his brain commenced to spin and his
ideas got all mixed up. He wanted to ask the fairy to get him safely
home with his spoiled dinner, but somehow the words just would not
tumble off his tongue. So he leaned against the shop-front and gazed
dumbly at his new friend.
“Lost your tongue, have you?” she said, after a pause; then, “I’ll
have to do something about it we can’t have you cluttering up the
sidewalk like this. Hold tight, sonnie! here we go!”
There was a swish-swish, and a rush of cool air, followed by a
gentle thud. “Open your peep-
ers,” he heard the fairy say,
and very cautiously obeying,
Bumblepump discovered to his
amazement and relief that he
was seated in the breech of his
gun-residence, with his dinner
laid out neatly on his match-
box table; and the threepenny
fairy beaming at him from the
opposite side.
“Gosh ! ”he squeaked. “That
was sudden, if you like. You
know your stuff, don’t you ?”
The fairy simpered. “ Think
I’ve been wasting my time all
HACK JUST PICKED HER UP AND HANDED HER
OVER TO THE PILOT


these years ?” she demanded. “ Haven’t I taken correspondence les-
sons from all the best teachers of magic in the Commonwealth! Why, I
gained five firsts in the Open Championship against every magician
they could put up. And not so long ago I defended my title against a
refugee wizard from Europe, who thought he was the only person
capable of turning round three times, jumping down his own throat,
and swallowing his baton. He sang pretty small, I can tell you, when I
not only equalled his effort, but actually ended up by climbing INSIDE
the baton and then changing it and myself into a glass of invis-
ible milk. That was a trick, if you like —it brought the ‘house’
down.”
“ Weren’t you hurt when it fell down ?”
“ Hurt? Of course not, silly. What I meant was, the audience went
wild with appreciation.”
“But —but —if you were a glass of invisible milk, how did
they know it was you ? ”
“ It wasn’t. A kitten walked across the stage and began to lap up
the milk I was the kitten.”
“ But you just said ”
“ Of course I did that’s where my magic comes in; while the
refugee chap was trying to bend the glass without spilling the milk
I’d drunk it all; and the glass bounced. So did his trick.”
“ It all sounds odd to me,” remarked the manikin; “but I suppose
I must be a little upset. Shall we eat ? ”
“ That’s the first sensible thing I’ve heard you say today. 1 hope
you have a healthy appetite.”
“ Eating is the one thing I like better than anything else ’cept
drinking. Or perhaps, sleeping. I’m a good sleeper, I am.”


THE CROSS-EYED MAN WAS LYING ON THE GROUND.
“ Don’t chatter, then,” said the fairy. “ One day I’ll introduce you
to that wizard he’s settled down at a place in Victoria called let
me see, now—yes, that’s it— a place called Warrandyte. They tell me
he’s livened it up good and proper since he began to feel his feet. D’you
know what his latest gag is? Of course you don’t, so stop your inter-
rupting while I tell you.”
She paused to help herself to a slice of meat, and Bumblepump’s
eyes grew rounder and rounder as he noticed that no matter how much
of his dinner she ate, there didn’t seem to be any less on the platter.
This was a bit of all right, he decided, and wondered if he would be out
of order if he invited her to stay for tea, or even breakfast.


“As I was saying,” she continued, “the Wizard doesn’t like the
local garage-man he beats his wife and children regularly each Fri-
day night; and he’s awfully mean, as well. Listen, sonnie. This will
show you how mean he is: he has nineteen kids; every night he gives
’em a penny each to go to bed without supper and save rations. Then,
when they’re asleep he goes round their beds and steals the pennies
from ’em. And would you believe it? next morning they get no break-
fast for losing the money they should have put in the Liberty Loan.”
Then the fairy proceeded to tell Bumblepump how the Wizard had
cured the garage man of his mean manners and bad temper by making
his words come out of his mouth backwards, every time he had been
cruel to his children.
Bumblepump’s ears stood out from his head. “ My! ” he com-
mented, “ That was a good one, if you like. You certainly do have
some clever friends.”
“ Clever friends or not,” said the threepenny fairy, “ I know my
business and do you know what I’m going to do?” Without waiting
for the manikin’s reply, she continued: “I am going to send him to
a place in Victoria called Sassafras—”
“ I know Sassafras! ” Bumblepump interrupted, jumping about in
his excitement; “ It’s the prettiest spot in the world, with the excep-
tion of of Fitzroy !”
“ What’s so beautiful about Fitzroy?”
“ Why, don’t you know ? It has some of the finest hydrangeas you
ever saw; besides the Cottage of Captain Cuttle.”
“ Your geography is terrible,” said the fairy; “the gardens aren’t
in Fitzroy they’re in the City; and Captain Cook’s Cottage, not Cap-
tain Cuttle’s. Crumbs!” she added, “you’ve got me doing it again!”


“ Doing what?”
“Why, beginning all my
words with ‘C’, only hard-C,
that sounds like ‘K’. You
ought to know better, big
boy.”
She folded a piece of meat
into a neat triangle and
popped it into her handbag.
“ That’s for a snack later,” she
remarked. “ Now, I must
drop a line to the Wizard;
have you seen my fountain
pen in case?”
“In case?” Bumblepump
queried, “In case what ?”
“CRUMBS ! ” CRIED MR. CONN
“ In case I’ve lost it, silly. Haven’t you any ideas of your own ? ”
She rummaged in her reticule, and found her pen in a miniature
writing tablet and set about composing a letter to the Witty Wizard
of Warrandyte, while the tenant of Germania House—as he’d decided
to call his residence smoked his after-dinner pipe.
The fairy paused in the midst of her writing and asked: “ How
would you like to spend a holiday with the Wizard ? He’s going to be
the guest of a little girl named Sally and her cousins, and I daresay
they would be glad to set eyes on a man of your size. What do you
O 99
say :
“What’s wrong with my being this size?” asked Bumblepump,
drawing himself up till he was at least half-an-inch taller. “Haven’t
you ever heard that expression, ‘Little and good’?”


“ Don’t be so touchy,” snapped the fairy, “you may be all you
are satisfied to be but humans are funny in many ways, and when
they see anything not quite er usual, they say and do funny
things. But you needn’t worry, the Wizard will be there to protect you,
and you should have a pleasant week or two down there. What do you
say?”
“ Try anything once,” said the manikin, and watched anxiously
as the little woman added a few words to her letter. He was gazing so
intently at her pen as it moved quickly along the paper that he grew
remarkably sleepy, and at last his head began to nod. His friend
noticed this, and her eyes gleamed. Faster and faster her pen moved,
and sleepier and sleepier, became Bumblepump. His eyes closed, his
head drooped on his chest and his pipe dropped from his mouth. A
gentle snore came from his lips, and Bumblepump was away in
the Land of Nod !
“Excellent!” cried the fairy and that was that! She waved
her wand, and in a trice the old gun barrel was empty and shining, and
Canberra had lost a new resident, one, moreover, it had not yet realised
was the strangest citizen the Federal Capital had ever entertained!


I
“ I HOPE YOU’VE LEFT SOMETHING FOR ME ! ”


CHAPTER IV.
ALONG COMES THE WIZARD
No sooner had Uncle Dogsbury finished his yarn about Bumble-
pump and the Threepenny Fairy, than the strangest of strange
happenings occurred. Uncle rubbed his eyes incredulously, and
the whole party stared in open-mouthed wonderment at the sight
that met their gaze. For right there on the hollow log appeared the
self-same Bumblepump, the very Threepenny Fairy that Uncle had
been telling them about.
“Allow me,” said the Threepenny Fairy, “to introduce to you ”
she paused for effect-“THE WITTY WIZARD OF WARRANDYTE!”
Nobody applauded, for the party was still trying to decide whether
it was just a dream, or really true, after all.
Nevertheless, at the very moment a figure appeared, apparently
from nowhere a figure so odd and personality so overpowering
that the miracle of the Threepenny Fairy and Bumblepump was imme-
diately forgotten in the contemplation of this new wonder.
Complete in a high wizard hat, cloak and knee breeches, a tall, lank
figure, whose hands and legs were forever on the go, twisting, contort-
ing, wriggling and untying themselves, the wizard beamed on the
company.
“Story-telling, eh ? ” he beamed, while his hands were busy with
the most startling of antics, reaching out and plucking from the air


/ y
- N "'\
WITH ONE WALLOP FROM HIS WHIP KNOCKED THE ’POSSUM’S HEAD OFF
tiny green snakes, humming-birds, white mice, bren guns so small that
a doll could have fired one, miniature battleships, lollies, wrapped in
cellophane, six-legged donkeys, kewpies tied up in blue ribands, and
camels with the hump beneath their tummies instead of on their backs.
Nobody thought of looking at Uncle. Had they done so they would
have discovered that he was very quietly pinching himself all over and
whispering in an awed tone: “It can’t be true; it must be the fried lob-
ster I had for supper!”
“Now, my friends,” the Wizard went on,“I believe your Uncle
Dogsbody is a bit of a dab hand at story-telling, eh ? Well, I rather


“THIS WAY, O WORSE THAN IDIOT!”
fancy myself in that direction. What about a little contest ? I tell a
story; your Uncle tells one and the winner takes all.”
“Takes all what?” demanded Sally, who comes of a forthright Scot
tribe I mean, family.
“Takes all for granted, missie,” replied the Wizard.
“ Don’t be so difficult to get on with.”
“Any prize?” asked Dogsbody. I ought to get a start, you know.
After all, I’m only an amateur; you’re a professional, aren’t you ?”
“ What’s that got to do with it ? If you’re an amateur you can’t
accept a prize but you can get ‘ honourable mention’.”


“ But what if they select me as the winner? ” Dogsbody persisted.
The Wizard frowned, and his fingers began to twitch ominously.
At once Dogsbody turned pale and cried: “ Isn’t it foolish of me? How
can I possibly be the winner I shall be relieved if I even run a poor
third.”
“ How can you run third if there’s only two of you ? ” demanded
Sally, always practical, if annoying.
“ S’easy,” remarked the Wizard, tersely. “You may award me first
and second prizes, and your Uncle third. Being an amateur, a certifi-
cate of merit will suffice, I think.”
“ I think it’s silly,” sniffed Sally, and the Wizard began to glower.
“ Before you start saying something that’s likely to land you in a
mess,” he said, “listen to this yarn: it’s not one of my best, but it has
its points and and I like it. If you take my advice you will like it too.”
Then he took an unfair advantage of his audience; he waved a
wand that sprouted from his left ear, and immediately everyone was
frozen stiff—able to hear and think and sit comfortably, but prohibited
from sneezing or coughing or scratching of noses or legs, or otherwise
upsetting and annoying the speaker! He blew his nose with a bandanna
of yellow and red, popped into his mouth a throat tablet, and began:
At the very end of Dandenong Road (he said), not far from the
big hoarding with the clock that has four faces and tells the time o’
day differently on each, there used to live a young woman who
was forever wanting something new, something different, something
strange.
She wouldn’t have anything to do with the boys who came to see
her from places round about; because, she said, they all came in the
same way—either on cycles with wheels, in motor-cars with wheels, or in


buses with wheels. “Why couldn’t one of them come along in a car with
five or nine wheels?” she said peevishly one day. “Or why come in that
way at all ? If one of them came down in a flying fortress, I should
marry him at once! ”
Although her father was tired of her tantrums, he was willing to
oblige, and being fairly well-off he booked a half-page advertisement
in each of the daily newspapers, in offering the hand of his daughter,
PLUS a vacant lot on the beach at Aspendale, PLUS a free pass on
the trams, to any likely lad arriving at his home in a conveyance so
novel that his daughter would fall into the suitor’s arms and name the
wedding day. The advertisement duly appeared. But, as I was say-
ing, on the far edge of Bendigo dwelt a widow with three sons and
as they took in all the daily papers the three sons soon learned all about
Mr. Conn’s offer regarding his daughter, Ruby. The two older lads
Mack and Jack said they wanted to go down to Melbourne and build
a special sort of carriage, one for each of them. The widow was proud
of her boys, and firmly convinced that should Ruby Conn see one of
them it wouldn’t be necessary for him to have a special car or flying
fortress; so she laid out their best clothes and gave each a packet of
sandwiches, kissed them good-bye and wished them good luck with
the young woman. “Whichever of you wins her,” she told them, “the
other must come back home at once; the three-acre paddock has to be
ploughed, and your brother can’t drive the tractor. He’s got a hammer-
toe, as you well know.”
Hack, the youngest of the family, was a bit simple. He spent hours
wandering over the fields and bush; but for all that, when he saw his
brothers setting off for the State Capital, he thought he might as well
go along also, and asked mother for a lunch like theirs.
‘‘l can build a flying fortress as well as anybody,” he boasted; but


V ■W»-W^
\ '**
his mother went on with her
needlework, and said quietly,
“ The farm’s the place for you,
Hack; someone’s got to be here
to shoot the landlord when he
calls for the rent.”
But Hack persisted; so at
last, to shut him up, his mother
gave him a packet of food and
a milk bottle filled with cold
coffee, unsweetened and black.
Off went the lad to the sta-
tion; but near the corner of
the thicket he met a wee man
about SO high, who asked him
for a bite to eat and summat to
“WE’LL SOON SETTLE THAT!” SAID THE
BUTCHER
sup. Hack was almost ashamed to offer him so poor a meal as he pos-
sessed; but thinking that if one is hungry black coffee and dry bread
look more appetising than no bread and less coffee, and feeling sure
that the beggar looked hungry, he opened up his parcel and passed it
to him.
And would you believe it the meal inside the package was finer
than anything Hack had ever eaten in his life.
Down on a fallen trunk they sat together, and as they munched and
drank, the wee stranger asked Hack whither he was bound. “Off to the
city to build me a flying fortress, or something like that,” said Hack.
He almost forgot about the girl who’d been responsible for the idea,
but remembered as an afterthought, and told the stranger that when
the airship was completed he was going to fly it to the girl’s home, and
marry her.


“Well,” said the wee mannie, “if that’s all you intend, take this
snuff-box with you. It’s a magic snuff-box, as you can see. I brought
it from Ould Oireland in the year 1805. The first cross-eyed man you see
after you leave me, offer him a pinch of snuff. Then take a pinch your-
self; you will sneeze three times; so will he. When you have done
sneezing, shut your eyes and count five—slowly—and when you open
them again you’ll find a flying ship before you. Climb into it and fly to
the home of your girl-friend; if you meet anybody along the way, take
him or her along with you.”
Hack was rather dubious at accepting so valuable a gift, but the
wee man insisted; so he slipped it into his hip pocket, bade his donor a
cheery good-day, and trotted off in the direction of the town-lands.
Sure enough, as he passed a cottage on the outskirts of Bendigo,
whom should he meet but a cross-eyed man, so cross-eyed indeed, that
he was looking about five ways at once, or so it seemed. He stopped
the lad by stepping in his path; and said in a wheezy tone: “ Can you
spare a copper or two for a meal, young fellermelad ? ”
“ I have no coppers,” said Hack, “ but I CAN offer you a pinch of
snuff if you take snuff.”
“ Snuff! Snuff ? Did you say snuff? Bless my buttons, I haven’t
set eyes on real snuff since the time of the Eureka Stockade. Sure you
are not foolin’? ”
“ No, here it is,” said Hack; and pulling the magic box from his hip
pocket passed it to the cross-eyed man, not forgetting, as soon as the
box was returned, to take a pinch himself. No sooner had he sniffed
the dusty grains, watching how the cross-eyed man had done it, than
a vast sneeze overtook him, starting at his very toes and travelling to
the top of his head. For a moment he thought he was going to lose it,
so hard did he wriggle and shake!


1 "^’-4-4;
•>
“Atishoo - atishooo - atish-
ooo!” sneezed the man, knock-
ing himself flat in the process.
“A-chooo! atchooooo! at-
choooo!” Hack echoed. It was
just as well that the force of
his sneeze closed his eyes for
him, otherwise he couldn’t pos-
sibly have remembered the
manikin’s injunction! Then as
he felt wildly for his kerchief,
his eyes streaming and his
nose burning like anything,
he managed to recall that he
was supposed to count “ five,”
and did so, as slowly as he could
in the circumstances.
THE WIZARD TOOK AN UNFAIR ADVANTAGE
OF HIS AUDIENCE
When Hack opened his eyes the cross-eyed man was lying on the
ground with his right ear pressed to the earth, but of the promised
flying ship there was no sign.
Hack was so disappointed he could have wept, and was about to
speak to the cross-eyed man, when someone tapped him on the shoulder.
He turned about with a nervous start and there, looming over him
in all its massive slenderness, was a Flying Fortress. Its pilot was stand-
ing immediately in front of Hack; it was he who startled the lad.
“When do we take off?” he asked; but Hack was too astonished
to reply. Instead, he turned about again and spoke to the cross-eyed
man.
“What are you doing down there, Mister?” he enquired.


“Doing?” said the man,squinting up at Hack, “I’m listening to all
the sounds of the world,”
“ Then you’d better take a ride with me in this Fortress,” said the
lad. “You ought to be able to hear more up above.”
“ You’re the boss,” the cross-eyed man replied. Rising, he dusted
the knees of his tattered trousers and climbed into the plane.
“ Shall we go ?” the pilot persisted, and Hack grinned feebly.
“ Might as well,” he decided. “Things are happening to me today
that never happened before.”
“ There has to be a first time, every time,” said the pilot, as he
followed Hack up the collapsible steps of the Fortress.


ift m.j.)
,U': 'f"' -
CHAPTER Y.
HACK WINS A BRIDE
OnCE ABOARD, it wasn’t long before the big plane was on her way,
but at so low an altitude that Hack could see clearly the paddocks and
the railway tracks and the main road to Melbourne. Suddenly he saw,
in a field just below, a man hopping along on one leg, with the other
strapped up behind his ear. Hack leaned out of the plane.
“Hey!” he called out, cup- //• / / n \\ v
ping his hands to make his
voice carry, “What are you
hopping about like that for?
You’ll go a long way in a long
time, won’t you ? ”
“That doesn’t matter,”
called out the man, hopping
along and just keeping pace
with the shadow of the flying
ship, as it skimmed over the
earth. “If I were to take my
leg out of its strappings II q[
would step so far that I’d be |
. | | p j 1 1 | • p • \
at the end of the world in forty-
eight seconds, flat.”
“IT SOUNDS TERRIBLY MUDDLED TO ME,”
SAID THE LION


“Well then,” said Hack, “how about coining up here? You’ll get
ever so much further without tiring yourself out.”
Suits me,” said the man, and with one gigantic hop he was stand-
ing on the wing of the plane, supporting himself against the wind as if
he d been on level ground. Hack helped him through the window and
returned to his post, maintaining a sharp lookout on what was going
on beneath the fast-moving plane. But the one-legged man was only
one of the many oddly-assorted passengers whom Hack picked up en
route to Oakleigh. There was the old woman he found paddling in the
Campaspe River; the truck driver who always worried about an imag-
inary bread shortage; the man with the magical bundle of straw;
another with sticks that turned into armed soldiers when you struck
them on the ground; altogether the queerest complement that ever
flew in a Flying Fortress.
The pilot set the Fortress down in the young lady’s back garden,
so cleverly that an old Scottie dozing in the afternoon sun didn’t even
waken. Then the passengers disembarked, lining up beside the plane
like a member of parliament waiting for the newsreel cameraman and
the microphone. Almost at once the kitchen door opened and out came
the difficult young woman.
“What on earth do you want?” she cried. “Don’t you know that
Essendon’s on the other side of the city?”
“We know all about that, missie,” said Hack, while his friends of
the plane touched their hats (that is, the men touched their hats; the
old lady curtseyed in real pre-war style). “It’s you we I have
come to see. You see, it’s about that advertisement of your dad’s.”
“What! Do you actually think I’d marry a man who goes about
with a crowd of tramps, and things and doesn’t know enough to
use the front door of a strange house? I’d —Fd sooner marry Hitler;


so hurry up and get this flying dog-kennel out of my house before I set
the Scottie on you.”
Hack scratched his head sheepishly, but made no attempt to move.
“Do you know what?” said the old dame, “I think this cheeky
young snippet needs a lesson. What do you think, Mr. Pilot?”
“ I agree with you, mother. What say we teach her the lesson our-
selves ? ”
“ You’re a man after my own heart! ” declared the old lady; and
before you could hold your breath the young woman, the old lady and
the pilot were gone. Nobody saw ’em go—all that happened was a gust
of wind, a leaf or two drifting gently to the grassy lawn from an over-
hanging oak tree, and a faint squeal of protest dying away in the upper
distance.
“ Nothing like doing a job properly,” said the cross-eyed man;
but whether he was speaking to Hack or the man with the sticks, or the
car-driver with the loaves, nobody could decide. Or perhaps he was
addressing his remarks to the snoozing Scottish terrier, for Jock
stirred uneasily, opened one eye, glared up at the speaker, turned over
on his shaggy back and waved his paws lazily.
“ Where do you think they’ve taken her ? ” asked Hack.
“ I wonder why they didn’t use the plane?”
“ Let’s take it ourselves and follow them,” suggested the truck-
driver.
“But who’s to fly it?” Hack objected. “I never learned even to
ride a bike.”
“ S’easy; you just climb aboard and leave the rest to me.”
“ I dunno,” said the lad. “You might smash it up; and for all I
know it’s Gov’ment property. Destroyin’ Gov’ment property is against
the law, you know.”


“WHO ARE YOU, TO COMPLAIN?” SAID THE WATTLE TREE
36


“Destroy nothin’,” said the truck-driver. “If I can’t fly this thing,
I’ll eat that dog, kennel and all!”
“ Saz you! ” came from the Scottie in indignant tones. “ The guy
that tries to eat ME will wish he’d never been born. In Scotland, where
I come from, we’re royal blood and to touch us is like stealing the
Crown jewels.”
“ You don’t think much of yourself, do you? ” said the man with
the sticks; but Jock had no time to reply, for without warning the
boughs of the oak-tree began to shake; and almost immediately after-
wards the old dame and the pilot were standing beneath a wing of the
Fortress, each looking as pleased as Punch. With them was the young
woman, pale as ale and much more subdued than she’d been before.
“ Well, Hack,” said the pilot, as he dropped to the ground and sat
there tailor-wise with his legs crossed, “ we think that the girl-friend
will behave herself now. Am I right, Missie or am I wrong ? ”
Ruby Conn shuddered and said faintly : “ Yes, Mister airman
I’ll be good now. Only DO take all your friends away. If my dad sees
them he’ll put me to bed without any supper.”
Hack opened his eyes in amazement.
“ Do you mean to say a girl as big as you gets sent to bed without
supper ? ” he asked, and Ruby nodded.
“Too right, I do!” You don’t know father when he’s got a grouch
on I mean, when someone’s upset him.”
“ That someone being you ?”
“ Sometimes.”
Hack scratched his head. “ Well,” he said at last, “if you marry me
you won’t have to go to bed without supper. How about it ?”
Ruby scowled. “ You read the advertisement ? ” she snapped.


“ Course I did—why else did I fly here all the way from Bendigo?”
“ Well then, if you did you know that I have to find a SPECIAL
sort of husband and what’s special about you? ”
“About me ? Didn’t I come here in this posh Flying Fortress? An’
haven’t I brought along some of the most queerest of friends? Why,
they can do things like nobody else ever did! You just try ’em ! ”
“What can they do ?” came a voice from the doorway of Ruby’s
house; and spinning round, Hack saw that it belonged to a kind-looking
man, so like Ruby in spite of the difference in age, that it was easy to
see that he was her father.
Plucking up his courage, Hack went across and faced Mr. Conn.
“ They can do anything you want —in reason, sir! At least, I
THINK they can; and that’s why we’re here —so’s you’ll let your
daughter marry me. We’ll have to make it snappy, though, ’cos Ma
needs me back home to help on the farm.”
Mr. Conn laughed. Ruby scowled. The cross-eyed man and the
old lady clapped their hands, and the others just went on looking.
“ Do you know, young man,” said Ruby’s father, “ I like your spirit;
but it’s up to Ruby here. What do you say, daughter?”
“He’s just a bluffer, Pa. Come on, dad; try him out! ”
“ You’re a nice young thing” said the old dame. “If I had a kid
like you I’d larrup and larrup and lar —”
“ Quiet! ” the pilot interrupted, and the old dame shut up like a
closed penknife; nevertheless, you could see her lips still forming the
words “Larrup; larrup.”
“ You know, that’s a dash good idea,” said Mr. Conn. “ Either this
young men is SO good he WILL be able to keep his promise—in which
case he’ll have earned a wife; or else we shall prove him to be just what


The Scottie snorted. “Yon’s
no Australian,” he snarled; “ it
is real Scotch! For why did ye
think ah couldna’ put in a wee
bit argument now an’ then? ”
Mr. Conn rubbed his chin
and started to reply. Then he
changed his mind, and looked
at Hack. “This business gets
more screwy every minute,” he
commented; “ but my girl is
right. If you want her get
me a a—”
you suggest a bluffer; and I
don’t suppose in that case that he
or his friends will hang about
here for long.”
“Boss,” said the Scottie, sit-
ting up in the path and begging,
with his little rudder beating a
tattoo on the gravel, “take a tip
frae me; yon wee laddie has the
making o’ a real dandy husband;
and ” Mr. Conn jumped.
“Crumbs!” he cried, “This is
getting beyond a joke. Since when
did you learn Australian ? ”
CAME RUNNING OUT WITH A WHIP AND SEVERAL SONS AND DAUGHTERS


/ ■
k He stammered a little, and
Jy his voice faded off as he gazed
’-fjOL.. \ \ /(, vacantly at expectant Hack.
I i' | Ruby waited a second, then
\ j J s he butted in: “ Fetch me a
glass of ice-water from the
''lvTv> Aleutians,” she began, thus
showing that she DID read
the War bulletins, if nothing
else: “and then use it to fill
up-”
She was still speaking when
the man with his leg bound up
behind his ear untied the knot,
let his leg drop to the ground,
stamped once or twice to bring
—CROSSED THE RIVER SAFELY
back the circulation, and disappeared just like that! And before
you could say “Eeny-meeny-moe!” there he was back again, with a
gallon jar labelled “Aleutian Island Fresh Food and Ice Company.”
“ Here you are, young lady,” he said. “ Next time, choose a place
where there aren’t troops a-fighting each other. I nearly lost an ear
when a Jap sniper mistook me for a seagull.”
Ruby watched him lower the jar to the ground and re-strap his leg
behind his ear. Then suddenly she ran to her father and buried her
face in his waistcoat.
“ Daddy,” she sobbed, “send him away! It isn’t fair. What chance
has a girl got with people like these hanging around. Do tell them to
hop it.”
Hack stared for a moment; then he winked at the pilot, who grinned
back.


“ Do you know, sir,” he said politely, ““I’ve made up my mind that if
I married your daughter it’d be the worst thing I could do. My mother
expects me to marry a LADY and your daughter isn’t one - by gosh
she isn’t! So you don’t have to worry we’re leaving. Good day, sir
good morning, missie —■ s’long pal! ” (this last to the Scottie, who
barked out a gruff reply and trotted off to the back of the kennel, where
he had lately buried a fine bone only five days old).
“ Hey! ” said Ruby, flinging herself in Hack’s road. “ Who do you
think you are telling me who I’m going to marry and who I’m not
going to ? When I make up my mind, it takes more than a man to change
it for me. When do we go to church?”
Hack was too much of a gentleman to argue. He just picked her
up, handed her over to the pilot, who lifted her to the cabin of the plane,
shook hands with her father, who in turn was too dumbfounded to open
his mouth any wider than to gape and shoo’d his friends to the great
flying ship. The Scottie dashed after them, barking furiously, and in
a second he was in his young mistress’s lap.
Five minutes later Mr. Conn was alone. He shook himself like a
man coming in from the rain, tottered indoors, and poured himself out
a drink; and sat down to write to the newspapers, withdrawing his ad-
vertisement, and asking for a wedding announcement to be inserted
instead. It was only then that he realised that he didn’t know his son-
in-law’s name.


$£&$?
M nfTr^s&r*0^
CHAPTER VI.
THE PERFIDIOUS POSSUM.
THE WIZARD’S VOICE died away. He gazed expectantly at the
kiddies and Uncle Dogsbody; but nobody spoke. Then the Wizard
remembered that they were under a spell, and, waving his wand, re-
stored them to their previous state.
“ Now,” he swaggered, “how about it? Do I get the first prize
and the second ?”
“Not on your life! ” said a tiny
voice, that of the Threepenny
Fairy. “The Wizard tells a good
tale, but I bet you (pointing at
Camphoretta the Cat) could tell
quite a good one, couldn’t you ? ”
Camphoretta simpered and
stroked her whiskers. “Well,
ma’am,” she admitted, “ p’raps I
could and then again, p’raps I
couldn’t; but at least I could try.”
“ You’d better,” said the fairy,
grimly. The tone in which she said
it made the cat lose some of her
ladylike stiffness, “ Go ahead, and
SAW THE DEVIL AND SCREAMED LIKE MAD


don’t make it too long this
book is long enough as it is!”
Camphoretta grinned feebly.
She curled her tail about her
paws, half closed her eyes, and
began:
Many years ago, before the
railway ran to Aspendale and
that part of the country was
all forest, a ’possum boarded
with a mother fox and her baby
cub. There were no other
animals in the forest, because
the farmers had killed them all
off; and they had set so many
traps about that the ’possum
Tv i” ' 'Ay
1
—BEGAN TO SHARPEN HIS KNIFE
and the fox dared not leave their home.
They stuck it out as long as they could; but by and by the three
became so hungry that the ’possum decided to call it a day. Said he:
“I’ve thought of a darn good plan. I’ll pretend to be dead. You change
yourself into a man and take me into the town and sell me. With the
money they pay you, buy food and bring it home—and as soon as I get
the chance I’ll slip away and come too, so we can have the dinner to-
gether. Now, don’t forget; you WAIT for me and don’t eat it all before
I get here.”
“Of course not,” said the mother fox; “what do you take me for
a human child? We’ll wait but for goodness’ sake don’t be late; I
am so hungry I could eat a stove, chimney and all.”
She tied the ’possum in her handbag, warned the cub not to open


the cabin door until she returned; and set off forthe village—walking
past the paddock where the golf club is now and changing herself
into the very image of a woodcutter who lived on the edge of the
woods, but whom the mother fox knew was spending the day (and his
money) in the city.
In the village she sold the ’possum, who, the fur-trader agreed, was
in a remarkably fine condition; and with the money had a topping time
in the shops. Then she trotted off homewards, waiting till she was near
her own garden before changing back into the shape of a fox. Baby
cub was safe indoors, and wanted to start on the food mother had
brought, as soon as she’d unpacked it.
“Oh, no,” says ma; “fair play’s a jewel. We must wait for the
lodger.”
Soon the ’possum arrived, out of breath with running so fast. “ I
hope you’ve left something for me,” he panted. “ I couldn’t get away
any sooner.”
Well, they made that food last a full week. Then, when it was all
eaten, the ’possum rubbed his paws together and said:
“ Now it’s your turn, Mrs. Fox. You pretend to be dead, and I’ll be
a squatter or something like that. I bet I make them pay more for you
than you had the sense to get for me !”
“ I’ll do better next time,” promised mother fox, and locking the
cub in the kitchen, off they went. Near Aspendale the fox crawled
into a sack, and changing himself into a man the ’possum swung the
sack over his shoulder.
He was as good as his word, and sold the fox for a handsome sum;
but as he was leaving the buyer it occurred to him that his cash would
go a lot further if there were fewer mouths to feed. So he tiptoed back


to the man who’d bought the fox, and whispered: “That fox may only
be foxing. Take care she doesn’t hop off when you open the bag.”
“ We’ll soon settle that,” said the butcher; and tapping the fox
on the head with his chopper, he really killed her.
Back in the forest home, the ’possum ate all the nice things on his
own, taking no notice of the poor wee cub, who crouched in the corner,
hungry and cold and lonely, and crying for his mother.
Poor little fellow! He watched in vain for his mother; then he
began to put two and two together; and at last felt quite sure the
’possum had in some way caused the death of his ma. He sat up all one
night, and had the satisfaction of hearing the ’possum talk in his sleep;
and because murder WILL out, he learned the terrible truth!
“ I’ll learn him,” he vowed; and set himself to figuring out a plan.
It was clear that he was not big enough to punish the ’possum by
force, so he tried cunning, and without letting the murderer see how
angry he was, the cub said in a coaxing tone:
“ Let’s have a game of changing ourselves into men. If you can
change yourself so smartly that I can’t smell you out you win; but if
I change myself so that you can’t spot me, I win and you pay forfeit.
Would you like to start?”
“No, you go first,” said the ’possum. “And think of something
original there are too many ordinary men in this part of the woods.”
“Oke-doke,” said the cub. “ But you’ll have to be pretty good to
catch me; I’m going to change myself into someone really important.
Here goes!”
He shot behind a big tree, and made for the open road near the
beach. Here he squatted behind a tree trunk and waited for something
to happen. Sure enough it did! In an hour or so, who should come along


“WHAT ARE YOU DOING, OLD MAN?” ASKED THE TASMANIAN DEVIL
the road but a cattle-buyer, driving a smart pony and sitting at his ease
in a smart little trap. The ’possum had one look at the elegant turn-
out, and said to himself: “He certainly looks important enough!”
Without further ado he sprang on to the footboard of the trap and
barked: “I’ve found you out! I’ve won! I’ve won! I’ve won!”
“ No, you’ve lost! ” said the cattle-buyer, and with one wallop from
his whip he knocked off the ’possum’s head. “ Funny things happen in
Aspendale,” said the cattle-buyer. “I wonder what made him talk?”
“Wouldn’t you like to know?” said the little cub, as he made off
through the woods. “Anyway, even humans have their uses at times.”


“That’s all, folks,” said Camphoretta, and gazed fixedly at the
Koala, who was making faces at her from his stance on the trunk.
“ Quite good, I must confess,” said the fairy; “you’ll have to look
to yourself, Wizard,” she went on; “these locals aren’t so dumb as one
might imagine.”
“ Dumb, indeed!” grumbled Gertrude Gobbler. “I have no wish to
enter in controversy, madam; but if I couldn’t spin a yarn as interesting
as any that little twirp can unfold, I’d eat my hutch, staples and all!”
“ That’s a bold statement,” said Bumblepump, who was beginning
to feel better and enjoying himself immensely in this new world the
fairy had so kindly introduced him to.


’ I 1
/ w
THE WOLF DROVE HOME A FINE FLOCK OF
GEESE.
CHAPTER VII.
DINGO’S LAST RIDE.
ii.
LISTEN TO THIS, then,”
said Gertrude, and started her
story:
A few miles up the Murray
there’s a particular spot where
the wild ducks go to raise their
families. They choose a tiny
island in the middle of the
stream where it is widest, and
there they stay till the children are old enough to fly.
One bright morning a hungry dingo stood on the river bank licking
his chops and wishing he could swim or fly. But not being able to do
either, he cast about for some other way of getting across the water to
what looked like a most succulent breakfast, lunch and dinner rolled
into one.
“If only I could swim,” he sighed; “ instead of being crippled
how I could enjoy a meal of fat, juicy ducklings even without apple
sauce.”
Just then a poor old horse strolled to the river bank and stooped
his long neck for a drink. My, what a scrawny steed he was, to be
sure! Once upon a time he’d been a marvellous racer winning valu-
able stakes all over the land. Among the feats credited to this unbe-


hungry, nor am I FULL — I’m
sort of training, you know.”
“Training for what?”
“For the day when I can Yu|
live on one gum-leaf a week.”
“When’ll that be — when
you’re dead?” '
“ No, before that — when my \\h \
master returns from wherever t| V v v sA
he is and puts me on rations X s
again.
lievably aged horse (according to Gertrude, who might have been mis-
taken) were these: he had won the Melbourne Cup twice, the Sydney-
Melbourne boat race once, the Police tug-of-war at the Botanical Gar-
dens; and beaten the Collingwood Football team on their own ground!
Anyhow, in recognition of all his prowess, he had been turned out to
pasture on the banks of the Murray, and here he was free to roam as
he wished.
“ Good morning, friend,” said the dingo, limping up to the horse
when he had finished drinking. “ Are you very hungry this morning
or have you broken your fast already ? ”
“Well,pal!” the horse replied, running his tongue around his
teeth in search of any stray piece of gum-leaf that might have lodged
there during his last GOOD meal two days ago, “Fm not exactly
“Well, in case your boss
should be held up for a travel
permit, how about a nice, juicy J
meal of apples —ripe, ruddy
I fyyj THE RABBIT CAME NEXT WITH A
apples; millions ol apples: bundle of vegetables


“ Lead me to ’em! said the horse, his ears erect and a gleam in his
dulled eye; “ Or are you kidding ? ”
“ Not on your life,” said the dingo, “There’s an orchard across the
river there I could show you the exact place, but this gammy leg of
mine stops me being able to swim and I used to be SUCH a good man
in the water; you wouldn’t believe the prizes I got for swimming! ”
“ Don’t worry about that,” said old man horse. “Just scramble on
my back and get up behind my ears; thank heaven I learned the grace-
ful art early in life and have never forgotten it.”
“0.K.,’ said the dingo,“and while you’re having you’re fill of
apples I can scratch about in the undergrowth there may be an odd
bird or two or perhaps a wee lamb.”
“ I didn’t know lads of your family went in for birds,” the horse
remarked as he stepped into the crystal-clear stream and made for the
other bank.
“ We don’t, as a rule,” said the dingo, “but what with ration coupons
and no firewood and two elections in the last twelve months, a fellow
doesn’t know where he is and can’t keep up the same traditions, can he?”
“ I s’pose not,” said the horse, although he didn’t quite understand
what it all meant. “ That’s a job well done,” he said. The dingo agreed,
and pointed out the path to the orchard. As soon as Mister Horse had
gone, Mr. Dingo trotted up the bank to a spot from which he could quite
easily reach the island home of the wild duck. Standing well back for a
good run, the dingo got into his stride, launched himself into the air, and
made a perfect three-point landing on the tiny islet.
It wasn’t long before he had cleaned up the duckling brood; then,
after washing down his late breakfast or early dinner with a gulp or
two of fresh water, he jumped back to the mainland and took a short
cut to the orchard.


A SMALL BLACK WIZARD APPEARED IN A CLOUD OF SMOKE
51


“ Well, have you eaten all you could?” asked the horse, knee-deep
in apple-cores.
“ I have! I couldn’t eat another bird if you paid me. Let’s go back
now.”
“But I’ve hardly begun to eat yet,” the horse objected.
“Very well,” the dingo replied,“ I’ll go and lie down in the sun on
the river-bank. Don’t be too long.”
He had a snooze for an hour or two, but the horse was still nowhere
in sight, and running back to the orchard the dingo saw him still eat-
ing. By this time the old horse was up to his tummy in apple-cores.
“ This is too much enough,” said the dingo. “I know a little song
I can sing that’ll stir HIM up.”
So he began to sing. Of course, the old horse wasn’t bothered by
that he was too used to the cheering or boo-ing of the crowds on the
race-track stands but the farmer who owned the orchard was; and
he came running out with a whip, and several sons and daughters
carrying sticks. Dingo was too cunning to be chased, however; but the
horse was easy meat, and by the time they’d finished with him every
bone in his poor old carcass ached like fun; only it wasn’t FUN for Mr.
Horsie!
When the humans had gone, the dingo came out of the thick under-
brush and found the horse lying on the sand bruised and sore with the
thrashing he’d received.
“Good heavens, pal,” he cried, “wherever have you been? I’ve been
looking for you all over the place.”
“Don’t call me ‘pal’ ? ” said the horse. “Why did you sing that song
and bring the farmer on my tail ? I can hardly move, I’m so battered.”
“What?” cried the dingo; “ D’you mean to say you got thrashed


4
just over a simple song? I
always indulge in a spot of
music after meals.”
“Is that so?” commented
the horse. “How unfortunate
for me that I didn’t know. Very
well, let’s go home. Climb on
my back while I’m lying down.”
So the dingo mounted the
horse once more, and, clinging
tightly to the swimmer’s ear-
roots, he managed to keep his
bushy tail well out of the wet.
When they were about the “ IBET YOU COULD TELL quite a good one.”
middle of the river the horse suddenly trod water, and said:
“ I think I’ll have a roll; I need a good bath.”
“ Gosh! ” the dingo cried out, “Don’t do that, or 1 may get wet or
possibly drowned.”
“ Maybe you will,” said the horse; “but you see, I always have a
roll after a good dinner, and, thanks to you, I had an extra good
dinner!”
So over he rolled in the water, and the dingo got wet first, the
tip of his tail, then all over, and finally he was drowned, just as he had
feared!


CHAPTER Vffl.
JUJU OF THE JUNGLE
“n
l/ O YOU CALL that a story fit for a competition like ours?” asked
the Wizard, as Gertrude Gobbler ended and beamed on the assembly.
“And why not, indeed? ” the fairy enquired. “It contains a moral,
doesn’t it? And if a story HAS a moral, it doesn’t need to be much of a
yarn in other respects. Not that your tale isn’t perfectly satisfactory,”
she added, as she saw a sarcastic reply trembling on the turkey-lady’s
tongue.
Then Bumblepump put in a word. “I never told a story—not even
a tweeny-weeny fib, in my whole life,” he confessed. “How about me
having a go?”
“By all means,” said the fairy, graciously. “But keep it short, if
you please—the shorter, the less long, if you follow.”
Bumblepump grinned, spat on his hands and rubbed them together
and gazed unblinkingly at Konrad the Kookaburra. Konrad tried
to stare him out, but couldn’t, so he burst into a violent cackle of
laughter—and somehow or other THAT gave Bumblepump the inspir-
ation he needed. He sat him down on Dogsbody’s knee, coughed just
like a public speaker, and this is the tale he told :
Long, long ago, before the white folks built noisy trains, that go
here, there and everywhere across the African veldt, and through the
steaming jungles,a whopping big gorilla got himself caught in a cage.


THE PEOPLE THREW THEIR HATS IN THE AIR AND BOMBS AT HIS FEET
He tried in vain to get through the heavy wooden bars, and roared with
rage and grief when he couldn’t.
By chance, a Zulu laddie named Juju came along and gazed in
astonishment at the gorilla in the trap.
“ Hey! Let me out of this, 0 Chief! ” begged the captive.
“ Not so, my friend,” the Zulu replied calmly, “you would probably
kill and eat me if I did.”
“Never think of such a thing!”’ the gorilla screamed; “On the con-
trary, I should be grateful so long as I live and serve you as a slave.”
Now, when the gorilla sobbed and sighed, and wept and swore.


jL
s YT'i'y x *
0 D 0
K\ \ »i / / n L
. p 1 “, h
A
'A
poor Juju’s heart was soften-
ed, and at last he opened the
door of the cage. Out popped
the huge ape. He grabbed the
Zulu in his tremendous hands,
and cackled: “ What a poor fool
you are! What’s to stop me eat-
ing you now, for after being
cooped up so long I’m so
hungry you wouldn’t believe!”
The Zulu pleaded for his life,
but in vain; all he could obtain
from the gorilla was a promise
to accept the decision of the
first THREE things he chose
to question as to the justice of the gorilla’s action.
So the laddie first asked a wattle-tree what it thought of the mat-
ter, but the wattle-tree replied coldly: “Who are you to complain of
harsh treatment? I give shelter and shade to all who pass by and in
return they lop off my limbs for firewood and tear off my leaves and
flowers to feed their cattle! I don’t whimper nor should you. Be a
man and take what’s coming with a smile!”
Sad at heart and dreadfully scared, Juju passed on; and a mile or
so along the way he saw a bullock treading corn—around and around
he plodded, bent with the weight of his yoke and sweating in the mid-
day sun. The Zulu laddie put his question to the bullock, but fared no
better than he had with the wattle. “ You are a fool to expect grati-
tude ! ” said the bullock, keeping up his weary circular walk as he did so.
“Look at me! I used to draw a family cart, all painted and gaily gar-


landed; but I fell ill, and a youngster supplanted me. And this is my
reward! Take it on the chin, black man; it’s no use whining!”
Still sad, but still hopeful, the Zulu asked the Road to give him its
opinion. “My dear sir,” said the Road, “ aren’t you foolish to expect
anything else? Here am I, useful to everybody, yet all, rich and poor,
great and small alike, trample on me as they go their ways; the white
men giving me nothing but the ashes of their pipes and folk of your
colour the husks of their grain!”
Hearing this, Juju turned back sorrowfully. On the way he met a
lion an old mangy lion with no teeth hut a head full of wisdom.
“What’s the matter, 0 Zulu?” he called out. “You look as miser-
able as an ostrich without a sand-heap.”
The laddie told him all that had occurred.
“It sounds terribly muddled
to me,” said the lion, when he
had finished his story. “Would
you mind telling me all over
again; everything has got so
terribly mixed up.”
The chocolate boy told his
tale all over again, but the lion
shook his head in a dazed sort
of way, and still couldn’t under-
stand what it was all about.
“ It’s very queer,” he said sadly;
“ but it all seems to go in at one
ear and out of the other! I tell
you what, let’s go to the place
where it all happened, and then


possibly I shall be able to give a considered judgment.
So they returned to the open cage, where they found the gorilla
waiting for the Zulu, and sharpening his teeth on a slab of rock.
“ You’ve been away a long time,” he growled; “but now that you
are back, to dinner!”
“To dinner!” muttered the Zulu. “There’s a delicate way of put-
ting it, if you like!”
“ Give me five minutes, 0 Great One!” he implored, “so that I may
explain the whole affair to the Lion here, who, being old, is somewhat
slow in his wits.”
“0.K.; but don’t make it too long,” the gorilla snapped; “It is
already well past my usual meal time.”
So the Zulu laddie commenced the whole story all over again, not
missing a single detail, and spinning as long a yarn as possible.
“Oh, my poor addled brain, my poor, useless brain!” the lion
moaned, wringing his paws. “Let me see! how did it all begin? You
were in this trap, and the gorilla came walking along ”
“ Crumbs! What a muggins you are!” the gorilla interrupted. “ I
was in the cage.”
“Of course ! ” said the lion, pretending to tremble with fright.
“ Yes, I was in the cage —no I wasn’t! Dear, dear! Where are my wits ?
Let me get this straight—the Gorilla was in the Zulu, and the cage
came walking by but no, that’s not it either! Well, don’t mind me;
just begin your dinner, for it doesn’t seem as if I’ll ever understand!”
“ By cripes you will!” said the gorilla, in a rage at the lion’s utter
stupidity; “ I’ll make you understand!” Look here! lam the gorilla—”
“ Yes, 0 Great One !”
“ And that is the Zulu!”


“ True, 0 King! ”
“ And here is the cage! ”
“So I see, Lord of the Jungle! ”
“ And I was in the cage. Do you understand now ? ”
“ Yes no! Please, 0 Great One ”
“ What is it ? asked the gorilla, impatiently.
“ Please, 0 King! How did you get into the cage ? ”
“ How? Why, in the usual way, of course! ”
“ Oh, dearie me, my head’s beginning to whirl again I Please don’t
be angry, 0 Lord of the Jungle but what is the usual way?”
At this the gorilla lost all patience, and jumping into the cage he
cried: “This way, 0 worse than an idiot! Now, do you understand how
it was?”
“ Perfectly! 0 Wise One!” grinned the lion, as he slammed the door
to and dropped the bar across; “and, if you will permit me to say so, I
think matters had best remain as they were! Come on, black boy—this
is your way home!”
And leaving the huge ape shaking the bars in rage, they went their
ways.
“ Sounds pretty good to me,” said Dogsbody, when Bumblepump
ended. “What do you say, ma’am? ”
“ I agree,” said the fairy; but of course she may have been inclined
to favour the manikin, because he was her guest, so to speak!
But the Wizard was not so gracious. “It’s JUST a story! ”he re-
marked. “ They’ll have to do better than that if I’m to be beaten. Any-
body else feel in the mood ?”
He glared at each in turn; and finally his eyes lighted on Konrad
the Kookaburra. “How about you ? ” he asked. “You seem to get
about a bit perhaps you could oblige?”


CHAPTER IX.
THE KING’S CAT
KoNRAD hadn’t expected this challenge, but he wasn’t the least bit
perturbed. “I bet I can tell a tale as well as the next,” he replied. “The
only trouble is, I tell such a good tale that I’d win ALL the prizes—then
you might be so upset you’ld want to set Camphoretta the Cat on me.
And that wouldn’t be nice, would it ? ”
“Don’t let that worry you, young fellow,” said Camphoretta, strok-
ing her right whisker languidly, “I’ve promised Sally here to behave at
least while the holidays are on so you needn’t be frightened of me.”
“ In that case,” said the Kookaburra, “ things is are different!
Well, this is my story: ”


that ’cos he was blacker than a
night in a coal cellar. At the
time of this tale Dusky was
extremly old—as a matter of
fact he was older than that;
and as for temper! My, oh, my!
he was the worst - tempered
thing in the kingdom.
But the most unusual thing
about Dusky was that in all his
born days he’d never arched
his back or purred! He’d never
learned—and being the daddy
of all cats* there was no one to
tell him how satisfying a good
purr could be. But he learned
and this is how!
SCRUMPTIOUS SALLY
One fine day there was a procession in the town; and as a mark of
especial favour the whole kitchen staff received permission to take time
off to see the parade ; the whole staff that is, with the exception of
Dusky who had to stay indoors and turn the coffee-mill!
Watching the others as they pranced off to enjoy the fun, Dusky
scowled and glowered and spat after them; and retired to the chimney-
corner, where he sat on his tail and felt very glum indeed.
Just then the chief cook looked in on his way to the procession.
“ What’s all this loafing for?” he asked gruffly. “Come on—hurry
up with the coffee; they’ll be wanting a meal as soon as they come in.”
Dusky’s whiskers bristled. He seized the handle of the coffee-mill
and began turning fiercely, a terrible frown on his face.


I M 'wlv
| '*
MASTER REYNARD CARRIED A BOUNCING BUFF ORPINGTON
Meanwhile, out of doors the townsfolk were having a wonderful
time! From king down to cottager a good time was the only order of
the day; banners waved in the summer breeze. Then came the proces-
sion, at the head of which were three battalions of buglers, each man
blowing a tune of his own. After the buglers came twenty regiments
of marine infantry on pure white chargers, each regiment fully armed
with the very latest in spears and bows-and-arrows. These soldiers
followed in close array ten squadrons of dragoons in the famous crim-
son-and-green uniform of their order, with lances all ablaze with pen-
nants, ribands, flags, streamers, favours, and bits of coloured cloth;


and headed by their own drum-and-fife band, eight thousand strong, in
a livery of scarlet and gold with black-and-silver braid on their chests
and arms and thighs and down the seams of their yellow breeches.
Then came their king walking alone, in his martial garb, and
bowing on either side as his people cheered and screamed and threw
their hats in the air and bombs at his feet.
The lollie-shops sold out, the restaurants ran out of food and the
rest, the bars sold out their beer, the inns issued no more invitations,
and the shops suspended selling. The city cleaning corps reported next
day that they had gathered half a million cans of garbage, ten thou-
sand tins of broken toys, and filled seventy sheds with smashed seats,
suspender-belts and starched thingamebobs.
But taking it by and large, not in the memory of the oldest
inhabitant had there been so successful a parade; and there was
only one dissatisfied resident in the whole land. Can you guess who
that was ? Of course you can it was our pal Dusky Knight!
Even as the people cheered and the soldiers marched, Dusky
turned the coffee-mill. “ Crumbs! ”he growled, “ it’s not fair that those
scullions with feet like leather should see the King in his glory, while
I, shod as it were in velvet, have to remain here ! Hasn’t it
been said from time immemorial that ‘a cat may look at a king’ ? In-
deed it has, quite as much as a dog may have his day. I won’t stand it;
it’s not fair. A cat may look at a king; and if any cat may look at a king,
why, I’m the cat who may! There are no other cats in the world; lam
the only one. Miaauw! the cook may shout till his breath gives out; he
shall not frighten me! For once lam going to see the King; for once, I
am going to have my fling!”
He was so pleased with this little rhyme that he regained his tem-
per for a while; but soon he heard another burst of cheering, and


/
forthwith went mad. Without counting the cost, he up and swallowed
the coffee-mill box, handle, drawer knobs, coffee-well and all and
was off to see the King.
So far, so good. But unluckily, the procession couldn’t last for ever
and the time of reckoning came for Dusky. When the crowds had
gone, and with them the barons and the dukes, the marquises and the
earls when the last of the troops had disappeared beneath the giant
portcullis of the distant castle, our friend the cat stood by the palace
gate, dejected and sorrowful, with tail a-drooping. He felt miserable,
glum and sour; and with very good reason: he had a coffee-mill on his
conscience! To own up to the entire truth, Dusky had the coffee-mill
on his tummy; and was feeling decidedly unwell.
Taking advantage of the unusual turmoil, he sneaked into the
scullery, just in time to see the
cook pop his head in at the
entry, and hear him yell: “How
now, how now, you loafers!
The parade is over, but the
breakfast is not hurry up,
scurry up, scamper and trot!
The cakes are all cooked and
are piping hot! Then WHY IS
THE COFFEE SO SLOW! ”
Shamefaced and penitent,
Dusky hid himself under the
refrigerator; it seemed to
him that the whole world was
wrong. Anybody who has ever
swallowed a coffee-mill will
readily understand why!
UNCLE FOUND AN UNUSUAL WATCH


While the cat was groaning and weeping, the cook came into the
kitchen. “Where’s the coffee? ”he began; then, catching sight of the
crying cat, he bent and commenced to stroke his back.
Dusky Knight cowered in horror. “My ! ” he gasped, “if he rubs
his great hand down my back he will feel the corners of the coffee-mill
through my ribs as sure as fate. Oh! Oh! I am a gone cat!”
With that, he humped his back as high as he could, so that the
corners of the mill might not make bumps in his side. But alas! he
forgot that coffee-mills turn. As he arched his back the mill inside
rolled over, and as it rolled began to grind rr-rr-rr-rr
“ Jiminy crickets ! You’ve swallowed the mill!” cried the cook.
“ Of course I haven’t,” said Dusky, “I was only thinking aloud.”
Barely had this terrible falsehood crossed his lips, before a small
black wizard appeared in a cloud of smoke, and, with his forefinger
pointed at Dusky, said, in a frightful voice, all husky with mallee-root
ashes : “ Miserable and cowardly custard! By telling a downright lie
you have made matters worse. For this and your other faults of bad
temper you shall be under a curse until the end of time. Whenever men
shall stroke you aye ! you and your sons forever the recollection
of your shame will make you hump your back, as you did to avoid being
found out; and in order that the reason for your being so cursed shall
never be forgotten, whenever man is kind to a cat the sound of a coffee-
mill grinding inside shall remind him of your guilt and shame ! ”
And it has ever been as the wizard commanded. From then on
Dusky Knight could not stand having his back stroked without having
to hump it instantly; and no sooner did he hump it than the coffee-mill
began to grind rr-rr-rr!
But the curse has come down to the present day; but because cats
have forgotten the real facts, whenever they are stroked they hump
their backs and purr as if these actions were a credit instead of a blot
on their family record.


CHAPTER X.
HANNAHS STORY.
f~ OR THE LAST PART of the Kookaburra’s tale, Camphoretta the
Cat had become so engrossed that she actually started to purr; but by
the time the tragedy had been fully unfolded she was tense with rage,
and her purrs had changed to a deep and menacing growl.
“ I should give Camphoretta a wide berth for the next few days,”
suggested Sally, and as Konrad followed the direction of her gaze he
shuddered from stem to stern like a tank on a washing-board road.
“ No hard feelings, I hope, ma’am ?” he ventured; but the cat made
no reply. The good fellowship of the party seemed about to break up;
but the fairy stepped into the breach.
“ That was a good yarn,” she said; “Of course, present comp’ny
is always excepted. Now, Wizard, how about it?”
The Wizard rubbed his chin. “ Not a bad story, as stories go,” he
said. “ But we still have one or two who haven’t contributed. Until
they do we can’t come to any decision although in my own opinion
nobody has come within five miles of me —that’s speaking in all
modesty, you understand.”
“ Quite,” said the fairy ; and winked at Sally.
“ Who is next on the list?” asked Dogsbody, looking hard at Han-
nah the Hen, who had been an interested but silent member since the
very commencement of the picnic.


* r r*
“ I vote we let the lady have her say,” cried Bumblepump. “ Any-
body second it ?”
There were about three seconders, so Bumblepump declared the
motion duly carried, and Hannah plunged into her story without even
a warning cackle. Said she:
On the edge of a forest in the wilds of Southern Tasmania an old
man lived with his older wife in a tumble-down hut. The man spent
his days in the fields, but was never able to save a penny, and even
though his wife spun flax they were as poverty-stricken after fifty years
of wedded life as on the day they plighted their troth. One day—it was
the fifty-first anniversary of their betrothal the old man said: “I’d
love to give you a present, but alas ! I have less than nothing to give.”
“Don’t fash yourself about that,” said the old lady, “just make me
a straw ox.”
The old man’s eyes stood out
like a snail’s. “A straw ox?”
he cried. “What on earth good
is a straw ox?”
“ Never you mind —just you
do as I say; and while you’re at
it, smear it all over with tar.”
“ Why smear it with tar?”
“ Why worry about that ?
Just do as I say, if you really
want to do something for me.”
“Of course I do,” said her old
man, and speedily he made an
ox of straw on a framework of
A REAL TORTOISE-SHELL LORGNETTE


two-by-two and wire-netting, smearing it from head to tail with tar, as
his wife had commanded.
The next morning, when the old woman went out to the fields to
gather flax, she took the straw ox with her and left it standing alone on
the forest’s verge. Soon a Tasmanian devil came out of the woods and
sniffed the ox inquisitively. “Who are you?” he asked.
“I am an ox all filled with straw, and smeared with tar, as oxen
are,” replied the ox.
“ Is that so?” said the devil “ I need some straw to mend my coat,
and the tar will keep it in place.”
“ Help yourself,” said the ox.
So the devil began to tear at the dummy ox. His great paws stuck
fast, and as he tugged and pulled and pulled and tugged, he covered
himself so much with tar, that finally he stuck and couldn’t get away,
nohow. Then the straw ox dragged him back to the old hut.
When the goodwife came home with her flax and saw the devil, she
screamed like mad for her man. He came running, fearing that some-
thing terrible had happened; but no sooner had he set eyes on the devil
than he pulled him off the ox, tied his four paws to a stout stick, and
threw him into the cellar.
Believe it or not, children, but on the following morning the straw
ox “caught” a wolf; the day after that he got a fox; and the morning
after that he “collected” a rabbit. By this time he was much the worse
for wear, so the old woman made a fine bonfire of him, and she and her
man warmed themselves at the blaze before going off to work. The
last they saw of the old straw ox was a solemn wink from his tinny
eye, made from the lid of a long-preserved cigarette tin.
First thing next day the old man sat down by the cellar door and


began to sharpen his knife,
drawing a hone along the
blade with slow steady strokes.
“What are you doing, old
man?” asked the Tasmanian
devil, a cold shiver going up
and down his spine as he saw
the bright winter sunlight
flicker on the steel.
“Fm getting my knife all
nice and sharp so as to take
off your hide without too much
of a mess; it will make a
lovely warm coat for my old
dame, don’t you think ? ”
“ It looks better on me than
HANNAH LAID THE BIGGEST TWO-YOLKER
YOU EVER SAW
it would on her,” said the devil, his blood running cold. “ I don’t think
it would fit, somehow.”
“ That’s as may be—anyway, there’s no harm in trying, is there?”
“ Look here, boss,” said the devil, in desperation, “you don’t want
my pelt let’s do a deal.”
“ What sort of a deal ? ”
“ Let me loose out of here and I will bring you a dozen of the
finest honey-combs you ever saw. They’ll keep your missus warm
enough, and you won’t have a murder on your conscience.”
“ Haven’t got a conscience.”
“ What have you got, then? ”


A knife and a wife that’s awful cold in winter. Her feet are
just two slabs of ice right in the middle of my back.”
“ Let’s ask her which she’d sooner have, shall we ? ”
“If you like. Hazel!”
“ Yes, dad,” the old dame called out, and came running. The devil
put his question to her, and his heart almost stood still as he watched
her make up her mind. My, how relieved he was when she decided to
accept the honey-combs in lieu of his shiny pelt—and how he tore out
for home when the old man severed his fastenings. “ Don’t forget the
honey,” called out the woman, and he shook a hairy tail in reply.
“ Now, let me see,” said the old man, and sat down again in full
view of the wolf. Slowly and deliberately he honed his knife.
“ Whaffor that knife, boss? ” asked the wolf, the hair on his shaggy
hide rustling uncomfortably.
“ I’m getting a fine edge on it,” the man replied, “ so as to cut up
your coat and make a fine fur cap like the Canadians wear.”
“ You don’t need no cap,” said the wolf, “You aren’t bald.”
“ That’s awful bad grammar,” said the old man; “And what’s not
being bald got to do with fur caps?”
“ You can keep yourself warm without a fur cap,” said the wolf.
“ Let me out of this and I’ll bring you a gaggle of geese. Surely that’s
a fair bargain ?”
“ Mebbe you’re right,” said the old man, after a pause; and cutting
the wolf’s cords he set him free. “ See you to-morrow,” said the de-
lighted animal, as he sped for the forest’s friendly shelter.
“ This looks fine to me,” said the old man; and sat down for the
third time. He pretended not to notice the anxious glance of the bound
fox lying at the foot of the cellar steps.


“P-r-ring, pring!” went the hone; and the fox’s teeth chattered
in dreadful unison. He struck it for a few minutes; then his courage
went, and he stammered:
“S-S-Say, mister, why all that sharpening? A razor couldn’t be
any sharper than your knife already.”
“ When you does a REGULAR job of skinning, you needs a knife
that’s extra sharp; didn’t you know that? ”
“ Y-y-yes! But who I mean, what are you going to skin ? ”
“ You, of course ; the rabbit isn’t worth while skinning. He goes
into the pot, hair and hide and all.”
“ Moses! ” squealed the unhappy rabbit, as he overheard these
ominous words, “that’s an awful way to treat a guest, if you ask me.”
“ We weren’t,” said the man ; and the rabbit shut up promptly
“What do you want with
my skin, mister ? ” asked the
fox, squirming.
“ You know a dandy new
fur vest; this one wore out
ten years ago, but I never had
time to catch another. You’re
fine and plump, aren’t you,
now?”
“Plump? Me?” cried the
fox; “ you’re dreaming, man.
Look, you can count every one
of my ribs ! I’m so thin I have
to stand twice in the same
place to cast a shadow! And I
have crawled through so many
WIZARD (BACK VIEW)


\ ' /
w r
HOW HANNAH STRUTTED TO AND FRO!
reaching out till it met the
proper hand! Then there was
a BANG—not a noisy, raucous
bang, but a tuneful report like
a tuning fork, and as the bon-
bon tore apart a thousand but-
terflies soared into the air and
floated above, while a paper
cap settled lightly on the head
of the guest in particular!
It would have done your eyes
> good to watch that little group
enjoying their Christmas cheer
—especially while Konrad the
Kook, was sending Sally off
into fits of merriment as he
whispered silly riddles, such as “How big is less than half?” and “Who
was it that didn’t ? ”
“Didn’t what?” giggled Sally.
“Don’t say ‘what’” replied Konrad; “That’s not nice say T beg
your pardon’.”
“ It doesn’t make sense to me,” said Sally.
“ Perhaps not,” laughed the Kookaburra, “ but girls with the right
type of manners need not be sensible so long as they are happy.”
Sally shook her head doubtfully—but was too full of good
cheer to object any further and Konrad flew off to the
Wizard, who was shewing Hannah and Ponsasinorum the pup a
new trick he’d just thought out! The Wizard first cleared a space in
