

■>: *








THE
INNOCENTS AT HOME
PART lI—THE PACIFIC COAST
By MARK TWAIN
(SAMUEL L. CLEMENS)
Author of “THE INNOCENTS ABROAD” &G
AUSTRALIAN EDITION
MELBOUENE:
GEOEGE EOBEETSON, 69 ELIZABETH STEEET.
MDCCCLXXII,


MELBOURNE:
PRINTED BY FERGUSSON AND MOORE,
48 FLINDERS LANE EAST.


CALVIN H. HIGBIE,
OP CALIFORNIA,
AN HONEST MAN, A GENIAL COMRADE, AND A
STEADFAST FRIEND,
THIS BOOK IS INSCRIBED
BY THE AUTHOR,
IN MEMORY OF THE CURIOUS TIME
WHEN WE TWO
WERE MILLIONAIRES FOR TEN DAYS.
tf'ivvr I 1"K


t
••
-
■
■


This book is merely a personal narrative, and not a preten-
tious history or a philosophical dissertation. It is a record
of several years of variegated vagabondising, and its object is
rather to help the resting reader while away an idle hour than
afflict him with metaphysics, or goad him with science. Still,
there is information in the volume; information concerning
an interesting episode in the history of the Far West, about
which no books have been written by persons who were on the
ground in person, and saw the happenings of the time with
their own eyes. I allude to the rise, growth, and culmination
of the silver-mining fever in Nevada—a curious episode, in
some respects; the only one, of its peculiar kind, that has
occurred in the land; and the only one, indeed, that is likely
to occur in it.
Yes, take it all around, there is quite a good deal of in-
formation in the book. I regret this very much; but really it
could not be helped: information appears to stew out of me
naturally, like the precious ottar of roses out of the otter.
Sometimes it has seemed to me that I would give worlds if I
could retain my facts; but it cannot be. The more I caulk
up the sources, and the tighter I get, the more I leak wisdom.
Therefore, I can only claim indulgence at the hands of the
reader, not justification.
THE AUTHOE.




CHAPTER L.
Captain Ned Blakely—Bill Nookes Receives Desired Infor-
mation—Killing of Blakely’s Mate—A Walking Battery
—Blakely Secures Nookes —Hang First and Be Tried
Afterwards—Captain Blakely as a Chaplain—The First
Chapter of Genesis Read at a Hanging—Nookes Hung
CHAPTER XLYI. page
The Nabobs of Those Days—John Smith as a Traveller—
Sudden Wealth—A Sixty-Thousand-Dollar Horse—A
Smart Telegraph Operator—A Nabob in New York
City—Charters an Omnibus—“ Walk in, It’s All Free”
—“You Can’t Pay a Cent”—“Hold On, Driver, I
Weaken—“ Sociability of New Yorkers” 179
CHAPTER XLYII.
Buck Fanshaw’s Death—The Cause Thereof —Preparations
for His Burial —Scotty Briggs the Committee Man—
He Visits the Minister—Scotty Can’t Play His Hand—
The Minister Gets Mixed—Both Begin to See—“ All
Down Again But Nine ” —Buck Fanshaw as a Citizen
—How To “Shook Your Mother”—The Funeral—
Scotty Briggs, as a Sunday School Teacher 184*
CHAPTER XLYI
The First Twenty-Six Graves in Nevada—The Prominent
Men of the County—The Man Who Had Killed His
Dozen—Trial by Jury—Specimen Jurors—A Private
Grave Yard—The Desperadoes —Who They Killed—
Waking up the Weary Passenger—Satisfaction With-
out Fighting 191
CHAPTER XLIX.
Fatal Shooting Affray—Robbery and Desperate Affray—A
Specimen City Official —A Marked Man—A Street
Fight—Punishment of Crime 195


CHAPTER LIV.
Chinese in Virginia City—Washing Bills —Habit of Imita-
tion—Chinese Immigration—A Visit to Chinatown —
Messrs. Ah Sing, Hong Wo, See Yup, &c ... 219
CHAPTER LV.
Tired of Virginia City—An Old Schoolmate —A Two Years’
Loan —Acting as an Editor—Almost Receive an Offer —
An Accident —Three Drunken Anecdotes—Last Look at
Mt. Davidson—A Beautiful Incident 223
CONTENTS,
CHAPTER LI.
The Weekly Occidental—A Ready Editor—A Novel—A
Concentration of Talent—The Heroes and Heroines—
The Dissolute Author Engaged—Extraordinary Havoc
With the Novel—A Highly Romantic Chapter—The
Lovers Separated—Jonah Out-done—A Lost Poem —
The Aged Pilot Man—Storm on the Erie Canal—
Bollinger the Pilot Man—Terrific Gale—Danger
Increases A Crisis Arrived Saved as if by a
Miracle
CHAPTER LIE
Freights to California—Silver Bricks—Under Ground Mines
—Timber Supports—A Visit to the Mines—The Caved
Mines—Total of Shipments in 1863
CHAPTER LIII.
Ji m Blaine and his Grandfather’s Ram—Filkin’s Mistake—
Old Miss Wagner and her Glass Eye—Jacobs, the
Coffin Dealer —Waiting for a Customer —His Bargain
With Old Robbins —Robbins Sues for Damage and
Collects—A New Use for Missionaries —The Effect—
His Uncle Lem. and the Use Providence Made of Him
—Sad Fate of Wheeler —Devotion of His Wife—A
Model Monument —What About the Ram ?
Off for San Francisco—Western and Eastern Landscapes
—The Hottest Place on Earth—Summer and Winter
CHAPTER LVI.
CHAPTER LVII.
California —Novelty of Seeing a Woman —"Well if it ain’t
a Child!”—One Hundred and Fifty Dollars for a Kiss
—Waiting for a turn


Kingdom—Fruits and Delightful Effects
256
CHAPTEE LXIY.
An Excursion—Captain Phillips and his Turn-Out—A Horse-
back Eide—A Vicious Animal —Nature and Art—Inte-
resting Euins—All Praise to the Missionaries
258
CHAPTEE LXY.
Interesting Mementoes and Eelics—An Old Legend of a
Frightful Leap—An Appreciative Horse—Horse
Jockeys and Their Brothers—A New Trick—A Hay
Merchant—Good Country for Horse Lovers
262
CHAPTEE LYIII.
Life in San Francisco—Worthless Stocks—My First Earth-
quake—Eeportorial Instincts—Effects of the Shocks—
Incidents and Curiosities—Sabbath Breakers —The
Lodger and the Chambermaid —A Sensible Fashion to
Follow—Effects of the Earthquake on the Ministers...
CHAPTER LIX.
Poor Again—Slinking as a Business—A Model Collector—
Misery loves Company—Comparing Notes for Comfort
—A Streak of Luck—Finding a Dime—Wealthy by
Comparison—Two Sumptuous Dinners
CHAPTER LX.
An Old Friend—An Educated Miner—Pocket Mining—
Freaks of Fortune
CHAPTEE LXI.
Dick Baker and His Cat—Tom Quartz’s Peculiarities—On an
Excursion—Appearance On His Return —A Prejudiced
Cat —Empty Pockets and a Roving Life
CHAPTEE LXII.
Bound for the Sandwich Islands—The Three Captains—The
Old Admiral—His Daily Habits —His Well Fought
Fields—An Unexpected Opponent—The Admiral Over-
powered—The Victor Declared a Hero
CHAPTER LXIII.
Arrival at the Islands—Honolulu—What I Saw There—
Dress and Habits of the Inhabitants—The Animal


CHAPTER LXVI.
A Saturday Afternoon—Sandwich Island Girls on a Frolic—
The Poi Merchant—Grand Gala Day—A Native Dance
—Church Membership—Cats and Officials—An Over-
whelming Discovery
CHAPTER LXVII.
The Legislature of the Island—What Its President Has
Seen—Praying for an Enemy Women’s Rights
Romantic Fashions—Worship of the Shark—Desire for
Dress—Full Dress—Not Paris Style—Playing Empire
—Officials and Foreign Ambassadors —Overwhelming
Magnificence
CHAPTER LXYIII.
A Royal Funeral—Order of Procession—Pomp and Ceremony
—A Striking Contrast—A Sick Monarch Human
Sacrifices at His Death—Burial Orgies
CHAPTER LXIX.
“Once more upon the Waters”—A Noisy Passenger—
Several Silent Ones—A Moonlight Scene —Fruits and
Plantations ..; 282
CHAPTER LXX.
A Droll Character—Mrs. Beazeley and Her Son—Meditations
on Turnips—A Letter from Horace Greeley—An Indig-
nant Rejoinder—The Letter Translated but Too Late...
CHAPTER LXXI.
Kealakekua Bay—Death of Captain Cook—His Monument
—lts Construction—On Board the Schooner
CHAPTER LXXII.
Young Kanakas in New England—A Temple Built by
Ghosts Female Bathers—l Stood Guard—Women
and Whiskey—A Fight for Religion—Arrival of Mis-
sionaries 292
CHAPTER LXXIII.
Native Canoes—Surf Bathing—A Sanctuary—How Built—
The Queen’s Rock—Curiosities —Petrified Lava
CHAPTER LXXIV.
Visit to the Volcano—The Crater—Pillar of Fire—Magni-
ficent Spectacle—A Lake of Fire


CHAPTER LXXV, PAGE
The North Lake—Fountains of Fire—Streams of Burning
Lava—Tidal Waves . 304
CHAPTER LXXYI.
A Reminiscence —Another Horse Story—My Ride with the
Retired Milk Horse—A Picnicing Excursion—Dead
Volcano of Holeakala—Comparison with Vesuvius—
An Inside View., 305
CHAPTER LXXVII,
A Curious Character—A Series [of Stories—Sad Fate of a
Liar—Evidence of Insanity 310
CHAPTER LXXVIII.
Return to San Franciso—Ship Amusements—Preparing for
Lecturing—Valuable Assistance Secured—My First
Attempt—The Audience Carried—“All’s Well that
Ends Well” 311
CHAPTER LXXIX,
Highwaymen —A Predicament —A Huge Joke—Farewell to
California —At Home Again—Great Changes. Moral. 31}
APPENDIX.
A,—Brief Sketch of Mormon History 324
B. —The Mountain Meadows Massacre 328
C. —Concerning a Frightful Assassination that was never
Consummated 332




THE INNOCENTS AT HOME.
BOOK II. —THE PACIFIC. COAST.
CHAPTEE XLYI.
There were nabobs in those days—in the “flush times/’ I
mean. Every rich strike in the mines created one or two. I
call to mind several of these. They were careless, easy-going
fellows, as a general thing, and the community at large was as
much benefited by their riches as they were themselves—
possibly more, in some cases.
Two cousins, teamsters, did some hauling for a man and had
to take a small segregated portion of a silver mine in lieu of 300
dollars cash. They' gave an outsider a third to open the mine,
and they went on teaming. But not long. Ten months after-
ward the mine was out of debt and paying each owner 8,000
dollars to 10,000 dollars a month—say 100,000 dollars a year.
One of the earliest nabobs that Nevada was delivered of wore
6,000 dollars worth of diamonds in his bosom, and swore he was
unhappy because he could not spend his money as fast as he
made it.
Another Nevada nabob boasted an income that often reached
16,000 dollars a month ; and he used to love to tell how he had
worked in the very mine that yielded it, for five doUars a day,
when he first came to the country.
The silver and sage-brush State has knowledge of another of
these pets of fortune—lifted from actual poverty to affluence
almost in a single night —who was able to offer 100,000 dollars
for a position of high official distinction, shortly afterward, and
did offer it—but failed to get it, his politics not being as sound
as his bank account.
Then there was John Smith. He was a good, honest, kind-
hearted soul, born and reared in the lower ranks of life, and
miraculously ignorant. He drove a team, and owned a small
179 k


ranch—a ranch that paid him a comfortable living, for although
it yielded but little hay, what little it did yield was worth from
250 dollars to 300 dollars in gold per ton in the market.
Presently Smith traded a few acres of the ranch for a small un-
developed silver mine in Gold Hill. He opened the mine and
built a little unpretending ten-stamp mill. Eighteen months
afterward he retired from the hay business, for his mining in-
come had reached a most comfortable figure. Some people said
it was 30,000 dollars a month, and others said it was 60,000
dollars. Smith was very rich, at any rate.
And then he went to Europe and travelled. And when he
came back he was never tired of telling about the fine hogs he
had seen in England, and the gorgeous sheep he had seen in
Spain, and the fine cattle he had noticed in the vicinity of Rome.
He was full of the wonders of the old world, and advised every-
body to travel. He said a man never imagined what surprising
things there were in the world till he had travelled.
One day, on board ship, the passengers made up a pool of 500
dollars, which was to be the property of the man who should
come nearest to guessing the run of the vessel for the next
twenty-four hours. Next day, toward noon, the figures were all
in the purser’s hands, in sealed envelopes. Smith was serene
and happy, for he had been bribing the engineer. But another
party won the prize ! Smith said: —
“ Here, that won’t do ! He guessed two miles wider of the
mark than I did.”
The purser said, “ Mr. Smith, you missed it further than any
man on board. We travelled two hundred and eight miles yes-
terday.”
“ Well, sir,” said Smith, “ that’s just where I’ve got you, for
I guessed two hundred and nine. If you’ll look at my figgers
again you’ll find a 2 and two o’s, which stands for 200, don’t it ?
and after’em you’ll find a 9 (2009,) which stands for two
hundred and nine. I reckon I’ll take that money, if you
please.”
The Gould and Curry claim comprised twelve hundred feet,
and it all belonged originally to the two men whose names it
bears. Mr. Curry owned two-thirds of it—and he said that he sold
it out for twenty-five hundred dollars in cash, and an old plug
horse that ate up his market value in hay and barley in seven-
teen days by the watch. And he said that Gould sold out for a
pair of second-hand government blankets, and a bottle of
whiskey that killed nine men in three hours, and that an un-
offending stranger that smelt the cork was disabled for life. Four
years afterward the mine thus disposed of was worth in the San
Francisco market seven millions six hundred thousand dollars
in gold coin.
In the early days, a poverty-stricken Mexican, who lived in a
canyon directly back of Virginia City, had a stream of water as


large as a man’s wrist trickling from the hill-side on his premises.
The Ophir Company segregated a hundred feet of their mine
and traded it to him for the stream of water. The hundred feet
proved to be the richest part of the entire mine; four years
after the swap, its market value (including its mill) was 1,500,000
dollars.
An individual who owned twenty feet in the Ophir mine be-
fore its great riches were revealed to men, traded it for a horse,
and a very sorry looking brute he was, too. A year or so after,
ward, when Ophir stock went up to 3,000 dollars a foot, this
man, who had not a cent, used to say he was the most startling
example of magnificence and misery the world had ever seen—
because he was able to ride a sixty-thousand dollar horse—yet
could not scrape up cash enough to buy a saddle, and was
obliged to borrow one or ride bareback. He said if fortune
were to give him another sixty-thousand dollar horse, it would
ruin him.
A youth of nineteen, who was a telegraph operator in Virginia
on a salary of a hundred dollars a month, and who, when he
could not make out German names in the list of San Francisco
steamer arrivals, used to ingeniously select and supply substi-
tutes for them out of an old Berlin city directory, made himself
rich by watching the mining telegrams that passed through his
hands, and buying and selling stocks accordingly, through a
friend in San Francisco. Once, when a private despatch was
sent from Virginia, announcing a rich strike in a prominent
mine, and advising that the matter be kept secret till a large
amount of the stock could be secured, he bought forty “ feet ”
of the stock at twenty dollars a foot, and afterwards sold half
of it at eight hundred dollars a foot and the rest at double that
figure. Within three months he was worth one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars, and had resigned his telegraphic posi-
tion.
Another telegraph operator, who had been discharged by the
company for divulging the secrets of the office, agreed with a
moneyed man in San Francisco to furnish him the result of a
great Virginia mining lawsuit within an hour after its private
reception by the parties to it in San Francisco. For this he
was to have a large percentage of the profits on purchases
and sales made on it by his fellow-conspirator. So he went,
disguised as a teamster, to a little wayside telegraph office in
the mountains, got acquainted with the operator, and sat in the
office day after day, smoking his pipe, complaining that his
team was fagged out and unable to travel —and meantime
listening to the despatches as they passed clicking through the
machine from Virginia. Finally the private despatch announcing
the result of the lawsuit sped over the wires, and as soon as he
heard it he telegraphed his friend in San Francisco:—
“Am tired waiting. Shall sell the team and go home.”


It was the signal agreed upon. The word “ waiting ” left
out would have signified that the suit had gone the other way.
The mock teamster’s friend picked up a deal of the mining
stock, at low figures, before the news became public, and a
fortune was the result.
For a long time after one of the great Virginia mines had
been incorporated, about fifty feet of the original location were
still in the hands of a man who had never signed the incorpora-
tion papers. The stock became very valuable, and every effort
was made to find this man, but he had disappeared. Once it
was heard that he was in New York, and one or two speculators
went east, but failed to find him. Once the news came that he
was in the Bermudas, and straightway a speculator or two
hurried east and sailed for Bermuda; but he was not there.
Finally he was heard of in Mexico, and a friend of his, a bar-
keeper on a salary, scraped together a little money and sought
him out, bought his “feet” for a hundred dollars, returned,
and sold the property for seventy-five thousand dollars.
But why go on ? The traditions of Silverland are filled with
instances like these, and I would never get through enumerating
them were Ito attempt to do it. I only desired to give the reader
an idea of a peculiarity of the “ flush times,” which I could not
present so strikingly in any other way, and which some mention
of was necessary to a realising comprehension of the time and
the country.
I was personally acquainted with the majority of the nabobs
I have referred to, and so, for old acquaintance sake, I have
shifted their occupations and experiences around in such a way
as to keep the Pacific public from recognising these once
notorious men. No longer notorious, for the majority of them
have drifted back into poverty and obscurity again.
In Nevada there used to be current the story of an adventure
of two of her nabobs, which may or may not have occurred. I
give it for what it is worth :
Col. Jim had seen somewhat of the world, and knew more or
less of its ways; but Col. Jack was from the back settlements
of the States, had led a life of arduous toil, and had never seen
a city. These two, blessed with sudden wealth, projected a
visit to New York—Col. Jack to see the sights, and Col. Jim to
guard his unsophistication from misfortune. They reached San
Francisco in the night, and sailed in the morning. Arrived in
New York, Col. Jack said:—
“ I’ve heard tell of carriages all my life, and now I mean to
have a ride in one; I don’t care what it costs. Come along.”
They stepped out on the sidewalk, and Col. Jim called a
stylish barouche. But Col. Jack said: —
“No, sir! None of your cheap-John turn-outs for me. I’m
here to have a good time, and money ain’t any object. I mean
.to have the nobbiest rig that’s going. Now here comes the


very trick. Stop that yaller one with the pictures on it—don’t
you fret—l’ll stand all the expenses myself.”
So Col. Jim stopped an empty omnibus, and they got in.
Said Col. Jack:—
“ Ain’t it gay, though ? Oh, no, I reckon not! Cushions,
and windows, and pictures, till you can’t rest. What would the
boys say if they could see us cutting a swell like this in New
York ? By George, I wish they could see us.”
. Then he put his head out of the window, and shouted to the
driver :
“ Say, Johnny, this suits me !—suits yours truly, you bet, you!
I want this shebang all day. I’m on it, old man ! Let ’em out!
Make ’em go ! We’ll make it all right with you , sonny!”
The driver passed his hand through the strap-hole, and tapped
for his fare—it was before the gongs came into common use.
Col. Jack took the hand, and shook it cordially. He said:—
“You twig me, old pard! All right between gents. Smell
of that , and see how you like it!”
And he put a twenty-dollar gold piece in the driver’s hand.
After a moment the driver said he could not make change.
" Bother the change! Eide it out. Put it in your pocket.”
Then to Col. Jim, with a sounding slap on his thigh :
“ Ain’t it style, though ? Hanged if I don’t hire this thing
every day for a week.”
The omnibus stopped, and a young lady got in. Col. Jack
stared a moment, then nudged Col. Jim with his elbow: —
" Don’t say a word,” he whispered. " Let her ride, if she
wants to. Gracious, there’s room enough.”
The young lady got out her porte-monnaie, and handed her
fare to Col. Jack.
" What’s this for ? ” said he.
“ Give it to the driver, please.”
"Take back your money, madam. We can’t allow it. You’re
welcome to ride here as long as you please, but this shebang’s
chartered, and we can’t let you pay a cent.”
The girl shrunk into a corner, bewildered. An old lady with
a basket climbed in, and proffered her fare.
"Excuse me,” said Col. Jack. “You’re perfectly welcome
here, madam, but we can’t allow you to pay. Set right down
there, mum, and don’t you be the least uneasy. Make yourself
just as free as if you was in your own turn-out.’’
Within two minutes, three gentlemen, two fat women, and a
couple of children, entered.
“ Come right along, friends,” said Col. Jack ; " don’t mind
us. This is a free blow-out.” Then he whispered to Col. Jim,
" New York ain’t no sociable place, I don’t reckon —it ain’t no
name for it! ”
He resisted every effort to pass fares to the driver, and made
everybody cordially welcome. The situation dawned on the


people, and they pocketed their money, and delivered them-
selves up to covert enjoyment of the episode. Half a dozen
more passengers entered.
“Oh, there’s plenty of room,” said Col. Jack. “Walk right
in, and make yourselves at home. A blow-out ain’t worth any-
thing as a blow-out, unless a body has company.” Then in a
whisper to Col. Jim: “But ain’t these New Yorkers friendly?
And ain’t they cool about it, too ? Icebergs ain’t anywhere. I
reckon they’d tackle a hearse, if it was going their way.”
More passengers got in; more yet, and still more. Both seats
were filled, and a file of men were standing up, holding on to
the cleats overhead. Parties with baskets and bundles were
climbing up on the roof. Half-suppressed laughter rippled up
from all sides.
“Well, for clean, cool, out-and-out cheek, if this don’t bang
anything that ever I saw, I’m an Injun !” whispered Col. Jack.
A Chinaman crowded his way in.
“ I weaken !” said Col. Jack. “ Hold on, driver! Keep your
seats, ladies and gents. Just make yourselves free—every-
thing’s paid for. Driver, rustle these folks around as long
as they’re a mind to go —friends of ours, you know. Take
them everywheres—and if you want more money, come to the
St. Nicholas, and we’ll make it all right. Pleasant journey to
you, ladies and gents—go it just as long as you please—it
shan’t cost you a cent! ”
The two comrades got out, and Col. Jack said;—
“ Jimmy, it’s the sociablest place I ever saw. The Chinaman
waltzed in as comfortable as anybody. If we’d staid awhile, I
reckon we’d had some niggers. B’ George, we’ll have to barri-
cade our doors to-night, or some of these ducks will be trying to
sleep with us.”
CHAPTER XLYII.
Somebody has said that in order to know a community, one
must observe the style of its funerals, and know what manner
of men they b ury with most ceremony. I cannot say which
class we buried with most 4clat in our “ flush times,” the dis-
tinguished public benefactor or the distinguished rough—
possibly the two chief grades or grand divisions of society
honoured their illustrious dead about equally; and hence,
no doubt the philosopher I have quoted from would have
needed to see two representative funerals in Virginia before
forming his estimate of the people.
There was a grand time over Buck Fanshaw when he died.
He was a representative citizen. He had “killed his man”—
not in his own quarrel, it is true, but in defence of a stranger


unfairly beset by numbers. He bad kept a sumptuous saloon.
He bad been tbe proprietor of a dashing helpmeet, whom he
could have discarded without the formality of a divorce. He
had held a high position in the fire department, and been a very
Warwick in politics. When he died there was great lamenta-
tion throughout the town, but especially in the vast bottom-
stratum of society.
On the inquest it was shown that Buck Fanshaw, in the
delirium of a wasting typhoid fever, had taken arsenic, shot
himself through the body, cut his throat, and jumped out of a
four-story window and broken his neck —and after due delibera-
tion, the jury, sad and tearful, but with intelligence unblinded
by its sorrow, brought in a verdict of death “by the visitation
of God.” What could the world do without juries ?
Prodigious preparations were made for the funeral. All the
vehicles in town were hired, all the saloons put in mourning, all
the municipal and fire-company flags hung at half-mast, and all
the firemen ordered to. muster in uniform and bring their
machines duly draped in black. How —let us remark in
parenthesis—as all the peoples of the earth had representative
adventurers in the Silverland, and as each adventurer had
brought the slang of his nation or his locality with him, the
combination made the slang of Nevada the richest and the
most infinitely varied and copious that had ever existed any-
where in the world, perhaps, except in the mines of California
in the “early days.” Slang was the language of Nevada. It
was hard to preach a sermon without it, and be understood.
Such phrases as “You bet!” “Oh, no, I reckon not!” “No
Irish need apply,” and a hundred others, became so common as
to fall from the lips of a speaker unconsciously—and very often
when they did not touch the subject under discussion, and
consequently failed to mean anything.
After Buck Fanshaw’s inquest, a meeting of the short-haired
brotherhood was held —for nothing can be done on the Pacific
coast without a public meeting and an expression of sentiment.
Regretful resolutions were passed, and various committees
appointed ; among others, a committee of one was deputed to
call on the minister, a fragile, gentle, spiritual new fledgling
from an Eastern theological seminary, and as yet unacquainted
with the ways of the mines. The committeeman, “ Scotty”
Briggs, made his visit; and in after days it was worth some-
thing to hear the minister tell about it. Scotty was a stalwart
rough, whose customary suit, when on weighty official business
like committee work, was a fire helmet, flaming red flannel
shirt, patent leather belt with spanner and revolver attached,
coat hung over arm, and pants stuffed into boot tops. He
formed something of a contrast to the pale theological student.
It is fair to say of Scotty, however, in passing, that he had a
warm heart, and a strong love for his friends, and never entered


INTERVIEW WITH THE CLERGYMAN.
into a quarrel when he could reasonably keep out of it. Indeed,
it was commonly said that whenever one of Scotty’s fights was
investigated, it always turned out that it had originally been no
affair of his, but that out of native goodheartedness he had
dropped in of his own accord to help the man who was getting
the worst of it. He and Buck Fanshaw were bosom friends for
years, and had often taken adventurous “ pot-luck” together.
On one occasion, they had thrown off their coats and taken the
weaker side in a fight among strangers, and after gaining a
hard-earned victory, turned and found that the men they were
helping had deserted early, and not only that, but had stolen their
coats and made off with them ! But to return t© Scotty’s visit to
the minister. He was on a sorrowful mission, now, and his face
was the picture of woe. Being admitted to the presence he
sat down before the clergyman, placed bis fire-hat on an
unfinished manuscript sermon under the minister’s nose, took
from it a red silk handkerchief, wiped his brow, and heaved a
sigh of dismal impressiveness, explanatory of his business.
He choked, and even shed tears; but with an effort he mastered
his voice, and said in lugubrious tones :
“Are you the duck that runs the gospel-mill next door ?”
“ Am I the—pardon me, I believe I do not understand ?”
With another sigh and a half-sob, Scotty rejoined:—
“ Why you see we are in a bit of trouble, and the boys thought
may be you would give us a lift, if we’d tackle you—that is, if
I’ve got the rights of it, and you are the head clerk of the dox-
ology-works next door.”
“ I am the shepherd in charge of the flock whose fold is next
door.”
“ The which ?”
“ The spiritual adviser of the little company of believers whose
sanctuary adjoins these premises.”
Scotty scratched his head, reflected a moment, and then
said:
“ You ruther hold over me, pard. I reckon I can’t call that
hand. Ante and pass the buck.”
“ How ? I beg pardon. What did I understand you to
say ?”
“Well, you’ve ruther got the bulge on me. Or may be we’ve
both got the bulge, somehow. You don’t smoke me and I don’t
smoke you. You see, one of the boys has passed in his checks
and we want to give him a good send-off, and so the thing I’m
on now is to roust out somebody to jerk a little chin-music for
us, and waltz him through handsome.”
“ My friend, I seem to grow more and more bewildered. Your
observations are wholly incomprehensible to me. Cannot you
simplify them in some way ? At first I thought perhaps I un-
derstood you, but I grope now. Would it not expedite matters
if you restricted yourself to categorical statements of fact, unen-


cumbered with obstructing accumulations of metaphor and
allegory ?”
Another pause, and more reflection. Then, said Scotty:—
“ I’ll have to pass, I judge.”
“How?”
“You’ve raised me out, pard.”
“ I still fail to catch your meaning.”
“Why, that last lead of yourn is too many for me—that’s the
idea. I can’t neither trump nor follow suit.”
The clergyman sank back in his chair perplexed. Scotty
leaned his head on his hand and gave himself up to thought.
Presently his face came up, sorrowful but confident.
“ I’ve got it now, so’s you can savvy,” he said. “What we
want is a gospel-sharp. See ?”
“ A what ?”
“ Gospel-sharp, Parson.”
“Oh ! Why did you not say so before ? lam a clergyman
—a parson.”
“Now you talk! You see my blind, and straddle it like a
man. Put it there !”—extending a brawny paw, which closed
over the minister’s small hand and gave it a shake indicative of
fraternal sympathy and fervent gratification.
“Now we’re all right, pard. Let’s start fresh. Don’t you
mind my snuffling a little—beeuz we’re in a power of trouble.
You see, one of the boys has gone up the flume—”
“ Gone where ?”
“ Up the flume—throwed up the sponge, you understand.”
“ Thrown up the sponge ?”
“Yes—kicked the bucket—”
“ Ah—has departed to that mysterious country from whose
bourne no traveller returns.”
“ Return! I reckon not. Why pard, he’s dead ! ”
“Yes, I understand.”
“ Oh, you do ? Well I thought may be you might be getting
tangled some more. Yes, you see he’s dead again—”
“ Again ? Why, has he ever been dead before ?”
“ Dead before ? No ! Do you reckon a man has got as many
lives as a cat ? But you bet, you, he’s awful dead now, poor old
boy, and I wish I’d never seen this day. I don’t want no better
friend than Buck Fanshaw. I knowed him by the back; and
when I know a man and like him, I freeze to him—you hear me.
Take him all round, pard, there never was a bullier man in the
mines. No man ever knowed Buck Fanshaw to go back on a
friend. But it’s all up, you know, it’s all up. It ain’t no use.
They’ve scooped him.”
“ Scooped him ?”
“ Yes—death has. Well, well, well, we’ve got to give him
up. Yes indeed. It’s a kind of hard world, after all, ain’t it ?
But pard, he was a rustler! You ought to seen him get started
187 K 2


once. He was a bully boy with a glass eye ! Just spit in his
face, and give him room according to his strength, and it was
just beautiful to see him peel and go in. He was the worst son
of a thief that ever drawed breath. Pard, he was on it! He
was on it bigger than an Injun ! ”
“Onit P On what ?”
“On the shoot. On the shoulder. On the fight, you under-
stand. He didn’t give a continental for anybody. Beg your
pardon, friend, for coming so near saying a cuss-word—but you
see I’m on an awful strain, in this palaver, on account of having
to cramp down and draw everything so mild. But we’ve got to
give him up. There ain’t any getting around that, I don’t
reckon. Now if we can get you to help plant him—”
“ Preach the funeral discourse ? Assist at the obsequies ?”
“ Obs’quies is good. Yes. That’s it—that’s our little game.
We are going to get the thing, up regardless, you know. He
was always nifty himself, and so you bet, you, his funeral ain’t
going to be no slouch—solid silver door-plate on his coffin, six
plumes on the hearse, and a nigger on the box in a biled shirt
and a plug hat—how’s that for high ? And we’ll take care of
you, pard. We’ll fix you all right. There’ll be a kerridge for
you ; and whatever you want, you just ’scape out and we’ll
’tend to it. We’ve got a shebang fixed up for you to stand be-
hind, in No. I’s house, and don’t you be afraid. Just go in and
toot your horn, if you don’t sell a clam. Put Buck through as
bully as you can, pard, for anybody that knowed him will tell
you that he was one of the whitest men that was ever in the
mines. You can’t draw it too strong. He never could stand it
to see things going wrong. He’s done more to make this town
quiet and peaceable than any man in it. I’ve seen him lick
four Greasers in eleven minutes, myself. If a thing wanted
regulating, he warn’t a man to go browsing around after some-
body to do it, but he would prance in and regulate it himself.
He warn’t a Catholic. Scasely. He was down on ’em. His
word was, ‘No Irish need apply!’ But it didn’t make no dif-
ference about that when it came down to what a man’s rights
was—and so, when some roughs jumped the Catholic bone-yard
and started in to stake out town-lots, in it he went for ’em!
And cleaned ’em, too! I was there, pard, and I seen it myself.”
“That was very well indeed —at least the impulse was—
whether the act was strictly defensible or not. Had deceased
any religious convictions? That is to say, did he feel a
dependence upon, or acknowledge allegiance to a higher
power ?”
More reflection.
“ I reckon you’ve stumped me again, pard. Could you say it
over once more, and say it slow ?”
“ Well, to simplify it somewhat, was he, or rather had he
ever been connected with any organisation sequestered from


secular concerns and devoted to self-sacrifice in the interests of
morality ?”
“ All down but nine—set ’em up on the other alley, pard.”
“ What did I understand you to say ?”
“ Why, you’re most too many for me, you know. When you
get in with your left I hunt grass every time. Every time you
draw, you fill; but I don’t seem to have any luck. LetsTiave
a new deal.
“ How ? Begin again ? ”
“ That’s it.”
“ Very well. Was he a good man, and—”
** There—l see that ; don’t put up another chip till I look at
my hand. A good man, says you ? Pard, it ain’t no name for
it. He was the best man that ever—pard, you would have
doted on that man. He could lamb any galoot of his inches in
America. It was him that put down the riot last election before
it got a start; and everybody said he was the only man that
could have done it. He waltzed in with a spanner in one hand
and a trumpet in the other, and sent fourteen men home on a
shutter in less than three minutes. He had that riot all broke
up and prevented nice before anybody ever got a chance to
strike a blow. He was always for peace, and he would have
peace—he could not stand disturbances. Pard, he was a great
loss to this town. It would please the boys if you could chip in
something like that and do him justice. Here once when the
Micks got to throwing stones through the Methodis’ Sunday
school windows, Buck Fanshaw, all of his own notion, shut up
his saloon and took a couple of six-shooters and mounted guard
over the Sunday-school. Says he, ‘No Irish need apply ! ’ And
they didn’t. He was the bulliest man in the mountains, pard !
He could run faster, jump higher, hit harder, and hold more
tangle-foot whiskey without spilling it than any man in seven-
teen counties. Put that in, pard—it’ll please the boys more
than anything you could say. And you can say, pard, that he
never shook his mother.”
“Never shook his mother?”
“ That’s it—any of the boys will tell you so.”
“ Well, but why should he shake her ? ”
“ That’s what I say—but some people does.”
“ Not people of any repute ?”
“ Well, some that average, pretty so-so.”
“In my opinion the man that would offer personal violence
to his own mother, ought to—”
“ Cheese it, pard ; you’ve banked your ball clean outside the
string. What I was a drivin’ at, was that he never throived off
on his mother—don’t you see ? No indeedy. He give her a
house to live in, and town lots, and plenty of money; and he
looked after her and took care of her all the time ; and when
she was down with the small-pox I’m d—d if he didn’t set up


nights and miss her himself ! Beg your pardon for saying it,
but it hopped out too quick for yours truly. You’ve treated
me like a gentleman, pard, and I ain’t the man to hurt your
feelings intentional. I think you ’re white. I think you’re a
square man, pard. I like you, and I’ll lick any man that don’t.
I’ll lick him till he can’t tell himself from a last year’s corpse!
Put it there!” (Another fraternal handshake—and exit.)
The obsequies were all that “ the boys ” could desire. Such
a marvel of funeral pomp had never been seen in Virginia.
The plumed hearse, the dirge-breathing brass bands, the closed
marts of business, the flags drooping at half-mast, the long
plodding procession of uniformed secret societies, military
battalions, and fire companies, draped engines, carriages of
officials, and citizens in vehicles and on foot, attracted multi-
tudes of spectators to the sidewalks, roofs, and windows; and for
years afterward, the degree of grandeur attained by any civic
display in Virginia was determined by comparison with Buck
Panshaw’s funeral.
Scotty Briggs, as a pall-bearer and a mourner, occupied a
prominent place at the funeral, and when the sermon was finished,
and the last sentence of the prayer for the dead man’s soul
ascended, he responded, in a low voice, but with feeling:—
“ Amen. No Irish need apply.”
As the bulk of the response was without apparent relevancy,
it was probably nothing more than a humble tribute to the
memory of the friend that was gone; for, as Scotty had once
said, it was “ his word.”
Scotty Briggs, in after days, achieved the distinction of be-
coming the only convert to religion that was ever gathered from
the Virginia roughs; and it transpired that the man who had it
in him to espouse the quarrel of the weak out of inborn nobility
of spirit was no mean timber whereof to construct a Christian.
The making him one did not warp his generosity or diminish
his courage; on the contrary it gave intelligent direction to the
one and a broader field to the other. If his Sunday-school class
progressed faster than the other classes, was it matter for
wonder ? I think not. He talked to his pioneer small-fry in a
language they understood ! It was my large privilege, a month
before he died, to hear him tell the beautiful story of Joseph and
his brethren to his class “without looking at the book.” I
leave it to the reader to fancy what it was like, as it fell,
riddled with slang, from the lips of that grave, earnest teacher,
and was listened to by his little learners with a consuming
interest that showed that they were asimconscious as he was
that any violence was being done to thffSacred proprieties!


CHAPTER XLYIII.
The first twenty-six graves in the Virginia cemetery were
occupied by murdered men. So everybody said, so everybody
believed, and so they will always say and believe. The reason
why there was so much slaughtering done was, that in a new
mining district the rough element predominates, and a person
is not respected until he has “ killed his man.” That was the
very expression used.
If an unknown individual arrived, they did not enquire if he
was capable, honest, industrious, but—had he killed his man ?
If he had not, he gravitated to his natural and proper position,
that of a man of small consequence; if he had, the cordiality
of his reception was graduated according to the number of his
dead. It was tedious work struggling up to a position of in-
fluence with bloodless hands; but when a man came with the
blood of half a dozen men on his soul, his worth was recognised
at once and his acquaintance sought.
In Nevada, for a time, the lawyer, the editor, the banker, the
chief desperado, the chief gambler, and the saloon-keeper
occupied the same level in society, and it was the highest. The
cheapest and easiest way to become an influential man, and be
looked up to by the community at large, was to stand behind a
bar, wear a cluster-diamond pin, and sell whiskey. I am not
sure but that the saloon-keeper held a shade higher rank than
any other member of society. Ilis opinion had weight. It
was his privilege to say how the elections should go. No great
movement could succeed without the countenance and direction
of the saloon-keepers. It was a high favour when the chief
saloon-keeper consented to serve in the legislature or the board
of aldermen. Youthful ambition hardly aspired so much to
the honours of the law, or the army and navy, as to the dignity
of proprietorship in a saloon.
To be a saloon-keeper and kill a man was to be illustrious.
Hence the reader will not be surprised to learn that more than
one man was killed in Nevada under hardly the pretext of
provocation, so impatient was the slayer to achieve reputation
and throw off the galling sense of being held in indifferent
» repute by his associates. I knew two youths who tried to " kill
their men ” for no other reason—and got killed themselves for
their pains. “ There goes the man that killed Bill Adams ”
'was higher praise and a sweeter sound in the ears of this sort
of people than any other speech that admiring lips could utter.
The men who murdered Virginia’s original twenty-six ceme-
tery-occupants were never punished. Why ? Because Alfred the
Great, when he invented trial by jury, and knew that he had
admirably framed it to secure justice in his age of the world.


was not aware that in the nineteenth century the condition of
things would be so entirely changed that unless he rose from
the grave and altered the jury plan to meet the emergency, it
would prove the most ingenious and infallible agency for
defeating justice that human wisdom could contrive. For how
could he imagine that we simpletons would go on using his
jury plan after circumstances had stripped it of its usefulness,
any more than he could imagine that we would go on using his
candle clock after we had invented chronometers ? In his day
news could not travel fast, and hence he could easily find a jury of
honest, intelligent men who had not heard of the case they
were called to try—but in our day of telegraphs and news-
papers his plan compels us to swear in juries composed of fools
and rascals, because the system rigidly excludes honest men
and men of brains.
I remember one of those sorrowful farces, in Virginia, which
we call a jury trial. A noted desperado killed Mr. 8., a good
citizen, in the most wanton and cold-blooded way. Of course
the papers were full of it, and all men capable of reading, read
about it. And of course all men not deaf and dumb and
idiotic, talked about it. A jury-list was made out, and Mr. B.
L., a prominent banker and a valued citizen, was questioned
precisely as he would have been questioned in any court in
America:—
“ Have you heard of this homicide ?”
“Yes.”
“ HaVe you held conversations upon the subject?”
“ Yes.”
“ Have you formed or expressed opinions about'it.’’
“Yes.”
“ Have you read the newspaper accounts of it.”
“ Yes.”
“We do not want you.”
A minister, intelligent, esteemed, and greatly respected; a
merchant of high character and known probity; a mining
superintendent of intelligence and unblemished reputation ; a
quartz mill owner of excellent standing, were all questioned in
the same way, and all set aside. Each said the public talk and
the newspaper reports had not so biased his mind but that
sworn testimony would overthrow his previously foi’med
opinions and enable him to render a verdict without prejudice
and in accordance with the facts. But of course such men
could not be trusted with the case. Ignoramuses alone could
mete out unsullied justice.
When the peremptory challenges were all exhausted, a jury
of twelve men was impanelled—a jury who swore they had
neither heard, read, talked about, nor expressed an opinion con-
cerning a murder which the very cattle in the corrals, the
Indians in the sage-brush, and the stones in the streets were


cognizant of! It was a jury composed of two desperadoes, two
low beer-house 'politicians, three bar-keepers, two ranchmen
who could not read, and three dull, stupid, human donkeys!
It actually came out afterward, that one of these latter thought
that incest and arson were the same thing.
The verdict rendered by this jury was Not Guilty. What
else could one expect.
The jury system puts a ban upon intelligence and honesty,
and a premium upon ignorance, stupidity, and perjury. It is a
shame that we must continue to use a worthless system because
it was good a thousand years ago. In this age, when a gentle-
man of high social standing, intelligence, and probity, swears
that testimony given under solemn oath will outweigh, with
him, street talk and newspaper reports based upon mere hear-
say, he is worth a hundred jurymen who will swear to their own
ignorance and stupidity, and justice would be far safer in his
hands than in theirs. Why could not the jury law be so altered
as to give men of brains and honesty an equal chance with fools
and miscreants ? Is it right to show the present favouritism to
one class of men and inflict a disability on another, in a land
whose boast is that all its citizens are free and equal P lam a
candidate for the legislature. I desire to tamper with the jury
law. I wish to so alter it as to put a premium on intelligence
and character, and close the jury box against idiots, blacklegs,
and people who do not read newspapers. But no doubt I shall
be defeated—every effort I make to save the country “ misses
fire.”
My idea, when I began this chapter, was to say something
about desperadoism in the “flush times” of Nevada. To
attempt a portrayal of that era and that land, and leave out the
blood and carnage, would be like portraying Mormondom and
leaving out polygamy. The desperado stalked the streets with
a swagger graded according to the number of his homicides,
and a nod of recognition from him was sufficient to make a
humble admirer happy for the rest of the day. The deference
that was paid to a desperado of wide reputation, and who
“kept his private graveyard,” as the phrase went, was marked,
and cheerfully accorded. When he moved along the sidewalk
in his excessively long-tailed frock-coat, shiney stump-toed
boots, and with dainty little slouch hat tipped over left eye, the
small-fry roughs made room for his majesty; when he entered
the restaurant, the waiters deserted bankers and merchants to
overwhelm him with obsequious service; when he shouldered
his way to a bar, the shouldered parties wheeled indignantly,
recognised him, and—apologized. They got a look in return
that froze their marrow, and by that time a curled and breast-
pinned bar keeper was beaming over the counter, proud of the
established acquaintanceship that permitted such a familiar
form of speech as:—


«How’re ye, Billy, old fel ? Glad to see you. What’ll you
take —the old thing ?”
The “ old thing” meant his customary drink, of course.
The best known names in the Territory of Nevada were
those belonging to these long-tailed heroes of the revolver.
Orators, Governors, capitalists, and leaders of the legislature
enjoyed a degree of fame, but it seemed local and meagre when
contrasted with the fame of such men as Sam Brown, Jack
Williams, Billy Mulligan, Farmer Pease, Sugarfoot Mike, Pock-
marked Jake, Eldorado Johnny, Jack M'Nabb, Joe M'Gee,
Jack Harris, Six-fingered Pete, etc., etc. There was a long list
of them. They were brave, reckless men, and travelled with,
their lives in their hands. To give them their due, they did
their killing principally among themselves, and seldom molested
peaceable citizens, for they considered it small credit to add to
their trophies so cheap a bauble as the death of a man who was
“ not on the shoot,” as they phrased it. They killed each other
on slight provocation, and hoped and expected to be killed
themselves —for they held it almost shame to die otherwise
than “ with their boots on,” as they expressed it.
I remember an instance of a desperado’s contempt for such
small game as a private citizen’s life. I was taking a late
supper in a restaurant one night, with two reporters and a
little printer named—Brown, for instance —any name will do.
Presently a stranger with a long-tailed coat on came in, and not
noticing Brown’s hat, which was lying in a chair, sat down on it.
Little Brown sprang up and became abusive in a moment. The
stranger smiled, smoothed out the hat, and offered it to Brown
with profuse apologies couched in caustic sarcasm, and begged
Brown not to destroy him. Brown threw off his coat and chal-
lenged the man to fight—abused him, threatened him, impeached
his courage, and urged and even implored him to fight; and in
the meantime the smiling stranger placed himself under our
protection in mock distress. But presently he assumed a serious
tone, and said :
“ Very well, gentlemen, if we must fight, we must, I suppose.
But don’t rush into danger and then say I gave you no warning.
lam more than a match for all of you when I get started. I
will give you proofs, and then if my friend here still insists, I
will try to accommodate him.”
The table we were sitting at was about five feet long, and un-
usually cumbersome and heavy. He asked us to put our hands
on the dishes and hold them in their places a moment—one of
them was a large oval dish with a portly roast on it. Then he
sat down, tilted up one end of the table, set two of the legs on
bis knees, took the end of the table between his teeth, took his
hands away, and pulled down with his teeth till the table came
up to a level position, dishes and all! He said he could lift a
keg of nails with his teeth. He picked up a common glass


tumbler and bit a semi-circle out of it. Then he opened his
bosom and showed us a net-work of knife and bullet scars;
I showed us more on his arms and face, and said he believed he
had bullets enough in his body to make a pig of lead. He was
armed to the teeth. He closed with the remark that he was
Mr. of Cariboo—a celebrated name whereat we shook in
our shoes. I would publish the name, but for the suspicion that
he might come and carve me. He finally enquired if Brown still
thirsted for blood. Brown turned the thing over in his mind a
moment, and then—asked him to supper.
With the permission of the reader, I will group together, in
the next chapter, some samples of life. in our small mountain
village in the old days of desperadoism. I was there at the time.
The reader will observe peculiarities in our official society; and
he will observe also, an instance of how, in new countries, mur-
ders breed murders. /
CHAPTEE XLIX.
An extract or two from the newspapers of the day will furnish
a photograph that can need no embellishment: —
Fatal Shooting Affray. —An affray occurred, last evening in a billiard
saloon on C street, between Deputy Marshal Jack Williams and Win. Brown,
which resulted in the immediate death of the latter. There had been some
difficulty between the parties for several months.
An inquest was immediately held, and the following estimony
adduced:—
Officer Geo. Birdsall, sworn, says :—I was told Wm. Brown was drunk
and was looking for Jack Williams ; so, soon as I heard that, I started for the
parties to prevent a collision; went into the billiard saloon ; saw Billy
Brown running around, saying if anybody had anything against him to show
cause ; he was talking in a boisterous manner, and officer Perry took him to
the other end of the room to talk to him; Brown came back to me ;
remarked to me that he thought he was as good as anybody, and knew how
to take care of himself ; he passed by me and went to the bar ; don’t know
whether he drank or not; Williams was at the end of the billiard-table, next
to the stairway ; Brown, after going to the bar, came back and said he was
as good as any man in the world ; he had then walked out to the end of the
first billiard-table from the bar ; I moved closer to them, supposing there
would be a fight; as Brown drew his pistol I caught hold of it; he had fired
one shot at Williams ; don’t know the effect of it; caught hold of him with
one hand, and took hold of the pistol and turned it up ; think he fired once
after I caught hold of the pistol; I wrenched the pistol from him ; walked to
the end of the billiard-table and told a party that I had Brown’s pistol, and
to stop shooting ; I think four shots were fired in all; after walking out,
Mr. Foster remarked that Brown was shot dead.
Oh, there was no excitement about it—he merely “remarked”
the small circumstance!
Four months later the following item appeared in the same
paper (the Enterprise.) In this item the name of one of the city
officers above referred to (Deputy Marshal Jack Williams) occurs
again:—


Robbery and Desperate Affray.—On Tuesday night, a German
named Charles Hurtzal, engineer in a mill at Silver City, came to this place,
and visited the hurdy-gurdy house on B street. The music, dancing, and
Teutonic maidens awakened memories of Faderland until our German
friend was carried away with rapture. He evidently had money, and was
spending it freely. Late in the evening Jack Williams and Andy Blessington
invited him down stairs to take a cup of coffee. Williams proposed a game
of cards, and went up stairs to procure a deck, but not finding any returned.
On the stairway he met the German, and drawing his pistol knocked him
down and rifled his pockets of some seventy dollars. Hurtzal dared give no
alarm, as he was told, with a pistol at his head, if he made any noise or
•exposed them, they would blow his brains out. So effectually was he
frightened that he made no complaint, until his friends forced him. Yester-
day a warrant was issued, but the culprits had disappeared.
This efficient city officer. Jack Williams, had the common
reputation of being a burglar, a highwayman, and a desperado.
It was said that he had several times drawn his revolver and
levied money contributions on citizens at dead of night in the
public streets of Virginia.
Five months after the above item appeared, Williams was
assassinated while sitting at a card table one night; a gun was
thrust through the crack of the door and Williams dropped from
his chair riddled with balls. It was said, at the time, that
Williams had been for some time aware that a party of his own
sort (desperadoes) had sworn away his life ; and it was generally
believed among the people that Williams’s friends and enemies
would make the assassination memorable—and useful to—by a
wholesome destruction of each other.*
It did not so happen, but still, times were not dull during the
next twenty-four hours, for within that time a woman was killed
by a pistol shot, a man was brained with a slung shot, and a
man named Reeder was also disposed of permanently. Some
matters in the Enterprise account of the killing of Reeder are
* However, one prophecy was verified, at any rate. It was asserted by the
desperadoes that one of their brethren (Joe McGee, a special policeman) was
known to be the conspirator chosen by lot to assassinate Williams ; and they
also asserted that doom had been pronounced against McGee, and that he
would be assassinated in exactly the same manner that had been adopted
for the destruction of Williams—a prophecy which came true a year later.
After twelve months of distress (for McGee saw a fancied assassin in every
man that approached him,) he made the last of many efforts to get out of
the country unwatched. He went to Carson and sat down in a saloon to
wait for the stage—it would leave at four in the morning. But as the night
waned and the crowd thinned, he grew uneasy, and told the bar-keeper that
assassins were on his track. The bar-keeper told him to stay in the middle
of the room, then, and not go near the door, or the window by the stove.
But a fatal fascination seduced him to the neighbourhood of the stove every
now and then, and repeatedly the bar-keeper brought him back to the
middle of the room, and warned him to remain there. But he could not. At
three in the morning he again returned to the stove, and sat down by a
stranger. Before the bar-keeper could get to him with another warning
whisper, some one outside fired through the window and riddled McGee’s
breast with slugs, killing him almost instantly. By the same discharge the
stranger at McGee’s side also received attentions which proved fatal in the
course of two or three days.


worth noting—especially the accommodating complaisance of a
Virginia justice of the peace. The italics in the following nar-
rative are mine:—
More Cutting and Shooting. —The devil seems to have again broken
loose in our town. Pistols and guns explode and knives gleam in our streets
as in early times. When there has been a long season of quiet, people are
slow to wet their hands in blood; but once blood is spilled, cutting afld
shooting come easy. Night before last Jack Williams was assassinated, and
yesterday forenoon we had more bloody work, growing out of the killing of
Williams, and on the same street in which he met liis death, It appears
that Tom Reeder, a friend of Williams, and George _ Gumbert were
talking, at the meat market of the latter, about the killing of Williams,
the previous night, when Reeder said it was a most cowardly act to
shoot a man in such a way, giving him “no show.” Gumbert said that
Williams had “as good a show as he gave Billy Brown,” meaning the man
killed by Williams last March. Reeder said it was a d—d lie, that Williams
had no show at all. At this, Gumbert drew a knife and stabbed Reeder,
cutting him in two places in the back. One stroke of. the knife cut into the
sleeve of Reeder’s coat and passed downward in a slanting direction through
his clothing, and entered his body at the small of the back ; another blow
struck more squarely, and made a much more dangerous wound. Gumbert
gave himself up to the officers of justice, and was shortly after dis-
charged by Justice Atwill, on his own recognizance, to appear for trial at six
o’clock in the evening. In the meantime Reeder had been taken into the
office of Dr. Owens, where his wounds were properly dressed. One of his
■wounds was considered quite dangerous, and it was thought by many that it
would prove fatal. But being considerably under the influence of liquor,
Reeder did not feel his wounds as he otherwise would, and he got up and went
into the street. He went to the meat market and renewed his quarrel with
Gumbert, threatening his life. Friends tried to interfere to put a stop to
the quarrel and get the parties away from each other. In the Fashion
Saloon, Reeder made threats against the life of Gumbert, saying he would
kill him, and it is said that he requested the oflicers not to arrest Oumbert, as
he intended to kill him. After these threats Gumbert went off and procured
a double-barrelled shot gun, loaded with buck-shot or revolver balls, and
went after Reeder. Two or three persons were assisting him along the
street, trying to get him home, and had him just in front of the store of
Klopstock and Harris, when Gumbert came across toward him from the
opposite side of the street, with his gun. He came up within about ten or
fifteen feet of Reeder, and called out to those with him to “ look out! get out
of the way 1” and they had only time to heed the warning, when he fired.
Reeder was at the time attempting to screen himself behind a large cask,
which stood against the awning post of Klopstock and Harris’s store, but
some of the balls took effect in the lower part of his breast, and he reeled
around forward and fell in front of the cask. Gumbert then raised his gun
and fired the second barrel, which missed Reeder and entered the ground.
At the time that this occurred, there were a great many persons on the
street in the vicinity, and a number of them called out to Gumbert, when
they saw him raise his gun, to “hold on,” and “ don’t shoot! ” The cutting
took place about ten o’clock and the shooting about twelve. After the
shooting the street was instantly crowded with the inhabitants of that part
of the town, some appearing much excited and laughing—declaring that it
looked like the “good old times of ’60.” Marshal Perry and officer Birdsall
were near when the shooting occurred, and Gumbert was immediately
arrested and his gun taken from him, when he was marched off to jail.
Many persons who were attracted to the spot where this bloody work had
just taken place, looked bewildered and seemed to be asking themselves
what was to happen next, appearing in doubt as to whether the killing
mania had reached its climax, or whether we were to turn in and have a
grand killing spell, shooting whoever might have given us offence. It was
whispered around that it was not all over yet—five or six more were to be
killed before night. Reeder was taken to the Virginia City Hotel, and


doctors called in to examine his wounds. They found that two or three halls
had entered his right side ; one of them appeared to have passed through
the substance of the lungs, while another passed into the liver. Two
balls were also found to have struck one of his legs. As some of the
balls struck the cask, the wounds in Reeder’s leg were probably from
these, glancing downwards, though they might have been caused by the
second shot fired. After being shot, Reeder said when he got on his feet—
smiling as he spoke It will take better shooting than that to kill me.”
The doctors consider it almost impossible for him to recover, but as he has an
excellent constitution he may survive, notwithstanding the number and
dangerous character of the wounds he has received. The town appears to be
perfectly quiet at present, as though the late stormy times had cleared our
moral atmosphere; but who can tell in what quarter clouds are lowering or
plots ripening ?
Eeeder—or at least what was left of him —survived his
wounds two days! Nothing was ever done with Gumbert.
Trial by jury is the palladium of our liberties. Ido not know
what a palladium is, having never seen a palladium, but it is a
good thing, no doubt, at any rate. Not less than a hundred men
have been murdered in Nevada—perhaps I would be within
bounds if I said three hundred—and as far as I can learn, only
two persons have suffered the death penalty there. However,
four or five who had no money and no political influence have
been punished by imprisonment —one languished in prison as
much as eight months, I think. However, Ido not desire to be
extravagant—it may have been less.
CHAPTER L.
These murder and jury statistics remind me of a certain very
extrordinary trial and execution of twenty years ago; it is a
scrap of history familiar to all old Californians, and worthy te
be known by other peoples of the earth that love simple, straight-
forward justice unencumbered with nonsense. I would apolo-
gise for this digression but for the fact that the information I
am about to offer is apology enough in itself. And since I
digress constantly anyhow, perhaps it is as well to eschew
apologies altogether, and thus prevent their growing irksome.
Capt. Ned Blakely—that name will answer as well as any
other fictitious one (for he was still with the living at last
accounts, and may not desire to be famous) —sailed ships out
of the harbour of San Francisco for many years. He was a
stalwart, warm-hearted, veteran, who had been a
sailor nearly fifty years —a sailor from early boyhood. He was
a rough, honest creature, full of pluck, and just as full of
hard-headed simplicity, too. He hated trifling conventionali-
ties—" business ” was the word, with him. He had all a sailor’s
vindictiveness against the quips and quirks of the law, and


steadfastly believed that the first and last aim and object of
the law and lawyers was to defeat justice.
He sailed for the Chincha Islands in command of a guano
ship. He had a fine crew, but his negro mate was his pet—
on him he had for years lavished his admiration and esteem.
It was Capt. Ned’s first voyage to the Chinchas, but his fame
had gone before him —the fame of being a man who would
fight at the dropping of a handkerchief, when imposed upon,
and would stand no nonsense. It was a fame well earned.
Arrived in the islands, he found that the staple of conversation
was the exploits of one Bill Noakes, a bully, the mate of a
trading ship. This man had created a small reign of terror
there. At nine o’clock at night, Capt. Ned, all alone, was
pacing his deck in the starlight, A form ascended the side,
and approached him. Capt. Ned said:—
“ Who goes there ? ”
“ I’m Bill Noakes, the best man in the islands.”
What do you want aboard this ship ? ”
“ I’ve heard of Capt. Ned Blakely, and one of us is a better
man than ’tother—l’ll know which before I go ashore.”
“ You’ve come to the right shop—l’m your man. I’ll learn
you to come aboard this ship without an invite.”
He seized Noakes, backed him against the mainmast, pounded
his face to a pulp, and then threw him overboard.
Noakes was not convinced. He returned the next night,
got the pulp renewed, and went overboard head first, as before.
He was satisfied.
A week after this, while Noakes was carousing with a sailor
crowd on shore, at noonday, Capt. Ned’s coloured mate came
along, and Noakes tried to pick a quarrel with him. The
negro evaded the trap, and tried to get away. Noakes followed
him up; the negro began to run; Noakes fired on him with a
revolver, and killed him. Half a dozen sea-captains witnessed
the whole affair. Noakes retreated to the small after-cabin of
his ship, with two other bullies, and gave out that death would
be the portion of any man that intruded there. There *was no
attempt made to follow the villains; there was no disposition
to do it, and indeed very little thought of such an enterprise.
There were no courts and no officers; there was no government;
the islands belonged to Peru, and Peru was far away; she had
no official representative on the ground; and neither had any
other nation.
However, Capt. Ned was not perplexing his head about such
things. They concerned him not. He was boiling with rage,
and furious for justice. At nine o’clock at night he loaded a
double-barrelled gun with slugs, fished out a pair of handcuffs,
got a ship’s lantern, summoned his quartermaster, and went
ashore. He said
“Do you see that ship there, at the dock! ”


“ Ay-ay, sir.”
“ It’s the Venus.”
“Ay-ay, sir.”
“ You—you know me.”
“ Ay-ay, sir.”
“Very well, then. Take the lantern. Carry it just under
your chin. I’ll walk behind you and rest this gun-barrel on
your shoulder, p’inting forward—so. Keep your lantern well
up, so’s I can see things ahead of you good. I’m going to
inarch in on Noakes—and take him—and jug the other chaps.
If you flinch —well, you know me.
“Ay-ay, sir.”
In this order they filed aboard softly, arrived at Noakes’s
den, the quartermaster pushed the door open, and the lantern
revealed the three desperadoes sitting on the floor. Capt. Ned
said:—
“ I’m Ned Blakely. I’ve got you under fire. Don’t you move
without orders —any of you. You two kneel down in the
corner; faces to the wall—now. Bill Noakes, put these hand-
cuffs on ; now come up close. Quartermaster, fasten ’em. All
right. Don’t stir, sir. Quartermaster, put the key in the out-
side of the door. Now, men. I’m going to lock you two in;
and if you try to burst through this door—well, you’ve heard of
me. Bill Noakes. fall in ahead, and march. All set. Quarter-
master, lock the door.”
Noakes spent the night on board Blakely’s ship, a prisoner
under strict guard. Early in the morning Capt. Ned called in
all the sea-captains in the harbour and invited them, with
nautical ceremony, to be present on board his ship at nine
o’clock to witness the hanging of Noakes at the yard-arm !
“ What! The man has not been tried.”
“Of course he hasn’t. But didn’t he kill the nigger ?”
“ Certainly he did; but you are not thinking of hanging
him without a trial ?”
“ Trial! What do I want to try him for, if he killed the
nigger ?’’
“ Oh, Capt. Ned, this will never do. Think how it will
sound.”
Sound be hanged! Didn't he hill the nigger ? ”
“Certainly, certainly, Capt. Ned—nobody denies that—but—”
“Then I’m going to hang him, that’s all. Everybody I’ve
talked to talks just the same way you do. Everybody says he
killed the nigger. Everybody knows he killed the nigger, and
yet every lubber of you wants him tried for it. I don’t under-
stand such bloody foolishness as that. Tried! Mind you, I
don’t object to trying him, if its got to be done to give satis-
faction ; and I’ll be there, and chip in and help, too; but put
it off till afternoon—put it off till afternoon, for I’ll have my
hands middling full till after the burying—”


“ Why, what do you mean ? Are you going to hang him any
how —and try him afterward ?”
“ Didn’t I say I was going to hang him ? I never saw such
people as you. What’s the difference ? You ask a favour, and
then you ain’t satisfied when you get it. Before or after’s
all one —you know how the trial will go. He killed the
Say—l must be going. If your mate would like to come to the
hanging, fetch him along. I like him.”
There was a stir in the camp. The captains came in a body
and pleaded with Capt. Ned not to do this rash thing. They
promised that they would create a court composed of captains
of the best character; they would empanel a jury; they would
conduct everything in a way becoming the serious nature of the
business in hand, and give the case an impartial hearing, and
the accused a fair trial. And they said it would be murder,
and punishable by the American courts if he persisted and
hung the accused on his ship. They pleaded hard. Capt. Ned
said—
“ Gentlemen, I’m not stubborn and I’m not unreasonable.
I’m always willing to do just as near right as I can. How long
will it take ?”
" Probably only a little while.”
“ And can I take him up the shore and hang him as soon as
you are done ?”
“If he is proven guilty he shall be hanged without unneces-
sary delay.”
“If he’s proven guilty. Great Neptune, ain’t he guilty ? This
beats my time. Why you all lenow he’s guilty.”
But at last they satisfied him that they were projecting
nothing underhanded. Then he said: —
Well, all right. You go on and try him, and I’ll go down
and overhaul his conscience and prepare him to go —like enough
he needs it, and I don’t want to send him off without a show
for hereafter.”
This was another obstacle. They finally convinced him that
it was necessary to have the accused in court. Then they said
they would send a guard to bring him.
“ No, sir, I prefer to fetch him myself—he don’t get out of
my hands. Besides, I’ve got to go to the ship to get a rope
anyway.”
The court assembled with due ceremony, empanelled a jury,
and presently Capt. Ned entered, leading the prisoner with one
hand and caiTying a Bible and a rope in the other. He seated
himself by the side of his captive, and told the court to “up
anchor and make sail.” Then he turned a searching eye on
the jury, and detected Noakes’s friends, the two bullies. He
sti-ode ovex-, and said to them confidentially:—
“ You’x-e here to interfere, you see. Now you vote right, do
you hear ? —or else there ’ll be a double-barrelled inquest liere


when this trial’s off, and your remainders will go home in a
couple of baskets.”
The caution was not without fruit. The jury was a unit—
the verdict, “ Guilty.”
Capt. Ned sprung to his feet, and said :
“ Come along—you’re my meat now, my lad, anyway. Gen-
tlemen you’ve done yourselves proud. I invite you all to come
and see that Ido it all straight. Follow me to the canyon, a
mile above here.”
The court informed him that a sheriff had been appointed to
do the hanging, and—
Capt. Ned’s patience was at an end. His wrath was bound-
less. The subject of a sheriff was judiciously dropped.
When the crowd arrived at the canyon, Capt. Ned climbed a
tree and arranged the halter, then came down and noosed his
man. He opened his Bible, and laid aside his hat. Selecting
a chapter at random, he read it through, in a deep bass voice,
and with sincere solemnity. Then he said:—
“ Lad, you are about to go aloft and give an account of your-
self ; and the lighter a man’s manifest is, as far as sin’s con-
cerned, the better for him. Make a clean breast, man, and
carry a log with you that’ll bear inspection. You killed the
nigger ?”
No reply. A long pause.
The captain read another chapter, pausing, from time to
time, to impress the effect. Then he talked an earnest, per-
suasive sermon to him, and ended by repeating the question:—
“ Hid you kill the nigger ?”
No reply—other than a malignant scowl. The captain now
read the first and second chapters of Genesis, with deep feeling
—paused a moment, closed the book reverently, and said with
a perceptible savour of satisfaction: —
“ There. Four chapters. There’s few that would have took
the pains with you that I have.”
Then he swung up the condemned, and made the rope fast;
stood by, and timed him half an hour with his watch, and then
delivered the body to the court, A little after, as he stood
contemplating the motionless figure, a doubt came into his face;
evidently he felt a twinge of conscience—a misgiving—and he
said, with a sigh:—
“ Well, p’raps I ought to burnt him, may be. But I was trying
to do for the best.”
"When the history of this affair reached California (it was in
the “ early days ”) it made a deal of talk, but did not diminish
the captain’s popularity in any degree. It increased it, indeed.
California had a population then that “inflicted” justice after
a fashion that was simplicity and primitiveness itself, and
could therefore admire appreciatively when the same fashion
was followed elsewhere.


CHAPTER LI.
Vice flourished luxuriantly during the hey-day of our “ flush
times.” The saloons were overburdened with custom ; so were
the police courts, the gambling dens, the brothels, and the jails
—unfailing signs of high prosperity in a mining region—in
any region, for that matter. Is it not so ? A crowded police
court docket is the surest of all signs that trade is brisk and
money plenty. Still, there is one other sign ; it comes last,
but when it does come it establishes beyond ckvil that the
“ flush times ” are at the flood. This is the birth of the
“ literary” paper. The Weekly Occidental, “ devoted to litera-
ture,” made i s appearance in Virginia. All the literary people
were engaged to write for it. Mr. P. was to edit it. He was a
felicitous skirmisher with a pen, and a man who could say
happy things in a crisp, neat way. Once, while editor of the
Union, he had disposed of a laboured, incoherent, two-column
attack made upon him by a contemporary, with a single line,
which, at first glance, seemed to contain a solemn and tre-
mendous compliment —viz.: —“ The logic of our adversary
resembles the peace of God,” —and left it to the reader’s
memory and after-thought to invest the remark with another
and “ more different ” meaning by supplying for himself and at
his own leisure the rest of the Scripture—“ in that it passeth
understanding .” He once said of a little, half-starved, wayside
community that had no subsistence except what they could get
by preying upon chance passengers who stopped over with them
a day when travelling by the overland stage, that in their
Church service they had altered the Lord’s Prayer to read: —
“ Give us this day our daily stranger !”
We expected great things of the Occidental. Of course it
could not get along without an original novel, and so we made
arrangements to hurl into the work the full strength of the
company. Mrs. F. was an able romancist of the ineffable
school—l know no other name to apply to a school whose
heroes are all dainty and all perfect. She wrote the opening
chapter, and introduced a lovely blonde simpleton who talked
nothing but pearls and poetry and who was virtuous to the
verge of eccentricity. She also introduced a young French
Duke of aggravated refinement, in love with the blonde.
Mr. F. followed next week, with a brilliant lawyer who set
about getting the Duke’s estates into trouble, and a sparkling
young lady of high society who fell to fascinating the Duke
and impairing the appetite of the blonde. Mr. D., a dark and
bloody editor of one of the dailies, followed Mr. F., the third
week, introducing a mysterious Eoscicrucian who transmuted
metals, held consultations with the devil in a cave at dead of


night, and cast the horoscope of the several heroes and heroines
in such a way as to provide plenty of trouble for their future
careers and breed a solemn and awful public interest in the
novel. He also introduced a cloaked and masked melodra-
matic miscreant, put him on a salary and set him on the mid-
night track of the Duke with a poisoned dagger. He also
created an Irish coachman with a rich brogue, and placed him
in the service of the society-young-lady with an ulterior mis-
sion to carry billet-doux to the Duke.
About this time there arrived in Virginia a dissolute stranger
with a literacy turn of mind—rather seedy he was, but very
quiet and unassuming; almost diffident, indeed. He was so
gentle, and his manners were so pleasing and kindly, whether
he was 'sober or intoxicated, that he made friends of all who
came in contact with him. He applied for literary work, offered
conclusive evidence that he wielded an easy and practised pen,
and so Mr. F. engaged him at once to help write the novel. His
chapter was to follow Mr. D.’s, and mine was to come next.
How what does this fellow do but go off and get drunk, and
then proceed to his quarters and set to work with his imagina-
tion in a state of chaos, and that chaos in a condition of ex-
travagant activity. The result may be guessed. He scanned
the chapters of his predecessors, found plenty of heroes and
heroines already created, and was satisfied with them; he de-
cided to introduce no more: with all the confidence that whiskey
inspires, and all the easy complacency it gives to its servant, he
then launched himself lovingly into his work: he married the
coachman to the society-young-lady for the sake of the scandal!
married the Duke to the blonde’s stepmother, for the sake of
the sensation; stopped the desperado’s salary; created a mis-
understanding between the devil and the Eoscicrucian; threw
the Duke’s property into the wicked lawyer’s hands; made the
lawyer’s upbraiding conscience drive him to drink, thence to
delirium tremens, thence to suicide; broke the coachman’s neck;
let his widow succumb to contumely, neglect, poverty, and con-
sumption; caused the blonde to drown herself, leaving her
clothes on the bank, with the customary note pinned to them,
forgiving the Duke, and hoping he would be happy; revealed
to the Duke, by means of the usual strawberry mark on left
arm, that he had married his own long-lost mother and destroyed
his long-lost sister; instituted the proper and necessary suicide
of the Duke and the Duchess, in order to compass poetical jus-
tice ; opened the earth and let the Eoscicrucian through, accom-
panied with the accustomed smoke and thunder and smell of
brimstone, and finished with the promise that, in the next
chapter, after holding a general inquest, he would take up the
surviving character of the novel, and tell what became of the
devil!
It read with singular smoothness, and with a “ dead” earnest-


ness that was funny enough to suffocate a body. But there was
war when it came in. The other novelists were furious. The
mild stranger, not yet more than half sober, stood there, under
a scathing fire of vituperation, meek and bewildered, looking
from one to another of his assailants, and wondering what fip
could have done to invoke such a storm. When a lull came at
last, he said his say gently and appealingly—said he did.not
rightly remember what he had written, but was sure he had
tried to do the best he could, and knew his object had been to
make the novel not only pleasant and plausible, but instructive
and—
The bombardment began again. The novelists assailed his
ill-chosen adjectives, and demolished them with a storm of
denunciation and ridicule. And so the siege went on. Every
time the stranger tried to appease the enemy, he only made
matters worse. Finally, he offered to rewrite the chapter. This
arrested hostilities. The indignation gradually quieted down,
peace reigned again, and the sufferer retired in safety and got
him to his own citadel.
But on the way thither the evil angel tempted him, and he
got drunk again. And again his imagination went mad. He
led the heroes and heroines a wilder dance than ever; and yet
all through it ran that same convincing air of honesty and
earnestness that had marked his first work. He got the charac-
ters into the most extraordinary situations, put them through
the most surprising performances, and made them talk the
strangest talk! But the chapter cannot be described. It was
symmetrically crazy; it was artistically absurd; and it had
explanatory footnotes that were fully as curious as the text. I
remember one of the “ situations,” and will offer it as an example-
of the whole. He altered the character of the brilliant lawyer,
and made him a great-hearted, splendid fellow; gave him fame
and riches, and set his age at thirty-three years. Then he made
the blonde discover, through the help of the Eoscicrucian and
the melodramatic miscreant, that while the Duke loved her
money ardently and wanted it, he secretly felt a sort of leaning
toward the society-young-lady. Stung to the quick, she tore
her affections from him and bestowed them with tenfold power
upon the lawyer, who responded with consuming zeal. But the
parents would none of it. What they wanted in the family was
a Duke—and a Duke they were determined to have; though they
confessed that, next to the Duke, the lawyer had their preference.
Necessarily, the blonde now went into a decline. The parents
were alarmed. They pleaded with her to marry the Duke; but
she steadfastly refused, and pined on. Then they laid a plan.
They told her to wait a year and a day; and if, at the end of
that time, she still felt that she could not marry the Duke, she
might marry the lawyer with their full consent. The result was
as they had foreseen: gladness came again, and the flush of


returning health. Then the parents took the next step in their
scheme. They had the family physician recommend a long sea
voyage and much land travel for the thorough restoration of the
blonde’s strength ; and they invited the Duke to be of the party.
They judged that the Duke’s constant presence and the lawyer’s
protracted absence would do the rest—for they did not invite
the lawyer.
So they set sail in a steamer for America—and the third day
• out, when their sea-sickness called truce, and permitted them to
take their first meal at the public table, behold there sat the
lawyer! The Duke and party made the best of an awkward
situation; the voyage progressed, and the vessel neared
America. But, by and by, two hundred miles off New Bedford,
the ship took fire; she burned to the water’s edge; of all her
crew and passengers, only thirty were saved. They floated
about the sea half an afternoon and all night long. Among
them were our friends. The lawyer, by superhuman exertions,
had saved the blonde and her parents, swimming back and
forth two hundred yards and bringing one each time—(the girl
first.) The Duke had saved himself. In the morning two
whale ships arrived on the scene and sent their boats. The
weather was stormy and the embarkation was attended with
much confusion and excitement. The lawyer did his duty like
a man; helped his exhausted and insensible blonde, her parents,
and some others into a boat (the Duke helped himself in;) then
a child fell overboard at the other end of the raft, and the lawyer
rushed thither and helped half a dozen people fish it out,
under the stimulus of its mother’s screams. Then he ran back
—a few seconds too late —the blonde’s boat was under way. So
he had to take the other boat, and go to the other ship. The
storm increased and drove the vessels out of sight of each other
■ —drove them whither it would. When it calmed, at the end of
three days, the blonde’s ship was seven hundred miles north of
Boston and the other about seven hundred south of that port.
The blonde’s captain was bound on a whaling cruise in the
North Atlantic and could not go back such a distance or make
a port without orders; such being nautical law. The lawyer’s
captain was to cruise in the North Pacific, and he could not go
back or make a port without orders. All the lawyer’s money
and baggage were in the blonde’s boat and went to the blonde’s
ship—so his captain made him work his passage as a common
sailor. When both ships had been cruising nearly a year, the
one was off the coast of Greenland and the other in Behring’s
Strait. The blonde had long ago been well-nigh persuaded
that her lawyer had been washed overboard and lost just before
the whale ships reached the raft, and now, under the pleadings
of her parents and the Duke she was at last beginning to nerve
herself for the doom of the covenant, and prepare for the hated
marriage. But she would not yield a day before the date set.


The week’s dragged on, the time narrowed, orders were given
to deck the ship for the wedding—a wedding at sea among ice-
bergs and walrusses. Five days more and all would be over.
So the blonde reflected, with a sigh and a tear. Oh, where was
her true love —and why, why did he not come and save her ?
At that moment he was lifting his harpoon to strike a whale in
Behring’s Strait, five thousand miles away, by the way of thS
Arctic Ocean, or twenty thousand by the way of the Horn—that
was the reason. He struck, but not with perfect aim—his
foot slipped and he fell in the whale’s mouth and went down his
throat. He was insensible five days. Then he came to himself,
and heard voices; daylight was streaming through a hole cut
in the whale’s roof. He climbed out, and astonished the sailors
who were hoisting blubber up a ship’s side. He recognised the
vessel, flew aboard, surprised the wedding party at the altar,
and exclaimed:—
“ Stop the proceedings —I’m here ! Come to my arms, my
own!”
There were foot-notes to this extravagant piece of literature
wherein the author endeavoured to show that the whole thing
was within the possibilities; he said he got the incident of the
whale travelling from Behring’s Strait to the coast of
Greenland, five thousand miles in five days, through the Arctic
Ocean, from Charles Keade’s “ Love Me Little, Love Me Long,”
and considered that that established the fact that the thing
could be done; and he instanced Jonah’s adventure as proof
that a man could live in a whale’s belly, and added that if a
preacher could stand it three days a lawyer could surely stand it
five!
There was a fiercer storm than ever in the editorial sanctum,
now, and the stranger was peremptorily discharged, and his
manuscript flung at his head. But he had already delayed
things so much that there was not time for some one else to
rewrite the chapter, and so the paper came out without any
novel in it. It was but a feeble, struggling, stupid journal,
and the absence of the novel probably shook public confidence;
at any rate, before the first side of the next issue went to press,
the Weekly Occidental died as peacefully as an infant.
An effort was made to resurrect it, with the proposed advan-
tage of a telling new title, and Mr. F. said that The Phcenix would
be just the name for it, because it would give the idea of a
resurrection from its dead ashes in a new and undreamed of
condition of splendour; but some low-priced smarty on one of
the dailies suggested that we call it the Lazarus ; and inasmuch
as the people were not profound in Scriptural matters but
thought the resurrected Lazarus and the dilapidated mendicant
that begged in the rich man’s gateway were one and the same
person, the name became the laughing stock of the town, and
killed the paper for good and all.


I was sorry enough, for I was very proud of being connected
with a literary paper—prouder than I have ever been of any-
thing since, perhaps. I had written some rhymes for it—
poetry I considered it —and it was a great grief to me that the
production was on the “first side” of the issue that was not
completed, and hence did not see the light. But time brings
its revenges —I can put it in here ; it will answer in place of
a tear dropped to the memory of the lost Occidental. The
idea (not the chief idea, but the vehicle that bears it) was
probably suggested by the old song called “ The Eaging Canal,”
But I cannot remember now. I do remember, though, that at
that time I thought my doggerel was one of the ablest poems
•of the age:—
THE AGED PILOT MAN.
On the Erie Canal, it was,
All on a summer’s day,
I sailed forth with my parents
Ear away to Albany.
From out the clouds at noon that day
There came a dreadful storm.
That piled the billows high about,
And filled us with alarm.
A man came rushing from a house,
Saying “Snub up * your boat I pray,
Snub up your boat, snub up, alas,
Snub up while yet you may.”
Our captain cast one glance astern,
Then forward glanced he,
And said “My wife and little ones
I never more shall see. ”
Said Bollinger the pilot man,
In noble words, but few, —
“ Fear not, but lean on Bollinger,
And he will fetch you through.”
The boat drove on, the frightened mules
Tore through the rain and wind.
And bravely still, in danger’s post,
The whip-boy strode behind.
“Come ’board, come ’board,” the captain cried,
“Nor tempt so wild a storm
But still the raging mules advanced,
And still the boy strode on.
Then said the Captain to us all,
“ Alas, ’tis plain to me,
The greater danger is not there,
But here upon the sea.
* The customary canal technicality for “ tie-up.”
208


So let us strive, while life remains,
To save all souls on board,-
And then if die at last we must,
Let .... I cannot speak the word !’"
Said Bollinger the pilot man,
Tow’ring above the crew,
“Fear not, but trust in Bollinger,
And he will fetch you through.”
“Low bridge ! low bridge! ” all heads went down,
The labouring bark sped on;
A mill we passed, we passed a church,
Hamlets, and fields of corn ;
And all the world came out to see,
And chased along the shore.
Crying, “Alas, alas, the sheeted rain,
The wind, the tempests roar !
Alas, the gallant ship and crew,
Can nothing help them more 1”
And from our deck sad eyes looked out
Across the stormy scene :
The tossing wake of billows aft,
The bending forests green.
The chickens sheltered under carts,
In lee of barn the cows,
The skurrying swine with straw in mouth,
The wild spray from our bows !
“ She balances !
She wavers!
Now let her go about!
If she misses stays and broaches to,
We’re all”—[then with a shout,]
“Huray ! huray!
Avast! belay !
Take in more sail!
Lord, what a gale !
Ho, boy, haul taut on the hind mule’s tail! ”
“Ho ! lighten ship ! ho ! man the pump !
Ho, hostler, heave the lead !
Si A quarter-three!—’tis shoaling fast!
Three feet large ! —t-h-r-e-e feet !
Three feet scant!” I cried in fright,
“Oh, is there no retreat?”
Said Bollinger the pilot man,
As on the vessel flew,
“Fear not, but trust in Bollinger,
And he will fetch you through.”
A panic struck the bravest hearts,
The boldest cheek turned pale ;
For plain to all, this shoaling said
A leak had burst the ditch’s bed !
And, straight as bolt from crossbow sped,
Our ship swept on, with shoaling lead,
Before the fearful gale !


“Sever the tow line! Cripple the mules!’ "
Too late!...-. . There comes a shock!
******
Another length, and the fated craft
Would have swum in the saving lock!
Then gathered together the shipwrecked crew.
And took one last embrace,
While sorrowful tears from despairing eyes
Ran down each hopeless face;
And some did think of their little ones
Whom they never more might see.
And others of waiting wives at home,
And mothers who grieved would be.
But of all the children of misery there
On that poor sinking frame,
But one spake words of hope and faith.
And I worshipped as they came:
Said Bollinger the pilot man, —
(O brave heart, strong and true!)
11 Fear not, but trust in Bollinger,
For he will fetch you through.”
Lo ! scarce the words have passed his lips,
The dauntless prophet say’th,
When every soul about him seeth
A wonder crown his faith!
And count ye all, both great and small,
As numbered with the dead !
For mariner for forty year,
On Erie, boy and man,
I never yet saw such a storm,
Or one’t with it began!”
So overboard a keg of nails.
And anvils three we threw,
Likewise four bales of gunny sacks.
Two hundred pounds of glue,
Two sacks of corn, four ditto wheat,
A box of books, a cow,
A violin, Lord Byron’s works,
A rip-saw and a sow.
A curve! a curve! the dangers grow!
“Labbord !—stabbord! —s-t-e-a-d-y!—so
.Hard-a-port, Bol! —hellum-a-lee!
Haw the head mule!—the aft one gee!
Luff!—bring her to the wind!”
For straight a farmer brought a plank,—
(Mysteriously inspired.)—
And laying it unto the ship,
In silent awe retired.
Then every sufferer stood amazed
That pilot man before;
A moment stood. Then wondering turned,
And speechless walked ashore.


CHAPTEE LIT.
Since I desire, in this chapter, to say an instructive word or
two about the silver mines, the reader may fake this fair warn-
ing and skip, if he chooses. The year 1863 was perhaps the
very top blossom and culmination of the “flush times.”
Virginia swarmed with men and vehicles to that degree that
the place looked like a very hive —that is, when one’s vision
could pierce through the thick fog of alkali dust that was
generally blowing in summer. I will say, concerning this dust,
that if you drove ten miles through it, you and your horses
would be coated with it a sixteenth of an inch thick, and pre-
sent an outside appearance that was a uniform pale yellow
colour, and your buggy would have three inches of dust in it,
thrown there by the wheels. The delicate scales used by the
assayers were enclosed in glass cases intended to be air-tight,
and yet some of this dust was so impalpable and so invisibly
fine that it would get in, somehow, and impair the accuracy of
those scales.
Speculation ran riot, and yet there was a world of substantial
business going on, too. All freights were brought over the
mountains from California (150 miles) by pack-train partly, and
partly in huge waggons drawn by such long mule teams that
each team amounted to a procession, and it did seem, sometimes,
that the grand combined procession of animals stretched
unbroken from Virginia to California. Its long route was
traceable clear across the deserts of the Territory by the writh-
ing serpent of dust it lifted up. By these waggons, freights
over that hundred and fifty miles were 200 dollars a ton for
small lots (same price for all express matter brought by stage,)
and 100 dollars a ton for full loads. One Virginia firm received
one hundred tons of freight a month, and paid 10,000 dollars
a month freightage. In the winter the freights were much
higher. All the bullion was shipped in bars by stage to San
Francisco (a bar was usually about twice the size of a pig of
lead, and contained from 1500 dollars to 3000 dollars, accord-
ing to the amount of gold mixed with the silver,) and the
freight on it (when the shipment was large) was one and a
quarter per cent, of its intrinsic value. So, the freight on
these bars probably averaged something more than 25 dollars
each. Small shippers paid two per cent. There were three
stages a day, each way, and I have seen the out-going stages
carry away a third of a ton of bullion each, and more than once
I saw them divide a two ton lot and take it off. However, these
were extraordinary events.* Two tons of silver bullion would
* Mr. Valentine, Wells, Fargo’s agent, has handled all the bullion shipped
211 L 2


be in the neighbourhood of forty bars, and the freight on it over
1000 dollars. Each coach always carried a deal of ordinary
express matter beside, and also from fifteen to twenty passen-
gers, at from 25 dollars to 30 dollars a head. With six stages
going all the time. Wells, Fargo, and Co.’s Virginia City business
was important and lucrative.
All along under the centre of Virginia and Gold Hill, for a
couple of miles, ran the great Comstock silver lode—a vein of
ore from fifty to eighty feet thick between its solid walls of
rock —a vein as wide as some of Hew York’s streets. I will
remind the reader that in Pennsylvania a coal vein only eight
feet wide is considered ample.
Virginia was a busy city of streets and houses above ground.
Tinder it was another busy city, down in the bowels of the earth,
where a great population of men thronged in and out among
an intricate maze of tunnels and drifts, flitting hither and
thither under a winking sparkle of lights, and over their heads
towered a vast web of interlocking timbers that held the walls
of the gutted Comstock apart. These timbers were as large as
a man’s body, and the framework stretched upward so far that
no eye could pierce to its top through the closing gloom. It
was like peering up through the clean-picked ribs and bones of
some colossal skeleton. Imagine such a framework two miles
long, sixty feet wide, and higher than any church spire in
America. Imagine this stately lattice-work stretching down
through the Virginia office for many a month. To his memory —which is
excellent —we are indebted for the following exhibit of the company’s busi-
ness in the Virginia office since the first of January, 1862: From January
Ist to April Ist, about 270,000 dollars worth of bullion passed through that
office; during the next quarter, 570,000 dollars; next quarter, 800,000 dollars;
next quarter, 956,000 dollars; next quarter, 1,275,000 dollars; and for the
quarter ending on the 30th of last June, about 1,600,000 dollars. Thus in a
year and a hah, the Virginia office only shipped 5,330,000 dollars in bullion.
During the year 1862 they shipped 2,615,000 dollars ; so we perceive the aver-
age shipments have more than doubled in the last six months. This gives us
room to promise for the Virginia office 500,000 dollars a month for the year
1863 (though perhaps, judging by the steady increase in the business, we are
under-estimating, somewhat.) This gives us 6,000,000 dollars for the year.
Gold Hill and Silver City together can beat us—we will give them 10,000,000
dollars. To Dayton, Empire City, Ophir, and Carson City, we will allow an
aggregate of 8,000,000 dollars, which is not over the mark, perhaps, and may
possibly be a little under it. To Esmeralda we give 4,000,000 dollars. To
Reese River and Humboldt 2,000,000 dollars, which is liberal now, but may
not be before the year is out. So we prognosticate that the yield of bullion
this year will be about 30,000,000 dollars. Placing the number of mills in
the Territory at one hundred, this gives to each the labour of producing
300,000 dollars in bullion during the twelve months. Allowing them to run
three hundred days in the year (which none of them more than do,) this
makes their work average 1000 dollars a day. Say the mills average twenty
tons of rock a day, and this rock worth 50 dollars as a general thing, and you
have the actual work of our one hundred mills figured down “to a spot”—
1000 dollars a day each, and 30,000,000 dollars a year in the aggregate.—
Enterprise.
(A considerable over-estimate.—M.T.]


Broadway, from St. Nicholas to Wall street, and a Fourth of
July procession, reduced to pigmies, parading on top of it and
flaunting their flags high above the pinnacle of Trinity steeple.
One can imagine that, but he cannot well imagine what that
forest of timbers cost, from the time they were felled in the
pineries beyond Washoe Lake, hauled up and around Mount*
Davidson at atrocious rates of freightage, then squared, let
down into the deep maw of the mine and built up there.
Twenty ample fortunes would not timber one of the greatest of
those silver mines. The Spanish proverb says it requires a gold
mine to “run” a silver one, and it is true. A beggar with a
silver mine is a pitiable pauper indeed, if he cannot sell.
I spoke of the underground Virginia as a city. The Gould
and Curry is only one single mine under there, among a great
many others; yet the Gould and Curry’s streets of dismal drifts
and tunnels were five miles in extent, altogether, and its popu-
lation five hundred miners. Taken as a whole, the underground
city had some thirty miles of streets and a population of five or
six thousand. In this present day some of those populations
are at work from twelve to sixteen hundred feet under Virginia
and Gold Hill, and the signal-bells that tell them what the
superintendent above ground desires them to do are struck by
telegraph as we strike a fire alarm. Sometimes men fall down
a shaft, there, a thousand feet deep. In such cases the usual
plan is to hold an inquest.
If you wish to visit one of those mines, you may walk through
a tunnel about half a mile long if you prefer it, or you may
take the quicker plan of shooting like a dart down a shaft on a
small platform. It is like tumbling down through an empty
steeple, feet first. When you reach the bottom, you take a
candle and tramp through drifts and tunnels where throngs of
men are digging and blasting; you watch them send up tubs
full of great lumps of stone —silver ore; you select choice speci-
mens from the mass, as souvenirs; you admire the world of
skeleton timbering; you reflect frequently that you are buried
under a mountain, a thousand feet below daylight; being in
the bottom of the mine you climb from “gallery” to “gallery,”
up endless ladders that stand straight up and down; when your
legs fail you at last, you lie down in a small box-car in a
cramped “incline,” like a half-up-ended sewer, and are dragged
up to daylight, feeling as if you are crawling through a coffin
that has no end to it. Arrived at the top you find a busy crowd
of men receiving the ascending cars and tubs, and dumping the
ore from an elevation into long rows of bins capable of holding
half a dozen tons each; under the bins are rows of waggons
loading from chutes and trap-doors in the bins, and down the
long street is a procession of these waggons wending toward the
silver mills with their rich freight. It is all “ done,” now, and
there you are. You need never go down again, for you have


seen it all. If yon have forgotten the process of reducing the
ore in the mill and making the silver bars, you can go back and
find it again in my Esmeralda chapters, if so disposed.
Of course these mines cave in, in places, occasionally, and
then it is worth one’s while to take the risk of descending into
them and observing the crushing power exerted by the pres-
sing weight of a settling mountain. I published such, an
experience in the Enterprise, once, and from it I will take an
extract:—
An Hour in the Caved Mines.— We journeyed down into the Ophir
mine yesterday, to see the earthquake. We could not go down the deep
incline, because it still has a propensity to cave in places. Therefore we
travelled through the long tunnel which enters the hill above the Ophir
office, and then by means of a series of long ladders, climbed away down
from the first to the fourth gallery. Traversing a drift, we came to the
Spanish line, passed five sets of timbers still uninjured, and found the
earthquake. Here was as complete a chaos as ever was seen—vast masses
of earth and splintered and broken timbers piled confusedly together, with
scarcely an aperture left large enough for a cat to creep through. Rubbish
was still falling at intervals from above, and one timber which had braced
others earlier in the day, was now crushed down out of its former position,
showing that the caving and settling of the tremendous mass was still going
on. We were in that portion of the Ophir known as the “north mines.
Returning to the surface, we entered a tunnel leading into the Central,
for the purpose of getting into the main Ophir. Descending a long incline
in this tunnel, we traversed a drift or so, and then went down a deep shaft,
from whence we proceeded into the fifth gallery of the Ophir. From
a side-drift we crawled through a small hole and got into the midst of
the earthquake again—earth and broken timbers mingled together with-
out regard to grace or symmetry. A large portion of the second, third,
and fourth galleries had caved in, and gone to destruction —the two latter
at seven o’clock on the previous evening.
At the turn-table, near the northern extremity of the fifth gallery two
big piles of rubbish had forced their way through from the fifth gallery,
and from the looks of the timbers more was about to come. These beams
are solid—eighteen inches square ; first, a great beam is laid on the floor,
then upright ones, five feet high, stand on it, supporting another horizontal
beam, and so on, square above square, like the framework of a window. The
superincumbent weight was sufficient to mash the ends of those great up-
right beams fairly into the solid wood of the horizontal ones three inches,
compressing and bending the upright beam till it curved like a bow.
Before the Spanish caved in, some of their twelve-inch horizontal timbers
were compressed in this way until they were only five inches thick ! Imagine
the power it must take to squeeze a solid log together in that way. Here,
also, was a range of timbers, for a distance of twenty feet, tilted six inches
out of the perpendicular by the weight resting upon them from the caved
galleries above. You could hear things cracking and giving way and it was
not pleasant to know that the world overhead was slowly and silently sinking
down upon you. The men down in the mine do not mind it, however.
Returning along the fifth gallery we struck the safe part of the Ophir
incline, aftd went down it to the sixth ; but we found ten inches of water
there, and had to come back. In repairing the damage done to the incline,
the pump had to be stopped for two hours, and in the mean time the water
gained about a foot. However, the pump was at work again, and the flood-
water was decreasing. We climbed up to the fifth gallery again, and sought
a deep shaft, whereby we might descend to another part of the sixth, out of
reach of the water, but suffered disappointment, as the men had gone to
dinner, and there was no one to man the windlass. So, having seen the
earthquake, we climbed out at the Union incline and tunnel, and adjourned,
all dripping with candle grease and perspiration, to lunch at the Ophir office.


During the great flush year of 1863, Nevada [claims to have]
produced 25,000,000 dollars in bullion —almost, if not quite, a
round million to each thousand inhabitants, which is very
well, considering that she was without agriculture and manu-
factures.* Silver mining was her sole productive industry.
CHAPTER LIII.
Evert now and then, in these days, the boys used to tell me I
ought to get one Jim Blaine to tell me the stirring story of his
grandfather’s old ram—but they always added that I must not
mention the matter unless Jim was drunk at the time —just
comfortably and sociably drunk. They kept this up until my
curiosity was on the rack to hear the story. I got to haunting
Blaine ; but it was of no use, the boys always found fault with
his condition: he was often moderately but never satisfactorily
drunk. I never watched a man’s condition with such absorbing
interest, such anxious solicitude; I never so pined to see a man
uncompromisingly drunk before. At last, one evening I hurried
to his cabin, for I learned that this time his situation was such
that even the most fastidious could find no fault with it—he
was tranquilly, serenely, symmetrically drunk —not a hiccup to
mar his voice, not a cloud upon his brain thick enough to
obscure his memory. As I entered, he was sitting upon an
empty powder-keg, with a clay pipe in one hand and the other
raised to command silence. His face was round, red, and
very serious; his throat was bare, and his hair tumbled; in
general appearance and costume he was a stalwart miner of the
period. On the pine table stood a candle, and its dim light
* Since the above was in type, I learn from an official source that the
above figure is too high, and that the yield for 1863 did not exceed 20,000,000
dollars. However, the day for large figures is approaching ; the Sutro
Tunnel is to plough through the Comstock lode from end to end, at a depth
of two thousand feet, and then mining will be easy and comparatively
inexpensive; and the momentous matters of drainage, and hoisting and
hauling of ore will cease to be burdensome. This vast work will absorb
many years, and millions of dollars, in its completion; but it will early
yield money, for that desirable epoch will begin as soon as it strikes the first
end of the vein. The tunnel will be some eight miles long, and will develop
astonishing riches. Cars will carry the ore through the tunnel and dump it
in the mills, and thus do away with the present costly system of double
handling and transportation by mule teams. The water from the tunnel
will furnish the motive power for the mills. Mr. Sutro, the originator of
this prodigious enterprise, is one of the few men in the world who is gifted
with the pluck and perseverance necessary to follow up and hound such an
undertaking to its completion. He has converted several obstinate Con-
gresses to a deserved friendliness toward his important work, and has gone
up and down and to and fro in Europe until he has enlisted a great moneyed
interest in it there.


revealed “ the hoys ” sitting here and there on bunks, candle-
boxes, powder-kegs, &c. They said :
“ Sh —! Don’t speak—he’s going to commence.”
THE STORT OF THE OLD RAM.
I found a seat at once, and Blaine said: —
"I don’t reckon them times will ever come again. There
never was a more bullier old ram than what he was. Grand-
father fetched him from Illinois—got him of a man by the name
of Yates —Bill Yates —may be you might have heard of him;
his father was a deacon —Baptist—and he was a rustler, too; a
man had to get up ruther early to get the start of old Thankful
Yates; it was him that put the Greens tip to jining teams with
my grandfather when he moved west. Seth Green was prob’ly
the pick of the flock ; he married a Wilkerson —Sarah Wilkerson
—good cretur, she was —one of the likeliest heifers that was
ever raised in old Stoddard, everybody said that knowed her.
She could heft a bar’l of flour as easy as I can flirt a flapjack.
And spin ? Don’t mention it! Independent ? Humph! When
Sile Hawkins come a browsing around her, she let him know
that for all his tin he couldn’t trot in harness alongside of her.
You see, Sile Hawkins was —no, it warn’t Sile Hawkins, after
all—it was a galoot by the name of Filkins—l disremember
his first name; but he was a stump—come into pra’r meeting
drunk, one night, hooraying for Nixon, becuz he thought it
was a primary; and old Deacon Ferguson up and scooted him
through the window, and he lit on old Miss Jefferson’s head,
poor old filly. She was a good soul —had a glass eye, and used
to lend it to old Miss Wagner, that hadn’t any, to receive
company in; it warn’t big enough, and when Miss Wagner
warn’t noticing, it would get twisted around in the socket, and
look up, may be, or out to one side, and every which way,
while t’ other one was looking as straight ahead as a spy-glass.
Grown people didn’t mind it, but it most always made the
children cry, it was so sort of scary. She tried packing it in
raw cotton, but it wouldn’t work, somehow —the cotton would
get loose, and stick out, and look so kind of awful that the chil-
dren couldn’t stand it no way. She was always dropping it out,
and turning up her old dead-light on the company empty, and
making them oncomfortable, becuz she never could tell when
it hopped out, being blind on that side, you see. So somebody
would have to hunch her, and say, “Your game eye has fetched
loose, Miss Wagner, dear;” —and then all of them would have
to sit and wait till she jammed it in again—wrong side be-
fore, as a general thing, and green as a bird’s egg, being a
bashful cretur and easy sot back before company. But being
wrong side before warn’t much difference, anyway, becuz her
own eye was sky-blue, and the glass one was yaller on the front


side, so whichever way she turned it it didn’t match nohow.
■Old Miss Wagner was considerable on the borrow, she was.
When she had a quilting, or Dorcas S’iety at her house she
gen’ally borrowed Miss Higgins’s wooden leg to stump around
on; it was considerable shorter than her other pin, but much
she minded that. She said she couldn’t abide crutches when
she had company, becuz they were so slow ; said when she had
company, and things had to be done, she wanted to get up and
hump herself. She was as bald as a jug, and so she used to
borrow Miss Jacops’s wig—Miss Jacops was the coffin-pedlar’s
wife—a ratty old buzzard, he was, that used to go roosting around
where people was sick, waiting for ’em; and there that old rip
would sit all day, in the shade, on a coffin that he judged would
fit the can’idate; and if it was a slow customer and kind of
uncertain, he’d fetch his rations and a blanket along and sleep
in the coffin nights. He was anchored out that way, in frosty
weather, for about three weeks, once, before old Robbins’s
place, waiting for him; and after that, for as much as two
years, Jacops was not on speaking terms with the old man, on
account of his disapp’inting him. He got one of his feet froze,
and lost money, too, because old Robbins took a favourable turn,
and got well. The next time Robbins got sick, Jacops tried to
make up with him, and varnished up the same old coffin, and
fetched it along; but old Robbins was too many for him; he had
him in, and ’peared to be powerful weak; he bought the coffin for
ten dollars, and Jacops was to pay it back and twenty-five more
besides, if Robbins didn’t like the coffin after he’d tried it. And
then Robbins died, and at the funeral he bursted off the lid
and riz up in his shroud and told the parson to let up on the
performances, becuz he could not stand such a coffin as that.
You see he had been in a trance once before, when he was
young, and he took the chances on another, cal’lating that if
he made the trip it was money in his pocket, and if he missed
fire he couldn’t lose a cent. And by George he sued Jacops for
the rhino and got jedgment; and he set up the coffin in his back
parlour and said he Towed to take his time, now. It was always
an aggravation to Jacops, the way that miserable old thing
acted. He moved back to Indiany pretty soon—went to Wells-
ville—Wellsville was the place the Hogadorns was from.
Mighty fine family. Old Maryland stock. Old Squire Hogadorn
could carry around more mixed licker, and cuss better than
most any man I ever see. His second wife was the widder
Billings—she that was Becky Martin; her dam was Deacon
Dunlap’s first wife. Her oldest child, Maria, married a mis-
sionary and died in grace—et up by the savages. They et him,
too, poor feller—biled him. It warn’t the custom, so they say,
but they explained to friends of his’n that went down there to
•bring away his things, that they’d tried missionaries every other
way, and never could get any good out of ’em; and so it annoyed


all his relations to find out that that man’s life was fooled
away just out of a dern’d experiment, so to speak. But mind
you, there ain’t anything ever reely lost; everything that
people can’t understand and don’t see the reason of does good
if you. only hold on and give it a fair shake; Prov’dence don’t
fire no blank ca’tridges, boys. That theremissionary’s substance,
unbeknowns to himself, actu’y converted every last one of them
heathens that took a chance at the barbacue. Nothing ever
fetched them but that. Don’t tell me it was an accident that he
was biled. There ain’t no such a thing as an accident. When
my uncle Lem was leaning up agin a scaffolding once, sick, or
drunk, or suthing, an Irishman with a hod full of bricks fell
on him out of the third story and broke the old man’s back in
two places. People said it was an accident. Much accident
there was about that. He didn’t know what he was there for,
but he was there for a good object. If he hadn’t been there,
the Irishman would have been killed. Nobody can ever
make me believe anything different from that. Uncle Lem’s
dog was there. Why didn’t the Irishman fall on the dog ?
Becuz the dog would a seen him a coming and stood from
under. That’s the reason the dog warn’t appinted. A dog
can’t be depended on to carry out a special providence. Mark
my words, it was a put-up thing. Accidents don’t happen, boys.
Uncle Lem’s dog—l wish you could a seen that dog. He was
a reglar shepherd—or ruther he was part bull and part shep-
herd—splendid animal; belonged to parson Hagar before Uncle
Lem got him. Parson Hagar belonged to the Western Eeserve
Hagars. Prime family: his mother was a Watson; one of his
sisters married a Wheeler. They settled in Morgan county,
and he got nipped by the machinery in a carpet factory, and
went through in less than a quarter of a minute; his widder
bought the piece of carpet that had his remains wove in, and
people come a hundred miles to ’tend the funeral. There was
fourteen yards in the piece. She wouldn’t let them roll him up,
but planted him just so—full length, The church was middling
small where they preached the funeral, and they had to let one
end of the coffin stick out of the window. They didn’t bury
him—they planted one end, and let him stand up, same as a
monument. And they nailed a sign on it and put—put on—put
on it—sacred to—the m-e-m-o-r-y—of fourteen y-a-r-d-s—of
three-ply—car - - - pet—containing all that was—m-o-r-t-a-1—
of—of—W-i-l-l-i-a-m —W-h-e—”
Jim Blaine had been growing gradually drowsy and drowsier
—his head nodded, once, twice, three times —dropped peacefully
upon his breast, and he fell tranquilly asleep. The tears were
running down the boys’ cheeks—they we*-e suffocating with
suppressed laughter—and had been from the start, though I
had never noticed it. I perceived that I was “ sold.” I learned
then that Jim Blaine’s peculiarity was, that whenever he reached


a certain stage of intoxication, no human power could keep him
from setting out, with impressive unction, to tell about a
wonderful adventure which he had once had with his grand-
father’s old ram—and the mention of the ram in the first sentence
was as far as any man had ever heard him get concerning it.
He always maundered off, interminably, from one thing to
another, till his whiskey got the best of him, and he fell asleep.
What the thing was that happened to him and his grandfather’s
old ram is a dark mystery to this day, for nobody has ever yet
found out.
CHAPTEE LIY.
Oe course there was a large Chinese population in Virginia
—it is the case with every town and city on the Pacific coast.
They are a harmless race when white men either let them alone
or treat them no worse than dogs ; in fact they are almost en-
tirely harmless anyhow, for they seldom think of resenting the
vilest insults or the cruelest injuries. They are quiet, peace-
able, tractable, free from drunkenness, and they are as indus-
trious as the day is long. A disorderly Chinaman is rare, and
a lazy one does not exist. So long as a Chinaman has strength
to use his hands, he needs no support from anybody; white men
often complain of want of work, but a Chinaman offers no
such complaint; he always manages to find something to do.
He is a great convenience to everybody—even to the worst
class of white men, for he bears the most of their sins, suffer-
ing fines for their petty thefts, imprisonment for their robberies,
and death for their murders. Any white man can swear a
Chinaman’s life away in the courts, but no Chinaman can
testify against a white man, Ours is the “ land of the free ”
—nobody denies that—nobody challenges it. [May be it is
because we won’t let other people testify.] As I write, news
comes that in broad daylight, in San Francisco, some boys have
stoned an inoffensive Chinaman to death, and that, although a
large crowd witnessed the shameful deed, no one interfered.
There are seventy thousand (and possibly one hundred
thousand) Chinamen on the Pacific coast. There were about
a thousand in Virginia. They were penned into a “ Chinese-
quarter ” —a thing which they do not particularly object to, as
they are fond of herding together. Their buildings were of
wood; usually only one story high, and set thickly together
along streets scarcely wide enough for a waggon to pass through.
Their quarter was a little removed from the rest of the town.
The chief employment of Chinamen in towns is to wash
clothing. They always send a bill pinned to the clothes. It
is mere ceremony, for it does not enlighten the customer


much. Their price for washing was 2.50 dollars per dozen—
rather cheaper than white people could afford to wash for at
that time. A very common sign on the Chinese houses
was : “ See Yup, Washer and Ironer“ Hong Wo, Washer •”
“Sam Sing & Ah Hop, Washing.” The house servants,
cooks, etc., in California and Nevada, were chiefly China-
men. There were few white < servants and no Chinawomen
so employed. Chinamen make good house servants, being
quick, obedient, patient, quick to learn, and tirelessly industri-
ous. They do not need to be taught a thing twice, as a general
thing. They are imitative. If a Chinaman were to see his
master break up a centre table, in a passion, and kindle a fire
with it, that Chinaman would be likely to resort to the fur-
niture for fuel for ever afterward.
All Chinamen can read, write, and cipher with easy facility—
pity but all our petted voters could. In California they rent
little patches of ground and do a deal of gardening. They will
raise surprising crops of vegetables on a sand pile. They waste
nothing. What is rubbish to a Christian, a Chinaman carefully
preserves and makes useful in one way or another. He gathers
up all the old oyster and sardine cans that white people throw
away, and procures marketable tin and solder from them by
melting. He gathers up old bones and turns them into manure.
In California he gets a living out of old mining claims that
white men have abandoned as exhausted and worthless—and
then the officers come down on him once a month Avith an exor-
bitant swindle to which the legislature has given the broad,
general name of “ foreign ” mining tax, but it is usually
inflicted on no foreigners but Chinamen. This SAvindle has, in
some cases, been repeated once or twice on the same victim in
the course of the same month —but the public treasury was not
additionally enriched by it, probably.
Chinamen hold their dead in great reverence—they worship
their departed ancestors, in fact. Hence, in China, a man’s
front yard, back yard, or any other part of his premises, is
made his family burying ground, in order that he may visit the
graves at any and all times. Therefore that huge empire is
one mighty cemetery; it is ridged and wringled from its centre
to its circumference with graves —and inasmuch as every foot
•of ground must be made to do its utmost, in China, lest the
swarming population suffer for food, the very graves are culti-
vated and yield a harvest, custom holding this to be no dis-
honour to the dead. Since the departed are held in such wor-
shipful reverence, a Chinaman cannot bear that any indignity
be offered the places where they sleep. Mr. Burlingame said
that herein lay China’s bitter opposition to railroads; a road
could not be built anywhere in the empire without disturbing
the graves of their ancestors or friends.
A Chinaman hardly believes he could enjoy the hereafter


except his body lay in his beloved China; also, he desires to
receive, himself, after death, that worship with which he has
honoured his dead that preceded him. Therefore, if he visits
a foreign country, he makes arrangements to have his bones
returned to China in case he dies; if he hires to goto a foreign
country on a labour contract, there is always a stipulation that
his body shall be taken back to China if he dies; if the govern-
ment sells a gang of Coolies to a foreigner for the usual five-
year term, it is specified in the contract that their bodies shall
be restored to China in case of death. On the Pacific coast the
Chinamen all belong to one or another of several great com-
panies or organisations, and these companies keep track of their
members, register their names, and ship their bodies home when
they die. The See Yup Company is held to be the largest of
these. The Ning Yeong Company is next, and numbers eighteen
thousand members on the coast. Its head-quarters are at San
Francisco, where it has a costly temple, several great officers
(one of whom keeps regal state in seclusion and cannot be
approached by common humanity,) and a numerous priesthood.
In it I was shown a register of its members, with the dead and
the date of their shipment to China duly marked. Every ship
that sails from San Francisco carries away a heavy freight of
Chinese corpses —or did, at least, until the legislature, with an
ingenious refinement of Christian cruelty, forbade the ship-
ments, as a neat underhanded way of deterring Chinese immi-
gration. The bill was offered, whether it passed or not. It is
my impression that it passed. There was another bill—it
became a law —compelling every incoming Chinaman to be
vaccinated on the wharf and pay a duly appointed quack (no
decent doctor would defile himself with such legalised robbery)
ten dollars for it. As few importers of Chinese would want to
go to an expense like that, the lawmakers thought this would
be another heavy blow to Chinese immigration.
What the Chinese quarter of Virginia was like—or, indeed,
what the Chinese quarter of any Pacific coast town was and is
like—may be gathered from this item which I printed in the
Enterprise while reporting for that paper :
Chinatown.— Accompanied by a fellow reporter, we made a trip through
our Chinese quarter the other night. The Chinese have built their portion
•of the city to suit themselves; and as they keep neither carriages nor wag-
gons, their streets are not wide enough, as a general thing, to admit of the
passage of vehicles. At ten o’clock at night the Chinaman may be seen in
all his glory. In every little cooped-up, dingy cavern of a hut, faint with
the odour of burning Joss-lights, and with nothing to see the gloom by save
the sickly, guttering tallow candle, were two or three yellow, long-tailed
vagabonds, coiled up on a sort of short, truckle bed, smoking opium, motion-
less, and with their lustreless eyes turned inward from excess of satisfaction
—or rather the recent smoker looks thus, immediately after having passed
the pipe to his neighbour—for opium-smoking is a comfortless operation, and
requires constant attention. A lamp sits on the bed, the length of the long
pipe-stem from the smoker’s mouth; he puts a pellet of opium on the end of


a wire, sets it on fire, and plasters it into the pipe much as a Christian would
fill a hole with putty ; then he applies the howl to the lamp, and proceeds to
smoke—and the stewing and frying of the drug and the gurgling of the
juices in the stem would wellnigh turn the stomach of a statue. John
likes it, though; it soothes him. He takes about two dozen whiffs, and then
rolls over to dream, Heaven only knows what, for we could not imagine by
looking at the soggy creature. Possibly in his visions he travels far away
from the gross world and his regular washing, and feasts on succulent rats
and birds’-nests in Paradise.
Mr. Ah Sing keeps a general grocery and provision store at No. 13 Wang-
street. He lavished his hospitality upon our party in the friendliest way.
He had various kinds of coloured and colourless wines and brandies, with
unpronouncable names, imported from China in little crockery jugs, and
which he offered to us in dainty little miniature wash-basins of porcelain.
He offered us a mess of birds’-nests ; also, small, neat sausages, of which we
could have swallowed several yards if we had chosen to try, but we sus-
pected that each link contained the corpse of a mouse, and therefore
refrained. Mr. Sing had in his store a thousand articles of merchandise,
curious to behold, impossible to imagine the uses of, and beyond our ability
His ducks, however, and his eggs, we could understand ; the former were
split open and flattened out like codfish, and came from China in that shape,
and the latter were plastered over with some kind of paste, which kept
them fresh and palatable through the long voyage.
We found Mr. Hong Wo, No. 37 Chow-chow-street, making up a lottery
scheme—in fact we found a dozen others occupied in the same way in various
Earts of the quarter, for about every third Chinaman runs a lottery, and the
alance of the tribe “buck” at it. “Tom,” who speaks faultless English,
and used to be chief and only cook to the Territorial Enterprise, when the
establishment kept bachelor’s hall two years ago, said that “Sometime
Chinaman buy ticket one dollar hap, ketch um two tree hundred, sometime
no ketch um anyting; lottery like one man fight um seventy—may-be he
whip, may-be he get whip heself, welly good.” However, the percentage
being sixty-nine against him, the chances are, as a general thing, that “he
get whip heself.” We could not see that these lotteries differed in any
respect from our own, save that the figures being Chinese, no ignorant
white man might ever hope to succeed in telling “t’other from which the
manner of drawing is similar to ours.
Mr. See Yup keeps a fancy store on Live Fox-street. He sold us fans_ of
white feathers, gorgeously ornamented ; perfumery that smelled like Lim-
burger cheese, Chinese pens, and watch-charms made of a stone unscratch-
able with steel instruments, yet polished and tinted like the inner coat of a
sea-shell.* As tokens of his esteem, See Yup presented the party with
gaudy plumes made of gold tinsel and trimmed with peacocks’ feathers.
We ate chow-chow with chop-sticks in the celestial restaurants our com-
rade chided the moon-eyed damsels in front of the houses for their want of
feminine reserve; we received protecting Joss-lights from our hosts and
“dickered” for a pagan god or two. Finally, we were impressed with the
genius of a Chinese book-keeper ; he figured up his accounts on a machine
like a gridiron with buttons strung on its bars; the different rows repre-
sented units, tens, hundreds, and thousands. He fingered them with
incredible rapidity—in fact, he pushed them from place to place as fast as a
musical professor’s fingers travel over the keys of a piano.
They are a kindly disposed, well-meaning race, and are
respected and well treated by the upper classes, all over the
Pacific coast. No Californian gentleman or lady ever abuses or
oppresses a Chinaman, under any circumstances, an explanation
that seems to be much needed in the East. Only the scum of
* A peculiar species of the “jade-stone”—to a Chinaman peculiarly
precious.


the population do it—they and their children; they, and,
naturally and consistently, the policemen and politicians, like-
wise, for these are the dust-licking pimps and slaves of the
scum, there, as well as elsewhere in America.
CBAPTEE LY.
I began to get tired of staying in one place so long. There
was no longer satisfying variety in going down to Carson
to report the proceeding of the legislature once a year, and
horse-races and pumpkin shows once in three months; (they
had got to raising pumpkins and potatoes in Washoe Yalley,
and of course one of the first achievements of the legislature
was to institute a 10,000 dollar Agricultural Fair to show off forty
dollars’ worth of those pumpkins in—however, the Territorial
Legislature was usually spoken of as the “ asylum.”) I wanted
to see San Francisco. I wanted to go somewhere. I wanted—l
did not know what I wanted. I had the “ spring fever” and
wanted a change,principally,no doubt. Besides a conventionhad
framed a State Constitution; nine men out of every ten wanted
an office; I believed that these gentlemen would “treat” the
moneylessand the irresponsible amongthe population into adopt-
ing the constitution and thus well nigh killing the country (it
could not well carry such a load as a State Government, since it
had nothing to tax that could stand a tax, for undeveloped mines
could not, and there were not fifty developed ones in the land,
there was but little reality to tax, and it did seem as if nobody
was ever going to think of the simple salvation of inflicting a
money penalty on murder.) I believed that a State Government
would destroy the " flush times,” and I wanted to get away. I
believed that the mining stocks I had on hand would soon be
worth 100,000 dollars, and thought if they reached that before the
Constitution was adopted, I would sell out and make myself
secure from the crash the change of government was going to
bring. I considered 100,000 dollars sufficient to go home with
decently, though it was but a small amount compared to what
I had been expecting to return with. I felt rather down
hearted about it, but I tried to comfort myself with the
reflection that with such a sum I could not fall into want.
About this time a schoolmate of mine whom I had not seen
since boyhood, came tramping in on foot from Eeese Eiver, a
very allegory of Poverty. The son of wealthy parents, here
he was, in a strange land, hungry, bootless, mantled in an
ancient horse-blanket, roofed with a brimless hat, and so gener-
ally and so extravagantly dilapidated that he could have
“taken the shine out of the Prodigal Son himself,” as he
pleasantly remarked. He wanted to borrow forty-six dollars—


twenty-six to take him to San Francisco, and twenty for some-
thing else ; to buy some soap with, may be, for he needed it.
I found I had but little more than the amount wanted, in my
pocket ; so I stepped in and borrowed forty-six dollars of a
banker (on twenty-days’ time, without the formality of a note,)
and gave it him, rather than walk half a block to the office,
where I had some specie laid up. If anybody had told me that
it would take me two years to pay back that forty-six dollars to
the banker (for I did not expect it of the Prodigal, and was
not disappointed,) I would have felt injured. And so would the
banker.
I wanted a change. I wanted variety of some kind. It
came. Mr. Goodman went away for a week and left me the
post of chief editor. It destroyed me. The first day, I wrote
my “ leader ” in the forenoon. The second day I had no sub-
ject and put it off till the afternoon. The third day I put it
off till the evening, and then copied an elaborate editorial out
of the “ American Cyclopaedia,” that steadfast friend of the
editor, all over this land. The fourth day I “fooled around”
till midnight* and then fell back on the Cyclopaedia again. The
fifth dw. I audgelled my brain till midnight, and then kept the
press warning while I penned some bitter personalities on six
different people. The sixth day I laboured in anguish till far
into the night and brought forth—nothing. The paper went
to press without an editorial. The seventh day I resigned.
On the eighth, Mr. Goodman returned and found six duels on
his hands—my personalities had borne fruit.
Nobody, except he has tried it, knows what it is to be an
editor. It is easy to scribble local rubbish, with the facts all
before you ; it is easy to clip selections from other papers; it
is easy to string out a correspondence from any locality; but it
is unspeakable hardship to write editorials. Subjects are the
trouble—the dreary lack of them, I mean. Every day, it is
drag, drag, drag—think, and worry, and suffer—all the world
is a dull blank, and yet the editorial columns must be filled.
Only give the editor a subject, and his work is done—it is no
trouble to write it up; but fancy how you would feel if you had
to pump your brains dry every day in the week, fifty-two weeks
in the year. It makes one low-spirited simply to think of it.
The matter that each editor of a daily paper in America writes
in the course of a year would fill from four to eight bulky
volumes like this book ! Fancy what a library an editor’s work
would make after twenty or thirty years’ service. Yet people
often marvel that Dickens, Scott, Bulwer, Dumas, etc., have
been able to produce so many books. If these authors had
wrought as voluminously as newspaper editors do, the result
would be something to marvel at, indeed. How editors can
continue this tremendous labour, this exhausting consumption
of brain fibre (for their work is creative, and not a mere


mechanical laying-up of facts, like reporting,) day after day,
and year after year, is incomprehensible. Preachers take two
months’ holiday in midsummer, for they find that to produce
two sermons a week is wearing, in the long run. In truth it
must be so, and is so; and therefore, how an editor can take
from ten to twenty texts, and build upon them from ten to
twenty painstaking editorials a week, and keep it up all the
year round, is farther beyond comprehension than ever. Ever
since I survived my week as editor, I have found at least one
pleasure in any newspaper that comes to my hand ; it is in
admiring the long columns of editorial, and wondering to myself
how in the mischief he did it!
Mr. Goodman’s return relieved me of employment, unless I
chose to become a reporter again. I could not do that; I could
not serve in the ranks after being general of the army. So I
thought I would depart and go abroad into the world some-
where. Just at this juncture, Dan, my associate in the repor-
torial department, told me, casually, that two citizens had been
trying to persuade him to go with them to New York, and aid
in selling a rich silver mine which they had discovered and
secured in a new mining district in our neighbourhood. He
said they offered to pay his expenses and give him of
the proceeds of the sale. He had refused to go. It was the
very opportunity I wanted. I abused him for keeping so quiet
about it, and not mentioning it sooner. He said it had not
occurred to him that I would like to go, and so he had recom-
mended them to apply to Marshall, the reporter of the other
paper. I asked Dan if it was a good, honest mine, and no
swindle. He said the men had shown him nine tons of the
rock, which they had got out to take to New York, and he could
cheerfully say that he had seen but little rock in Nevada that
was richer; and moreover, he said that they had secured a tract
of valuable timber and a mill-site near the mine. My first idea
was to kill Dan. But I changed ray mind, notwithstanding I
was so angry, for I thought may be the chance was not yet lost.
Dan said it was by no means lost; that the men were absent at
the mine again, and would not be in Virginia to leave for the
East for some ten days; that they had requested him to do the
talking to Marshall, and he had promised that he would either
secure Marshall or somebody else for them by the time they
got back ; he would now say nothing to anybody till they
returned, and then fulfil his promise by furnishing me to them.
It was splendid. I went to bed all on fire with excitement;
for nobody had yet gone East to sell a Nevada silver mine, and
the field was white for the sickle. I felt that such a mine as
the one described by Dan would bring a princely sum in New
York, and sell without delay or difficulty. I could not sleep,
my fancy so rioted through its castles in the air. It was the
“ blind lead ” come again.


Next day I got away, on the coach, with the usual dclat attend-
ing departures of old citizens; for if you have only half a dozen
friends out there, they will make noise for a hundred rather
than let you seem to go away neglected and unregretted—and
Dan promised to keep strict watch for the men that had the
mine to sell.
The trip was signalised but by one little incident, and that
occurred just as we were about to start. A very seedy-looking
vagabond passenger got out of the stage a moment to wait till
the usual ballast of silver bricks was thrown in. He was
standing on the pavement, when an awkward express employe,
carrying a brick weighing a hundred pounds, stumbled and let
it fall on the bummer’s foot. He instantly dropped on the
ground, and began to howl in the most heart-breaking way. A
sympathising crowd gathered around, and were going to pull
his boot off; but he screamed louder than ever, and they
desisted; then he fell to gasping, and between the gasps
ejaculated, “ Brandy! for Heaven’s sake, brandy ! ” They
poured half a pint down him, and it wonderfully restored and
comforted him. Then he begged the people to assist him to
the stage, which was done. The express people urged him to
have a doctor at their expense, but he declined, and said that if
he only had a little brandy to take along with him, to soothe
his paroxysms,of pain when they came on, he would be grateful
and content. He was quickly supplied with two bottles, and
we drove off. He was so smiling and happy after that, that I
could not refrain from asking him how he could possibly be so
comfortable with a crushed foot.
“ Well,” said he, “ I hadn’t had a drink for twelve hours, and
hadn’t a cent to my name. I was ’most perishing; and so,
when that duffer dropped that hundred-pounder on my foot, I
see my chance. Got a cork leg, you know !” and he pulled up
his pantaloons and proved it.
He was as drunk as a lord all day long, and full of chucklings
over his timely ingenuity. .
One drunken man necessarily reminds one of another. I once
heard a gentleman tell about an incident which he witnessed in
a Californian bar-room. He entitled it “Ye Modest Man Taketh
a Drink.” It was nothing but a bit of acting, but it seemed to
me a perfect rendering, and worthy of Toodles himself. The
modest man, tolerably far gone with beer and other matters,
enters a saloon (twenty-five cents is the price for anything and
everything, and specie the only money used) and lays down a
half dollar; calls for whiskey, and drinks it; the bar-keeper
makes change and lays the quarter in a wet place on the counter;
the modest man fumbles at it with nerveless fingers, but it slips,
and the water holds it. He contemplates it and tries again;
same result. Observes that people are interested in what he is
at; blushes; fumbles at the quarter again—blushes—puts his


forefinger carefully, slowly down, to make sure of his aim—
pushes the coin towards the bar-keeper, and says with a sigh :
“ (’ic !) Gimme a cigar!”
Naturally, another gentleman present told about another
drunken man. He said he reeled toward home late at night;
made a mistake and entered the wrong gate; thought he saw a
dog on the stoop; and it was—an iron one. He stopped and
considered; wondered if it was a dangerous dog; ventured to
say, “Be (’ic) begone !” No effect. Then he approached
warily, and adopted conciliation; pursed up his lips and tried
to whistle, but failed; still approached, saying, “ Poor dog!—
doggy, doggy, doggy ! —poor doggy-dog!” Got up on the stoop,
still petting with fond names, till master of the advantages;
then exclaimed, “ Leave, you thief !” —planted a vindictive kick
in his ribs, and went head-over-heels overboard, of course. A
pause; a sigh or two of pain, and then a remark in a reflective
voice:—
“ Awful solid dog. What could he ben eating ? (’ic!) Eocks,
p’raps. Such animals is dangerous, ’At’s what I say—they’re
dangerous. If a man—(’ic !) —if a man wants to feed a dog on
rocks, let him feed him on rocks. ’At’s all right; but let him
keep him at home —not have him layin’ round promiscuous, where
(’ic!) where people’s liable to stumble over him when they ain’t
noticin’!”
It was not without regret that I took a last look at the tiny
flag (it was thirty-five feet long and ten feet wide) fluttering
like a lady’s handkerchief from the topmost peak of Mount
Davidson, two thousand feet above Virginia’s roofs, and felt
that doubtless I was bidding a permanent farewell to a city
which had afforded me the most vigorous enjoyment of life I
had ever experienced. And this reminds me of an incident
which the dullest memory Virginia could boast at the time it
happened must vividly recall, at times, till its possessor dies.
Late one summer afternoon we had a rain shower. That was
astonishing enough, in itself, to set the whole town buzzing,
for it only rains (during a week or two weeks) in the winter
in Nevada, and even then not enough at a time to make it
worth while for any merchant to keep umbrellas for sale. But
the rain was not the chief wonder. It only lasted five or ten
minutes; while the people were still talking about it all the
heavens gathered to themselves a dense blackness as of mid-
night. All the vast eastern front of Mount Davidson, overlook-
ing the city, put on such a funereal gloom that only the near-
ness and solidity of the mountain made its outlines even faintly
distinguishable from the dead blackness of the heavens they
rested against. This unaccustomed sight turned all eyes
toward the mountain; and as they looked, a little tongue of rich
golden flame was seen wavering and quivering in the heart of
the midnight, away up on the extreme summit! In a few
227 M


minutes the streets were packed with people, gazing with
hardly an uttered word, at the one brilliant mote in the brood-
ing world of darkness. It flicked like a candle-flame, and
looked no larger; but with such a background it was wonder-
fully bright, small as it was. It was the flag !—though no one
suspected it at first, it seemed so like a supernatural visitor of
some kind—a mysterious messenger of good tidings, some were
fain to believe. It was the nation’s emblem transfigured by
the departing rays of a sun that was entirely palled from view;
and on no other object did the glory fall, in all the broad pano-
rama of mountain ranges and deserts. Not even upon the staff
of the flag—for that, a needle in the distance at any time, was
now untouched by the light and undistinguishable in the gloom.
For a whole hour the weird visitor winked and burned in its
lofty solitude, and still the thousands of uplifted eyes watched
it with fascinated interest. How the people were wrought up !
The superstition grew apace that this was a mystic courier
come with great news from the war—the poetry of the idea ex-
cusing and commending it—and on it spread, from heart to
heart, from lip to lip, and from street to street, till there was a
general impulse to have out the military and welcome the
bright waif with a salvo of artillery!
And all that time one sorely tried man, the telegraph ope-
rator, sworn to official secrecy, had to lock his lips and chain
his tongue with a silence that was like to rend them; for he,
and he°only, of all the speculating multitude, knew the great
things this sinking sun had seen that day in the east—Yicks-
burgh fallen, and the Union arms victorious at Gettysburg !
But for the journalistic monopoly that forbade the slightest
revealment of eastern news till a day after its publication in
the California papers, the glorified flag on Mount Davidson
would have been saluted and re-saluted, that memorable even-
in", as long as there was a charge of power to thunder with ;
the city would have been illuminated, and every man that had
any respect for himself would have got drunk —as was the
custom of the country on all occasions of public moment.
Even at this distant day I cannot think of this needlessly
marred supreme opportunity without regret. What a time we
might have had!
CHAPTER LYI.
We rumbled over the plains and valleys, climbed the Sierras to
the clouds, and looked down upon summerclad California. And
I will remark here, in passing, that all scenery in California
requires distance to give it its highest charm. The mountains
are imposing in their sublimity and their majesty of form and


altitude, from any point of view—but one must have distance
to soften their ruggedness and enrich their tintings ; a 'Cali-
fornian forest is best at a little distance, for there is a sad
poverty of variety in species, the trees being chiefly of one
monotonous family—redwood, pine, spruce, fir—and so, at a
near view there is a wearisome sameness of attitude in their
rigid arms, stretched downward and outward in one continued
and reiterated appeal to all men to “Sh ! —don’t say a word!
—you might disturb somebody ! ” Close at hand, too, there is
a reliefless and relentless smell of pitch and turpentine; there
is a ceaseless melancholy in their sighing and complaining
foliage; one walks over a soundless carpet of beaten yellow
bark and dead spines of the foliage till he feels like a wander-
ing spirit bereft of a footfall; he tires of the endless tufts of
needles, and yearns for substantial, shapely leaves; he looks
for moss and grass'to 101 l upon, and finds none, for where there
is no bark there is naked clay and dirt, enemies to pensive
musing and clean apparel. Often a grassy plain in California,
is what it should be, but often, too, it is best contemplated at
a distance, because although its grass blades are tall, they
stand up vindictively straight and self-sufficient, and are
unsociably wide apart, with uncomely spots of barren sand
between.
One of the queerest things I know of is to hear tourists from
“the States” go into ecstacies over the loveliness of “ever-
blooming California.” And they always do go into that sort of
ecstacies. But perhaps they would modify them if they knew
how old Californians, with the memory full upon them of the
dust-covered and questionable summer greens of Californian
“ verdure,” stand astonished, and filled with worshipping
admiration, in the presence of the lavish richness, the brilliant
green, the infinite freshness, the spendthrift variety of form
and species and foliage that make an Eastern landscape a vision
of Paradise itself. The idea of a man falling into raptures over
grave and sombre California, when that man has seen New
England’s meadow-expanses and her maples, oaks and cathedral-
windowed elms deckedin summer attire, orthe opaline splendours
of autumn descending upon her forests, comes very near being
funny—would be, in fact, but that it is so pathetic. No land
with an unvarying climate can be very beautiful. The tropics
are not, for all the sentiment that is wasted on them. They seem
beautiful at first, but sameness impairs the charm by and by.
Change is the handmaiden Nature requires to do her miracles with.
The land that has four well-defined seasons cannot lack beauty
or pall with monotony. Each season brings a world of enjoy-
ment and interest in the watching of its unfolding, its gradual,
harmonious development, its culminating graces; and just as
one begins to tire of it, it passes away and a radical change
comes, with new witcheries and new glories in its train. And


I think that, to one in sympathy with nature, each season, in
its turn, seems the loveliest.
San Francisco, a truly fascinating city to live in, is stately
and handsome at a fair distance, but close at hand one notes
that the architecture is mostly old-fashioned, many streets are
made up of decaying, smoke-grimed, wooden houses, and the
barren sand-hills toward the outskirts obtrude themselves too
prominently. Even the kindly climate is sometimes pleasanter
when read about than personally experienced, for a lovely,
■cloudless sky wears out its welcome by and by, and then when
the longed-for rain does come, it stays. Even the playful earth-
•quake is better contemplated at a dis—
However, there are varying opinions about that.
The climate of San Francisco is mild and singularly equable.
The thermometer stands at about seventy degrees the year
round. It hardly changes at all. You sleep under one or two
light blankets summer and winter, and never use a mosquito
bar. Nobody ever wears summer clothing. You wear black
broadcloth —if you have it—in August and January, just the
same. It is no colder and no warmer in the one month than
the other. You do not use overcoats, and you do not use fans.
It is as pleasant a climate as could well be contrived, take it all
around, and is doubtless the most unvarying in the whole world.
The wind blows there a good deal in the summer months, but
then you can go over to Oakland, if you choose —three or four
miles away—it does not blow there. It has only snowed twice
in San Francisco in nineteen years, and then it only remained
on the ground long enough to astonish the children, and set
them to wondering what the feathery stuff was.
During eight months of the year, straight along, the skies are
bright and cloudless, and never a drop of rain falls. But when
the other four months come along, you will need to go and steal
an umbrella. Because you will require it. Not just one day,
but one hundred and twenty days in hardly varying succession.
When you want to go visiting, or attend church, or the theatre,
you never look up at the clouds to see whether it is likely to
rain or not —you look at the almanac. If it is Winter, it will
rain; and if it is Summer, it won’t rain, and you cannot help it.
You never need a lightning-rod, because it never thunders and
it never lightens. And after you have listened for six or eight
weeks, every night, to the dismal monotony of those quiet rains,
you will wish in your heart the thunder would leap and crash
and roar along those drowsy skies once, and make everything
a li ve —you will wish the prisoned lightnings would cleave the
dull firmament asunder, and light it with a blinding glare for
one little instant. You would give anything to hear the old
familiar thunder again, and see the lightning strike somebody.
And along in the Summer, when you have suffered about four
months of lustrous, pitiless sunshine, you are ready to go down


on yonr knees and plead for rain—hail —snow —thunder and
lightning—anything to break the monotony—yon will take an
earthquake, if you cannot do any better. And the chances are
that you’ll get it, too.
San Francisco is built on sand hills, but they are prolific sand
hills. They yield a generous vegetation. All the rare flowers
which people in “ the States ” rear with such patient care in
parlour flower-pots and green-houses, flourish luxuriantly in the
open air there all the year round. Calla lilies, all sorts of
geraniums, passion-flowers, moss roses—l do not know the
names of a tenth part of them. I only know that while New
Yorkers are burdened with banks and drifts of snow, Califor-
nians are burdened with banks and drifts of flowers, if they
only keep their hands off and let them grow. And I have heard
that they have also that rarest and most curious of all the
flowers, the beautiful Espiritu Santo, as the Spaniards call it—
or flower of the Holy Spirit—though I thought it grew only in
Central America, down on the Isthmus. In its cup is the daintiest
little fac-simile of a dove, as pure as snow. The Spaniards have
a superstitious reverence for it. The blossom has been conveyed
to the States, submerged in ether; and the bulb has been taken
thither also, but every attempt to make it bloom after it arrived
has failed.
I have elsewhere spoken of the endless Winter of Mono,
California, and but this moment of the eternal Spring of San
Francisco. Now, if we travel a hundred miles in a straight line,
we come to the eternal Summer of Sacramento. One never
sees summer-clothing or mosquitoes in San Francisco ; but they
can be found in Sacramento. Not always and unvaryingly, but
about one hundred and forty-three months out of twelve years,
perhaps. Flowers bloom there always, the reader can easily
believe; people suffer and sweat, and swear, morning, noon, and
night, and wear out their staunchest energies fanning them-
selves. It gets hot there, but if you go down to Fort Yuma
you will find it hotter. Fort Yuma is probably the hottest
place on earth. The thermometer stays at one hundred and
twenty in the shade there all the time —except when it varies
and goes higher. It is aU. S. military post, and its occupants
get so used to the terrific heat that they suffer without it.
There is a tradition (attributed to John Phenix*) that a very,
very wicked soldier died there once, and, of course, went
straight to the hottest corner of perdition,—and the next day
he telegraphed hack for his blankets. There is no doubt about
the truth of this statement —there can be no doubt about
it. I have seen the place where that soldier used to board.
In Sacramento it is fiery Summer always, and you can
* It has been purloined by fifty different scribblers, who were too poor to
invent a fancy, but not ashamed to steal one.—M. T.


gather roses, and eat strawberries and ice-cream, and wear
white linen clothes, and pant and perspire, at eight or nine
o’clock in the morning, and then take the cars, and at noon put
on your furs and your skates, and go skimming over frozen
Donner Lake, seven thousand feet above the valley, among
snow banks fifteen feet deep, and in the shadow of grand
mountain peaks that lift their frosty crags ten thousand feet
above the level of the sea. There is a transition for you!
Where will you find another like it in the western hemisphere ?
And some of us have swept around snow-walled curves of the
Pacific Railroad in that vicinity, six thousand feet above the
sea, and looked down as the birds do upon the deathless Sum-
mer of the Sacramento Valley, with its fruitful fields, its
feathery foliage, its silver streams, all slumbering in the mellow
haze of its enchanted atmosphere, and all infinitely softened
and spiritualised by distance —a' dreamy, exquisite glimpse of
fairyland, made all the more charming and striking that it was
caught through a forbidden gateway of ice and snow, and
savage crags and precipices.
CHAPTER LYII.
It was fn this Sacramento Valley, just referred to, that a deal
of the most lucrative of the early gold mining was done, and
you may still see, in places, its grassy slopes and levels torn and
guttered and disfigured by the avaricious spoilers of fifteen and
twenty years ago. You may see such disfigurements far and
wide over California—and in some such places, where only
meadows and forests are visible—not a living creature, not a
house, no stick or stone or remnant of a ruin, and not a sound,
not even a whisper to disturb the Sabbath stillness —you will
find it hard to believe that there stood at one time a fiercely-
flourishing little city, of two thousand or three thousand souls,
with its newspaper, fire company, brass band, volunteer militia,
bank, hotels, noisy Fourth of July processions and speeches,
gambling hells crammed with tobacco smoke, profanity, and
rough-bearded men of all nations and colours, with tables
heaped with gold dust sufficient for the revenues of a German
principality—streets crowded and rife with business —town lots
worth four hundred dollars a front foot —labour, laughter,
music, dancing, swearing, fighting, shooting, stabbing—a
bloody inquest and a man for breakfast every morning—every-
thing that delights and adorns existence —all the appointments
and appurtenances of a thriving and prosperous and promising
young city, and now nothing is left of it all but a lifeless, home-
less solitude. The men are gone, the houses have vanished;
even the name of the place is forgotten. In no other land, in


modern times, have towns so absolutely died and disappeared
as in the old mining regions of California.
It was a driving, vigorous, restless population in those days.
It was a curious population. It was the only population of the
kind that the world has ever seen gathered together, and it is
not likely that the world will ever see its like again. For,
observe, it was an assemblage of two hundred thousand younQ
men—not simpering, dainty, kid-gloved weaklings, but stalwart,
muscular, dauntless young braves, brimful of push and energy,
and royally endowed with every attribute that goes to make up
a peerless and magnificent manhood —the very pick and choice
of the world’s glorious ones. No women, no children, no gray
and stooping veterans —none but erect, bi’ight-eyed, quick-
moving, strong-handed young giants—the strangest population,
the finest population, the most gallant host that ever trooped
down the startled solitudes of an unpeopled land. And where
are they now ? Scattered to the ends of the earth—or prema-
turely aged and decrepit—or shot or stabbed in street affrays
—or dead of disappointed hopes and broken hearts —all gone,
or nearly all—victims devoted upon the altar of the golden
calf —the noblest holocaust that ever wafted its sacrificial
incense heavenward. It is pitiful to think upon.
It was a splendid population —for all the slow, sleepy, slug-
gish-brained sloths staid at home—you never find that sort of
people among pioneers—you cannot build pioneers out of that
sort of material. It was that population that gave to California
a name for getting up astounding enterprises and rushing them
through with a magnificent dash and daring and a recklessness
of cost or consequences, which she bears unto this day—and
when she projects a new surprise, the grave world smiles as
usual, and says, “ Well, that is California all over.”
But they were rough in those times ! They fairly revelled
in gold, whiskey, fights, and fandangoes, and were unspeakably
happy. The honest miner raked from a hundred to a thousand
dollars out of his claim a day, and what with the gambling
dens and the other entertainments, he hadn’t a cent the next
morning, if he had any sort of luck. They cooked their own
bacon and beans, sewed on their own buttons, washed their own
shirts—blue woollen ones ; and if a man wanted a fight on his
hands without any annoying delay, all he had to do was to
appear in public in a white shirt or a stove-pipe hat, and he
would be accommodated. For those people hated aristocrats.
They had a particular and malignant animosity toward what
they called a “ biled shirt.”
It was a wild, free, disorderly, grotesque society ! Men —only
swarming hosts of stalwart men —nothing juvenile, nothing
feminine, visible anywhere!
In those days miners would flock in crowds to catch a glimpse
of that rare and blessed spectacle, a woman ! Old inhabitants


tell how, in a certain camp, the news went abroad early in the
morning that a woman was come! They had seen a calico dress
hanging out of a waggon down at the camping-ground—sign
of emigrants from over the great plains. Everybody went
down there, and a shout went up when an actual, hona fide dress
was discovered fluttering in the wind! The male emigrant was
visible. The miners said :
“ Fetch her out!”
He said:—“lt is my wife, gentlemen—she is sick—we have
been robbed of money, provisions, everything, by the Indians—
we want to rest.”
“ Fetch her out! We’ve got to see her !”
“ But, gentlemen, the poor thing, she—”
“Fetch her out !”
He “ fetched her out,” and they swung their hats and sent
up three rouging cheers and a tiger; and they crowded around
and gazed at her, and touched her dress, and listened to her
voice with the look of men who listened to a memory rather
than a present reality—and then they collected twenty-five
hundred dollars in gold and gave it to the man, and swung
their hats again and gave three more cheers, and went home
satisfied.
Once I dined in San Francisco with the family of a pioneer,
and talked with his daughter, a young lady whose first ex
perience in San Francisco was an adventure, though she herself
did not remember it, as she was only two or three years old at
the time. Her father said that, after landing from the ship,
they were walking up the street, a servant leading the party
with the little girl in her arms. And presently a huge miner,
bearded, belted, spurred, and bristling with deadly weapons—
just down from a long campaign in the mountains, evidently—
barred the way, stopped the servant, and stood gazing, with a
face all alive with gratification and astonishment. Then he
said, reverently:—
“Well, if it ain’t a child!” And then he snatched a little
leather sack out of his pocket, and said to the servant: —
“ There’s a hundred and fifty dollars in dust, there, and I’ll
give it to you to let me kiss the child!”
That anecdote is true.
But see how things change. Sitting at that dinner-table,
listening to that anecdote, if I had offered double the money
for the privilege of kissing the same child, I would have been
refused. Seventeen added years have far more than doubled the
price.
And while upon this subject I will remark that once in Star
City, in the Humboldt Mountains, I took my place in a sort of
long, post-office single file of miners, to patiently await my
chance to peep through a crack in the cabin and get a sight of
the splendid new sensation—a genuine, live Woman! And at


the end of half of an hour my turn came, and I put my eye to the
crack, and there she was, with one arm akimbo, and tossing
flap-jacks in a frying-pan with the other. And she was one
hundred and sixty-five* years old, and hadn’t a tooth in her
head.
CHAPTER LYIII.
For a few months I enjoyed what to me was an entirely new
phase of existence —a butterfly idleness; nothing to do, nobody
to be responsible to, and untroubled with financial uneasiness.
I fell in love with the most cordial and sociable city in the
Union. After the sage-brush and alkali deserts of Washoe,
San Francisco was Paradise to me. I lived at the best hotel,
exhibited my clothes in the most conspicuous places, infested
the opera, and learned to seem enraptured with music which
oftener afflicted my ignorant ear than enchanted it, if I had had
the vulgar honesty to confess it. However, I suppose I was not
greatly worse than the most of my countrymen in that. I had
longed to be a butterfly, and I was one at last. I attended
private parties in sumptuous evening dress, simpered and aired
my graces like a born beau, and polked and schottisched with
a step peculiar to myself —and the kangaroo. In a word, I kept
the due state of a man worth a hundred thousand dollars (pros-
pectively,) and likely to reach absolute affluence when that
silver-mine sale should be ultimately achieved in the East. I
spent money with a free hand, and meantime watched the stock
sales with an interested eye, and looked to see what might
happen in Nevada.
Something very important happened. The property holders
of Nevada voted against the State Constitution; but the folks
who had nothing to lose were in the majority, and carried the
measure over their heads. But after all it did not immediately
look like a disaster, though unquestionably it was one. I hesi-
tated, calculated the chances, and then concluded not to sell.
Stocks went on rising; speculation went mad; bankers, mer-
chants, lawyers, doctors, mechanics, labourers, even the very
washerwomen and servant girls, were putting up their earnings
on silver stocks, and every sun that rose in the morning went
down on paupers enriched and rich men beggared. What a
gambling carnival it was! Gould and Curry soared to six
thousand three hundred dollars a foot! And then—all of a
sudden, out went the bottom and everything and everybody
went to ruin and destruction ! The wreck was complete. The
* Being in calmer mood, now, I voluntarily knock off a hundred from that.
—M.T.
235 M 2


bubble scarcely left a microscopic moisture behind it. I was an
early beggar and a thorough one. My hoarded stocks were not
worth the paper they were printed on. I threw them all away.
I, the cheerful idiot that had been squandering money like
water, and thought myself beyond the reach of misfortune, had
not now as much as fifty dollars when I gathered together my
various debts and paid them. I removed from the hotel to a
very private boarding-house. I took a reporter’s berth and
went to work. I was not entirely broken in spirit, for I was
building confidently on the sale of the silver mine in the east.
But I could not hear from Dan. My letters miscarried or were
not answered.
One day I did not feel vigorous, and remained away from
the office. The next day I went down toward noon as usual, and
found a note on my desk which had been there twenty-four
hours. It was signed “ Marshall ’’—the Virginian reporter—
and contained a request that I should call at the hotel and see
him and a friend or two that night, as they would sail for the
east in the morning. A postscript added that their errand was
a big mining speculation ! I was hardly ever so sick in my life.
I abused myself for leaving Virginia and entrusting to another
man a matter I ought to have attended to myself; I abused
myself for remaining away from the office on the one day of all
the year that I should have been there. And thus berating
myself, I trotted a mile to the steamer wharf, and arrived just
in time to be too late. The ship was in the stream and under
way.
I comforted myself with the thought that may be the specu-
lotion would amount to nothing—poor comfort at best —and
then went back to my slavery, resolved to put up with my
thirty-five dollars a week and forget all about it.
A month afterward I enjoyed my first earthquake. It was
one which was long called the “great” earthquake, and is,
doubtless, so distinguished till this day. It was just afternoon,
on a bright October day. I was coming down Third-street.
The only objects in motion anywhere in sight in that thickly-
built and populous quarter, were a man in a buggy behind me,
and a street car wending slowly up the cross street. Otherwise,
all was solitude and a Sabbath stillness. As I turned the corner,
around a frame house, there was a great rattle and jar, and it
occurred to me that here was an item! —no doubt a fight in
that house. Before I could turn and seek the door, there came
a really terrific shock ; the ground seemed to roll under me in
waves, interrupted by a violent joggling up and down, and
there was a heavy grinding noise as of brick houses rubbing
together. I fell up against the frame house and hurt my elbow.
I knew what it was, now, and from mere reportorial instinct —
nothing else—took out my watch and noted the time of day.
at that moment a third and still severer shock came, and as I


reeled about on the pavement trying to beep my footing, I saw
a sight! The entire front of a tall four-storey brick building
in Third-street sprung outward like a door and fell sprawling
across the street, raising a dust like a great volume of smoke!
And here came the buggy—overboard went the man, and in
less time than I can tell it the vehicle was distributed in small
fragments along three hundred yards of street. One could
have fancied that somebody had fired a charge of chair-rounds
and rags down the thoroughfare. The street car had stopped,
the horses were rearing and plunging, the passengers were
pouring out at both ends, and one fat man had crashed half
way through a glass window on one side of the car, got wedged
fast, and was squirming and screaming like an impaled madman.
Every door, of every house, as far the eye could reach, was
vomiting a stream of human beings; and almost before one
could execute a wink and begin another, there was a massed
multitude of people stretching in endless procession down
every street my position commanded. Never was solemn
solitude turned into teeming life quicker.
Of the wonders wrought by “ the great earthquake,” these
were all that came under my eye; but the tricks it did, else-
where, and far and wide over the town, made toothsome gossip
for nine days. The destruction of property was trifling—the
injury to it was wide-spread and somewhat serious.
The “ curiosities ” of the earthquake were simply endless.
Gentlemen and ladies who were sick, or were taking a siesta,
or had dissipated till a late hour, and were making up lost
sleep, thronged into the public streets in all sorts of queer ap-
parel, and some without any at all. One woman who had been
washing a naked child, ran down the street holding it by the
ankles as if it were a dressed turkey. Prominent citizens who
were supposed to keep the Sabbath strictly, rushed out of
saloons in their shirt-sleeves, with billiai’d cues in their hands.
Dozens of men with necks swathed in napkins, rushed from
barber-shops, lathered to the eyes or with one cheek clean
shaved and the other still bearing a hairy stubble. Horses
broke from stables, and a frightened dog rushed up a short
attic ladder and out on to a roof, and when his scare was over had
not the nerve to go down again the same way he had gone up. A
prominent editor flew down stairs, in the principal hotel, with
nothing on but one brief undergarment —met a chambermaid,
and exclaimed:—
“ Oh, what shall Ido ! Where shall Igo ! ”
She responded with naive serenity :
“ If you have no choice, you might try a clothing-store!”
A certain foreign consul’s lady was the acknowledged leader
of fashion, and every time she appeared in anything new or
extraordinary, the ladies in the vicinity made a raid on their
husbands’ purses and arrayed themselves similarly. One man


who had suffered considerably, and growled accordingly, was
standing at the window when the shocks came, and the next
instant the consul’s wife, just out of the bath, fled by with no
other apology for clothing than —a bath-towel! The sufferer
rose superior to the terrors of the earthquake, and said to his
wife:
“ Now that is something like ! Get out your towel, my dear!”
The plastering that fell from ceilings in San Francisco that
day would have covered several acres of ground. For some
days afterward, groups of eyeing and pointing men stood
about many a building, looking at long zig-zag cracks that
extended from the eaves to the ground. Four feet of the tops
of three chimneys on one house were broken square off and
turned around in such a way as to completely stop the draft.
A crack a hundred feet long gaped open six inches wide in the
middle of one street, and then shut together again with such
force as to ridge up the meeting earth like a slender grave. A
lady sitting in her rocking and quaking parlour, saw the wall
part at the ceiling, open and shut twice, like a mouth, and then
drop the end of a brick on the floor like a tooth. She was a
woman easily disgusted with foolishness, and she arose and
went out of there. One lady who was coming down stairs was
astonished to see a bronze Hercules lean forward on its pedestal
as if to strike her with its club. They both reached the bottom
of the flight at the same time —the woman insensible from the
fright. Her child, born some little time afterward, was club-
footed. However —on second thought—if the reader sees any
coincidence in this, he must do it at his own risk.
The first shock brought down two or three huge organ pipes
in one of the churches. The minister, with uplifted hands, was
just closing the services. He glanced up, hesitated, and said: —
“However, we will omit the benediction!” —and the next
instant there was a vacancy in the atmosphere where he had
stood.
After the first shock, an Oakland minister said: —
“ Keep your seats! There is no better place to die than
this.” —
And added, after the third: —
“ But outside is good enough!” He then skipped out at the
back door.
Such another destruction of mantel ornaments and toilet
bottles as the earthquake created, San Francisco never saw
before. There was hardly a girl or a matron in the city but
suffered losses of this kind. Suspended pictures were thrown
down, but oftener still, by a curious freak of the earthquake s
humour, they were whirled completely around with their faces
to the wall! There was great difference of opinion, at first, as
to the course or direction the earthquake travelled, but water
that splashed out of various tanks and buckets settled that.


Thousands of people were made so sea-sick by the rolling and
pitching of floors and streets that they were weak and bed-
ridden for hours, and some few for even days afterward.
Hardly an individual escaped nausea entirely.
The queer earthquake—episodes that formed the staple of
San Francisco gossip for the next week —would fill a much
larger book than this, and so I will diverge from the subject.
By and by, in the due course of things, I picked up a copy of-
the Enterprise one day, and fell under this cruel blow :
Nevada Mines in New York.—G. M. Marshall, Sheba Hurs, and Amos
H. Rose, who left San Francisco last July for New York City, with ores from
mines in Pine Wood District, Humboldt County, and on the Reese River
range, have disposed of a mine containing six thousand feet and called the
Pine Mountains Consolidated, for the sum of 3,000,000 dollars. The stamps
on the deed, which is now on its way to Humboldt County, from New York,
for record, amounted to 3000 dollars, which is said to be the_ largest amount
of stamps ever placed on one document. A working capital of 1,000,000
dollars has been paid into the treasury, and machinery has already been
purchased for a large quartz mill, which will be put up as soon as possible.
The stock in this company is all full paid and entirely unassessable. The
ores of the mines in this district somewhat resemble those of the _ Sheba
mine in Humboldt. Sheba Hurst, the discoverer of the mines, with his
friends, corralled all the best leads and all the land and timber they desired
before making public their whereabouts. Ores from there, assayed in this
city, showed them to be exceedingly rich in silver and gold—silver
predominating. There is an abundance of wood and water in the district.
We are glad to know that New York capital has been enlisted in the develop-
ment of the mines of this region. Having seen the ores and assays, we are
satisfied that the mines of the district are very valuable—anything but
wild-cat.
Once more native imbecility had carried the day, and I had
lost a million ! It was the “ blind lead” over again.
Let us not dwell on this miserable matter. If I were inventing a
these things, I could be wonderfully humorous over them ; but
they are too true to be talked of with hearty levity, even at
this distant day.* Suffice it that Iso lost heart, and so yielded
myself up to repinings and sighings and foolish regrets, that I
neglected my duties and became about worthless as a reporter
for a brisk newspaper. And at last one of the proprietors took
me aside, with a charity I still remember with considerable
respect, and gave me an opportunity to resign my berth, and so
save myself the disgrace of a dismissal.
* True, and yet not exactly as given in the above figures, possibly. I saw
Marshall months afterward, and, although he had plenty of money, be chd
not claim to have captured an entire million. In fact, 1 gathered that he
had not then received 50,000 dollars. Beyond that figure his fortune appeared
to consist of uncertain vast expectations rather than prodigious certainties.
However, when the above item appeared in print, I put full faith in it, and
incontinently wilted and went to seed under it.


CHAPTER LIX.
Foe a time I wrote literary screeds for the Golden Era. C. H,
Webb had established a very excellent literary weekly called
the Californian, but high merit was no guaranty of success. It
languished, and he sold out to three printers, and Bret Harte
became editor at twenty dollars a week, and I was employed to con-
tribute an article a week at twelve dollars. But the journal
still languished, and the printers sold out to Captain Ogden, a
rich man and a pleasant gentleman who chose to amuse himself
with such an expensive luxury without much caring about the
cost of it. When he grew tired of the novelty, he re-sold to the
printers; the paper presently died a peaceful death, and I was
out of work again. I would not mention these things but for
the fact that they so aptly illustrate the ups and downs that
characterise life on the Pacific coast. A man could hardly
stumble into such a variety of queer vicissitudes in any other
country.
For two months my sole occupation was avoiding acquaint-
ances; for during that time I did not earn a penny, or buy an
article of any kind, or pay my board. I became a very adept
at “ slinking.” I slunk from back street to back street; I slunk
away from approaching faces that looked familiar; I slunk to my
meals, ate them humbly and with a mute apology for every
mouthful I robbed my generous landlady of; and at midnight,
after wanderings that were but slinkings away from cheerful-
ness and light, I slunk to my bed. I felt meaner and lowlier
and more despicable than the worms. During all this time I
had but one piece of money—a silver ten cent piece—and I held
to it and would not spend it on any account, less the conscious-
ness coming strong upon me that I was entirely penniless, might
suggest suicide. I had pawned everything but the clothes I
had on; so I clung to my dime desperately, till it was smooth
with handling.
However, lam forgetting. I did have one other occupation
beside that of “ slinking.” It was the entertaining of a
collector (and being entertained by him,) who had in his hands
the Virginia banker’s bill for the forty-six dollar’s which I had
loaned my schoolmate, the “ Prodigal.” This man used to call
regularly once a week and dun me, and sometimes oftener. He
did it from sheer force of habit, for he knew he could get
nothing. He would get out his bill, calculate the interest for
me, at five per cent, a month, and show me clearly that there
was no attempt at fraud in it and no mistakes; and then plead,
and argue, and dun with all his might for any sum—any little
trifle —even a dollar—even half a dollar, on account. Then his
duty was accomplished and his conscience free. He immediately


dropped the subject there always; got out a couple of cigars
and divided, put his feet in the window, and then we would
have a long, luxurious talk about everything and everybody,
and he would furnish me a world of curious dunning
adventures out of the ample store in his memory. By and
by he would clap his hat on his head, shake hands, and say
briskly:—
“ Well, business is business—can’t stay with you always!”—
and was off in a second.
The idea of pining for a dun ! And yet I used to long for him
to come, and would get as uneasy as any mother if the day went
by without his visit, when I was expecting him. But he never
collected that bill, at last, nor any part of it. I lived to pay it to
the banker myself.
Misery loves company. Now and then at night, in out-of-the
way, dimly-lighted places, I found myself happening on another
child of misfortune. He looked so seedy and forlorn, so homeless
and friendless and forsaken, that I yearned toward him as a
brother. I wanted to claim kinship with him, and go about and
enjoy our wretchedness together. The drawing toward each
other must have been mutual; at any rate we got to falling
together oftener, though still seemingly by accident; and
although we did not speak or evince any recognition, I think
the dull anxiety passed out of both of us when we saw each
other, and then for several hours we would idle along con-
tentedly, wide apart, and glancing furtively in at home lights
and fireside gatherings, out of the night shadows, and very much
enjoying our dumb companionship.
Finally we spoke, and were inseparable after that. For our
woes were identical, almost. He had been a reporter, too, and
lost his berth, and this was his experience, as nearly as I can
recollect it. After losing his berth, he had gone down, down,
down, with never a halt: from a boarding house on Eussian
Hill to a boarding-house in Kearney-street; from thence to
Dupont; from thence to a low sailor den; and from thence to
lodgings in goods boxes and empty hogsheads near the wharves.
Then, for awhile, he had gained a meagre living by sewing up
bursted sacks of grain on the piers; when that failed he had
found food here and there as chance threw it in his way. He
had ceased to show his face in daylight, now, for a reporter
knows everybody, rich and poor, high and low, and cannot well
avoid familiar faces in the broad light of day.
This mendicant Blucher—l call him that for convenience—
was a splendid creature. He was full of hope, pluck, and
philosophy; he was well read and a man of cultivated taste;
he had a bright wit and was a master of satire; his kindliness
and his generous spirit made him royal in my eyes, and changed
his curb-stone seat to a throne and his damaged hat to a crown.
He had an adventure once, which sticks fast in my memory


as the most pleasantly grotesque that ever touched my sympa-
thies. He had been without a penny for two months. He had
shirked about obscure streets, among friendly dim lights, till
the thing had become second nature to him. But at last he
was driven abroad in daylight. The cause was sufficient; he
had not tasted food for forty-eight hours, and he could not endure
the misery of his hunger in idle hiding. He came'along a back
street glowering at the loaves in bake-shop windows, and feel-
ing that he could trade his life away for a morsel to eat. The
sight of the bread doubled his hunger; but it was good to look
at it, anyhow, and imagine what one might do if one only had
it. Presently, in the middle of the street he saw a shining spot
—looked again—did not, and could not, believe his eyes —turned
away to try them, then looked again. It was a verity—no
vain, hunger-inspired delusion—it was a silver dime! He
snatched it—gloated over it; doubted it —bit it—found it gen-
uine—choked his heart down, and smothered a halleluiah.
Then he looked around—saw that nobody was looking at him—
threw the dime down where it was before —walked away a few
steps, and approached again, pretending he did not know it was
there, so that he could re-enjoy the luxury of finding it. He
walked around it, viewing it from different points; then saun-
tered about with his hands in his pockets, looking up at the
signs, and now and then glancing at it and feeling the old thrill
again. Finally he took it up, and went away fondling it in his
pocket. He idled through unfrequented streets, stopping in
doorways and corners to take it out and look at it. By and by,
he went home to his lodgings—an empty queensware hogshead
—and employed himself till night trying to make up his mind
what to buy with it. But it was hard to do. To get the most
for it was the idea. He knew that at the Miner’s Eestaurant
he could get a plate of beans and a piece of bread for ten cents;
or a fish-ball and some few trifles, but they gave “ no bread
with one fish-ball ” there. At French Pete’s he could get a veal
cutlet, plain, and some radishes and bread, for ten cents; or a
cup of coffee —a pint at least —and a slice of bread; but the
slice was not thick enough by the eighth of an inch, and some-
times they were still more criminal than that in the cutting of
it. At seven o’clock his hunger was wolfish; and still his mind
was not made up. He turned out and went up Merchant-street,
still ciphering; and chewing a bit of stick, as is the way of
starving men. He passed before the lights of Martin’s Ees-
taurant, the most aristocratic in the city, and stopped. It was
a place where he had often dined in better days, and Martin
knew him well. Standing aside, just out of the range of the
light, he worshipped the quails and steaks in the show window,
and imagined that may be the fairy times were not gone yet,
and some prince in disguise would come along presently and
tell him to go in there and take whatever he wanted. He


chewed his stick with a hungry interest as he warmed to his
subject. Just at this juncture he was conscious of some one at
his side, sure enough; and then a finger touched his arm. He
looked up over his shoulder, and saw an apparition —a very
allegory of Hunger! It was a man six feet high, gaunt, un-
shaven, hung with rags; with a haggard face and sunken
cheeks, and eyes that pleaded piteously. This phantom said:—
“ Come with me, please.”
He locked his arm in Blucher’s and walked up the street to
where the passengers were few and the light not strong, and
then facing about, put out his hands in a beseeching way, and
said:—
“ Friend —stranger—look at me ! Life is easy to you—you
go about placid and content, as I did once, in my day—you have
been in there, and eaten your sumptuous supper, and picked
your teeth, and hummed your tune, and thought your pleasant
thoughts, and said to yourself it is a good world—but you’ve
never suffered! You don’t know what trouble is—you don’t
know what misery is—nor hunger! Look at me ! Stranger,
have pity on a poor friendless, homeless dog ! As God is my
judge, I have not tasted food for eight and forty hours !- —look
in my eyes, and see if I lie! Give me the least trifle in the
world to keep me from starving—anything —twenty-five cents!
Do it, stranger—do it, 'please. It will be nothing to you, but
life to me. Do it, and I will go down on my knees and lick the
dust before you! I will kiss your footprints—l will worship
the very ground you walk on ! Only twenty-five cents ! lam
famishing—perishing —starving by inches! For God’s sake
don’t desert me !
Blucher was bewildered —and touched, too —stirred to the
depth. He reflected. Thought again. Then an idea struck
him, and he said: —
“ Come with me.”
He took the outcast’s arm, walked him down to Martin’s
restaurant, seated him at a marble table, placed the bill of fare
before him, and said :
“ Order what you want, friend. Charge it to me, Mr. Martin.”
"All right, Mr. Blucher,” said Mai’tin.
Then Blucher stepped back and leaned against the counter
and watched the man stow away cargo after cargo of buckwheat
cakes at seventy-five cents a plate; cup after cup of coffee, and
porter-house steaks worth two dollars apiece; and when six
dollars and a half’s worth of destruction had been accomplished,
and the stranger’s hunger appeased, Blucher went down to
French Pete’s, bought a veal cutlet plain, a slice of bread, and
three radishes, with his dime, and set to and feasted like a king!
Take the episode all around, it was as odd as any that can
be culled from the myriad curiosities of Californian life,,
perhaps.


CHAPTER LX.
By and bye, an old friend of mine, a miner, came down from
one of the decayed mining camps of Tuolumne, California,
and I went back with him. We lived in a small cabin on a
verdant hillside, and there were not five other cabins in view
over the wide expanse of hill and forest. Yet a flourishing
city of two or three thousand population had occupied this
grassy dead solitude during the flush times of twelve or fifteen
years before, and where our cabin stood had once been the
heart of a teeming hive, the centre of the city. When the
mines gave out the town fell into decay, and in a few years
•wholly disappeared—streets, dwellings, shops, everything—and
left no sign. The grassy slopes were as green and smooth and
desolate of life as if they had never been disturbed. The mere
handful of miners still remaining, had seen the town spring up,
spread, grow, and flourish in its pride; and they had seen it
sicken and die, and pass away like a dream. With it their
hopes had died, and their zest of life. They had long ago
resigned themselves to their exile, and ceased to correspond
with their distant friends or turn longing eyes toward their
early homes. They had accepted banishment, forgotten the
world and been forgotten of the world. They were far from
telegraphs and railroads, and they stood, as it were, in a living
grave, dead to the events that stirred the globe’s great popula-
tions, dead to the common interests of men, isolated and out-
cast from brotherhood with their kind. It was the most singu-
lar, and almost the most touching and melancholy exile that
fancy can imagine.—One of my associates in locality, for
two or three months, was a man who had had an university edu-
cation; but now for eighteen years he had decayed there by
inches, a bearded, rough-clad, clay-stained miner, and at times,
among his sighings and soliloquisings, he unconsciously in-
terjected vaguely remembered Latin and Greek sentences—
dead and musty tongues, meet vehicles for the thoughts of one
whose dreams were all of the past, whose life was a failure; a
tired man, burdened with the present, and indifferent to the
future: a man without ties, hopes, interests, waiting for rest
and the end.
In that one little corner of California is found a species of
mining which is seldom or never mentioned in print, It is
called “ pocket mining ” and I am not aware that any of it is
done outside of that little corner. The gold is not evenly dis-
tributed through the surface dirt, as in ordinary placer mines,
but is collected in little spots, and they are very wide apart
and exceedingly hard to find, but when you do find one you
reap a rich and sudden harvest. There are not now more than


twenty pocket miners in that entire little region. I think I
know every one of them personally. I have known one of them
to hunt patiently about the hill sides every day for eight
months without finding gold enough to make a snuff-box—his
grocery bill running up relentlessly all the time —and then find
a pocket and take out of it two thousand dollars in two dips of
his shovel. I have known him to take out three thousand
dollars in two hours, and go and pay up every cent of his in-
debtedness, then enter on a dazzling spree that finished the
last of his treasure before the night was gone. And the next
day he bought his groceries on credit as usual, and shouldered
bis pan and shovel and went off to the hills, hunting pockets,
again happy and content. This is the most fascinating of
all the different kinds of mining, and furnishes a very hand-
some percentage of victims to the lunatic asylums.
Pocket hunting is an ingenious process. You take a spadeful
of earth from the hill-side and put it in a large tin pan and
dissolve and wash it gradually away till nothing is left but a
teaspoonful of fine sediment. Whatever gold was in that earth
has remained, because, being the heaviest, it has sought the
bottom. Among the sediment you will find half a dozen yellow
particles no larger than pin-heads. You are delighted. You
move off to one side and wash another pan. If you find gold
again, you move to one side further, and wash a third pan. If
you find no gold this time, you are delighted again, because
you know you are on the right scent. You lay an imaginary
plan, shaped like a fan, with its handle up the hill—for just
where the end of the handle is, you argue that the rich deposit
lies hidden, whose vagrant grains of gold have escaped and
been washed down the hill, spreading farther and farther apart
as they wandered. And so you proceed up the hill, washing
the earth and narrowing your lines every time the absence of
gold in the pan shows that you are outside the spread of the
fan; and at last, twenty yards up the hill your lines have
converged to a point—a single foot from that point you cannot
find any gold. Your breath comes short and quick, you are
feverish with excitement; the dinner-bell may ring its clapper
off, you pay no attention; friends may die, weddings transpire,
houses burn down, they are nothing to you; you sweat and dig
and delve with a frantic interest—and all at once you strike it!
Up comes a spadeful of earth and quartz that is all lovely with
soiled lumps and leaves and sprays of gold. Sometimes that
one spadeful is all —500 dollars. Sometimes the nest contains
10,000 dollars, and it takes you three or four days to get it all
out. The pocket-miners tell of one nest that yielded 60,000
dollars and two men exhaused it in two weeks, and then sold
the ground for 10,000 dollars to a party who never got 300
dollars out of it afterward.
The hogs are good pocket hunters. All the summer they


root around the bushes, and turn up a thousand little piles of
dirt, and then the miners long for the rains ; for the rains beat
upon these little piles and wash them down and expose the gold,
possibly right over a pocket. Two pockets were found in
this way by the same man in one day. One had 5000 dollars
in it and the other 8000 dollars. That man could appreciate it,
for he hadn’t had a cent for about a year.
In Tuolumne lived two miners who used to go to the neigh-
bouring village in the afternoon, and return every night with
household supplies. Part of the distance they traversed a trail,
and nearly always sat down to rest on a great boulder that lay
beside the path. In the course of thirteen years they had
worn that boulder tolerably smooth, sitting on it. By and by
two vagrant Mexicans came along and occupied the seat. They
began to amuse themselves by chipping off flakes from the
boulder with a sledge-hammer. They examined one of these
flakes and found it rich with gold. That boulder paid them
800 dollars afterward. But the aggravating circumstance was
that these “Greasers” knew that there must be more gold
where that boulder came from, and so they went panning up
the hill and found what was probably the richest pocket that
region has yet produced. It took three months to exhaust it,
and it yielded 120,000 dollars. The two American miners who
used to sit on the boulder are poor yet, and they take turn
about in getting up early in the morning to curge those Mexicans
—and when it comes down to pure ornamental cursing, the
native American is gifted above the sons of men.
I have dwelt at some length upon this matter of pocket
mining because it is a subject that is seldom referred to in
print, and therefore I judged that it would have for the reader
that interest which naturally attaches to novelty.
CHAPTER LXI.
One of my comrades there—another of those victims of eighteen
years of unrequited toil and blighted hopes—was one of the
gentlest spirits that ever bore its patient cross in a weary
exile; grave and simple Dick Baker, a pocket-miner of Dead-
House Gulch. He was forty-six, grey as a rat, earnest,
thoughtful, slenderly educated, slouchily dressed, and clay-
soiled, but his heart was finer metal than any gold his shovel
ever brought to light—than any, indeed, that ever was mined or
minted.
Whenever he was out of luck and a little down-hearted, he
would fall to mourning over the loss of a wonderful cat he
used to own (for where women and children are not, men of
kindly impulses take up with pets, for they must love some-


thing.) And he always spoke of the strange sagacity of that
cat with the air of a man who believed in his secret heart
that there was something human about it—may be even super-
natural.
I heard him talking about this animal once. He said: —
“ Gentlemen, I used to have a cat here, by the name of Tom
Quartz, which you’d a took an interest in I reckon —most any"-
body would. I had him here eight year —and he was the
remarkablest cat I ever see. He was a large grey one of the
Tom specie, an’ he had more hard, natchral sense than any man
in this camp—’n’ a power of dignity—he wouldn’t let the
Gov’ner of Californy be familiar with him. He never ketched
a rat in his life —’peared to be above it. He never cared for
nothing but mining. He knowed more about mining, that cat
did, than any man J ever, ever see. You couldn’t tell him
noth’n’ ’bout placer diggin’s —’n’ as for pocket mining, why he
was just born for it. He would dig out after me an’ Jim when
we went over the hills prospect’n’, and he would trot along
behind us for as much as five mile, if we went so fur. An’ he
had the best judgment about mining ground—why you never
see anything like it. When we went to work, he’d scatter a
glance around, ’n’ if he didn’t think much of the indications, he
would give a look as much as to say, ‘Well, I’ll have to get you
to excuse me ,’ ’n’ without another word he’d hyste his nose into
the air ’n’ shove for home. But if the ground suited him, he
would lay low ’n’ keep dark till the first pan was washed, ’n’
then he would sidle up ’n’ take a look, an’ if there was about
six or seven grains of gold he was satisfied—he didn’t want no
better prospect ’n’ that —’n’ then he would lay down on our
coats and snore like a steamboat till we’d struck the pocket,
an’ then get up ’n’ superintend. He was nearly lightnin’ on
superintending.
“Well, by an’ bye, up comes this yer quartz excitement.
Everybody was into it—everybody was pick’n ’n’ blast’n’ instead
of shovelin’ dirt on the hillside —everybody was put’n’ down a
shaft instead of scrapin’ the surface. Noth’n’ would do Jim,
but we must tackle the ledges, too, ’n’ so we did. We com-
menced put’n’ down a shaft, ’n’ Tom Quartz he bpgin to wonder
what in the dickens it was all about. He had’nt ever seen any
mining like that before, ’n’ he was all upset, as you may say—
he couldn’t come to a right understanding of it no way—it was
too many for him. He was down on it, too, you bet, you —he
was down on it powerful—’n’ always appeared to consider
it the cussedest foolishness out. But that cat, you know,
was always agin new fangled arrangements—somehow he
never could abide ’em. Tou know how it is with old habits.
But by ’an bye Tom Quartz begin to git sort of reconciled a
little, though he never could altogether understand that eternal
sinkin’ of a shaft an’ never pannin’ out anything. At last he


got to cornin’ down in the shaft, hisself, to try to cipher it out.
An’ when he’d git the blues, ’n’ feel kind o’ scruffy, ’n’ aggra-
vated ’n’ disgusted —knowin’ as he did, that the bills was run-
nin’ up all the time an’ we warn’t makin’ a cent—he would curl
up on a gunny sack in the corner an’ go to sleep. Well, one
day when the shaft was down about eight foot, the rock got
so hard that we had to put in a blast—the first blast’n’ we’d
ever done since Tom Quartz was born. An’ then we lit the
fuse ’n’ clum out ’n’ got off ’bout fifty yards—-’n’ forgot ’n’ left
Tom Quartz sound asleep on the gunny sack. In ’bout a
minute we seen a puff of smoke bust up out of the hole, ’n’
then everything let go with an awful crash, ’n’ about four mil-
lion ton of rocks ’n’ dirt ’n’ smoke ’n’ splinters shot up ’bout a
mile an’ a half into the air, an’ by George, right in the dead
centre of it was old Tom Quartz a goin’ end over end, an’ a
snortin’ an’ a sneez’n’, an’ a clawin’ an’ a reachin’ for things
like all possessed. But it warn’t no use, you know, it warn’t
no use. An’ that was the last we see of him for about two
minutes ’n’ a half, an’ then all of a sudden it begin to rain
rocks and rubbage, an’ directly he come down ker-whop about
ten foot off f’m where we stood. Well, I reckon he was p’raps
the orneriest lookin’ beast you ever see. One ear was sot back
on his neck, ’n’ his tail was stove up, ’n’ his eye-winkers was
swinged off, ’n’ he was all blacked up with powder an’ smoke>
an’ all sloppy with mud ’n’ slush f’m one end to the other.
Well, sir, it warn’t no use to try to apologise—we couldn’t say
a word. He took a sort of disgusted look a hisself, ’n’ then he
looked at us—an’ it was just exactly the same as if he had said
— c Gents, may be you think it’s smart to take advantage of a
cat that ’ain’t had no experience of quartz minin’, but I think
different' —an’ then he turned on his heel ’n’ marched off home
without ever saying another word.
“ That was jest his style. An’ may be you won’t believe it,
but after that you never see a cat so prejudiced agin quartz
mining as what he was. An’ by an’ bye when he did git to
goin’ down in the shaft agin, you’d ’a been astonished at his
sagacity. The minute we’d tetch off a blast ’n’ the fuse’d
begin to sizzle, he’d give a look as much as to say:— e Well.
I’ll have to git you to excuse me,’ an’ it was surpris’n’ the way
he’d shin out of that hole ’n’ go f’r a tree. Sagacity ? It ain’t
no name for it. ’Twas inspiration /”
I said, “Well, Mr. Baker, his prejudice against quartz-
mining was remarkable, considering how he came by it.
Couldn’t you ever cure him of it ?”
Cure him! No! When Tom Quartz was sot once, he was
always sot—and you might a blowed him up as much as three
million times ’n’ you’d never a broken him or his cussed pre-
judice agin quartz-mining.”
The affection and the pride that lit up Baker’s face when he


delivered this tribute to the firmness of his humble friend of
other days, will always be a vivid memory with me.
At the end of two months we had never “ struck” a pocket.
We had panned up and down the hillsides till they looked
ploughed like a field; we could have put in a crop of grain,
then, but there would have been no way to get it to market.
We got many good “ prospects,” but when the gold gave out iu
the pan and we dug down, hoping and longing, we found only
emptiness —the pocket that should have been there was as
barren as our own. At last we shouldered our pans and shovels
and struck out over the hills to try new localities. We pros-
pected around Angel’s Camp, in Calaveras county, during
three weeks, but had no success. Then we wandered on foot
among the mountains, sleeping under the trees at .night, for
the weather was mild, but still we remained as centless as the
last rose of summer. That is a poor joke, but it is in pathetic
harmony with the circumstances, since we were so poor our-
selves. In accordance with the custom of the country, our
door had always stood open and our board welcome to tramping
miners—they drifted along nearly every day, dumped their
paust shovels by the threshold and took "pot luck” with us—
and now on our own tramp we never found cold hospitality.
Our wanderings were wide and in many directions; and now
I could give the reader a vivid description of the Big Trees and
the marvels of the Yo Semite —but what has this reader done
to me that I should persecute him ? I will deliver him into
the hands of less conscientious tourists and take his blessing.
Let me be charitable, though I fail in all virtues else.
Some of the phrases in the above are mining technicalities, purely, and
may be a little obscure to the general reader. In “ placer diggings” the gold
is scattered all through the surface dirt; in “ pocket ” diggings it is concen-
trated in one little spot; in “ quartz ” the gold is in a solid, continuous vein
of rock, enclosed between distinct walls of some other kind of stone—and
this is the most laborious and expensive of all the different kinds of mining.
“ Prospecting ” is hunting for a “placer”; “indications” are signs of its pre-
sence ; “panning out” refers to the washing process by which the grains of
gold are separated from the dirt; a “prospect” is what one finds in the first
panful of dirt—and its value determines whether it is a good or a bad pros-
pect, and whether it is worth while to tarry there or seek further.
CHAPTER EXIT.
After a three months’ absence, I found myself in San Fran-
cisco again, without a cent. When my credit was about
exhausted (for I had become too mean and lazy, now, to work
on a morning paper, and there were no vacancies on the evening
journals,) I was created San Francisco correspondent of the
Enterprise , and at the end of five months I was out of debt,
but my interest in my work was gone ; for my correspondence


being a daily one, without rest or respite, I got unspeakably tired
of it. I wanted another change. The vagabond instinct was
strong upon me. Fortune favoured, and I got a new berth,
and a delightful one. It was to go down to the Sandwich
Islands and write some letters for the Sacramento Union, an
excellent journal and liberal with employes.
We sailed in the propeller Ajax, in the middle of winter.
The almanac called it winter, distinctly enough, but the weather
was a compromise between spring and summer. Six days out
of port it became summer altogether. We had some thirty
passengers; among them a cheerful soul by the name of
Williams, and three sea-worn old whaleship captains going down
to join their vessels. These latter played euchre in the smok-
ing room day and night, drank astonishing quantities of raw
whiskey without being in the least affected by it, and were the
happiest people I think I ever saw. And then there was “ the
old Admiral —” a retired whaleman. He was a roaring, terrific
combination of wind and lightning and thunder, and earnest,
whole-souled profanity. But nevertheless he was tender-
hearted as a girl. He was a raving, deafening, devastating
typhoon, laying waste the cowering seas but with an unvexed
refuge in the centre where all comers were safe and at rest.
Nobody could know the “Admiral ” without liking him : and in
a sudden and dire emergency I think no friend of his would
know which to choose —to be cursed by him or prayed for by a
less efficient person.
His title of “Admiral’’was more strictly “official” than
any ever worn by a naval officer before or since, perhaps—for it
was the voluntary offering of a whole nation, and came direct
from the 'people themselves without any intermediate red tape—
the people of the Sandwich Islands. It was a title that came to
him freighted with affection, and honour, and appreciation of
his unpretending merit. And in testimony of the genuineness
of the title it was publicly ordained that an exclusive flag should
be devised for him and used solely to welcome his coming and
wave him God-speed in his going. From that time forth, when-
ever his ship was signalled in the offing, or he catted his anchor
and stood out to sea, that ensign streamed from the royal hal-
liards on the parliament house and the nation lifted their hats
to it with spontaneous accord.
Yet he had never fired a gun or fought a battle in his life.
When I knew him on board the Ajax, he was seventy-two years
old and had ploughed the salt water sixty-one of them. For
sixteen years he had gone in and out of the harbour of Honolulu
in command of a whaleship, and for sixteen more had been
captain of a San Francisco and Sandwich island passenger
packet, and had never had an accident or lost a vessel. The
simple natives knew him for a friend who never failed them,
and regarded him as children regard a father. It was a dan-


gerous thing to oppress them when the roaring Admiral was
around.
Two years before I knew the Admiral he had retired from the
sea on a competence, and had sworn a colossal nine-jointed oath
that he would “ never go within smelling distance of the salt
water again as long as he lived.” And he had conscientiously
kept it. That is to say, he considered he had kept it, and it
would have been more than dangerous to suggest to him, even
in the gentlest way, that making eleven long sea voyages, as a
passenger, during the two years that had transpired since he
“retired,” was only keeping the general spirit of it and not the
strict letter.
The Admiral knew only one narrow line of conduct to pursue
in any and all cases where there was a fight, and that was to
shoulder his way straight in without any enquiry as to the rights
or the merits of it, and take the part of the weaker side.—And
this was the reason why he was always sure to be present at the
trial of any universally execrated criminal to oppress and inti-
midate the jury with a vindictive pantomime of what he would
do to them if he ever caught them out of the box. And this was
why harried cats and outlawed dogs that knew him confidently
took sanctuary under his chair in time of trouble. In the
beginning he was the most frantic and bloodthirsty Union man
that drew breath in the shadow of the Flag; but the instant
the Southerners began to go down before the sweep of the
Northern armies, he ran up the Confederate colours, and from
that time till the end was a rampant and inexorable secessionist.
He hated intemperance with a more uncompromising ani-
mosity than any individual I have ever met, of either sex; and
he was never tired of storming against it, and beseeching friends
and strangers alike to be wary and drink with moderation. And
yet if any creature had been guileless enough to intimate that
his absorbing nine gallons of “ straight ” whiskey during our
voyage was any fraction short of rigid or inflexible abstemious-
ness, in that self-same moment the old man would have spun
him to the uttermost parts of the earth in the whirlwind of his
wrath. Mind, I am not saying his whiskey ever affected his
head or his legs, for it did not, in even the slightest degree. He
was a capacious container, but he did not hold enough for that.
He took a level tumblerful of whiskey every morning before he
put his clothes on—“ to sweeten his bilgewater,” he said.—He
took another after he got the most of his clothes on, ‘“to settle
his mind, and give him his bearings.” He then shaved, and
put on a clean shirt; after which he recited the Lord’s Prayer
in a fervent, thundering bass that shook the ship to her kelson,
and suspended all conversation in the main cabin. Then, at
this stage, being invariably “by the head,” or “ by the stern,”
or “ listed to port or starboard,” he took one more to “ put him
on an even keel, so that he would mind his helium and not miss
261 n


stays and go about, every time he came up in the wind.”—And
now, his state-room door swung open and the sun of his benig-
nant face beamed redly out upon men and women and chil-
dren, and he roared his “ Shipmets a’hoy!” in a way that was
calculated to wake the dead and precipitate the final resurrec-
tion ; and forth he strode, a picture to look at, and a presence to
enforce attention. Stalwart and portly; not a grey hair;
broad-brimmed slouch hat; semi-sailor toggery of blue navy
flannel —roomy and ample ; a stately expanse of shirt front and
a liberal amount of black silk neck-cloth tied with a sailor
knot; large chain and imposing seals impending from his fob ;
awe-inspiring feet, and “a hand like the hand of Providence.”
as his whaling brethren expressed it; wrist-bands and sleeves
pushed back half way to the elbow, out of respect for the warm
weather, and exposing hairy arms, gaudy with red and blue
anchors, ships, and goddesses of liberty tattooed in India ink.
But these details were only secondary matters —his face was
the lodestone that chained the eye. It was a sultry disk, glow-
ing determinedly out through a weather-beaten mask of ma-
hogany, and studded with warts, seamed with scars, “ blazed ”
all'over with unfailing fresh slips of the razor; and with cheery
eyes, under shaggy brows, contemplating the world from over
the back of a gnarled crag of a nose that loomed vast and lonely
out of the undulating immensity that spread away from its
foundations. At his heels frisked the darling of his bachelor
estate, his terrier “ Fan,” a creature no larger than a squirrel.
The main part of his daily life was occupied in looking after
«Fan,” in a motherly way, and doctoring her for a hundred
ailments which existed only in his imagination.
The Admiral seldom read newspapers; and when he did he
never believed anything they said. He read nothing, and
believed in nothing, but The Old Guard, a secession periodi-
cal published in New York. He carried a dozen copies of it
with him, always, and referred to them for all required infor-
mation. If it was not there, he supplied it himself, out of a
bountiful fancy, inventing history, names, dates, and every
thing else necessary to make his point good in an argument.
Consequently he was a formidable antagonist in a dispute. When-
ever he swung clear of the record and began to create history,
the enemy was helpless and had to surrender. Indeed, the enemy
could not keep from betraying some little spark of indignation
at his manufactured history—and when it came to indignation,
that was the Admiral’s very “best hold.” He was always
ready for a political argument, and if nobody started one he
would do it himself. With his third retort his temper would
begin to rise, and within five minutes he would be blowing a
gale, and within fifteen his smoking-room audience would be
utterly stormed away and the old man left solitary and alone,
banging the table with his fist, kicking the chairs, and roaring


a hurricane of profanity. It got so, after awhile, that whenever
the Admiral approached, with politics in his eye, the passengers
would drop out with quiet accord, afraid to meet him j and he
would camp on a deserted field.
But he found his match at last, and before a full company.
At one time or another, everybody had entered the lists against
him and been routed, except the quiet passenger Williams. He
had never been able to get an expression of opinion out of him
on politics. But now, just as the Admiral drew near the door
and the company were about to slip out, Williams said:—
“Admiral, are you certain about that circumstance concerning
the clergymen you mentioned the other day ?”—referring to a
piece of the Admiral’s manufactured history.
Every one was amazed at the man’s rashness. The idea of
deliberately inviting annihilation was a thing incomprehensible.
The retreat came to a halt; then everybody sat down again
wondering, to await the upshot of it. The Admiral himself was
as surprised as any one. He paused in the door, with his red
handkerchief half raised to his sweating face, and contemplated
the daring reptile in the corner.
“ Certain of it P Am I certain of it ? Do you think I’ve been
lying about it ? What do you take me for ? Anybody that
don’t know that circumstance, don’t know anything ; a child
ought to know it. Read up your history! Read it up
• and don’t come asking a man if he’s certain
about a bit of A B C stuff that the very southern niggers know
all about.”
Here the Admiral’s fires began to wax hot, the atmosphere
thickened, the coming earthquake rumbled, he began to
thunder and lighten. Within three minutes his volcano was in
full irruption, and he was discharging flames and ashes of indig-
nation, belching black volumes of foul history aloft, and
vomiting red-hot torrents of profanity from his crater.
Meantime Williams sat silent, and apparently deeply and
earnestly interested in what the old man was saying. By
and bye, when the lull came, he said in the most deferential
way, and with the gratified air of a man who has had a
mystery cleared up which had been puzzling him uncom-
fortably :
“ Now I understand it. I always thought I knew that piece
of history well enough, but was still afraid to trust it, because
there was not that convincing particularity about it that one
likes to have in history; but when you mentioned every name,
the other day, and every date, and every little circumstance, in
their just order and sequence, I said to myself, this sounds some-
thing like —this is history —this is putting it in a shape that gives
a man confidence; and I said to myself afterward, I will just
ask the Admiral if he is perfectly certain about the details, and
if he is I will come out and thank him for clearing this matter


up for me. And that is what I want to do now—for until you
set that matter right it was nothing but just a confusion in my
mind, without head or tail to it.”
Nobody ever saw the Admiral look so mollified before, and so
pleased. Nobody had ever received his bogus history as gospel
before; its genuineness had always been called in question
either by words or looks; but here was a man that not only
swallowed it all down, but was grateful for the dose. He
was taken aback; he hardly knew what to say; even his
profanity failed him. Now, Williams continued, modestly and
earnestly:—
“ But Admiral, in saying that this was the first stone thrown,
and that this precipitated the war, you have overlooked a
circumstance which you are perfectly familiar with, but which
has escaped your memory. Now, I grant you that what you
have stated is correct in every detail —to wit, that on the 16th
of October, 1860, two Massachusetts clergymen, named Waite
and Granger, went in disguise to the hoTise of John Moody, in
Bockport, at dead of night, and dragged forth two southern
women and their two little children, and, after tarring and
feathering them, conveyed them to Boston, and burned them
alive in the State House square; and I also grant your proposi-
tion that this deed is what led to the secession of South Carolina
on the 20th of December following. Very well.” (Here the
company were pleasantly surprised to hear-Williams proceed to
come back at the Admiral with his own invincible weapon—
clean, pure, manufactured history, without a word of truth in it.)
“Very well, I say. But, Admiral, why overlook the Willis and
Morgan case in South Carolina ? You are too well informed a
man not to know all about that circumstance. Your arguments
and your conversations have shown you to be intimately con-
versant with every detail of this national quarrel. You develop
matters of history every day that show plainly that you are no
smatterer in it, content to nibble about the surface; but a man
who has searched the depths, and possessed yourself of every-
thing that has a bearing upon the great question. Therefore
let me just recall to your mind that Willis and Morgan case—
though I see by your face that the whole thing is already passing
through your memory at this moment, On the 12th of August,
1860, two months before the Waite and Granger affair, two South
Carolina clergymen, named John H. Morgan and Winthorp L.
Willis—one a Methodist, and the other an Old School Baptist—
disguised themselves, and went at midnight to the house of a
planter named Thompson—Archibald F. Thompson, Vice-Presi-
dent under Thomas Jefferson —and took thence, at midnight,
his widowed aunt (a northern woman) and her adopted child, an
orphan named Mortimer Highie, afflicted with epilepsy, and
suffering at the time from white swelling on one of his legs, and
compelled to walk on crutches in consequence; and the two


ministers, in spite of the pleadings of the victims, dragged them
to the hush, tarred and feathered them, and afterwards burned
them at the stake in the city of Charleston. You remember
perfectly well what a stir it made; you remember perfectly
well that even the Charleston Courier stigmatized the act as
being unpleasant, of questionable propriety, and scarcely justi-
fiable, and likewise that it would not be matter of surprise if
retaliation ensued. And you remember, also, that this thing
was the cause of the Massachusetts outrage. Who, indeed, were
the two Massachusetts ministers ? and who were the two Southern
women they burned? I do not need to remind you, Admiral,
with your intimate knowledge of history, that Waite was the
nephew of the woman burned in Charleston; that Granger was
her cousin in the second degree, and that the woman they burned
in Boston was the wife of John H. Morgan, and the still loved,
but divorced, wife of Winthorp L. Willis. Now, Admiral, it is
only fair that you should acknowledge that the first provocation
came from the Southern preachers, and that the Northern ones
were justified in retaliating. In your arguments you never yet
have shown the least disposition to withhold a just verdict or
be in anywise unfair, when authoritative history condemned
your position; and, therefore, I have no hesitation in asking
you to take the original blame from the Massachusetts ministers,
in this matter, and transfer it to the South Carolina clergymen,
where it justly belongs.”
The Admiral was conquered. This sweet-spoken creature,,
who swallowed his fraudulent history as if it were the bread of
life—basked in his furious blasphemy as if it were generous
sunshine—found only calm, even-handed justice in his rampant
partizanship, and flooded him with invented history so sugar-
coated with flattery and deference that there was no rejecting
it—was “ too many” for him. He stammered some awkward,
profane sentences about the Willis and
Morgan business having escaped his memory, but that he
“ remembered it now,” and then, under pretence of giving Fan
some medicine for an imaginary cough, drew out of the battle
and went away, a vanquished man. Then cheers and laughter
went up, and Williams, the ship’s benefactor, was a hero. The
news went about the vessel, champagne was ordered, an enthu-
siastic reception instituted in the smoking room, and everybody
flocked thither to shake hands with the conqueror. The wheels-
man said afterward, that the Admiral stood up behind the pilot
house and “ ripped and cursed all to himself,” till he loosened
the smoke-stack guys and becalmed the mainsail.
The Admiral’s power was broken. After that, if he began an
argument, somebody would bring Williams, and the old man
would grow weak and begin to quiet down at once. And as soon
as he was done, Williams, in his dulcet, insinuating way, would
invent some history (referring for proof to the old man’s own


excellent memory, and to copies of The Old Guard known
not to be in his possession) that would turn the tables com-
pletely, and leave the Admiral all abroad and helpless. By and
bye he came to so dread Williams and his gilded tongue that he
would stop talking when he saw him approach, and finally
ceased to mention politics altogether, and from that time forward
there was entire peace and serenity in the ship.
CHAPTER LXIII.
On a certain bright morning the Islands hove in sight, lying
low on the lonely sea, and everybody climbed to the upper deck
to look. After two thousand miles of watery solitude the vision
was a welcome one. As we approached, the imposing promon-
tory of Diamond Head rose up out of the ocean, its rugged front
softened by the hazy distance, and presently the details of the
land began to make themselves manifest: first the line of
beach; then the plumed cocoa-nut trees of the tropics; then
cabins of the natives; then the white town of Honolulu, said to
contain between twelve and fifteen thousand inhabitants, spread
over a dead level, with streets from twenty to thirty feet wide,
solid and level as a floor, most of them straight as a line and few
as crooked as a corkscrew.
The further I travelled through the town the better I liked
it. Every step revealed a new contrast—disclosed something I
was unaccustomed to. In place of the grand mud-coloured brown
fronts of San Francisco, I saw dwellings built of straw, adobies,
and cream-coloured pebble-and-shell-conglomerated coral, cut
into oblong blocks and laid in cement; also a great number
of neat white cottages, with green window-shutters; in place of
front yards like billiard-tables with iron fences around them,
I saw these homes surrounded by ample yards, thickly clad
with green grass, and shaded by tall trees, through whose
dense foliage the sun could scarcely penetrate; in place of
the customary geranium, calla lily, etc., languishing in dust
and general debility, I saw luxurious banks and thickets of
flowers, fresh as a meadow after a rain, and glowing with the
richest dyes; in place of the dingy horrors of San Francisco’s
pleasure grove, the “ Willows,” I saw huge-bodied, wide-spread-
ing forest trees, with strange names and stranger appearance
—trees that cast a shadow like a thunder-cloud, and were able
to stand alone without being tied to green poles; in place of
gold fish wriggling around in glass globes, assuming countless
shades and degrees of distortion through the magnifying and
diminishing qualities of their transparent prison houses, I saw
cats —Tom cats, Maxy Ann cats, long-tailed cats, bob-tailed
•cats, blind cats, one-eyed cats, wall-eyed cats, cross-eyed cats.


gray cats, black cats, white cats, yellow cats, striped cats,
spotted cats, tame cats, wild cats, singed cats, individual cats,
groups of cats, platoons of cats, companies of cats, regiments
of cats, armies of cats, multitudes of cats, millions of cats, and
all of them sleek, fat, lazy, and sound asleep.
I looked on a multitude of people, some white, in white coats,
vests, pantaloons, even white cloth shoes, made snowy with
chalk duly laid on every morning; but the majority of the
people were almost as dark as negroes —women with comely
features, fine black eyes, rounded forms, inclining to the volup-
tuous, clad in a single bright red or white garment that fell
free and unconfined from shoulder to heel, long black hair
falling loose, gipsy hats, encircled with wreaths of natural
flowers of a brilliant carmine tint; plenty of dark men in
various costumes, and some with nothing on but a battered
stove-pipe hat tilted on the nose, and a very scant breech-clout;
—certain smoke-dried children were clothed in nothing but
sunshine —a very neat fitting and picturesque apparel indeed.
In place of roughs and rowdies staring and blackguarding on
the corners, I saw long-haired, saddle-coloured Sandwich Island
maidens sitting on the ground in the shade of corner houses,
gating indolently at whatever or whoever happened along;
instead of wretched cobble-stone pavements, I walked on a firm
foundation of coral, built up from the bottom of the sea by the
absurd but persevering insect of that name, with a light layer
of lava and cinders overlying the coral, belched up out of
fathomless perdition long ago, through the seared and blackened
crater that stands dead and harmless in the distance now;
instead of cramped and crowded street-cars, I met dusky native
women sweeping by, free as the wind, on fleet horses and
astride, with gaudy riding-sashes, streaming like banners
behind them; instead of the combined stenches of Chinadom
and Brannan-street slaughter-houses, I breathed the balmy
fragrance of jessamine, oleander, and the Pride of India; in
place of the hurry and bustle and noisy confusion of San
Francisco, I moved in the midst of a Summer calm as tranquil
as dawn in the Garden of Eden; in place of the Golden City’s
skirting sand hills and the placid bay, I saw on the one side
a frame-work of tall, precipitous mountains close at hand,
clad in refreshing green, and cleft by deep, cool, chasm-like
valleys—and in front the grand sweep of the ocean: a brilliant,
transparent green near the shore, bound and bordered by a
long white line of foamy spray dashing against the reef, and
further out the dead blue water of the deep sea, flecked with
“ white-caps,” and in the far horizon a single, lonely sail —a
mere accent-mark to emphasize a slumberous calm and a
solitude that were without sound or limit. When the sun
sunk down—the one intruder from other realms and persistent
in suggestions of them —it was tranced luxury to sit in the


perfumed air and forget that there was any world but these
enchanted islands.
It was such ecstasy to dream, and dream —till you got a bite.
A scorpion bite. Then the first duty was to get up out of the
grass and kill the scorpion ; and the next to bathe the bitten
place with alcohol or brandy ; and the next to resolve to keep
out of the grass in future. Then came an adjournment to the
bed-chamber and the pastime of writing up the day’s journal
with one hand and the destruction of mosquitoes with the
other—a whole community of them at a slap. Then, observing
an enemy approaching,—a hairy tarantula on stilts—why not
set the spittoon on him ? It is done, and the projecting ends of
his paws give a luminous idea of the magnitude of his reach.
Then to bed and become a promenade for .a centipede with forty-
two legs on a side and every foot hot enough to burn a hole
through a raw-hide. More soaking with alcohol, and a resolu-
tion to examine the bed before entering it, in future. Then
wait, and suffer, till all the mosquitoes in the neighbourhood
have crawled in under the bar, then slip out quickly, shut them
in and sleep peacefully on the floor till morning. Meantime it
is comforting to curse the tropics in occasional wakeful inter-
vals.
We had an abundance of fruit in Honolulu, of course.
Oranges, pine-apples, bananas, strawberries, lemons, limes,
mangoes, guavas, melons, and a rare and curious luxury called
the chirimoya, which is deliciousness itself. Then there is the
tamarind. I thought tamarinds were made to eat, but that
was probably not the idea. I ate several, and it seemed to me
that they were rather sour that year. They pursed up my lips,
till they resembled the stem-end of a tomato, and I had to take
my sustenance through a quill for twenty-four hours. They
sharpened my teeth till I could have shaved with them, and
gave them a “ wire edge ” that I was afraid would stay; but a
citizen said, “no, it will come off when the enamel does ”
which was comforting, at any rate. I found, afterward, that
only strangers eat tamarinds —but they only eat them once.
CHAPTER LXIY.
In my diary of our third day in Honolulu, I find this: —
I am probably the most sensitive man in Hawaii to-night—
especially about sitting down in the presence of my betters. I
have ridden fifteen or twenty miles on horseback since 5 p.m.,
and, to tell the honest truth, I have a delicacy about sitting
down at all.
An excursion to Diamond Head and the King’s Cocoanut
Grove was planned to-day—time, 4.30 p.m. —the party to con-


sist of half a dozen gentlemen and three ladies. They all
started at the appointed hour except myself. I was at the
Government prison (with Captain Fish and another whaleship
skipper. Captain Phillips,) and got so interested in its examina-
tion that I did not notice how quickly the time was passing.
Somebody remarked that it was twenty minutes past five
o’clock, and that woke me up. It was a fortunate circumstance
that Captain Phillips was along with his “turn out,” as he calls
a top-buggy that Captain Cook brought here in 1778, and a
horse that was here when Captain Cook came. Captain
Phillips takes a just pride in his driving, and in the speed of
his horse, and to his passion for displaying them I owe it that
we were only sixteen minutes coming from the prison to the
American Hotel—a distance which has been estimated to be
over half a mile. But it took some fearful driving. The
Captain’s whip came down fast, and the blows started so much
dust out of the horse’s hide that, during the last half of the
journey, we rode through an impenetrable fog, and ran by a
pocket compass in the hands of Captain Fish, a whaler of
twenty-six years’ experience, who sat there through the perilous
voyage as self-possessed as if he had been on the euchre-deck of
his own ship, and calmly said, “ Port your helm—port,” from
time to time, and “ Hold her a little free—steady—so-o,” and
“ Luff —hard down to starboard! ” and never once lost his pres-
ence of mind, or betrayed the least anxiety by voice or manner.
When we came to anchor at last, and Captain Phillips looked
at his watch and said, “ Sixteen minutes—l told you it was in
her! that’s over three miles an hour! ” I could see he felt
entitled to a compliment, and so I said I had never seen light-
ning go like that horse. And I never had.
The landlord f>f the American said the party had been gone
nearly an hour, but that he could give me my choice of several
horses that could overtake them. I said, never mind—l pre-
ferred a safe horse to a fast one—l would like to have an
excessively gentle horse —a horse with no spirit whatever—a
lame one, if he had such a thing. Inside of five minutes I was
mounted, and perfectly satisfied with my outfit. I had no
time to label him “ This is a horse,” and so if the public took
him for a sheep I cannot help it. I was satisfied, and that was
the main thing. I could see that he had as many fine points
as any man’s horse, and so I hung my hat on one of them,
behind the saddle, and swabbed the perspiration from my
face, and started. I named him after this island, “Oahu”
(pronounced O-waw-hee.) The first gate he came to he started
in; I had neither whip nor spur, and so I simply argued
the case with him. He resisted argument, but ultimately
yielded to insult and abuse. He backed out of that gate and
steered for another one on the other side of the street. I
triumphed by my former process. Within the next six hundred
259 n 2


yards he crossed the street fourteen times, and attempted
thirteen gates, and in the meantime the tropical sun was beat-
ing down and threatening to cave the top of my head in, and
I was literally dripping with perspiration. He abandoned the
gate business after that, and went along peaceably enough, but
absorbed in meditation. I noticed this latter circumstance,
and it soon began to fill me with apprehension. I said to
myself, this creature is planning some new outrage, some fresh
deviltry or other—no hox-se ever thought over a subject so pro-
foundly as this one is doing just for nothing. The more this
thing preyed upon my mind the more uneasy I became, until
the suspense became almost unbearable, and I dismounted to
see if there was anything wild in his eye—for I had heard
that the eye of this noblest of our domestic animals is very
expressive. I cannot describe what a load of anxiety was
lifted from my mind when I found that he was only asleep.
I woke him up and started him into a faster walk, and then
the villainy of his nature came out again. He tried to climb
over a stone wall, five or six feet high. I saw that I must
apply force to this horse, and that I might as well begin first
as last. I plucked a stout switch from a tamarind tree, and the
moment he saw it he surrendered. He broke into a convul-
sive sort of a canter, which had three short steps in it and one
long one, and reminded me alternately of the clattering shake
of the great earthquake, and the sweeping plunging of the Ajax
in a storm.
And now there can be no fitter occasion than the present to
pronounce a left-handed blessing upon the man who invented
the American saddle. There is no seat to speak of about it—
one might as well sit in a shovel —and the stirrups are nothing
but an ornamental nuisance. If I were to write down here all
the abuse I expended on those stirrups, it would make a large
book, even without pictures. Sometimes I got one foot so far
through, that the stirrup partook of the nature of an anklet;
sometimes both feet were through, and I was handcuffed by the
legs; and sometimes my feet got clear out and left the stirrups
wildly dangling about my shins. Even when I was in proper
position and carefully balanced upon the balls of my feet, there
was no comfort in it, on account of my nervous dread that they
were going to slip one way or the other in a moment. But the
subject is too exasperating to write about.
A mile and a half from town I came to a grove of tall cocoa-
nut trees, with clean, branchless stems reaching straight up
sixty or seventy feet, and topped with a spray of green foliage
sheltering clusters of cocoa-nuts —not more picturesque than a
forest of collossal ragged parasols, with bunches of magnified
grapes under them, would be. I once heard a grouty northern
invalid say that a cocoa-nut tree might be poetical —possibly it
was ; but it looked like a feather-duster struck by lightning. I


think that describes it better than a picture—and yet, without
any question, there is something fascinating about a cocoa-nut
tree —and graceful, too.
About a dozen cottages, some frame and the others of native
grass, nestled sleepily in the shade here and there. The grass
cabins are of a greyish colour, are shaped much like our own
cottages, only with higher and steeper roofs usually, and'are
made of some kind of weed, strongly bound together in bundles.
The roofs are very thick, and so are the walls; the latter have
square holes in them for windows. At a little distance these
cabins have a furry appearance, as if they might be made of
bear skins. They are very cool and pleasant inside. The King’s
flag was flying from the roof of one of the cottages, and His
Majesty was probably within. He owns the whole concern
thereabouts, and passes his time there frequently, on sultry days
“laying off.” The spot is called “The King’s Grove.”
Near by is an interesting ruin—the meagre remains of an
ancient heathen temple—a place where human sacrifices were
offered up in those old bygone days when the simple child of
nature, yielded momentarily to sin when sorely tempted,
acknowledged his error when calm reflection had shown it him,
and came forward with noble frankness and offered up his
grandmother as an atoning sacrifice—in those old days when
the luckless sinner could keep on cleansing his conscience and
achieving periodical happiness as long as his relations held out;
long, long before the missionaries braved a thousand privations
to come and make them permanently miserable by telling them
how beautiful and how blissful a place heaven is, and how
nearly impossible it is to get there; and showed the poor native
how dreary a place perdition is and what unnecessarily liberal
facilities there are for going to it; showed him how, in his
ignorance, he had gone and fooled away all his kinfolks to no
purpose; showed him what rapture it is to work all day long
for fifty cents to buy food for next day with, as compared with
fishing for pastime and lolling in the shade through eternal
Summer, and eating of the bounty that nobody laboured to pro-
vide but Nature. How sad it is to think of the multitudes
who have gone to their graves in this beautiful island and never
knew there was a hell!
This ancient temple was built of rough blocks of lava, and
was simply a roofless enclosure, a hundred and thirty feet long
and seventy feet wide—nothing but naked walls, very thick, but
not much higher than a man’s head. They will last for ages,
no doubt, if left unmolested. Its three altars and other sacred
appurtenances have crumbled and passed away years ago. It
is said that in the old times thousands of human beings were
slaughtered here, in the presence of naked and howling savages.
If these mute stones could speak, what tales they could tell,
what pictures they could describe, of fettered victims writhing


under the knife; of massed forms straining forward out of the
gloom, with ferocious faces lit up by the sacrificial fires; of the
background of ghostly trees; of the dark pyramid of Diamond
Head standing sentinel oyer the uncanny scene, and the peace-
ful moon looking down upon it through rifts in the cloud-rack!
When Kamehameha (pronounced Ka-may-ha-may-ah) the
Great—who was a sort of a Napoleon in military genius and
uniform success —invaded this island of Oahu three quarters of
a century ago, and exterminated the army sent to oppose him,
and took full and final possession of the country, he searched
out the dead body of the King of Oahu, and those of the
principal chiefs, and impaled their heads on the walls of this
temple.
Those were savage times when this old slaughter house was
in its prime. The King and the chiefs ruled the common herd
with a rod of iron; made them gather all the provisions the
masters needed; build all the houses and temples; stand all
the expenses, of whatever kind; take kicks and cuffs for thanks;
drag out lives well flavoured with misery; and then suffer death
for trifling offences or yield up their lives on the sacrificial altars
to purchase favours from the gods for their hard rulers. The
missionaries have clothed them, educated them, broken up the
tyrannous authority of their chiefs, and given them freedom
and the right to enjoy whatever their hands and brains produce
with equal laws for all, and punishment for all alike who trans-
gress them. The contrast is so strong—the benefit conferred
upon this people by the missionaries is so prominent, so palpa-
ble and so unquestionable that the frankest compliment I can
pay them, and the best, is simply to point to the condition of
the Sandwich Islanders of Captain Cook’s time; and their con-
dition to day. Their work speaks for itself.
CHAPTEE LXY.
By and bye, after a rugged climb, we halted on the summit of
a hill which commanded a far-reaching view. The moon rose
and flooded mountain and valley and ocean with a mellow
radiance, and out of the shadows of the foliage the 'distant
lights of Honolulu glinted like an encampment of fire-flies.
The air was heavy with the fragrance of flowers. The
halt was brief.—Gaily laughing and talking, the partly
galloped on, and I clung to the pommel and cantered after.
Presently we came to a place where no grass grew—a wide
expense of deep sand. They said it was an old battle ground.
All around everywhere, not three feet apart, the bleached bones
of men gleamed white in the moonlight. We picked up a lot


of them for mementoes. I got quite a number of arm bones
and leg bones—of great chiefs, may be, who had fought savagely
in that fearful battle in the old days, when blood flowed like
wine where we now stood—and wore the choicest of them out
on Oahu afterward, trying to make him go. All sorts of bones
could be found except skulls ; but a citizen said, irreverently,
that there had been an unsual number of “ skull-hunters ”
there lately—a species of sportsmen I had never heard of
before.
Nothing whatever is known about this place—its story is a
secret that will never be revealed. The oldest natives make no
pretence of being possessed of its history. They say these
bones were here when they were children. They were here
when their grandfathers were children —but how they came
here, they can only conjecture. Many people believe this spot
to be an ancient battle-ground, and it is usual to call it so; and
they believe that these skeletons have lain for ages just where
their proprietors fell in the great fight. Other people believe
that Kamehameha I. fought his first battle here. On this
point I have heard a story, which may have been taken from
one of the numerous books which have been written concerning
these islands —I do not know where the narrator got it. He
said that when Kamehameha (who was at first merely a subor-
dinate chief on the island of Hawaii,) landed here, he brought
a large army with him, and encamped at Waikiki. The
Oahuans marched against him, and so confident were they of
success that they readily acceded to a demand of their priests
that they should draw a line where these bones now lie, and
take an oath that, if forced to retreat at all, they would never
retreat beyond this boundary. The priests told them that
death and everlasting punishment would overtake any who
violated the oath, and the march was resumed. Kamehameha
drove them back step by step ; the priests fought in the front
rank and exhorted them, both by voice and inspiriting example,
to remember their oath—to die, if need be, but never cross the
fatal line. The struggle was manfully maintained, but at last
the chief priest fell, pierced to the heart with a spear, and the
unlucky omen fell like a blight upon the brave souls at his
back; with a triumphant shout the invaders pressed forward—
the line was crossed—the offended gods deserted the despairing
army, and, accepting the doom their perjury had brought upon
them, they broke and fled over the plain where Honolulu stands
now—up the beautiful Nuuanu Valley—paused a moment,
hemmed in by precipitous mountains on.either hand and the
frightful precipice of the Pari in front, and then were driven
ovei’—a sheer plunge of six hundred feet!
The story is pretty enough, but Mr. Jarves’ excellent history
says the Oahuans were intrenched in Nuuanu Valley; that
Kamehameha ousted them, routed them, pursued them up the.


valley and drove them over the precipice. He makes no men-
tion of our bone-yard at all in his book.
Impressed by the profound silence and repose that rested
over the beautiful landscape, and being, as usual, in the rear,
I gave voice to my thoughts. I said:—
“ What a picture is here slumbering in the solemn glory of
the moon! How strong the rugged outlines of the dead
volcano stand out against the clear sky! What a snowy fringe
marks the bursting of the surf over the long, curved reef!
How calmly the dim city sleeps yonder in the plain! How
soft the shadows lie upon the stately mountains that border
the dream-haunted Mauoa Valley ! What a grand pyramid of
billowy clouds towers above the storied Pari! How the grim
warriors of the past seem flocking in ghostly squadrons to their
ancient battlefield again—how the wails of the dying well up
from the ”
At this point the horse called Oahu sat down in the sand.
Sat down to listen, I suppose. Never mind what he heard, I
stopped apostrophising and convinced him that I was not a
man to allow contempt of court on the part of a horse. I
broke the back-bone of a Chief over his rump and set out to
join the cavalcade again.
Very considerably fagged out we arrived in town at nine
o’clock at night, myself in the lead —for when my horse finally
came to understand that he was homeward bound and hadn’t
far to go, he turned his attention strictly to business.
This is a good time to drop in a paragraph of information.
There is no regular livery stable in Honolulu, or, indeed, in
any part of the kingdom of Hawaii; therefore, unless you are
acquainted with wealthy residents (who all have good horses,)
you must hire animals of the wretchedest description from the
Kanakas ( i. e. natives.) Any horse you hire, even though it be
from a white man, is not often of much account, because it will
be brought in for you from some ranch, and has necessarily
been leading a hard life. If the Kanakas, who have been
caring for him (inveterate riders they are) have not ridden him
half to death every day themselves, you can depend upon it
they have been doing the same thing by proxy, by clandes-
tinely hiring him out. At least, so lam informed. The result
is, that no horse has a chance to eat, drink, rest, recuperate, or
look well, or feel well, and so strangers go about the Islands
mounted as I was to-day.
In hiring a horse from a Kanaka, you must have all your eyes
about you, because you can rest satisfied that you are dealing
with a shrewd unprincipled rascal. You may leave your door
open and your trunk unlocked as long as you please, and he
will not meddle with your property; he has no important vices
and no inclination to commit robbery on a large scale; but if
he can get ahead of you in the horse business, he will take a


genuine delight in doing it. This trait is characteristic of
horse jockeys, the world over, is it not F He will overcharge
you, if he can; he will hire you a fine-looking horse at night
(anybody’s—may be the King’s, if the royal steed be in con-
venient view,) and bring you the mate to my Oahu in the
morning, and contend that it is the same animal. If you
make trouble, he will get out by saying it was hot himself who
made the bargain with you, but his brother, “ who went out in
the country this morning.” They have always got a “bro-
ther” to shift the responsibility upon. A victim said to one
of these fellows one day :
“But I know I hired the horse of you, because I noticed
that scar on your cheek.”
The reply was not bad;—“ Oh, yes —yes —my brother all same
—we twins!”
A friend of mine, J. Smith, hired a horse yesterday, the
Kanaka warranting him to be in excellent condition. Smith
had a saddle and blanket of his own, and he ordered the
Kanaka to put these on the horse. The Kanaka protested that
he was perfectly willing to trust the gentleman with the saddle
that was already on the animal, but Smith refused to use it.
The change was made; then Smith noticed that the Kanaka
had only changed the saddles, and had left the original blanket
on the horse; he said he forgot to change the blankets, and so,
to cut the bother short. Smith mounted and rode away. The
horse went lame a mile from town, and afterward got to cutting
up some extraordinary capers. Smith got down and took off
the saddle, but the blanket stuck fast to the horse —glued to a
procession of raw places. The Kanaka’s mysterious conduct
stood explained.
Another friend of mine bought a pretty good horse from a
native, a day or two ago, after a tolerably thorough examination
of the animal. He discovered to-day that the horse was as
blind as a bat, in one eye. He meant to have examined that
eye, and came home with a general notion that he had done it;
but he remembers now that every time he made the attempt his
attention was called to something else by his victimiser.
One more instance, and then I will pass to something else.
lam informed that when a certain Mr. L., a visiting stranger,
was here, he bought a pair of very respectable-looking match
horses from a native. They were in a little stable, with a par-
tition through the middle of it —one horse in each apartment.
Mr. L. examined one of them critically through a window (the
Kanaka’s “ brother ” having gone to the country with the key,)
and then went around the house and examined the other
through a window on the other side. He said it was the neatest
match he had ever seen, and paid for the horses on the spot.
Whereupon the Kanaka departed to join his brother in the
country. The fellow had shamefully swindled L. There was


only one “ match ” horse, and he had examined his starboard
side through one window and his port side through another I
I decline to believe this story, but I give it because it is worth
something as a fanciful illustration of a fixed fact—namely, that
the Kanaka horse-jockey is fertile in invention and elastic in
conscience.
You can buy a pretty good horse for forty or fifty dollars,
and a good enough horse for all practical purposes for two
dollars and a half. I estimate “Oahu” to be worth somewhere
in the neighbourhood of thirty-five cents. A good deal better
animal than he is was sold here the day before yesterday for a
dollar and seventy-five cents, and sold again to-day for two
dollars and twenty-five cents. Williams bought a handsome
and lively little pony yesterday for ten dollars; and about the
best common horse on the island (and he is a really good one)
sold yesterday, with Mexican saddle and bridle, for seventy
dollars—a horse which is well and widely known, and greatly
respected for his speed, good disposition, and everlasting
bottom. You give your horse a little grain once a day; it
comes from San Francisco, and is worth about two cents a
pound ; and you give him as much hay as he wants ; it is cut and
brought to the market by natives, and is not very good. It is
baled into long, round bundles, about the size of a large man;
one of them is stuck by the middle on each end of a six-foot
pole, and the Kanaka shoulders the pole and walks about the
streets between the upright bales in search of customers.
These hay bales, thus carried, have a general resemblance to a
colossal capital H.
The hay-bundles cost twenty-five cents apiece, and one will
last a horse about a day. You can get a horse for a song, a
week’s hay for another song, and you can turn your animal
loose among the luxuriant grass in your neighbour’s broad front
yard without a song at all —you do it at midnight, and stable
the beast again before morning. You have been at no expense
thus far, but when you come to buy a saddle and bridle they
will cost you from twenty to thirty-five dollars. You can hire
a horse, saddle and bridle, at from seven to ten dollars a week,
and the owner will take care of them at his own expense.
It is time to close this day’s record —bed time. As I prepare
for sleep, a rich voice rises out of the still night, and, far as
this ocean rock is toward the ends of the earth, I recognise a
familiar home air. But the words seem somewhat out of
joint:—
“ Waikiki lantoni oe Kaa hooly hooly wawhoo.”
Translated, that means, “ When we were marching through
Georgia.”


CHAPTEE LXYI.
Passing through the market place we saw that feature of Hono-
lulu under its most favorable auspices—that is, in the full glory
of Saturday afternoon, which is a festive day with the natives.
The native girls, by twos and threes and parties of a dozen, and
sometimes in whole platoons and companies, went cantering up
and down the neighbouring streets astride of fleet but homely
horses, and with their gaudy riding habits streaming like
banners behind them. Such a troop of free and easy riders, in
their natural home—the saddle —makes a gay and graceful
spectacle. The riding habit I speak of is simply a long, broad
scarf, like a tavern table-cloth brilliantly coloured, wrapped
around the loins once, then apparently passed between the
limbs, and each end thrown backward over the same, and floating
and flapping behind on both sides, beyond the horse’s tail, like
a couple of fancy flags; then, slipping the stirrup-irons between
her toes, the girl throws her chest forward, sits up like a Major-
General, and goes sweeping by like the wind.
The girls put on all the finery they can on Saturday afternoon
—fine black silk robes; flowing red ones, that nearly put your
eyes out; others as white as snow; still others that discount
the rainbow; and they wear their hair in nets, and trim their
jaunty hats with fresh flowers, and encircle their dusky throats
with home-made necklaces of the brilliant vermillion-tinted
blossom of the ohia; and they fill the markets and the adjacent
streets with their bright presences, and smell like a rag factory
on fire with their offensive cocoa-nut oil.
Occasionally you see a heathen from the sunny isles away
down in the South Seas, with his face and neck tatooed till he
looks like the customary mendicant from Washoe who has been
blown up in a mine. Some are tatooed a dead blue colour down
to the upper lip—masked, as it were—leaving the natural light
yellow skin of Micronesia unstained from thence down; some
with broad marks drawn down from hair to neck, on both sides
of the face, and a strip of the original yellow skin, two inches
wide, down the centre —a gridiron with a spoke broken out;
and some with the entire face discoloured with the popular
mortification tint, relieved only by one or two thin, wavy threads
of natural yellow running across the face from ear to ear, and
eyes twinkling out of this darkness, from under shadowing hat
brims, like stars in the dark of the moon.
Moving among the stirring crowds, you come to the poi
merchants, squatting in the shade on their hams, in true
native fashion, and surrounded by purchasers. (The Sandwich
Islanders always squat on their hams, and who knows but
they maybe the old original “ham sandwiches ?” The thought


is pregnant with interest.) The poi looks like common flour
paste, and is kept in large bowls formed of a species of gourd,
and capable of holding from one to three or four gallons. Poi
is the chief article of food among the natives, and is prepared
from the taro plant. The taro root looks like a thick, or, if you
please, a corpulent, sweet potato, in shape, but is of a light
purple colour when boiled. When boiled it answers as a pass-
able substitute for bread. The buck Kanakas bake it under
ground, then mash it up well with a heavy lava pestle, mix
water with it until it becomes a paste, set it aside and let it
ferment, and then it is poi—and an unseductive mixture it is,
almost tastless before it ferments and too sour for a luxury
afterward. But nothing is more nutritious. When solely used,
however, it produces acrid humours, a fact which sufficiently
accounts for the humorous character of the Kanakas. I think
there must be as much of a knack in handling poi as there is
in eating with chopsticks. The forefinger is thrust into the
mess and stirred quickly round several times and drawn as
quickly out, thickly coated, just as if it were poulticed; the
head is thrown back, the finger inserted in the mouth, and the
delicacy stripped off and swallowed —the eye closing gently,
meanwhile, in a languid sort of ecstacy. Many a different
finger goes into the same bowl and many a different kind of
dirt and shade and quality of flavour is added to the virtues of
its contents.
Around a small shanty was collected a crowd of natives
buying the awa root. It is said that but for the use of this root
the destruction of the people in former times by certain
imported diseases would have been far greater than it was, and
by others it is said that this is merely a fancy. All agree that
poi will rejuvenate a man who is used up and his vitality
almost annihilated by hard drinking, and that in some kinds of
diseases it will restore health after all medicines have failed ;
but all are not willing to allow to the awa the virtues claimed
for it. The natives manufacture an intoxicating drink from it,
which is fearful in its effects when persistently indulged in.
It covers the body with dry, white scales, inflames the eyes, and
causes premature decrepitude. Although the man before
whose establishment we stopped has to pay a Government
license of eight hundred dollars a year for the exclusive right
to sell awa root, it is said that he makes a small fortune every
twelvemonth; while saloon keepers, who pay a thousand dollars
a year for the privilege of retailing whiskey, etc., only mke a
bare living.
We found the fish market crowded, for the native is very
fond of fish, and eats the article raw and alive ! Let us change
the subject.
In old times here Saturday was a grand gala day indeed.
All the native population of the town forsook their labours, and


those of the surrounding country journeyed to the city. Then
the white folks had to stay indoors, for every street was so
packed with charging cavaliers and cavalieresses that it was
next to impossible to thread one’s way through the cavalcades
without getting crippled.
At night they feasted, and the girls danced the lascivious
hula hula —a dance that is said to exhibit the very perfection of
educated motion of limb and arm, hand, head, and body, and
the exactest uniformity of movement and accuracy of “ time.”
It was performed by a circle of girls with no raiment on them
to speak of, who went through an infinite variety of motions
and figures without prompting, and yet so true was their
“ time,” and in such perfect concert did they move, that when
they were placed in a straight line, hands, arms, bodies, limbs,
and heads waved, swayed, gesticulated, bowed, stooped, whirled,
squirmed, twisted, and undulated, as if they were part and parcel
of a single individual; and it was difficult to believe they were
not moved in a body by some exquisite piece of mechanism.
Of late years, however, Saturday has lost most of its quondam
gala features. This weekly stampede of the natives interfered
too much with labour and the interests of the white folks,
and by sticking in a law here, and preaching a sermon there,
and by various other means, they gradually broke it up. The
demoralising hula hula was forbidden to be performed, save at
night, with closed doors, in presence of few spectators, and only
by permission duly procured from the authorities and the paying
of ten dollars for the same. There are few girls now-a-days
able to dance this ancient national dance in the highest perfec-
tion of the art.
The missionaries have Christianised and educated all the
natives. They all belong to the Church, and there is not one
of them, above the age of eight years, but can read and write
with facility in the native tongue. It is the most universally
educated race of people outside of China. They have any
quantity of books, printed in the Kanaka language, and all
the natives are fond of reading. They are inveterate church-
goers—nothing can keep them away. All this ameliorating
cultivation has at last built up in the native women a profound
respect for chastity—in other people. Perhaps that is enough
to say on that head. The national sin will die out when the
race does, but perhaps not earlier.—But doubtless this puri-
fying is not far off, when we reflect that contact with civilisa-
tion and the whites has reduced the native population from
four hundred thousand (Captain Cook’s estimate,) to fifty-five
thousand in something over eighty years !
Society is a queer medley in this notable missionary, whaling,
and governmental centre. If you get into conversation with
a stranger, and experience that natural desire to know what sort
of ground you are treading on by finding out what manner of


man your stranger is, strike out boldly and address him as
“ Captain.” Watch him narrowly, and if you see by his coun-
tenance that you are on the wrong tack, ask him where he
preaches. It is a safe bet that he is either a missionary or a
captain of a whaler. lam now personally acquainted with
seventy-two captains and ninety-six missionaries. The captains
and ministers form one-half of the population; the third fourth
is composed of common Kanakas and mercantile foreigners and
their families, and the final fourth is made up of high officers of
the Hawaiian Government. And there are just about cats
enough for three apiece all round.
A solemn stranger met me in the suburbs the other day, and
said:—
“ Good morning, your reverence. Preach in the stone church
yonder, no doubt P”
“ No, I don’t. I’m not a preacher.”
" Eeally, I beg your pardon, captain. I trust you had a good
season. How much oil —”
“ Oil ? What do you take me for ? I’m not a whaler.”
“Oh, I beg a thousand pardons, your Excellency. Major-
General in the household troops, no doubt ? Minister of the
Interior, likely? Secretary of War? First Gentleman of the
Bed-chamber ? Commissioner of the Royal— ”
“ Stuff! I’m no official. I’m not connected in any way with
the Government.”
“ Bless my life! Then, who the mischief are you ? what
the mischief are you? and how the mischief did you get here ?
and where in thunder did you come from ?”
“ I’m only a private personage—an unassuming stranger—
lately arrived from America,”
“No? Not a missionary! Not a whaler! not a member of
his Majesty’s Government! not even Secretary of the Navy!
Ah, Heaven ! it is too blissful to be true; alas, Ido but dream.
And yet that noble, honest countenance —those oblique, ingen-
uous eyes —that massive head, incapable of —of—anything ;
your hand; give me your hand, bright waif. Excuse these
tears. For sixteen weary years I have yearned for a moment
like this, and—”
Here his feelings were too much for him, and he swooned
away. I pitied this poor creature from the bottom of my heart.
I was deeply moved. I shed a few tears on him, and kissed
him for his mother. I then took what small change he had,
and “shoved.”


CHAPTER LXVII.
I still quote from my journal:—
I found the national Legislature to consist of half a dozen
white men and some thirty or forty natives. It was a dark
assemblage. The nobles and Ministers (about a dozen of them
altogether) occupied the extreme left of the hall, with David
Kalakaua (the King’s Chamberlain) and Prince William at the
head. The President of the Assembly, His Royal Highness
M. Kekuanaoa,* and the Vice President (the latter a white man,)
sat in the pulpit, if I may so term it.
The President is the King’s father. He is an erect, strongly
built, massive featured, white-haired, tawny old gentleman of
eighty years of age or thereabouts. He was simply but well
dressed, in a blue cloth coat and white vest, and white panta-
loons, without spot, dust, or blemish upon them. He bears
himself with a calm, stately dignity, and is a man of noble
presence. He was a young man and a distinguished warrior
under that terrific fighter, Kamehameha 1., more than half a
century ago. A knowledge of his career suggested some such
thought as this: —“ This man, naked as the day he was born,
and war-club and spear in hand, has charged at the head of a
horde of savages against other hordes of savages more than a
generation and a half ago, and revelled in slaughter and carnage;
has worshipped wooden images on his devout knees; has seen
hundreds of his race offered up in heathen temples as sacrifices
to wooden idols, at a time when no missionary’s foot had ever
pressed this soil, and he had never heard of the white man’s
God ; has believed his enemy could secretly pray him to death;
has seen the day, in his childhood, when it was a crime punish-
able by death for a man to eat with his wife, or for a plebeian
to let his shadow fall upon the King—and now look at him ; an
educated Christian; neatly and handsomely dressed; a high-
minded, elegant gentleman; a traveller, in some degree, and one
who has been the honoured guest of royalty in Europe; a man
practised in holding the reins of an enlightened government,
and well versed in the politics of his country and in general
practical information. Look at him, sitting there presiding
over the deliberations of a legislative body, among whom are
white men—a grave, dignified, statesmanlike personage, and as
seemingly natural and fitted to the place as if he had been
born in it, and had never been out of it in his life time. How
the experiences of this old man’s eventful life shame the cheap
inventions of romance!”
Kekuanaoa is not of the blood royal. He derives his princely
* Since dead.


rank from his wife, who was a daughter of Kamehameha the
Great. Under other monarchies the male line takes precedence
of the female in tracing genealogies, hut here the opposite is
the case—the female line takes precedence. Their reason for
this is exceedingly sensible, and I recommend it to the aristocracy
of Europe: They say it is easy to know who a man’s mother
was, but, etc., etc.
The Christianising of the natives has hardly even weakened
some of their barbarian superstitions, much less destroyed them.
I have just referred to one of these. It is still a popular belief
that if your enemy can get hold of any article belonging to
you, he can get down on his knees over it and pray you to death.
Therefore many a native gives up and dies, merely because he
imagines that some enemy is putting him through a course of
damaging prayer. This praying an individual to death seems
absurd enough at a first glance, but then when we call to mind
some of the pulpit efforts of certain of j our own ministers the
thing looks plausible.
In former times, among the Islanders, not only a plurality
of wives was customary, but a plurality of husbands likewise.
Some native women of noble rank had as many as six husbands.
A woman thus supplied did not reside with all her husbands at
once, but lived several months with each in turn. An under-
stood sign hung at her door during these months. When the
sign was taken down, it meant “ Next.”
In those days woman was rigidly taught to “ know her place.”
Her place was to do all the work, take all the cuffs, provide all
the food, and content herself with what was left after her lord
had finished his dinner. She was not only forbidden, by ancient
law, and under penalty of death, to eat with her husband or
enter a canoe, but was debarred, under the same penalty, from
eating bananas, pine-apples, oranges, and other choice fruits, at
any time or in any place. She had to confine herself pretty
strictly to “ poi ” and hard work. These poor ignorant heathen
seem to have had a sort of groping idea of what came of woman
eating fruit in the garden of Eden, and they did not choose to
take any more chances. But the missionaries broke up this
satisfactory arrangement of things. They liberated woman and
made her the equal of man.
The natives had a romantic fashion of burying some of their
children alive when the family became larger than necessary.
The missionaries interfered in this matter, too, and stopped it.
To this day the natives are able to lie down and die when-
ever they want to, whether there is anything the matter with
them or not. If a Kanaka takes a notion to die, that is the end
of him ; nobody can persuade him to hold on; all the doctors in
the world could not save him.
A luxury which they enjoy more than anything else is a large
funeral. If a person wants to get rid of a troublesome native.


it is only necessary to promise him a fine funeral, and name the
hour, and he will be on hand to the minute —at least his remains
will.
All the natives are Christians, now, but many of them still
desert to the great shark god for. temporary succour in time of
trouble. An irruption of the great volcano of Kilauea, or an
earthquake, always brings a deal of latent loyalty to the great
shark god to the surface. It is common report that the King,
educated, cultivated, and refined Christian gentleman as he un-
doubtedly is, still turns to the idols of his fathers for help when
disaster threatens. A planter caught a shark, and one of his
Christianised natives testified his emancipation from the thrall
of ancient superstition by assisting to dissect the shark after a
fashion forbidden by his abandoned creed. But remorse
shortly began to torture him. He grew moody and sought soli-
tude ; brooded over his sin, refused food, and finally said he
must die, and ought to die, for he had sinned against the great
shark god and could never know peace any more. He was
proof against persuasion and ridicule, and in the course of a day
or two took to his bed and died, although he showed no
symptoms of disease. His young daughter followed his lead
and suffered a like fate within the week. Superstition is
ingrained in the native blood and bone, and it is only natural
that it should crop out in time of distress. Wherever one goes
in the Islands, he will find small piles of stones by the wayside,
covered with leafy offerings, placed there by the natives to
appease evil spirits or honour local deities belonging to the
mythology of former days.
In the rural districts of any of the Islands, the traveller
hourly comes upon parties of dusky maidens bathing in the
streams or in the sea without any clothing on, and exhibiting no
very intemperate zeal in the matter of hiding their nakedness.
When the missionaries first took up their residence in Honolulu,
the native women would pay their families frequent friendly
visits, day by day, not even clothed with a blush. It was
found a hard matter to convince them that this was rather
indelicate. Finally the missionaries provided them with long,
loose calico robes, and that ended the difficulty—for the women
would troop through the town, stark-naked, with their robes
folded under their arms, march to the missionary houses and
then proceed to dress !—The natives soon manifested a strong
proclivity for clothing, but it was shortly apparent that they
only wanted it for grandeur. The missionaries imported a
quantity of hats, bonnets, and other male and female wearing
apparel, instituted a general distribution, and begged the people
not to come to church naked, next Sunday, as usual. And they
did not j but the national spirit of unselfishness led them to
divide up with neighbours who were not at the distribution, and
next Sabbath the poor preachers could hardly keep countenance


before their vast congregations. In the midst of the reading of
a hymn a brown, stately dame would sweep up the aisle with
a world of airs, with nothing in the world on but a stovepipe
hat and a pair of cheap gloves; another dame would follow,
tricked out in a man’s shirt, and nothing else; another one
would enter with a flourish, with simply the sleeves of a bright
calico dress tied around her waist, and the rest of the garment
dragging behind like a peacock’s tail off duty; a stately “buck”
Kanaka would stalk in with a woman’s bonnet on, wrong side
before —only this, and nothing more; after him would stride
his fellow, with the legs of a pair of pantaloons tied around
his neck, the rest of his person untrammelled; In his rear would
come another gentleman simply gotten up in a fiery necktie and
a striped vest. The poor creatures were beaming with com-
placency and wholly unconscious of any absurdity in their
appearance. They gazed at each other with happy admiration,
and it was plain to see that the young girls were taking note
of what each other had on, as naturally as if they had always
lived in a land of Bibles and knew what churches were made
for; here was the evidence of a dawning civilisation. The
spectacle which the congregation presented was so extraordi-
nary and withal so moving, that the missionaries found it diffi-
cult to keep to the text and go on with the services; and by
and bye, when the simple children of the sun began a general
swapping of garments in open meeting, and produced some
irresistibly grotesque effects in the course of re-dressing, there
was nothing for it but to cut the thing short with the benedic-
tion and dismiss the fantastic assemblage.
In our country children play “ keep house;” and in the same
high-sounding but miniature way the grown folk here, with the
poor little material of slender territory and meagre population,
play “empire.” There is his Royal Majesty the King, with a
New York detective’s income of thirty or thirty-five thousand
dollars a year from the “royal civil list,” and the “ royal do-
main.” He lives in a two-story fraipe “palace.”
And there is the “royal family”—the customary hive of
royal brothers, sisters, cousins, and other noble drones and vag-
rants usual to monarchy,—all with a spoon in the national pap-
dish, and all bearing such titles as his or her Royal Highness
the Prince or Princess So-and-so. Few of them can carry their
royal splendours far enough to ride in carriages, however ; they
sport the economical Kanaka horse, or “hoof it”* with the
plebeians.
Then there is his Excellency the “royal Chamberlain”—a
sinecure; for his majesty dresses himself with his own hands,
except when he is ruralizing at Waikiki, and then he x’equires
no dressing.
* Missionary phrase.


Next we have his Excellency the Commander-in-chief of the
Household Troops, whose forces consist of about the number
of soldiers usually placed under a corporal in other lands.
Next comes the royal Steward and the Grand Equerry in
Waiting—high dignitaries with modest salaries and little to
do.
Then we have his Excellency the First Gentleman of the
Bed-chamber —an office as easy as it is magnificent.
Next we come to his Excellency the Prime Minister, a
renegade American from New Hampshire, all jaw, vanity,
bombast, and ignorance, a lawyer of “ shyster” calibre, a fraud
by nature, a humble worshipper of the sceptre above him, a
reptile never tired of sneering at the land of his birth or
glorifying the ten-acre kingdom that has adopted him—salary,
4000 dollars a year, vast consequence, and no perquisites.
Then we have his Excellency the Imperial Minister of
Finance, who handles a million dollars of public money a year,
sends in his annual “ budget ” with great ceremony, talks pro-
digiously of “ finance,” suggests imposing shemes for paying
off the “ national debt ” (of 150,000 dollars,) and does it all for
4000 dollars a year and unimaginable glory.
Next we have his Excellency the Minister of War, who holds
sway over the royal armies—they consist of two hundred and
thirty uniformed Kanakas, mostly Brigadier Generals, and if
the country ever gets into trouble with a foreign power we
shall probably hear from them. I knew an American whose
copper-plate visiting card bore this impressive legend: —
“ Lieutenant-Colonel in the Eoyal Infantry.” To say that he
was proud of this distinction is stating it but tamely. The
Minister of War has also in his charge some venerable swivels on
Punch-Bowl Hill wherewith royal salutes are fired when foreign
vessels of war enter the port.
Next comes his Excellency the Minister of the Navy—a
nabob who rules the “ royal fleet ” (a steam-tug and a sixty-ton
schooner.)
And next comes his Grace the Lord Bishop of Honolulu,
the chief dignitary of the ‘‘Established Church”—for when
the American Presbyterian missionaries had completed the
reduction of the nation to a compact condition of Christianity,
native royalty stepped in and erected the grand dignity of an
“ Established (Episcopal) Church ” over it, and imported a
cheap ready-made Bishop from England to take charge. The
chagrin of the missionaries has never been comprehensively
expressed, to this day, profanity not being admissible.
Next comes his Excellency the Minister of Public Instruc-
tion.
Next, their Excellencies the Governors of Oahu, Hawaii,
etc., and after them a string of High Sheriffs and other small
fry too numerous for computation.


Then there are their Excellencies the Envoy Extraordinary
and Minister Plenipotentiary of his Imperial Majesty the
Emperor of the French; her British Majesty’s Minister; the
Minister Resident, of the United States; and some six or
eight representatives of other foreign nations, all with sound-
ing titles, imposing dignity, and prodigious but economical
state.
Imagine all this grandeur in a playhouse “ kingdom,” whose
population falls absolutely short of sixty thousand souls !
The people are so accustomed to nine-jointed titles and
colossal magnates that a foreign prince makes very little more
stir in Honolulu than a Western Congressman does in New
York.
And let it be borne in mind that there is a strictly defined
“ court costume” of so “ stunning” a nature that it would make
the clown in a circus look tame and commonplace by comparison;
and each Hawaiin official dignitary has a gorgeous vari-coloured,
gold-laced uniform peculiar to his office: no two of them are
alike, and it is hard to tell which one is the “ loudest.” The
King has a “ drawing-room” at stated intervals, like other
monarchs, and when these varied uniforms congregate there,
weak-eyed people have to contemplate a spectacle through
smoked glass. Is there not a gratifying contrast between this
latter-day exhibition and the one the ancestors of some of these
magnates afforded the missionaries the Sunday after the old-
time distribution of clothing ? Behold what religion and
civilisation have wrought!
CHAPTER LXYIII.
While I was in Honolulu I witnessed the ceremonious funeral
of the King’s sister. Her Royal Highness the Princess Victoria.
According to the royal custom, the remains had lain in state at
the palace thirty days, watched day and night by a guard of
honour; and during all that time a great multitude of natives
from the several islands had kept the palace grounds well
crowded, and had made the place a pandemonium every night
with their bowlings and wailings, beating of tom-toms and
dancing of the (at other times) forbidden hula hula by half-clad
maidens to the music of songs of questionable decency chaunted
in honour of the deceased. The printed programme of the funeral
procession interested me at the time; and after what I have
just said of Hawaiin grandiloquence in the matter of “ playing
empire,” I am persuaded that a perusal of it may interest the
reader:—


After reading the long list of dignitaries, &c., and remembering the sparse-
ness of the population, one is almost inclined to wonder where the material
for that portion of the procession devoted to “Hawaiin Population Gene-
rally” is going to be procured :
Undertaker.
Royal School. Kawaiahao School. Roman Catholic School. Misenue
School.
Honolulu Fire Department.
Mechanics’ Benefit Union.
Attending Physicians.
Knonohikis (Superintendents) of the Crown Lands, Konohikis of the
Private Lands of His Majesty, Konohikis of Private Lands of
Her late Royal Highness.
Governor of Oahu and Staff.
Hulumanu (Military Company.)
Household Troops.
The Prince of Hawaii’s Own (Military Company.)
The King’s Household Servants.
Servants of Her late Royal Highness.
Protestant Clergy. The Clergy of the Roman Catholic Church.
His Lordship Louis Maigret, the Right Rev. Bishop of Arathea,
Vicar-Apostolic of the Hawaiian Islands.
The Clergy of the Hawaiian Reformed Catholic Church.
His Lordship the Right Rev. Bishop of Honolulu.
£ ' "
g ‘ §.
S||s glia
I-sIS sfeSs
[HEARSE.]
& ® c; C*
"lift
I I
w 'r s
Her Majesty Queen Emma’s Carriage.
His Majesty’%Staff.
Carriage of Her late Royal Highness.
Carriage of Her Majesty the Queen Dowager.
The King’s Chancellor.
Cabinet Ministers.
His Excellency the Minister Resident of the United States.
H. I. M.’s Commissioner.
H. B. M.’s Acting-Commissioner.
Judges of Supreme Court.
Privy Councillors.
Members of Legislative Assembly.
Consular Corps.
Circuit Judges.
Clerks of Government Departments.
Members of the Bar.
Collector-General, Custom-House Officers, and Officers of the Customs-
Marshal and Sheriffs of the different Islands.
King’s Yeomanry.
Foreign Residents.
Ahahui Kaahumanu.
Hawaiian Population Generally.
Hawaiian Cavalry.
Police Force.
* Ranks of long-handled mops made of gaudy feathers—sacred to royalty.
They are stuck in the ground around the tomb and left there.


I resume my journal at the point where the procession
arrived at the royal mausoleum: —
As the procession filed through the gate, the military deployed handsomely
to the right and left, and formed an avenue through which the long column
■of mourners passed to the tomb. The coffin was borne through the door of
the mausoleum, followed by the King and his chiefs, the great officers of the
kingdom, foreign Consuls, Ambassadors, and distinguished guests (Burlin-
game and General Van Yalkenburg.) Several of the kahilis 'were then
fastened to a frame-work in front of the tomb, there to remain until they
decay and fall to pieces, or, forestalling this, until another scion of royalty
dies. At this point of the proceedings the multitude set up such a heart-
broken wailing as I hope never to hear again. The soldiers fired three
volleys of musketry—the wailing being previously silenced to permit of the
guns being heard. His Highness Prince William, in a showy military
uniform (the “true prince,” this—scion of the house over-thrown by the
present dynasty—he was formerly betrothed to the Princess but was not
allowed to marry her.) stood guard and paced back and forth within the
door. The privileged, few who followed the coffin into the mausoleum
remained some time, but the King soon came out and stood in the door and
near one side of it. A stranger could have guessed his rank (although he
was so simply and unpretentiously dressed) by the profound deference paid
him by all persons in his vicinity ; by seeing his high officers receive his
quiet orders and suggestions with bowed and uncovered heads ; knd by
observing how careful those persons who came out of the mausoleum were
to avoid “crowding” him (although there was room enough in the door-way
for a waggon to pass, for that matter;) how respectfully they edged out
sideways, scraping their backs against the wall and always presenting a
front view of their persons to his Majesty, and never putting their hats on
until they were well out of the royal presence.
He was dressed entirely in black—dress-coat and silk hat—and looked
rather democratic in the midst of the showy uniforms about him. On his
breast he wore a large gold star, which was half hidden by the lappel of his
coat. He remained at the door a half hour, and occasionally gave an order
to the men who were erecting the kahilis before the tomb. He had the good
taste to make one of them substitute black crape for the ordinary hempen
rope he was about to tie one of them to the frame-work with. Finally he
entered his carriage and drove away, and the populace shortly began to drop
into his wake. While he was in view there was but one man who attracted
more attention than himself, and that was Harris (the Yankee Prime
Minister.) This feeble personage had crape enough around his hat to express
the grief of an entire nation, and as usual he neglected no opportunity of
making himself conspicuous and exciting the admiration of the simple
Kanakas. Oh ! noble ambition of this modern Richelieu.
It is interesting to contrast the funeral ceremonies of the
Princess Victoria with those of her noted ancestor Kameha-
meha the Conqueror, who died fifty years ago —in 1819, the
year before the missionaries came.
“ On the Bth of May, 1819, at the age of sixty-six, he died, as he had lived,
in the faith of his country. It was his misfortune not to have come in con-
tact with men who could have rightly influenced his religious aspirations.
Judged by his advantages, and compared with the most eminent of his
countrymen, he may be justly styled not only great, but good. To this day
Ms memory warms the heart and elevates the national feelings of Hawaiians.
They are proud of their old warrior King; they love his name ; his deeds
form their historical age; and an enthusiasm everywhere prevails, shared
even by foreigners who knew his worth, that constitutes the firmest pillar of
the throne of his dynasty.
“ In lieu of human victims (the custom of that age,) a sacrifice of three
hundred dogs attended his obsequies—no mean holocaust when their


national value and the estimation in which they were held are considered. The
bones of Kamehameha, after being kept for a while, were so carefully con-
cealed that all knowledge of their final resting-place is now lost. There was
a proverb current among the common people that the bones of a cruel King
could not be hid ; they made fish-hooks and arrows of them, upon which, in
using them, they vented their abhorence of his memory in bitter execrations.”'
The account of the circumstances of his death, as written
by the native historians, is full of minute detail, but there is
scarcely a line of it which does not mention or illustrate some
by-gone custom of the country. In this respect it is the most
comprehensive document I have yet met with. I will quote
it entire:—
“ When Kamehameha was dangerously sick, and the priests were unable
to cure him, they said : ‘ Be of good courage and build a house for the god'
(his own private god or idol,) that thou mayest recover.’ The chiefs cor-
roborated this advice of the priests, and a place of worship was prepared
for Kukailimoku, and consecrated in the evening. They proposed also to
the King, with a view to prolong his life, that human victims should be
sacrificed to his deity; upon which the greater part of the people absconded,
through fear of death, and concealed themselves in hiding places till the
tabu* in which destruction impended, was past. It is doubtful whether
Kamehameha approved of the plan of the chiefs and priests to sacrifice men,
as hejwas known to say, ‘The men are sacred for the King ; meaning that
they were for the service of his successor. This information was derived
from Liholiho, his son.
“After this, his sickness increased to such a degree that he had not
strength to turn himself in his bed. When another season, conse-
crated for worship at the new temple (heiau) arrived, he said to his son,
Liholiho, ‘ Go thou and make supplication to thy god ; I am not able to go,
and will offer my prayers at home.’ When his devotions to his feathered
god, Kukailimoku, were concluded, a certain religiously-disposed individual
who had a bird god, suggested to the King that through its influence his
sickness might be removed. The name of this god was Pua ; its body was
made of a bird, now eaten by the Hawaiins, and called in their language
alae. Kamehameha was willing that a trial should be made, and two houses
were constructed to facilitate the experiment; but while dwelling in them
he became so very weak as not to receive food. After lying there three days,
his wives, children, and chiefs, perceiving that he was very low, returned
him to his own house. In the evening he was carried to the eating house, t
where he took a little food in his mouth which he did not swallow ; also a
cup of water. The chiefs requested him to give them his counsel; but he
made no reply, and was carried back to the dwelling house; but when near
midnight—ten o’clock, perhaps—he was carried again to the place to eat;
but, as before, he merely tasted of what was presented to him. Then
Kaikioewa addressed him thus: ‘Here we all are, your younger brethren,
your son Liholiho, and your foreigner ; impart to us your dying charge, that
Liholiho and Kaahumanu may hear.’ Then Kamehameha enquired, ‘ What
do you say?’ Kakioewa repeated, ‘Your counsels for us.’ He then said,
‘Move on in my good way and—.’ He could proceed no further. The
foreigner, Mr. Young, embraced and kissed him. Hoapili also embraced
him, whispering something in his ear, after which he was taken back to
* Tabu (pronounced tah-boo,) means prohibition (we have borrowed it,)
or sacred. The tabu was sometimes permanent, sometimes temporary; and
the person or thing placed under tabu was for the time being sacred to the
purpose for which it was set apart. In the above case the victims selected
under the tabu would be sacred to the sacrifice.
t It was deemed pollution to eat in the same hut a person slept in—the
fact that the patient was dying could not modify the rigid etiquette-


the house. About twelve he was carried once more to the house for
eating, into which his head entered, while his body was in the dwelling-
house immediately adjoining. It should be remarked that this frequent
carrying of a sick chief from one house to another resulted from the tabu
system then in force. There were at that time six houses (huts) connected
with an establishment —one was for worship, one for the men to eat in, an
eating house for the women, a house to sleep in, a house in which to
manufacture kapa (native cloth) and one where, at certain intervals, the
women might dwell in seclusion. .
“ The sick was once more taken to his house, when he expired ; this was
at two o’clock, a circumstance from which Leleiohoku derived his name. As
he breathed his last, Kalaimoku came to the eating-house to order those in
it to go out. There were two aged persons thus directed to depart; one
went, the other remained on account of love to the King, by whom he had
formerly been kindly sustained. The children also were sent away. Then
Kalaimoku came to the house, and the chiefs had a consultation. One of
them spoke thus ‘This is my thought—we will eat him raw.'* _ Kaahu-
manu (one of the dead King’s widows) replied, ‘ Perhaps his body is not at
our disposal; that is more properly with his successor. Our part in him—
his breath—has departed ; his remains will be disposed of by Liholiho.’
“ After this conversation the body was taken into the consecrated house for
the performance of the proper rites by the priest and the new King. The name
of this ceremony is ulco ; and when the sacred hog was baked the priest
offered it to the dead body, and it became a god, the King at the same time
repeating the customary prayers. _ ...
“ Then the priest, addressing himself to the King and chiefs, said ‘I will
now make known to you the rules to be observed respecting persons to be
sacrificed on the burial of this body. If you obtain one man before the
corpse is removed, one will be sufficient; but after it leaves this house four
will be required. If delayed until we carry the corpse to the grave there
must be ten ; but after it is deposited in the grave there must be fifteen. To-
morrow morning there will be a tabu, and if the sacrifice be delayed until
that time, forty men must die.’
“ Then the high priest, Hewahewa, enquired of the chiefs, ‘ Where shall be
the residence of King Liholiho ?’ They replied, ‘ Where indeed ? You, of
all men, ought to know.’ Then the priest observed, ‘There are two suitable
places; one is Kau, the other is Kohala.’ The chiefs preferred the latter, as
it was more thickly inhabited. The priest added, ‘ These are proper places
for the King’s residence ; but he must not remain in Kona, for it is polluted.’
This was agreed to. It was now break of day. As he was being carried to
the place of burial the people perceived that their King was dead, and they
wailed. When the corpse was removed from the house to the tomb, a dis-
tance of one chain, the procession was met by a certain man who was
ardently attached to the deceased. He leaped upon the chiefs who were
carrying the King’s body ; he desired to die with him on account of his love.
The chiefs drove him away. He persisted in making numerous attempts,
which were unavailing. Kalaimoka also had it in his heart to die with him,
hut was prevented by Hookio.
“The morning following Kamehameha’s death, Liholiho and his train de-
parted for Kohala, according to the suggestions of the priest, to avoid the
defilement occasioned by the dead. At this time if a chief died the land was
polluted, and the heirs sought a residence in another part of the country until
the corpse was dissected and the bones tied in a bundle, which being done,
the season of defilement terminated. If the deceased were not a chief, the
house only was defiled which became pure again on the burial of the body.
Such were the laws on this subject.
“On the morning on which Liholiho sailed in his canoe for Kohala, the
* This sounds suspicious, in view of the fact that all Sandwich Island
historians, white and black, protest that cannibalism never existed in the
Islands. However, since they only proposed to “eat him raw” we “ won’t
count that.” But it would certainly have been cannibalism if they had
cooked him.—[M. T.]


chiefs and people mourned after their manner on occasion of a chief’s death,
conducting themselves like madmen and like beasts. Their conduct was
such as to forbid description. The priests, also, put into action the sorcery
apparatus, that the person who had prayed the Kmg to death might die; for
it was not believed that Kamehameha’s departure was the effect either of
sickness or old age. |When the sorcerers set up by their fire-places a stick
with a strip of kapa flying at the top, the chief Keeaumoku, Kaahumanu’s
brother came in a state of intoxication and broke the flag-staff of the
sorcerers, from which it was inferred that Kaahumanu and her friends had
been instrumental in the King’s death. On this account they were subjected
to abuse.”
You have the contrast, now, and a strange one it is. This
great Queen, Kaahumanu, who was “subjected to abuse” dur-
ing the frightful orgies that followed the king’s death, in
accordance with ancient custom, afterward became a devout
Christian and a steadfast and powerful friend of the mission-
aries.
Dogs were, and still are, reared and fattened for food, by the
natives—hence the reference to their value in one of the above
paragraphs.
Forty years ago it was the custom in the Islands to suspend
all law for a certain number of days after the death of a royal
personage; and then a saturnalia ensued, which one may picture
to himself after a fashion, but not in the full horror of the
reality. The people shaved their heads, knocked out a tooth
or two, plucked out an eye sometimes, cut, bruised, mutilated or
burned their flesh, got drunk, burned each other’s huts, maimed
or murdered one another according to the caprice of the moment,
and both sexes gave themselves up to brutal and unbridled
licentiousness. And, after it all, came a torpor from which the
nation slowly emerged bewildered and dazed, as if from a
hideous half-remembered nightmare. They were not the salt
of the earth, those “ gentle children of the sun.”
The natives still keep up an old custom of theirs which can-
not be comforting to an invalid. When they think a sick
friend is going to die, a couple of dozen neighbours surround
his hut and keep up a deafening wailing night and day till he
either dies or gets well. No doubt this arrangement has helped
many a subject to a shroud before his appointed time.
They surround a hut and wail in the same heart-broken way
when its occupant returns from a journey. This is their dismal
idea of a welcome. A very little of it would go a great way
with most of us.


CHAPTER LXIX.
Bound for Hawaii (a hundred and fifty miles distant,) to visit
the great volcano and behold the other notable things which
distinguish that island above the remainder of the group, we
sailed°from Honolulu on a certain Saturday afternoon, in the
good schooner Boomerang.
The Boomerang was about as long as two street cars, and
about as wide as one. She was so small (though she was larger
than the majority of the inter-island coasters) that when I
stood on her deck I felt but little smaller than the Colossus of
Rhodes must have felt when he had a man-of-war under him.
I could reach the water when she lay over under a strong
breeze. When the captain and my comrade (a Mr. Billings,)
myself and four other persons were all assembled on the little
after portion of the deck which is sacred to the cabin passengers,
it was full—there was not room for any more quality folks.
Another section of the deck, twice as large as ours, was full of
natives of both sexes, with their customary dogs, mats, blankets,
pipes, calabashes of poi, fleas, and other luxuries and baggage of
minor importance. As soon as we set sail the natives all lay down
on the deck as thick as negroes in a slave-pen, and smoked,
conversed, and spit on each other, and were truly sociable.
The little low-ceiled cabin below was rather larger than a
hearse, and as dark as a vault. It had two coffins on each side
—I mean two bunks. A small table, capable of accommodating
three persons at dinner, stood against the forward bulkhead,
and over it hung the dingiest whale oil lantern that ever peo-
pled the obscurity of a dungeon with ghostly shapes. The floor
room unoccupied was not extensive. One might swing a cat in
it, perhaps, but not a long cat. The hold forward of the bulk-
head had but little freight in it, and from morning till night
a portly old rooster, with a voice like Baalam’s ass and the same
disposition to use it, strutted up and down in that part of the
vessel and crowed. He usually took dinner at six o’clock, and
then, after an hour devoted to meditation, he mounted a barrel
and crowed a good part of the night. He got hoarser and
hoarser all the time' but he scorned to allow any personal con-
sideration to interfere with his duty, and kept up his labours in
defiance of threathened diphtheria.
Sleeping was out of the question when he was on watch.
He was a source of genuine aggravation and annoyance. It
was worse than useless to shout at him or apply offensive epi-
thets to him —he only took these things for applause, and
strained himself to make more noise. Occasionally, during the
day, I threw potatoes at him through an aperture in the bulk-
head, but he only dodged and went on crowing.


The first night as I lay in my coffin, idly watching the dim
lamp swinging to the rolling of the ship, and snuffing the nau-
seous odours of bilge water, I felt something gallop over me. I
turned out promptly. However, I turned in again when I
found it was only a rat. Presently something galloped over
me once more. I knew it was not a rat this time, and I thought
it might be a centipede, because the captain had killed one on
deck in the afternoon. I turned out. The first glance at the
pillow showed me a repulsive sentinel perched up on each end of
it—cockroaches as large as peach leaves —fellows with long,
quivering antense, and fiery, malignant eyes. They were
their teeth like tobacco worms, and appeared to be dissatisfied
about something. I had often heard that these reptiles were in
the habit of eating off sleeping sailors’ toe nails down to the quick,
and I would not get in the bunk any more. I lay down on the
floor. But a rat came and bothered me, and shortly afterward
a procession of cockroaches arrived and camped in my hair. In
a few moments the rooster was crowing with uncommon spirit,
and a party of fleas were throwing double somersaults about
my person in the wildest disorder, and taking a bite every time
they struck. I was beginning to feel really annoyed. I got up
and put my clothes on, and went on deck.
The above is not overdrawn; it is a truthful sketch of inter-
island schooner life. There is no such thing as keeping a vessel
in elegant condition, when she carries molasses and Kanakas.
It was compensation for my sufferings to come unexpectedly
upon so beautiful a scene as met my eye—to step suddenly out
of the sepulchral gloom of the cabin and stand under the strong
light of the moon—in the centre, as it were, of a glittering sea
of liquid silver —to see the broad sails straining in the gale,
the ship keeled over on her side, the angry foam hissing past
her lee bulwarks, and sparkling sheets of spray dashing high
over her bows and raining upon her decks; to brace myself and
hang fast to the first object that presented itself, with hat
jammed down and coat tails whipping in the breeze, and feel
that exhilaration that thrills in one’s hair and quivers down his
back bone when he knows that every inch of canvas is drawing,
and the vessel cleaving through the waves at her utmost speed.
There was no darkness, no dimness, no obscurity there. All
was brightness, every object was vividly defined. Every pros-
trate Kanaka; every coil of rope; every calabash of poi; every
puppy; every seam in the flooring; every bolthead; every
object, however minute, showed sharp and distinct in its every
outline; and the shadow of the broad mainsail lay black as a
pall upon the deck, leaving Billings’s white upturned face glori-
fied and his body in a total eclipse.
Monday morning we were close to the island of Hawaii.
Two of its high mountains were in view—Mauna Loa and
Hualaiai. The latter is an imposing peak, but being only ten
283 02


thousand feet high is seldom mentioned or heard of. Manna
Loa is said to be sixteen thousand feet high. The rays of
glittering snow and ice, that clasped its summit like a claw,
looked refreshing when viewed from the blistering climate we
were in. One could stand on that mountain (wrapped up in
blankets and furs to keep warm,) and while he nibbled a snow-
ball or an icicle to quench his thirst, he could look down the
long sweep of its sides and see spots where plants are growing
that grow only where the bitter cold of Winter prevails ; lower
down he could see sections devoted to productions that thrive
in the temperate zone alone; and at the bottom of the mountain
he could see the home of the tufted cocoa-palms and other
species of vegetation that grow only in the sultry atmosphere of
eternal Summer. He could see all the climes of the world at a
single glance of the eye, and that glance would only pass over a
distance of four or five miles as the bird flies !
By and bye we took boat and went ashore at Kailua, design-
ing to ride horseback through the pleasant orange and coffee
region of Kona, and rejoin the vessel at a point some leagues
distant. This journey is well worth taking. The trail passes
along on high ground—say a thousand feet above sea level—
and usually about a mile distant from the ocean, which is always
in sight, save that occasionally you find yourself buried in the
forest in the midst of a rank tropical vegetation and a dense
growth of trees, whose great boughs overarch the road, and shut
out sun and sea and everything, and leave you in a dim, shady
tunnel, haunted with invisible singing birds and fragrant with
the odour of flowers. It was pleasant to ride occasionally in
the warm sun, and feast the eye upon the ever-changing pano-
rama of the forest (beyond and below us,) with its many tints,
its softened lights and shadows, its billowy undulations sweep-
ing gently down from the mountain to the sea. It was pleasant,
also, at intervals, to leave the sultry sun and pass into the cool,
green depths of this forest, and indulge in sentimental reflections
under the inspiration of its brooding twilight and its whispering
foliage.
We rode through one orange grove that had ten thousand
trees in it! They were all laden with fruit.
At one farmhouse we got some large peaches of excellent
flavour. This fruit, as a general thing, does not do well in the
Sandwich Islands. It takes a sort of almond shape, and is
small and bitter. It needs frost, they say, and perhaps it does ;
if this be so, it will have a good opportunity to go on needing
it, as it will not be likely to get it. The trees from which the
fine fruit I have spoken of came, had been planted and replanted
sixteen times, and to this treatment the proprietor of the orchard
attributed his success.
We passed several sugar plantations—new ones and not very
extensive. The crops were, in most cases, third rattoons. [Note.


—The first crop is called “ plant canesubsequent crops which
spring from the original roots, without replanting, are called
“rattoons.”] Almost everywhere on the island of Hawaii
sugar-cane matures in twelve months, both rattoons and plant,
and although it ought to be taken off as soon as it tassels, no
doubt, it is not absolutely necessary to do it until about four
months afterward. In Kona, the average yield of an acre of
ground is two tons of sugar, they say. This is only a moderate
yield for these Islands, but would be astounding for Louisiana
and most other sugar growing countries. The plantations in
Kona being on pretty high ground—up among the light aftd
frequent rains—no irrigation whatever is required.
CHAPTER LXX.
We stopped some time at one of the plantations, to rest our-
selves and refresh the horses. We had a chatty conversation
with several gentlemen present; but there was one person, a
middle-aged man with an absent look in his face, who simply
glanced up, gave us good-day, and lapsed again into the
meditations which our coming had interrupted. The planters
whispered us not to mind him —crazy. They said he was in the
Islands for his health; was a preacher; his home, Michigan.
They said that if he woke up presently and fell to talking about
a correspondence which he had sometime held with Mr, Greeley
about a trifle of some kind, we must humour him and listen
with interest ; and we must humour his fancy that his corres-
pondence was the talk of the world.
It was easy to see that he was a gentle creature, and that his
madness had nothing vicious in it. He looked pale, and a little
worn, as if with perplexing thought and anxiety of mind. He
sat a long time, looking at the floor, and at intervals muttering
to himself and nodding his head acquiescingly or shaking it in
mild protest. He was lost in his thought, or in his memories.
We continued our talk with the planters, branching from sub-
ject to subject. But at last the word “circumstance,” casually
dropped in the course of conversation, attracted his attention,
and brought an eager look into his countenance. He faced
about in his chair and said :
Circumstance? What circumstance? Ah, I know—l know
too well. So you have heard of it too.” [With a sigh.] “Well,
no matter—all the world has heard of it. All the world. The
whole world. It is a large world, too, for a thing to travel so
far in—now, isn’t it? Yes, yes —the Greeley correspondence
with Erickson has created the saddest and bitterest controversy
on both sides of the ocean—and still they keep it up? It makes
us famous, but at what a sorrowful sacrifice! I was so sorry


when I heard that it had caused that bloody and distressful war
over there in Italy. It was little comfort to me, after so much
bloodshed, to know that the victors sided with me, and the
vanquished with Greeley.—lt is little comfort to know that
Horace Greeley is responsible for the battle of Sadowa, and not
me. Queen Victoria wrote me that she felt just as I did about
it—she said that as much as she was opposed to Greeley and
the spirit he showed in the correspondence with me, she would
not have had Sadowa happen for hundreds of dollars. I can
show you her letter, if you would like to see it. But, gentlemen,
much as you may think you know about that unhappy corres-
pondence, you cannot know the straight of it till you hear it
from my lips. It has always been garbled in the journals, and
even in history. Yes, even in history—think of it! Let me—
please let me, give you the matter, exactly as it occurred. I
truly will not abuse your confidence.”
Then he leaned forward, all interest, all earnestness, and told
his story—and told it appealingly, too, and yet in the simplest
and most unpretentious way; indeed, in such a way as to sug-
gest to one, all the time, that this was a faithful, honourable
witness, giving evidence in the sacred interest of justice, and
under oath. He said: —
“Mrs. Beazeley—Mrs. Jackson Beazeley, widow, of the village
of Campbellton, Kansas, —wrote me about a matter which was
near her heart —a matter which many might think trivial, but
to her it was a thing of deep concern. I was living in Michi-
gan, then—serving in the ministry. She was, and is, an esti-
mable woman—a woman to whom poverty and hardship have
proved incentives to industry, in place of discouragements.
Her only treasure was her son William, a youth just verging
upon manhood; religious, amiable, and sincerely attached to
agriculture. He was the widow’s comfort and her px-ide. And
so, moved by her love for him, she wrote me about a matter,
as I have said before, which lay near her heart—because it lay
near her boy’s. She desired me to confer with Mr. Greeley
about turnips. Turnips were the dream of her child’s young
ambition. While other youths were frittering away in frivo-
lous amusements the precious years of budding vigour which
God had given them for useful preparation, this boy was
patiently enriching his mind witlx information concerning
turnips. The sentiment which he felt toward the turnip was
akin to adoration. He could not think of the turnip without
emotion; he could not speak of it calmly; he could not
contemplate it without exaltation; he could not eat it without
shedding tears. All the poetry i*x his sensitive nature was in
sympathy with the gracious vegetable. With the earliest pipe
of dawn he sought his patch, and when the curtaining night
drove him from it he shut himself up with his books and
garnered statistics till sleep overcame him. On rainy days he


sat and talked hours together with his mother about turnips.
When company came, he made it his loving duty to put aside
everything else and converse with them all the day long of his
great joy in the turnip. And yet, was this joy rounded and
complete? Was there no secret alloy af unhappiness in it?
Alas, there was. There was a canker gnawing at his heart; the
noblest inspiration! of his soul eluded his endeavour —viz: he
could not make of the turnip a climbing vine. Months went
by; the bloom forsook his cheek, the fire faded out of his eye;
sighings and abstraction usurped the place of smiles and
cheerful converse. But a watchful eye noted these things-and
in time a motherly sympathy unsealed the secret. Hence the
letter to me. She pleaded for attention —she said her boy was
dying by inches. *
“ I was a stranger to Mr. Greeley, but what of that ? The
matter was urgent. I wrote and begged him to solve the difficult
problem if possible and save the student’s life. My interest
grew, until it partook of the anxiety of the mother. I waited in
much suspense. —At last the answer came.
“ I found that I could not read it readily, the handwriting
being unfamiliar and my emotions somewhat wrought up. It
seemed to refer in part to the boy’s case, but chiefly to other
and irrelevant matters—such as paving-stones, electricity,
oysters, and something which I took to be ‘absolution’ or
* agrarianism,’ I could not be certain which; still, these appeared
to be simply casual mentions, nothing more; friendly in spirit,
without doubt, but lacking the connection or coherence neces-
sary to make them useful.—l judged that my understanding
was affected by my feelings, and so laid the letter away till
morning.
“ In the morning I read it again, but with difficulty and uncer-
tainty still, for I had lost some little rest and my mental vision
seemed clouded. The note was more connected, now, but did
not meet the emergency it was expected to meet. It was too
discursive. It appeared to read as follows, though I was not
certain of some of the words: —
‘Polygamy dissembles majesty ; extracts redeem polarity; causes hitherto
exist. Ovations pursue wisdom, or warts inherit and condemn. Boston,
botany, cakes, folony undertakes, but who shall allay ? We fear not.
‘ Yrxwly, ‘Hevace Eveeloj.’
“ But there did not seem to be a word about turnips. There
seemed to be no suggestion as to how they might be made to
grow like vines. There was not even a reference to the
Beazeleys. I slept upon the matter! I ate no supper neither
any breakfast next morning. So I resumed my work with a
brain refreshed, and was very hopeful. Now the letter took a
different aspect—all save the signature, which latter I judged
to be only a harmless affectation of Hebrew. The epistle was


necessarily from Mr. Greeley, for it bore tlie printed heading
of The Tribune, and I had written to no one else there. The
letter, I say, had taken a different aspect, but still its language
was eccentric and avoided the issue. It now appeared to
say:—
‘ Bolivia extemporises mackerel; borax esteems polygamy ; sausages
wither in the east. Creation perdu, is done; for woes inherent one can
damn. Buttons, buttons, corks, geology underrates but we shall allay. My
beer’s out. Yrxwly,
‘Hevace Eveeloj.’
“ I was evidently overworked. My comprehension was im-
paired. Therefore I gave two days to recreation, and then
returned to my task greatly refreshed. The 4 letter now took
this form:—
‘ Poultices do sometimes choke swine ; tulips reduce posterity ; causes
leather to resist. Our notions empower wisdom, her let’s afford while !we
can Butter but any cakes, fill any undertaker, we’ll wean him from his
filly. We feel hot.
‘ Yrxwly, ‘ Hevace Eveeloj.’
“ I was still not satisfied. These generalities did not meet
the question. They were crisp, and vigorous, and delivered
with a confidence that almost compelled conviction; but at such
a time as this, with a human life at stake, they seemed inap-
propriate, worldly, and in bad taste. At any other time I
would have been not only glad, but proud, to receive from a
man like Mr. Greeley a letter of this kind, and would have
studied it earnestly and tried to improve myself all I could;
but now, with that poor boy in his far home languishing for
relief, I had no heart for learning.
“ Three day passed by, and I read the note again. Again
its tenor had changed. It now appeared to say :
‘Potations do sometimes wake wines; turnips restrain passion; causes
necessary to state. Infest the poor widow? her lord’s effects will be void.
But dirt, bathing, etc., etc., followed unfairly, will worm him from his folly
—so swear not.
‘Yrxwly, ‘Hevace Eveeloj.’
“ This was more like it. But I was unable to proceed. I
was too much worn. The word * turnips ’ brought temporary
joy and encouragement, but my strength was so much impaired,
and the delay might be so perilous for the boy, that I relin-
quished the idea of pursuing the translation further, and
resolved to do what I ought to have done at first. I sat down
and wrote Mr. Greeley as follows :
“ Dear Sir—l fear Ido not entirely comprehend your kind note. It
cannot be possible, sir, that ‘ turnips restrain passion ’ —at least the study
or contemplation of turnips cannot —for it is this very employment that has
scorched our poor friend’s mind and sapped his bodily strength.—But if they
do restrain it, will you bear with us a little further and explain how they


*
should be prepared ? I observe that you say ‘ causes necessary to state,
but you have omitted to state them.
“Under a misapprehension, you seem to attribute to me interested
motives in this matter—to call it by no harsher term. But I assure you, dear
sir, that if I seem to be ‘infesting the widow,’ it is all seeming, and void of
reality. It is from no seeking of mine that lam in this position. She
asked me, herself, to write you. I never have infested her—indeed I scarcely
know her. Ido not infest anybody. I try to go along, in my humble way,
doing as near right as I can, never harming anybody, and never throwing
out insinuations. As for ‘her lord and his effects,’ they are of no interest
to me. I trust I have effects enough of my own—shall endeavour to get
along with them, at any rate, and not go mousing around to get hold of
somebody’s that are ‘ void.’ But do you not see ? —this woman is a widow —
she has no ‘lord.’ He is dead—or pretended to be, when they buried him.
Therefore, no amount of ‘dirt, bathing,’ etc., etc., howsoever ‘unfairly
followed ’ will be likely to ‘ worm him from his folly ’ —if being dead and a
ghost is ‘folly.’ Your closing remark is as unkind as it was uncalled for;
and if report says true you might have applied it to yourself, sir, with more
point and less impropriety.
‘Very Truly Yours, ‘Simon Erickson.’
‘ln the course of a few days, Mr. Greeley did what would
have saved a world of trouble, and much mental and bodily
suffering and misunderstanding, if he had done it sooner. To
wit, he sent an intelligible rescript or translation of his original
note, made in a plain hand by his clerk. Then the mystery
cleared, and I saw that his heart had been right all the time.
I will recite the note in its clarified form:—
[Translation.]
‘Potatoes do sometimes make vines; turnips remain passive: cause
unnecessary to state. Inform the poor widow her lad’s efforts will be vain.
But diet, bathing, etc. etc., followed uniformly, will wean him from his
folly—so fear not. ‘Yours, ‘Horace Greeley.’
“ But alas, it was too late, gentlemen—too late. The crimv
inal delay had done its work —young Beazeley was no more.
His spirit had taken its flight to a land where all anxieties
shall be charmed away, all desires gratified, all ambitions
realised. Poor lad, they laid him to rest with a turnip in each
hand.”
So ended Erickson, and lapsed again into nodding, mumbling,
and abstraction. The company broke up, and left him so. . . .
But they did not say what drove him crazy. In the momen-
tary confusion, I forgot to ask.
CHAPTER LXXI.
At four o’clock in the afternoon we were winding down a
mountain of dreary and desolate lava, to the sea, and closing
our pleasant land journey. This lava is the accumulation of
ages; one torrent of fire after another has rolled down here in
old times, and built up the island structure higher and higher.
Underneath, it is honeycombed with caves; it would be of no


use to dig wells in sucli a place; they would not hold water—
you would not find any for them to hold, for that matter.
Consequently, the planters depend upon cisterns.
The last lava flow occurred here so long ago, that there are
none now living who witnessed it. In one place it enclosed and
burned down a grove of cocoa-nut trees, and the holes in the
lava where the trunks stood are still visible; their sides retain
the impression of the bark; the trees fell upon the burning
river, and becoming partly submerged, left in it the perfect
counterpart of every knot and branch and leaf, and even nut,
for curiosity seekers of a long distant day to gaze upon and
wonder at.
There were doubtless plenty of Kanaka sentinels on guard
hereabouts at that time, but they did not leave casts of their
figures in the lava, as the Roman sentinels at Herculaneum
and Pompeii did. It is a pity it is so, because such things are
so interesting; but so it is. They probably went away. They
went away early, perhaps. However they had their merits;
the Romans exhibited the higher pluck, but the Kanakas
showed the sounder judgment.
Shortly we came in sight of that spot whose history is so
familiar to every school-boy in the wide world —Kealakekua
Bay—the place where Captain Cook, the great circumnavigator,
was killed by the natives, nearly a hundred years ago. The
setting sun was flaming upon it, a Summer shower was falling,
and it was spanned by two magnificent rainbows. Two men
who were in advance of us rode through one of these and for a
moment their garments shone with a more than regal splendour.
Why did not Captain Cook have taste enough, to call his great
discovery the Rainbow Islands ? These charming spectacles
are present to you at every turn; they are common in all the
islands : they are visible every day, and frequently at night
also—not the silvery bow we see once in an age in the States,
by moonlight, but barred with all bright and beautiful colours,
like the children of the sun and rain. I saw one of them a few
nights ago. What the sailors call “ raindogs ” —little patches
of rainbow—are often seen drifting about the heavens in these
latitudes, like stained cathedral windows.
Kealakekua Bay is a little curve like the last kink of a snail-
shell, winding deep into the land, seemingly not more than a
mile wide from shore to shore. It is bounded on one side—
where the murder was done—by a little flat plain, on which
stands a cocoanut grove and some ruined houses ; a steep wall
of lava, a thousand feet high at the upper end and three or four
hundred at the lower, comes down from the mountain and
bounds the inner extremity of it. From this wall the place
takes its name, Kealakekua, which in the native tongue signifies
“ The Pathway of the Gods.” They say (and still believe in
spite of their liberal education in Christianity,) that the great


god Lono, who used to live upon the hillside, always travelled
that causeway when urgent business connected with heavenly
affairs called him down to the seashore in a hurry.
As the red sun looked across the placid ocean through the tall
clean stems of the cocoanut trees, like a blooming whiskey
bloat through the bars of a city prison, I went and stood in the
edge of the water on the flat rock pressed by Captain Cook’s
feet when the blow was dealt which took away his life, and tried
to picture in my mind the doomed man struggling in the midst
of the multitude of exasperated savages—the men in the ship
crowding to the vessel’s side and gazing in anxious dismay
toward the shore—the—but I discovered that I could not do it.
It was growing dark, the rain began to fall, we could see that
the distant Boomerang was helplessly becalmed at sea, and so I
adjourned to the cheerless little box of a warehouse and sat down
to smoke and think, and wish the ship would make the land—
for we had not eaten much for ten hours and were viciously
hungry.
Plain unvarnished history takes the romance out of Captain
Cook’s assassination, and renders a deliberate verdict of justifi-
able homicide. Wherever he went among the Islands, he was
cordially received and welcomed by the inhabitants, and his
ships lavishly supplied with all manner of food. He returned
these kindnesses with insult and ill-treatment. Perceiving
that the people took him for the long-vanished and lamented
god Lono, he encouraged them in their delusion for the sake of
the limitless power it gave him ; but during the famous disturb-
ance at this spot, and while he and his comrades were sur-
rounded by fifteen thousand maddened savages, he received a
hurt and betrayed his earthly origin with a groan. It was his
death-warrant. Instantly a shout went up: “He groans ! —he
is not a god!” So they closed in upon him, and dispatched him.
His flesh was stripped from the bones and burned (except
nine pounds of it which were sent on board the ships.) The
heart was hung up in a native hut, where it was found and
eaten by three children, who mistook it for the heart of a dog.
One of these children grew to be a very old man, and died in
Honolulu a few years ago. Some of Cook’s bones were re-
covered and consigned to the deep by the officers of the ships.
Small blame should attach to the natives for the killing of
Cook. They treated him well. In return, he abused them.
He and his men inflicted bodily injury upon many of them at
different times, and killed at least three of them before they
offered any proportionate retaliation.
Near the shore we found “ Cook’s Monument ” —only a cocoa-
nut stump, four feet high and about a foot in diameter at the
butt. It had lava boulders piled around its base to hold it up
and keep it in its place, and it was entirely sheethed ovex% from
top to bottom, with rough, discoloured sheets of copper, such


as ships’ bottoms are coppered with. Each sheet had a rude
inscription scratched upon it —with a nail, apparently—and in
every case the execution was wretched. Most of these merely
recorded the visits of British naval commanders to the spot,
but one of them bore this legend:—
“ Near this spot fell
CAPTAIN JAMES COOK,
The Distinguished Circumnavigator, who Discovered these
Islands A.D., 1778.”
After Cook’s murder, his second in command, on board the
ship, opened fire upon the swarms of natives on the beach, and
one of his cannon balls cut this cocoanut tree short off and
left this monumental stump standing. It looked sad and lonely
enough to us, out there in the rainy twilight. But there is no
other monument to Captain Cook. True, up on the mountain
side we had passed by a large enclosure like an ample hog-pen,
built of lava blocks, which marks the spot where Cook’s flesh
was stripped from his bones and burned; but this is not pro-
perly a monument, since it was erected by the natives them-
selves, and less to do honour to the circumnavigator than for the
sake of convenience in roasting him. A thing like a guide-
board was elevated above this pen on a tall pole, and formerly
there was an inscription upon it describing the memorable
occurrence that had there taken place; but the sun and the
wind have long ago so defaced it as to render it illegible.
Toward midnight a fine breeze sprang up, and the schooner
soon worked herself into the bay and cast anchor. The boat
came ashore for us, and in a little while the clouds and the rain
were all gone. The moon was beaming tranquilly down on
land and sea, and we two were stretched upon the deck sleeping
the refreshing sleep and dreaming the happy dreams that are
only vouchsafed to the weary and the innocent.
CHAPTER LXXII.
In the breezy morning we went ashore and visited the ruined
temple of the last god Lono. The high chief cook of this
temple—the priest who presided over it and roasted the human
sacrifices —was uncle to Obookia, and at one time that youth
was an apprentice-priest under him. Obookia was a young
native of fine mind, who, together with three other native boys,
was taken to New England by the captain of awhaleship during
the reign of Kamehameha I, and they were the means of
attracting the attention of the religious world to their country.
This resulted in the sending of missionaries there. And this
Obookia was the very same sensitive savage who sat down on
the church steps and wept because his people did not have the


Bible. That incident has been very elaborately painted in
many a charming Sunday School book —aye, and told so plain-
tively and so tenderly that I have cried over it in Sunday
School myself, on general principles, although at a time when
I did not know much and could not understand why the people
of the Sandwich Islands needed to worry so much about it as
long as they did not know there was a Bible at all.
Obookia was converted and educated, and was to have
returned to his native land with the first missionaries, had he
lived. The other native youths made the voyage, and two of
them did good service, but the third, William Kanui, fell from
grace afterward, for a time, and when the gold excitement
bi;oke out in California he journeyed thither and went to mining,
although he was fifty years old. He succeeded pretty well, but
the failure of Page, Bacon, and Co. relieved him of six
thousand dollars, and then, to all intents and purposes, he was
a bankrupt in his old age, and he resumed service in the pulpit
again. He died in Honolulu in 1864.
Quite a broad tract of land near the temple, extending from
the sea to the mountain top, was sacred to the god Lono in
olden times—so sacred that if a common native set his sacri-
legious foot upon it it was judicious for him to make his will,
because his time had come. He might go around it by water,
but he could, not cross it. It was well sprinkled with pagan
temples and stocked with awkward, homely idols carved out of
logs of wood. There was a temple devoted to prayers for rain
—and with fine sagacity it was placed at a point so well up on
the mountain side that if you prayed there twenty-four times a
day for rain you would be likely to get it every time. You
would seldom get to your Amen before you would have to hoist
your umbrella.
And there was a large temple near at hand which was built
in a single night, in the midst of storm and thunder and rain,
by the ghastly hands of dead men ! Tradition says that by the
weird glare of the lightning a noiseless multitude of phantoms
were seen at their strange labour, far up the mountain side, at
dead of night—flitting hither and thither, and bearing great
lava-blocks clasped in their nerveless fingers —appearing and
disappearing as the pallid lustre fell upon their forms and faded
away again. Even to this day, it is said, the natives hold this
dread structure in awe and reverence, and will not pass by it in
the night.
At noon I observed a bevy of nude native young ladies bathing
in the sea, and went and sat down on their clothes to keep them
from being stolen. I begged them to come out, for the sea was
rising, and I was satisfied that they were running some risk.
But they were not afraid, and presently went on with their
sport. They were finished swimmers and divers, and enjoyed
themselves to the last degree. They swam races, splashed and


ducked, and tumbled each other about, and filled the air with
their laughter. It is said that the first thing an Islander learnt
is how to swim; learning to walk, being a matter of smaller
consequence, comes afterward. One hears tales of native men
and women swimming ashore from vessels many miles at sea-
more miles, indeed, than I dare vouch for or even mention.
And they tell of a native diver who went down in thirty or
forty-foot waters and brought up an anvil! I think he swallowed
the anvil afterward, if my memory serves me. However, I will
not urge this point.
I have spoken, several times, of the god Lono —I may as well
furnish two or three sentences concerning him.
The idol the natives worshipped for him was a slender, unor-
namented staff twelve feet long. Tradition says he was a
favourite god on the Island of Hawaii —a great king who had
been deified for meritorious services—just our own fashion of
rewarding heroes, with the difference that we would have made
him a postmaster instead of a god, no doubt. In an angry
moment he slew his wife, a goddess named Kaikilani Aiii.
Eemorse of conscience drove him mad, and tradition presents
us the singular spectacle of a god travelling “ on the shoulder
for in his gnawing grief he wandered about from place to place
boxing and wrestling with all whom he met. Of course, this
pastime soon lost its novelty, inasmuch as it must necessarily
have been the case that when so powerful a deity sent a frail
human opponent “to grass,” he never came back any more.
Therefore, he instituted games called makahiki, and ordered
that they should be held in his honour, and then sailed for
foreign lands on a three-cornered raft, stating that he would
return some day—and that was the last of Lono. He was never
seen any more; his raft got swamped, perhaps. But the people
always expected his return, and thus they were easily led to
accept Captain Cook as the restored god.
Some of the old natives believed Cook was Lono to the day of
their death; but many did not, for they could not understand
how he could die if he was a god.
Only a mile or so from Kealakeku Bay is a spot of historic
interest—the place where the last battle was fought for idolatry.
Of course we visited it, and came away as wise as most people
do who go and gaze upon such mementoes of the past when in
an unrefiective mood.
While the first missionaries were on their way around the
Horn, the idolatrous customs which had obtained in the island,
as far back as tradition reached were suddenly broken up. Old
Kamehameha 1., was dead, and his son, Liholiho, the new King
was a free liver, a roystering, dissolute fellow, and hated the
restraints of the ancient tabu. His assistant in the Govern-
ment, Kaahumanu, the Queen dowager, was proud and high-
spirited, and hated the tabu because it restricted the privileges


of her sex, and degraded all women very nearly to the level of
brutes. So the case stood. Liholiho had half a mind to put
his foot down, Kaahumanu had a whole mind to badger him
into doing it, and whiskey did the rest. It was probably the
rest. It was probably the first time whiskey ever prominently
figured as an aid to civilisation. Liholiho came up to Kailua
as drunk as a piper, and attended a great feast; the determined
Queen spurred his drunken courage up to a reckless pitch, and
then, while all the multitude stared in blank dismay, he moved
deliberately forward and sat down with the women! They saw
him eat from the same vessel with them, and were appalled!
Terrible moments drifted slowly by, and still the King ate, still
he lived, still the lightnings of the insulted gods were with-
held! Then conviction came like a revelation—the superstitions
of a hundred generations passed from before the people like a
cloud, and a shout went up, “ the tabu is broken! the tabu is
broken!”
Thus did King Liholiho and his dreadful whiskey preach the
first sei’mon, and prepare the way for the new gospel that was
speeding southward over the waves of the Atlantic.
The tabu broken and destruction failing to follow the awful
sacrilege, the people, with that childlike precipitancy which has
always characterised them, jumped to the conclusion that their
gods were a weak and wretched swindle, just as they formerly
jumped to the conclusion that Captain Cook was no god, merely
because he groaned, and promptly killed him without stopping
to enquire whether a god might not groan as well as a man if
it suited his convenience to do it; and, satisfied that the idols
were powerless to protect themselves, they went to work at once
and pulled them down —hacked them to pieces—applied the
torch—annihilated them !
The pagan priests were furious. And well they might be;
they had held the fattest offices in the land, and now they were
beggared; they had been great—they had stood above the
chiefs—and now they were vagabonds. They raised a revolt;
they scared a number of people into joining their standard, and
Bekuokalani, an ambitious offshoot of royalty, was easily per-
suaded to become their leader.
In the first skirmish the idolaters triumphed over the royal
army sent against them, and full of confidence they resolved
to march upon Kailua. The King sent an envoy to try and
conciliate them, and came very near being an envoy short by
the operation; the savages not only refused to listen to him,
but wanted to kill him. So the King sent his men forth under
Major Genera] Kalaimoku, and the two hosts met at Kuamoo.
The battle was long and fierce —men and women fighting side
by side, as was the custom—and when the day was done the
rebels were flying in every direction in hopeless panic, and
idolatry and the tabu were dead in the land !


The royalists marched gaily home to Kailua, glorifying the
new dispensation. “ There is no power in the gods,” said they,
“ they are a vanity and a lie. The army with idols was weak ;
the army without idols was strong and victorious!”
The nation was without a religiou.
The missionary ship arrived in safety shortly afterward, timed
by providential exactness to meet the emei’gency, and the Gos-
pel was planted as in a virgin soil.
CHAPTER LXXIII.
At noon, we hired a Kanaka to take us down to the ancient
ruins at Honaunau in his canoe—price two dollars—reasonable
enough for a sea voyage of eight miles, counting both ways.
The native canoe is an irresponsible looking contrivance. I
cannot think of anything to liken it to but a boy’s sled runner
hollowed out, and that does not quite convey the correct idea.
It is about fifteen feet long, high and pointed at both ends, is a
foot and a half or two feet deep, and so narrow that if you
wedged a fat man into it you might not get him out again. It
sits on top of the water like a duck, but it has an outrigger,
and does not upset easily, if you keep still. This outrigger is
formed of two long bent sticks like plough handles, which project
from one side, and to their outer ends is bound a curved beam,
composed of an extremely light wood, which skims along the
surface of the water, and thus saves you from an upset on that
side, while the outrigger’s weight is not so easily lifted as to
make an upset on the other side a thing to be greatly feared.
Still, until one gets used to sitting perched upon this knife-
blade, he is apt to reason within himself that it would be more
comfortable if there were just an outrigger or so on the other
side also.
I had the bow seat, and Billings sat amidships and faced the
Kanaka, who occupied the stern of the craft, and did the pad-
dling. With the first stroke the trim shell of a thing shot out
from the shore like an arrow. There was not much to see.
While we were on the shallow water of the reef, it was pastime
to look down into the limpid depths at the large bunches of
branching coral —the unique shrubbery of the sea. We lost
that, though, when we got out into the dead blue water of the
deep. But we had the picture of the surf, then, dashing
angrily against the crag-bound shore, and sending a foaming
spray high into the air. There was interest in this beetling
border, too, for it was honey-combed with quaint caves and
arches and tunnels, and had a rude semblance of the dilapidated
architecture of ruined keeps and castles rising out of the rest-
less sea. When this novelty ceased to be a novelty, we turned


our eyes shoreward, and gazed at the long mountain with its
rich green forests stretching up into the curtaining clouds, and
at the specks of houses in the rearward distance, and the dim-
inished schooner riding sleepily at anchor. And when these
grew tiresome we dashed boldly into the midst of a school of
huge, beastly porpoises engaged at their eternal game of arch-
ing over a wave and disappearing, and then doing it over
again, and keeping it up —always circling over, in that way,
like so many well-submerged wheels. But the porpoises wheeled
themselves away, and then we were thrown upon our ow’n
resources. It did not take many minutes to discover that the
sun was blazing like a bonfire, and that the weather was of a
melting temperature. It had a drowsing effect, too.
In one place we came upon a large company of naked natives,
of both sexes and all ages, amusing themselves with the
national pastime of surf-bathing. Each heathen would paddle
three or four hundred yards out to sea (taking a short board
with him, then face the shore, and wait for a particularly pro-
digious billow to come along; at the right moment he would
fling his board upon its foamy crest, and himself upon the
board, and here he would come whizzing by like a bombshell!
It did not seem that a lightning express train could shoot along
at a more hair-lifting speed. I tried surf-bathing once, subse-
quently, but made a failure of it. I got the board placed right,
and at the right moment, too; but missed the connection
myself. The board struck the shore in three quarters of a
second, without any cargo, and I struck the bottom about the
same time, with a couple of barrels of water in me. None but
natives ever master the art of surf-bathing thoroughly.
At the end of an hour, we had made the four miles, and
landed on a level point of land, upon which was a wide extent
of old ruins, with many a tall cocoanut tree growing among
them. Here was the ancient City of Refuge—a vast inclosure,
whose stone walls were twenty feet thick at the base,
and fifteen feet high; an oblong square, a thousand and forty
feet one way and a fraction under seven hundred the other.
Within this enclosure, in early times, has been three rude
temples, each two hundred and ten feet long by one hundred
wide, and thirteen high.
In those days, if a man killed another anywhere on the island,
the relatives were privileged to take the murderer’s life; and
then a chase for life and liberty began—the outlawed criminal
flying through pathless forests and over mountain and plain,
with his hopes fixed upon the protecting walls of the City of
Refuge, and the avenger of blood following hotly after him!
Sometimes the race was kept up to the very gates of the tem-
ple, and the panting pair sped through long files of excited
natives, who watched the contest with flashing eye and dilated
nostril, encouraging the hunted refugee with sharp, inspiriting


ejaculations,and sending up a ringing shout of exultation when
the saving gates closed upon him and the cheated pursuer sank
exhausted at the threshold. But sometimes the flying criminal
fell under the hand of the avenger at the very door, when one
more brave stride—one more brief second of time, would have
brought his feet upon the sacred ground and barred him against
all harm. Where did these isolated pagans get this idea of a
City of Refuge —this ancient Oriental custom ?
This old sanctuary was sacred to all—even to rebels in arms,
and invading armies. Once within its walls, and confession
made to the priest and absolution obtained, the wretch with a
price upon his head could go forth without fear and without
danger—he was tabu, and to harm him was death. The routed
rebels in the lost battle for idolatry fled to this place to claim
sanctuary, and many were thus saved.
Close to the corner of the great enclosure is a round structure
of stone, some six or eight feet high, with a level top about ten
or twelve in diameter. This was the place of execution. A high
palisade of cocoa-nut piles shut out the cruel scenes from the
vulgar multitude. Here criminals were killed, the flesh stripped
from the bones and burned, and the bones secreted in holes in
the body of the structure. If the man had been guilty of a high
crime, the entire corpse was burned.
The walls of the temple are a study. The same food for spe-
culation that is offered the visitor to the Pyramids of Egypt he
will find here—the mystery of how they were constructed by a
people unacquainted with science and mechanics. The natives
have no invention of their own for hoisting heavy weights, they
had no beasts of burden, and they have never even shown any
knowledge of the properties of the lever. Yet some of the lava
blocks quarried out, brought over rough, broken ground, and
built into this wall, six or seven feet from the ground, are of
prodigious size, and would weigh tons. How did they transport,
and how raise them ?
Both the inner and outer surfaces of the walls present a smooth
front, and are very creditable specimens of masonry. The blocks
are of all manner of shapes and sizes, but yet are fitted together
with the neatest exactness. The gradual narrowing of the wall
from the base upward is accurately preserved.
No cement was used, but the edifice is firm a,nd compact, and
is capable of resisting storm and decay for centuries. Who
built this temple, and how was it built, and when, are mysteries
that may never be unravelled.
Outside of these ancient walls lies a sort of coffin-shaped stone
eleven feet four inches long and three feet square at the small
end (it would weigh a few thousand pounds,) which the high
ehief who held sway over this district many centuries ago
brought thither on his shoulder one day to use as a lounge!
This circumstance is established by the most reliable traditions.


He used to lie down on it, in his indolent way, and keep an eye
on his subjects at work for him and see that there was no
“ soldiering ” done. And no doubt there was not any done to
speak of, because he was a man of that sort of build that incites
to attention to business on the part of an employe. He was
fourteen or fifteen feet high. When he stretched himself at
full length on his lounge, his legs hung down over the end, and
when he snored he woke the dead. These facts are all attested
by irrefragable tradition.
On the other side of the temple is a monstrous seven ton rdck
eleven feet long, seven feet wide, and three feet thick. It. is
raised a foot or a foot and a half above the ground, and rests
upon half a dozen little stony pedestals. The same old fourteen-
footer brought it down from the mountain, merely for fun (he
had his own notions about fun,) and propped it up as we find it
now, and as others may find it a century hence, for it would take
a score of horses to budge it from its position. They say that
fifty or sixty years ago the proud Queen Kaahumanu used to fly
to this rock for safety, whenever she had been making trouble
with her fierce husband, and hide under it until his wrath was
appeased. But these Kanakas will lie, and this statement is
one of their ablest efforts —for Kaahumanu was six feet high—
she was bulky—she was built like an ox—and she could no more
have squeezed herself under that rock than she could have passed
between the cylinders of a sugar mill. What could she gain by
it, even if she succeeded ? To be chased and abused by a savage
husband could not be otherwise than humiliating to her high
spirit, yet it could never make her feel so flat as an hour’s repose
under that rock would.
We walked a mile over a raised macadamised road of uniform
width ; a road paved with flat stones and exhibiting in its every
detail a considerable degree of engineering skill. Some say
that that wise old pagan, Kamehameha I. planned and built it,
but others say it was built so long before his time that the
knowledge of who constructed it has passed out of the traditions.
In either case, however, as the handiwork of an untaught and
degraded race it is a thing of a pleasing interest. The stones
are worn and smooth, and pushed apart in places, so that the
road has the exact appearance of those ancient paved highways
leading out of Eome which one sees in pictures.
The object of our tramp was to visit a great natural curiosity
at the base of the foothills—a congealed cascade of lava. Some
old forgotten volcanic eruption sent its broad river of fire down
the mountain side here, and it poured down in a great torrent
from an overhanging bluff some fifty feet high to the ground
below. The flaming torrent cooled in the winds from the sea,
and remains there to-day, all seamed, and frothed, and rippled
a petrified Niagara. It is very picturesque, and withal so natural
that one might almost imagine it still flowed. A smaller
299 p


stream trickled over the cliff and built up an isolated pyramid
about thirty feet high, which has the semblance of a mass of
laro-e gnarled and knotted vines and roots and stems intricately
twisted and woven together.
We passed in behind the cascade and the pyramid, and found
the bluff pierced by several cavernous tunnels, whose crooked
courses we followed a long distance.
Two of these winding tunnels stand as proof of Nature’s
mining abilities. Their floors are level—they are seven feet
wide ;°and their roofs are gently arched. Their height is not
uniform, however. We passed through one a hundred feet long,
which leads through a spur of the hill, and opens out well up
in the sheer wall of a precipice whose foot rests in the waves
of the sea. It is a commodious tunnel, except that there are
occasional places in it where one must stoop to pass under.
The roof is lava, of course, and is thickly studded with little
lava-pointed icicles an inch long, which hardened as they dripped.
They project as closely together as the iron teeth of a corn-
sheller, and if one will stand up straight and walk any distance
there, he can get his hair combed free of charge.
CHAETEE LXXIY.
We cot back to the schooner in good time, and then sailed down
to Kau, where we disembarked and took final leave of the vessel.
Next day we bought horses and bent our way over the summer-
clad mountain-terraces, towards the great volcano of Kilauea
(Ke-low-way-ah.) We made nearly a two-days’ journey of it,
but that was on account of laziness. Toward sunset, on the
second day, we reached an elevation of some four thousand feet
above sea level, and as we picked our careful way through billowy
wastes of lava long generations ago stricken dead and cold in
the climax of its tossing fury, we began to come upon signs of
the near presence of the volcano—signs in the nature of ragged
fissures that discharged jets of sulphurous vapour into the air,
hot from the molten ocean down in the bowels of the mountain.
Shortly the crater came into view. I have seen Vesuvius
since, but it was a mere toy, a child’s volcano, a soup-kettle,
compared to this. Mount Vesuvius is a shapely cone thirty-six
hundred feet high; its crater, an inverted cone only three
hundred feet deep, and not more than a thousand feet in
diameter, if as much as that; its fires meagre, modest, and
docile. But here was a vast, perpendicular, walled cellar, nine
hundred feet deep in some places, thirteen hundred in others,
level-floored, and ten miles in circumference ! Here was a yawning
pit upon whose floor the armies of Eussia could camp, and have
room to spare.


Perched upon the edge of the crater, at the opposite end
from where we stood, was a small look-out house—say three
miles away. It assisted us, by comparison, to comprehend and
appreciate the great depth of the basin—it looked like a tiny
martin-box clinging at the eaves of a cathedral. After some
little time spent in resting and looking and ciphering, we
hurried on to the hotel.
By the path it is half a mile from the Volcano House to the
look-out house. After a hearty supper we waited until it was
thoroughly dark, and then started to the crater. The first
glance in that direction revealed a scene of wild beauty. There
was a heavy fog over the crater and it was splendidly illumina-
ted by the glare from the fires below. The illumination was
two miles wide and a mile high, perhaps; and if you ever, on
a dark night and at a distance beheld the light from thirty or
forty blocks of distant buildings all on fire at once, reflected
strongly against overhanging clouds, you can form a fair idea
of what this looked like.
A colossal column of cloud towered to a great height in the
air immediately above the crater, and the outer swell of every
one of its vast folds was dyed with a rich crimson lustre,
which was subdued to a pale rose tint in the depressions be-
tween. It glowed like a muffled torch and stretched upward
to a dizzy height toward the zenith. I thought it just pos-
sible that its' like had not been seen since the children of
Israel wandered on their long march through the desert so
many centuries ago over a path illuminated by the mysterious
“ pillar of fire.” And I was sure that I now had a vivid con-
ception of what the majestic “pillar of fire” was like, which
almost amounted to a revelation.
Arrived at the little thatched look-out house, we rested our
elbows on the railing in front, and looked abroad over the wide
crater and down over the sheer precipice at the seething fires
beneath us. The view was a startling improvement on my
daylight experience. I turned to see the effect on the balance
of the company, and found the reddest-faced set of men I almost
ever saw. In the strong light every countenance glowed like
red-hot iron, every shoulder was suffused with crimson, and
shaded rearward into dingy, shapeless obscurity! The place
below looked like the infernal regions and these men like
half-cooled devils just come up on a furlough.
I turned my eyes upon the volcano again. The “ cellar ”
was tolerably well lighted up. For a mile and a half in front
of us, and half a mile on either side, the floor of the abyss was
magnificently illuminated ; beyond these limits the mists
hung down their gauzy curtains and cast a deceptive gloom
over all that made the twinkling fires in the remote corners of
the crater seem countless leagues removed—made them seem
like the camp-fires of a great army far away. Here was


room for the imagination to work! You could imagine
those lights the width of a continent away—and that hid-
den under the intervening darkness were hills, and winding
rivers, and weary wastes of plain and desert—and even then
the tremendous vista stretched on, and on, and on! —to the
fires and far beyond! You could not compass it—it was the
idea of eternity made tangible—and the longest end of it
made visible to the naked eye!
The greater part of the vast floor of the desert under us was
as black as ink, and apparently smooth and level ; but over a
mile square of it was ringed and streaked and striped with a
thousand branching streams of liquid and gorgeously brilliant
fire ! It looked like a colossal railroad map of the State of
Massachusetts done in chain lightning on a midnight sky.
Imagine it —imagine a coal-black sky shivered into a tangled
net-work of angry fire !
Here and there were gleaming holes a hundred feet in diam-
eter, broken in the dark crust, and in them the melted lava—
the colour a dazzling white just tinged with yellow—was boil-
ing and surging furiously; and from these holes branched num-
berless bright torrents in many directions, like the spokes of a
wheel, and kept a tolerably straight course for a while, and then
swept round in huge rainbow curves, or made a long succession
of sharp worm-fence angles, which looked precisely like the
fiercest jagged lightning. These streams met other streams,
and they mingled with and crossed and recrossed each other in
every conceivable direction, like skate tracks on a popular skat-
ing ground. Sometimes streams twenty or thirty feet wide
flowed from the holes to some distance without dividing, and
through the opera-glasses we could see that they ran down
small, steep hills, and were genuine cataracts of fire, white at
their source, but soon cooling and turning to the richest red,
grained with alternate lines of black and gold. Every now and
then masses of the dark crust broke away, and floated slowly
down these streams like rafts down a river. Occasionally the
molten lava flowing under the superincumbent crust broke
through—split a dazzling streak, from five hundred to a thou-
sand feet long, like a sudden flash of lightning, and then acre
after acre of the cold lava parted into fragments, turned up
edgewise, like cakes of ice when a great river breaks up, plunged
downward, and were swallowed in the crimson cauldron. Then
the wide expanse of the “thaw” maintained a ruddy glow for
a while, but shortly cooled and became black and level again.
During a “ thaw ” every dismembered cake was marked by a
glittering white border, which was superbly shaded inward by
aurora borealis rays, which were a flaming yellow where they
joined the white border, and from thence toward their points
tapered into glowing crimson, then into a rich, pale carmine,
and finally into a faint blush tbnt held its own a moment and


then dimmed and turned black. Some of the streams preferred
to mingle together in a tangle of fantastic circles, and then
they looked something like the confusion of ropes one sees on a
ship’s deck when she has just taken in sail and dropped anchor
—provided one can imagine those ropes on fire.
Through the glasses the little fountains scattered about looked
very beautiful. They boiled, and coughed, and spluttered, and
discharged sprays of stringy red fire—of about the consistency
of mush, for instance—from ten to fifteen feet into the air,
along with a shower of brilliant white sparks—a quaint and
unnatural mingling of gouts of blood and snow-flakes !
We had circles and serpents and streaks of lightning all
twined and wreathed and tied together, without a break
throughout an area more than a mile square (that amount of
ground was covered, though it was not strictly “square,”) and
it was with a feeling of placid exultation that we reflected that
many years had elapsed since any visitor had seen such a
splendid display—since any visitor had seen anything more
than the now snubbed and insignificant “ North” and “ South”
lakes in action. We had been reading old files of Hawaiian
newspapers and the “Record Book” at the Volcano House, and
were posted.
I could see the North Lake lying out on the black floor away
off in the outer edge of our panorama, and knitted to it by a
web-work of lava-streams. In its individual capacity it looked
very little more respectable than a schoolhouse on fire. True, it
was about nine hundred feet long and two or three hundred
wide, but then, under the present circumstances, it necessarily
appeared rather insignificant, and besides it was so distant
from us.
I forgot to say that the noise made by the bubbling lava
is not great, heard as we heard it from our lofty perch. It
makes three distinct sounds—a rushing, a hissing, and a cough-
ing or puifing sound; and if you stand on the brink and close
your eyes it is no trick at all to imagine that you are sweeping
down a river on a large low-pressure steamer, and that you hear
the hissing of the steam about her boilers, the pufiing from her
escape-pipes,* and the churning rush of the water abaft her
wheels. The smell of sulphur is strong, but not unpleasant to
a sinner.
We left the look-out house at ten o’clock in a half cooked
condition, because of the heat from Pole’s furnaces, and wrap-
ping up in blankets, for the night was cold, we returned to our
hotel.


CHAPTER LXXV.
The next night was appointed for a visit to the bottom of the
crater, for we desired to traverse its floor, and see the “North
Lake” (of fire) which lay two miles away, toward the further
wall. After dark half a dozen of us set out, with lanterns and
native guides, and climbed down a crazy, thousand-foot path-
way in a crevice fractured in the crater wall, and reached the
bottom in safety.
The irruption of the previous evening had spent its force
and the floor looked black and cold ; but when we ran out upon
it we found it hot yet, to the feet, and it was likewise riven with
crevices which revealed the underlying fires gleaming vin-
dictively. A neighbouring cauldron was threatening to over-
flow, and this added to the dubiousness of the situation. So
the native guides refused to continue the venture, and then
everybody deserted except a stranger named Marlette. He
gaid he had been in the crater a dozen times in daylight, and
believed he could find his way through it at night. He thought
that a run of three hundred yards would carry us over the
hottest part of the floor and leave us our shoe-soles. His pluck
gave me back-bone. We took one lantern and instructed the
guides to hang the other to the roof of the look-out house to
serve as a beacon for us in case we got lost, and then the party
started back up the precipice and Marlette and I made our run.
We skipped over the hot floor and over the red crevices with
brisk despatch, and reached the cold lava safe, but with pretty
warm feet. Then we took things leisurely and comfortably,
jumping tolerably wide and probably bottomless chasms, and
threading our way through picturesque lava upheavels with
considerable confidence. When we got fairly away from the
cauldrons of boiling fire, we seemed to be in a gloomy desert,
and a suffocatingly dark one, surrounded by dim walls that
seemed to tower to the sky. The only cheerful objects were the
glinting stars high overhead.
By and by Marlette shouted “ Stop !” I never stopped
quicker in my life. I asked what the matter was. He said we
were out of the path. He said we must not try to go on till we
found it again, for we were surrounded with beds of rotten
lava, through which we could easily break and plunge down a
thousand feet. I thought eight hundred would answer for me,
and was about to say so when Marlette partly proved his state-
ment by accidentally crushing through, and disappearing to his
arm-pits. He got out, and we hunted for the path with the
lantern. He said there was only one path, and that it was but
vaguely defined. We could not find it. The lava surface was
all alike in the lantern light. But he was an ingenious man.


He said it was not the lantern that had informed him that we
were out of the path, but his feet. He had noticed a crisp
grinding of fine lava-needles under his feet, and some instinct
reminded him that in the path these were all worn away. So
he put the lantern behind him and began to search with his
boots instead of his eyes. It was good sagacity. The first
time his foot touched a surface that did not grind under it he
announced that the trail was found again; and after that we
kept up a sharp listening for the rasping sound, and it always
warned us in time.
It was a long tramp, but an exciting one. We reached the
North Lake between ten and eleven o’clock, and sat down on a
huge overhanging lava shelf, tired but satisfied. The spectacle
presented was worth coming double the distance to see. Under
us, and stretching away before us, was a heaving sea of molten
fire of seemingly limitless extent. The glare from it was so
blinding that it was some time before we could bear to look
upon it steadily. It was like gazing at the sun at noon-day,
except that the glare was not quite so white. At unequal dis-
tances all round the shores of the lake were nearly white-hot
chimneys or hollow drums of lava, four or five feet high, and up
through them were bursting gorgeous sprays of lava-gouts and
gem spangles, some white, some red, and some golden—a cease-
less bombardment, and one that fascinated the eye with its
unapproachable splendour. The more distant jets, sparkling
up through an intervening gossamer veil of vapour, seemed miles
away; and the further the curving ranks of fiery fountains
receded, the more fairy-like and beautiful they appeared.
Now and then the surging bosom of the lake under our noses
would calm down ominously and seem to be gathering strength
for an enterprise; and then all of a sudden a red dome of lava
of the bulk of an ordinary dwelling would heave itself aloft,
like an escaping balloon, then burst asunder, and out of its
heart would flit a pale-green film of vapour, and float upward
and vanish in the darkness —a released soul soaring homeward
from captivity with the damned, no doubt. The crashing
plunge of the ruined dome into the lake again would send a
world of seething billows lashing against the shores and shaking
the foundations of our perch. By and bye, a loosened mass of
the hanging shelf we sat on tumbled into the lake, jarring the
surroundings like an earthquake, and delivering a suggestion
that may have been intended for a hint, and may not. We did
not wait to see.
We got lost again on our way back, and were more than an
hour hunting for the path. We were where we could see the
beacon lantern at the look-out house at the time, but thought
it was a star, and paid no attention to it. We reached the hote
at two o’clock in the morning, pretty well fagged out.
Kilauea never overflows its vast crater, but bursts a passage


for its lava through the mountain side when relief is necessary,
and then the destruction is fearful. About 1840, it rent its
overburdened stomach, and sent a broad river of fire careering
down to the sea, which swept away forests, huts, plantations,
and everything else that lay in its path. The stream was five
miles broad in places, and two hundred feet deep, and the distance
it travelled was forty miles. It tore up and bore away acre-
patches of land on its bosom like rafts —rocks, trees, and all
intact. At night the red glare was visible a hundred miles at
sea; and at a distance of forty miles fine print could be read at
midnight. The atmosphere was poisoned with sulphurous
vapours and choked with falling ashes, pumice-stones, and
cinders; countless columns of smoke rose up and blended
together in a tumbled canopy that hid the heavens, and glowed
with a ruddy flush, reflected from the fires below; here and
there jets of lava sprung hundreds of feet into the air and burst
into rocket-sprays that returned to earth in a crimson rain ; and
all the while the labouring mountain shook with Nature’s great
palsy, and voiced its distress in moanings and the muffled
booming of subterranean thunders.
Fishes were killed for twenty miles along the shore, where
the lava entered the sea. The earthquakes caused some loss
of human life, and a prodigious tidal wave swept inland, carry-
ing every thing before it and drowning a number of natives.
The devastation consummated along the route traversed by the
river of lava was complete and incalculable. Only a Pompeii
and a Herculaneum were needed at the foot of Kilauea to make
the story of the eruption immortal.
CHAPTER LXXVI.
We rode horseback all around the island of Hawaii (the
crooked road making the distance two hundred miles,) and
enjoyed the journey very much. We were more than a week
making the trip, because our Kanaka horses would not go
by a house or a hut without stopping—whip and spur could
not alter their minds about it, and so we finally found that it
economised time to let them have their way. Upon enquiry
the mystery was explained: the natives are such thorough-
going gossips that they never pass a house without stopping to
swap news, and consequently their horses learn to regard that
sort of thing as an essential part of the whole duty of man,
and his salvation not to be compassed without it. However, at
a former crisis in my life I had once taken an aristocratic young
lady out driving, behind a horse that had just retired from a
long and honourable career as the moving impulse of a milk
waggon, and so this present experience awoke a reminiscent sad-


ness in me in place of the exasperation more natural to the
occasion. I remember how helpless I was that day, and how
humiliated; how ashamed I was of having intimated to the girl
that I had always owned the horse and was accustomed to
grandeur; how hard I tried to appear easy, and even vivacious,
under suffering that was consuming my vitals; how placidly
and maliciously the girl smiled, and kept on smiling, while my
hot blushes baked themselves into a permanent blood-pudding
in my face; how the horse ambled from one side of the street
to the other and waited complacently before every third house
two minutes and a quarter while I belaboured his back and
reviled him in my heart; how I tried to keep him from turning
corners, and failed; how I moved heaven and earth to get him
out of town, and did not succeed; how he traversed the entire
settlement and delivered imaginary milk at a hundred and
sixty-two different domiciles, and how he finally brought up at
a dairy depot and refused to budge further, thus rounding and
completing the revealment of what the plebeian service of his
life had been; how, in eloquent silence, I walked the girl home,
and how. when I took leave of her, her parting remark scorched
my soul and appeared to blister me all over : she said that my
horse was a fine, capable animal, and I must have taken great
comfort in him in my time—but that if I would take along
some milk-tickets next time, and appear to deliver them at the
various halting places, it might expedite his movements a little.
There was a coolness between us after that.
In one place in the island of Hawaii, we saw a laced and
ruffled cataract of limpid water leaping from a sheer precipice
fifteen hundred feet high; but that sort of scenery finds its
stanchest ally in the arithmetic rather than in spectacular effect.
If one desires to be so stirred by a poem of Nature wrought in
the happily commingled graces of picturesque rocks, glimpsed
distances, foliage, colour, shifting lights and shadows, and
falling water, that the tears almost come into his eyes so potent
is the charm exerted, he need not go away from America to
enjoy such an experience. The Rainbow Fall, in Watkins Glen
(N. Y.,) on the Erie railway, is an example. It would recede
into pitiable insignificance if the callous tourist drew an arith-
metic on it; but left to compete for the honours simply on
scenic grace and beauty—the grand, the august, and the
sublime being barred the contest —it could challenge the old
world and the new to produce its peer.
In one locality, on our journey, we saw some horses that had
been born and reared on top of the mountains, above the range
of running water, and consequently they had never drank that
fluid in their lives, but had been always accustomed to quench-
ing their thirst by eating dew-laden, or shower-wetted leaves.
And now it was destructively funny to see them sniff suspici-
ously at a pail of water, and then put in their noses and try
307 p 2


to take a hite out of the fluid, as if it were a solid. Finding it
liquid, they would snatch away their heads and fall to trem-
bling, snorting, and showing other evidences of fright. When
they became convinced at last that the water was friendly and
harmless, they thrust in their noses up to their eyes, brought
out a mouthful of the water, and proceeded to chew it com-
placently. We saw a man coax, kick and spur one of them five
or ten minutes before he could make it cross a running stream.
It spread its nostrils, distended its eyes, and trembled all over,
just as horses customarily do in the presence of a serpent—and
for aught I know it thought the crawling stream ivas a serpent.
In due course of time our journey came to an end at Kawaehae
(usually pronounced To-a-M —and before we find fault with
this elaborate orthographical method of arriving at such
an unostentatious result, let us lop off the ugh from our word
“though.”) I made this horseback trip on a mule. I paid ten
dollars for him at Kau (Kah-oo,) added four to get him shod,
rode him two hundred miles and then sold him for fifteen dol-
lars. I mark the circumstance with a white stone (in the ab-
sence of chalk —for I never saw a white stone that a body could
mark anything with, though out of respect for the ancients I
have tried it often enough;) for up to that day and date it was
the first strictly commercial transaction I had ever entered into,
and came out winner. We returned to Honolulu, and from
thence sailed to the island of Maui, and spent several weeks
there very pleasantly. I still remember, with a sense of indo-
lent luxury, a picnicing excursion up a romantic gorge there,
called the lao Yalley. The trail lay along the edge of a brawl-
ing stream in the bottom of the gorge —a shady route, for it
was well roofed with the verdant domes of forest trees. Through
openings in the foliage we glimpsed picturesque scenery that
revealed ceaseless changes and new charms with every step of
our progress. Perpendicular walls from one to three thousand
feet high guarded the way, and were sumptuously plumed with
varied foliage, in places, and in places swathed in waving ferns.
Passing shreds of cloud trailed their shadows across these shin-
ing fronts, mottling them with blots ; billowy masses of white
vapour hid the turreted summits, and far above the vapour swelled
a background of gleaming green crags and cones that came and
went, through the veiling mists, like islands drifting in a fog ;
sometimes the cloudy curtain descended till half the canon wall
was hidden, then shreded gradually away till only airy glimpses
of the ferny front appeared through it—then swept aloft and
left it glorified in the sun again. Now and then, as our posi-
tion changed, rocky bastions swung out from the wall, a mimic
ruin of castellated ramparts and crumbling towers clothed with
mosses and hung with garlands of swaying vines, and as we
moved on they swung back again and hid themselves once more
in the foliage. Presently a verdure-clad needle of stone, a thou


sand feet high, stepped out from behind a corner, and mounted
guard over the mysteries of the valley. It seemed to me that if
Captain Cook needed a monument, here was one ready made—
therefore, why not put up his sign here, and sell out the vener-
able cocoa-nut stump P
But the chief pride of Maui is her dead volcano of Halea-
kala—which means, translated, “ The house of the Sun.” We
climbed a thousand feet up the side of this isolated colossus
one afternoon, then camped, and next day climbed the remain-
ing nine thousand feet, and anchored on the summit, where we
built a fire, and froze and roasted by turns all night. With
the first pallor of dawn we got up and saw things that were
new to us. Mounted on a commanding pinnacle, we watched
Nature work her silent wonders. The sea was spread abroad
on every hand, its tumbled surface seeming only wrinkled and
dimpled in the distance. A broad valley below appeared like
an ample checker-board, its velvety green sugar plantations
alternating with dun squares of barrenness and groves of trees
diminished to mossy tufts. Beyond the valley were mountains
picturesquely grouped together; but bear in mind, we fancied
that we were looking up at these things—not down. We seemed
to sit in the bottom of a symmetrical bowl ten thousand feet
deep, with the valley and the skirting sea lifted away into the
sky above us ! It was curious, and not only curious, but ag-
gravating ; for it was having our trouble all for nothing, to
climb ten thousand feet toward heaven and then have to look
up at our scenery. However, we had to be content with it and
make the best of it; for, all we could do we could not coax our
landscape down out of the clouds. Formerly, when I had read
an article in which Poe treated of this singular fraud perpetrated
upon the eye by isolated great altitudes, I had looked upon the
matter as an invention of his own fancy.
I have spoken of the outside view—but we had an inside
one, too. That was the yawning dead crater, into which we
now and then tumbled rocks, half as large as a barrel, from our
perch, and saw them go careering down the almost perpendic-
ular sides, bounding three hundred feet at a jump; kicking up
dust-clouds wherever they struck ; diminishing to our view as
they sped farther into distance; growing invisible finally, and
only betraying their course by faint little puffs of dust; and
coming to a halt at last in the bottom of the abyss, two thousand
five hundred feet down from where they started! It was
magnificent sport. We wore ourselves out at it.
The crater of Vesuvius, as I have before remarked, is a modest
pit about a thousand feet deep and three thousand in circum-
ference ; that of Kilauea is somewhat deeper, and ten miles in
circumference. But what are either of them compared to the
vacant stomach of Haleakala ? I will not offer any figures of
my own, but give official ones—those of Commander Wilkes,


U.S.N., who surveyed it, and testifies that it is twenty-seven
miles in circumference! If it had a level bottom, it would make a
fine site for a city like London. It must have afforded a spectacle
worth contemplating in the old days, when its furnaces gave full
rein to their anger.
Presently vagrant white clouds came drifting along, high over
the sea and the valley; then they came in couples and groups;
then in imposing squadrons; gradually joining their forces,
they banked themselves solidly together, a thousand feet under
us, and totally shut out land and ocean —not a vestige of anything
was left in view but just a little of the rim of the cratur, circling
away from the pinnacle whereon we sat (for a ghostly procession
of wanderers from the filmy hosts without had drifted through
a chasm in the crater wall and filed round and round, and
gathered and sunk and blended together till the abyss was
stored to the brim with a fleecy fog.) Thus banked, motion
ceased, and silence reigned. Clear to the horizon, league on
league,, the snowy floor stretched without a break —not level, but
in rounded folds, with shallow creases between, and with here
and there stately piles of vapoury architecture lifting themselves
aloft out of the common plain —some near at hand, some in the
middle distances, and others relieving the monotony of the
remote solitudes. There was little conversation, for the impres-
sive scene overawed speech. I felt like the Last Man, neglected
of the judgment, and left pinnacled in mid-heaven, a forgotten
relic of a vanished world.
While the hush yet brooded, the messengers of the coming
resurrection appeared in the East. A growing warmth suffused
the horizon, and soon the sun emerged and looked out over the
cloud-waste, flinging bars of ruddy light across it, staining its
folds and billow-caps with blushes, purpling the shaded troughs
between, and glorifying the massy vapour-palaces and cathe-
drals with a wasteful splendour of all blendings and combinations
of rich colouring.
It was the sublimest spectacle I ever witnessed, and I think
the memory of it will remain with me always.
CHAPTEE LXXYII.
I Stumbled upon one curious character in the Island of Mani.
He became a sore annoyance to me in the course of time.
My first glimpse of him was in a sort of public room in the
town of Lahaina. He occupied a chair at the opposite side of
the apartment, and sat eyeing our party with interest for some
minutes, and listening as critically to what we were saying as
if he fancied we were talking to him and expecting him to
reply. I thought it very sociable in a stranger. Presently, in


the course of conversation, I made a statement bearing upon
the subject under discussion —and I made it with due modesty,
for there was nothing extraordinary about it, and it was only
put forth in illustration of a point at issue. I had barely
finished when this person spoke out with rapid utterance and
feverish anxiety:—
“ Oh, that was certainly remarkable, after a fashion, but you
-ought to have seen my chimney—you ought to have seen my
chimney, sir! Smoke! I wish I may hang if—Mr. Jones, you
remember that chimney—you must remember that chimney!
No, no—l recollect, now, you warn’t living on this side of the
island then. But lam telling you nothing but the truth, and
I wish I may never draw another breath if that chimney didn’t
smoke so that the smoke actually got caked in it and I had to
dig it out with a pickaxe ! You may smile, gentlemen, but the
High Sheriff’s got a hunk of it which I dug out before his eyes,
and so it’s perfectly easy for you to go and examine for
yourselves.”
The interruption broke up the conversation, which had
already begun to lag, and we presently hired some natives and
an out-rigger canoe or two, and went out to overlook a grand
surf-bathing contest.
Two weeks after this, while talking in a company, I looked
up and detected this same man boring through and through
me with his intense eye, and noted again his twitching muscles
and his feverish anxiety to speak. The moment I paused, he
said: —
“ Beg your pardon, sir, beg your pardon, but it can only be
considered remarkable when brought into strong outline by
isolation. Sir, contrasted with a circumstance which occurred
in my own experience, it instantly becomes commonplace. No,
not that—for I will not speak so discourteously of any experi-
ence in the career of a stranger and a gentleman —but I am
obliged to say that you could not, and you would not ever again
refer to this tree as a large one, if you could behold, as I have,
the great Yatmatack tree, in the island of Ounaska, sea of
Kamtchatka—a tree, sir, not one inch less than four hundred
and fifteen feet in solid diameter ! —and I wish I may die in a
minute if it isn’t so! Oh, you needn’t look so questioning,
gentlemen; here’s old Cap Saltmarsh can say whether I know
what I’m talking about or not. I showed him the tree.”
Captain Saltmarsh. —“ Come, now, cat your anchor, lad—you’re
heaving too taut. You promised to show me that stunner, and
I walked more than eleven mile with you through the cussedest
jungle I ever see, a hunting for it; but the tree you showed me
finally warn’t as big round as a beer cask, and you know that
your own self, Markiss.”
“ Hear the man talk ! Of course the tree was reduced that
way, but didn’t I explain it? Answer me, didn’t I? Didn’t


I say I wished you could have seen it when I first saw it?
When you got up on your ear and called me names, and said I
had brought you eleven miles to look at a sapling, didn’t I
explain to you that all the whale-ships in the North Seas had
been wooding off of it for more than twenty-seven years? And
did you s’pose the tree could last for -ever, con -found it? I don’t
see why you want to keep back things that way, and try to
injure a person that’s never done you any harm.
Somehow this man’s presence made me uncomfortable, and I
was glad when a native arrived at that moment to say that
Muckawow, the most companionable and luxurious among the
rude war-chiefs of the Islands, desired us to come over and help
him enjoy a missionary whom he had found trespassing on his
grounds.
I think it was about ten days afterward that, as I finished a
statement I was making for the instruction of a group of friends
and acquaintances, and which made no pretence of being extra-
ordinary, a familiar voice chimed instantly in on the heels of
my last word, and said: —
" But, my dear sir, there was nothing remarkable about that
horse, or the circumstance either—nothing in the world! I
mean no sort of offence when I say it, sir, but you really do
not know anything whatever about speed. Bless your heart,
if you could only have seen my mare Margaretta; there was a
beast! — there was lightning for you ! Trot! Trot is no name
for it—she flew! How she could whirl a buggy along! I
started her out once, sir—Colonel Bilgewater, you recollect that
animal perfectly well—l started her out about thirty or thirty-
five yards ahead of the awfullest storm I ever saw in my life,
and it chased us upwards of eighteen miles! It did, by the
everlasting hills! And I’m telling you nothing but the un-
varnished truth when I say that not one single drop of rain fell
on me—not a single drop, sir! And I swear to it! But my dog
was a-swimming behind the waggon all the way !”
For a week or two I stayed mostly within doors, for I seemed
to meet this person everywhere, and he had become utterly
hateful to me. But one evening I dropped in on Captain Per-
kins and his friends, and we had a sociable time. About ten
o’clock I chanced to be talking about a merchant friend of mine,
and without really intending it, the remark slipped out that he
was a little mean and parsimonious about paying his workmen.
Instantly, through the steam of a hot whiskey punch on the
opposite side of the room, a remembered voice shot—and for a
moment I trembled on the imminent verge of profanity:—
“ Oh, my dear sir, really you expose yourself when you parade
that as a surprising circumstance. Bless your heart and hide,
you are ignorant of the very A B C of meanness ! ignorant as
the unborn babe ! Ignorant as unborn twins ! You don’t know
anything about it! It is pitiable to see you, sir, a well-spoken


and prepossessing stranger, making such an enormous pow-wow
here about a subject concerning which your ignorance is
perfectly humiliating! Look me in the eye, if you please; look
me in the eye. John James Godfrey was the son of poor but
honest parents in the State of Mississippi—boyhood friend of
mine—bosom comrade in later years. Heaven rest his noble
spirit, he is gone from us now. John James Godfrey was hired
by the Hayblossom Mining Company, in California, to do some
blasting for them —the “ Incorporated Company of Mean Men,”
the boys used to call it. Well, one day he drilled a hole about
four feet deep and put in an awful blast of powder, and was
standing over it, ramming it down with an iron crowbar about
nine foot long, when the cussed thing struck a spark and fired
the powder, and scat! away John Godfrey whizzed like a sky-
rocket, him and his crowbar! Well, sir, he kept on going up in
the air higher and higher, till he didn’t look any bigger than a
boy—and he kept going on up higher and higher, till he didn’t
look any bigger than a doll—and he kept on going up higher
and higher, till he didn’t look any bigger than a little small
bee—and then he went out of sight! Presently he came in
sight again, looking like a little small bee —and he came along
down further and further, till he looked as big as a doll again—
and down further and further, till he was as big as a boy again—
further and further, till he was a full-sized man once more;
and then him and his crowbar came whi-zzing down and lit
right exactly in the same old tracks and went to r-ramming
down, and r-ramming down, and r-ramming down again, just
the same as if nothing had happened ! Now do you know, that
poor cuss warn’t gone only sixteen minutes, and yet that Incor-
porated Company of Mean Men docked him for the lost
time !”
I said I had the headache, and so excused myself and went
home. And on my diary I entered “ another night spoiled ”
by this offensive loafer. And a fervent curse was set down
with it to keep the item company. And the very next day I
packed up, out of all patience, and left the Island.
Almost from the very beginning, I regarded that man as a
liar.
The line of points represents an interval of years. At the
end of which time the opinion hazarded in that last sentence
came to be gratifying and remarkably endorsed, and by wholly
disinterested persons. The man Markiss was found one
morning banging to a beam of his own bedroom (the doors and
windows securely fastened on the inside) dead; and on his
breast was pinned a paper in his own handwriting begging his
friends to suspect no innocent person of having anything to do
with his death, for that it was the work of his own hands
entirely. Yet the jury brought in the astounding verdict that


deceased came to liis death “by the hands of some person or
persons unknown !” They explained that the perfectly unde-
viating consistency of Markiss’s character for thirty years
towered aloft as colossal and indestructible testimony, that
whatever statement he chose to make was entitled to instant
and unquestioning acceptance as a lie. And they furthermore
stated their belief that he was not dead, and instanced the
strong circumstantial evidence of his own word that he was
dead—and beseeched the coroner to delay the funeral as long
as possible, which was done. And so, in the tropical climate of
Lahania,;the coffin stood open for seven days, and then even
the loyal jury gave him up. But they sat on him again, and
changed their verdict to “ suicide induced by mental aberra-
tion”—because, said they, with penetration, “he said he was
dead, and he was dead; and would he have told the truth if he
had been in his right mind P No, sir.”
CHAPTER LXXVIII.
After half a year’s luxurious vagrancy in the Islands, I took
shipping in a sailing vessel, and regretfully returned to San
Francisco —a voyage in every way delightful, but without an
incident: unless lying two long weeks in a dead calm, eighteen
hundred miles from the nearest land, may rank as an incident.
Schools of whales grew so tame that day after day they played
about the ship among the porpoises and the sharks without the
least apparent fear of us, and we pelted them with empty bottles
for lack of better sport. Twenty-four hours afterward these
bottles would be still lying on the glossy water under our noses,
showing that the ship had not moved out of her place in all
that time. The calm was absolutely breathless, and the surface
of the sea absolutely without a wrinkle. For a whole day and
part of a night we lay so close to another ship that had drifted
to our vicinity, that we carried on conversations with her pas-
sengers, introduced each other by name, and became pretty
intimately acquainted with people we had never heard of before,
and have never heard of since. This was the only vessel we
saw during the whole lonely voyage. We had fifteen passengers,
and to show how hard pressed they were at last for occupation
and amusement, I will mention that the gentlemen gave a good
part of their time every day, during the calm, to trying to sit
on an empty champagne bottle (lying on its side,) and thread a
needle without touching theirs heels to the deck, or falling
over; and the ladies sat in the shade of the mainsail, and
watched the enterprise with absorbing interest. We were at
sea five Sundays ; and yet, but for the almanac, we never would
have known but that all the other days were Sundays too.


I was home again, in San Francisco, without means and
without employment. I tortured my brain for a saving scheme
of some kind, and at last a public lecture occurred to me! I
sat down and wrote one, in a fever of hopeful anticipation. I
showed it to several friends, but they all shook their heads.
They said nobody would come to hear me, and I would make a
humiliating failure of it. They said that as I had never spoken
in public, I would break down in the delivery, anyhow. I was
disconsolate now. But at last an editor slapped me on the
back and told me to “go ahead.” He said, “ Take the largest
house in town, and charge a dollar a ticket.” The audacity ©f
the proposition was charming; it seemed fraught with practi-
cal wordly wisdom, however. The proprietor of the several
theatres endorsed the advice, and said I might have his hand-
some new opera-house at half-price—fifty dollars. In sheer
desperation I took it—on credit, for sufficient reasons. In
three days I did a hundred and fifty dollars’ worth of printing-
and advertising, and was the most distressed and frightened
creature on the Pacific coast. I could not sleep—who could,
under such circumstances ? For other people there was
facetiousness in the last line of my posters, but to me it was
plaintive with a pang when I wrote it:—
“ Doors open at The trouble will begin at 8.”
That line has done good service since. Showmen have
borrowed it frequently. I have even seen it appended to a
newspaper advertisement reminding school pupils in vacation
what time next term would begin. As those three days of
suspense dragged by, I grew more and more unhappy. I had
sold two hundred tickets among my personal friends, but I
feared they might not come. My lecture, which had seemed
“ humorous ” to me, at first, grew steadily more and more
dreary, till not a vestige of fun seemed left, and I grieved that I
could not bring a coffin on the stage and turn the thing into a
funeral. I was so panic-stricken, at last, that I went to three
old friends, giants in stature, cordial by nature, and stormy-
voiced, and said: —
“ This thing is going to be a failure; the jokes in it are so
dim that nobody will ever see them; I would like to have you
sit in the parquette, and help me through.”
They said they would. Tlaen I went to the wife of a popular
citizen, and said that if she was willing to do me a very great
kindness, I would be glad if she and her husband would sit
prominently in the left-hand stage-box, where the whole house
could see them. I explained that I should need help, and would
turn toward her and smile, as a signal, when I had been delivered
of an obscure joke—“ and then,” I added, “ don’t wait to inves-
tigate, but respond!”


She promised. Down the street I met a man I never had
seen before. He had been drinking, and was beaming with
smiles and good nature. He said :
“My name’s Sawyer. You don’t know me, but that don’t
matter. I haven’t got a cent, but if you knew how bad I wanted
to laugh, you’d give me a ticket. Come, now, what do you
say?”
“ Is your laugh hung on a hair-trigger ?—that is, is it critical,
or can you get it off easy ?”
My drawling infirmity of speech so affected him that he
laughed a specimen or two that struck me as being about the
article I wanted, and I gave him a ticket, and appointed him to
sit in the second circle, in the centre, and be responsible for
that division of the house. I gave him minute instructions
about how to detect indistinct jokes, and then went away, and
left him chuckling placidly over the novelty of the idea.
I ate nothing on the last of the three eventful days—l only
suffered, I had advertised that on this third day the box-office
would be opened for the sale of reserved seats. I crept down
to the theatre at four in the afternoon to see if any sales had
been made. The ticket seller was gone, the box office was locked
up. I had to swallow suddenly, or my heart would have got
out. “No sales,” I said to myself ; “ I might have known it.”
I thought of suicide, pretended illness, flight. I thought of
these things in earnest, for I was very miserable and scared.
But of course I had to drive them away, and prepare to meet
my fate. I could not wait for half-past seven—l wanted to face
the horror, and end it—the feeling of many a man doomed to
hang, no doubt. I went down back streets at six o’clock, and
entered the theatre by the back door. I stumbled my way in
the dark among the ranks of canvas scenery, and stood on the
stage. The house was gloomy and silent, and its emptiness de-
pressing. I went into the dark among the scenes again, and for
an hour and a half gave myself up to the horrors, wholly un-
conscious of everything else. Then I heard a murmur; it rose
higher and higher, and ended in a crash, mingled with cheers.
It made my hair raise, it was so close to me, and so loud. There
was a pause, and then another; presently came a third, and
before I well knew what I was about, I was in the middle of
the stage, staring at a sea of faces, bewildered by the fierce
glare of the lights, and quaking in every limb with a terror that
seemed like to take my life away. The house was full, aisles
and all!
The tumult in my heart and brain and legs continued a full
minute before I could gain any command over myself. Then I
recognised the charity and the friendliness in the faces before
me, and little by little my fright melted away, and I began to
talk. Within three or four minutes I was comfortable, and even
content. My three chief allies, with three auxilliaries, were on


hand, in the parquette, all sitting together, all armed with
bludgeons, and all ready to make an onslaught upon the feeblest
joke that might show its head. And whenever a joke did fall,
their bludgeons came down and their faces seemed to split
from ear to ear. Sawyer, whose hearty countenance was seen
looming redly in the centre of the second circle, took it up,
and the house was carried handsomely. Inferior jokes never
fared so royally before. Presently I delivered a bit of.
serious matter with impressive unction (it was my pet,) and
the audience listened with an absorbed hush that gratified me
more than any applause; and as I dropped the last word t)f
the clause, I happened to turn and catch Mrs. ’s intent
and waiting eye; my conversation with her flashed upon me,
and in spite of all I could do I smiled. She took it for the
signal, and promptly delivered a mellow laugh that touched off
the whole audience; and the explosion that followed was the
triumph of the evening. I thought that that honest man
Sawyer would choke himself; and as for the bludgeons, they
performed like pile drivers. But my poor little morsel of
pathos was ruined. It was taken in good faith as an inten-
tional joke, and the prize one of the entertainment, and I
wisely lefc it go at that.
All the papers were kind in the morning; my appetite
returned; I had abundance of money. All’s well that ends
well.
CHAPTER LXXIX.
I launched out as a lecturer, now, with great boldness. I had
the field all to myself, for public lectures were almost an
unknown commodity in the Pacific market. They are not so
rare, now, I suppose. I took an old personal friend along to
play agent for me, and for two or three weeks we roamed
through Nevada and California, and had a very cheerful time
of it. Two days before I lectured in Virginia City, two stage-
coaches were robbed within two miles of the town. The daring
act was committed just at dawn, by six masked men, who
sprang up alongside the coaches, presented revolvers at the
heads of the drivers and passengers, and commanded a general
dismount. Everybody climbed down, and the robbers took
their watches and every cent they had. Then they took gun-
powder and blew up the express specie boxes and got their con-
tents. The leader of the robbers was a small, quick-spoken
man, and the fame of his vigorous manner and his intrepidity
was in everybody’s mouth when we arrived.
That night after instructing Virginia, I walked over the
desolate “ divide ” and down to Gold Hill, and lectured there.


The lecture done, I stopped to talk with a friend, and did not
start back till eleven. The “divide” was high, unoccupied
ground, between the towns, the scene of twenty midnight
murders and a hundred robberies. As we climbed up and
stepped out on this eminence, the Gold Hill lights dropped
out of sight at our backs, and the night closed down gloomy
and dismal. A sharp wind swept the place, too, and chilled our
perspiring bodies through.
“ I tell you I don’t like this place at night,” said Mike, the
agent.
“Well, don’t speak so loud,” I said. “You needn’t remind
anybody that we are here.”
Just then a dim figure approached me from the direction of
Virginia—a man, evidently. He came straight at me, and I
stepped aside to let him pass ; he stepped in the way and con-
fronted me again. Then I saw that he had a mask on and was
holding something in my face—l heard a click-click and recog-
nised a revolver in dim outline. I pushed the barrel aside with
my hand and said: —
“ Don’t!”
He ejaculated sharply :
“ Your watch ! Your money !”
I said: —
“ You can have them with pleasure—but take the pistol away
from my face, please. It makes me shiver.”
“No remarks ! Hand out your money !”
“ Certainly—l—”
« Put up your hands ! Don’t you go for a weapon! Put ’em
up! Higher.”
I held them above my head.
A pause. Then: —
“Are you going to hand out your money or not?”
I dropped my hands to my pockets and said
“ Certainly! I—”
“ Put up your hands ! Do you want your head blown off?
Higher.”
I put them above my head again.
Another pause.
“ Are you going to hand out your money or not ? Ah-ah—again ?
Put up your hands ! By George, you want the head shot off you
awful bad!”
“ Well, friend, I’m trying piy best to please you. You tell me
to give up my money, and when I reach for it you tell me to
put up my hands. If you would only—. Oh, now—don’t!
All six of you at me ! That other man will get away while.—
Now please take some of those revolvers out of my face— do,
if you please ! Everytime one of them clicks, my liver comes
up into my throat! If you have a mother—any of you—or if
any of you have ever had a mother—or a—grandmother —or a—”


“ Cheese it! Will you give up your money, or have we got
to —. There-there—none of that! Put up your hands !”
“ Gentlemen —I know you are gentlemen by your—”
“ Silence! If you want to be facetious, young man, there
are times and places more fitting. This is a serious business.”
“ You prick the marrow of my opinion. The funerals I have
attended in my time were comedies compared to it. Now I
think —”
“ Curse your palaver! Tour money !—your money ! —your
money ! Hold ! —put up your hands !”
“ Gentlemen, listen to reason. You see how lam situated*—
now don’t put those pistols so close—l smell the powder. You
see how lam situated. If I had four hands—so that I could
hold up two and—”
“ Throttle him ! Gag him ! Kill him!”
“ Gentlemen, don’t! Nobody’s watching the other fellow. Why
don’t some of you —. Ouch ! Take it away, please ! Gentlemen,
you see that I’ve got to hold up my hands; and so I can’t take
out my money —but if you’ll be so kind as to take it out for me,
I will do as much for you some—”
“Search him, Beauregard —and stop his jaw with a bullet,
quick, if he wags it again. Help Beauregard, Stonewall.”
Then three of them, with the small, spry leader, adjourned to
Mike and fell to searching him. I was so excited that my law-
less fancy tortured me to ask my two men all manner of facetious
questions about their rebel brother-generals of the South; but,
considering the order they had received, it was but common
prudence to keep still. When everything had been taken from
me—watch, money, and a multitude of trifles of small value—
I supposed I was free, and forthwith put my cold hands into
my empty pockets and began an inoffensive jig to warm my
feet and stir up some latent courage —but instantly all pistols
were at my head, and the order came again :■ —
“Be still! Put up your hands ! And keep them up! ”
They stood Mike up alongside of me, with strict orders to
keep his hands above his head, too, and then the chief high-
wayman said:—
“ Beauregard, hide behind that boulder; Phil Sheridan, you
hide behind that other one; Stonewall Jackson, put yourself
behind that sage-bush there. Keep your pistols bearing on
these fellows, and if they take down their hands within ten
minutes, or move a single peg, let them have it! ”
Then three disappeared in the gloom toward the several
ambushes, and the other three disappeared down the road to-
ward Virginia.
It was depressingly still, and miserably cold. Now this whole
thing was a practical joke, and the robbers were personal friends
of ours in disguise, and twenty more lay hidden within ten feet
of us during the whole operation, listening. Mike knew all


this, and was in the joke, but I suspected nothing of it. To me
it was most uncomfortably genuine.
When we had stood there in the middle of the road five min-
utes, like a couple of idiots, with our hands aloft, freezing to
death by inches, Mike’s interest in the joke began to wane.
He said:—
“ The time’s up, now, aint it ? ”
“ No, you keep still. Do you want to take any chances with
those bloody savages ? ”
Presently Mike said: —
“ Now the time’s up, anyway. I’m freezing.’,
“ Well freeze. Better freeze than carry your brains home in
a basket. May be the time is up, but how do we know ? —got no
watch to tell by. I mean to give them good measure. I cal-
culate to stand here fifteen minutes or die. Don’t you move.”
So, without knowing it, I was making one joker very sick of
his contract. When we took our arms down at last they were
aching with cold and fatigue, and when we went sneaking off
the dread I was in that the time might not yet be up, and that
we would feel bullets in a moment, was not sufficient to draw
all my attention from the misery that racked my stiffened
body.
The joke of these highwayman friends of ours was mainly a
joke upon themselves ,• for they had waited for me on the cold
Viill top two full hours before I came, and there was very little
fun in that; they were so chilled that it took them a couple of
weeks to get warm again. Moreover, I never had a thought
that they would kill me to get money, which it was so perfectly
easy to get without any such folly, and so they did not really
frighten me bad enough to make their enjoyment worth the
trouble they had taken. I was only afraid that their weapons
would go off accidentally. Their very numbers inspired me
with confidence that no blood would be intentionally spilled.
They were not smart; they ought to have sent only one high-
wayman, with a double-barrelled shot gun, if they desired to
see the author of this volume climb a tree.
However, I suppose that in the long run I got the largest
share of the joke at last; and in a shape not foreseen by the
highwayman; for the chilly exposure on the “ divide ” while I
was in a perspiration gave me a cold which developed itself
into a troublesome disease and kept my hands idle some three
months, besides costing me quite a sum in doctors’ bills. Since
then I play no practical jokes on people, and generally lose my
temper when one is played upon me.
When I returned to San Francisco I projected a pleasure
journey to Japan, and thence westward around the world; but
a desire to see home again changed my mind, and I took a berth
in the steamship, bade good-bye to the friendliest land and
livest, heartiest community on our continent, and came by the


way of the Isthmus to New York —a trip that was not much of
a pic-nic excursion, for the cholera broke out among us on the
passage, and we buried two or three bodies at sea every day,
I found home a dreary place after my long absence; for half
the children I had known were now wearing whiskers or water-
falls, and few of the grown people I had been acquainted with
remained at their hearthstones prosperous and happy—some of
them had wandered to other scenes, some were in gaol, and the
rest had been hanged. These changes touched me deeply, and
I went away and joined the famous Quaker City European Ex-
cursion, and carried my tears to foreign lands.
Thus, after seven years of vicissitudes, ended a " pleasure
trip ” to the silver mines of Nevada, which had originally been
intended to occupy only three months. However, I usually
miss my calculations further than that.
MORAL.
If the reader thinks he is done, now, and that this book has
no moral to it, he is in error. The moral of it is this: If you
are of any account, stay at home and make your way by faithful
diligence ; but if you are “no account,” go away from home,
and then you will have to work, whether you want to or not.
Thus you become a blessing to your friends by ceasing to be a
nuisance to them—if the people you go among suffer by the
operation.
THE END.




APPENDIX


APPENDIX.
BRIEF SKETCH OF MORMON HISTORY.
Mormonism is only about forty years old, but its career has been full
of stir and adventure from the beginning, and is likely to remain so
to the end. Its adherents have been hunted and hounded from one
end of the country to the other, and the result is that for years they
have hated all “ Gentiles” indiscriminately and with all their might.
Joseph Smith, the finder of the Book of Mormon and founder of the
religion, was driven from State to State with his mysterious copper-
plates and the miraculous stones he read their inscriptions with. Finally
he instituted his “ church ” in Ohio, and Brigham Young joined it.
The neighbours began to persecute, and apostasy commenced. Brigham
held to the faith, and worked hard. He arrested desertion. He did
more—he added converts in the midst of the trouble. He rose in
favour and importance with the brethren. He was made one of the
Twelve Apostles of the Church. He shortly fought his way to a higher
post and a more powerful —President of the Twelve. The neighbours
rose up and drove the Mormons out of Ohio, and they settled in
Missouri. Brigham went with them. The Missourians drove them
out, and they retreated to Nauvoo, Illinois. They prospered there, and
built a temple which made some pretensions to architectural grace, and
achieved some celebrity in a section of country where a brick court-
house with a tin dome and a cupola on it was contemplated with
reverential awe. But the Mormons were badgered and harried again
by their neighbours. All the proclamations Joseph Smith could issue
denouncing polygamy and repudiating it as utterly anti-Mormon were
of no avail; the people of the neighbourhood, on both sides of the
Mississippi, claimed that polygamy was practised by the Mormons, and
not only polygamy but a little of everything that was bad. Brigham
returned from a mission to England, where he had established a
Mormon newspaper, and he brought back with him several hundred
converts to his preaching. His influence among the brethren
augmented with every move he made. Finally Nauvoo was invaded by
the Missouri and Illinois Gentiles, and Joseph Smith killed. A Mor-
mon Earned Rigdon assumed the Presidency of the Mormon church and
government, in Smith’s place, and even tried his hand at a prophecy
or two. But a greater than he was at hand. Brigham seized the


advantage of the hour, and without other authority than superior brain
and nerve and will, hurled Higdon from his high place and occupied it
himself. He did more. He launched an elaborate curse at Higdon
and his disciples; and he pronounced Higdon’s “prophecies” emana-
tions from the devil, and ended by “ handing the false prophet over to
the hulfetings of Satan for a thousand years”—probably the longest
term ever inflicted in Illinois. The people recognised their master.
They straightway elected Brigham Young President, by a prodigious
majority, and have never faltered in their devotion to him from that
day to this. Brigham had forecast —a quality which no other promi-
nent Mormon has probably ever possessed. He recognised that it was
better to move to the wilderness than be moved. By his command the
people gathered together their meagre effects, turned their backs upon
their homes, and their faces toward the wilderness, and on a hitter
night in February filed in sorrowful procession across the frozen Missis-
sippi, lighted on their way by the glare from their burning temple,
whose sacred furniture their own hands had fired 1 They camped,
several days afterward, on the western verge of lowa, and poverty,
want, hunger, cold, sickness, grief, and persecution did their work, and
many succumbed and died—martyrs, fair and true, whatever else they
might have been. Two years the remnant remained there, while
Brigham and a small party crossed the country and founded Great Salt
Lake City, purposely choosing a land which was outside the ownership
and jurisdiction of the hated American nation. Note that. This
was in 1847. Brigham moved his people there, and got them settled
just in time to see disaster fall again. For the war closed and Mexico
ceded Brigham’s refuge to the enemy—the United States ! In 1849
the Mormons organised a “ free and independent” government, and
erected the “ State of Deseret,” with Brigham Young as its head.
But the very next year Congress deliberately snubbed it, and created
the “ Territory of Utah” out of the same accumulation of mountains,
sage-brush, alkali, and general desolation, but made Brigham Governor
of it. Then for years the enormous migration across the plains to
California poured through the land of the Mormons, and yet the church
remained staunch and true to its lord and master. Neither hunger,
thirst, poverty, grief, hatred, contempt, nor persecution, could drive the
Mormons from their faith or their allegiance ; and even the thirst for
gold, which gleaned the flower of the youth and the strength of many
nations, was not able to entice them ! That was the final test. An
experiment that could survive that was an experiment with some sub-
stance to it somewhere.
Great Salt Lake City throve finely, and so did Utah. One of the
last things which Brigham Young had done before leaving lowa, was
to appear in the pulpit dressed to personate the worshipped and
lamented prophet Smith, and confer the prophetic succession, with all
its dignities, emoluments, and authorities upon “ President Brigham
Young!” The people accepted the pious fraud with the maddest
enthusiasm, and Brigham’s power was sealed and secured for all time.
Within five years afterwards he openly added polygamy to the tenets of
the church by authority of a “ revelation” which he pretended had


been received nine years before by Joseph Smith, albeit Joseph is
amply on record as denouncing polygamy to the day of his death.
Now was Brigham become a second Andrew Johnson in the small
beginning and steady progress of his official grandeur. He had served
successively as a disciple in the ranks ; home missionary ; foreign
missionary ; editor and publisher; Apostle ; President of the Board
of Apostles; President of all Mormondom, civil and ecclesiastical ;
successor to the great Joseph by the will of heaven ; “ prophet,”
“seer,” “ revelator,” There was but one dignity higher which he
could aspire to, and he reached out modestly and took that—he pro-
claimed himself a God !
He claims that he is to have a heaven of his own hereafter, and that
he will be its God, and his wives and children its goddesses, princes, and
princesses. Into it all faithful Mormons will be admitted, with their
families, and will take rank and consequence according to the number
of their wives and children. If a disciple dies before he has had time
to accumulate enough wives and children to enable him to be respect-
able in the next world any friend can marry a few wives and raise a
few children for him after he is dead, and they are duly credited to
his account, and his heavenly status advanced accordingly.
Let it be borne in mind that the majority of the Mormons have
always been ignorant, simple, of an inferior order of intellect, unac-
quainted with the world and its ways ; and let it be borne in mind that
the wives of these Mormons are necessarily after the same pattern, and
their children likely to be fit representatives of such a conjunction;
and then let it be remembered that for forty years these creatures
have been driven, driven, driven, relentlessly ! and mobbed, beaten,
and shot down ; cursed, despised, expatriated; banished to a remote
desert, whither they journeyed gaunt with famine and disease, dis-
turbing the ancient solitudes with their lamentations and marking the
long way with graves of their dead—and all because they were simply
trying to live and worship God in the way which they believed with all
their hearts and souls to be the true one. Let all these things be borne
in mind, and then it will not be hard to account for the deathless
hatred which the Mormons bear our people and our government.
That hatred has “fed fat its ancient grudge” ever since Mormon
Utah developed into a self-supporting realm and the church waxed rich
and strong. Brigham, as Territorial Governor, made it plain that
Mormondom was for the Mormons. The United States tried to rectify
all that by appointing territorial officers from New England and other
anti-Mormon localities, but Brigham prepared to make their entrance
into his dominions difficult. Three thousand United States troops had
to go across the plains and put these gentlemen in office. And after
they were in office they were as helpless as so many stone images.
They made laws which nobody minded and which could not be executed.
The federal judges opened court in a land filled with crime and violence,
and sat as holiday spectacles for insolent crowds to gape at—for there
was nothing to try, nothing to do, nothing on the dockets! And if a
Gentile brought a suit, a Mormon jury would do just as it pleased
about bringing in a verdict, and when the judgment of the court was


rendered no Mormon cared for it and no officer could execute it. Our
Presidents shipped one cargo of officials after another to Utah, hut the
result was always the same—they sat in a blight for awhile, they fairly
feasted on scowls and insults day by day, they saw every attempt to
do their official duties find its reward in darker and darker looks, and
in secret threats and warnings of a more and more dismal nature—and
at last they either succumbed and became despised tools and toys of the
Mormons, or got scared and discomforted beyond all endurance and left
the Territory. If a brave officer kept on courageously till his pluck was
proven, some pliant Buchanan or Pierce would remove him and appoint
a stick in his place. In 1857 General Harney came very near being
appointed Governor of Utah. And so it came very near being Harney
governor and Cradlebaugh judge!—two men who never had any idea of
fear further than the sort of murky comprehension of it which they
were enabled to gather from the dictionary. Simply (if for nothing
else) for the variety they would have made in a rather monotonous
history of Federal servility and helplessness, it is a pity they were not
fated to hold office together in Utah.
Up to the date of our visit to Utah, such had been the Territorial
record. The Territorial government established there had been a hopeless
failure, and Brigham Young was the only real power in the land. He was
an absolute monarch—a monarch who defied our President—a monarch
who laughed at our armies when they camped about his capital—a
monarch who received without emotion the news that the august
Congress of the United States had enacted a solemn law against poly-
gamy, and then went forth calmly and married twenty-five or thirty
more wives.


THE MOUNTAIN MEADOWS MASSACRE.
The persecutions which the Mormons suffered so long—and which they
consider they still suffer, in not being allowed to govern themselves—•
they have endeavoured and are still endeavouring to repay. The now
almost forgotten “Mountain Meadows massacre” was their work. It
•was very famous in its day. The whole United States rang with its
horrors. A few items will refresh the reader’s memory. A great
emigrant train from Missouri and Arkansas passed through Salt Lake
City, and a few disaffected Mormons joined it for the sake of the strong
protection it afforded for their escape. In that matter lay sufficient
cause for hot retaliation by the Mormon chiefs. Besides, these one
hundred and forty-five or one hundred and fifty unsuspecting emigrants
being in part from Arkansas, where a noted Mormon missionary had
lately been killed, and in pai't from Missouri, a State remembered with
execrations as a hitter persecutor of the saints when they were few and
poor and friendless, here were substantial additional grounds for lack
of love for these wayfarers. And finally, this train was rich—very
rich in cattle, horses, mules, and other property —and how could the
Mormons consistently keep up their coveted resemblance to the Israel-
itish tribes and not seize the “ spoil ” of an enemy, when the Lord had
so manifestly ‘ ‘ delivered it into their hand ?”
Wherefore, according to Mrs. C. V. Waite’s entertaining book, “The
Mormon Prophet,” it transpired that —
“A ‘ revelation ’ from Brigham Young, as Great Grand A rchee, or
God, was dispatched to President J. C. Haight, Bishop Higbee, and J.
D. Lee (adopted son of Brigham,) commanding them to raise all the
forces they could muster and trust, follow those cursed Gentiles (so
read the revelation,) attack them disguised as Indians, and with the
arrows of the Almighty make a clean sweep of them, and leave none
to tell the tale; and if they needed any assistance they were com-
manded to hire the Indians as their allies, promising them a share of
the booty. They were to be neither slothful nor negligent in their
duty, and to be punctual in sending the teams back to him before
winter set in, for this was the mandate of Almighty God.”
The command of the “ revelation ” was faithfully obeyed. A large
party of Mormons, painted and tricked out as Indians, overtook the
train of emigrant waggons some three hundred miles south of Salt L?ke


City, and made an attack. But the emigrants threw up earth-works,
made fortresses of their waggons, and defended themselves gallantly
and successfully for five days ! Your Missouri and Arkansas gentle-
man is not much afraid of the sort of scurvy apologies for “ Indians n
which the southern part of Utah affords. He would stand up and
fight five hundred of them.
At the end of the five days the Mormons tried military strategy.
They retired to the upper end of the “Meadows,” resumed civilised
apparel, washed off their paint, and then, heavily armed, drove down
in waggons to the beleaguered emigrants, bearing a flag of truce !
When the emigrants saw white men coming they threw down their
guns and welcomed them with cheer after cheer ! And, all uncon-
scious of the poetry of it, no doubt, they lifted a little child aloft,
dressed in white, in answer to the flag of truce !
The leaders of the timely white “ deliverers ” were President Haight,
and Bishop John D. Lee, of the Mormon Church. Mr. Cradlebaugh,
who served a term as a Federal Judge in Utah, and afterward was
sent to Congress from Nevada, tells, in a speech delivered in Congress,
how these leaders next proceeded :
“ They professed to be on good terms with the Indians, and repre-
sented them as being very mad. They also proposed to intercede and
settle the matter with the Indians. After several hours parleythey, having
(apparently) visited the Indians, gave the ultimatum of the
which was that the emigrants should march out of their camp, leaving
everything behind them, even their guns. It was promised by the
Mormon bishops that they would bring a force and guard the emigrants
back to the settlements. The terms were agreed to, the emigrants
being desirous of saving the lives of their families. The Mormons
retired, and subsequently appeared with thirty or forty armed men.
The emigrants were marched out, the women and children in front and
the men behind, the Mormon guard being in the rear. When they had
marched in this way about a mile, at a given signal the slaughter com-
menced. The men were almost all shot down at the first fire from the
guard. Two only escaped, who fled to the desert, and were followed
one hundred and fifty miles before they were overtaken and slaughtered.
The women and children ran on two or three hundred yards further,
when they were overtaken, and with the aid of the Indians they were
slaughtered. Seventeen individuals only, of all the emigrant party,
were spared, and they were little children, the eldest of them being only
seven years old. Thus, on the 10th day of September, 1857, was con-
summated one of the most cruel, cowardly, and bloody murders known
in our history.”
The number of persons butchered by the Mormons on this occasion
was one hundred and twenty.
With unheard-of temerity Judge Cradlebaugh opened his court and
proceeded to make Mormondom answer for the massacre. And what a.
spectacle it must have been to see this grim veteran, solitary and alone
in his pride and his pluck, glowering down on his Mormon jury and
Mormon auditory, deriding them by turns, and by turns “ breathing
•threatenings and slaughter !”


An editorial in the Territorial Enterprise of that day says of him
and of the occasion :
“ He spoke and acted with the fearlessness and resolution of a Jack-
son ; hut the jury failed to indict, or even report on the charges, while
threats of violence were heard in every quarter, and an attack on the
U. S. troops intimated, if he persisted in his course.
“Finding that nothing could he done with the juries, they were
discharged, with a scathing rebuke from the judge. And then sitting
as a committing magistrate he commenced his task alone. He
examined witnesses, made arrests in every quarter, and created a con-
sternation in the camps of the saints greater than any they had ever
witnessed before, since Mormondom was born. At last accounts
terrified elders, and bishops were decamping to save their necks ; and
developments of the most startling character were being made,
implicating the highest church dignitaries in the many murders
and robberies committed upon the Gentiles during the past eight
years.”
Had Harney been Governor, Cradlebaugh would have been supported
in his work, and the absolute proofs adduced by him of Mormon guilt
in this massacre and in a number of previous murders, would have
conferred gratuitous coffins upon certain citizens, together with occasion
to use them. But Gumming was the Federal Governor, and he, under
a curious pretence of impartiality, sought to screen the Mormons from
the demands of justice. On one occasion he even went so far as to
publish his protest against the use of the U. S. troops in aid of Cradle-
baugh’s proceedings.
Mrs. C. V. Waite closes her interesting detail of the great massacre
with the following remark and accompanying summary of the testi-
mony—and the summary is concise, accurate, and reliable :
“For the benefit of those who may still be disposed to doubt the
guilt of Young and his Mormons in this transaction, the testimony is
here collated, and circumstances given which go not merely to implicate
but to fasten conviction upon them by * confirmations strong as proofs
of Holy Writ
“ 1. The evidence of Mormons themselves, engaged in the affair, as
shown by the statements of Judge Cradlebaugh and Deputy U. S.
Marshal Rodgers.
“2. The failure of Brigham Young to embody any account of it in
his Report as Superintendent of Indian Affairs. Also his failure to
make any allusion to it whatever from the pulpit, until several years
after the occurrence.
“ 3. The flight to the mountains of men high in authority in the Mor-
mon Church and State, when this affair was brought to the ordeal of a
judicial investigation.
“4. The failure of the Deseret News, the Church organ, and the
only paper then published in the Territory, to notice the massacre until
several months afterward, and then only to deny that Mormons were
engaged in it.
“5. The testimony of the children saved from the massacre.
“6. The children and the property of the emigrants found in posses*


sion of the Mormons, and that possession traced back to the very day
after the massacre.
‘‘ 7. The statements of Indians in the neighbourhood of the scene of
the massacre : these statements are shown, not only by Cradlebaugh
and Rodgers, but by a number of military officers, and by J. Forney,
who was, in 1859, Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the Territory.
To all these were such statements freely and frequently made by the
Indians.
“8. The testimony of R. P. Campbell, Capt. 2nd Dragoons, who was
sent in the Spring of 1859 to Santa Clara, to protect travellers on the
road to California and to enquire into Indian depredations.”


CONCERNING A FRIGHTFUL ASSASSINATION THAT WAS
NEVER CONSUMMATED.
[lf ever there was a harmless man, it is Conrad Wiegand, of Gold Hill,
Nevada. If ever there was a gentle spirit that thought itself unfired
gunpowder and latent ruin, it is Conrad Wiegand. If ever there was
an oyster that fancied itself a whale; or a jack-o’lantern, confined to a
swamp, that fancied itself a planet with a billion-mile orbit; or a
summer zephyr that deemed itself a hurricane, it is Conrad Wiegand.
Therefore, what wonder is it that when he says a thing, he thinks the
world listens ; that when he does a thing the world stands still to look;
and that when he suffers, there is a convulsion of nature ? When I met
Conrad, he was “Superintendent of the Gold Hill Assay Office”—ands
he was not only its Superintendent, but its entire force. And he wa,
a street preacher, too, with a mongrel religion of his own invention,
whereby he expected to regenerate the universe. This was years ago
Here latterly he has entered journalism; and his journalism is what it
might be expected to be —colossal to ear, but pigmy to the eye. It is
extravagant grandiloquence confined to a newspaper about the size of a
double letter sheet. He doubtless edits, sets the type, and prints his
paper, all alone; but he delights to speak of the concern as if it
occupies a block and employs a thousand men.
[Something less than two years ago, Conrad assailed several people
mercilessly in his little “People’s Tribune,” and got himself into
trouble. Straightway he airs the affair in the “ Territorial Enterprise,”
in a communication over his own signature, and I propose to reproduce
it here, in all its native simplicity and more than human candour. Long
as it is, it is well worth reading, for it is the richest specimen of
journalistic literature the history of America can furnish, perhaps.]
From the “Territorial Enterprise,” Jan. 20th, 1870.
A SEEMING PLOT FOR ASSASSINATION MISCARRIED.
To the Editor of the “Enterprise:”—Months ago, when Mr.
Sutro incidentally exposed mining management on the Comstock, and
among others roused me to protest against its continuance, in great


kindness you warned me that any attempt by publications, by public
meetings, and by legislative action, aimed at the correction of chronic
mining evils in Storey County, must entail upon me {a) business ruin,
(b) the burden of all its costs, (c) personal violence, and if my purpose
were persisted in, then ( d) assassination, and after all nothing would
be effected.
YOUR PROPHECY FULFILLING.
In a large part, at least, your prophecies have been fulfilled, for (a)
assaying, which was well attended to in the Gold Hill Assay Office
(of which I am superintendent,) in consequence of my publications, fias
been taken elsewhere, so the President of one of the companies assures
me. With no reason assigned, other work has been taken away. With
but one or two important exceptions, our assay business now consists
simply of the gleanings of the vicinity. (6) Though my own personal
donations to the “ People’s Tribune” Association have already exceeded
1,500 dollars, outside of our own numbers we have received (in money) less
than 300 dollars as contributions and subscriptions for the journal, (c)
On Thursday last, on the main street in Gold Hill, near noon, with
neither warning nor cause assigned, by a powerful blow I was felled to the
ground, and while down I was kicked by a man who, it would seem, had
been led to believe that I had spoken derogatorily of him. By whom
he was so induced to believe lam as yet unable to say. On Saturday
last I was again assailed and beaten by a man who first informed me
why he did so, and who persisted in making his assault even after the
erroneous impression under which he also was at first labouring had been
clearly and repeatedly pointed out. This same man, after failing
through intimidation to elicit from me the names of our editorial con-
tributors, against giving which he knew me to be pledged, beat himself
weary upon me with a raw hide, I not resisting, and then pantingly
threatened me with permanent disfiguring mayhem, if ever again I
should introduce his name into print, and who but a few minutes
before his attack upon me, assured me that the only reason that I was
“permitted” to reach home alive on Wednesday evening last (at which
time the People’s Tribune was issued) was, that he deems me only half-
witted ; and be it remembered the very next morning I was knocked
down and kicked by a man who seemed to be prepared for flight.
[He sees doom impending .]
WHEN WILL THE CIRCLE JOIN ?
How long before the whole of your prophecy will be fulfilled I cannot
say, but under the shadow of so much fulfilment in so short a time,
and with such threats from a man who is one of the most prominent
exponents of the San Francisco mining-ring staring me and this whole
community defiantly in the face, and pointing to a completion of your
augury, do you blame me for feeling that this communication is the


last I shall ever write for the Press, especially when a sense alike o£
personal self-respect, of duty to this money-oppressed and fear-ridden
community, and of American fealty to the spirit of true Liberty, all
command me, and each more loudly than love of life itself, to declare
the name of that prominent man to be JOHN B. WINTERS, Presi-
dent of the Yellow Jacket Company, a political aspirant and a military
general ? The name of his partially-duped accomplice and abettor in
this last marvellous assault, is no other than PHILIP LYNCH, Editor
and Proprietor of the Gold Hill News.
Despite the insult and wrong heaped upon me by John B. Winters,
on Saturday afternoon, only a glimpse of which I shall be able to afford
your readers, so much do I deplore clinching (by publicity) a serious
mistake of any one, man or woman, committed under natural and not
self-wrought passion, in view of his great apparent excitement at the
time and in view of the almost perfect privacy of the assault, I am far
from sure that I should not have given him space for repentance before
exposing him, were it not that he himself has so far exposed the .matter
as to make it the common talk of the town that he has horsewhipped
me. That fact having been made public, all the facts in connection
need to be also, or silence on my part would seem more than singular,
and with many would be a proof either that I was conscious of some
anworthy aim in publishing the article, or else that my “non-com-
batant” principles were but a convenient cloak alike of physical and
moral cowardice. I therefore shall try to present a graphic but truthful
picture of this whole affair, but shall forbear all comments, presuming
that the editors of our own journal, if others do not, will speak freely
and fittingly upon this subject in our next number, whether I shall then
be dead or living, for my death will not stop, though it may suspend, the
publication of the People’s Tribune.
[The “ non-combatant ” sticks to principle, hut takes along a friend
or two of a conveniently different stripe .]
THE TRAP SET.
On Saturday morning John B. Winters sent verbal word to the Gold
Hill Assay Office that he desired to see me at the Yellow Jacket Office.
Though such a request struck me as decidedly cool in view of his own
recent discourtesies to me there alike as a publisher and as a stock-
holder in the Yellow Jacket mine, and though it seemed to me more
like a summons than the courteous request by one gentleman to another
for a favour, hoping that some conference with Sharon looking to the
betterment of mining matters in Nevada might arise from it, I felt
strongly inclined to overlook what possibly was simply an oversight in
courtesy. But as then it had only been two days since I had been
bruised and beaten under a hasty and false apprehension of facts, my
caution was somewhat aroused. Moreover I remembered sensitively his
contemptuousness of manner to me at my last interview in his office. I
therefore felt it needful, if I went at all, to go accompanied by a friend
whom he would not dare to treat with incivility, and whose presence


with me might secure exemption from insult. Accordingly I asked a
neighbour to accompany me.
THE TRAP ALMOST DETECTED.
Although I was not then aware of this fact, it would seem that
previous to my request this same neighbour had heard Dr. Zabriskie
state publicly in a saloon, that Mr. Winters had told him he had de-
cided either to kill or to horsewhip me, but had not finally decided on
which. My neighbour, therefore, felt unwilling to go down with me
until he had first called on Mr. Winters alone. He therefore paid him
a visit. From that interview he assured me that he gathered the im-
pression that he did not believe I would have any difficulty with Mr.
Winters, and that he (Winters) would call on me at four o’clock in my
own office.
MY OWN PRECAUTIONS.
As Sheriff Cummings was in Gold Hill that afternoon, and as I
desired to converse with him about the previous assault, I invited him
to my office, and he came. Although a half-hour had passed beyond
four o’clock, Mr Winters had not called, and we both of us began pre-
paring to go home. Just then, Philip Lynch, publisher of the Gold
Hill News, came in and said, blandly and cheerily, as if bringing good
news :
“ Hello, John B. Winters wants to see you.”
I replied, “ Indeed ! Why he sent me word that he would call on me
here this afternoon at four o’clock,”
“ 0, well, it don’t do to be too ceremonious just now, he’s in my
office, and that will do as well —come on in, Winters wants to consult
with you alone. He’s got something to say to you. ”
Though slightly uneasy at this change of programme, yet believing
that in an editor's house I ought to be safe, and anyhow that I would
be within hail of the street, I hurriedly, and but partially whispered
my dim apprehensions to Mr. Cummings, and asked him if he would
not keep near enough to hear my voice in case I should call. He con-
sented to do so while waiting for some other parties, and to come in if
he heard my voice or thought I had need of protection.
On reaching the editorial part of the News office, which, viewed from
the street, is dark, I did not see Mr. Winters, and again my misgivings
arose. Had I paused long enough to consider the case, I should have
invited Sheriff Cummings in, but as Lynch went down stairs, he
said :
“This way, Wiegand—it’s best to be private,” or some such remark,
[I do not desire to strain the reader’s fancy, hurtfully, and yet it
would be a favour to me if he would try to fancy this lamb in battle, or
the duelling ground or at the head of a vigilance committee —M.T.]
I followed and without Mr. Cummings, and without arms, which I
never do or will carry, unless as a soldier in war, or unless I should


yet come to feel I must fight a duel, or to join and aid in the ranks of
a necessary vigilance committee. But by following I made a fatal
mistake. Following was entering a trap, and whatever animal suffers
itself to be caught should expect the common fate of a caged rat, as I
fear events to come will prove.
Traps commonly are not set for benevolence.
[His body-guard is shut out.]
THE TRAP INSIDE.
I followed Lynch down stairs. At their foot a door to the left
opened into a small room. From that room another door opened into
yet another room, and once entered I found myself inveigled into what
many will ever henceforth regard as a private subterranean Gold Hill
den, admirably adapted in proper hands to the purposes of murder,
raw or disguised, for from it, with both or even one door closed, when
too late, I saw that I could not be heard by Sheriff Cummings, and
from it, BY VIOLENCE AND BY FORCE, I was prevented from
making a peaceable exit, when I thought I saw the studious object of
this “consultation” was no other than to compass my killing, in the
presence of Philip Lynch as a witness, as soon as by insult a prover-
bially excitable man should be exasperated to the point of assailing Mr,
Winters, so that Mr. Lynch, by his conscience and by his well known
tenderness of heart toward the rich and potent would be compelled to
testify that he saw Gen. John B. Winters kill Conrad Wiegand in
“ self-defence.” But lam going too fast.
OUR HOST.
Mr. Lynch was present during the most of the time (say a little
short of an hour,) but three times he left the room. His testimony,
therefore, would be available only as to the bulk of what transpired.
On entering this carpeted den I was invited to a seat near one corner
of the room. Mr. Lynch took a seat near the window. J. B. Winters
sat (at first) near the door, and began his remarks essentially as
follows:
“I have come here to exact of you a retraction, in black and white,
of those damnably false charges which you have preferred against me
in that infamous lying sheet of yours, and you must declare
yourself their author, that you published them knowing them to be
false, and that your motives were malicious.”
“ Hold, Mr. Winters. Your language is insulting and your demand
an enormity. I trust I was not invited here either to be insulted or
coerced. I supposed myself here by invitation of Mr. Lynch, at your
request.”
“ Nor did I come here to insult you. I have already told you that
I am here for a very different purpose.”


“Yet your language has been offensive, and even now shows strong
excitement. If insult is repeated I shall either leave the room or call
in Sheriff Cummings, whom I just left standing and waiting for me
outside the door.”
“No, you won’t, sir. You may just as well understand it at once as
not. Here you are my man, and I’ll tell you why ! Months ago you
put your property out of your hands, boasting that you did so to escape
losing it on prosecution for libel.”
“It is true that I did convert all my immovable property into
personal property, such as I could trust safely to others, and chiefly to
escape ruin through possible libel suits.”
“Very good, sir. Having placed yourself beyond the pale of the law,
may God help your soul if you DON’T make precisely such a retraction
as I have demanded. I’ve got you now, and by before you can get
out of this room you’ve got to both write and sign precisely the
retraction I have demanded, and before you go, anyhow—you
low-lived lying , I’ll teach you what personal responsibility
is [outside of the law; and, by , Sheriff Cummings and all the
friends you’ve got in the world besides, can’t save you, you —,
etc! No, sir. I’m alone now, and I’m prepared to be shot down just
here and now rather than be villified by you as I have been, and suffer
you to escape me after publishing those charges, not only here where I
am known and universally respected, but where I am not personally
known and may be injured.”
I confess this speech, with its terrible and but too plainly implied
threat of killing me if I did not sign the paper he demanded, terrified
me, especially as I saw he was working himself up to the highest possible
pitch of passion, and instinct told me that any reply other than one of
seeming concession to his demands would only be fuel to a raging fire,
so I replied:—
“Well, if I’ve got to sign ,” and then I paused some time.
Resuming, I said, “But, Mr, Winters, you are greatly excited.
Besides, I see you are labouring under a total misapprehension. It is
your duty not to inflame but to calm yourself. lam prepared to show
you, if you will only point out the article that you allude to, that you
regard as ‘charges’ what no calm and logical mind has any right to
regard as such. Show me the charges, and I will try, at all events;
and if it becomes plain that no charges have been preferred, then
plainly there can be nothing to retract, and no one could rightly urge you
to demand a retraction. You should beware of making so serious a
mistake, for however honest a man may be, every one is liable to
misapprehend. Besides you assume that lam the author of some
certain article which you have not pointed out. It is hasty to
do so.”
He then pointed to some numbered paragraphs in a Tribune article,
headed “ What’s the Matter with Yellow Jacket?” saying "That's what
I refer to.”
To gain time for general reflection and resolution, I took up the paper
and looked it over for awhile, he remaining silent, and as I hoped,
cooling. I then resumed, saying, “As I supposed. I do not admit


having written that article, nor have you any right to assume so
important a point, and then base important action upon your assumption.
You might deeply regret it afterwards. In my published Address to
the People, I notified the world that no information as to the authorship
of any article would be given without the consent of the writer. I there-
fore cannot honourably tell you who wrote that article, nor can you
exact it.”
“ If you are not the author, then I do demand to know who is? ”
“I must decline to say.”
“Then, by , I brand you as its author, and shall treat you
accordingly. ”
“Passing that point, the most important misapprehension which I
notice is, that you regard them as ‘ charges’ at all, when their context,
both at their beginning and end, show they are not. These words
introduce them: ‘ Such an investigation [just before indicated,] we think
MIGHT result in showing some of the following points ’ Then follow
eleven specifications, and the succeeding paragraph shows that the
suggested investigation ‘might EXONERATE those who are generally
believed guilty. ’ You see, therefore, the context proves they are not
preferred as charges, and this you seem to have overlooked.”
While making those comments, Mr, Winters frequently interrupted
me in such a way as to convince me that he was resolved not to consider
candidly the thoughts contained in my words. He insisted upon it that
they were charges, and “By ,” he would make me take them back
as charges, and he referred the question to Philip Lynch, to whom I
then appealed as a literary man, as a logician, and as an editor, calling
his attention especially to the introductory paragraph just before
quoted.
He replied, “If they are not charges, they certainly are insinuations,"
whereupon Mr. Winters renewed his demands for retraction precisely
such as he had before named, except that he would allow me to state
who did write the article if I did not myself, and this time shaking his
fist in my face with more cursings and epithets.
When he threatened me with his clenched fist, instinctively I tried to
rise from my chair, but Winters then forcibly thrust me down, as he did
every other time (at least seven or eight,) when under similar imminent
danger of bruising by his fist (or for aught I could know worse than that
after the first stunning blow,) which he could easily and safely to him-
self have dealt me so long as he kept me down and stood over me.
This fact it was, which more than anything else, convinced me that
by plan and plot I was purposely made powerless in Mr. Winters’ hands
and that he did not mean to allow me that advantage of being afoot,
which he possessed. Moreover, I then became convinced, that Philip
Lynch (and for what reason I wondered) would do absolutely nothing
to protect me in his own house. I realised then the situation thoroughly.
I had found it equally vain to protest or argue, and I would make no
unmanly appeal for pity, still less apologise. Yet my life had been by
the plainest possible implication threatened. I was a weak man. I
was unarmed. I was helplessly down, and Winters was afoot and
probably armed. Lynch was the only “witness.” The statements


demanded, if given and not explained, would utterly sink me in my
own self-respect, in my family’s eyes, and in the eyes of the community.
On the other hand, should I give the author’s name how could I ever
expect that confidence of the People which I should no longer deserve,
and how much dearer to me and to my family was my life than the life
of the real author to his friends. Yet life seemed dear and each minute
that remained seemed precious if not solemn. I sincerely trust that
neither you nor any of your readers, and especially none with families,
may ever be placed in such seeming direct proximity to death while
obliged to decide the one question I was compelled to, viz.:—What
should I do—l, a man of family, and not as Mr. Winters is, “alone.”
[The reader is requested not to ship the following. — M.T.~]
STRATEGY AND MESMERISM.
To gain time for further reflection, and hoping that by a seeming
acquiescence I might regain my personal liberty, at least till I could
give an alarm, or take advantage of some momentary inadvertance of
Winters, and then without a cowardly flight escape, I resolved to write
a certain kind of retraction, but previously had inwardly decided: —
* First. That I would studiously avoid every action which might be
construed into the drawing of a weapon, even by a self-infuriated man,
no matter what amount of insult might be heaped upon me, for it
seemed to me that this great excess of compound profanity, foulness, and
epithet must be more than a mere indulgence, and therefore must have
some object. “Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any
bird. ” Therefore, as before without thought, I thereafter by intent, kept
my hands away from my pockets, and generally in sight and spread
upon my knees.
Second. —l resolved to make no motion with my arms or hands which
could possibly be construed into aggression.
Third. —l resolved completely to govern my outward manner and
suppress indignation. To do this, I must govern my spirit. To do
that, by force of imagination I was obliged like actors on the boards to
resolve myself into an unnatural mental state and see all things through
the eyes of an assumed character.
Fourth. —l resolved to try on Winters, silently, and unconsciously to
himself, a mesmeric power which I possess over certain kinds of people,
and which at times I have found to work even in the dark over the
lower animals.
Does any one smile at these last counts ? God save you from ever
being obliged to beat in a game of chess, whose stake is your life, you
having but four poor pawns and pieces and your adversary with his full
force unshorn. But if you are, provided you have any strength with
breadth of will, do not despair. Though mesmeric power may not save
you, it may help you; try it at all events. In this instance I was
conscious of power coming into me, and by a law of nature, I know


Winters was correspondingly weakened. If I could have gained more
time I am sure he would not even have struck me.
It takes time both to form such resolutions and to recite them. That
time, however, I gained while thinking of my retraction, which I first
wrote in pencil, altering it from time to time till I got it to suit me,
my aim being to make it look like a concession to demands, while in
fact it should tersely speak the truth into Mr, Winters’ mind. When
it was finished, I copied it in ink, and if correctly copied from my
first draft, it should read as follows. In copying Ido not think I made
any material change:—
To Philip Lynch , Editor of the Gold Hill News ;—l learn that Gen.
John B. Winters believes the following (pasted on) clipping from the
People’s Tribune of January to contain distinct charges of mine against
him personally, and that as such he desires me to retract them unquali-
fiedly.
In compliance with his request, permit me to say that, although Mr.
Winters and I see this matter differently, in view of his strong feelings
in the premises, I hereby declare that I do not know those “charges”
(if such they are) to be true, and I hope that a critical examination
would altogether disprove them.
CONRAD WIEGAND,
Gold Hill, January 15th, 1870.
I then read what I had written and handed it to Mr. Lynch, where-
upon Mr. Winters said: —
“That’s not satisfactory,and it won’t do;’’and then addressing him-
self to Mr. Lynch, he further said: “ How does it strike youl ”
“Well, I confess I don’t see that it retracts anything.”
“Nor do I,” said Winters; “in fact, I regard it as adding insult to
injury. Mr. Wiegand you’ve got to do better than that. You are not
the man who can pull wool over my eyes. ”
“That, sir, is the only retraction I can write.”
“No it isn’t, sir, and if you so much as say so again you do it at
your peril, for I’ll thrash you to within an inch of your life, and, by
, sir, I don’t pledge myself to spare you even that inch either. I
want you to understand I have asked you for a very different paper,
and that paper you’ve got to sign.”
“Mr. Winters, I assure you that I do not wish to irritate you, but,
at the same time, it is utterly impossible for me to write any other
paper than that which I have written. If you are resolved to compel
me to sign something, Philip Lynch’s hand must write at your dictation,
and if, when written, I can sign it, I will do so, but such a document
as you say you must have from me, I never can sign. I mean what I
say.”
“Well, sir, what’s to be done must be done quickly, for I’ve been
here long enough already. I’ll put the thing in another shape (and
then pointing to the paper;) don’t you know those charges to be false?”


“ I do not.”
“ Do you know them to be true ? ”
“ Of my own personal knowledge I do not.”
“ Why, then, did you print them ? ”
“Because rightly considered in their connection they are not charges,
but pertinent and useful suggestions, in answer to the queries of a
correspondent who stated facts which are inexplicable.”
“ Don’t you know that 1 know they are false ?”
“ If you do, the proper course is simply to deny them and court an
investigation.”
“ And do YOU claim the right to make ME come out and deny any-
thing you may choose to write and print ?”
To that question I think I made no reply, and he then further said: —
—“Come now, we’ve talked about the matter long enough. I want
your final answer—did you write that article or not ?”
“ I cannot in honour tell you who wrote it.”
“ Did you not see it before it was printed ?”
“ Most certainly, sir.”
“ And did you deem it a fit thing to publish ?”
“ Most assuredly, sir, or I would never have consented to its appear-
ance. Of its authorship I can say nothing whatever, but for its
publication I assume full, sole, and personal responsibility.”
“ And do you then retract it or not ?”
“Mr. Winters, if my refusal to sign such a paper as you have
demanded must entail upon me all that your language in this room
fairly implies, then I ask a few minutes for prayer.”
“Prayer ! you, this is not your hour for prayer—your
time to pray was when you were writing those lying charges.
Will you sign or not?”
“ You already have my answer.”
“ What! do you still refuse ?”
“ I do, sir. ” .....
“Take that, then,” and to my amazement and inexpressible relief
he drew only a rawhide instead of what I expected—a bludgeon or
pistol. With it, as he spoke, he struck at my left ear downwards, as
if to tear it off, and afterwards on the side of the head. As he moved
away to get a better chance for a more effective shot, for the first time
I gained a chance under peril to rise, and I did so pitying him from
the very bottom of my soul, to think that one so naturally capable of
true dignity, power, and nobility, could, by the temptations of this
State, and by unfortunate associations and aspirations, be so deeply
debased as to find in such brutality anything which he could call-
satisfaction —but the great hope for us all is in progress and growth,
and John B. Winters, I trust, will yet be able to comprehend my
feelings. _
He continued to beat me with all his great force, until absolutely
weary, exhausted, and panting for breath. I still adhered to my pur-
pose of non-aggressive defence, and made no other use of my arms than-
to defend my head and face from further disfigurement. The mere
pain arising from the blows he inflicted upon my person was of course


transient, and my clothing to some extent deadened its severity, as it
now hides all remaining traces.
When I supposed he was through, taking the butt end of his weapon
and shaking it in my face, he warned me, if I correctly understood him,
of more yet to come, and furthermore said, if ever I again dared in-
troduce his name to print, in either my own or any other public jour-
nal, he would cut off my left ear (and I do not thivh he was jesting)
and send me home to my family a visibly mutilated man, to be a
standing warning to all low-lived puppies who seek to blackmail
gentlemen and to injure their good names. And when he did so
operate, he informed me that his implement would not be a whip, but
a knife.
When he had said this, unaccompanied by Mr. Lynch, as I remem-
ber it, he left the room, for I sat down by Mr. Lynch, exclaiming :
“The man is mad—he is utterly mad —this step is his ruin—it is a
mistake—it would be ungenerous in me, despite of all the ill usage I
have here received, to expose him, at least until he has had an oppor-
tunity to reflect upon the matter. I shall be in no haste.”
“Winters is very mad just now,” replied Mr. Lynch, “but when he
is himself, he is one of the finest men I ever met. In fact, he told me
the reason he did not meet you up stairs was to spare you the humilia-
tion of a beating in the sight of others.”
I submit that that unguarded remark of Philip Lynch convicts him
of having been privy in advance to Mr. Winters’ intentions, whatever
they may have been, or at least to his meaning to make an assault
upon me; but I leave to others to determine how much censure an
editor deserves for inveigling a weak, non-combatant man, also a pub-
lisher, to a pen of his own to be horsewhipped, if no worse, for the
simple printing of what is verbally in the mouth of nine out of ten men,
and women too, upon the street.
While writing this account two theories have occurred to me as
possibly true respecting this most remarkable assault:—
First —The aim may have been simply to extort from me such
admissions as, in the hands of money and influence, would have sent me
to the Penitentiary for libel. This, however, seems unlikely, because
any statements elicited by fear or force could not be evidence in law, or
could be so explained as to have no force. The statements wanted so
badly must have been desired for some other purpose.
Second —The other theory has so dark and wilfully murderous a look
that I shrink from writing it, yet, as in all probability my death at the
earliest practicable moment has already been decreed, I feel I should
do all I can before my hour arrives, at least to show others how to
break up that aristocratic rule and combination which has robbed all
Nevada of true freedom, if not of manhood itself. Although Ido
not prefer this hypothesis as a “ charge,” I feel that as an American
citizen I still have a right both to think and to speak my thoughts
even in the land of Sharon and Winters, and as much so respecting
the theory of a brutal assault (especially when I have been its subject)
as respecting any other apparent enormity. I give the matter simply


as a suggestion which may explain to the proper authorities and to the
people whom they should represent, a well ascertained, but notwith-
standing, a darkly mysterious fact. The scheme of the assault may
have been—
First —To terrify me by making me conscious of my own helpless-
ness after making actual though not legal threats against my life.
Second —To imply that I could save my life only by writing or sign-
ing certain specific statements which if not subsequently explained
would eternally have branded me as infamous, and would have con-
signed my family to shame and want, and to the dreadful compassion
and patronage of the rich.
Third - To blow my brains out the moment I had signed, thereby
preventing me from making any subsequent explanation such as could
remove the infamy.
Fourth —Philip Lynch to be compelled to testify that I was killed
by John B. Winters in self-defence, for the conviction of Winters would
bring him in as an accomplice. If that was the programme in John B.
Winters’ mind nothing saved my life but my persistent refusal to sign,
when that refusal seemed clearly to me to be the choice of death.
The remarkable assertion made to me by Mr. Winters, that pity only
spared my life on Wednesday evening last, almost compels me to believe
that at first he could not have intended me to leave that room alive ;
and why I was allowed to, unless through mesmeric or some other
invisible influence, I cannot divine. The more I reflect upon this
matter, the more probable as true does this horrible interpretation
become.
The narration of these things I might have spared both to Mr.
Winters and to the public had he himself observed silence, but as he
has both verbally spoken and suffered a thoroughly garbled statement
of facts to appear in the Gold Hill News I feel it due to myself no less
than to this community, and to the entire independent press of America
and Great Britain, to give a true account of what even the Gold Hill
News has pronounced a disgraceful affair, and which it deeply regrets,
because of some alleged telegraphic mistake in the account of it. [Who
received the erroneous telegram ?]
Though he may not deem it prudent to take my life just now, the
publication of this article I feel sure must compel Gen. Winters (with
his peculiar views about his right to exemption from criticism by me)
to resolve on my violent death, though it may take years to compass it.
Notwithstanding, I bear him no ill will; and if W. C. Ralston and
William Sharon, and other members of the San Francisco mining and
milling-ring feel that he above all other men in this State and California
is the most fitting man to supervise and control Yellow Jacket matters,
until I am able to vote more than half their stock I presume he will be
retained to grace his present post.
Meantime, I cordially invite all who know of any sort of important
villainy which only can be cured by exposure (and who would expose it
if they felt sure they would not be betrayed under bullying threats,) to


communicate with the People’s Tribune ; for until I am murdered, so
long as I can raise the means to publish, I propose to continue my
efforts at least to revive the liberties of the State, to curb oppression,
and to benefit man’s world and God’s earth.
CONRAD WIEGAND.
[lt does seem a pity that the Sheriff was shut out, since the good
sense of a general of militia and of a prominent editor failed to teach
them that the merited castigation of this weak, half-witted child was a
thing that ought to have been done in the street, where the poor thing
could have a chance to run. When a journalist maligns a citizen, or
attacks his good name on hearsay evidence, he deserves to be thrashed
for it, even if he is a “non-combatant” weakling; but a generous
adversary would at least allow such a lamb the use of his legs at such
a time. —M. T. ]


/ ' . . , ' ' ,»
...


»5 (I 1 ' .
| : m ylm, is most amusing*
•3b
•' .*.ym . *
t—
The narrative is brimful of fur, and i
Mr. Twain re-tells famous indd< nts, am
* T places, looking at everything from a
p..irt , /
