



The Fertility Of the Untit
BY
W. A. CHAPPLE, M.D., Ch.B., M.R.C.S., D.P.H.
WITH PREFACE BY
RUTHERFORD WADDELl, M.A., D.D.
Melbourne : >
Christchurch, Wellington, Dunedin, N.Z., and London
WHITCOMBE & TOMBS LIMITED.




PREFACE.
The problem with which Dr. Chappie deals in this book is
one of extreme gravity. It is also one of pressing impor-
tance. The growth of the Criminal is one of the most
ominous clouds on every national horizon. In spite of
advances in criminology the rate of increase is so alarming
that the “Unfit” threatens to be to the new Civilization
what the Hun and Vandal were to the old. How to deal
with this dangerous class is perhaps the most serious
question that faces Sociologists at this hour. And some-
thing must be done speedily, else our civilization is in
imminent peril of being swamped by the increasingly
disproportionate progeny of the Criminal.
Various methods have from time to time been suggested
to ward off this danger. In my judgment one of the most
effective has yet to be tried in the Colony—the system of
indeterminate sentences. Nothing can be more futile than
the present method of criminal procedure. After a certain
stated period in gaol, we allow Criminals —even of the most
dangerous character —to go out free without making the
slightest effort to secure that they are fit to be returned to
society. We quarantine the plague-stricken or small-pox ship,
and keep the passengers isolated till the disease is eradi-
cated. But we send up the Criminal only for a definite
time, and at the end of that, he is allowed to go at large
even though we may know he is a more dangerous character
than when he entered the gaol. This is egregious folly.
Dr. Chappie’s treatise, however, takes things as they are.
He proposes to save society from the multiplication of its


Criminals by a remedy of the most radical kind. When he
was good enough to ask me to write a preface for his book
I hesitated somewhat. I read the substance of it in MS.S.
and was deeply impressed by it. But still I am in some
doubt. I am not quite prepared to accept at once Dr.
Chappie’s proposed remedy. Neither am I prepared to
reject it. lam simply an enquirer, trying to arrive at the
truth regarding this clamant social problem. The time has
certainly come when the issues raised in Dr. Chappie’s book
must be faced. It is very desirable therefore, that the
public should have these put before it in a frank, cautious
way, by experts who understand what they are writing
about, and have a due sense of the grave responsibilities
involved. Dr. Chappie’s contribution seems to me very
fully to satisfy these requirements. No doubt both his
premises and conclusions are open to criticism at various
points. It is, indeed, not unlikely that the plan whereby he
proposes to limit the “ fertility of the Unfit ” may come with
a sort of shock to some readers.
It is, perhaps, well that it should, for it may lead to
thought and criticism. In any case, this policy of drift
must be dropped and Dr. Chappie’s remedy, or some other,
promptly adopted. A preface is not the place to discuss the
pro’s and con’s of Dr. Chappie’s treatise. My main object
in this foreword is to commend to the public who take an
interest in this grave problem a discussion of it, which is
alike timely and thorough and reverent. And this, I
believe, readers will find in the following pages.
RUTHERFORD WADDELL.
Dunedin ,
Dec. gth, ipoj.


From Dr. J. G. FINDLAY, M.A., LL.D.
Dear Dr. Chapple,—
You are aware that I gave your Treatise on the
“ Fertility of the Unfit ’’ a very careful perusal. It is a
subject to which I have devoted some attention, both at
College and since I left College, and I feel competent to
say that no finer work on the subject has been accomplished
than that contained in your Treatise. I consider it of
value, not only from a statistical point of view, but also
from a point of view of scientific originality.
I have no doubt that if the work were published in New
Zealand it would be read and bought by a large number of
people. I may add that I discussed your views with
competent critics, and they share the opinion which I have
expressed in this letter. I sincerely hope that the volume
will be published, and need not add that my friends and
myself will be subscribers for copies.
Yours sincerely,
J. G. FINDLAY.
FROM MALCOLM ROSS, ESQ.
Dear Dr. Chapple,—
I am pleased to hear that your MS. is to be published.
The subject is one that must attract an increasing amount
of attention on the part of all who have the true interests of
of the state at heart. There can be no doubt that the
Parliamentary machine has failed, lamentably, to grapple
with the problems you have referred to. At the present
time, when some of our most earnest statesmen and greatest


thinkers are discussing the supposed commercial decadence
of the nation, the publication of such a treatise as you have
prepared is opportune, and a perusal of it prompts the
thought that the main remedy lies deeper, and may be
found in sociological even more than in economic reform.
I do not profess myself competent to express any
opinion regarding the remedy you propose. That is a
matter for a carefully selected expert Royal Commission.
The whole question, however, is one that might with advan-
tage be discussed, both in the Press and the Parliament, at
the present time, and I feel sure your book will be welcomed
as a valuable contribution on the subject.
Yours sincerely,
MALCOLM ROSS.
FROM SIR ROBERT STOUT, K.C.M.G., CHIFF JUSTICE.
My Dear Dr. Chapple,—
I have read your MSS., and am much pleased with it.
It puts the problem of our times very plainly, and I think
should be published in England. I have a friend in
England who would, I think, be glad to help, and he is
engaged by one of the large publishing firms in England.
If you decide on sending it to England I shall be glad to
write to him, and ask his assistance. The subject is one
that certainly required ventilation, and whether your
remedy is the proper one or not, it ought certainly to be
discussed.
Yours truly,
ROBERT STOUT.


CONTENTS.
Introduction
Chapter I.—The Problem Stated p. i
The spread of moral restraint as a check.—Predicted by Malthus.—The
declining Birth-rate. —Its Universality.—Most conspicuous in New Zealand.
Great increase in production of food.—With rising food rate falling birth-
rate. —Malthus’s checks. —His use of the term “moral restraint.”—The
growing desire to evade family obligations.—Spread of physiological know-
ledge, _ All limitation involves self-restraint.—Motives for limitation.—
Those who do and those who do not limit. —Poverty and the Birth-rate.—
Defectives prolific and propagate their kind. —Moral restraint held to
include all sexual interference designed to limit families.—Power of self-
control an attribute of the best citizens. —Its absence an attribute of the
worst. —Humanitarianism increases the number and protects the lives of
defectives. —The ratio of the unfit to the fit.—lts dangers to the State. —
Antiquity of the problem.—The teaching of the ancients.—Surgical methods
already advocated.
Chapter ll.—The Population Question ... t p. 10
The teaching of Aristotle and Plato.—-The teaching of Malthus. —His
assailants.—Their illogical position.— Bonar on Malthus and his work. —The
increase of food supplies held by Nitti to refute Malthus.—The increase of
food and the decrease of births.—Mr. Spencer's biological theory —Maxi-
mum birth-rate determined by female capacity to bear children.—'The
pessimism of Spencer’s law.—Wider definition of moral restraint.—Where
Malthus failed to anticipate the future.—Economic law operative only
through biological law.
Chapter 111.— Declining Bikth-rate p. 26
Declining birth-rates rapid and persistent.—Food cost in New Zealand.—
Relation of birth-rate to prosperity before and after 1877. —Neo-Malthusian
propaganda.—Marriage rates and fecundity of marriage.—Statistics of
Hearts of Oak Friendly Society.—Deliberate desire of parents to limit
family increase.
Chap per IV.— Means Adopted p. 32
Family responsibility Natural fertility undiminisbed.—Voluntary pre
vention and physiological knowledge.—New Zealand experience.—
Diminishing influence of delayed marriage.—Practice of abortion.-Popular
sympathy in criminal cases.—Absence of complicating issues in New
Zealand. —Colonial desire for comfort and happiness.
Chapter V.—Causes of Declining Birth-rate ... _ ... p. 36
Influence of self-restrainst without continence. —Desire to limit families in
New Zealand not due to poverty.—Offspring cannot be limited without self-
restraint. —New Zealand’s economic condition. —High standard of general
education.—Tendency to migrate within the colony.—Diffusion of ideas.—
Free social migration between all classes. —Desire to migrate upwards.—
Desire to raise the standard of ease and comfort. —Social status the measure
of financial status.—Social attraction of one class to next below.—Each
conscious of his limitation.—Large families confirm this limitation. —The
cost of the family. - The cost of maternity. —The craving for ease and luxury.
Parents’ desire for their children’s social success. —Humble homes bear
distinguished sons.—Large number with University education in New
Zealand. —No child labour except in hop and dairy districts. —Hopeless
poverty a cause of high birth-rates.—High birth-rates a cause of poverty. —
Fecundity depends on capacity of the female to bear children.
Chapter Vl.—Ethics of Prevention p. 31
Fertility the law of life.—Man interprets and controls this law. —Marriage
law necessary to fix paternal responsibility.—Malthus’s high ideal.—lf
prudence the motive, continence and celibacy violate no law.—Post-nuptial
intermittent restraint.—Ethics of prevention Judged by consequences.—
When procreation is a good and when an evil.—Oligantrophy,—Artiflc
checks are physiological sins.


Chapter Vll.—Who Prevent.. p 64:
Desire for family limitation result of our social system. —Desire and practice-
not uniform through all classes. —The best limit, the worst do not. —Early
marriages and large families.—N.Z. marriage rates. —Those who delay, and
those who abstain from marriage.—Good motives mostly actuate. —All
limitation implies restraint.—Birth-rates vary inversely with prudence and
self-control. —The limited family usually born in early married life when
progeny is less likely to be well developed.—Our worst'citizens most prolific.
Effect of poverty on fecundity.—Effect of alcoholic intemperance.—Effect of
mental and physical defects.—Defectives propagate their kind. - The inter-
mittent inhabitants of Asylums and Gaols constitute the greatest danger to
society. Character the resultant of two forces motor impulse and
inhibition.—Chief criminal characteristic is defective inhibition.—This defect
is strongly hereditary.—lt expresses itself in unrestrained fertility.
Chapter VIII.— The Multiplication of the Fit in
Relation to the State p. 77
The State’s ideal in relation to the fertility of its subjects.—Keen com-
petition means great effort and great waste of life.—lf in the minds of the
citizens space and food are ample multiplication works automatically.—To
New Zealanders food now Includes the luxuries as well as the necessities of
life.—Men are driven to the alternative of supporting a family of their own
or a degenerate family of defectives.—The State enforces the one but cannot
enforce the other.—New Zealand taxation.—The burden of the bread-
winner.—As the State lightens this burden it encourages fertility.—The
survival of the unfit makes the burden of the fit.
Chapter IX. —The Mui tiplication of the Unfit in
Relation to the State .. ... .. p. 85
Ancient methods of preventing the fertility of the unfit.—Christian senti-
ment suppressed inhuman practices.—Christian care brings many defectives
to the child-bearing period of life. —The association of mental and physical
defects.—Who are the unfit? —The tendency of relatives to cast their
degenerate kinsfolk on the State.—Our social conditions manufacture
defectives and foster their fertility.—The only moral force that limits
families is inhibition with prudence. Defective self-control transmitted
hereditarily,—Dr. MacGregor's cases.—The transmission of insanity.—
Celibacy of the insane is the prophylaxis of insanity in the race. —The
environment of the unfit.—Defectives snatched from Nature's clutches.—At
the age of maturity they are left to propogate their kind.
Chapter X.—What Anesthetics and Antiseptics have
MADE POSSIBLE ... ••• P-99
Education of defectives in prudence and self-restraint of little avail.—
Surgical suggestions discussed.
Chapter Xl.—Tubo-ligature ... _p.no
The fertility of the criminal a greater danger to society than his depre-
dations.—Artificial sterility of women. —The menopause artificially induced.
Untoward results. —The physiology of the Fallopian tubes.—Their ligature
procures permanent sterility.—No other results immediate or remote. —
Some instances due to disease. —Defective women and the wives of defective
men wonld welcome protection from unhealthy offspring.
Chapter XII.— Suggestions as to Application ... p. n 8
The State’s humanitarian zeal protects the lives and fosters the fertility of
the degenerate.—A confirmed or hereditary criminal defined. —Law on the
subject of sterilization could at first be permissive.—lt should apply, to begin
with, to criminals and the insane.—Marriage certificates of health should
be required.—Women’s readiness to submit to surgical treatment for minor
as well as major pelvic diseases.—Surgically induced sterility of healthy
women a greater crime than abortion. —This danger not remote.
Conclusion p- i 24


THE FERTILITY OF THE UNFIT.
INTRODUCTION.
Biology is the Science of Life. It seeks to explain the
phenomena of all life, whether animal or vegetable. Its
methods are observation and experiment. It observes the
tiny cell on the surface of an egg yolk, and watches it
divide and multiply until it becomes a great mass of cells,
which group off or differentiate, and rearrange and alter
their shapes. It observes how little organs unfold them-
selves, or evolve out of these little cell groups how
gradual, but how unvarying the change ; how one
group becomes a bone, another a brain, another a muscle,
to constitute in three short weeks the body of a matured
chick. Those little tendons like silken threads, that run
down those slender pink legs to each and every toe, and
move its little joints so swiftly that we hardly see them—
that little brain, no bigger than a tiny seed, in which is
planted a mysterious force that impels it to set all those
brand-new muscles in motion, and to dart after a fly with
the swiftness of an arrow —all this wondrous mechanism,
all this beauteous structure, all this perfection of function,
all this adaptation to environment, have evolved from a few
microscopic cells in three short weeks.
Biology is the science that observes all this, and
enunciates the law that the life history of this animal' celL


t.e., its history from a simple unicellular state in the egg, to
its complex multicellular state in the matured chick,
represents the history of the race to which the chick
belongs. If we could trace that chicken back through all
its ancestry, we would discover at different periods in the
history of life upon the globe (about too million years,
according to Haeckel) exactly the stages of development we
found in the life history of the chick, and arrive at last at
a primordial cell.
What is true of the chick is true of all life. This is the
law of evolution. It is true of all plant and animal life; it
is true of man as an individual; it is true of his mind as
well as of his body ; it is true of society as an aggregation
of individuals. As men have evolved from a lower to a
higher, a simple to a complex state, so they are still
evolving and rising “ on stepping stones of their dead
selves to higher things.”
Natural selection, or the survival of the fittest, is one of
the processes by which evolution takes place. According
to this law, only the fittest survive in the struggle for life.
Darwin was led to this discovery on reading Malthus’s
thesis regarding the disproportion between the rates of
increase in population and food, and the consequent
struggle for existence.
All living organisms require food and space. The power
of multiplication in plants and animals is so great that food
or space is sooner or later entrenched upon, and then
commences this inevitable struggle for existence. In this
struggle for life, the individuals best able to conform to
their environment, i.e., the best able to resist adverse
circumstances, to sustain hardships, to overcome difficulties,
to defend themselves, to outstrip their fellows, in short, to
harmonise function with environment, survive. These


propagate their kind according to the law of heredity.
Variations exist in the progeny, and the individuals whose
variations best adapt them to their environment are the
fittest to, and do, survive.
In a state of nature the weaklings perish. If man
interferes with this state of nature in the lower animals, he
may make a selection and cultivate some particular
attribute. This is artificial selection, and is best exemplified
in the experiments with pigeons. Pasteur saved the silk
industry of France, and perhaps of the whole world, by the
application of this law of artificial selection. The disease of
silkworms, known as Pebrine, was spreading with ruinous
rapidity in France. Pasteur demonstrated that the germ of
the disease could be detected in the blood of affected
moths by the aid of the miscroscope. He proved that the
eggs of diseased moths produced unhealthy worms, and he
advised that the eggs of each moth be kept apart, until the
moth was examined for germs. If these were found, the
eggs were to be burned. Thus the eggs of unhealthy
moths were never hatched, and artificial selection of healthy
stock stamped out a disease, and saved a great industry.
Each individual plant in the struggle for life has only
itself to maintain. In the higher forms of animal life, each
animal has its offspring as well as itself to maintain. In a
state of nature, that is in a state unaffected by man’s
rational interference, defective offspring and weaker
brethren were the victims of the inexorable law of natural
selection. When Christ gave his reply to the question,
“Am I my brother’s keeper ? ” the defective and the
weakling became the special care of their stronger brother.
They constituted thenceforth The Fit Man’s Burden. The
work a man has to do during life, in order to support
■himself, is the unit of measurement of the burden he has to


bear. Many factors in modern times have helped to-
reduce that work to a minimum. The invention of
machinery has multiplied his eyes, his hands, his feet ; and
one man can now produce, for his own maintenance and
comfort, what it took perhaps a score of men to produce
even a century ago. Man’s disabilities from incidental and
epidemic disease have been immeasurably reduced by-
modern sanitation, and the teaching and practice of
preventive medicine. Agricultural chemistry has made the
soil more productive, and manufacturing arts have aided
distribution as well as production.
All the departments of human knowledge have been
placed under contribution to man’s necessity, and longer
life, better health, and more food and clothing for less
work, are the blessings on his head to-day.
While the burden has been lessened by the industrial
and scientific progress of the last half century, it has been
augmented by the fertility of the unfit ; and the mainten-
ance in idleness and comfort of the great and increasing
army of defectives constitutes the fit man’s burden. The
unfit in the State include all those mental and moral and
physical defectives who are unable or unwilling to
support themselves according to the recognised laws of
human society. They include the criminal, the pauper, the
idiot and imbecile, the lunatic, the drunkard, the deformed,,
and the diseased. We are now face to face with the
startling fact that this army of defectives is increasing in
numbers and relative fertility.
Consider what a burden is the criminal. Every
community is more or less terrorised by him ; our property
is liable to be plundered, our houses invaded, our women
ravished, our children murdered. To restrain him we must
build gaols, and keep immense staffs of highly paid


■officials to tend him in confinement, and watch him when
he is at liberty. Notwithstanding these, crime is rife, and
is rapidly increasing. Says Douglas Morrison :—“ It is
perfectly well known to every serious student of criminal
■questions, both at home and abroad, that the proportion of
habitual criminals in the criminal population is steadily on
the increase, and was never so high as it is now The
population under detention in reformatory institutions is
increasing more rapidly than the growth of the community
as a whole, and, as far as it is possible to see, the juvenile
population in prisons is doing the same thing.” Havelock
Ellis (“The Criminal,” p. 295), Boies, and McKim, all
corroborate this testimony. “ Among the three or four
millions of inhabitants of London, one in every five dies in
gaol, prison, or workhouse.” (“ Heredity and Human
Progress,” p. 32.)
All these defectives are prolific, and transmit their fatal
taints. “In a certain family of sixteen persons, eight were
born deaf and dumb, and one at least of this family
transmitted the defect as far as the third generation.”
(“Heredity and Human Progress.”) A murderer was the
son of a drunkard ; of three brothers, one was normal, one
a drunkard, and the third was a criminal epileptic. Of his
three paternal uncles, one was a murderer, one a half idiot,
and one a violent character. Of his four cousins, sons of
the latter, two were half idiots, one a complete idiot, and
the other a lunatic.
There is an agricultural community of about 4000 in the
rich and fertile district in the valley of Artena, in Italy, who
have been thieves, brigands, and assassins since 1155 a.d.
They were outlawed by Pope Paul IV., in 1557, but they
still live and flourish in their crime, the victims of a
criminal inheritance. The ratio of homicides in Italy and


Artena is as 9 to 61 ; of assault and battery as 34 to-
-205; of highway robbery as 3 to 145; of theft as 47 to m.
Professor Pellman, of Bonn University, has traced the
careers of a large number of defectives, and shown their
cost to the State. Take this example A woman who was
a thief, a drunkard, and a tramp for forty years of her life,
had 834 descendants, 709 of whom were traced ; 106 were
born out of wedlock, 142 were beggars, and 64 more lived
on charity. Of the women, 181 lived disreputable lives.
There were in the family 76 convicts, 7 of whom were
convicted of murder. In 75 years, this family cost their
country in almshouses, trials, courts, prisons, and
correctional establishments about .£250,000. The injury
inflicted by this one family on person and property was
simply incalculable.
In New Zealand, the ratio of those dependent upon the
State, or on public or private support, has gone up from
16 86 per thousand of population, over 15 years of age in
1878, to 23-01 in 1901. The ratio of defectives, including
deaf and dumb, blind, lunatics, epileptics, paralytics,
crippled and deformed, debilitated and infirm, has gone up
from 5-4 per thousand, over fifteen years, in 1874, to 11-4
in 1896, declining slightly to 10-29 in 1901. The ratio of
lunatics has gone up from 1-9, in 1874, to 3-4 in 1901. This
is the period of the most rapid and persistent decline in the
New Zealand birth-rate ; and, coincident with this period,
the marriage-rate went down from 8 8 per thousand in 1874,
to 5-8 in 1886, and then gradually rose to 7 83 in 1901.
The number of weekly rations (Parkes’s standard),
purchasable by the average weekly wages of an artisan in
Wellington province, has gone up from 11 to 16-5 between
the years 1877 and 1897. In other words, the price of
food and the rate of wages in 1897 would enable an


artisan to fill 5y 2 more mouths than he could have done at
the rates prevailing in 1877.
Notwithstanding the development of civilising, Christian-
ising, and educational institutions, crime, insanity, and
pauperism are increasing with startling rapidity. The true
cause is to be found deep down in biological truth. Society
is breeding from defective stock. The best fit to produce
the best offspring are ceasing to produce their kind, while
the fertility of the worst remains undisturbed. The most
striking demographical phenomenon of recent years is the
declining birth-rate of civilised nations. In Germany the
birth-rate has fallen from 40 to 35 per thousand of the
population ; in England from 35 to 30; in Ireland from 26
to 22 ; in France from 26 to 21; and in the United States
from 36 to 30 during the last twenty years ; while, in New
Zealand, it has declined from 40 8, in 1880, to 25 - 6, in 1900.
In Australia there were 47,000 less births in 1899 than
would have occurred under the rates prevailing ten years
ago.
There is a consensus of opinion among demographists
that this decline is due to the voluntary curtailment of the
family in married life. Prudence is the motive, and self-
restraint the means by which this curtailment is made
possible. But prudence and self-restraint are the
characteristic attributes of the best citizens. They are
conspicuous by their absence in the worst; and it is a
matter of common observation that the hopelessly poor, the
drunken and improvident, the criminal and the defective
have the largest families, while those in the higher walks of
life rejoice in smaller numbers. The very qualities,
therefore, that make the social unit a law-abiding and useful
citizen, who could and should raise the best progeny for the
State, also enable him to limit his family, or escape the


responsibility of family life altogether; while, on the other
hand, the very qualities which make a man a social burden,
a criminal, a pauper, or a drunkard—improvidence and
defective inhibition ensure that his fertility will be
unrestrained, except by the checks of biological law. And
it now comes about that the good citizen, who curtails his
family, has the defective offspring of the bad citizen thrown
•upon his hands to support; and the humanitarian zeal, born
of Christian sentiment, which is at flood-tide to-day,
ensures that all the defectives born to the world shall not
only be nursed and tended, but shall have the same
opportunities of the highest possible fertility enjoyed by
their defective progenitors.
A higher and nobler human happiness is attainable only
through social evolution, and this comes from greater
freedom of thought, from bolder enquiry, from broader
experience, and from a scientific study of the laws of
causation. What “is ” becomes “ right ” from custom, but
with our yearnings for a higher ideal, sentiment slowly
yields to the logic of comparison, and, often wiping from
our eyes the sorrows over vanishing idols, we behold
broader vistas of human powers, possibilities, duties, and
destiny.
As the proper study of mankind is man, influenced
wholly by a desire to be useful to a society to which I am
indebted for the pleasures of civilised life, I offer this brief
volume as a comment on a phase of the social condition of
the times, and as my conclusions regarding its interest for
.’he future.


CHAPTER I.
THE PROBLEM STATED.
The spread of moral restraint as a check.—Predicted by Malthus.
The declining Birth-rate.—Its Universality.—Most conspicuous
in New Zealand.—Great increase in production of food. —With
rising food rate falling birth-rate.—Malthus’s checks.—His use
of the term “ moral restraint—The growing desire to evade
family obligations.—Spread of physiological knowledge.—All
limitation involves self restraint.—Motives for limitation. —
Those who do and those who do not limit.—Poverty and the
Birth-rate. Defectives prolific and propagate their kind.
Moral restraint held to include all sexual interference designed
to limit families.—Power of self-control an attribute of the best
citizens.—Its absence an attribute of the worst.—Humanitarian-
ism increases the number and protects the lives of defectives.—
The ratio of the unfit to the fit.—Its dangers to the State.—
Antiquity of the problem.—The teaching of the ancients.—Surgi-
cal methods already advocated.
A century has passed since Malthus made
his immortal contribution to the supreme
problem of all ages and all people, but the
whole aspect of the population question has
changed since his day. The change, however,
was anticipated by the great economist, and
predicted in the words:—“ The history of
modern civilisation is largely the history of the
gradual victory of the third check over the two
others ” (vide Essay, 7th edition, p. 476).
The third check is moral restraint and the twe
others vice and misery,
A


The statistics of all civilized nations show a
gradual and progressive decline in the birthrate
much more marked of recent years. In
Germany, between the years 1875 and 1899,
it has diminished from 40 to 35’9 per thousand
of the population. In England and Wales,
it dropped from 35 to 29-3 during the same
time ; in Ireland, from 26 to 22^9; in France,
from 26 to 21-9; in the United States of
America (between the years 1880 and 1890) the
decline has been from 36 to 30 ; while in New
Zealand it gradually and persistently declined
from 40'8 in 1880 to 25 ‘6 in 1900.
During the period, 1875-1890, the rapid
strides made in industry and production have
been unparallelled in the history of the world,
Wealth has accumulated on all sides, and pro-
duction and distribution have far outrun the
needs and demands of population. To-day
food is far more abundant, cheaper, and there-
fore more accessible to all classes of the
people than it was 50 years ago, and co-
incident with this rapid and abundant increase
in those things which go to supply the
necessities, the comforts, and even the luxuries
of life, there has been a constant and uniform
decline in the birth-rate, and this decrease is
even more conspicuous in those nations in
which the rate of production has been most
pronounced. It would even be true to say that
the birth-rate during recent years is in inverse
proportion to the rate of production.


At first sight this might appear to falsify the
law of population enunciated by Malthus.
Malthus maintained that population tended to
increase beyond the means of subsistence ;
that three checks constantly operated to limit
population—vice, misery, and moral restraint :
vice, due largely to diseased conditions,
misery, due to povery and want, and moral
restraint due to a dread of these. I shall show
later that nothing has been said or written to
add to or take away from the truth and force
of these great principles, but, that the moral
restraint of Malthus has been practised to an
extent, and in a direction of which the great
economist never dreamt. By moral restraint in
the limitation of families Malthus meant only
delayed marriage. In so far as men and
women abstained from, or delayed their
marriage, on the ground of inability to support
a family, they fulfilled the law, and followed
the advice of Malthus. Continence without
the marriage bond was assumed ; incontinence
was classed with another check vice.
Contrary to the expectations arising out of
the famous progressions, wealth and production
have increased and the birth-rate has decreased.
It is the purpose of this work to show what
are the causes that have led to this decline,
that those causes are not equally operative
through all classes of the people, and that the
chief cause of the decline of the birth-rate is
the desire on the part of both sexes to limit the


number they have to support and educate.
The considerations that lead up to, and, to
some extent, justify this desire, will be discussed
later.
The fact remains that an increasingly large
number of people have come to the conclusion
that the burden and responsibility of family
obligations limit their enjoyments in life, their
ambition, and even their scope for usefulness,
and have discovered, through the spread of
physiological information, means by which
marriage may be entered upon without
necessarily incurring these responsibilities and
limitations.
It is the knowledge of these physiological
laws and the practice of rules arising out of
that knowledge, that account for the declining
birth-rate of civilized nations.
If it be true that the birth-rate is controlled
by a voluntary effort on the part of married
people to limit their families, and that that effort
implies self restraint and self denial, it would
not be too much to claim that those most
capable of exercising self-control and with the
strongest motives for such exercise, are those
most responsible for the declining birth-rate,
and that those with least self-control and the
fewest motives for exercising the control they
have, are most likely to have the normal
number of children.
It has already been suggested, that the
desire to limit families is due to a consciousness


of responsibility on the part of prospective
parents. They realise the stress of competition
in the struggle for existence, they are anxious
for their own pecuniary and social stability, and
even more anxious that the children, for whose
birth they are responsible, should be provided
with the necessities and comforts of life which
health and development require. They are
eager, too, that their children should be
equipped with a good education, and thus be
given a fair advantage in the race of life.
To the great mass of people this is possible
only when the numbers of the family are
limited. As the numbers of the family increase,
the difficulties of clothing and feeding and
educating increase, and each member is the
poorer for every birth, and in this sense an
increasing birth-rate is a cause of poverty.
The sense in which poverty causes a high birth-
rate will be dealt with later on.
It will be readily conceded, that those
actuated by the motives just considered, those
with the keenest sense of responsibility in life,
those capable of exercising the self-restraint
which family limitation requires, constitute the
best type of citizens in any community. From
such the State has good reason to expect the
best stock.
It is one purpose of this work to show that
this class, which can and should produce the best
in the largest numbers, is being overwhelmed


with the burden of supporting an ever-
increasing number of incapables, and, largely
in consequence of this increasing burden and
responsibility, are unwilling to produce, because
they are unable adequately to support their own
kind.
There is a class in every large community,
whose sense of responsibility in life is at zero,
whose self-control is substituted by the law and
its sanctions, and whose modes and habits of
life are little better than those of the lower
animals. Their appetites are stronger, their
desires, though fewer, are more intense, and
their self-control less easily and less frequently
exerted than those in the highest planes of
life.
In the first place then they have less desire
to limit their families, and less power to exer-
cise the self-restraint that is necessary to do
so. Less sense of responsibility is attached to
the rearing of a family, whilst the education of
their children gives them little or no concern.
They entertain no ambition that members of
their family should compete in the struggle
for social status. Their instincts and their
impulses are their guide in all things. They
marry early, and procreation is unrestrained
except by the hardships of life.
This constitutes a numerous class in every
large community, and includes the criminal, the
drunkard, and the pauper, and many defectives


such as epileptics and imbeciles. Now all these
propagate their kind. The checks to the
increase of this class, are the checks which are
common to the lower animals, and which were
elaborated in his first essay by Malthus. They
are vice and misery.
If it were not for moral restraint (not the
limited restraint of Malthus, delayed marriages
simply), but restraint in the wider sense, within
as well as without the marriage bond, and in-
cluding all artificial checks to conception, these
two checks, vice and misery, would absolutely
control the population of the world.
The mind of man has added to the checks
which control increase in the lower animals, a
new check, which applies to, and can be exer-
cised only by himself, and the problem is, how
far will misery and vice as checks to the popu-
lation be eliminated, and moral restraint take
their places ? And if this restraint must
control and determine the population of the
future how far will its exercise affect the moral
and mental evolution of the race ?
If moral restraint with the consequent
limitations of families is the peculiar character-
istic of the best people in the state, and the
absence of this characteristic expressing itself
in normal fertility is peculiar to the worst
people of the state, the future of the race may
be divined, by reference to the history of the
great nations of antiquity.


An accumulating amount of evidence shows
that society is face to face with this grave
aspect of the population question. The birth-
rate of the unfit is steadily maintained. Im-
proved conditions of life increase the number
that arrive at maturity and enter the procreative
period, so that not only are defectives born
into the world at a constant rate, but sanitary
laws and a growing impatience with the suffer-
ings of the poor, tend so to improve their
conditions of life, as to increase their birth-rate
and their chances of arriving at adult life.
Shortly stated then, the problem that society
has to solve is this, —The birth-rate is rapidly
declining amongst the most fit to produce the
best offspring, while it is steadily maintained
amongst the least fit, so that the relative pro-
portion of the unfit born into the world is
annually increasing.
What should be the State’s attitude to this
problem, and how it should attempt to solve it
will be discussed in detail in a subsequent
chapter. Let it suffice to say now, that the
right of the State to interfere directly with the
limitation of families amongst the best classes
would find few advocates amongst reformers.
The right of the State to say, however, that
the criminal, the drunkard, the diseased, and
the pauper, shall not propagate their kind
should be stoutly maintained by all rational
men.


Most of the nations of history have recog-
nized the gravity of the population question,
but they were mostly concerned with the ten-
dency of the numbers in the State to increase
beyond the means of subsistence, instead of
the tendency to degeneration as it now concerns
us.


CHAPTER II.
THE POPULATION QUESTION.
The Teaching of Aristotle and Plato.—The teaching of Malthus. —
His assailants. — Their illogical position.—Bonar on Malthus
and his work. — The increase of food supplies held by Nitti to
refute Malthus. —The increase of food and the decrease of births.
— Mr. Spencer’s biological theory . — Maximum birth-rate deter-
mined by female capacity to bear children. — The pessimism of
Spencer’s law. — Wider definition of moral restraint. — Where
Malthus failed to anticipate the future. —Economic law operative
only through Biological law.
Births, deaths, and migration are the factors
which make up the population question.
The problem has burned in the minds of
all great students of human life and its con-
ditions.
Aristotle says (Politics ii. 7-5) “ The
legislator who fixes the amount of property
should also fix the number of children, for
if they are too many for the property, the
law must be broken.” And he proceeds
to advise (ib. vii. 16-15) “As to the ex-
posure and rearing of children, let there be
a law that no deformed child shall live, but
where there are too many (for in our State
population has a limit) when couples have
children in excess and the state of feeling is
adverse to the exposure of offspring, let abortion
be procured.”


The difficulty of over-population was con-
spicuous in the minds of Aristotle and Plato,
and these philosophers both held that the State
had a right and a duty to control it.
But some States were almost annihilated
because they were not sufficiently populous,
and Aristotle attributes the defeat of Sparta on
one celebrated occasion to this fact. He says :
—“ The legislators wanting to have as many
Spartans as they could, encouraged the citizens
to have large families, and there is a law at
Sparta, that the father of three sons should
be exempt from military service, and he who
has four, from all the burdens of the State.
Yet it is obvious that if there were many
children, the land being distributed as it is,
many of these must necessarily fall into poverty.”
The problem in the mind of the Greek
philosophers was this. Over-population is a
cause of poverty; under-population is a cause of
weakness. Defectives are an additional burden
to the State. How shall population be so
regulated as to established an equilibrium be-
tween the stability of the State, and the highest
well-being of the citizens ?
The combined philosophy of the Greeks
counselled the encouragement of the best
citizens to increase their kind, and the practice
of the exposure of infants and abortion.
A century of debate has raged round the
name of Mai thus, the great modern analyst of
the population problem. He published his


first essay on population in 1798, a modest
pamphlet, which fed so voraciously on the
criticism supplied to it, that it developed into
a mighty contribution to a great social problem,
second only in time and in honour to the work
of his great predecessor in economic studies,
Adam Smith.
Malthus’s first essay defined and described
the laws of multiplication as they apply only to
the lower animals and savage man. It was
only in his revised work, published five years
later, that he described moral restraint as a third
check to population.
Adverse criticism had been bitter and severe,
and Malthus saw that his first work had been
premature. He went to the continent to study
the problem from personal observation in
different countries. He profited by his obser-
vation, and by the writings of his critics, and
published his matured work in 1803.
The distinguishing feature about this
edition was the addition of moral restraint as
a check, to the two already described, vice and
misery.
Malthus maintained that population has
the power of doubling itself every 25 years.
Not that it does so, or had done so, or will
do so, but that it is capable of doing so, and
he instanced the American Colonies to prove
this statement.
One would scarcely think it was necessary
to enforce this distinction, between what


population has done, or is doing, and what it is
capable of doing. But when social writers,
like Francesco Nitti (Population and the Social
System, p. 90), urge as an argument against
Malthus’s position that, if his principles were
true, a population of 176,000,000 in the year
1800 would have required a population of only
one in the time of our Saviour, it is necessary
to insist upon the difference between increase
and the power of increase.
One specific instance of this doubling pro-
cess is sufficient to prove the power of increase
possessed by a community, and the instance
of the American Colonies, cited by Malthus,
has never been denied.
A doubling of population in 25 years was
thus looked upon by Malthus as the normal
increase, under the most favourable conditions ;
but the checks to increase, vice, misery, and
moral restraint are operative in varying degrees
of intensity in civilized communities, and these
may limit the doubling to once in 50, or once
in 100 years, stop it altogether, or even sweep
a nation from the face of the earth.
The natural increase among the lower
animals is limited by misery only, in savage
man by vice and misery only, and in civilized
man by misery, vice, and moral restraint.
Misery is caused by poverty, or the need
of food or clothing, and is thus proportionate
to the means of subsistence. As the means of
subsistence are abundant, misery will be less.


the death-rate lower, and caeteris paribus the
birth-rate higher. The increase will be directly
proportional to the means of subsistence.
Vice as a check to increase, is common to
civilized and savage man, and limits population
by artificial checks to conception, abortion, in-
fanticide, disease, and war. The third check,
moral restraint, is peculiar to civilized man,
and in the writings of Malthus, consists in
restraint from marriage or simply delayed
marriage.
Bonar says (Malthus and his Work, p. 53),
“ Moral restraint in the pages of Malthus,
simply means continence which is abstinence
from marriage followed by no irregularities.”
These checks have their origin in a need
for, and scarcity of food, —food comprising all
those conditions necessary to healthy life.
The need of food is vital and permanent.
The desire for food, immediate and pros-
pective, is the first motive of all animal
activity, but the amount of food available in
the world is limited, and the possible increase
of food is estimated by Malthus at an arith-
metical ratio.
Whether or not this is an accurate estimate
of the ratio of food increase is immaterial.
Malthus’s famous progressions, the geometrical
ratio of increase in the case of animals, and
the arithmetical ratio of increase in the case of
food, contain the vital and irrefutable truth of
the immense disproportion between the power


of reproduction in man and the power of pro-
duction in food.
Under the normal conditions of life, the
population tends constantly to press upon, and
is restrained by the limits of food. The true
significance of the word tends must not be
overlooked, or a similar fallacy to that of Nitti’s
will occur, when he overlooked the significance
of the term “ power to multiply.” It is perfectly
true to say, that population tends to press upon
the limits of subsistence, and unrestrained by
moral means or man’s reason actually does so.
Some social writers appear to think that,
if they can show that production has far
outstripped population, that, in other words,
population for the last fifty years at least has
not pressed upon the limits of food, Malthus by
that fact is refuted.
Nitti says (Population and the Social Sys-
stem, p. 91), “ But now that statistics have
made such great progress, and the comparison
between the population and the means of
subsistence in a fixed period of time is no
longer based upon hypothesis, but upon con-
crete and certain data in a science of observation
it is no longer possible to give the name of law
to a theory like that of Malthus, which is a
complete disagreement with facts. As our
century has been free from the wars, pestilences
and famines which have afflicted other ages,
population has increased as it never did before,
and, nevertheless, the production of the means


of subsistence has far exceeded the increase of
men.”
And later on (p. ii4)he says “ Malthus’s
law explains nothing just as it comprehends
nothing. Bound by rigid formulas which are
belied by history and demography, it is in-
capable of explaining not only the mystery of
poverty, but the alternate reverses of human
civilization.”
Nitti’s conclusions are based largely on the
fact that while food supplies have become
abundant and cheap, birth-rates have steadily
and persistently declined.
No-one who has studied the economic and
vital statistics of the last half century can fail
to be impressed with the change that has come
over the relative ratios of increase in popula-
tion and food.
Bonar says (Malthus and his Work, p. 165),
“The industrial progress of the country
(France) has been very great. Fifty years
ago, the production of wheat was only half
of what it is to-day, of meat less than half.
In almost every crop, and every kind of food,
France is richer now than then, in the pro-
portion of 2to 1. In all the conveniences
of life (if food be the necessaries) the in-
creased supply is as 4 to 1, while foreign trade
has become as 6 to 1.”
In a remarkable table prepared by Mr.
F. W. Gallon, and quoted by Mr. Sydney Webb
in “ Industrial Democracy,” it is clearly shown,


that, while the birth-rate and food-rate (defined
as the amount of wheat in Imperial quarters,
purchased with a full week’s wages) gradually
increased along parallel lines between 1846
and 1877, the former suddenly decreased from
36‘5 per thousand in 1877 to 30 per thousand
in 1895, the latter increasing from ‘6 to 17 for
the same period.
The remarkable thing about the facts that
this table so clearly discloses is that with a
gradual increase of the means of subsistence
from 1846 to 1877 there is also a gradual in-
crease in the proportion of births to population.
But at the year 1877 there, is a very sudden
and striking increase in food products, and the
purchasing power of the people coincides exactly
with a very sudden and striking decrease in the
birth-rate of the people. The greater the
decrease in the birth-rate, the greater the in-
crease in the people’s purchasing power. Now,
what has brought about this change in the
ratios of increase in population and in food
respectively ?
Some serious factor, inoperative during the
thirty years prior to 1877 must have suddenly
been introduced into the social system, to work
such a marvellous revolution during the last
twenty years.
Some economic writers find it easy here to
discover a law, and declare that the birth-rate
is in inverse ratio to the abundance of food.
B


(Doubleday quoted by Nitti, Population and
the Social System, p. 55).
Other economic writers of recent date
attribute this great change in ratio of increase
to economic causes. Only a few find the ex-
planation in biological laws.
Herbert Spencer is the champion of the
biological explanation of a decreasing birth-
rate.
With the intellectual progress of the race
there is a decadence of sexual instinct. In
proportion as an individual concentrates his
energies and attention on his own mental
development, does the instinct to, and power of,
generation decrease.
It may be true, it certainly is true, that if
an individual’s energies are concentrated in the
direction of development of one system of the
body, the other systems to some extent suffer.
A great and constant devotion to the develop-
ment of the muscular system will produce very
powerful muscles, and great muscular energy,
with a strong tendency to, and pleasure in
exercise. It is true also, that time and energy
are monopolized in this creation of muscle, and
that less time and energy are available for
mental pursuits and mental exercise.
Up to a certain point muscular exercise
aids mental development, but beyond that
point concentration of effort in the direction
of muscular development starves mental growth.


On the other hand, if the education and
exercise of the mind receive all attention,
the muscular system will suffer, and to some
extent remain undeveloped. Or generally, one
system of the body can be highly developed
only at the expense of some other system,
not immediately concerned.
It is true that the more an individual con-
centrates his efforts on his own intellectual
development, the more his sexual system suffers,
and the less vigorous his sexual instincts.
And the converse of this is also true, for
examples of those with great sexual powers
are numerous.
In plant life, this same law is also in opera-
tion. If one system in a plant, the woody
fibre for instance, takes on abundant growth,
the fruit is starved and is less in quality and
quantity, and vice versa.
But to what extent does this affect fertility ?
Sexual power and fertility are not synonymous
terms.
The vast profusion of seed in plant and
animal life, would allow of an enormous reduc-
tion in the amount produced, without the least
affecting fertility. Even admitting the appli-
cation of Spencer’s law to sexual vitality, and
allowing him to claim that, with the progress of
“individuation,” there is a decline in sexual
instinct, would the fertility of the race be
affected thereby ?


To have any effect at all on the birth-rate,
the instinct would have either to be killed or
to be so reduced in intensity as to stop
marriage, or to delay it till very late in life.
When once marriage was contracted sexual
union once in every two years, would, under
strictly normal conditions, result in a very large
family.
For according to Mr. Spencer’s theory, it
is the instinct that is weakened not the power
of the spermatozoa to fertilize.
Evidence is wanting, however, to show
that there is a decrease in the sexual power of
any nation.
France might be flattered to be told that
her low birth-rate is due to the high intellec-
tual attainments of her people, and that the
rapidly decreasing birth-rate is due to a rapid
increase of her intellectual power during recent
years.
Ireland and New Zealand would be equally
pleased could they believe that their low, and
still decreasing birth-rate is due to the lessening
of the sexual instinct, attendant upon, and re-
sulting from a high and increasing intellectual
power and activity.
The fact is, that the sexual instinct is so
immeasurably in excess of the maximum power
of procreation in the female, that an enormous
reduction in sexual power would require to take
place before it would have any effect on the
number of children born.


The number of children born is controlled
by the capacity of the human female to bear
children, and one birth in every two years
during the child-bearing period of life is about
the maximum capacity.
A moderate diminution in the force of the
sexual instinct might lead to a decrease in the
marriage rate, but it would require a very serious
diminution bordering on total extinction of the
instinct to exert any serious effect on the fecun-
dity of marriage.
All that can be claimed for this theory of
population is, that, reasoning from known
physiological analogies, we might expect a
weakening of the desire for marriage,
coincident with the general development of
intellect in the race.
There are as yet no facts to prove that such
weakening has taken or is taking place, nor
are there facts to prove that population has
in any way suffered from this cause.
If such a law obtained, and resulted in
a diminished birth-rate, the future of the race
would be the gloomiest possible. An inexor-
able law would determine that there could be
no mental evolution, for the best of the race
would cease to propagate their kind. All who
would arrive at this standard of mental growth
would become barren. And against this there
could be no remedy.
One of the main contentions of this work
is that the best have to a large extent ceased


to propagate their kind, but it is not main-
tained that this is the result of a biological law,
over which there is no control. It can be
safely claimed that to Malthus’s three checks
to population—vice, misery, and moral restraint,
the demographic phenomena of a century have
added no other. The third check, however,
moral restraint, must be held to include all
restraint voluntarily placed by men and women
on the free and natural exercise of their powers
of procreation,
Malthus used the term “moral” in this
connection, not so much in relation to the
motive for the restraint, but in relation to the
result, viz., the limitation of the family. The
“moral restraint” of Malthus meant to him,
restraint from marriage only, chiefly because
of the inability to support a family. It implied
marriage delayed until there was reasonable
hope that the normal family, four in number,
could be comfortably supported, continence in
the mean time being assumed. Bonar interpre-
ting Malthus says (p. 53) that impure celibacy
falls under the head of “ vice,” and not of
“moral restraint.”
To Malthus, vice and misery, as checks to
population, were an evil greatly to be deplored
in civilized man, and not only did he declare
that moral restraint obtained as a check, but he
also declared it a virtue to be advocated and
encouraged in the interest of society, as well
as of the individual.


His moral restraint was delayed marriage
with continence. He trusted to the moral
force of the sexual passion in a continent man
to stimulate to work, to thrift, to marriage ;
to work and save so that he may enter the
marriage state with a reasonable prospect of
being able to support a wife and family.
Malthus never anticipated the changes and
developments of recent years. He advised
moral restraint as a preventive measure in the
hope that vice and misery, as checks would be
superseded, and that no more would be born
into the world than there was ample food to
supply. He believed that moral restraint was
the check of civilized man, and as civilization
proceeded, this check would replace the others,
and prevent absolutely the population pressing
upon the limits of subsistence.
He saw in moral restraint only self-denial,
constant continence, and entertained not a
doubt, that the generative instinct would be
cheated of its natural fruit. The passion for
marriage is so strong (thought Malthus) that
there is no fear for the race ; it cannot be over-
controlled.
The gratification of the sexual instinct, and
procreation were the same thing in the mind of
Malthus.
But this is not so.
A physiological law makes it possible, in a
large proportion of strictly normal women, for
union to take place without fertilisation. If, it


were possible to maintain an intermittent re-
straint in strict conformity with this law, it would
control considerably the population of the world.
It is easier to practice intermittent than to
practice constant restraint.
It is just here that Malthus failed to antici-
pate the future. Malthus believed that “moral
restraint ” would lessen the marriage rate, but
would have no direct effect on the fecundity of
marriage.
A man would not put upon himself the self-
denial and restraint, which abstinence from
marriage implied, for a longer period than he
could help.
The greater the national prosperity, there-
fore, the higher the birth-rate. But prosperity
keeps well in advance of the birth-rate; in
other words, population, though it still tends
to, does not actually press upon the food
supply.
If the moral restraint of Malthus be extended
so as to include intermittent moral restraint
within the marriage bond, then, under one or
other, or all of his three checks, vice, misery,
and moral restraint, will be found the explana-
tion of the remarkable demographic phenomena
of recent years.
Misery will cover deaths from starvation
and poverty, the limitation of births from
abortion due to hardship, from deaths due to
improper food, clothing, and housing ; and
emigration to avoid hardship.


Vice will cover criminal abortions, limitation
of births from venereal disease, deaths from
intemperance, etc., and artificial checks to
conception. Malthus included artificial checks
of this kind under vice (7 ed. of Essay, p. q.n.),
though they have some claim to be considered
under moral restraint. But the question will
be referred to in a later chapter.
Moral restraint will cover those checks to
conception, voluntarily practised in order to
escape the burden and responsibility of rearing
children continence, delayed marriage, and
intermittent restraint.
No other checks are directly operative.
Misgovernment and the unequal distribution
of wealth and land affect population indirectly
only, and can only act through one or other or
all of the checks already mentioned.


Articles.
Daily quantity in
oz. av.
Meat
... 12*0
Bread
24O
Potatoes
i6 - o
Other vegetables ...
8-o
Milk
3‘ 2 S
Sugar
*'33
Salt
0-25
Coffee ...
o - 33
Tea
o - i6
Total
65-32
Butter ...
• ■ • 2 *4— (Molcschott.)
CHAPTER III.
DECLINING BIRTH-RATE.
Decline of birth-rates rapid and persistent.—Food cost in New Zealand. —
Relation of birth-rate to prosperity before and after 1877. — Neo-
Malthusian propaganda. — Marriage rates and fecundity of
marriage .— Statistics of Hearts of Oak Friendly Society.
Deliberate desire of parents to limit family increase.
It is not the purpose of this work to follow
any further the population problem so far as it
relates to deaths and emigration. Attention
will be concentrated on births, and the
influences which control their rates.
A rapid and continuous decline in the birth-
rate of Northern and Western Europe, in
contravention of all known biological and
economic laws, has filled demographists with
amazement.
A table attached here shows the decline very
clearly. According to Parkes (“ Practical
Hygiene,” p. 516), the usual food of the soldier
may be expressed as follows :






1
877
1
887
897
1901
s
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
s.
d.
Bread
per lb.
o
4
0
T l
0
4
0
4
Beef
per lb.
o
5i
0
02
0
3
0
5
Mutton
per lb.
o
4
0
0
2
0
4i
Sugar
per lb.
o
Si
0
3
0
4
0
2f
Tea
per lb.
3
0
2
3
2
0
I
10
Butter (fresh)
per lb.
i
3
I
0
O
8
0
1 r
Cheese (col’n’l.) per lb.
o
10
O
5f
O
6
0
6
Milk
per qt.
o
4i
O
3
O
3
0
3h
The New Zealand Official Year Book gives
the following as the average prices of food for
the years mentioned ;
The official returns give the average daily
wage for artisans for the years 1877, 1887,
1897, and 1901 as ns., 10s. 6d., gs. gd., and
1 os. 3d., respectively.
The weekly rations (the standard food
supply for soldiers—Parkes’s) purchaseable by
the weekly wages for these years respectively
are in, 14/3, 16, and 12-4; t.e., the average
weekly wage of an artisan in constant employ-
ment in 1877 would purchase rations for in
persons, in 1887 for i4’3 persons, in 1897 f° r
16 persons, and in 1901 for 12*4 persons.
Up to the year 1877, the birth-rate in
England and Wales conformed to the law of
Malthus, and kept pace with increasing
prosperity ; but, after that year, and right up to
the present time, the nation’s prosperity has
gone on advancing at a phenomenal rate pari
passu with an equally phenomenal decline in
the number of births per 1000 of the population.


Now, it is a remarkable coincidence that in
this very year, 1877, the Neo-Malthusians
began to make their influence felt, and spread
amongst all classes of the people a knowledge
of preventive checks to conception.
People were encouraged to believe that
large families were an evil. A great many, no
doubt, had already come to this conclusion ; for
there is no more common belief amongst
the working classes, at least, than that large
families are a cause of poverty and hardship.
And this is even more true than it was in the
days of the Neo-Malthusians, for then child
and women labour was a source of gain to the
family, and a poor man’s earnings were often
considerably augmented thereby.
The uniform decrease of the birth-rate is a
matter of statistics, and admits of no dispute.
It has been least rapid in the German Empire,
and most rapid in New Zealand.
With the declining birth-rate the marriage-
rate must be considered
Malthus would have expected a declining
birth-rate to be the natural result of a declining
marriage-rate, and a declining marriage-rate to be
due to the practice of moral restraint, rendered
imperative because of hard times, and a
difficulty in obtaining work, wages, and food.
Given the purchasing power of a people,
Malthus would have estimated, according to his
laws, the marriage-rate, and, given the marriage-
rate, he would have estimated the birth-rate.


But anticipations in this direction, based on
Malthus’s laws, have not been realised. The
purchasing power of the people we know has
enormously increased; the marriage-rate has not
increased, it has, in fact, slightly decreased; but
the birth-rate per marriage, or the fecundity of
marriage, has decreased in a remarkable degree.
In “ Industrial Democracy,” by Sydney and
Beatrice Webb (p. 637), the following occurs:—
“The Hearts of Oak Friendly Society is the
largest centralised Benefit Society in this
country, having now over two hundred
thousand adult male members. No one is
admitted who is not of good character, and in
receipt of wages of twenty-four shillings a week or
upwards. The membership consists, therefore,
of the artisan and skilled operative class, with
some intermixture of the small shopkeeper, to
the exclusion of the mere labourer. Among its
provisions, is the “ Lying-in Benefit,” a
payment of thirty shillings for each confinement
of a member’s wife.
From 1866 to 1880 the proportion of lying-in
claims to membership slowly rose from 2176 to
2478 per too. From 1880 to the present time
it has continuously declined, until now it is only
between 14 and 15 per xoo.
The following table (from the annual
reports of the Committee of Management of
the Hearts of Oak Friendly Society, and those
of the Registrar-General) shows, for each year
from 1866 to 1895 inclusive, the number of


HEARTS OF OAK FRIENDLY SOCIETY.
Year.
Number of Members
at the beginning of
each year.
Number of Cases
of lying-in Benefit
paid during year.
Percentage of
cases paid to
total Member-
ship at begin-
ning of year.
England and
Wales : births
per 1000 of the
total popula-
tion.
1866
10,571
2,300
2176
35' 2
1867
12,051
2,853
2368
35'4
1868
13,5 68
3,0/5
22*66
35 - 8
1869
15,903
3,509
22*07
34‘8
1870
18,369
4,i73
22*72
35‘ 2
1871
21,484
4,685
2I*8i
35'°
1872
26,510
6,156
2322
35’6
1873
3 2 ,837
7,386
22*49
35'4
1874
40,740
9,603
2 3’57
36*0
1875
51,144
1 3, io 3
2366
35'4
1876
64,421
15,473
24*02
36-3
1877
76,369
18,423
24*11
360
1878
84,471
20,409
2416
355
1879
90,603
22,057
2 4'34
347
1880
91,986
22,740
24*72
34‘ 2
1881
93,6iS
2i,95°
2 3‘45
33‘9
1882
96,006
21,860
22*77
33‘ 8
1883
98,873
2i,S77
21*82
33-5
1884
104,339
2i,375
20*51
33'6
1885
105,622
21,277
2014
32-9
1886
109,074
21,856
20*04
32*8
1887
m,937
20,590
18 39
3 r 9
1888
115,803
20,244
17*48
31*2
1889
123,223
20,503
16*64
3I' 1
members in the Hearts of Oak Friendly
Society at the beginning of the year, the
number of those who received Lying-in Benefit
during the year, the percentage of these to the
membership at the beginning of the year, and
the birth-rate per thousand of the whole
population of England and Wales.


1890
131,057
20,402
I S’S7
30-2
1891
141,269
22,500
1 5'93
3 *'4
1892
*53,595
23,47i
15-28
3°'5
1893
169,344
25,43°
15-02
30-8
1894
184,629
27,000
14-08
29-6
1895
201,075
29,263
I 4‘S5
30 - 4
1896
206,673
30,313
14-67
In this remarkable table the percentage of
births to total membership gradually rose from
2176, in 1866, to 2472, in 1880, and then
gradually declined to 14-67 in 1896.
This is a striking instance of the fact that
the decrease in the total birth-rate is due more
to a decrease in the fecundity of marriage, than
to a decrease of the marriage-rate.
Mr. Webb adds : “ The well-known
actuary, Mr. R. P. Hardy, watching the
statistics year by year, and knowing intimately
all the circumstances of the organisation,
attributes this startling reduction in the number
of births of children to these specially
prosperous and specially thrifty artisans entirely
to their deliberate desire to limit the size of
their families.”
The marriage-rate in England and Wales
commenced to decline about three years before
the sudden change in the birth-rate of 1877,
and continued to fall till about 1880, but has
maintained a fairly uniform standard since then,
rising slightly in fact, the birth-rate, meanwhile,
descending rapidly.


CHAPTER IV.
MEANS ADOPTED.
Family Responsibility —Natural fertility undiminished. — Voluntary
prevention and physiological knowledge.—New Zealand ex-
perience.—Diminishing influence of delayed marriage.—Practice
of abortion. —Popular sympathy in criminal cases.—Absence of
complicating issues in New Zealand.—Colonial desire for com-
fort and happiness.
There is a gradually increasing consensus of
opinion amongst statisticians, that the explana-
tion of the decrease in the number of births
is to be found in the desire of married per-
sons to limit the family they have to rear and
educate, and the voluntary practice of certain
checks to conception in order to fulfil this
desire.
It is assumed that there is no diminution
in the natural fertility of either sex. There
is no evidence to show that sexual desire is
not as powerful and universal as it ever was
in the history of the race ; nor is there any
evidence to show that the generative elements
have lost any of their fertilizing and develop-
mental properties and power.
Dr. J. S. Billings in the June number of
the Forum for 1893, says that “the most im-
portant factor in the change is the deliberate


and voluntary avoidance or prevention of child-
bearing on the part of a steadily increasing
number of married people, who not only prefer
to have but few children, but who know b ow
to obtain their wish.”
He further says, “ there is no good reason
for thinking that there is a diminished power
to produce children in either sex.”
M. Arsene Dumont in “ Natalite et De-
mocratic ” discusses the declining birth-rate of
France, and finds the cause to be the voluntary
prevention of child-bearing on the part of the
people, going so far as to say that where
large families occur amongst the peasantry, it is
due to ignorance of the means of prevention.
The birth-rate in none of the civilized
countries of the world has diminished so
rapidly as in New Zealand. It was 40 - 8 in
1880 ; it was 25'6 in 1900, a loss of 15-2 births
per 1000 of the population in 20 years.
There is no known economic cause for this
decline. The prosperity of the Colony has
been most marked during these years.
Observation and statistics force upon us the
conclusion that voluntary effort upon the part
of married couples to prevent conception is
the one great cause of the low and declining
birth-rate. The means adopted are artificial
checks and intermittent sexual restraint, within
the marriage bond, the latter tending to re-
place the former amongst normal women, as
physiological knowledge spreads.
c


Delayed marriage still has its influence on
the birth-rate, but with the spread of the same
knowledge, that influence is a distinguishing
quantity.
Delayed marriage under Malthusian princi-
ples would exert a potent influence in limiting
the births, because early marriages were, and,
under normal circumstances would still be,
fruitful.
In the 28th annual report relating to the
registration and return of Births, Marriages
and Deaths in Michigan for the year 1894
(p. 125), it is stated that “The mean number
of children borne by females married at from
15 to 19 years of age inclusive, is 676. For
the next five year period of ages, it is 5 72,
or a loss of rqq children per marriage, this
attending an advance of five years in age at
marriage.”
Voluntary effort frequently expresses itself in
the practice of abortion. Many monthly nurses
degenerate into abortionists and practise their
calling largely, while many women have learned
successfully to operate on themselves.
The extent to which this method of limiting
births is practised, and the absence of public
sentiment against it, in fact the wide-spread sym-
pathy extended to it, may be surmised from the
facts that at a recent trial of a Doctor in Christ
church, New Zealand, for alleged criminal abor-
tion, a large crowd gathered outside the Court,
greeting the accused by a demonstration in his


favour on his being discharged by the jury. A
similar verdict in a similar case in Auckland,
New Zealand, was greeted by applause by the
spectators in a crowded Court, which brought
down the indignant censure of the presiding
J udge.
In New Zealand there is no oppressive mis-
government, there is no land question in the
sense in which Nitti applies the term, there is
no poverty to account for a declining birth-rate
or to confuse the problem. There is prosperity
on every hand, and want is almost unknown.
And yet, fewer and fewer children, in propor-
tion to the population, and in proportion to the
number of marriages, are born into the colony
every year. The only reason that can be given
is that the people, though they want marriage
and do marry, do not wish to bear more
children than they can safely, easily, and health-
fully support, with a due and ever-increasing
regard for their own personal comfort and
happiness. They have learned that marriage
and procreation are not necessarily inseperable
and they practice what they know.


CHAPTER V.
CSAUSES OF DECLINING BIRTH-RATE.
Influence of self-restraint without continence. —Desire to limit families
in New Zealand not due to poverty.—Offspring cannot be limited
without self-restraint. —New Zealand's economic condition. —
High standard of general education. — Tendency to migrate
within the colony.—Diffusion of ideas.—Free social migration
between all classes.—Desire to migrate upwards.—Desire to
raise the standard of ease and comfort. —Social status the measure
of financial status. —Social attraction of one class to next below.
—Each conscious of his limitation. —Large families confirm
this limitation.—The cost of the family.—The cost of maternity.
The craving for ease and luxury. — Parents’ desire for their
children's social success.—Humble homes bear distinguished sons.
Large number with University education in New Zealand. —
No child labour except in hop and dairy districts.—Hopeless-
poverty a cause of high birth-rates.—High birth-rates a cause of
poverty. —Fecundity depends on capacity of the female to bear
children.
The first or direct cause of this decline in the
birth-rate then, is the inhibition of conception
by voluntary means, on the part of those
capable of bearing children.
This inhibition is the result of a desire on
the part of both sexes to limit their families.
Conception is inhibited by means which do
not necessitate continence, but which do
necessitate some, and in many cases, a great
amount of self-restraint. But how comes it,
that in these days of progress and prosperity.


especially in New Zealand, a desire to limit
offspring should exist amongst its people, and
that the desire should be so strong and so
universal ?
The desire for this limitation must be strong,
for there is absolutely no evidence that the
passion for marriage has lost any of its force ;
it must be extensive for the statistics show its
results, and the experience of medical men bears
the contention out.
While the marriage passion remains normal,
offspring cannot be limited without the exercise
of self-restraint on the part of both parties to
the marriage compact. Artificial means of
inhibiting conception, and intermittent restraint
are antagonistic to the sexual instinct, and the
desire for limitation must be strong and mutual
to counteract this instinct within the marriage
bond.
The reasons for this strong and very
general desire, that marriage should not result
in numerous births must have some foundation.
What is it ?
It cannot be poverty. New Zealand’s
economic experience has been one of uniform
progress and prosperity. There is abundant
and fertile land in these islands where droughts,
floods, and famine years, are practically un-
known. Blissards and destructive storms are
mysterious terms. Fluctuations in production
take place of course, but not such as to result
in want, to any noticeable extent. There are


no extremes of heat and cold, no extremes of
drought and flood, no extremes of wealth and
poverty. The climate is equable, the progress
is uniform, the classes are at peace.
Every natural blessing that a people could
desire in a country, is to be found in New
Zealand. Climate, natural fertility, and pro-
duction, unrivalled scenery in mountain, lake,
and forest, everything to bless and prosper
the present, and inspire hope in the future.
Why is it that, with all this wealth, and with the
country still progressing and yet undeveloped,
a desire exists in the heart of the people to limit
families.
The reason is social not economic, if one
may contrast the terms.
Take women’s attitude to the question first.
Our women are well educated. A state system
of compulsory education has placed within the
reach of all a good education, up to what is
known as the VI. or VII. Standard, and only a
very few in the colony have been too poor or
too rich to take advantage of it.
Most women can and do read an extensive
literature, and to this they have abundant
access, for even small country towns have good
libraries. Alexandra, a little town of 400 in-
habitants amongst the Central Otago mountains,
has a public library of several thousand volumes,
and the people take as much pride in this in-
stitution as in their school and church.


People move about from place to place, and
it is surprising how small and even large
families keep migrating from one part of the
colony to another. They are always making
new friends and acquaintances, and with these
interchanging ideas and information.
Class distinctions have no clear and defined
line of demarcation, and there is a free
migration between all the classes ; the highest,
which is not very high, is always being
recruited from those below, and from even the
lowest, which is not very low.
The highest class is not completely out of
sight of any class below it, and many families
are distributed evenly over all the classes. A
woman is the wife of a judge, a sister is the
President of a Woman’s Union, another sister
is in a shop, and a fourth is married to a
labourer.
If one of the poorer {they do not like
“lower”) class rises in the social scale, he or she
is welcome—if one of the richer (they do not
like “higher”) falls, no effort is made by the
class they formerly belonged to to maintain her
status in order to save its dignity or repute.
In other words, there are not the hindrances
to free migration between the various strata of
society that obtain in other lands. Not only is
that migration continually taking place, but
there are very few who are not touched by a
consciousness of it.


Members of the lower strata, all well
educated voters, can give instances of friends,
or relatives, or acquaintances, who are higher
up than themselves—have “ made their way,”
have “risen in society,” have “done well,” are
“ well off.” And this consciousness inspires in
all but the very lowest classes an ambition to
rise.
Because it is possible to rise, because others
rise, the desire to be migrating upwards soon
takes possession of members of all but the
lowest or poorest class, or those heavily
ballasted with a large or increasing family.
The desire to rise in social status is
inseparably bound up with the kindred desire
to rise in the standard of comfort and ease.
Social status in New Zealand is, as yet,
scarcely distinguishable from financial status.
Those who are referred to as the better classes,
are simply those who have got, or who have
made, money. All things, therefore, are
possible to everyone in this democratic colony.
There is thus permeating all classes in New
Zealand a spirit of social rivalry, which shows
no tendency to abate nor to be diverted. The
social status of one class exerts an attractive
force on the class next below.
But, apart from the influence of status, one
class keeps steadily in view, and persistently
strives to attain, the ease, comfort, and even
luxury of the class above it.


Because the members of different grades
are so migratory, there are many in one class
known well to members in some class or classes
below, and the ease and luxury which the
former enjoy are a constant demonstration of
what is possible to all.
Many who do not acquire wealth enough to
make any appreciable difference in their social
status, are able, through family, to improve
their position. Their sons and daughters are
given an University education, and by far the
largest number of those entering the learned
professions in New Zealand are the sons of
farmers, tradespeople, and retail dealers.
The great mass of the people in our Colony
are conscious of the fact that their social
relations and standard of comfort, or shall one
say standard of ease, are capable of improve-
ment, and the desire to bring about that
improvement is the dominant ambition of their
lives.
Anything that stands in the way of this
ambition must be overcome. A large family is
a serious check to this ambition, so a large
family must be avoided.
This desire to rise, and this dread too of
incurring a responsibility that will assuredly
check individual progress were counselled by
Malthus, and resulted, and he said should
result, in delayed marriage, lest a man, in
taking to himself a wife, take also to himself a
family he is unable to support.


But if this man can take to himself a wife
without taking to himself a family, what then ?
Men and women, in this Colony at least,
have discovered that conformity to physiological
law makes this possible.
A wife does not really add very much to a
mans responsibility—it is the family that adds
to his expense, and taxes all his resources. It
is the doctor and the nurse, the food and the
clothing, and the education of the uninvited
ones to his home, that use up all his earnings,
that keep him poor, or make him poorer.
Then there is one aspect of the question
peculiar to the women themselves. Women
have come to dread maternity. This is part of
a general impatience with pain common to us
all. Chloroform, and morphia, and cocaine,
and ethyl chloride have taught us that pain is
an evil.
When there was no chance of relieving it,
we anaesthetised ourselves and each other with
the thought that it was necessary, it was the
will of Providence, the cry of our nerves for
succour.
Now it is an evil, and if we must submit we
do so under protest. Women now engage
doctors on condition that chloroform will be
administered as soon as they scream, and they
scream earlier in their labour at each succeeding
occasion.
Women are less than ever impressed with
the sacredness and nobility of maternity, and


look upon it more and more as a period of
martyrdom. This attitude is in consonance
with the crave for ease and luxury that is
beginning to possess us.
It is, however, no new phase in human
experience. It characterised all the civilisations
of ancient times, at the height of their
prosperity, and was really the beginning of
their decay.
Women with us are more eager to limit
families than are their husbands. They feel
the burdens of a large family more. They are
often heard to declare that, with a large family
around her, and limited funds at her disposal
with which to provide assistance, a woman is a
slave. A large number think this, and, if there
is a way out of the difficulty, they will follow
that way. And they are not content to escape
the hardships of life. They want comforts, and
seek them earnestly. With the advent of
comfort, they seek for ease, and, when this is
found, they seek for luxury and social position.
Parents with us have a high ideal of what
upbringing should be. Every parent wants his
children to “do better” than himself. If he
does not wish to make a stepping-stone of
them, on which to rise to higher social things,
he certainly wishes to give them such a “ start
in life ” as will give them the best prospects of
keeping pace with, or outstripping their fellows.
The toil and self-denial that many poor
parents undergo, in order to give their children


a good education, is almost pathetic, and is not
eclipsed by the enthusiasm for education even
in Scotland.
There is a shoemaker in a small digging
town in New Zealand, still toiling away at his
last, whose son is a distinguished graduate of
our University, author of several books, and in
a high position in his profession.
There is a grocer in another remote inland
village whose son is a doctor in good practice.
There is a baker in a little country district
whose sons now hold high positions in the
medical profession, one at home and the other
abroad.
These facts are widely known amongst the
working classes, and inspire them with a spirit
of rivalry.
With regard to the general education of the
people, the Registrar-General says, (New
Zealand Official Year Book for 1898, page 164)
“In considering the proportions of the
population at different age periods, the
improvement in education is even more clearly
proved. It is found that, in 1896, of persons
at the age-period 10-15 years, 9873 per cent,
were able to read and write, while 0’65 per
cent, could merely read, and o - 62 per cent,
were unable to read. The proportion who could
not read increased slowly with each succeding
quinquennial period of age, until at 50-55 years
it stood at 4-04 per cent. At 75 to 80 years the
proportion was 7"05, and at 80 and upwards it


advanced to B 'oj. Similarly, the proportion of
persons who could read only increased from
CV6S at 10-15 years to 3 - 66 at the period 50-55
years, and again to 974 and upwards. The
better education of the people at the earlier
stages is thus exhibited.
Further evidences of improved education
will be found in the portion of his work relating
to marriages, where it is shown that the
proportion of persons in every thousand
married, who signed by mark, has fallen very
greatly since 1881. The figures for the sexes
in the year 1881 were 32x14 males, and 57x14
females, against 6'ig males and 7x12 females in
1895-”
For the position of teacher in a public
school in New Zealand, at a salary of £6O a
year, there were 14 female applicants, 10 of
whom held the degree of M.A., and the other
four that of B.A.
The number of children, 5-15 years of age,
in New Zealand, was estimated as on 31st
December, 1902, at 178,875. The number
of children, 7-13 years of age (compulsory
school age), was estimated as on 31st
December, 1902, at 124,986. The attendance
at schools, public and private, during the
fourth quarter of 1902, was European 150,332,
Maoris and half-castes 5,573. If children
spend their useful years of child life at school,
they can render little or no remunerative
service to their parents.


Neither boys or girls can earn anything till
over the age of 14 years. Our laws prohibit
child labour.
In New Zealand, children, therefore, while
they remain at home, are a continual drain on
the resources of the bread-winner. More is
expected from parents than in many other
countries.
At our public schools children are expected
to be well clad ; and it is quite the exception,
even in the poorest localities of our large cities,
to see children attending school with bare feet.
During child-life, nothing is returned to the
parent to compensate for the outlay upon the
rearing and educating of children.
If a boy, by reason of a good education,
soon, say, at from 14-18 years, is enabled to
earn a few shillings weekly, it is very readily
absorbed in keeping him dressed equally well
with other boys at the same office or work.
An investment in children is, therefore,
from a pecuniary point of view, a failure.
There are, perhaps, two exceptions in New
Zealand—in dairy farming in Taranaki, where
the children milk outside school hours ; and in
the hop districts of Nelson, where, during the
season, all the children in a family become
hop-pickers, and a big cheque is netted when
the family is a large one.
Quite apart from considerations of self,
parents declare that the fewer children they
have, the better they can clothe and educate


WEEKLY
EXPENSES OF FAMILY COMPRISING
FIVE CHILDREN AND PARENTS.
Per Week.
£
s.
d.
I.
Groceries and milk ...
O
15
O
2.
Coal and light
O
4
O
3-
Butcher
o
4
O
4-
Baker
o
4
O
5-
Boots, with repairing
o
2
6
6.
Clothing and underclothing
o
5
O
7-
Rent in suburbs
o
IO
O
8.
Sundries
o
2
O
9-
Benefit Society
0
2
O
Weekly total
8
6
them ; and they prefer to “ do well ” for two or
three, than to “drag up” twice or three times
as many in rags and ignorance.
Clothing is dear in New Zealand. The
following is a labourer’s account of his expendi-
ture. He is an industrious man, and his wife
is a thrifty Glasgow woman. It is drawn very
fine. No. 7is less than he would have to pay
in the city by two or three shillings a week for
a house of similar size No. 9is rather higher
than is usual with Benefit Societies, which
average about sixteen shillings a quarter.
Most young people make a good start in
New Zealand. Even men-servants and maid-
servants want for nothing. They dress well,
they go to the theatres and music-halls, they
have numerous holidays, and enjoy them by
excursions on land or sea. It is when they


marry, and mouths come crying to be filled,
that they become poor, and the struggle of life
begins.
In our Colony, there is no more prevalent
or ingrained idea in the minds of our people
than that large families are a cause of poverty.
A high birth-rate in a family certainly is a
cause of poverty. Many children do not
enable a father to earn higher wages, nor do
they enable a mother to render the bread-
winner more assistance; while in New Zealand,
especially, compulsory education and the
inhibition of child-labour prevent indigent
parents from procuring the slight help that
robust boys and girls of 10 years of age, or so,
are often able to supply.
These considerations go far to explain the
desire on the part of married couples to limit
offspring ; and, if there were no means at their
disposal of limiting the number of children born
to them, a great decline in the marriage-rate
would be the inevitable result of the existing
conditions of life, and the prevalent ideas of the
people.
Hopeless poverty appears to be a cause of
a high birth-rate, and this seems to be due to
the complete abandonment by the hopelessly
poor of all hope of attaining comfort and
success.
Marriage between two who are hopelessly
poor is extremely rare with us. Each is able
to provide for his or herself at least, and in all


probability the husband is able to provide
comfortably for both.
If he is not, the wife can work, and their
joint earnings will keep them from want. But,
if one of the partners has not only to give
herself up to child-bearing, and thus cease to
earn, but also bring another into the home that
will monopolise all her time, attention, and
energy, and a good deal of its father’s earnings,
how will they fare ?
If a man’s wages has to be divided between
two, then between three, then four, six, eight,
ten, while all the time that wages is not
increasing, have we not a direct cause of
poverty, and, moreover, is not that cause first
in time and importance ?
Later on in the history of the family their
poverty will become a cause of an increase in
the children born to them. At first they may
struggle to prevent an increase, but, when they
are in the depths of hopeless poverty, they will
abandon themselves to despair.
Could they have had born to them only
one, or two, or three, during their early married
life, they might not only have escaped want,
but later in life may have had others born to
them, without either their little ones or them-
selves feeling the pinch of poverty.
It must be remembered in this connection
that fecundity and sexual activity are not
convertible terms.
D


It is certainly not true to say that the
greater the fecundity of the people the stronger
their sexual instinct, or the greater the sexual
exercise.
A high fecundity does not depend on an
inordinate sexual activity.
Fecundity depends on the child-bearing
capacity of each female, and a sexual union
at an appropriate time once in two years
between puberty and the catamenia is com-
patible with the highest possible fecundity.
It would be quite illogical, and inconsistent
with physiological facts, to aver that, were the
poor less given to indulge the pleasures of
sense, their fecundity would be modified in an
appreciable degree.


CHAPTER VI.
ETHICS OF PREVENTION.
Fertility the law of life. —Man interprets and controls this law, —
Marriage law necessary to fix paternal responsibility.—Malt bus's
high ideal, — If prudence the motive , continence and celibacy
violate no law. — Post-nuptial intermittent restraint.—Ethics of
prevention judged by consequences. — When procreation is a good
and when an evil. — Oligantrophy.—Artificial checks are physio-
logical sins.
41 So God created man in his own image, in the
image of God created He him, male and female
created He them, and God blessed them and
God said unto them, 4 Be fruitful and multiply,
and replenish the earth.’”—(Genesis i., 27-28).
This commandment was repeated to Noah and
his sons.
Whether Moses was recording the voice of
God, or interpreting a physiological law is
immaterial to this aspect of a great social
question. The fact remains that in obedience
to a great law of life, all living things are
fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth,
and multiplication in a state of nature is limited
only by space and food.
In a state of nature, reproduction is
automatic, and only in this state is this phy-
siological law, or this divine command obeyed.


The reason of man intervenes, and inter-
prets, and modifies this law.
A community of men becomes a social
organism, calls itself a State, and limits the
law of reproduction. It decrees that the sexes
shall, if they pair, isolate themselves in pairs,
and live in pairs whether inclined to so live or
not.
If the State has a right so to interpret
and limit the law of reproduction, a principle in
human affairs is established, and its decree
that individuals shall not mate before a certain
age, or not mate at all, is only a further ap-
plication of the same principle. By the law
of reproduction a strong instinct, second only
in force and universality to the law of self-
preservation, is planted in the sexes, and upon
a blind obedience to this force, the continuity
of the race depends.
The tendency in the races of history has
been to over-population, or to a population
beyond the food supply, and there is probably
no race known to history that did not at some
one period of its rise or fall suffer from over-
population.
States have mostly been concerned, therefore,
with restraining or inhibiting the natural re-
productive instinct of their subjects through
marriage laws which protect the State, by fixing
paternal responsibility. There were strong
reasons why a State should not be over-
populated, and only one reason why it should


not be under-populated. That one reason was
the danger of annihilation from invasion.
Sparta was said to have suffered thus,
because of under-population, and passed a law
encouraging large families. Alexander en-
couraged his soldiers to intermarry with the
women of conquered races, in order to diminish
racial differences and antagonism, and Augustus
framed laws for the discouragement of celibacy,
but no law has ever been passed decreeing
that individuals must mate, or if they do mate
that they shall procreate.
Malthus, the great and good philanthro-
pist of Harleybury, a great moralist and
Christian clergyman, urged that it was people’s
duty not to mate and procreate until they had
reasonable hope of being able easily to rear,
support, and educate the normal family of four,
and, if that were impossible, not to mate at all.
As a Christian clergyman, Malthus did not in-
terpret the Divine command apart from the
consequences of its literal acceptance.
“ Be fruitful,” meant to Malthus reproduce
your kind, —that implied not only bringing
babies into the world, but rearing them up to
healthy, robust, and prosperous manhood, with
every prospect of continuing the process.
“ Multiply and replenish the earth ” as a
command to Noah, meant in the mind of the
Rector of Harleybury, “ People the earth with
men after your own image.”


Very little care would be required in Noah’s
time, with his fine alluvial flats, and sparse
population, but in Malthus’s time the command
could not be fully carried out without labour,
self-development, and “moral restraint.”
The physiological law is simple and blind,
taking no cognisance of the consequences, or
the quality of the offspring produced. The
divine command is complex. It embodies the
reproductive instinct, but restrains and guides
it in view of ultimate consequences.
So much for the views and teaching of
Malthus. To him no ethical standard was
violated in preventing offspring by protracted
continence, or lifelong celibacy, provided the
motive was the inability so to provide for a
family as to require no aid from the state. And
it is difficult to escape this conclusion. There
is no ethical, Christian, or social law, that
directs a man or woman to procreate their kind
if they cannot, or have reasonable grounds to
think they cannot, support their offspring with-
out aid from others.
There can be, therefore, no just law that
decrees that men or women shall marry under
such circumstances. In fact most philanthropists
think they violate a social and ethical law if they
do marry.
But, if with Paul, they resolve that it is
better to marry than to burn, is there any law
that can or should prevent them selecting the


occasions of their union, with a view to limiting
fertility.
Abstention is the voluntary hindrance of a
desire, when that desire is strongest in both
sexes ; and as such it limits happiness, and is
in consequence an evil per se. A motive that
will control this desire must be a strong one ;
such a motive is not necessarily bad. It may
be good or evil.
There can be no essential ethical differ-
ence between constant continence, prior to
marriage, and intermittent continence subse-
quent to marriage, both practices having a
similar motive.
If post nuptial restraint with a view to
limiting offspring is wrong, restraint from
marriage with the same motive is wrong.
If delayed marriage in the interest of the
individual and the State is right, marriage with
intermittent restraint is in the same interest,
and can as easily be defended.
The ethics of prevention by restraint must
be judged by its consequences. If unrestrained
procreation will place children in a home where
the food and comfort are adequate to their
healthful support and development, then pro-
creation is good,—good for the individual,
society, and the State.
If the conditions necessary to this healthful
support and development, can by individual or
State effort be provided for all children born,


it is the duty of the individual and of the State
to make that effort.
All persons of fair education and good in-
telligence know what those conditions are, and
if they procreate regardless of their absence,
that procreation is an evil, and prevention by
restraint is the contrary virtue.
It is not suggested, however, that all those
who prevent, without or within the marriage
bond, do so from this worthy motive, nor is it
suggested that all those who prevent are not
extravagant in their demand for luxurious con-
ditions for themselves and for their children.
Many require not merely the conditions
necessary to the healthful development of each
and every child they may bear, but they demand
that child-bearing shall not entail hardships nor
the prospect of hardships, shall not involve the
surrender of any comfort or luxury, nor the
prospect of any such surrender.
Whatever doubt may exist in the minds of
moralists and philanthropists as to the ethics of
prevention in the face of poverty, there can be
no doubt that prevention by those able to bear
and educate healthy offspring, without hardship,
is a pernicious vice degrading to the individual,
and a crime against society and the State.
Aristotle called this vice “ oliganthropy.”
Amongst the ancients it was associated with
self-indulgence, luxury, and ease. It was the
result of self-indulgence, but it was the cause
of mental and moral anaemia, and racial decay.


So far in this chapter prevention has been
dealt with only in so far as it is brought
about by ante-nuptial and post-nuptial restraint.
Artificial checks were first brought prominently
before the notice of the British Public under
the garb of social virtue, about the year
1877 by Mrs. Annie Besant and Mr. Charles
Bradlaugh.
These checks to conception, though they are
very largely used, can hardly be defended on
physiological grounds. Every interference with
a natural process must be attended, to some
extent at least, with physical injury. There is
not much evidence that the injury is great, but
in so far as an interference is unnatural, it is
unhealthy, and there is much evidence to show
that many of the checks advocated and used,
are not only harmful but are quite useless for
the purpose for which they are sold.
It will be conceded by most, no doubt,
that with those capable of bearing healthy
children, and those unable to rear healthy ones
when born, prevention by restraint, ante-nuptial
or post nuptial, is a social virtue, while pre-
vention under all other circumstances is a social
vice.
Happiness has been defined as the surplus
of pleasure over pain. What constitutes plea-
sure and what pain varies in the different stages
of racial and individual development. In
civilized man we have the pleasures of mind
supplementing and in some cases replacing the


pleasures of sense. We talk, therefore, of the
higher pleasures—the pleasures of knowledge
and learning, of wider sympathies and love,
of the contemplation of extended prosperity
and concord, of hope for international fraternity
and peace, and for a life beyond the grave.
Happiness to the highly civilized will consist,
therefore, of the surplus of these pleasures over
the pains of their negation.
Self-preservation is the basal law of life,
and to preserve one’s-self in happiness, the
completest preservation, for happiness promotes
health, and health longevity.
The first law of living nature then is to
preserve life and the enjoyment of it, and the
pleasures sought, to increase the sum of
happiness will depend on the sentiments and
emotions, i.e., on the faculties of mind that
education and experience have developed, in
the race, or in the individual.
My first thought is for myself, and my duty
is to increase the sum of my happiness. But
the mental state we call happiness is relative to
the presence or absence of this state in others.
Even amongst the lower animals, misery and
distress in one of the flock militate against the
happiness of the others. In a highly developed
man true happiness is impossible in the pre-
sence of pain and misery in others and vice
versa; happiness is contagious and flows to us
from the joy of others. If the happiness of
others then is so essential to my own happiness,


I am fulfilling the first law of life and minister-
ing to my own preservation in health and
happiness by using my best endeavours to
promote this state in others. My material
comfort too depends largely on the labour, and
love, and the contribution of others in the
complex industrial system and division of
labour of the higher civilisations. Not only
my happiness and health but my very existence
depends on the good-will and toil of others.
Thus from a purely egoistic standpoint, my
first duty to myself is to increase the happiness
in others, and, therefore, my first duty to myself
becomes my highest duty to society.
My duty to my child is comprehended in
my duty to society, i.e., to others. My duty to
others is to increase the sum of the happiness
of others, and bringing healthy children into
the world not only creates beings capable of
experiencing and enjoying pleasures, but adds
to the sum of social happiness, by increasing
the number of social units capable of rendering
service to others.
The next great law of life is the law of race
preservation. This law comprises the instinct
to reproduction and the instinct of parental
love. The first and chief function of these
instincts in the animal economy is the perpetua-
tion of the race. The preservation of self
implies and comprehends the preservation of
the race.


My first duty to myself is to preserve
myself in health and happiness; but this is
best fulfilled and realized in labouring for the
health and happiness of others. If this be the
universal law, I also am the recipient of others’
care, therefore probably better tended and
preserved. I save my life by losing it in
others.
My second duty, though nominally to
Society, is in reality to myself, and it is to
preserve myself by preserving the race to which
I belong.
Self-preservation therefore, is the first law
of life, race preservation the second or sub-
sidiary law.
To fulfil this second law, nature has placed
on every normal healthy man and woman the
sacred duty of reproducing their kind. Repro-
duction as a physiological process promotes,
both directly and indirectly, the health,
happiness and longevity of healthy men and
women,
Statistics confirm the popular opinion “that
the length of life, to the enjoyment of which a
married person may look forward, is greater
than that of the unmarried, both male and
female at the same age.”—(Coghlan).
It is a familiar observation that the mothers
of large families of ten and even twice that num-
ber are not less healthy nor shorter lived
because of the children they have borne.
Pregnancy is a stimulus to vitality. Because


another life has to be supported, all the vital
powers are invigorated and rise to the occasion
—the circulation increases, the heart enlarges
in response to the extra work, and the assimi-
lative powers of the body are greatly accelerated.
During lactation also, the same extra vital
work done is a stimulus to a physiological
activity which is favourable to health and
longevity. The expectancy of life in women
is greater than in men all through life, the
difference during the child-bearing period of
life being about 2 ’2 years in favour of women.
Statistics and physicians from their obser-
vation agree in this, that the bearing of children
by normal women, so far from being injurious
to health, is as healthful, stimulating, and in-
vigorating a function as the blooming of a
flower, or the shedding of fruit, and a mother
is no worse for the experience of maternity
than is the plant or the tree for the fruit it
bears.
The supreme law of society is the law of
race-preservation, and the infraction of this law
is a social crime. One’s duty to society is a
higher duty than to one’s-self, but the lower
duty comes first in our present stage of racial
evolution. Instinct prompts to the one, reason
—a higher and later, but less respected, faculty—
prompts to the other.
But it can be shown that from an egoistic
standpoint my duty to the State in this regard
is my highest duty to myself.


The parental sacrifice necessary in rearing
the normal number of children is infinitesimal
compared with the parental advantage.
Parental love is a passion as well as an
instinct in normal men and women, and the
full play of this passion in its natural state is
productive of the greatest happiness.
Vice may restrain, replace, or smother it,
but nothing else can damage or adulterate this
powerful passion in the human heart.
Low level selfishness, love of low level
luxury, diseased imaginings, and unreasonable
dreads and fears, are some of the forms of vice
that smother this noble passion.
The pursuit of happiness and the higher
forms of selfishness would naturally point to
parentage.
The ectasy of parental love, the sweet res-
ponse from little ones that rises as the fragrance
of lovely flowers, self-realization in the comfort
and joy of family life, the parental pride in
the contemplation of effulgent youth, the sym-
pathetic partnership in success, the repose of
old age surrounded by filial manhood and
womanhood, all go to make a surplus of
pleasure over pain, that no other way of life
can possibly supply.
What is the alternative ?
To miss all this and live a barren life and a
loveless old age. Perhaps to bear a child, that,
for the need of the educative, elevating com-
panionship of family mates is consumed by self,


inheriting that vicious selfishness, which he by
his birth defeated, and finding all the forces of
nature focussed on his defect, like a pack of
hounds that turn and rend an injured mate.
Or a family of one, after years of parental
care and love, education and expense, dies or
turns a rake, and the canker of remorse takes
his place in the broken hearts.
Nature’s laws are not broken with impunity
—as a great Physician has said, “ She never
forgives and never forgets.”
Self-preservation and race-preservation
together constitute the law of life, just as Con-
servation of Matter and Conservation of Energy
constitute the Law of Substance in Haeckel’s
Monistic Philosophy, and the severest altruism
will permit man to follow his highest self-in-
terest in obedience to these laws. It is only
a perverted and vicious self-interest that would
tempt him to infraction.
That the vice of oliganthropy is growing
amongst normal and healthy people is a painful
and startling fact. In New Zealand the pre-
vailing belief is that a number of children adds
to the cares and responsibilities of life more
than they add to its joys and pleasures, and
many have come to think with John Stuart
Mill, that a large family should be looked on
with the same contempt as drunkenness.


CHAPTER VII.
WHO PREVENT.
Desire for family limitation result of oar social system. —Desire and
practice not uniform through all classes. — The best limit , the
worst do not. —Early marriages and large families. — N.Z.
marriage rates. Those who delay , and those who abstain from
marriage.—Good motives mostly actuate.—All limitation im-
plies restraint. — Birth-rates vary inversely with prudence and
self-control. —The limited family usually born in early married
life when progeny is less likely to be well developed.—Our worst
citizens most prolific. —Effect of poverty on fecundity.—Effect
of alcoholic intemperance. —Effect of mental and physical
defects. —Defectives propagate their kind.—The intermittent
inhabitants of Asylums and Gaols constitute the greatest danger
to society.—Character the resultant of two forces —motor impulse
and inhibition. —Chief criminal characteristic is defective
inhibition. —This defect is strongly hereditary.—It expresses
itself in unrestrained fertility.
It has been sufficiently demonstrated in pre-
ceding chapters, that the birth-rate has been,
and is still rapidly declining. It has been
sought to prove that this decline is chiefly due
to voluntary means taken by married people to
limit their families, and that the desire for this
limitation is the result of our social system.
The important question now arises. Is the
desire uniform through all classes of Society,
and is the practice of prevention uniform through
all classes ?


In other words, is the decline in the birth-
rate due to prevention in one class more than
in another, and if so which ?
Experience and statistics force us to the
startling conclusion, that the birth-rate is de-
clining amongst the best classes of citizens, and
remains undisturbed amongst the worst.
Now the first-class responsible for the de-
cline includes those who do not marry, and
those who marry late. The Michigan vital
statistics for 1894 (p- 125) show that the mean
number of children to each marriage at the
age of 15-19 years is 675, at the age of
20-25 years it is 572, a difference of i - 44 in
favour of delayed marriage for a period of five
years.
In New Zealand the marriage rate has gone
up from 5 - 97 per thousand persons living in
1888 to 7*67 in 1900.
This class includes clerks with an income
of and under, —a large number with
£ 150, and all misogynists with higher incomes.
It includes labourers with £75 a-year and
under, and many who receive £lOO.
Their motives for avoiding marriage are
mostly prudential.
Those who abstain from marriage for pru-
dential reasons are as a rule good citizens.
They are workers who realise their respon-
sibilities in life, and shrink from undertaking
duties which they feel they cannot adequately
perform. By far the largest class who practice
E


prevention, consists of those who marry, and
have one or two children, and limit their
families to that number, for prudential, health,
or selfish reasons.
These too are as a rule good citizens, and
there are two qualities that so distinguish them.
First, their prudence; they have no wish to
burden the State with the care or support of
their children. Their fixed determination is to
support and educate them themselves, and they
set themselves to the work with thriftiness and
forethought.
In order to do this, however, it is essential
that the family is limited to one, two, or three,
as the case may be, and before it is too late,
preventive measures are resorted to.
The second quality that distinguishes them
as good citizens is their self-control. Every
preventive measure in normal individuals im-
plies a certain amount of self-restraint, and in
proportion as prudential motives are strong is
the self-imposed restraint easy and effective.
The existence of these two qualities, pru-
dence and self-control, is a very important
factor in human character, and upon their
presence and prevalence in its units depend the
progress and stability of society. But the
birth-rate varies in an inverse ratio with these
qualities. In those communities or sections
of communities, where these qualities are con
spicuous, will the birth-rate be correspondingly
low.


There is another class of people that has
strong desires to keep free from the cares and
expense of a large family. These are, too,
good citizens and belong to good stock, They
are those possessed of ambition to rise socially,
politically, or financially, and they are a
numerous body in New Zealand.
They are quite able to support and educate
a fairly large family, but as children are
hindrances, and increase the anxieties, the res-
ponsibilities and the expense, they must be
limited to one or two.
There is still another class that consists
of the purely selfish and luxurious members of
society, who find children a bother, who have
to sacrifice some of the pleasures of life in order
to rear them.
Now all those who prevent have some
rational ground for prevention, and at least
are possessed of sufficient self-control to give
effect to their wish. They include the best
citizens and the best stock, and from them
would issue, if the reproductive faculty were
unrestrained, the best progeny.
One grave aspect of this limitation is that,
as a rule, the family is limited after the first
one or two are born. The small families, say of
two, are born when the parents are both young,
and carefully compiled statistics prove that
these are not the best offspring a couple can
produce. Those born first in wedlock, are
shorter and not so well developed as those born


later in married life, when parents are more
matured.
If it is substantially true, that the decline
in the birth-rate is due to voluntary prevention,
and that prevention implies prudence and self-
control, it is safe to conclude that those in whom
these qualities are absent or least conspicuous,
will be the most prolific.
But those in whom these qualities are absent
or least conspicuous are our worst citizens, and,
therefore, our worst citizens are the most
prolific. Observation and statistics lead to the
same conclusion.
Amongst the very poor in crowded localities,
the passion for marriage early asserts itself.
Its natural enemies are prudence and a
consciousness of responsibility, and these
suggest restraint. But prudence and restraint
are not the common attributes of the very poor.
Poverty makes people reckless, they live from
hour to hour as the lower animals do. They
satisfy their desires as they arise, whether it
be the desire for food or the desire of sex.
The very poor includes amongst its num-
bers, the drunkard, the criminal, the pro-
fessional pauper, and the physically and men-
tally defective.
The drunkard is not distinguished by his
prudence, nor by his self-restraint. In fact
the alcohol which he imbibes paralyses what
self-control he has, and excites through an
increased circulation in his lower brain-centres


an unnatural sexual desire. What hope is there
of the drunkard curtailing his family by self-
restraint ?
Dr. Billings says, (Forum, June 1893) “So
far as we have data with regard to the use of
intoxicating liquors, fertility seems greatest in
those countries and amongst those classes where
they are most freely used.”
Neither is the criminal blessed with the
important attributes of prudence and self-
control. They are conspicuous by their
absence in him.
In all defectives, in epileptics, idiots, the
physical deformed, the insane, and the criminal,
the prudence and self-restraint necessary to the
limitation of families is either partially or en-
tirely absent.
To the poor in crowded localities, with
limited room-space and insanitary surroundings,
effective self-restraint is more difficult than in
any other class of society.
In all defectives the sexual instinct is as
strong, if not stronger, than in the normal,
and they have not that interest in life, and
regard for the future that suggest restraint, nor
have they the power to practise it though pru-
dence were to guide them.
The higher checks to population, as they
exist among the better classes of people, do
not obtain amongst the defectives taken as a
class.


Vice and misery are more active checks
amongst the very poor, and abortion is
practised to a very considerable extent, but
the appalling fact remains, that the birth-rate
of the unfit goes on undisturbed, while the
introduction of higher checks amongst the
normal classes has led to a marked decline,
more marked than at first sight appears. The
worst feature of the problem, however, is not
so much the disproportion in the numbers born
to the normal and the abnormal respectively,
but the fact that the defectives propagate their
kind.
The defectives, whose existence and whose
liberty constitute the greatest danger to the
State, are the intermittent inhabitants of our
lunatic asylums, prisons, and reformatories.
There is one defect common to all these,
and that is defective inhibition.
All human activity is the result of two
forces, motor impulses tending to action, and
inhibition tending to inertia.
The lower animals have strong motor im-
pulses constantly exploding and expressing
themselves in great activity, offensive, defen-
sive, self-preservative, and procreative, being
restrained only by the inhibitive forces of their
conditions and environment.
Children have strong motor impulses, which
are at first little controlled. Inhibition is a
late development and is largely a result of
education.


If the motor impulses remain strong, or
become stronger in the presence of develop-
ment with exercise, while inhibition remains
weak, we have a criminal.
Inhibition is the function performed by the
highest and last-formed brain-cells. These
brain cells may be undeveloped either from
want of exercise, that is, education, or from
hereditary weakness, or, having been developed
may have undergone degeneration, under the
influence of alcohol, or from hereditary or
acquired disease.
Motor impulses, as the springs of action,
are common to all animals. In the lower
animals inhibition is external, and never
internal or subjective. In man it may be
internal or external.
It is internal or subjective in those whose
higher brain centres are well developed and
normal. Their auto-inhibition is such that all
their motor impulses are controlled and directed
in the best interests of society.
It is externa] only in those whose higher
brain centres are either undeveloped or diseased.
These constitute the criminal classes. Their
motor impulses are unrestrained. They offer a
low or reduced resistance to temptation.
Weak or absent resistance in the face of a
normal motor impulse whose expression in-
juriously affects another, is crime, and a
criminal is one whose power of resistance to
motor impulses has been reduced by disease,


hereditary or acquired, or is absent through
arrested development.
A confirmed criminal is one in whom the
frequent recurrence of an unrestrained impulse
injurious to others has induced habit.
Auto-inhibition is defective or absent, and
society must in her own interest provide
external restraint, and this we call law.
Criminals are, therefore, mental defectives,
and may be defined for sociological purposes
as those in whom legal punishment for the
second time, for the same offence, has failed to
act as a deterrent.
M. Boies, in “ Prisoners and Paupers,” says
that conviction for the third time for an offence,
is proof of hereditary criminal taint.
The existence of motor impulses in the
human animal is normal. They vary in
strength and force. We cannot eradicate, we
can only control them.
They may become less assertive under the
constant control of a highly cultivated inhibi-
tion, but it is only in this way that they can be
affected at all. They may be controlled,
either by the individual himself or by the
State. Our reformatories are peopled by young
persons whose distinguishing characteristic is
that inhibition is undeveloped or defective.
This defect may be due to want of education,
but it is more often hereditary.
Two things only can be done for them.
This faculty of inhibition can be trained by


education, or external restraint can be provided
by law.
But the distinguishing characteristic of all
defectives, within or without our public insti-
tutions, is defective inhibition, —they are unable
to control the spontaneous impulses that con-
tinually arise, and which may indeed be
normal.
Impulses may be abnormal from hereditary
predisposition, as e.g. the impulse to drink, but
only through strengthening inhibition can these
impulses be controlled, —their existence must be
accepted.
But whether the defect is an abnormal
impulse, or a normal impulse abnormally strong,
or an abnormally weak or defective inhibition,
the condition is hereditary, and such defectives
propagate their kind.
It has been shown that they are more fertile
than any other classes because of the very
defect that makes them a danger to society.
The defective restraint that allows them to
commit offences against person and property,
also allows their procreative impulse un-
restrained activity.
Defectives, therefore, are not only fertile,
but they propagate their kind, and a few
examples will serve to show to some extent
the fertility, and to an enormous extent the
hereditary tendencies, of the unfit.






CASE No. 7, p. 231.
J. G. A ’s Family History.
Paternal Side. Maternal Side.
“ J Grandfather, a drunkard Grandmother, “ odd ”
£ \ Grandmother, normal Grandfather, normal
{Uncle, a drunkard Uncle, epileptic
Uncle, a drunkard Uncle, rheumatic, totally crippled
and his daughter also
Uncle, an epileptic Uncle, rheumatic
Aunt, rheumatic
Father, excitable & irritable Mother, died in asylum
w /Daughter, has had rheumatism and has had heart disease
u Son, now insane
."2 Son, died a few days old of convulsions
Son, now a chronic maniac in an asylum
Daughter, suicidal, melancholic ; died in an asylum. No issue.
V Family now extinct.
The above diagrammatic histories of eight families are taken
from Dr. Strahan’s “ Marriage and Disease.”


CHAPTER VIII.
THE MULTIPLICATION OF THE FIT IN RELATION
TO THE STATE.
The State's ideal in relation to the fertility of its subjects.—Keen
competition means great effort and great waste of life. — If
in the minds of the citizens space and food are ample multi-
plication works automatically.—To New Zealanders food now
includes the luxuries as well as the necessities of life. —Men are
driven to the alternative of supporting a family of their own or a
degenerate family of defectives. —The State enforces the one but
cannot enforce the other.—New Zealand taxation.—The burden
of the bread-winner.—As the State lightens this burden it
encourages fertility.—The survival of the unfit makes the burden
of the fit.
The multiplication of the fit is of the first im-
portance to the State. It supplies competent
producers and courageous defenders, and the
more of these, consistent with space and food
(using these terms in their fullest significance),
the better off the State.
If healthy happy citizens are the State’s
ideal, then limitation of population well within
the space and food will be encouraged. If
national wealth and prosperity in its material
aspect are the State’s ideal, the harder the
population presses on the means of subsistence
the sooner will that ideal be realised. For it
cannot be denied, that the greater the stress


and hardship in life, the more strenuous the
effort put forth to obtain a foothold. The
greater the competition the keener the effort,
and the higher the accomplishment; while to
ensure an adequate supply of labour in time of
great demand there must always be a
surplus.
The waste of life must always be greater;
but what of that! National wealth is the ideal
—the maximum amount of production. Child
labour, and women labour, are called in to fill
the national granaries, though misery and death
attend the process.
If this be the ideal of the State, life is of
less value than the product of labour, for it
can be more easily and readily replaced.
But the ideal of the perfect state is not
wealth but the robust happiness of its members.
The happiness of its members is best pro-
moted by the maximum increase in its numbers,
consistent with ample space and food. With
ample space and food multiplication works
automatically, being kept up to the limit of
space and food by the procreative instinct.
If it can be shown that multiplication is
not sufficiently stimulated by this instinct, then
it must be concluded that, in the minds of the
citizens the space and food are not ample.
In New Zealand the procreative impulse
does not keep multiplication at an equal pace
with the apparent supply of food and space,
and this is due, as has been shown, to the


fact that our citizens are not satisfied that
the supply is ample.
They have come to enlarge the definition of
“food,” and this term now includes luxuries
easily obtainable for themselves and their
families.
But the luxuries of life and living can only
be easily obtained when individual effort to
obtain them is unhampered. Every burden
which a man has to bear (only the best are
here referred to, —the fit members of the State)
limits his power to provide for himself, and any
he may bring into the world.
If the State decrees that a citizen shall
support himself, his mate, and his progeny,
well and good,—if he has no other burden to
bear, no other responsibility, he knows exactly
where he is and what he has to do, and directs
his energies and controls his impulses, and
enlarges his desires to suit his tastes and
purposes.
But if the State decrees that a citizen shall
not only support all for whose existence he is
responsible, but also all those unable to support
themselves, born into the world in increasing
numbers as congenital defectives, and manufac-
tured in the world by legalised drinking saloons,
and by pauperising charitable aid and benevo-
lent institutions, then our self-respecting right-
respecting citizen must decide whether he will
forego the luxury and ease that he may enjoy,
and rear the normal family, or curtail his own


progeny, and support the army of defectives
thrown upon society by the State-encouraged
fertility of the unfit.
It has already been shown, that in this
colony the best fit to multiply are ceasing to
do so, because of a desire to attain a social
and financial stability that will protect them
and their dependents from want or the prospect
of want. There is every reason to believe,
that when this stability is assured the normal
family soon follows.
The love of luxurious idleness and a passion
for excitement, which were typical of the
voluntarily barren women of ancient Rome,
have little place with us, as a cause of limited
nativity.
Men and women reason out, that they
cannot bear all the burdens that the State
imposes upon them, support an increasing army
of paupers, and lunatics and defectives, and
non-producers, and that luxuriously, and at the
same time incur the additional burden of rearing
a large family.
Let us examine these burdens, and see if
the complaint of our best stock is justified.
The amount raised by taxation in New
Zealand (including local rates) during the year
1902-03, amounted per head of population
(excluding Maories) to 4s. 7d. The bread-
winners in New Zealand number according to
official returns, 340,230, and the total rates
and taxes collected for the year 1902-03


amounted to £4, 174,787 or £l2 ss. 4d. for
each bread-winner for the year.
On March 31st, 1901 (the last census date)
there were 23.01 persons per thousand of
population over 15 years of age, unable to
work from sickness, accident and infirmity.
Of these 12.72 were due to sickness and
accident, and 10.29 to “specified infirmities.”
The proportion of those suffering from
sickness and accident in 1874 was 12.64 per
1000 over 15 years, practically the same
as for 1901, while disability from “specified
infirmities” (lunacy, idiocy, epilepsy, deformity,
etc.) —degeneracies strongly hereditary—rose
rapidly from 5.32 in 1874 to 10.29 in 1901,
or taking the total sickness and infirmity, from
17.96 in 1874 to 23.01 in 1901.
On the last census date there were 340,230
bread-winners, and 12,747 persons suffering
from sickness, accident, and infirmity, or 26
fit to work and earn for every one unfit.
The cost to the Colony per year of—
£
1. Hospitals, year ended 31st March, 1903 138,027
2. Charitable Aid (expended by boards),
year ended 31st March, 1903 ... 93,158
3. Lunatic Asylums, year ended 31st Dec.,
1902 ... ... ... (gross) 85,238
Lunatic Asylums, year ended 31st Dec.,
1902 ... ... ... (nett) 64,688
4. Industrial Schools, year ended 31st Dec.,
1902 —
Government Industrial Schools for
neglected and criminal children 21,708
F


£
Government Expenditure on Private
Denominational Industrial
Schools ... ... ... 2,526
5. Police Force, year ended 31st March, 1903 123,804
6. Prisons, year ended 31st March, 1903 ... 32,070
7. Criminal Courts (Criminal Prosecutions),
year ended 31st March, 1903 ... 16,813
8. Old Age Pensions (pensions only for
persons over 65 years of age, who
have been 25 years in the Colony,
and who make a declaration of
poverty, including departmental
expenses) ... ... ... 212,962
A total of This constitutes the
burden due to defectives and defects in others,
a handful of workers have to bear in a sparse
population of 800,000 souls in one of the
finest countries on which the sun of heaven
ever shone.
The burden which the fit have to bear has
often been referred to by Dr. MacGregor,
who states in one of his reports, “ Wives and
husbands, parents of bastards, all alike are
encouraged by lavish charity (falsely so called)
to entirely shirk their responsibilities in the
well grounded assurance that public money will
be forth-coming to keep them and their families
in quite as comfortable position as their hard-
working and independent neighbours.”
The state can not decree that men shall
marry, or that women shall marry, or that
women shall procreate. All it can do is to
discover why its subjects are not fertile, and
remove the causes so far as it is possible.


As people become educated they become
conscious of their limitations, and endeavour
to break through them and better their con-
ditions.
The more difficult this process is, the less
likely will men and women be to incur the
burden of a large family. The more the con-
ditions of existence are improved, the more
completely is each man’s wish realized, and the
more readily will he undertake the responsi-
bilities of a family.
If the State can and will lighten the burden
of taxation and modify the strain and stress of
life, it will indirectly encourage procreation.
No direct encouragement is possible. It
was tried and it failed in Sparta, it was tried
by Augustus and it failed in Rome, it must fail
everywhere, for the most willing and the most
ready to respond to any provision made to
encourage increase, are the unfit, and it is the
fertility of the unfit that is the very evil that has
to be attacked.
It is the fertility of the unfit that makes the
burden of the fit, and a tax on bachelors, or a
bonus on families, would be responded to by
the least fit, long before it affected those whose
response was anticipated, and the problem
sought to be solved would only be aggravated
thereby.
No encouragement whatever can the State
afford to give to the natural increase of


population till it has successfully grappled with
the propagation of defectives.
The burden of life would be lessened by
nearly one-third if the fertility of defectives
could be stopped.
The State would have to support only those
who acquired defects, the scars of service more
honourable than wealth, in their efforts to
support themselves and families, and these
would be few indeed, if inherited tendencies
could be eliminated or reduced to a minimum.
It is the purpose of this work to attempt to
describe a method that will help to bring about
this end.






CHAPTER IX.
THE MULTIPLICATION OF THE UNFIT IN
RELATION TO THE STATE.
Ancient methods of preventing the fertility of the unfit. —Christian
sentiment suppressed inhuman practices—Christian care brings
many defectives to the child-bearing period of life. —The
association of mental and physical defects. — Who are the unfit.
—The tendency of relatives to cast their degenerate kinsfolk on
the State.—Our social conditions manufacture defectives and
foster their fertility.—The only moral force that limits families
is inhibition with prudence.—Defective self-control transmitted
hereditarily. — Dr. MacGregor's cases.—The transmission of
insanity.—Celibacy of the insane is the prophylaxis of insanity
in the race.—The environment of the unfit. —Defectives snatched
from Nature's clutch.—At the age of maturity they are left to
propagate their kind.
The humanitarian spirit, born 1900 years ago,
effectually checked all inhuman practices for
disposal of the unfit. Christ is the Author of
this spirit. The noisy triumph of His perse-
cutors had scarcely died away before His
conception of the sanctity of human life found
expression in the mission of those Roman
maidens who in His name devoted their lives
to collecting exposed infants from the environs
of their city—that they might rear and educate
them and bring them to the Church.
Not only has it done this, but it has taught
society that its first and highest duty is to its
weaker brethren, who constitute the unfit.


All our modern institutions are based on
this sentiment, and what is the result ? Weak-
lings are born into the world and the weaker
they are the more carefully are they tended and
nursed. The law of the struggle for existence,
i.e., the law of Justice is suspended or
modified, and the unfit are allowed to live, or
at least allowed to live a little longer, long
enough indeed to propagate their kind.
Hospitals and Homes and Charitable insti-
tutions all combine their energies, and direct
their efforts to nurture those whom the laws of
nature decree should die.
Sympathy and not indignation is aroused
when a defective is born, and the result of all
the effort which that sympathy evokes is that
the little weakling and thousands such are safely
led and tended all the way to the child-bearing
period of life, only to repeat their history, in
others.
Not only do defects “run in families,” but
they run in groups, and a physical defect such
as club-foot, cleft palate, or any arrested develop-
ment, is apt to be associated with some mental
defect, and it is the mental more than the
physical defects of individuals that prevent
them being self-supporting helpful members of
society.
In the “ North American Review ” for
August, 1903, Sir John Gorst declares that:—
“The condition of disease, debility, and
defective sight and hearing, in the public


Year.
1894
Proportion per thousand of
mean population.
24.76
1897
26.87
1898
29.42
1899
... 29.48
1900
31-54
1901
33.2°
1902
35-19
elementary schools in poorer districts, is
appalling. The research of a recent Royal
Commission has disclosed that of the children
in the public schools of Edinburgh, 70 per cent,
are suffering from disease of some kind, more
than half from defective vision, nearly half
from defective hearing, and 30 per cent, from
starvation. The physical deterioration of the
recruits who offer themselves for the army is a
subject of increasing concern. There are
grounds for at least suspecting a growing
degeneracy of the population of the United
Kingdom, particularly in the great towns.”
The following table gives the charges before
Magistrates in our Courts :
Now who are the unfit ? Are they more
fertile than the fit ? and do they propagate
their kind ?
The following defects constitute their victims
members of that great class of degenerates who
are unfit to procreate healthy normal offspring.
Many of these conditions are partly congenital
and partly acquired, but in the majority of
defectives a transmitted taint is present.


I. Congenital defects :
1. Idiocy.
2. Imbecility.
3. Criminal Taint.
4. Insanity.
5. Inebriate Taint.
6. Pauperism.
7. Deaf Mutism.
8. Epilepsy.
11. Acquired defects :
1. Crime.
2. Insanity.
3. Epilepsy,
4. Inebrity.
5. Confirmed Pauperism.
With the exception of the very young and
the very old, all members of society, who have
to be supported by others, constitute the unfit.
Many are supported by friends and relatives,
but year by year, it is becoming more notice-
able, that the moral guardians of the unfit are
shirking their responsibility and handing their
defective relatives over to the State and de-
manding their gratuitous support as a right.
Dr. MacGregor, Inspector of Asylums and
Hospitals, N.Z., in his report for 1898, p. 5,
says: —
“As if the State had a vested interest in
the degradation of its people, I find that they,
as fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, are


responding to our efforts to sap their self-respect
by doing their utmost to throw the cost of
maintaining their relatives on the ratepayers.
I constantly hear the plea urged that as
taxpayers and old colonists they have a right
to send their relatives to State institutions.”
Our social conditions manufacture defectives,
and foster their fertility. The strain and stress
of modern competition excite an anxiety and
nervous tension under which many break down,
and much of the insanity that exists to-day is
attributable to nervous strain in the struggle of
life.
The strong attractive force of one social
stratum upon the next below, excites in the
latter a nervous tension which predisposes to a
breakdown in the face of some adversity.
The passion for ease and luxury, and the
dread of poverty tend to overstrain the nervous
system, and numberless neurotic defectives fall
back upon society, and give themselves up to
the propagation of their kind.
Our charitable aid institutions tend largely
to swell the numbers of the great unfit.
Dr. MacGregor in one of his valuable and
forcible reports upon our charitable aid institu-
tions, says :
“Our lavish and indiscriminate outdoor
relief, whose evils I am tired of recapitulating,
—our shameless abuse of the hospital system,
the crowding of our asylums by people in
their dotage, kept there because there is, no


suitable place to send them to, and many of
them sent by friends anxious only to be
relieved of the duty of supporting and caring
for them, —what is it all coming to ? . . . .
“ The practical outcome of our overlooking the
continued accumulation of degenerates among
our people by our fostering of all kinds of
weakness will necessarily be, if it continues,
that society will itself degenerate. Taxation
will increase by leaps and bounds, and the
industrious and self-respecting citizens will
rebel, especially if taxation is expected to meet
all the demands of a legislature that puts our
humanitarian idea of justice in the place of
charity.”
It has already been urged that there is no
evidence of any physiological defect in any
class of society interfering with fertility.
Sexual inhibition, from prudential motives is
the real cause in New Zealand.
Sexual inhibition implies well-developed
self-control, the very force in which almost all
defectives are most deficient, and the absence
of which makes them criminals, drunkards and
paupers. In almost all defectives too, prudence
is conspicuous by its absence.
The only moral force we know of, that has
curtailed, or will curtail, the family within the
limits of comfortable subsistence, is sexual
inhibition with prudence. But this force is
absolutely impossible amongst defectives.


It is not only a powerful force among the
normal, but with us to-day it is powerfully
operative. Amongst the defectives it does not
and cannot exist.
Apart from observation and statistics, there-
fore, it can be shown that the birth-rate
amongst the unfit is undisturbed. They marry
and are given in marriage, free from all restraint
save that of environment, and worst of all they
propagate their kind.
Dr. Clouston says (Clinical Lectures on
Mental Diseases, 4th Ed., p. 330) “As we
watch children grow up we see that some have
the sense of right and wrong, the conscience,
developed much sooner and much stronger than
others ; just as some have their eye teeth much
sooner than others; and looking at adults, we
see that some never have much of this sense
developed at all. This is notoriously the case
in some of those whose ancestors for several
generations have been criminals, insane or
drunkards.” Again (p. 331) “We know that
some of the children of many generations of
thieves take to stealing, as a young wild duck
among tame ones takes to hiding in holes, and
that the children of savage races cannot copy
at once our ethics nor our power of controlling
our actions. It seems to take many generations
to redevelop an atrophied conscience. There
is no doubt that an organic lawlessness is trans-
mitted hereditarily.”


Cost per head.
Total
Cost.
Number. Name.
Rate yQi
Per week.
Family of B (Brothers).
£
s.
d.
£ s. d.
I. A.B.
80
2
0
II. C.B
274
4
0
III. D.B
230
2
0
IV. E.B
8
2
0
V. F.B
8
2
0
600 12 0
Mr. W. Bevan Lewis says (A text-book of
Mental Disease, p. 203) “It is also notable,
that in a large proportion of cases, we find the
history of ancestral insanity attached to the
grand-parents, or the collateral line of uncles
and aunts, significant of a more remote origin
for the neurosis. The actual proportion of
cases revealing strongly-marked hereditary
features (often involving several members of
the subject’s ancestry), amounts to 36 per cent
while Mr. Briscoe declares (Journal of Mental
Science, Oct. 1896) that 90 % of the insane
have a heredity of insanity.
The following table from Dr. MacGregor’s
reports gives an account of two families in New
Zealand and their Asylum history.
Family of C.
I. A.C. (wife) ... ... 472 2 o
11. B.C. (husband of A.C.) 418 o o
111. D.C. (daughter of A.C.) 834 2 o
IV. E.C. (ditto) ... ... 1,318 2 o
Y. F.C. (illegitimate daugh-
ter of E.C.) ... 169 8 o


VI. G.C. (husband of F.C.
but no blood relation) 520
3,216 16 o
8i 7 8 o
In his report for 1897, the same writer says :
—“ I know of a ‘ defective ’ half-imbecile girl,
who has had already five illegitimate children
by different fathers, all of whom are now being
supported by the Charitable Aid Board, while,
of course, the mother is maintained, and
encouraged to propagate more;” while in an
appendix to a pamphlet on “ Some Aspects of
the Charitable Aid question,” he gives the
following history of two defective cases :
J.A. admitted to Lunatic Asylum, May,
1897-
Three medical men report on her as follows :
—“She appears imbecile, but without
delusions : natural imbecility, stupid, idiotic
expression ; baby one month old ; age between
30 and 40. Suffering from dementia; lacta-
tional.”
J.A., husband aged 69 ; labourer, average
earnings 15s. week. He wishes to get admis-
sion into some Old Man’s Home.
This couple have six children—four girls
and one boy. A. aged 12 ;B. 10; C. 9 ; D.
(boy) 5 ; and E. 3 years. These children are
all in the Industrial School. There is also one
baby, born April, 1897; has been put out to
nurse by the County Council.


The sister of Mrs. J. A. in Salvation Army
Home, There are two brothers, whereabouts
not known. The police report on this case
that the whole of the relatives of Mrs. J. A.
were partly imbecile, always in a helpless con-
dition and state of destitution, and have been for
years supported partly by charity of neighbours
and help from the Charitable Aid Boards.
J.J., the father, now dead, reported as a
“lazy, drunken fellow.”
A.J., the mother, “a drunken prostitute”
(police report 1886). “ Makes a precarious
living at nursing” (police report 1897); i n
destitute circumstances, living with a man
known as a thief.
This couple had seven children—six boys
and one girl:—
A. committed to Industrial School, 1877 5
discharged from there 1890; aged 18. Sen-
tenced in 1896 to three years for burglary.
B. committed to Industrial school for lar-
ceny in 1883 ; discharged from there, 1887 ;
aged 17.
C. committed to Industrial School for
breaking into and stealing, 1886 ; aged 16 ;
discharged, 1890.
D. aged 14 ;E.
sent to Industrial School in 1891 by the Charit-
able Aid Board, the father being dead and the
mother in gaol.
D. was discharged last year, aged 18.
F. is in hospital for removal of nasal growth,


and defective eyesight. E. was admitted to a
lunatic Asylum, September, 1897. Four
medical men report on him as follows :— ■“ A
case of satyriasis from congenital defect.”
“His depraved habits result of bad bringing
up by his mother.” “ Probably hereditary,”
“ A case of moral depravity associated with
mental deficiency, and cretinism.” The young-
est of the family, a girl aged 11, is said to be
dependent on her mother.
With regard to the hereditary nature of
Insanity, John Charles Bucknill and Daniel
Hack Tuke, M.D.’s, in “A Manual of
Psychological Medicine,” 4th Ed., p. 65, says ;
“ Certainly, if in ever so small degree there
is to be a stamping out of insanity, we must
act on the principle, better let the individual
suffer than run the risk of bequeathing a legacy
of insanity to the next generation
With regard to males, marriage would no
doubt be highly beneficial in many instances,
and if the risk of progeny is not run, may
well be encouraged
Esquirol, quoted by Bucknill and Tuke,
p. 58, says;— “Of all diseases Insanity is the
most hereditary.”
Bucknill and Tuke, p. 647, say:—
“ Of marriage it may be said that the celibacy
of the insane is the prophylaxis of Insanity in
the race, and although a well chosen mate and
a happy marriage may sometimes postpone
or even prevent the development of insanity in


the individual, still no medical man, having
regard to the health of the community, or even
of that of the family, can possibly feel himself
justified in recommending the marriage of any
person of either sex in whom the insane
diathesis is well marked.”
Again (pp. 647 and 648) “ It is thus that
the seeds of mental diseases and of moral evils
are sown broadcast through the land ; and
other new defects and diseases are multiplied
and varied with imbecilities, and idiocies, and
suicidal and other propensities and dispositions,
leading to all manner of vice and crime. The
marriage of hereditary lunatics is a veritable
Pandora’s box of physical and moral evil.”
The least fit, then, are the most fertile,
and the most fertile are subject to the common
law of heredity, and the defects are transmitted
to their offspring, often accentuated by the
intermarriage which their circumstances favour
or even necessitate.
But this is not all. The least fit have the
worst environment, and in the worst possible
surroundings the progeny of the unfit multiply
and develop. They are born into conditions,
well described by Dr. Alice Vicery, in a paper
on “The food supplies of the next generation.”
“Conditions in which the food, warmth, and
clothing which are necessary for the mere
maintenance of the functions of the body in
their normal state, cannot be obtained; in
which men, women, and children are forced to


crowd into dens wherein decency is abolished,
and the most ordinary conditions of healthful
existence are impossible of attainment; in
which the pleasures within reach are reduced to
bestiality and drunkenness ; in which the pains
accumulate at compound interest in the shape
of starvation, disease, stunted development,
and moral degradation in which the prospect of
even steady and honest industry is a life of
unsuccessful battling with hunger, rounded by
a pauper’s grave.”
What possible hope can their be for the
progeny of defectives born with vicious,
criminal, drunken or pauper tendencies, into an
environment whose whole influence from in-
fancy to maturity tends to accentuate and
develop these inherited defects ?
In this pitiable stratum of human society,
vice and misery, as checks to increase, reign
supreme, but as no other check exists, fertility
is at its maximum, and keeps close up on the
heels of the positive checks.
The State in her humanitarian sympathy,
and in New Zealand it is extravagant, puts
forth every effort to improve the conditions of
its “submerged tenth.” Insanitary conditions
are improved, the rooms by law enlarged, the
air is sweetened, the water is purified, the
homes are drained. The delicate and diseased
are taken to our hospitals, the deaf and blind to
our deaf-mute institutions, the deformed and
the fatherless to our orphan homes. And all
G


are carefully nursed as tender precious plants.
They are snatched from Nature’s clutch and
reared as prize stock are reared and kept in
clover, till they can propagate their kind.
We feed and clothe the unfit, however
unfit, and then encourage their procreation,
and as soon as they are matured we foster their
fertility.
No want of human sympathy for the poor
unfortunates of our race is in these words
expressed,—a statement simply of the inevit-
able consequences of unscientific and anti-social
methods of dealing with the degenerate.
No State can afford to shut its eyes to the
magnitude of this problem. The procreation
of the unfit must be faced and grappled with.
And the greater the decline in the birth-rate
of our best stock, the more urgent does the
solution of the problem become. For is not
the proportion of the unfit to the fit yearly
increasing!
It has become the most pressing duty of
the State, in face of the great change that has
so rapidly come over our natural increase, to
declare that the procreation of the unfit shall
cease, or at least, that it shall be considerably
curtailed and placed among the vanishing evils,
with a view to its final extinction.


CHAPTER X.
WHAT ANÆSTHETICS AND ANTISEPTICS HAVE
MADE POSSIBLE.
Education of defectives in prudence and self-restraint of little avail.
—Surgical suggestions discussed.
For the intelligent mind, which I assume has
already been impressed with the importance o*
such an inquiry, I think I have set forth the
salient truths with sufficient clearness, but hold-
ing that a recitation of social faults, without a
suggestion as to social reforms, is not only
useless but mischievous, I shall endeavour to
show not only that the situation is not hopeless,
but that science and experience have, or will
reveal means to the accomplishment of all
rationally desired ends, and that it remains only
for intelligence to enquire that sentiment may
move up to the line so as to harmonise with
science, with justice, and with the demands of a
growing necessity.
These questions of population are not new.
More than two thousand years ago, many of the
wisest philosophers of all the centuries meditated
deeply upon the tendencies of the population to
crowd upon subsistence, and in many ages and


many countries, the situation has been discussed
with serious forebodings for the future.
In all ages thinking men have regarded war
with aversion, yet with peace and domestic
prosperity other dangers arose to threaten the
progress of the race, and as the passing genera-
tions cried out for some remedy for the ever
pressing evils, thinking men have been proposing
measures somewhat harmonising with the know-
ledge or the sentiment of the times. Whether
we are wiser than our ancestors remains an
unsettled question.
The old Greeks faced the problem boldly.
There were two dangers in the minds of these
ancient philosophers. There was the danger of
over-population of good citizens, and there was
the danger of increasing the burden good
citizens had to bear by the maintenance- of
defectives. However good the breed, over-
population was an economic danger, for, said
Aristotle, “ The legislator who fixes the amount
of property should also fix the number of
children, for if the children are too many for
the property the law must be broken.” (Politics
11, 7-5.) And he further declares (ib. VII. 16
25) “ As to the exposure and rearing of children,
let there be a law that no deformed child shall
live and the exposure of infants was for years
the Grecian method of eliminating the unfit.
A century ago “ Parson Malthus” dealt with
over-population without regard to the fitness of
individuals to survive, and he advised the


exercise of moral restraint expressed in delayed
marriage, to prevent population pressing on the
limits of food, which he maintained it invariably
tends to do. After the high souled Mai thus,
came the Neo-Malthusians, who, although they
retained the name perverted the teaching of this
great demographist, and some Socialist writers
of high repute still advocate the systematic
instruction of the poor in Neo-Malthusian prac-
tices.
The rising tide of firm conviction in the
minds of present day socioligists, that the fer-
tility of the unfit is menacing the stability of the
whole social superstructure, is forcing many to
advocate more drastic measures for the salvation
of the race. Weinhold seriously proposed the
annual mutilation of a certain portion of the
children of the popular classes. Mr. Henry
M. Boies, the most enlightened analyst of the
problem of the unfit, in his exhaustive work
“ Prisoners and Paupers,” urges the necessity
of effectively controlling the fecundity of the
degenerate classes, and he points to surgery,
and life-long incarceration as the solution of the
problem. Dr. McKim, in an exhaustive work
on “ Heredity and Human Progress,” after
declaring that he is profoundly convinced of the
inefficiency of the measures which we bring to
bear against the weakness and depravity of our
race, ventures to plead for the remedy which
alone, as he believes, can hold back the advan-
cing tide of disintegration. He states his


remedy thus :—“ The roll then, of those whom
our plan would eliminate, consists of the following
classes of individuals coming under the absolute
control of the State idiots, imbeciles, epil-
eptics, habitual drunkards and insane criminals,
the larger number of murderers, nocturnal
house-breakers, such criminals whatever their
offence as might through their constitutional
organization appear very dangerous, and finally,
criminals who might be adjudged incorrigible.
Each individual of these classes would undergo
thorough examination, and only by due process
of law would his life lie taken from him. The
painless extinction of these lives would present
no practical difficulty—in carbonic acid gas we
have an agent which would instantaneously
fulfil the need.”
These briefly are some of the remedies which
have been advocated and in part applied for the
protection of the race from degeneracy. I quote
them, not with approval, but merely to show
how grave and serious the social outlook is, in
the minds of some of the best thinkers and
truest philanthropists that have taught mankind.
If the fertility of the fit could be kept uniformly
at its normal rate in a state of nature, the race
would have little to fear, for the tendency to
further degeneration and consequent extinction
amongst the defective would be sufficient to
counteract their disposition to a high fertility.
But in all civilized nations, the fertility of the
fit is rapidly departing from that normal rate,


and Mr. Herbert Spencer declares, with the
gloomiest pessimism, that the infertility of the
best citizens is the physiological result of their
intellectual development. I have already ex-
pressed the opinion that prudence and social
selfishness, operating through sexual self-
restraint on the part of the best citizens of the
State, are the cause of their infertility. It is
impossible for the State to correct this evil,
except by lessening the burden the fit man has
to bear ; and the elimination of the unfit, by
artificial selection, is the surest and most effective
way of bringing this about.
We have learned from the immortal Pasteur
the true and scientific method of artificial selec-
tion of the fit, by the elimination of the unfit.
We have already seen that he examined the
moth, to find if it were healthy, and rejected its
eggs if it were diseased. Medical knowledge
of heredity and disease makes it possible to
conduct analogous examinations of prospective
mothers; and surgery secreted in the ample
and luxurious folds of anaesthesia, and protected
by its guardian angels antiseptics, makes it
possible to prevent the fertilization of human
ova with a vicious taint. It is possible to
sterilize defective women, and the wives of
defective men by an operation of simple liga-
ture, which produces absolutely no change
whatever in the subjects of it, beyond rendering
this fertilization impossible, for the rest of life.
This remedy for the great and growing evil


which confronts us to-day is suggested, not to
avenge but to protect society, and in profound
pity for the classes who are a burden to them-
selves, as well as to those who have to tend and
support them.
The problem of the unfit is not new. The
burden of supporting those unable to support
themselves has been keenly felt in all ages and
among all peoples.
The ancients realized the danger and the
burden, but found no difficulty when the stress
became acute in enacting that all infants should
be examined and the defective despatched.
To come nearer home, Boeltius tells us, that,
“ in old times when a Scot was affected with
any hereditary disease their sons were emascu-
lated, their daughters banished, and if any
female affected with such disease were pregnant,
she was to be burned alive.”
Aristotle declared (Politics Book 11, p. 40)
that “ neglect of this subject is a never failing
cause of poverty, and poverty is the parent of
revolution and crime,” and he advocated habitual
abortion as one remedy against over-population.
The combined wisdom of the Greeks found no
better method of keeping population well within
the limits of the State’s power to support its
members than abortion, and the exposure of
infants.
Since Aristotle’s time abortion has been
largely practised by civilized nations. Mutilation
and infibulation of females have been practised


by savages with the same end in view, while
vasectomy, orchotomy, and ovariotomy, have
had their avowed advocates in our own time.
The purpose of all these measures was to
limit population with little or no distinction as
to fitness to survive. The Spartans in ancient
times, and many social reformers of to-day have
discussed and advocated the artificial limitation
of the unfit. The exposure of defective infants
was the Spartan method of preserving the
physical and mental stature of the race.
The surgical operations on both sexes
advocated by some social writers of recent date,
have not been received with much favour, and,
as a social reform have not been practised. As
operations they are grave and serious, profound
in their effect upon the individual, and a viola-
tion of public sentiment. Anaesthetics and
antiseptics have, however, made them possible,
and if a surgical operation could be devised,
simple and safe in performance, inert in every
way but one, and against which there would be
no individual or public sentiment, its application
as a social reform, would go far to solve the
grave and serious problem of the fertility of the
unfit.
The unfit are subject to no moral law in the
matter of procreation. They can be taught
nothing, and they will practise nothing. Like
the lower animals they obey their instincts and
gratify their desires as they arise.


It has been seriously suggested that the
poor should be systematically taught Neo-
Malthusian methods for the limitation of their
offspring.
The best among the poor might practise
them, the worst certainly would not, and the
limitation among the best would only stimulate
the fertility of the worst. This is the most
innocent and harmless of the numerous sugges-
tions made by reformers for controlling the
fecundity of the poor.
Of surgical methods, castration of males,
Oophorectomy or the removal of the ovaries in
women, and vasectomy, or the section of the
cords of the testicles, have all been suggested.
Annual castration of a certain number of the
children of the popular classes was not long ago
seriously proposed by Weinhold.
Boies, in his “ Prisoners and Paupers,”
declares that surgical interference is the only
method of dealing with the criminal, and
preventing him from reproducing his kind. He
says :—“ These organs have no function in the
human organism except the creation and gratifi-
cation of desire and the reproduction of the
species. Their loss has no effect upon the
health, longevity, or abilities of the individual
of adult years. The removal of them therefore
by destroying desire would actually diminish
the wants of nature and increase the enjoyments
of life for paupers. A want removed is equiva-
lent to a want supplied. In other words, such


removal would be a positive benefit to the
abnormal rather than a deprivation, rather a
kindness than an injury. This operation be-
stowed upon the abnormal inmates of our
prisons, reformatories, jails, asylums, and public
institutions, would entirely eradicate those
unspeakable evil practices which are so terribly
prevalent, debasing, destructive, and uncon-
trolled in them. It would confer upon the
inmates health and strength, for weakness and
impotence, satisfaction and comfort for discontent
and insatiable desire.”
Anaesthetics have ensured that these opera-
tions may be performed without the slightest
suspicion of pain, and with careful sympathetic
surgery, pain may be absent throughout the
whole of convalescence. Antiseptics have made
it possible to perform these operations with
practically no risk to life.
Though castration and Oophorectomy can
be performed with safety and without pain, they
are absolutely unjustifiable operations, if done
to produce sterility.
Every incision and every stitch in surgery,
beyond the necessities of the case, are objection-
able, and to remove an organ, when the section
of its duct is sufficient is to say the least of it,
bad surgery.
Vasectomy is the resection of a portion of
the duct of the testicles, followed by ligature of
the ends. No doubt ligature alone would be
sufficient for the purpose, but up to the present,


a piece of the duct has been removed, when
this operation has been found necessary in the
treatment of disease.
This duct is the secretory tube of the
testicle, so that when it is occluded, the secretion
is dammed back, and degeneration and atrophy
of the organ are induced. It soon wastes, and
becomes as functionless as though it were
removed.
This operation can be performed in a
Surgery with the aid of a little Cocaine, and the
patient may walk to his home, sterilized for the
rest of his natural life, after the complete loss of
any accumulated fluid.
Of these two operations for the sterilization
of men, vasectomy is preferable. The major
operation for the purpose of inducing artificial
sterility should never for a moment be con-
sidered.
But vasectomy, though surgically simple,
and a less violation of sentiment than castration,
cannot be justified except in exceptional cases.
Neither of these operations makes the
subjects of them altogether or at once impotent,
certainly not for years. It sterilizes and partly
unsexes them and in the end completely so.
But the physical and mental changes that
follow the operation in the young adolescent are
grave and serious, and a violent outrage upon
the man’s nature and sentiment.
Society can hope for nothing but evil from
the man she forcibly unsexes; but if he must


be kept in durance vile for the whole of his life
there is little need for such an operation.
The criminal cases bad enough to justify
this grave and extreme measure should be
incarcerated for life.
The cases, it has been thought, that fully
justify this operation are those guilty of repeated
criminal assaults.
Such a claim arises out of insufficient know-
ledge of the physiology of sex, and the pathology
of crime. Emasculation would have little
influence in preventing a recurrence of this
crime, for the operation does not render its
subjects immediately impotent, nor does it
change their sexual nature any more than it
beautifies their character.
The instinct remains, and the power to
gratify it remains at least for some years. With
the less knowledge of surgery of earlier times,
a social condition in which such a practice
might be rationally considered, is conceivable,
but with the present state of our profession,
such measures would be unthinkable.


CHAPTER XI.
TUBO-LIGATURE.
The fertility of the criminal a greater danger to society than his
degradations.—Artificial sterility of women.—The menopause
artificially induced. —Untoward results.—The physiology of the
Fallopian tubes.—Their ligature procures permanent sterility .
—No other results immediate or remote.—Some instances due
to disease.—Defective women and the wives of defective men
would welcome protection from unhealthy offspring.
There is a growing feeling that society must
be protected, not so much against the criminal
as against the fertility of the criminal, and no
rational, practicable, acceptable method has
as yet been devised.
The operations on men to induce sterility
have been discussed and dismissed as un-
satisfactory.
But analogous operations may be performed
on women. And if women can be sterilized
by surgical interference, whence comes the
necessity of sterilizing both ?
Oophorectomy, or removal of the ovaries
is analogous to castration. It is an equally safe,
though a slightly more severe and complicated
operation.
It can be safely and painlessly performed,
the mortality in uncomplicated cases being
practically nil.


The changes physical and mental are not
so grave as in the analogous operation on the
opposite sex, and they vary considerably at
different ages and in different cases. The later
in life the operation is performed the less the
effect produced. At or after the menopause
(about the 45th year) little or no change is
noticeable.
In many, and especially in younger
women however, grave mental and physical
changes are induced. The menstrual function
is destroyed, the appearance often becomes
masculine, the face becomes coarse and heavy,
and hair may appear on the lips and chin.
Lethargy and increase of weight are often
noticed, and not a few, especially in congenitally
neurotic cases, have an attack of insanity
precipitated.
On the same principle on which the radical
operation on men was condemned, Oopho-
rectomy must also be condemned. It is a
serious operation, often attended with grave
mental and physical disturbances, not the least
of which is the partial unsexing of those
subjected to it.
While these are delicate they are also press-
ing questions, questions which, like the mythical
riddle of the Sphynx, not to answer means to
be destroyed, yet the sentimental difficulties
are accentuated by modern progress, for the
public conscience becomes more sensitive as
problems become more grave. But as science


has prepared the bridge over which society-
may safely march, so, with rules easily provided
by an enlightened community all remedial
measures formerly proposed—wise in their
times, probably, may now be waived aside.
With our present knowlege, the simple
process of tubo-ligature renders unsexing abso-
lutely unnecessary in order to effect complete
and permanent sterility. As the lesser operation
vasectomy, is effectual in men, so is a lesser
operation, tubo-ligature effectual in women.
And it has this paramount advantage that,
whereas vasectomy being an occlusion of a
secretory duct, leads to complete atrophy and
destruction of the testis, ligature of the
Fallopian tube, which is only a uterine
appendage and not a secretory duct of the
ovary, has absolutely no effect whatever on that
organ.
A simple ligature of each Fallopian tube
would effectually and permanently sterilise,
without in any way whatever altering or
changing the organs concerned, or the emotions,
habits, disposition, or life of the person operated
on.
The Fallopian tubes are two in number,
attached to the upper angles of the uterus, and
communicating therewith. Each is about five
inches in length, and trumpet-shaped at its
extremity, which floats free in the pelvic
cavity.


Attached to the margin of this trumpet-
shaped extremity, is a number of tentacle-
like fringes, the function of which is to embrace
the portion of the ovary, where an ovum has
matured during or immediately after men-
struation.
At all other times these tubes are practically
unattached to the ovaries. Ova may and do
mature on the surface of the ovaries, but do not
always pass into the Fallopian tubes; being
almost microscopic, they are disintegrated and
reabsorbed. If they do pass into a tube they
are lost or fertilized as the case may be.
It can be seen that the function and vitality
of the ovaries are in no way affected by the
tubes. The ovarian function goes on, whether
the tubes perform their function of conveyance
or not, and if this function can be destroyed,
life-long sterility is assured. There is no
abdominal operation more simple, rapid and
safe, than simple ligature of the Fallopian
tubes. It may be performed by way of the
natural passage, or by the abdominal route,
the choice depending on various circumstances.
If the former route be taken, there may be
nothing to indicate, in some cases not even to
a medical man, that such an operation has been
performed.
The Fallopian tubes have been ligatured by
Kossman, Ruhl and Neuman for the sterilization
of women with pelvic deformities; but all
testify to the danger of subsequent abnormal
H


or ectopic pregnancy, and several instances are
given. Mr. Bland Sutton relates a case in an
article on Conservative Hysterectomy in the
British Medical Journal.
After numerous experiments on healthy
tubes, I have found that simple ligature with
even a moderate amount of force in tying will
cut the tube through in almost any part of its
length. The mucous lining is so thrown into
folds that its thickness in relation to the
peritoneal layer is considerable. Because of
this, the tube when tied alone is brittle, and a
ligature applied to it will very easily cut through,
and either allow of reunion of the severed
ends or leave a patent stump. In a recorded
case in which pregnancy occurred after each
tube was ligatured in two places, and then
divided with a knife, a patent stump was no
doubt left.
In order to obviate this danger the peri-
toneal layer must be opened, and the mucous
membrane, which is quite brittle and easily
removed, must be torn away for about one
quarter of an inch. A simple cat-gut or silk
ligature lightly tied would then be sufficient
to insure complete and permanent occlusion.
Nature often performs this operation herself,
with the inevitable and irrevocable result, life-
long sterility, with no tittle of positive evidence
during life of its occurrence.
Here are a few examples :—A young married
woman has a miscarriage ; it is not severe, and


she is indiscreet enough to be about at her duties
in a day or two, but within a few days or so she
finds she must return to bed, with feverishness
and pelvic pain. Before a month is past she
is up and quite herself again. But she never
afterwards conceives. What has happened?
To the most careful and critical examination
nothing abnormal is detected. Her general
health, her vitality, her emotional and sexual
life, her youthful vigorous appearance, all are
unimpaired. But she is barren, and why ? A
little inflammation occurred in the uterus and
spread along the tubes. The sides of the tubes
cohered, permanently united by adhesive inflam-
mation, and complete and permanent occlusion
resulted.
The operation of tubo-ligature is an artificial
imitation of this inflamatory process.
Pelvic inflammation, sometimes very slight,
following a birth, or the same process set up by
uterine pessaries used for displacements, may
induce adhesive inflammation in the tubes,
and simple and permanent sterility is the
incurable result. It is a well known fact that
prostitutes are usually sterile, and this arises
from the prevalence of venereal disease, which
produces gonorrhoeal inflammation of the Fallo-
pian tubes, resulting in complete and permanent
occlusion.
This process could be best imitated, if
cauterisation of the tubes were a safe and
reliable procedure. An electric cautery passed


along the tubes would result in a simple and
speedy occlusion. But in the present state of
our gynecological knowledge this appears im-
practicable.
We have therefore at our hand, a simple,
safe, and certain method of stopping procreation
by the sterilization of women by tubo-ligature.
This operation would entail no hardship on
women. It is so easy, safe and painless, that
thousands would readily submit to it to-morrow,
to be relieved from the anxiety which a possible
increase in their already too numerous families
excites. Hundreds of women and men to-day
are living unnatural lives, because of their
refusal to bring children into the world with the
hereditary taint they know courses in their own
veins.
Many men are living loose and irregular
lives, amongst the easy women of society,
because the indiscretion of their youth has
damned them for ever with a syphilitic taint,
which they could not fail to transmit to their
progeny.
Many virtuous men and women are living a
life of abstinence from even each other’s society,
because their physician has taught them some-
thing of the law of heredity. Would not all
these women readily submit to sterilization ?
As it produces no mental nor moral, nor
physical change, it violates no law, and outrages
no sentiment. It is an outrage upon society,
and a greater upon an innocent helpless victim


to bring a defective into the world ; it is a moral
act to prevent it by this means.
And of all the methods yet suggested or
devised, or practised, tubo-ligature is the sim-
plest, most effective, and least opposed to
sentiment and prejudice.
It will of course be asked ;—What about
criminals and defective men ? Let their wives
be sterilized. The wife of any criminal would
deem it a boon to be protected from the offspring
of such a man, so would society.
If he is not married, then society must take
the risk, and it is not very great. The women
who will be his companions will be either
sterilized by disease or by tubo-ligature, because
they are defectives. This protection from the
progeny of defective men, though not absolute,
is complete enough for all practical purposes.
If all defective women and the wives of all
defective men are sterilized, a greater improve-
ment will take place in the race in the next
50 years, than has been accomplished by all the
sanitation of the Victorian era.


CHAPTER XII.
SUGGESTIONS AS TO APPLICATION.
The State's humanitarian zeal protects the lives and fosters the fertility
of the degenerate.—A confirmed or hereditary criminal defined. —
Law on the subject of sterilization could at first be permissive.
—It should apply , to begin with , to criminals and the insane. —
Marriage certificates of health should be required. — Women's
readiness to submit to surgical treatment for minor as well as
major pelvic diseases. —Surgically induced sterility of healthy
women a greater crime than abortion. —This danger not remote.
The fertility of the unfit goes on unrestrained
by any other check, save vice and misery. The
great moral checks have not, and cannot have
any place with them. But the State is, by its
humanitarian zeal, limiting the scope and
diminishing the force of these natural checks
amongst all classes of the community, but
especially amongst the unfit, so that its policy
now fosters the fertility of this class, while it
fails to arrest the declining nativity of our best
citizens. The greater the fertility of the unfit,
the greater the burden the fit have to bear, and
the less their fertility.
The State’s present policy therefore, fosters
the fertility of the unfit, and discourages the
fertility of the fit. This disastrous policy must
be changed without delay. The State can


arrest the gradual degradation of its people, by
sterilizing all defective women and the wives of
defective men falling into the hands of the law.
Mr. Henry M. Boies in “ Prisoners and
Paupers ” suggests life-long isolation. He
says : —“ It is time however that society should
interpose in this propagation of criminals. It
is irrational and absurd to occupy our attention
and exhaust our liberality with the care of his
constantly growing class, without any attempt
to restrict its reproduction. This is possible
too, without violating any humanitarian instinct,
by imprisonment for life ; and this seems to be
the most practicable solution of the problem in
America. As soon as an individual can be
identified as an hereditary or chronic criminal,
society shall confine him or her in a penitentiary
at self-supporting labour for life.
Every State should have an institution,
adapted to the safe and secure separation of
such from society, where they can be employed
at productive labour, without expense to the
public, during their natural life. When this is
ended with them, the class will become extinct,
and not before. Then each generation would
only have to take care of its own moral cripples
and defectives, without the burden of the
constantly increasing inheritance of the past.
When upon a third conviction the judicial
authorities determine the prisoner to belong to
the criminal class, the law should imperatively


require the sentence to be the penitentiary for
life, whatever the particular crime committed.”
M. Boies defines a criminal as one in whom
two successive punishments, according to law,
have failed to prevent a third offence.
If such a criminal is a woman, she should
be offered the alternative of surgical sterility or
incarceration during the child bearing period of
her life ; if a man, his wife should be offered
this remedy against the procreation of criminals
in exchange for her husband, on the expiry of
his sentence, or the protection of divorce.
No woman in the child-bearing period of
life should be released from an Asylum, until
this operation has been performed. If a man
is committed, his wife should have the option
of divorce or be sterilized before his release.
A central Board should issue marriage
certificates, after consideration of confidential
medical reports upon the health, physical con
dition, and family history of the parties to a
proposed marriage contract.
Medical officers should be appointed in the
various centres of population by the central
Board, and fees on reports should be paid after
the manner of Life Insurance fees.
In fact the Life Insurance system would
serve as a good model, for the establishment of
a system of marriage control, and if questions
involving a more detailed family history were
added to a typical Life Insurance report form,


it could hardly be improved upon, for the
purpose of marriage health reports.
If upon consideration of the medical report
of the contracting parties, in accordance with
the law upon the subject, a certificate of
marriage were refused, a certificate of sterilization
by tubo-ligature, forwarded to the Board by
a Surgeon, should entitle to the marriage
certificate
No law should attempt to step in between
two lovers, who have become attached to each
other by the bonds of a strong affection, lest a
greater evil befall both themselves and society.
A marriage certificate of health should state
the complete family history as well as the
physical condition of the parties to a proposed
marriage, and such certificates should be issued
only by the Central Board of Experts, who
would receive the medical reports of its own
medical officers.
When the principle of aritficial sterilization
is accepted by the State, the organization
necessary to ensure that only the fit shall
procreate, will only be a matter of arrangement
by experts.
One danger looms ahead however if the
operative means of producing artificial sterility
are popularised.
Every surgeon of experience knows how
readily large numbers of married women en-
courage surgical treatment for ovarian and even
uterine complaints, if they become aware that


such treatment is followed by sterility. It is
not at all an uncommon thing for women in all
ranks of life, to encourage, and even seek
removal of the ovaries in order to escape an
increase in the family.
They become acquainted with persons who
have submitted to this operation for ovarian
disease, and noting nothing but improvement in
their health, attended by sterility, their intense
anxiety to enjoy immunity from child-bearing
makes them eager to submit to operation.
It would be distinctly immoral to sterilize
healthy women, who become possessed with the
old Roman passion for a childless life, or who
simply wish to limit their families for any selfish
or personal reason.
Any law which recognizes the induction of
artificial sterility should make operative inter-
ference with those fit to procreate a healthy
stock an offence.
Induced sterility should rank with induced
abortion, and be a criminal offence, except in
certain cases which could be defined.
There is much evidence to suggest that
artificial sterilization may become as a great
vice, as great a danger to the State as criminal
abortion.
Artificial abortion, as commonly performed,
is a much more dangerous operation than tubo-
ligature. Of the two operations, any experienced
surgeon would readily declare that the latter is
the simpler and the safer; the one less likely to


lead to unfavourable complications, and the
one, moreover, that would leave the subject of
it with the better “expectancy of life.”
Anaesthetics and anti-septics have made this
comparison possible and true.
Any surgeon who performs tubo-ligature
should be liable to prosecution, unless he can
justify his action according to the law relating
to the artificial sterility of the unfit.
While the law would eventually require to
be obligatory, with regard to the absolutely
unfit, it would require to be permissive in all
other cases.
Many voluntarily abstain from marriage,
because of a strong hereditary tendency to
certain diseases such as cancer and tubercle.
There must of necessity be many on the
border-land between the fit and the unfit, and
clauses permitting sterilization under some
circumstances would be required.


CONCLUSION.
In conclusion let us briefly review the whole
position taken up in this imperfect study of a
great question.
1. The birth-rate is rapidly and persistently
declining.
2. The food-rate is persistently increasing.
3. The declining fertility is not uniform
through all classes.
4. The fertility of the best is rapidly declining.
5. The fertility of the worst is undisturbed.
6. The policy of the State is inimical to the
fertility of its best, and fosters the
fertility of its worst citizens.
7. The infertility of the best stock is due to
voluntary curtailment of the family,
through sexual self-restraint.
8. No such factor does or can obtain as a
check to the fertility of the unfit.
9. The proportion of the unfit to the fit is in
consequence annually increasing.
10. The future of society demands that com-
pulsory sterilization of the unfit should
be adopted.


11. No method ever tried or suggested offers
the advantages of simplicity, safety,
effectiveness, and popularity, promised
by tubo-ligature,
12. The State must protect itself against the
collateral danger of artificial sterilization
of its best stock.
The highest interest of Society and of the
individual urgently requires that the size of
families be controlled.
The moral restraint of Malthus (delayed
marriage) and post-nuptial intermittent restraint
are the only safe and rational methods, that our
civilization can possibly encourage, or physiology
endorse.
These methods must of necessity be peculiar
to the best class of people. For the worst
class of people, induced sterility, or prohibited
fertility, is an absolute necessity, if Society and
civilization must endure.
Now what are likely to be the results of,
first, the moral methods, and, second, the sur-
gical method of our curtailment.
“It does not appear to me,” says Dr.
Billings (Forum, June, 1893), “that this lessen-
ing of the birth-rate is in itself an evil, or that
it will be worth while to attempt to increase
the birth-rate merely for the sake of maintaining
a constant increase in the population, because
to neither this nor the next generation will
such increase be specially beneficial.”


To Aristotle, the great advantage of
an abundant popuiation was, that the State
was secured against invasion by numerous
defenders.
If we can find no stronger justification for
a teeming population than this to-day, we will
be forced to agree with Dr. Billings, that
neither to this nor the next generation, is a
great increase especially beneficial.
But the moral effect of judicial limitation is
very great. If men and women can marry
young, one great incentive to vice is removed.
If married people can bear their children when
they can best support them, they will marry
when their bodies are matured, and bear their
families when their finances are matured.
For children well provided for, and edu-
cated, and born after full physical and mental
maturity in their parents, turn out the best men
and women.
If the conditions of life are made easy, if
ease and comfort are tolerably secured to all,
if the strain and stress of life are reduced, if
hardship, poverty, and want are reduced to a
minimum, the sexual instinct and parental love
in human nature, so far unimpaired by any
known force, are powerful enough to keep
the race alive, and insure a progressive de-
velopment.
The greater the proportion and the fertility
of the defective, the less hope for the future.
If the fertility of the unfit be reduced to a


minimum, not only will many dreadful here-
ditary diseases be eradicated, but the fertility
of the fit will receive a powerful stimulus,
because of the great diminution there will
necessarily be in the burdens they will have
to bear.
The advantages of sterility to the unfit
themselves will, on the whole, be incalculable.
They are self-evident, and need not be dwelt
on here.
The whole sum of human happiness would
in this way be most assuredly increased, and
the aim and object of all social reform be to
some extent at least, realized.
Printed by Whitcombe and Tombs Limited— G 11227
