



THE LINCOLNSHIRE OBSERVER


THE
Lincolnshire Observer.
A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER
PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE “LINCOLNSHIRE”
DURING THE PASSAGE FROM LONDON TO MELBOURNE
COMMENCED SEPTEMBER 20, AND ENDED DECEMBER 20,
1866.
WITH NOTES ON
HENRY BRADLEY
AND
THE “LINCOLNSHIRE”
MELBOURNE: AUSTRALIA
PUBLISHED PRIVATELY
19 7 5


BOURKE STREET BOOKSHOP
569 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE, VICTORIA 3000


CONTENTS
NOTES ON HENRY BRADLEY .. .. .. vii
NOTES ON THE “LINCOLNSHIRE” .. . . xii
THE LINCOLNSHIRE OBSERVER .. .. 5
NOTES ON THIS EDITION .. .. .. 45


HENRY BRADLEY, HIS SON AND GRANDSON


SUPPLEMENT TO THE
Lincolnshire Observer.
TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1975.
NOTES ON HENRY BRADLEY
Henry Bradley, the owner of an original copy of this book,
was bom at Newark, Notts., England, on 14 February 1831.
He was the son of Jonathan Bradley, a patten or wooden
overshoe maker in Newark.
On 25 July 1854 he married Sarah Roberts Woulds at
St Alkmund’s Church, Bourne, Hants.
In 1861, it is recorded that he was in business on his
own account, in Market Place, Southwell, Notts., as a hair
cutter and perfumer. He prepared and marketed ‘Marrow
Oil’, which he claimed ‘would strengthen and beautify the
hair’. The bottle label for this product bore an impressive
illustration of Collegiate Church, Southwell.
By the newspaper clippings available it would seem that
he never lost an opportunity to avail himself of publicity.
He often worded his advertisements around a current event
or a well-known personality. In his scrapbook, there is an
envelope front, with the cancelled rose penny stamp still
intact. It is addressed as follows:
Postman use your utmost speed
In bearing this! Now pray take heed
The place to which It is to go
I’m sure you cannot tall to know
’Tis Mr Bradley’s famous mart
For toys and every-thing’s that’s smart
Hair fronts to add to female grace
Are sold too at the Market Place
In Southwell town, so hasten on
As you read this some time has gone.
He was also a Private in the Nottingham Volunteer
Rifles (Southwell), and according to the records available
he was a very good marksman.


But on 20 September 1866, Henry left all this behind.
He sailed from Gravesend in the SV Lincolnshire as a first-
class passenger. He was accompanied by his wife Sarah, his
son Henry Algernon and his daughter Fanny Elizabeth. The
voyage out is described in the Observer, and shows the
various shipboard activities in which the Bradley family
were involved.
The Lincolnshire arrived in Melbourne on 21 December
1866, and shortly after Henry purchased the Victoria Hotel
in Fitzroy Street, St Kilda.
Despite his success in business, the lure of the goldfields
caught up with him and he left for the Mt Alexander region
in 1868. He opened a business however, shortly after in
Piper Street, Kyneton. He also established a very successful
mining sharebroking business, his major competitor being
C. E. Jordan. These two people had considerable influence
on the then very active Melbourne mining share market.
In addition to his original premises in Piper Street,
Kyneton, he also opened a further shop in Mollison Street,
and had an agency in Woodend. His shops specialised in a
wide range of fancy goods, tobacco and smoker’s requisites.
He also had Camp’s Patent Machine Hair Brushes installed
at his Piper Street salon. The machine haircuts cost
sixpence each.
Henry Bradley’s migration to the colonies was obviously
a very early success, for only eight years after his arrival,
we find him writing to his favourite paper in Newark,
England. In the letter he strongly recommends his country
of adoption.
Sir, —I have frequently noticed in the Newark ‘Herald’
and ‘Advertiser’ how very favourable America is brought
forward as a field for emigration, whilst the claims of
this country are almost forgotten. I certainly would
prefer this country to America for several reasons. It is
a British Colony, It enjoys the greatest political and
social freedom that any reasonable man could possibly
wish to enjoy, and it is acknowledged to be the finest
climate in the known world, and certainly the richest in
mineral wealth, wages are high, and food cheap, the best
of the meat from 2id. to sd. per lb., flour is Is. 9d. per
stone, potatoes Is. per peck, butter from 6d. to Is. per lb.
We have also a liberal Land Policy, any man may select
up to 640 acres of land at a rental of 2s. per acre per
annum, and at the end of ten years it is his own freehold


without any further payment. Grapes, peaches, apricots,
and apples grow very luxuriantly and can be purchased
retail from 3d. to 4d. per lb. I have no doubt that the
long voyage and the fancied dangers prevent many from
turning their attention this way, whilst in reality the
dangers and the difficulties are imaginary. Once out of
the English Channel there is no more danger than there
is in a voyage from Hull to London: I have had more
knocking about on that short voyage than I had coming
out here. The length of the voyage is not felt in conse-
quence of its pleasantness, in fact it is often more like
a pleasure trip than anything else. The class of emigrants
likely to do the best are the small capitalists, tradesmen,
mechanics, miners, and labourers. Clerks are not wanted,
there being too many already. There is no fear of a man
not getting on if he is steady and industrious and willing
to turn his hand to anything that may present Itself.
Of course drunkards will not do anywhere, and this is a
bad place for them to come to, as intoxicating drink is
the dearest article in the colony. A glass of ale is six-
pence, yet I regret to say that there is a great deal of
drunkenness, which is the curse of the country, there are
thousands of workmen who could soon place themselves
and families out of the reach of want who daily squander
their earnings in dissipation, of course it is their own
fault, not the country’s. There is, I believe, another
cause which militates against intending emigrants coming
here viz:—the prevailing opinion in England that the
country is in a very wild state, in fact that we are semi-
savages. Such is not the case; we enjoy all the luxuries
this enlightened age can produce. A new chum might
walk down Collins street, Melbourne, any afternoon and
fancy that he was in Regent street, London. The fine
shops, the gay equipages, and fashionably-dressed crowds
would put him in mind of that famous street, and there
is nothing to fear from the aboriginal natives, they being
nearly extinct. You might live ten years in Victoria and
see no more of the natives than you would In Newark
Market-place . . .
Whilst at Kyneton he again began to pursue his old
interest of shooting. And considerable success, too, as we
can see from the following article in the Kyneton Guardian.
After fifteen competitions extending over two years, the
challenge cup of the Kyneton Rifle Corps was won by
Private Bradley, who has won it three times consecu-
tively. After the competition was over Mr Bradley was
formally presented with the cup, and each of his com-
rades present, partook thereout of some excellent sherry
provided by the winner.


Sarah and Henry’s second son, Ernest James Bryer,
was also born whilst they were at Kyneton.
By 1877, Henry was back in Emerald Hill (South Mel-
bourne), this time as licensee of the George Hotel in Cecil
Street. The Lodge of Emerald Hill held their anniversary
dinner at his hotel. The press of the day had concluded its
report of the proceedings with the following paragraph:
The catering of Bro. H. Bradley was the source of uni-
versal approbation, being superior to anything of the
kind ever given in this district and evoked the toast of
‘The Caterer’ to be proposed with great enthusiasm. [This
is not surprising, as family tradition has it that Sarah
was a cook of rare accomplishment.]
On leaving Emerald Hill, he became licensee of the
Royal Park Hotel, Queensberry Street, Hotham (North
Melbourne) in 1878. In 1879, he leased and set up a business
at Fawkner House, 276 Smith Street, Collingwood. Fawkner
House had been a residence of John Pascoe Fawkner.
Here billboards boasted ‘The cheapest wholesale house
in the trade’ and ‘The cheapest shop in Collingwood’. He
dealt in fancy goods, tobacco, musical instruments and
stationery. From this address he also campaigned on a
number of issues, over the years. These issues included
filthy gas, pilfering at the customs sheds, the ‘monstrous’
Shops Acts which forbade trading after 7 pm. He even for-
warded five shillings to help set up a fund to pay the fine of
a prosecuted shopkeeper, with a promise of a further con-
tribution if required.
His business prospered, he opened a branch shop at
198 Smith Street in 1882 and in 1886 boasted a warehouse
in Bedford Street, Collingwood. The depression at the con-
clusion of the land boom affected the business of Henry
Bradley & Son, and they were forced to retreat to their
Bedford Street warehouse, in 1889. However by 1891, they
were again back in business at 324 Smith Street, Colling-
wood. During the late 1890 s and nearly 1900 s, they had
various addresses in the Little Collins Street area of Mel-
bourne, their most permanent one was at 285 Little Collins
Street, Melbourne.
Henry Bradley died at ‘Hillcrest’, Warburton, on 9 July
1911 at 80 years of age, and was buried in the Melbourne
General Cemetery.


THE S.V. LINCOLNSHIRE IN FULL SAIL


NOTES ON THE “LINCOLNSHIRE”
The Lincolnshire was a three-masted clipper of 1024 tons.
She was built by the Blackwall yards for Messrs Money
Wigram & Sons, and launched in 1858. Classed A 1 at Lloyds,
she had a length of 207-5 ft, with a beam of 32-8 ft and a
depth of 20 5 ft.
She operated extensively on the Gravesend to Port
Phillip run and during the period 1859-79 and made twenty-
eight voyages to Port Phillip, including two in 1866. Henry
Bradley and his family were on the second of these.
Her time on this run was generally around eighty days
whilst the average in general, was eighty-five days. It is
noted however that the voyage in which the Bradley family
were aboard she took eighty-nine days.
In 1874 she was converted to barque rig and was finally
sold by Wigrams in 1881, after being condemned. She was
reportedly wrecked two years later.


[?]




THE
Lincolnshire Observer.
A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER,
PUBLISHED ON BOARD THE “LINCOLNSHIRE.'
DUETTO THE PASSAGE FROM LONDON TO MELBOURNE.
COMMENCED SEPTEMBER 20, AND ENDED DECEMBER 20, 1866.
OFFICERS OF THE SHIP :
H. H. Shinnee, Commander.
Newman, Chief Officer.
Tillett, 2nd ~
Eaely, 3rd „
NEWSPAPER COMMITTEE:
G. W. Peiston, Editor.
C. Tuenee.
J, Iliffe.
MELBOURNE :
FEINTED FOE THE EDITOE, BY EOBEET BEIL, 97b LITTLE COLLINS STESEI EAST.
1867.


PREFACE
The Lincolnshire Observer is published at the request and
by the subscription of the passengers of the “ Lincolnshire.” If it
does not possess much literary merit, it is hoped it will be regarded as
a memento of a very pleasant and prosperous voyage, by those for
whom the paper was expressly written.
Our thanks are especially due to Captain Skinner, for his
interesting observations on the voyage, also to Messrs. C. Turner
and J. Iliffe, for the assistance rendered to us, in the management
of the paper.
Trusting that the future career of every one of our readers will
be a prosperous and a happy one, we subscribe ourselves,
Their sincere well-wishers,
f THE EDITORS.


THE
limliraliirp dMismirr.
PUBLISHED EXPRESSLY FOR THE PASSENGERS OF THE "LINCOLNSHIRE.”
AND CONTAINING
AMUSEMENT TO ALL-OFFENCE TO NONE.
No. 1. SATURDAY, OCTOBER 27, 1866. [Gratis.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
lOST, STOLEN, or STRAYED from one of the rooms of the officials of the ship,
i A GENTLEMAN’S HEART. It is supposed to have gone in the direction of
'‘the Second Cabin, or Saloon. If any Lady should find the same, she is requested to
give it to the owner, or what would be better or more to the purpose, her own heart
in return. If after this notice, it is detained, the offender will be brought before the
Hymeneal Altar. Any one obtaining information respecting the above, will please
leave word in writing, in the Editor’s Box.
BIRTHS.
ON board on the morning of this day, the First number of the “ Lincolnshire
Observer — Great rejoicing.
ON Thursday morning, the 25th inst., in the Deck House, the Head Steward’s
Fanny, of Five.—All well.
MARRIAGES.
WITHIN a certain cabin, on board the “ Lincolnshire,” on her passage from
London to Port Phillip, Mr. C. B , to Miss .
This advertisement will be perhaps continued.
DEATHS.
DYED suddenly, at the barbarous institution of a hair cutter, in the Second
Cabin, in the prime of life, on the 23rd inst., a pair of whiskers, much and
deeply lamented. Friends will please accept this intimation.
EDUCATIONAL.
TO PARENTS AND GUARDIANS.
FOR nearly a fortnight, a morning school has existed in the Second Cabin. The
Conductors having had a desire to amuse and improve anyone who might wish
to become a pupil, respectfully say, nothing shall be wanted on their part, as far as
they are capable, to see realised their most ardent wishes; and they respectfully
trust that parents and guardians will assist them in their attempt.
Terms of admission : —Strict attention and perseverence.
The Lincolnshire Observer.
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 27th, 1866.
“To be or not to be, that is the question.” Are the important proceedings
on board the “Lincolnshire” to be unrecorded, to the irretrievable loss of
posterity ? Is our little life of three months on shipboard to remain


without a chronicle, or far worse, a chronicler? Doomed like an “ unsub-
stantial vision, to vanish, and leave not a wreck behind,” e’en as our track
on the ocean is speedily obliterated, shall our life here bo considered
unworthy of record.
Individually we make Logs—(there are exceptions, among which
number we must confess ourselves). Surely if the parts be thus preserved
the whole must be worthy of consideration. Have we no grievances to
complain of, no one suffering from the “ Cacoasthes Scribendi,” no jokes
worthy of preservation, no scandal to be made e’en more public than it
now is, if possible?
Reflection on the above questions has induced us to undertake the great
responsibility, expense, and trouble, of publishing the Lincolnshire Ob-
server as alegimate means of communication between our fellow passengers.
But let us hope that higher motives will induce some of our fellow
prisoners to come forward to help to contribute to the amusement of others,
and beguile the dreary hours on shipboard.
In this hope we are induced to venture our first essay, and ask the
generous assistance of those gifted with power to amuse and instruct.
We propose to lay before our readers, the weekly history of our life on
shipboard ! and if we are enabled to wile even one dreary hour, our task is
done. We shall be amply repaid by the only reward we seek—the
approval of our kind readers —this will make us insensible to the fault
finding of the censorious.
“Amusement for all, Offence to none,” is our motto, and this we trust
to carry out, by rejecting all personal or offensive communications what-
ever.
LOCAL NEWS.
Under the experienced management of our talented boatswain, the
sailors of the “ Lincolnshire ” kindly volunteered to give an entertainment
for the amusement of their shipmates and passengers. A selection of Negro
melodies were very tastefully rendered, enlivened by the broad humor and
energetic acting of Brother Bones, who had an able coadjutor in the
tambourine. To the same talented artistes we are indebted for the lively
comedy of “ Slim Jim,” w'hich, to judge from the plaudits of the spectators,
was quite a success. The thanks of all on board are due to the actors
concerned.
The striking and impressive ceremony of drowning the dead horse was
performed with due solemnity on the evening of Friday, the 19th instant.
A calm evening favored the proceedings —the doomed horse, with his


equally unfortunate rider was hoisted to the main yard arm, and amidst
the whole ship’s assembled population and the cheers of the crew, was
consigned to a watery grave.
In a few days we shall cross the equator. We may then expect a visit
from his majesty King Neptune; who, with his court, will doubtless pay
us a visit to congratulate those who, for the first time, cross his dominions.
OUR VOYAGE.
On Saturday, the 22nd of September, 1866, the good ship “Lin-
colnshire ” weighed anchor at Gravesend, with between fifty and sixty
passengers, for Melbourne, the future capital of the Southern hemis-
phere. A great part of Sunday and Monday were spent lying at anchor
off Deal, in an unpleasant chopping sea, which rendered the first two
nights very disagreeable, especially to those who had not yet propitiated
Neptune in his watery dominions. Owing to head-winds and calms,
Plymouth was not reached till the evening of the 28th. Here the rest
of our passengers joined us, congratulating themselves on having missed
the discomforts of the Channel; which is, in fact, generally the most
disagreeable part of the passage.
On the following evening, it being a dead calm, we were towed to
sea, and near the Eddystone Lighthouse we cast off the hawser from
the tug. A small boat takes off the emigration officer, Government
inspector, and those who do not wish to make a compulsory six months’
voyage, and we are now fairly at sea. Every one now sets himself
enthusiastically to prepare for the voyage, and to make the new home
as comfortable as circumstances will admit. To those just come on
board, the bustle, noise, and confusion were, if bewildering, at least not
devoid of a certain pleasing charm of novelty and excitement. Tea
over, every one betakes themselves to the deck to have a last look at
the shores of old England now fading- in the distance, and obscured by
the falling shadows of night. The sea is calm, and a thousand stars
shine out to light up a scene not to be forgotten. The Eddystone
Lighthouse sheds its bright rays over the waters, giving life and variety
to the scene.
For several days our voyage is prosperous, and we make good rpnsj
then head winds and calms sadly retard the ship’s progress.
On the 10th, we are in sight of Madeira, and during the 12th and
18th, are becalmed off Palma, the most western of the Canary Islands.
This majestic island is 2,000 feet above the level of the sea, and as it
towered amongst the clouds was a fine sight, in the distance.
On the 17th instant, we crossed the Tropic of Cancer, and it needed
no thermometer to tell us that we are in the Torrid Zone.
If our progress hitherto has been slow, we may congratulate our-
selves on having had a very pleasant voyage so far. A run of fine
weather on the other side of the Line will even now enable the “ Lin-
colnshire” to make up for lost time, and keep up the name she has so
justly earned for quick passages.


Sept.
Lat. N.
Long. W.
Distance
miles.
Sunday, 30th
48.33
7.07
151
Oct.
Monday, 1st
46.45
9.31
147
Tuesday, 2nd
45.11
10.33
122
Wednesday, 3rd
42.31
13.7
223
Thursday, 4th
44.13
13.0
82
Friday, 5th
323
14.13
121
Saturday, 6th
39.3
14.13
104
Sunday, 7th
37.50
16.52
145
Monday, 8th
36.38
16.30
85
Tuesday, 9th
34.37
16.6
139
Wednesday, 10th
32.17
16.2
142
Thursday, 11th
31.25
16.16
63
Friday, 12th
29.36
17.55
158
Saturday, 13th
28.48
18.58
88
Sunday, 14th
28.42
19.50
58
Monday, 15th
27.52
20.36
75
Tuesday, 16th
26.22
19.40
120
Wednesday 17th
24.11
18.34
165
Thursday, 18th
21.23
20.48
170
Friday, 19th
Saturday, 20th
19.49
21.1
108
Sunday, 21st
17.43
21.5
144
Monday, 22nd
15.37
21.12
148
LOG OF THE SHIP.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Lincolnshire Observer.)
Sir,- — I come before you with a real grievance; my instincts are
naturally of a cleanly nature—conceive my dismay, on finding that I am
expected to perform all the necessary ablutions of my person, and quench
my thirst, on one poor quart of water per diem. ’Tis true—’tis called con-
densed water; but in practice, I find it to go no further than the ordinary fluid.
I can imagine concentrated milk, and compressed potatoes, and the
essence of this, that, and the other ; but the condensed water of which we
are expected to make so small a quantity go such a very long way, is beyond
my comprehension, and I am emboldened to ask your advice on the subject.
Your thirsty correspondent,
V. DRY.
VARIETIES.
Bill Stickers Beware ! —We beg to caution those of our fellow-
passengers who favour this style of communicating their thoughts, that
the eye of our übiquitous reporter is on them, and in future all such
cases of insubordination will be treated with the utmost rigour of the
law.
Will shortly be delivered by Charles Brownlow, Esq., a lecture,
on “The Art of Courting,” accompanied by practical illustrations, by
the kind assistance of some of our fair friends. The versatile talents
of this gentleman are so well known that comment on the above is
unnecessary.


POETS CORNER.
THE VOYAGE OUT.
Three months at sea, a dreary time,
We pass to seek the southern clime ;
’Mid hopes and fears, our feelings each way turn,
As we hope of fortune’s wheel another turn.
Sadly to England’s shores we bid adieu,
And, as its generous scenes recede from view,
A fond long look of home we take at last,
Ere on the ocean broad our lot is cast.
Majestic sails our ship o’er Biscay’s deep,
Behind, before, around the waters sweep ;
The stars o’erhead reflected on the ocean,
Serenely smile upon “ our world” in motion.
As on the voyage of life when first we start,
Youthful with buoyant hope and trusting heart;
Nor see the rocks and shoals now hid from sight,
’Gtainst which we’re warned by no kind Eddy’s light.
A dreary time ! ah! no, the word’s misplaced,
While by those ladies fair our ship is graced ;
The jest, the dance, the chat, the jovial song,
Gaily enchant the hours that trip along.
As yet, ’tie all too fair, too gay, and when
The treacherous elements with envy ken
Our happy times, and thwart our watery course,
The windy god he comes without remorse.
In vain he thinks our trusty ship to stay,
While Captain Shinner o’er us holds his sway ;
Skilled in the art contrary winds to cross,
He brings us on our way with little loss.
But now beneath a tropic sky we bum,
And find that while we’re cooking to a turn,
Our patience and our tempers sorely tried,
The power of locomotion is to us denied.
But let us hope ere long a breeze propitious,
Will come in place of one so cross and vicious,
And while it bears us on with genial speed,
We hope to enjoy at home our Christmas feed.
TO MISS
Love in your eyes sits beaming,
And sheds delicious death;
Love in your lips sits straying,
And warbles on your breath.
Love in your breast sits panting,
And swells my heart’s desire ;
No grace, no charm is wanting,
You’ve set my heart on fire.
From your sincere
ADMIRER.
[We regret exceedingly that we cannot fill up the blanks, as owing to the exces-
sive agitation of our correspondent, the names alike of the admirer and admired are
illegible. Our regret is lessened by the conviction that the fair maiden, to whom
these lines are addressed, will intuitively recognise the author.]


AN ODE TO THURSDAY’S DINNER.
’Tis the last piece of pudding,
Left cold, and alone ;
AH his duffy companions
Are swallowed, and gone.
No paste of its kindred,
No jam-tart is nigh,
To reflect back the sweetness
Of the roly-poly.
I must leave thee, thou loved one,
To rest for a bit ;
My appetite is sleeping,
Q-o sleep thou with it.
But kindly we scatter
Thy crumbs o’er the plate,
Where thy lengthy proportions
Were reclining of late.
The time must soon follow,
When digestions decay j
And the fondness for dumplings
Prom our hearts drops away :
When our tastes and our stomachs
For pastry has flown ;
And the love for our sweet
Eoly-poly has gone.
During the fine weather, the impressive service of the Church of
England will be read as usual on the poop (as on Sunday last.)
We can conceive no circumstances so favourable for making an im-
E cession on a religious mind as the glorious prospect there spread before
im. In the boundless expanse above, and around, our temporary
home is the only moving object. Who can, then, fail to be struck by
the immensity of space, when the ship in which he is a parasite, is a
mere speck. The humbled man then, if ever, feels his own littleness,
and looks from Nature up to Nature’s God.
For the last two Sundays a meeting for Divine worship has been
held in the secondrcabin each evening, where we have had the pleasure
of listening to a feeling address from Mr. Lane. It is proposed to con-
tinue these services every Sunday evening, and we need scarcely say
that all are invited. Service to commence each evening at seven o’clock.
A JAVANESE MATRIMONIAL ADVERTISEMENT.
Amongst the many odd customs, which distinguish the Chinese of Jaya, is one
which will startle the young ladies on board the “ Lincolnshire.” Beneath the win-
dows of their houses is often to be seen an empty flower pot. This is nothing more
or less than a matrimonial advertisement. A young lady’s in the house; husband
wanted.
CONUNDRUMS.
1. Why is the “ Lincolnshire,” scudding before the wind, like a fashionable lady
taking an afternoon walk on the shady side of Collins-street ?
2. Why is courtship like champagne ?
3. What two numbers multiplied together make seven ?
Printed and Published by the “Lincolnshire Observer” Company (Limited), at their office. No,
I feck-house, Port-side.


THE
I'inrnlKiliirp dDterntr.
PUBLISHED EXPRESSLY FOR THE PASSENGERS OF THE LINCOLNSHIRE,”
AND CONTAINING
AMUSEMENT TO ALL. OFFENCE TO NONE.
No. 2.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 8, 1866.
[Gratis.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
TTTANTED, a few good spicy articles for the Observer , also a good REPORTER
T V in the Saloon and Third Cabins, address Editor’s Box, Saloon.
WANTED, a GLENGARRY BONNET, not too much Cock Dp:—Apply
J.D.K.Z., Chief Cabin.
W
ANTED a few YOUNG LADIES, to join the Dancing Class, on the Quarter
Deck, when the weather is suitable.
LOST— One sack of SOUR FLOUR, one drum of SALT FISH, and a GENTLE-
MAN’S HEART. The finder will be handsomely rewarded, by two
The Old Cat O’ Many Tails.
"FIOUND, —A BRIAR WOOD PIPE ; owner can haye it by giving a description.
J_ Also, a white Handkerchief, which may be had on the same terms.
Apply L., Observer Office.
ANY young person desirous of occupying her time, and amusing herself, can meet
with profitable employment. Application to be made in the first instance,
stating qualifications, &c., to J.D.K.Z.
ANTI-POKING YOUR NOSE INTO OTHER PEOPLE’S BUSINESS
SOCIETY.
A FULL MEETING of this body is called for special business, on Tuesday
evening, at 7 o’clock sharp.
By order of the Board,
J. JOHNSON, A.P.Y.N.1.0.P.8.5.
Hon. Sec., pro tem.
REPRESENTATION OF THE COUNTY OF LINCOLNSHIRE.
IREREBY GIVE NOTICE, that by the power in me, vested by act of Parlia-
ment, Viet. 7, Chap. 9, I shall on the 13th day of November, at the Town Hall,
Lincolnshire, proceed to the election of two members, to represent this constituency
in the ensuing Parliament. And I also intimate, that in the event of more than two
candidates offering themselves for election, by their applying in due form, and in the
terms of the act, I shall proceed to take a poll in the usual way. Polling day, 20th
of November. The polling place will be fixed immediately after the nomination.
ALFRED McGUINNESS, Returning Officer.
NOTICE TO CANDIDATES.
IT will be necessary for each intending Candidate, to be provided on the morning
of the nomination, with a Proposer, a Seconder, and a supply of refreshing
beverages, for the use of thte Electors.
ALFRED McGUINMISS, Returning Officer.


Grand dramatic performance'
Under Distinguished Patronage.
This Evening (Weather permitting),
Mr. T. B. Bamum’s
S HAYIN G SAL OON
Will he Performed by
Me. Boatswain Walkee and Company.
To commence at 7.30 p.m.
IMMENSE ATTRACTION!!!
GREAT SHAKESPERIAN REYIYAL.
,N Wednesday evening next, will be performed, in THE POOP THEATRE ; a
portion of the first act of HAMLET, with the following powerful cast; —
Not from the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane.
The Lincolnshire Observer.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 3, 1866.
In laying before oav readers this second number of the Observer, we have
to crave their indulgence for the unfavorable circumstances under wfiich they
have been written. Two hours before “ going to press,” with the first
number, it was uncertain whether anything of the kind was to be carried
out. The general lassitude, caused by the tropical heat, has caused us to
offer a like excuse, for the shortcomings of the present number.
But having commenced the undertaking, we ( i.e ., the L. 0. Co. Limited
—very!) shall not begrudge the the trouble necessary to carry it out, to
the end of the voyage : always supposing that our paper meets with
general approbation, and that the support of those qualified to render
assistance is not withheld. We here beg to tender our sincere thanks, for
the kindness of those who have favored us with contributions, and hope
for greater assistance in future. We are sorry to see that several grave
etymological errors escaped notice, by which, among others, the meaning
of two of the advertisements was totally destroyed. If it is too late to
remedy the mistakes, we shall be happy to refund the amount paid for
insertion.


If we are not mistaken, it is “Thingamy” who says, in “ What d’ye
call ’em,” “ Happy is the nation whose annals are a blank.”
Granting this to be true then, we on board the “Lincolnshire” must
consider ourselves the most favored of mortals. It has been said that
happiness is a mere negative feeling - , and consists in the absence of any
painful sensations. Ido not wish to insinuate that our life is so un-
eventful. Yet, as we pursue the even tenor of our way with unruffled
tempers o’er the placid ocean, the short space of time that seems to
separate Monday morning from Saturday night would show that we
ought to congratulate ourselves on being in that very enviable position.
The only fear is lest we yield too much to the seductive influence of our
indolent life, and like the lotus eaters of old become totally enamoured
of the dolce far niente.
Unfortunately, the fact of having “ nothing else to do ” has a ten-
dency to bring forward some slight angularities we are all endowed
with, and which, under more unfavourable auspices, would be buried
and hid from sight.
Perhaps it is hard to overrate the ill effect of this compulsory idle-
ness on shipboard. Yet we may surely congratulate ourselves this far:
if our voyage has not been of a very speedy nature, the weather has
been so fine as to rob the delay of half its disagreeable features; so
fine, indeed, as to excite the wonder of those who, for the first time,
have ventured on the ocean. How many are deterred from this voyage
by fear of its fancied dangers ? Once at sea, the terrors vanish, in lieu
comes dissatisfaction with the heat, the cold, the provisions, the length
of the voyage, &c., &c.
However, now we seem to have got into a steady trade-wind, which
is carrying us along at a rate promising speedily to terminate at once
our voyage and our troubles together.
When a person is obliged to make a long sea voyage, there are two
things, respecting - which he naturally wishes to satisfy himself —that
he selects a good and trustworthy ship, and sails under a captain
who has earned lor himself a name and position in his profession.
But there is one other point on which hangs the whole happiness or
misery of his trip, and respecting which he is, and must remain igno-
rant, until his voyage has actually commenced.
And this point is, who are to be his fellow-passengers ? Will
they be genial, agifeable people, who will wish to make what must
necessarily be a dreary time, pass as pleasantly as possible ? or, will
they be persons wrapt up in themselves, and who care not, so that meal
times come pretty regularly, and the night does not fail them ?
Hapless indeed is the fate of the man who falls among the latter
class. His dull hours and weary days which so slowly resolve them-
selves into weeks and months;’and his, that worst form of solitude,
mingling with a crowd, yet feeling himself alone.
But we, on board the good ship Lincolnshire, find our lot has fallen
in more pleasant places. When we had individually made up our minds
that our vessel was one in which we might safely trust our lives, and


those of our wives and children, and that we should sail under a com-
mander noted for his urbane and gentlemanly conduct, we were not
reckoning without our host.
This, the five weeks’ experience we have had, has amply proved to us.
Let us, then, seeing we are so comparatively well-situated, endea-
vour by all the means in our power to aid that good feeling which has
so far existed amongst us.
Let us also encourage the glad jest or song; and if it assume the
proportions of a concert, or dramatic performance, we will count it so
much the better. It is not for us to criticise too severely those who so
kindly come forward for the amusement of others, and to help to wile
away the hours which would otherwise hang - wearily on our hands.
We shall always lend our best support to any project which pro-
mises to afford a little harmless amusement. As such we hail with
genuine pleasure the announcement for next Wednesday eveningof a
portion of Shakspeare’s play of “ Hamletand we hope we shall have
yet to register many performances by the same, or other amateurs on
our Poop Theatre, which promises to be so well inaugurated on that
occasion.
LOCAL NEWS.
We are pleased to notice the success of an entertainment given last
week, by several of our fellow passengers. The proceedings commenced
with a very clever prologue, which was followed by readings from ‘ 1 Pick-
wick Papers,” Byron, and “ Handy Andy,” a recitation from Hamlet, and
several amusing songs.
Yesterday, at 10 o’clock, the ship “ Lincolnshire” crossed the equator,
and was honored by a visit from his Marine Highness, King Neptune, Mrs
■N. and Suite. Several of the “new chums” had the pleasure of being
introduced to him in the usual way. For want of space, our detailed
notice of the proceedings must stand over till next week.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Lincolnshire Observer .)
Sir, —When you did me the honor to appoint me your head re-
porter, I anticipated nothing less than a continual flourish of my
patronymic in print in connection with good articles- and lots of news.
I have since found, Sir, that this was a delusion, I may say a gross
delusion.
When I come to the reality, I find that there is no news to report;
and, worse still, that I have not to have my cognomen in print at all;
but in common writing! and, worse of all, I am styled in your first
number, “ Übiquitous reporter.”
Now, Sir, I do not know the meaning of this word, but I am on the
look-out for a copy of “Webster’s,” and should it mean anything per-
sonal, you may be sure you will be required to answer at the bar of
justice for traducing my fair and spotless name.


And now, Sir, for the news (which only my indefatigable industry
could have collected.)
On Tuesday night last, one of the lady passengers in the second-
cabin was very much alarmed in the middle of the night by an appari-
tion, which appeared sudddenly and silently at her cabin-door, and in a
sepulchral voice exclaimed, “ I am thy father’s ghost.” After which,
the thing produced an implement very much like a housemaid’s broom,
and after stamping twice, melted away, leaving the lady in a state of
trepidation more easily imagined than described.
I am exceeding pleased to have to chronicle an event, in this my
first report, which speaks very highly for our respected captain. The
passengers in the second-cabin had occasion, a day or two since, to com-
plain to him respecting some of the provisions served out, and not
served out to them.
This they did in a short note, which was sent up to Captain Shinner.
He immediately answered it in person, coming down in the course of
dinner, and, in the most kind and gentlemanly manner, entered into
the complaints, showing that they were altogether unavoidable nn his
part, and agreed to do all that lay in his power to rectify them.
Should you know any one at all disposed to kick up a disturbance of
any sort, for the benefit of your reporter, bid them “ God speed,” and
Believe me, your Argus-eyed (if not übiquitous)
REPORTER.
MARKET REPORT.
The money market at present appears to be well supplied; and great activity
is observable. Money changing hands very freely ; especially at whist, three card
100, and speculation.
In the provision market, a good trade has been doing; though of many articles
there have been short supplies, and in others, the quality has been rather inferior. In
preserved meats we report a very brisk trade, prices firm; also in soup and boulli.
Preserved soup, none offering, though certain merchants promised a weekly supply. A
limited trade has been done in salt pork and beef, the latter being rather inferior.
Rice, flat bread and flour, much inquired for, but a very short supply. Split peas find
a ready market at last week’s prices. Pickles very scarce; the supply being much
under the market requirements. Cheese and coffee are much inquired after, and
show strong disposition to rise, notwithstanding that the supply of cheese lately has
been rather inferior. In preserved potatoes and lime juice, the market is exceedingly
flat, and prices lowering. In bulk porter, the supply for some time past has been
very inferior in quality, and rather short in quantity; respecting which great dis-
satisfaction has been expressed. In bottled ales and stout, we report a very brisk trade,
with a good supply, and prices firm
The same may be said of wines. In spirits, brandy has been in good request.
Whisky, gin, and rum being almost totally neglected.
In tobacco the trade has been rather quiet, owing to there being a good supply of
English in consumers’ hands.
When Sheridan was asked at an amateur play, which performer he liked best, he
replied,—“ the prompter, for I saw less, and heard more of him than anyone else.”
Which is the best way of retaining a woman’s affections ?—by not returning them.
To get a duck for dinner—jump off the main chains.
To get a duck of a wife —apply to one of the “ Lincolnshire” belles.


POET’S CORNER.
We have received the following answer to a “ devoted admirer,” whose plaint
appeared last week.
These lines are written to form a reply y
To one who is blind with love in his eye ;
The lady for whom some lines were intended,
Thinks it quite time such nonsense were ended.
Not prompted by true love, of this she’s quite sure,
For shame, then, her smiles, and her heart to allure.
Whate’er in a newspaper bethinks are his games,
She thinks, from his nonsense, he’s cracked for his pains.
With Miss ’s uncomplimentary compliments.
Says Dick to Jack, your neighbors say,
You wrangle with your wife each day.
Pooh ! pooh! said Jack, they only joke,
’Tis now a fortnight since we spoke.
TWENTY FOUR HOURS AT SEA.
By Day.
Four of eating and of drinking,
None of working or of thinking ;
Eight or ten of loafing and joking,
Enlivened by a little smoking.
By Night.
Only two or three of sleeping,
The rest made up by late hours keeping :
For in bed you’re set a scratching,
Lots of searching, none of 'catching.
Query.—ls our unfortunate poetical correspondent disturbed by prickly heat; or
parasites r
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
A.T.C.M.—Of the two copies of the Observer printed, one is intended equally for the
Second and Third Cabins. All are welcome to have it, the only restriction being,
that the copy be kept clean and returned.
-X.Y.Z.—When your hat disappears, over the side of the “ Lincolnshire” in a squall,
it certainly becomes a projcc-tiie.
4. Why are Rooks the wisest of Birds P
5. Why should widows marry roues ?
6. What favorite Scotch sport resembles woman’s conversation ?
ANSWERS TO LAST.
CONUNDRUMS.


THE
fiiiralraljirr dDtemnr.
PUBLISHED EXPRESSLY POE THE PASSENGERS OP THE “LINCOLNSHIRE,"
AND CONTAINING
AMUSEMENT TO ALL—DEFENCE TO NONE,
No. 8. SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1866. [Gratis.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
TENDERS will be received, until the 13th inst., for supplying two gentlemen with
a quantity of Scented Soaps, Oils, Pomades, Nail, Tooth and Hair Brushes,
Combs, and other toilet requisites for the voyage. For further particulars apply to
C. C. & Co., 23 Fiddler’s Green.
N.B.—The highest or any Tender not necessarily accepted.
REWARD to those who can solve the following question. Question in Navigation.
Being in chase of a ship. I found the angle of by her mast ( 160 ft. )to
be 1° s'. Five minutes it was 1° 20'. In what time will she be just 500 yards off?
TTTE are extremely grateful to the fair hands that contributed the elegant covers,
in which our numbers now appear, and shall feel doubly anxious to produce an
interior worthy of such envelopes.
ANTED, a few Spicy Articles, on any interesting topic relating to our voyage.
The Lincolnshire Observer.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 1866.
The excessive heat of the last few days has entailed upon the production
of our weekly quota rather more labor than we are disposed to give it.
Owing to the sun being so far south of the line, it has been reserved for
the last week, to give us a specimen of his power in the tropics. His
perpendicular rays, have made the wooden prison in which we are cooped
up, like an enormous oven, in which we poor wretches are baking, stewing,
and sweltering, all day long. There is no approach to coolness, except on
deck, where composition cannot be carried on with the privacy desired ;
and therefore, nothing for it, but the heat of a close cabin, where at the
present writing, we are inclined to feel like Sydney Smith describes, when
he says he would prefer to take off his flesh, and sit in his bones.
Whether this would be cooler, we cannot say, but leave to our fellow
passengers to determine with how much greater gusto we could dip our


beak into a claret cup, than our pen into the ink bottle. Every one on
board experiences the same languour, and may be seen sprawling about the
deck, in every variety of attitude that listless laziness can suggest.
It is true that at night, when the fiddler strikes up and the dance begins,
many brighten up, and practice saltation and flirtation with great vigor.
The latter especially is indulged, apparently with great success, until the
rising of the inconvenient moon. At present, the early evening is only
lighted up by the mild rays of Venus, who looks down with an approving
smile on the gaieties of the deck. But fear not, young people, on this
head we will be discreet, and divulge no more. These tropical nights are
very pleasant on board; the relief from the heat of the days brings everyone
on deck, which is crowded. Dancing, promenading, and chatting is
going on, on every side ; while several independent musical performers
in various parts of the ship all contribute to make up “ quite a gay and
festive scene.” We wish that some of our friends could drop in on one
of these occasions. They would then have an opportunity of seeing one
of the bright sides of our life at sea.
DRAMATIC ENTERTAINMENT.
On Wednesday evening last, about four bells, an unusual stir was ob-
served on the poop. Under the awning a temporary stage of flags was
erected, and the first Act of Hamlet performed by several amateur
votaries of the sock and buskin. Mr. Tysack, as “ Hamlet,” acted ex-
ceedingly well, and was well supported by the other actors, whose
names we give below. The “ Ghost Scene ” was as well got up as cir-
cumstances would allow, and the whole was received with great ap-
plause, the only complaint being that the piece was too short.
We understand that this is only preliminary to an endeavour to
produce the entire play.
Owing to the indisposition of the real, original “ Ghost,” a slight
hitch in the proceedings was imminent, but at the right moment the
“Ghost” was all there, slightly, perhaps, absent in mind, but present
in the—well, say spirit—for it could' hardly be called the body of a Ghost.
The cast was as follows ;
Hfunlet Mr. Tysack.
Horatio ... ... ... ... Mr. J. Ilifie.
Marcellas ... ... ... Mr. Bradley.
Bernardo ... ... Mr. Gill.
Francisco and Ghost Mr. Friston.


NIGHT SCENE IN A YOUNG LADY’S BEDCHAMBER.
During our voyage, it beiflg one of the wannest nights, a young lady
was excessively frightened by a little circumstance which transpired about
the middle of the night. The young lady, whose beauty is only equalled
by her modesty, and whose “eye’s dark charm” has caused more than one
waistcoat to palpitate, had retired to her cabin, when, after laying aside
the greater portion of her wearing apparel, she committed herself to the
tender embraces of Morpheus, whose soothing influences were aided by the
cooling Zephyr which came in at the side porthole, fanning her cheeks
with his feathery wings. In short, she was snoozing finely. It was
about midnight, when the young lady was aroused by a noise from her
delicious slumbers. Half unclosing her eyes, she was startled by the
sight of a corpulent figure apparently struggling to get admission into her
chamber.
It struck her at once, that the intruder had been caught by the rear of
his unmentionables, by a nail, as he seemed to be striving with a stem
determination to enter.
Her first thought was to faint; her second to give the fellow a push;
her third to jump out of window; her fourth to scream, which last was
immediately carried into effect.
The whistle of the locomotive on the iron road, when it gives its first
snort, was but a whisper to the scream of the lady. The whole ship, and
half the ocean, were awakened by the cry. The passengers, servants, and
stewards rushed to the rescue. Broomsticks, mop handles, and bootjacks
flashed in the moonlight, as the household entered the chamber of the
scared beauty.
An examination of the figure in the cabin dispelled the fears of all, and
changed the screams of the young lady into shouts of laughter. The
imaginary fat man was only her own hooped skirt, which she had hung on
a hoop near the window, and which the wind had inflated, and set in
motion.
There was no more sleeping in the ship that night.
“ Do you know who built this bridge ? ” said someone to Hook, one day“ No,”
replied Hook, “ but if you go over you will be tolled."
A gentleman asked a lady the other da j why so many tall gentlemen were bache-
lors ? The reply was, that they were obliged to lie corner-wise in bed to keep their
feet in, and that a wife would he in the way.


CROSSING THE LINE.
On Friday, Nov. 2nd, the “Lincolnshire” crossed the Equator, and we
were duly honored by a visit from King Neptune and his court. To them
the New Chums were introduced, with the orthodox ceremonial customary
on this occasion. For the benefit of those who did not witness the pro-
ceedings we propose to give a description of them, and it may not be
inappropriate to preface our notice, by a few remarks on the pedigree of
our illustrious visitors, and on the origin of this curious custom.
In the Greek Mythology, Neptune was the King of the Ocean, and, we
are told, was the son of Saturn and Ops. Owing to a prediction that he
was to be dethroned by his children, Saturn proved anything but a kind
parent, and to prevent the fulfilment of the prophecy, adopted the plan of
practising cannibalism on his innocent offspring. Fansanias says that
Neptune’s mother concealed him in a sheepfold in Arcadia, and that she
imposed on her hubband, by telling, him that she had brought a colt into
the world, which, on being presented to Saturn as his son was instantly
devoured by him. Neptune shared with his brothers the empire of Saturn,
and received as his portion the kingdom of the sea. This, however, did
not seem equal to the empire of Heaven and Earth, which Jupiter had
claimed.' Neptune, therefore, conspired to dethrone him with the other
Gods, but they were unsuccessful, and had to yield to the power of Jove.
Still, as being Gcd of the Sea, Neptune was entitled to more power than
any other God except Jupiter.
Not only the Ocean, but rivers and fountains, were subject to him. He
also could cause earthquakes at his pleasure, and raise islands from the
the bottom of the sea, with a blow from his trident.
But turn wo to him, as he appeared on the deck of the “ Lincolnshire,”
coming to welome ua to his dominions. About 10 o’clock, we being then
just on i'- j 11 jmtor (Lat. 0, Long. 27° 28') a large sail was rigged on the
dock, near ihe main hatch, and the hose being laid on, it was speedily
filled wish wator. A temporary .stage was erected for the convenience of
the novices. Piescntly two or three “Middies” are seen floundering in the
water, but are warned by one of the officers that “ they will have plenty
of that before it is over.” A slight stir is seen forward, and His Majesty
appears. On his um gracefully rests Mrs. Neptune, dressed in what we
presume is the fashion of the capital of her dominions. His suite consists
of the “ Court Barber,” an important personage, the King’s Physician,
about half a dozen “ Tritons,” dressed in something like police uniform,
being in short Marino Bobbies, and three sea bears in charge of their
keeper. Having paid his respects to the Captain on the poop, and drunk
a glass of grog at the capstan, the court is opened, and they proceed to
business. The spectators have crowded around, and the poop, deckhouse,
rigging and bulwarks, are all occupied with lookers on.


Amidst rounds of applause, their first subject, Mr. Rayner, is secured,
and sitting on the rail, is kindly interrogated as to his home and parentage,
prospects and destination. Answers to these questions are suddenly cut
short, by sundry mouthfuls of a delightful compound, resembling pea soup
in appearance, and, if possible, ten times as nasty. To restore him after
this treatment, the “ Doctor” gives him some “ tropical pills ” which, to
judge from the wry faces made, -may be beneficial, but were certainly not
agreeable. Another restorative was also used, in the shape of a smelling
bottle, the efficacy of which depended on certain pins stuck in the cork.
By this time our trim young sailor is in a state which is a decided con-
trast to his appearance when rigged out in full uniform on Sunday.
All this time the bears in the water are growling for their prey, and he
is handed over to their tender mercies. The rolling water and rough
tumbling speedily remove all traces of the shaving, and he emerges from
the bath, looking like a drowned rat. One by one, those who have not
crossed the lino before (among the crew,) are caught, and subjected to
similar rough usage, the barber, with his razor a foot long, being anything
but an easy shaver. By this time the latter personage stands very much
in need of a wash himself, and enters the bath where some rough tumbling
takes place. Neptune again pays his respects on the Quarter Deck, and
then disappears with his fair consort, somewhere in the forecastle, to
unrobe.
By this time, eight bells have struck, and the boatswain pipes all hands
to wash and dry the decks, the sail is removed, ropes are speedily coiled
away, as if the decks of the “ Lincolnshire” had not been the stage for so
strange a scene. .
The origin of this custom is lost in obscurity. It must have come to us
from the most ancient times, when the god Neptune would be propitiated
by those who really believed in his power to hasten or delay the voyage.
We can imagine the Roman sailor, trusting himself on the first approach
of Spring to the still treacherous Mediterranean, and commencing his voy-
age by a sacrifice on the forecastle, in honor of the watery god. But
instead of a flask of Falcmian broken over the bows as a libation, we are
content to drink it at the capstan. The Latin chaunt of the Roman tar is
replaced ly loss sentimental songs. In these degenerate days our vocal
aspirations are confined to wishing “ To be at work on the Railway,” to
expressing a desire to visit “Sandy Point,” or to chanting a hymn to a
certain “ Saint John Brown.”
7. Why is a pretty young lady like a hinge ?
8. V* hy is a rejected lover like an accepted one ?
9. Why is love like a duck’s foot ?
ANSWERS TO LAST.
CONUNDRUMS.


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Distance.
October
27
8.30 N.
22.26 W.
32
28
8.10
22.28
20
29
6.31
22.16
100
”
30
4.58
22.52
100
31
3.43
23.43
91
November
1
2.29
25.28
128
2
0.26
27.33
208
>)
3
3. 9
29.13
192
4
6.38
30.33
224
5
... 10.11
31.31
224
6
... 14,16
31.30
245
7
... 17.53
31.15
218
8
... 21.24
31.18
211
>>
9
... 24.18
29.55
187
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Lincolnshire Observer .)
Dear Sir, —Thinking that some notes of our progress towards
Melbourne would be acceptable to your numerous readers, I beg to
enclose the result of the last fourteen days’ observation :
The first five of these days the winds were very light and variable,
and the weather excessively hot, the thermometer ranging as high as 86°
in the shade of the cabins. But on November Ist, the south-east
trade wind commenced, bringing with it a most cool and refreshing
change.
Two ships have been signalized with during the last week, one the
Said Meschid, from Hamburg to Zanzibar, fifty-seven days out; the
other, the County of Ayr, forty-two days from Glasgow to Batavia.
On November 2nd, we crossed the imaginary line called the
Equator, that is equidistant from the two Poles of the earth. On this
line the sun rises at 6 a.m. and sets at 6 p.m. the whole year round.
The days will now gradually increase in length until we obtain our ut-
most southing.
On the night of November 3rd, we passed the island of Fernando
Noronha, distant 160 miles. This island is a penal settlement of the
Portuguese; sixty miles to the westward of that lie the La Roccas
rocks, on which the Duncan Dunbar was totally wrecked on her pas-
sage out to Sydney last year.
Between the 4th and sth, we were only 220 miles from the conti-
nent of South America, about the neighbourhood of Pernambuco. This
coast is now well lighted by the Brazilian government. This land is


high, and can be seen at the distance of sixty or seventy miles in clear
weather.
Between the 7th and Bth, we passed at the distance of ninety miles,
the island of Trinidad, 2020 feet high. On this island is a good spring
of water running down into the sea, and a numerous quantity of wild
pigs, descendants of animals left there by whaling vessels. The island
has never been claimed, nor inhabited by any people.
METEOROLOGICAL.
The moon will favor us with her cheerful light during the early part
of the night, gradually extending her visits all next week. The bright
planet Jupiter may be seen in the western sky until midnight. Mars,
distinguishable by its deep red colour, rises in the north-eastern sky
about eleven. Saturn may be seen the whole night, rising in the east
soon after sunset. Numerous shooting-stars and small meteors have
been observed lately; the month of November being remarkable for
them. The weather may now be expected to get colder every day, and
ladies are recommended to prepare their winter costumes. Fine bracing
cheerful weather, with moderate breezes, may he looked for all next
week.
I am, dear Editor, yours, &0.,
OBSERVATION.
ACROSTIC.
Bead by Mr. Tysack, at the representation of Hamlet, last week.
Applause we don’t expect,
Most rare the gift we ask,
A pleasing smile, and calm respect,
To help us through our task.
E’en while we try to pass an hour,
Urged by desire to please,
Eefrain, ye critics, from your power,
Sarcasm is wit’s decrease. Hamlet .
VARIETIES.
Nautical Question. —A vessel on the high seas bound from Southampton to
Cowes, bends her course due east, for two hours. She then veers round and hears
due north for an hour and a half. When she arrives at Cowes, the Captain finds that
if he could have come direct from Southampton to Cowes, the distance would only
have been ten miles. At how many knots per hour did the vessel run, supposing she
kept on at the same rate the whole way ?
Anothee. —The “ Lincolnshire” is likely to reach Melbourne in x weeks. There
are on board Sheep equal to a and pigs equal to 6. Then a plus h divided by x
is equal to y, or so many per week.
Question— Could not some of these doomed creatures be spared to give us a taste
of fresh meat once a month or oftener.
Impromptu of Hungry Passenger to stubborn piece of Salt Junk. —“Oh! that
this too, too, solid flesh would melt.


POET’S CORNER.
I wear it o’er my throbbing heart,
It makes my bosom thrill;
I groan to feci the hidden smart,
No sympathy can still.
It plants a fire within my breast,
And I am ill at ease ;
Stay! shall the secret I confess,
Which cause pangs like these ?
Is it lore, or is it woo P
Or dun forbodings of disaster ?
Or anguish, or remorse ? ah! no,
It is a mustard plaster.
C.S.
TO AN ORDINARY SEA BISCUIT.
To thee, flat mockery of our daily bread,
The hardest morsel on which man e’er fed ;
These true and half sarcastic lines I give,
To warn those of thee, who nt home do lire.
Dry subject, thou, for poesy or verse!
Scarce worth a honest human being’s curse :
Yet cursed art thou, and hast been by scores,
Whom fate hath driven from their native shores ;
The dimples on thy brown and oven-burnt phiz,
Possess no charms, create no jealousies ;
No palate dost thou please, no stomach cheer,
For starving wretches tackle thee with fear :
Small damage would there be, were I to roll
Thee rudely o’er the earth from pole to pole.
Cohesion proudly ehooseth thee to prove and show,
His mighty power upon the atom world below i
Many a white tooth hast thou ruthless torn,
From its companions that for aye must mourn ;
The lost link from the snow enamelled chain,
With them to feast and smile, ah! ne'er again j
Through many a gaping breach in walls of pearl
Queen Vanity doth down upon thee hurl
Her stouey maledictions as her duty,
For thou didst rob her face of perfect beauty.
Foul waste of water pure and golden grain,'
Delicious as a piece of clay and rain,
Sapless and tasteless as my leathern pouch,'
Nutricious too as sand, I safely vouch,
May I again nor friends have need to sweat
In swallowing thee, but soft provisions get
If they should leave the comforts of their home,
To sail to lands where" comforts rarely bloom ;
How much I love thee, I may not express,
But one thing, oh ! I can and will confess,
Thy very shadow makes my jaws to ache,
Much less thy substance, oh ! infernal cake.
So now with joy I bid thee an adieu !
Thou beastly food unfit for man to chew.
Primed and Published by the " Lincolnshire Observer” Company (Limited), at their oflice, So. 1
Deck-house, Port-side.


THE
i'inrnliLflliirf dWtermr.
PUBLISHED EXPRESSLY FOE THE PASSENGERS OF THE LINCOLNSHIRE.”
AND CONTAINING
AMUSEMENT TO ALL. OFFENCE TO NONE.
No. 4. SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1866. [Gratis.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THEATRE ROYAL.
Will be performed, during the week, wind and weather permitting,
Shakespeare’s Grand Tragedy of
HAML E T .
The Characters will be sustained by the following talented Amateurs.
Lords, Ladies, Officers, Soldiers, Sailors, &0., Ac.
The Lincolnshire Observer.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1866.
It is generally admitted that life on ship-board is very monotonous, and
we, therefore, hail with pleasure any attempt to get up some rational
and intellectual employment to make the time pass more pleasantly.
In this light we must consider the laudable attempt on the part of some
of our fellow-passengers to produce the entire play of Hamlet. It may
be rather ambitious, and at first was considered impossible; but, from


the energy thrown into the proceedings, as evinced on the rehearsal of
Thursday night, we predict for it a complete success.
We are not in a position to say when the grand display will come
off; but, in the meantime, every one is working hard in preparation.
But the Shakspearian mania is not confined to the “ company.”
Half in the vessel seem stage-struck. On every side you are greeted
with hacknied quotations in the shape of ejaculations, or answers, to
the most ordinary questions.
Docs any one ask the hour, he is informed that it is the “ witching
hour of night;” or, in a tragic tone, that “it has just struck twelve.”
You see a melancholy-looking individual in a corner gesticulating and
gibbering to himself. He is not a lunatic; he is rehearsing his part.
You hear some one prowling about your cabin-door, after the lights are
put out.’ In reply to your challenge, a sepulchral voice hoarsely
mutters, “I am thy father’s,ghost! ” This seems to be the general
version, yet it is hardly a logical expression. This would be reversing
the mystery respecting the celebrated bird of Sir Boyle Roach, which
could be in two places at once. This, on the other hand, would be to
have two persons rolled into one.
Does a friend wish you to join him in “ a smoke,” he must ask you,
“ Can you play upon this pipe ? ” Is any one reading, it is “ Slander,
Sir, slander.” In one corner you will perhaps see an enthusiastic ama-
teur in a lady’s hat and feather, and perhaps her Garibaldi on as
well. He is trying if it will do for Bernardo or Francisco.
All this may appear very trivial, but the time is not generally found
so valuable on ship-board, that we should scan too closely how it is
passed. If the amateur theatricals afford some little activity to mind
and body, those who take the most trouble will derive the greatest
benefit.
Most certainly they will derive the greatest pleasure and satisfaction
from their exertions, and to judge from the fun at the rehearsals, this is
not the worst part of the performance.
It is a subject of regret that we have not on board the texts of some
lively, short comedies, which would be easier for the performers to get
up, and perhaps equally entertaining to the general public.
“ Shall I hare your hand ?” said a New York exquisite to a belle, as the
was about to commence. “ With all my heart,” was the soft response.
What is the lightest ship afloat ? Courtship.
24
The Lincolnshire Observer, Saturday, Nov. 17, 1866


FASHIONABLE INTELLIGENCE.
On Wednesday evening last, a fashionable and distinguished com-
pany were invited to a sumptuous entertainment at the mansion of the
Hon. Mrs. .fpyi+£ljL'ey
Owing to the fact of my not receiving an invitation, I am unable to
give the public the particulars of the affair, the names of the distin-
guished guests, or the occasion of the event. My attention was first
aroused by seeing one of our fellow-passengers, whose regular attend-
ance at meal times is only equalled by his industry when present, absent
himself from the regular tea table. Inquiries as to whether he was ill
only elicited vague replies. The mystery was cleared up, when I saw
him making up for lost time among the fortunate invited guests.
Taking as near a station as my sensitive delicacy would allow, I
tried to survey the proceedings through my lorgnette, but regret at not
being invited quite took away my powers of observation.
Tea over, and the tea-things washed up, the beautiful grounds were
thrown open to the public, and a magnificent “ Galanty Show,” under
the management of Professor Lindells, made some amends to the unfor-
tunate spectators, who had only been able to eye their more fortunate
neighbours with envious and watery mouths.
As I can only account for my not being invited, by supposing that
my address is not known, I will here advertise that in fiiture any invita-
tion left at No. 1 Second Cabin, will be sure to reach,
Youb Obsequious Reporter.
FROM OUR TIMID REPORTER.
On Wednesday last, my feelings received a severe shock on seeing
our respected chief running about the poop in a state of great excite-
ment. Hatless and breathless he flew over the sky-lights with an
agility which could only be caused by something of importance.
What was the matter ? Was there a mutiny, and was he fleeing
for his life ? or to cut away the masts, to avoid the shock of a sudden
squall ?
To my great relief, the mystery was solved. Two ladies are after
him—full chase; and, after a deal of dodging, the fair pursuers come
down upon him on opposite tacks. There was no room to wear ship,
or sheer off, and the captain was compelled to haul down his flag, and
surrender at discretion.
On seeing the captain in the hands or his fair captors, some one not
far from my elbow ejaculated, “ I wish I were in the captain’s place.”
As the skipper was seen shortly after skipping in company with
some of the other passengers, he could not have been very much ill-
treated.
In this cold weather a little exercise becomes a necessity, but we
are not all so fortunate as to be able to take it in such an agreeable
form.


Lat.
Long.
Distance.
November 10
25.40
28.55
110
.. n
27.42
28.53
113
» 12
30.33
29.05
172
» 13
33.34
27.37
196
„ 14
36.12
26.00
177
„ 15
38.42
22.43
216
„ 16
40.29
18.87
219
Total for the week
1203 miles.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Lincolnshire Observer .)
Sir,—during the last week we have experienced a continuation of light
and moderate easterly winds, accompanied with beautiful fine weather and
smooth water.
These winds have somewhat lengthened our course, causing us to
describe rather a larger circle than intended; but, nevertheless, we may
consider the total of the week’s progress as very satisfactory.
The ascertained position of the ship each day has been as under:—
The thermometer has ranged from 76° on the 10th, to 56° on the 16th.
The reading of the barometer has been unusually high: it attained its
maximum on the 15th, reaching 30° 75'
On Saturday last, we crossed the southern tropic named Capricorn.
This imaginary line is the extreme boundary of the sun’s course to the
southward. Southward of this line, as also north of the other tropic
called Cancer, the sun’s rays are never vertical. He travels on a great
circle named the Ecliptic, that is included between the tropics. The ship
•is now in the south temperate zone, which extends to the Antarctic Circle.
Our old friend, the Southern Cross, is now visible all the night. Below
the latitude of 80° this constellation never sets, but continues to describe
a circle round the south pole. At this date it attains its greatest elevation
at 9 a.m., and its lowest at 9 p.m. In this part of the world all the ships
are sailing in the one direction, so that very few are likely to be seen until
we make the Australian Coast. On Friday morning the barque
“Trevelyan,” of Glasgow, was passed, 14 days from Monte Video.
Destination unknown. Moderate fresh northerly winds, with damp cold
weather.
I am, yours respectfully,
OBSERVATION.
10. What is most likely to become a woman P
11. Why is a dog’s tail a great novelty ?
ANSWERS TO LAST.
CONUNDRUMS.


WANTED A HEART.
I want, ah! me, I want a heart
But not a heart for love,
To feel the sting of Cupid’s dart
And also rhyme with dove.
I do not want a manly heart
With high desires to glow,
Or feel what friendship can impart,
Or Sympathy bestow.
The heart for which I long is none
Of man’s—nor yet of maid’s,
I only want a little one
To trump that trick in spades.
RHYME WITHOUT REASON.
Tune —King of the Cannibal Islands.
Here we are, a happy band,
Sailing from our native laud,
Our vessel by stout breezes fanned,
The Money Wigram “ Lincolnshire.”
We’re happy now, the calms are o’er,
No burning sun we now deplore,
Two hundred miles a day or more
We make, or else it is a bore.
But how to pass the time away,
We must yet on board the good ship stay,
I’m afraid we cannot find any way
On board the clipper “ Lincolnshire."
Smoking’s considered a very good plan,
To console and cheer the inner man,
And make you forget it, if you can,
What an unlucky imprisoned man
You are on board the “ Lincolnshire.”
But then you can’t stand all the day
Acting the furnace in that ’ere way,
So you saunter off down the highway,
To the deckhouse of the “ Lincolnshire."
Arrived at the noted cabin door
Where scandal is retailed galore,
Wholesale too —and what is more,
Concocted fresh and chatted o’er
Of the doings on board the “ Lincolnshire.”
Says A to B, I know ’tis true,
Says C to D I’ll swear it too,
Says E to F and what think you
Of the doings on board the “ Lincolnshire.”
Or else to vary the talk they try,
Speak of the many miles that he
Between them and their new country;
And looking from the sail to the sky,
Talk of the winds that do not come
To help us on our voyage home,
On board the clipper “ Lincolnshire.”
The crew a fine and manly set,
To match them would be hard, I bet,
When they’re called to take their wet
At the capstan of the “ Lincolnshire.”
The passengers—ourselves I mean,


A jovial lot as can be seen,
Not eaten up by care or spleen :
All selfishness away we drive,
Striving each —as each should strive,
To keep one another alive,
While on board the “ Lincolnshire.”
With such a captain, such a crew,
Officers and shipmates too ;
We must go right, wrong we can’t do
While on board the “ Lincolnshire.”
Then, good old ship, we give thee hail,
For the golden land make thou all sail
To reach it, if these winds prevail,
By Christmas day we cannot fail:
And when we reach the wished-for shore,
To gaze on scenes not seen before ;
Once ere we part to meet no more,
We’ll give three cheers and aye one more,
For the gallant clipper “ Lincolnshire.”
We are requested to insert the following Prologue, which was spoken at our first
entertainment.
On weary shipboard cabined, cribbed, confined,
With nought to elevate or cheer the mind.
The trav’ler’s hours pass slowly—day by day,
He marks his progress o’er the briny way.
And sighs to think how many leagues extend
Between him and the wished-for journey’s end.
With listless steps, he paces too and fro,
With angry eye views adverse breezes blow.
For him the time drags on a lengthening chain,
Which but one thing alone will sever —home again.
But ’tis not so with us.—Our gallant barque
Holds on her steady way o’er billows dark.
And soon if still by fav’ring fortune blest,
In Melbourne folds her white wings to rest.
No gloomy wand’rers we, the dance the song,
Bid the glad hours more swiftly bound along;
The merry jest and cheerful games are ours,
And time’s dull path, for once, is strewn with flowers.
Ours is the task this evening to beguile,
To win by our attempts your cheerful smiles ;
Gazing on “ boxes,” “ gallery” and “ pit,”
Where smiling passengers expectant sit.
My eye with pleasure views the manly form
Of one who oft has weathered gale and storm.
Gladly we greet our chief with a cheer,
For the kind captain of the “ Lincolnshire.”
The ladies too—we must try all to please,
Could wish do aught our task were done with ease.
Encouraged then by your kind cheerful smiles,
Our first attempt your journey to beguile :
We hope to please—and if we don’t succeed,
Pray kindly take the will without the deed ;
And if sour critics should happen to be near,
Let me entreat they’ll not be too severe ;
Be to our many faults a little blind ;
Be to our merits very very kind ;
Nor fail to give whene’er the scene demands,
The actor’s best reward, applauding hands.


THE
i v inrn(nsliirr (T'lisrrnrr.
PUBLISHED EXPRESSLY FOR THE PASSENGERS OF THE LINCOLNSHIRE,”
AND CONTAINING
AMUSEMENT TO ALL. OFFENCE TO NONE.
No. 5. SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 1866. [Gratis.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
CHALLENGE. —Two persons are open to PLAY any other two in the ship a game
at QUOITS for £5 a-side. Apply 26, Fiddler’s Green.
Notice. —Mr. Higginbotham, from London, win give a lecture on
various languages, including English, French, and German, on Saturday, 7th
December, in the Town Hall, Lincoln. The doors will open at 7 p.m.
N.B. —No admittance.
HAIR-CUTTING and SHAVING SALOON.—P. CUTHAIR & 00. will open
the establishment formerly kept by Cutthroat & Co. Shaving by new steam
machinery.. Address Paddy’s Goose Street.
The Lincolnshire Observer.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 1866.
“ A duel's amang ye
Takin’ notes,
And, faith, he’ll prent it.”
TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN, GREETING.
Late, but it is hoped not unwelcome, we lay another Observer at the
feet, or rather before the eyes, of our fellow-passengers. Our last paper,
we are sorry to say, has not met with general approval. Sad stuff, says
one ; rubbish, another; all about nothing, says a third; while a fourth
guesses that the editor is used up.
We plead as an excuse for publishing the paper to the end of the voyage,
the general desire to see the interesting letters of “ Observation” continued.
The remainder of the paper may be read or not, as pleases you, kind
fellow-passenger.
We sincerely thank our contributors for their interesting articles, but
should have preferred some subjects more relating to the voyage.


TALENT AND TACT.
Talent is something, tact is everything. Talent is serious, sober,
grave and respectable. Tact is all that and more too. It is a sixth
sense, but it is the life of all the other five. It is the open eye, the
quick ear, the judging taste, the keen smell and the lively touch. It
is the interpreter of all riddles, the surmounter of all difficulties, the re-
mover of all obstacles. It is useful in all places and at all times. It is
useful in solitude, for it shows a man his way into the world. It is
useful in society, lor it shows him the way through the world. Talent
is power, talent is skill. Talent is weight, tact is momentum. Talent
knows what to do: tact knows how to do it. Talent makes a man
respectable, tact makes him respected. Talent is wealth, tact is ready
money. For all the practical purposes of life tact carries the day against
talent ten to one.
Take them to the theatre, talent shall produce a tragedy which shall
scarcely live long enough to be damned ; while tact keep the house in a
roar, night after night, with its successful farces. Take them to the
bar, talent speaks learnedly, logically; tact, triumphantly. Talent makes
the world wonder that it gets on no faster; tact excites astonishment that
it gets on so fast, and the secret is, it has no weight to carry; it makes
no false steps ; it hits the right nail on the head ; loses no time ; takes
all hints, and by keeping its eye on the weather-cock, it is ready to take
advantage of every wind that blows.
Take them into the church, talent may obtain a living, but tact will
make one. Talent gets a good name, tact a great one. Talent con-
vinces, tact converts. Talent is an honour to the profession, tact gains
honor from the profession.
* Take them to court, talent feels its weight, tact finds its way. Talent
commands, tact is obeyed. Talent is honored by approbation, and tact
is blessed by preferment. Place them in the Senate, talent has the ear
of the house; but tact wins its heart, and has its votes. Talent is fit
for employment, but tact is fitted for it; it has a knack of slipping into
place with a sweet silence and glibness of movement, as a billiard-ball
insinuates itself into the pocket. It seems to know everything without
learning anything. Talent is certainly a very fine thing to talk about,
a very good thing to be proud of, a very glorious eminence to look down
from ; but tact is useful, portable, applicable; always alive, always alert,
always marketable ; it is the talent of talents, the applicability of power,
the life of discrimination, the right hand of intellect.
ANSWERS TO LAST.
CONUNDRUMS.


Lat.
Long.
Knots.
November
deg.
rmn.
deg.
min.
17
41
45
13
10
259
»
18
42
20
7
32
253
>i
19
42
46
3
13 W.
. ... 191
if
20
43
11
1
4 E.
190
„
21
43
56
6
22
233
„
22
44
34
12
34
270
if
23
44
38
17
57
246
Total, 1642 knots.
(To the Editor of the Lincolnshire Observer.)
Sir,—l have much pleasure in reporting good progress during the last
week. Moderate and fresh winds have favoured us each day, and the good
ship has gone along as steady and fast as we could wish. The unpleasant
rainy and damp weather of Wednesday and Thursday has given way to
fine dry bracing winds, that I hope may long continue.
We are now steering a due East course, and shall not go further South,
unless compelled to do so by strong Northerly winds ; and the temperature
may now be considered at its extreme limit of cold. To-day the ther-
mometer stands at 41° on deck. The Barometer has been slowly rising
from 29°45' on the 22nd, the minimum of last week, to 29°90', its
present height.
Three vessels have been seen this week, but only one spoken with, viz.:
the barque “ Star of Peace,” from Callao to Mauritius, 45 days out. She
reports having seen a large quantity of ice on her passage round Cape Horn.
Our position as ascertained each day at noon was as under—showing
comparatively good runs in spite of the light and uncertain winds—
Yesterday, the 23rd, we crossed the meridian of the Cape of Good Hope,
at about 2 p.m. This we reckon 54 days from Plymouth. From there to
Melbourne, 25 days is a reasonable time to allow, so that we may still
hope to make a fair passage. The distance to the Cape bearing due north
on the 23rd, was 610 miles.
Between the 17th and 18th we passed Gough Island, a huge barren rock
about 4500 feet high. There is no landing place round the island, so that
it has never been troubled by any visitors except swarms of sea birds.
200 miles further north is Tristan d’Acunha, a very fertile island,
inhabited by about 100 people, descendants of a small party that left Cape
Town in the year 1814. Whaling vessels frequently call there, and some
of their crews have been tempted to stay. In the year 1852 there were
85 persons on the island, the great majority being females. The chlidren
are reported to be handsome and well grown, and disease almost unknown.
Fresh water is plentiful, and beef, mutton, eggs, butter and potatoes
abundant. In 1856 the crew and passengers of a ship destroyed by fire
(I think the “ Maria Soames”) arrived here, and had to remain about four
months before they w r ere taken off.
I think, Mr. Editor, that you will agree with me that our little floating
colony is preferable to theirs; and trusting in about three weeks we may
again mix with the larger world, am,
Sir, yours, &c.,
OBSERVATION.


THEATRICAL.
The principal event of the past week has been the theatrical perform-
ance so long anxiously looked for. Postponed in consequence of the
weather, it came off on Tuesday evening, with an eclat that was not
diminished by the delay. The theatre was crowded, and, to judge from
the applause, everyone was gratified. This is not to be wondered at,
for the general get-up of the piece was of a very superior kind.
A love of dramatic entertainment seems instinctive in the human
mind. Between the first rude stage of Thespis, and the magnificent
theatres of the present day, there is a gap of ages. Yet since that
remote age, when gaping crowds first gathered round the Grecian’s cart,
how many millions have laughed and wept at the fictitious joys and
sorrows of the stage. How many have thronged to see “ the mirror,
as ’twere held up to nature; to see virtue’s own features, scorn’s own
image; and the very age and body of the time, its form and feature.”
The piece chosen, Hamlet, was one well calculated to try the powers of
a company. Considered one of the finest of Shakspeare’s ideal con-
ceptions, the character of the unfortunate Danish Prince has been a
favorite one with all our best actors.
The traditions of Garrick, Kemble, nnd the elder Kean, and our
experiences of Brooke, Fechter and Charles Kean justify this assertion.
W 1 len we consider the unfavourable appliances of our sea-stage, we
cannot but admit that the “ Hamlet ” ol Mr. Tysack was calculated to
surprise those who had, perhaps, expected the usual performance of an
amateur in this difficult character.
But to commence at the beginning: —On Tuesday evening, a taste-
ful stage of flags was erected on the after-part of the ’tween-decks,
under the skilful management of Messrs. Perrot and Huddy. The
bulk-head was then cleared away, leaving the whole space to the main
hatch open to the audience. At seven bells, the cuddy bell announced
the commencement of the performance, and “ the flag that braved a
thousand years, the battle and the breeze,” and which now did the duty
of a drop-scene, was hauled up, by a skilful arrangement of clew-lines,
invented especially for the occasion.
Part of the first act had already been represented on board, but was
this time repeated under very different auspices. In the second scene,
where all the principal characters appear, the tableau was received with
loud applause. And it was well deserved, for the dresses would not
have disgraced a much more pretending theatre. Miss Bradshaw, as
“ Queen, presented a very queenly appearance, and was much applauded
for her tasteful dress, wnich well set off her excellent acting. As
“ Ophelia,” Miss King was very enthusiastically received. The pathos
and expression of her words and action exactly rendered the character.
In the call before the stage, we see the natural tendency of the human
heart to sympathise with innocence in misfortune and beauty in
distress.
Mr. Summers as “ Polonius ” was excellent. His make-up wonld
have done for any theatre, and to this was added very good acting.


Mr. Piggott, as “ King,” was so transformed, that his dearest friends
would have barely recognised him. By the help of a magnificent beard
(oakum), and (gilt) crown he assumed a very regal aspect and carriage.
In the part of “ Laertes,” Mr. Simpson was befriended by a com-
manding stature, and a good voice, which he displayed with good effect
in the churchyard and duel scenes. Owing to the low between decks,
the voices were badly heard. Mr. Doveton, in this respect, perhaps,
had the best of it, and acted a good “ Horatio.” Mr. Turner’s make-up
as “ Osrick,” was excellent,—decidedly stagey, and the tight shorts,
jaunty hat and feather, with short silk cloak, were well calculated to
show off a fine figure. The “ Ghost,” Mr. Priston, in white sheet, and
(tea-lead) helmet; in fact, armed cap, if not. a pied, when introduced
by the help of stage lightning, and the magnesian light gave a very
Faustian, or rather Peppery melo-dramatic effect to the scenes in which
the supernatural visitant appears. Mr. Bradley sustained the part of
“ Marcellus ” well, and the same may be said of Messrs. T. S. Iliffe, as
u Francisco,” Erie, as “ Rosencrantz,” and Rawlinson, as “ Guilden-
stern.”
The general sombreness of the scenes was well relieved by the
comic scene of the two grave-diggers (Messrs. J. Iliffe and A. Duff).
The dry humour and excellent make-up of these two characters made it
one of the best acts. Mr. J. Iliffe also appeared as “ Bernardo,” but
was thoroughly transformed by means of an oakum beard, red cap, &c.,
into a “ First Grave-digger,” as he threw up the imitation skulls from
the grave, singing—
“ Oh! for a pit of clay, for to be made
For such a guest is meet.”
We have before spoken of Mr. Tysack’s acting, but must especially
notice his rendering of the part commencing, “ Oh ! what a rogue and
peasant slave am I,” and, also, the “ portrait scene,” which were
rendered with an expression and elocution that only a professional star
could have bettered.
About four bells, the drop-scene was hauled down amid prolonged
applause.
THE LEGAL DON JUAN.
Upon a midnight stormy, a lone bachelor attorney, pondering many a
curious volume of his forgotten lore, while he nodded, nearly napping, sud-
denly there came a tapping, as of some one gently rapping, rapping, at his
cabin door. “ ’Tis the spirits ! ” and he started, “ rapping at the cabin
door.” “Oh 1 ” for help, “ I’m frightened sore.” Then into his cabin
flitting, not even one permitting him to fly into the corner, or to get
outside the door, came the ghosts of fond hearts broken (with many a
ring and other token), and they sat them down beside him on the dusky
book-strewn floor—sat amidst the volumes of most venerable lore.
Quoth the lawyer, “ What a bore! It must be something serious.
This is certainly mysterious; quite an advent of the spirits—resurrec


tion, con amove; but I understand them mostly.” Here there came a
rap so ghostly, that he could not more dissemble, as he had done here-
tofore. And bis face grew pale and paler, as he started for the door,
then, down he fell upon the floor. Then there came a clatter—clatter;
and his teeth began to chatter, as the spirits gathered round him, and
accused him very sore, how with handsome face all smiling, and with
winning words beguiling, he had charmed away the senses of fair
maidens by the score ; and each lass had fondly fancied that ’twas her
he did adore. Quoth the lawyer, “ Never more ! ”
Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken; for the
answer, strange enough, quite a relevancy bore; they began a noisy
rapping, a sort of spiritual clapping, which the lawyer thought could
be but a fashionable encore; and, again, as if his soul in that word he
would outpour, did he groan out, “ Never more ! ”
Presently, his soul grew stronger, hesitating then no longer. “ Oh!
sweet spirits, your forgiveness I implore. On my knees to every
ghostess, who to love has played a hostess, I will promise to recant the
many faithless things I swore. Will you promise then to leave me?”
Here he pointed to the door. Rapped the spirits, “Never more!”
“Be that word a sign of parting,” said the hapless wight up-starting.
“ Hie ye hence into the darkness; seek ye out some distant shore.
Leave my loneliness unbroken ! ” Here he opened wide thej door.
Rapped the spirits, “ Never more!”
So these vixen sprites of evil, spirits still the most uncivil; they
will never leave the lawyer, though in tears he may implore. At his
false heart they are tapping, rapping, rapping, rapping; and he wishes,
oh, how vainly, that his haunted life were o’er. “Oh! ” said he, “could
T n x'l _ j p >1 .
I but recall the days of yore.”
A. L.
The sixth and last number of the Lincolnshire Observer will he
published on Saturday, the 15th inst, at which date we hope to be not
far from the Port Philip Heads ; and to be able to congratulate our
readers upon the near approaching termination of the voyage.
ANSWER TO QUESTION IN NAVIGATION GIVEN IN OUR LAST.
40' 2” 40 91
ANSWER TO NAUTICAL QUESTION.
The sides of the triangle are proportional to the times occupied in sailing upon
them at the same rate. Hence, the time required to sail upon the hypothenuse
would be 2i hours equals (23 plus li 2 ), and consequently 10 divided by 2\ eduals
4 miles, the hourly rate; and 4 plus 3£ equal to 14 miles, the distance sailed.
The answer to the second nautical or rather cattle question was discussed in
the second cabin for dinner on Sunday. Result exceedingly satisfactory to all except
the unfortunate porker sacrificed for the occasion.
Printed and Published by the “Lincolnshire Observer” Company (Limited), at their office, No. 1
Deck-house, Port-side.


THE
Lincolnshire Observer.
No. 6. SATURDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1866. [Gratis.
With our sixth publication we are happy to be able to congratulate our
readers on their near approach to Terra Firma once more. To most of us
the veriest barren rock would seem a paradise after being “cabin’d,
cribb’d, confined” on shipboard for three months. Much more then may
we expect the landing in Melbourne to be a pleasing change. To those
who see Australia for the first time it will be a time of excitement and
novelty. Hope, which has led them from the old country, will lend an
additional charm to the change of scene.
We would wish everyone, on so landing, not to forget that where they
now find a splendid city, replete with all the luxuries, conveniences, and
what are, now from habit, the necessaries of the high civilization we have
left behind, Thirty-five years ago one solitary hut was the only sign of
European civilization, —one family the sole European occupants of the
whole country. Then a few blacks and kangaroos were the sole tenants
of the wilderness around; but we will leave to the next few hours to show
what it were useless to attempt to describe here.
To those who return to their homes, the change cannot but be doubly
welcome. They will hope to see friends long parted from, to revisit scenes
which perhaps a trip to the old world, with all its advantages, will not
make to appear worse by contrast.
As Englishmen, we do not willingly hear anything said against our
country; yet we could wish that as an abode her climate was a little more
cheerful, her atmosphere less smoky, her coughs, colds and rheumatisms
less prevalent, and her poor better off, by her great material prosperity
being more equally distributed.
When we land on the sunny shores of Australia, let us not forget the
probable state of affairs in the land we have left behind; and if we should
find the sun a little too warm in his attentions to us at first, let us forgive
this in consideration that he does not desert us for so many months in
winter.
PUBLISHED EXPRESSLY FOR THE PASSENGERS OF THE LINCOLNSHIRE,”
'AND CONTAINING
AMUSEMENT TO ALL. OFFENCE TO NONE.


Independent of all material benefits in the change, we contend that the
man who has placed the round bulk of the world between him and his
birthplace must have leamt something, which he who has never stirred
more than a few (hundred) miles from his natal chimney comer can never
learn. And here we travel, under the best auspices, to a finer climate,
under British laws, and where, if we cannot travel to see the world, we
shall find the world travelling to see us.
Christmas, which in all parts of the world is a season of rejoicing, will
be so especially to the passengers of the “ Lincolnshire.” It will be a
release from “durance vile” indeed, if we may judge from the general
remarks of the passengers. But we must consider ourselves very fortunate
in being able to spend it on shore, considering the delays of the early part
of the voyage.
To many it will seem impossible to have Christmas without frost and
feasting; snow and shivering; long nights and long bills. What would
they say in England to a pic-nic at Christmas ? yet at the antipodes we
shall find everything changed. No frost or man there makes a blazing fire
a necessity. Feasting and holiday we have, but it is among the trees and
under a bright sunlight. For Christmas day is, in Australia, the day par
excellence for pic-nics.
Space admonishes us to be brief, and we are compelled to Conclude
these remarks (just as we were getting to the interesting part of our paper)
with the wish that you may all enjoy a Merry Christmas in Melbourne, and
have many happy returns of the season.
A LEAK IN THE ROOF.
On Sunday morning, about seven o’clock, the sleepers in the second cabin
were aroused from their slumbers by an incident calculated to break the
monotony of our sea-life below stairs. The wind had increased to a gale, and
being right aft the ship began to roll to a very disagreeable degree ; when,
a loud thump on the vessel's side made her stagger, and the next minute
a perfect avalanche came down the hatchway, which answers the several
purposes of door, window, &c., to the second cabin. With each roll, fresh
torrents poured down, and our diningroom was speedily several inches deep
in water.
Heads with consternation written on their faces, and attached to bodies
in every stage of dishabile, speedily popped out at the cabin doors, which
(the doors) had to be closed again to prevent the rush of water to one side
as the vessel rolled, from totally swamping the cabins inside.


A few moments of blank consternation followed, as to most of us this
aspect of life at sea was quite a new feature.
But the steward and several volunteers are speedily busy bailing the
water up in buckets, and passing it out at one of the scupper holes.
When it appeared that a wetting was to be the worst of it, to fears suc-
ceeded laughing, and the affair became a joke to those who were not suffer-
ing the bad effects of the wetting.
One result of the shower was, that breakfast was delayed an hour, and
the hatchway being restored, and a sail made fast over it all, was apparently
secure again, and breakfast proceeded as if nothing unusual had occurred.
This was the aspect of things below.
After breakfast one of our staff went on deck to see the mountainous
rollers, and was standing near the mainmast, watching them as they rushed
past, high above the level of the bulwarks, breaking into foam as they
crashed against the side of the ship.
Suddenly the vessel with a tremendous roll dipped into one of those blue
mountains, and a volume of solid water two feet deep rushed on deck.
Nearly up to the waist in water, and apprehensive that the next wave
would wash him off his feet, our reporter flew with commendable agility to
the top of the deck house, from whence he was able calmly to survey the
devastation going on.
The sail over the hatchway was immediately washed away, and our door,
or window, whichever it may be called, totally hid under the rushing
waters.
From the recollection of what had happened earlier in the morning, it
was easy to guess the state of affairs below.
As soon as it was safe to cross the deck, a visit to the second cabin
revealed a repetition of the scene of the morning. Those who were linger-
ing over their coffee had again to take to the tables for safety. Several
inches deep of water was rolling from side to side, with volunteers bailing
it up ; —this time there was not quite so much laughing when it seemed to
promise that the ducking would be repeated so freely, which would be
carrying the joke a little too far.
After such a beginning, we expected to pass anything but a quiet
Sunday, but the wind fell, more sail could be put on to keep her steady,
and the “ Lincolnshire” speedily resumed her usual quiet behaviour.
SPORTING INTELLIGENCE.
Wednesday, the sth inst., was a day looked forward to very anxiously by
the betting portion of our community. On that day was decided the great
quoit match between the well-known players—Summers and Clifton v.
Butterfield and Brookyn, for £o a-side. Besides this, there was another
attraction in the minor event (for £2 ss. a-side), between the first of the
family of the Brownlows and the scion of the Huggonians.
The first event commenced at half-past two, the betting up to the start
being level; but very little money could be placed. After that, the odds
gradually went up to 20 to 1 on Summers during the last game, he and


Clifton finishing in noble style with five games to their opponents’ one.
Altogether, a good deal of money changed hands on the event, some
of the “ book-makers ” being heavily bitten.
In the second match, very little excitement could be mustered, the
event being a certainty from the commencement.
At the finish, Huggins scored sto Brownlow’s 3. Betting—s to 1
on Huggins.
CORRESPONDENCE.
(To the Editor of the Lincolnshire Observer .)
Dear Sir, —As we are so rapidly approaching our destination, I
suppose this will he the last number of your interesting paper, I must,
therefore, take the opportunity of wishing you and all our worthy
friends a hearty farewell, trusting that fortune will favour all, and that
your long vovage to the “ Sunny South,” and exertions to obtain an
honourable independance in a free country may not go unrewarded.
Accept ladies, gentlemen, passengers all, my most sincere thanks
for the orderly and patient manner in which you have borne the incon-
veniences necessarily attending a long sea voyage. Good feeling among
all parties has, on the whole, prevailed, in spite of close confinement and
sea diet. Be assured that I shall remember this outward passage as
one of the most enjoyable I have had; not only from the pleasure of
your society, but also from the entire absence of any unpleasant dis-
turbances.
Yours to all, most sincerely,
HENRY SHINNER.
(To the Editor of the Lincolnshire Observer.)
Dear Sir, —Our progress towards Melbourne during the last fort-
night must have given universal satisfaction.
Strong favorable winds have continued almost without intermission,
and they have generally been accompanied with fine weather. The sea
has been somewhat boisterous, indeed, very rude, for it has frequently
come tumbling along the main-deck without asking by, or with your
leave, and splashing over the poop, perfectly regardless of the ladies or
the dignity of the ship; but, notwithstanding this serious inconveni-
ence, accompanied by the heavy rolling, all has gone well, and the ship
has added to the good name she has always had, as being an admirable
“ sea boat ” in heavy weather.
The coldest day was on the 4th inst., when the thermometer on deck
was for a few hours down to 38°. The barometer fell lowest on the
night of Sunday the 9th, predicting the heavy gale from W.S.W.
afterwards experienced, after falling to 29.05, it soon commenced to
rise, and the weather improved.
On December the Ist and 2nd, the water was a decided green-colour.
This is generally a si£r r > of is nearer the surface


Date.
Lat.
Long.
Distance.
deg.
min.
deg.
min.
December 1
44
12
58
48
227
2
44
7
64
6
229
3
44
9
70
11
263
4
44
28
76
28
271
5
44
20
81
24
213
6
44
20
87
12
250
ft
7
44
30
93
0
249
Weekly total
1702
Date.
Lat.
Lone.
Distance.
deg.
min.
deg.
min.
December 8
44
10
98
54
256
9
43
30
104
52
262
10
43
25
108
48
220
„ 11
43
8
117
0
311
.. 12
42
36
122
53
261
„ 13
42
11
12 i
4
231
„ 14
41
49
131
36
' ... 160
Weekly total
1701
than where the water is the usual deep-blue. Large quantities of sea-
weed were also passed, detached from the islands hereafter described by
the prevailing winds and currents.
Our position each day, ascertained at noon, was as under :
I congratulate all our worthy friends and readers on our rapid pas-
sage from the Equator. I think the average daily runs for the last
thirty-two days have seldom been equalled, and we have good cause to
expect, at this season of the year, that our good fortune will continue
until we make the land.
On November 26th, we were 130 miles due north of the Prince
Edward’s Islands. These were discovered by Captain Cook, in 1776.
The largest one of the two is very high, the summit being always
covered with snow. It is about forty-five miles in circuit. They afford
no safe place of anchorage; but have been visited by English and
American vessels in search of seals, but these animals are now very
scarce.
On the 29th, we passed 100 miles north of the Crozets. These
islands are five in number; were discovered by Crozet, in 1772. The
largest of them is about twenty-five miles in circuit, the others being
about half that size. The Princess of Wales schooner, of London,
while sealing here, was driven on the rocks by a heavy swell and
wrecked; and her crew, consisting of fourteen persons, remained on
these barren islands nearly two years. Fortunately, an American
schooner, called the Philo, came here on the same errand (of taking
seals), and found them in a most distressing state of want and suffering.
The islands abound with sea-birds, and are surrounded with sea-weed,
growing in some places so thick as to be impenetrable a mile from the
rocks.


The islands of Amsterdam and St. Paul were passed on the 4th inst.,
but at a distance north of the ship of nearly 400 miles. Formerly,
ships sailing to Australia used to go near them ; but experience has
proved that a quicker passage can be made in a higher latitude. The
track that we have made is generally adopted at the present day.
We have seen no vessels during the last fourteen days, but may
expect to do so on nearing the coast of Australia.
Apologising for intruding so much on your valuable space,
I am, dear Mr. Editor, yours,
OBSERVATION.
LATEST TELEGRAPHIC NEWS.
By the Electro-Galvanic-Magnetic-Mesmer-Oadic Telegraph Company.
(Unlimited.)
The following telegraphic news from Melbourne will probably be read
with interest by our readers.
As this rapid means of communication is so fast, that we get the news
before it is written, we are enabled to be considerably in advance of the
ordinary daily journals, and we have news up to next Christmas.
From the Melbourne A ■ ,of the —th December, 1866 :—Yester-
day, the clipper-ship “ Lincolnshire ” arrived in Hobson’s Bay, days
out from Plymouth.
This celebrated ship has totally eclipsed her last voyage, when she
brought the salmon. Her present batch of passengers are of a quality
equalled by none and excelled by few.
They will be on view for a few minutes after she touches the Railway
Pier.
We hope our fellow-citizens of the genus “Loafer,” who having no-
thing else to do, usually congregate on such occasions, will give them a
cordial reception.
[The effect of this telegram is slightly marred by the omission of the
dates.]
Mbs. Partington says that if she were cast away, she would prefer meeting with
the catastrophe in the Bay of Biscuits, for there she would have something to live on.
Printed and Published by the *' Lincolnshiie Observer” Company (Limited), at their office, No, I
Deck-house, Port-side.


OUR VOYAGE ENDS.
Date
Lat.
Long.
Diet.
deg. min.
deg. mm.
December 15
40 40
132 36
82
16
40 52
134 52
102
17
39 30
137 41
155
18
40 44
138 00
91
1)
19
40 07
140 35
87
SUPPLEMENT TO
The Lincolnshire Observer.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 1866.
Wednesday, Dec. 19th,, Since the date of our last publication, the rapid
progress made by the “ Lincolnshire ” from the Line, has received a
severe check. Being then distant from the Heads but 780 miles, great
hopes were entertained of getting in on Tuesday. This was not an un-
reasonable expectation, as, for some weeks we had averaged nearly 250
miles a-day ; but the wind, after first changing right ahead, fell altogether,
and for two days we are nearly becalmed. This is the more tantalizing,
as we are so near in. With the wind, fell our hopes of spending Christmas
Day on shore, and dismal tales were told of vessels becalmed for three
weeks in sight of land.
But yesterday, a favourable S.W. breeze sprung up. This morning,
it increased, and is now driving us before it at a rate which promises
speedily to put an end to our voyage and our grumbling.
Thursday, 20th. All last night we were running before a splendid
breeze. With the first glimpse of dawn, early-risers are on the look out
for land, and the welcome sight greets our eyes, stretching away across the
northern horizon. In the dim haze, it is at first scarcely distinguishable
from a cloud, but for its regular contour of mountainous peaks.
As we gradually approach, day-light brings out clearly rugged moun-
tains clothed with trees from their summits to the sea-shore; with here
and there a cliff lit up by the rays of the rising sun. But all as yet has
a most desolate appearance—uninhabited, uninhabitable. Here truly
exists a wilderness of forest primeval, untrodden by the foot of man. The
only sign of human habitation is at Cape Otway, which we passed about
7 a.m. Here are a lighthouse, telegraph-station, and a few houses for the
employees, who are cut off from civilised world by about seventy miles of
impenetrable forest. Our signals are displayed as we pass, but at too
great a distance to be distinguishable, or our arrival would in a few
minutes be telegraphed to Melbourne. From here to the Port Philip
Heads, a distance of sixty miles, a mountainous coast is passed, if possi-
ble, more rugged, more desolate looking than that passed before.
Owing to the land tending to the north, the coast then gradually re-
cedes, and we cross a kind of bay till the lighthouses and other buildings
of Queenscliff gradually came in sight right a-head. About noon, we are


off the entrance, and lay too for a pilot. A little cutter cruising off the
entrance makes towards us, a small boat puts off from her,'the pilot steps
on board, the yards are squared, and we make right for the entrance, run-
ring before the wind.
Queenscliff, a little watering-place on one of the Heads, and princi-
pally remrrkable for its sand-hills and scanty vegetation may not be a very
pretty place. Yet, so it seems to us, accustomed for so many weeks to
the dreary prospect of the ocean.
Here we again stop for the health officer, who boards us to find a
healthy contented lot of people, happy in the idea of being on shore in a
few hours. Our course then lies across the large inland sea, called Port
Philip, and for two hours, except for a distant range of mountains on the
N.E., we appear to be going to sea again. Gradually we approach Mel-
bourne, which first shows itself in the shape of long lines of white houses
on the coast, Brighton, St. Kilda, Williamstown, successively coming in
view. In the background appears the city of Melbourne, situated on a
rising gound some miles inland; its 'lofty public buildings standing out
in relief against the sky. Steam-boats are plying here and there across
the bay, while on each side is seen the familiar signs of various railways.
Numerous ships are at anchor around us, while the railway-piers of
Williamstown are crowded With shipping. It being too late to get a berth:
at the pier, everything is got ready for anchoring for the night. At a
given signal, the huge mass of iron disappears in the water, dragging with
it the monster cable ; a few seconds, and we swing around, stationary—
our voyage ends. Several shore-boats are soon off, crowded with persons
eager to see their friends. Owing to the rough sea, this is only to be ac-
complished at the cost of a* wetting, and many in the little boats are
drenched. A boat-load of our passengers go on shore, but the majority
‘ consider it best to wait till morning. The lights of the town and ship-
ping, and numerous signs of life, make a pretty sight from the deck; and,
it being a fine night, most of us keep up late enjoying the prospect.
Early next morning, the “ Lincolnshire” is moved in to the Sand-
ridge Railway Pier, and many of the passengers are surprised next morn-
ing on waking, to find that they are once more on terra Jirma.
OUR LAST.
Last ! —a sad word that! a little sad even for us, though it means the
conclusion of the voyage,—rest to some—hopeful labours to others;
sweet meetings of long parted friends ; of mistress and lover; of husband
and wife ; of mother and child ; to a few, strange scenes and faces, and to
many, the dear delights of home. In but a few hours our company will
disperse, probably to meet no more. And now nothing more remains but
to say adieu, and throw down my pen : before doing so, few more


|oit word*. Wo regret exceedingly that tbe paper doe* not contain a more
detailed account of the various incidents of the voyage: and whoso (halt
is that ? yours, fellow passenger, yours, sir, who either would or could not
contribute. Tbe paper was upon to record any little episode that might
have proved amusing or instructive. However, as I oak for kindly
consideration for the failings of our little prossliug, so must I not now
begin to complain. lu the words of the prologue, yor. must take the will
for the deed; and we hope that if oar paper has not afforded amusement
for all, it has given offence to none.
ADDRESS TO CAPTAIN SHINNER.
Ship “ Lincolnshire,” Port Phillip Heads, December 20,1868
To HENRY HERBERT SHINNER, Esq., Commander of the ship Lincolnshire.
Dear Sir, —Arrived safely at our point of destination, we cannot allow this,
perhaps the last favorable opportunity that may present itself, to pass without saying
a few kind words to you, in recognition of your amiable behaviour, general courtesy,
and the able seamanship displayed by you in conducting us hither.
The command of a large passenger ship —at no time a very enviable task, and de-
manding an amount of tact and skill as well as kindness and afiaollity to harmonise
all parties, wo consider tliat you have done everything in your power to bring about
•o happy a termination to, at the best, a tedious journey. Many of us, old
Australians, who have made several passages to and fro, cannot look upon tbe whole
matter from beginning to end but as a moat favorable comparison with previous
experiences ; and wo are unanimously of one feeling, that of pleasure, at the complete
efficiency displayed by yourself in command, and the hearty cooperation which you
have received at the hands of your officers, in bringing us safely and happily, la
general pence and concord, some to their wished-for homes, others to their newly-
adopted land. We need hardly say, that however happy we may naturally be to
arrive at home, wo shall always look back with feelings of friendship to our short but
pleasant acquaintance, and we shall always be happy to hear of your prosperity and
the receipt of that due meed of approbation and reward, both from the general public
and your owners, that your undoubted skill and attention deserve.
Together with this letter, and as a small token of the genuineness of the same, wo
beg to present you with a purse of sovereigns,
And have the honor to remain,
Dear Sir, yours faithfully,
Signed by all the ffoloon Passengers.
[A complimentary address was also presented signed by all the 2nd Cabin
passengers.]
AN OCEAN RACE.
It is worthy of notice, that the “ Swiftsore,” which left Plymouth about
a day before the “ Lincolnshire," crossed the line on tho same day (Not. 2)
and the meridian of the Cape of Good Hopo the same day (Not. 23),
arrived off Cape Otway 2 hours after and anchored in Hobson’s Bay 8 hoars
after, the two vessels thus keeping close together the whole voyage.
We take the following from the Argus of the 21st.


EXTRACTS FROM “THE ARGUS."
Thb well-known clipper ship “ Lincolnshire,” one of the handsomest of the
Blackwell fleet, and a favorite in the Australian trade, was telegraphed off Cape Otway
at seven n.m. yesterday, and came np the bay last night in fine style, anchoring about
seven o’clock. The “Lincolnshire” brings over thirty saloon passengers, and about
eighty in the other cabins, all in excellent health and spirits, and highly gratified with
their pleasant voyage. A very flattering address, together with a more substantial
expression of the esteem entertained for him by his passengers, was presented to
Capt. Shinner, who is still in command of this noble ship. Of the voyage, Capt.
Shinner reports that ho left Plymouth on September 30th, but, in consequence of
light contrary winds, the lino was not crossed until the thirty-third day out. Better
weather was obtained after crossing the Equator, ond the meridian of the Cape of
Good Hope woe passed on the fifty-fourth day out. Altogether, the run from the line
until within some 500 or 600 miles from this port was exceedingly favorable, and from
the Cape to the Leuwin the speed accomplished was at the rate of 216 miles per day.
The “ Lincolnshire,” as usual, is in first-rate order.
Thb celebrated clipper ship “ Swiftsure,” of Messrs. Green’s Blackwall line, which
was telegraphed off the Otway yesterday morning, about two hours after the
“ Lincolnshire” anchored in the bay lost evening, at a quarter to ten o’clock, after an
excellent fair weather passage, during which some splendid sailing was achieved.
‘From the line to lon. 13ldeg. E., or for nearly forty consecutive days, the good ship
achieved an average of 236 knots, and on a subsequent day she performed the not very
common feat of 364 knots—a pace which is Turcly equalled even on the long voyage.
The Swiftsure left Plymouth on September 28, but was becalmed off the harbour, and
did not leave the Lizard until the following day. Until reaching the Canaries very
light S.W. winds prevailed, and they were followed by scanty N.E. trades, which
were parted with in 6dog. N. S.S.E. winds were experienced to the Equator, which
was crossed on November 2, in long. 26dog. 40min. \V. The S.E. trades were very
favorable, and the meridian of the Cape of Good Hope was passed on November 23,
in lat. 43deg. smin. S. Strong westerly winds were experienced to long. 131dcg. E.,
and off the Australian coast strong easterly predominated for a whole week. The
“ Swiftsure” is in very good order; and the passengers bear cordial testimony to the
pleasantness of the voyage, which had been owing m a great measure to the care and
courtesy of Captain Mayhew and his officers. The manifest will be given when she
enters at the Customs.
Thb following vessels were spoken by the “ Swiftsure” on her voyage to this port:—
Mermaid, seventeen days out, from London to Canterbury, in lat. 40deg. 40min. N. t
and long. 13deg. 7min. W., on October 4 j Glenoris, from London to Adelaide,
thirteen days out, in lat. 37deg. 32min. N., and long. 15deg. 46min. W., on October 6;
Orwell, from London to Sydney, on October 30, in lat. 4deg. filmin. N., and long.
22deg. 27min. W ; on November 9, in lat. 25deg. IBmin. S., and long. 32dcg. 38min.
TV., ship Donald M'Kay, fifty days, from Liverpool to Melbourne; same longitude,
latitude, and date, ship Dairy Maid, forty-five days, from London to Adelaide; and
on November 17, the ship John Duthie, from London to Sydney, fifty-four days out,
in lat. 42deg. 17min. 8., and long. 13deg, 9min. E. Several other vessels were spoken,
but not for these colonies.
PRINTED ST s. BELT* « ■ UTILE COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.


SUPPLEMENT TO THE
Lincolnshire Observer.
TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1975.
NOTES ON THIS EDITION
FEW production projects last, or draw out as long as this
one. The reprint was first considered by Mr E. S. Bradley,
a grandson of Henry Bradley, in 1965, to coincide with the
centenary of the arrival of Henry Bradley in December 1866.
Mr Bradley entrusted the project to Mr Bill Jamieson of
the Advertiser (Jamieson) Printery, Footseray. The litho-
graphic method was used for printing, and the negatives
were carefully retouched where necessary. With the print-
ing completed the flat sheets were then passed to Mr Phil
McLaren of Irwin & McLaren Pty Ltd, Richmond, for
binding.
The illness and subsequent death of Phillip, Mr E. S.
Bradley’s only son, on 5 December 1966 caused the project’s
suspension, and the unbound sheets have been stored at
Irwin & McLaren’s premises ever since. A seasonal clean out
resulted in the project’s revival in May 1975. Mr Phil
McLaren showed the most interesting item to Mr Jim
Lowden, a book collector and Kilmore based publisher.
After negotiation with Mr Bradley, Mr Lowden offered to
complete the project with the cooperation of a number of
people.
The original Bradley book was found to have missing
the last signature. Another volume, one of the very few
known to exist, was located in the LaTrobe Collection of
the State Library of Victoria. A microfilm copy of the
missing pages was made from this, and then a lithographic
plate. A further problem of matching the original paper
stock had to be solved. The nearest match in colour and


substance was found to be Bulky Newsprint. The supple-
mentary text was printed on Grandee Text, with the plates
on Cameo Dull Art.
The introductory notes on Henry Bradley were com-
piled from his scrapbook, with the assistance of Mr Ernest
Bradley, by Mr Lowden. He also collated some notes on the
Lincolnshire, with the assistance of the staffs of the
LaTrobe Library of the State Library of Victoria and the
Public Records Office of Victoria.
The illustration of Henry Bradley, with his son (Henry
Algernon) and grandson (Roy) was copied from the scrap-
book, with the kind permission of the Bradley family. The
illustration of the ship is copied from a lithograph held in
the LaTrobe Collection of the State Library of Victoria,
with their most kind permission.
The additional text was printed by Mr Jim Lowden of
Kilmore, and Miss Kay Craddock submitted ideas for the
blocking and binding which was completed by Mr Phil and
Mrs Beth McLaren.


THIS
EDITION
IS
LIMITED
TO
EIGHTY
SIGNED AND NUMBERED COPIES
OF WHICH THIS IS
%■
«•. 7B
