

THE
State of the Righteous
after Death.
The Fact, the Manner, & the Scene of It.
BY
REV. JAMES S. WHITE, M.A., LL.D., SYD,
GOWRIE, SINGLETON.
SYDNEY:
S. E. Lees, Printer and Stationer, 83 York Street.
1895.




THE STATE OF THE RIGHTEOUS
AFTER HEATH.
THE FACT, THE MANNER, AND THE SCENE OF IT.
BY REV. JAMES S. WHITE, M.A., LL.D., SYD,
GOWRIE, SINGLETON.
“ On the cold cheek of Death smiles and roses are blended,
And beauty immortal awakes from the tomb.”—Blair.
By the righteous is intended those whose principle
and practice are conformable to the rule or line of the
moral law. Love of God and man is the sum of that
law ; therefore, the righteous are those who love God
and man.
1. There is a future state. Whatever, on the evi-
dence of the inner consciousness, is universally believed
in, is of the nature of an intuition, and may be pre-
sumed to exist. Everything in nature has its counter-
part and complement. A future state is, and it has
been, believed in, on this ground, universally ; there-
fore, it may be presumed to exist. True, Materialists
of modern, and Sadducees of ancient, times deny the
existence of either angel or spirit, but their number
is comparatively small, so that their opinion may be
regarded as an exception proving a rule. Their incon-
sistency deprives it of even this character. All the
nations of antiquity, the most barbarous and savage,
as well as the most cultured and civilized, believed in
a future state. Belief in such a state is universal at
the present day. It would far exceed the limits of


this paper to submit proofs as to each individual case
involved in the two preceding propositions. A few
must suffice.
The funeral rites of the earliest savage tribes of
which we know anything, prove their belief that there
awaited them, after death, a state in which their ruling
passion would be fully gratified, and their favourite
pursuits indulged to the limit of desire. The hunter
anticipated happier hunting grounds and nobler game
than those of earth : and the warrior, foemen worthier
of his prowess than those to be encountered in the
flesh, and trophies of victory more glorious than those
of an earthly battlefield. In respect of this matter,
the same may be said of all the savage tribes of the
present day.
The polity of the civilized nations of antiquity, such
as that of the Egyptians, Assyrians, and Persians, was
framed on the recognition of a future state, and a
future state of reward and punishment. The Egyptians
believed, not only that there is a soul in man, but that
the soul, after death, was to be weighed in a balance
to determine its future desert. The Assyrians, as a
branch of the great Semitic family, to which the Jews
belong, were more perfectly instructed on this point.
Cyrus the elder, a Persian, is reported by Xenophon
to have said, on his deathbed, “ 0 children most dear
to me, put away the belief, that when I shall have
departed I shall be nowhere ( nusquam) or nothing
(nullum)."
That there is a future state, and one of reward and
punishment, was a fundamental article of the Greek
and of the Roman mythology. Hades was the abode
of disembodied spirits. In its Elysium, some of them
were supposed to be happy, whilst in its Tartarus,
others of them were supposed to be miserable. True,
the Areopagites mocked St. Paul preaching to them
Jesus and the resurrection, but they mocked, not at


the doctrine of a future state, but at the idea of Jesus
of Nazareth being a Divine Being, and at that of the
body rising from the grave.
Cicero, in the sublime apostrophe towards the close
of his most admirable and exquisite dissertation on old
age, rapt in a seer’s ecstacy, expatiates on the joys of
that most glorious day awaiting him beyond the night
of death. Horace, although at the time an Epicurean,
says, “ I shall not all die ; an important part (multa
pars) of me will escape death (Venus Sibitina, the
goddess of funerals). Although his conviction that
he would survive death brought him no comfort, ho
never faltered in it.
Belief in a future state may be regarded as universal.
Christians, Jews, Mohammedans, and Hindoos ad-
mittedly believe in it. Buddhists and Confucians are
by many regarded as materialists. That the Buddhists
are not is plain from the fact of their belief in the
doctrine of transmigration : and that the Confucians
are not is plain from the fact of their belief in a “hall
of ancestors.” These religionists, the Christians, Jews,
Mohammedans, Hindoos, Buddhists, and Confucians,
represent nearly the entire population of the world;
Even the South Sea Islanders and the Australian
aborigines believe in a state of existence after death.
2. The fact of a future state may be inferred from
reflection and observation. It is an axiom of science
that not an atom of matter either has been, or can be,
annihilated. Subjected to either mechanical or
chemical action, it may be changed, as to all its con-
tingent, but not as to any one of its essential properties.
It therefore remains matter. It is said, “ There is
nothing permanent but change.” The very fact of the
permanency of change involves the permanency of the
thing changed. There is in the complex being—man
—a sentient, thinking, moral element, which for con-
venience may be designated “ soul,” which is the in-


strument of converge, which moves, directs, and
controls the body, characterises its action, and largely
influences it as to health and sickness, and fashion.
This element is not matter, because it has neither the
essential nor the contingent properties of matter,
extension, figure, gravity, etc. Although destitute of
the properties of matter, it has properties both .essential
and contingent, and is therefore an entity Or thing.
It may be styled a force. It may be concentrated,
distributed, or modified, and, therefore, cannot be
annihilated any more than matter. Whilst it is an
axiom of science that force, no more than matter, can
be annihilated, it is also a maxim of science that
matter, as to progressive and final utility, cannot be
wasted ; therefore, force, as to progressive and final
utility, cannot be wasted. Man manipulates matter
and force, over and over again, but the process, sooner
or later, reaches a stage beyond which it becomes im-
possible for him to render it further available for his
ends. But it is not so with the Creator. After every
process, and after an indefinite number of processes,
He gathers up the fragments that remain, that nothing
be lost.
When the body decays and dies, why should
the soul be annihilated ? Is there any reasonable
ground for believing that it has exhausted its
potentialities of usefulness, when it has used the mem-
bers of the body for a few days or years ? Is there
any reasonable ground for believing that after it has
operated the bodily mechanism for a few days or years,
that it will be discarded as useless ? Man does not
allow force to be lost simply because the machine
driven by it may become deranged, or dismembered,
or decayed. He repairs, readjusts, or reconstructs the
machine. Meantime, the force is in existence, and it
requires only to be re-applied. The force is separate
from, and independent of, the machine. Why should


not the infinitely powerful, wise, and benevolent
Creator repair or reconstruct the body, or prepare a
new body, to be the instrument of re-appropriating
and of utilizing still further the moral and spiritual
force—the soul ?
We have two kinds of life, an animal and a
spiritual. The animal life is common to us with the
lower animals. Our bodies, as at present consti-
tuted, are their medium of contact and converse with
things material, for the purposes of animal enjoyment.
In order to subserve these ends they are organized.
The Creator at the first made, organized, and set them
in motion, as a machinist does a machine. The con-
tinuance of life depends on the continuance of the
motion originally imparted; and the continuance of
that motion depends on heat, partly from within, and
partly from without. The combustion, from within,
is maintained by the assimilated food, which food is
the fuel. So long as the bodily organs, such as the
lungs, heart, &c., are in a normal condition, the process
of combustion goes on and life continues. The bodily
machine is so marvellously constructed that, in respect
both of the quantity and quality of the fuel required
for its healthy action, it is self-regulating and self-
discriminating. It demands it, at certain times, and
will receive no more than is necessary and fit. As the
vital fire burns lower and fainter, it will receive less
and less. When it is extinguished, feeling and motion
are arrested. The body is disintegrated and resolved
into its original elements.
The spiritual life is different from and independent
of the mere animal life. Whilst the living creatures
or lower animals were the immediate product of
the creature—the water and the earth—man’s body
was formed directly by the Creator out of the dust
of the ground. The human body is different from
that of the lower animals in its substance, since the


blood corpuscles of man are different from theirs,
and difference of blood necessarily implies difference
of substance. Not only so, God breathed into man’s
nostrils the breath of life, and he became a living
soul. God could communicate only of His own nature.
He is love; therefore, the breath of life is the spirit
of love. Love is man’s spiritual, true, and distinguish-
ing life. To this fact the whole of the Scriptures,
especially those of the New Testament, bear witness.
Although the body, as presently constituted, is a
suitable and convenient instrument of the soul, i.e.,
love, for present necessities of manifestation, discipline
and development, in this state, it is not necessary to
its existence. If it were so, its manifestations would
be modified by the condition of the body as to com-
pleteness, or defect of parts, as to health or sickness.
But it is not so. Those whose bodies are deformed,
mutilated, or diseased, often illustrate love in its
purest and most intense form. As we see the outward
man perishing day by day, we not unfrequently per-
ceive that the inward man is renewed day by day. The
soul, then, may survive the death of the body.
Nature illustrates reproduction, indefinite in
form and persistency of type, in her three king-
doms. Rocks are resolved into their original sand-
grains, which re-appear as new rocks. The material
part of vegetables decays and perishes, but in their
seed, which is in themselves, they are reproduced
after their kind. The bodies of the lower animals
decay and perish, but they hold within them the
principle of animal life which secures the indefinite
succession of animals, in all essentials like them-
selves.
Why, when the human body dies and perishes,
should love, the principle of the higher and true
life, be annihilated? Why, since beings whose
life is of mechanical organization and chemical action,


are perpetuated, should man,whose life is a direct
emanation from the source of life, not perpetuate his
existence ? Why should it seem a thing impossible,
that there is a future state for the righteous ?
Revelation plainly, persistently, and emphatically
■declares that there is. In the Old Testament Scrip-
tures it is taught as clearly as it could be consistently
with their character as an expositor of a preparatory
and symbolical religion. In the New Testament it is
taught as fully, as clearly, and as convincingly as a
religion of light, truth, and grace could demand.
As to the duration of the future state. The mind,
in its lowest state of development, can conceive of
an indefinite portion of time. As it gains strength,
this conception expands, until, looking back, it
loses itself in the mist of an antiquity hoary with
the lapse of preceding ages, when the sequence of
order is lost in its extreme; and looking forward,
it loses itself in an endless succession of ages of
whose vista there is no angle of parallax, although
we should employ, as the unit of admeasurement,
the space of time from the geological morning
of creation to the present hour. To express this
indefinite aggregation of ages, the Greeks used the
phrase eis tons aionas —for ages upon ages—that is,
eternity. But the term aion means, not only an age,
but an age of breathing, or animal life, for the verb
to breathe and the noun aion have a common root.
The Greeks were taught only by nature; therefore,
nature teaches not only the doctrine of a future state,
but of a future state of vital existence. The concep-
tion of living for ages upon ages is to us the concep-
tion of eternity. It is but the instalment of a still
larger conception, for, whereas the senses, the gates
of knowledge, will hereafter be necessarily opened
wide, they are presently but slightly ajar. The fact
that the soul, on the principle of a sort of chrono


logical asymptote, can approximate nearer and still
nearer to the conception of endless vital existence, is-
to some extent presumptive proof of its immortality,
for that which conceives is larger than the conception.
Doubtless, in forming the conception in question,,
imagination is the chief agent. But imagination, in
its wildest flight, can never get beyond the region of
reality in respect of its individual material. It must
have reality, on which to alight to ease its pained eye
and rest its tired wing. The constituents of its most
fantastic fabrics are individual things having their
counterpart in nature. Imagination can neither
create, nor exaggerate, nor modify its individual con-
stituents. We may imagine a winged horse. Such a
being in its complexity does not exist, but wings, and
a horse, do.
Man is a progressive being capable of development
and improvement to an indefinite extent. Often,,
when he is just putting forth the tender leaves of
hope and giving hope of to-morrow’s blossoms, death’s;
killing frosts nip his roots.
In accordance with the law of conservation and
thrift pervading the economy of the universe, the in-
tellectual and moral force which generated and
moulded the improvement cannot be either annihilated
or wasted. It must have for its further and fuller
development a future of indefinite duration commen-
surate with its potentialities. As no limit can be
assigned to these potentialities, no limit may be
assigned to the duration of their future, which, there-
fore, may be deemed eternal. Bevelation is conclu-
sive on this point Daniel says, “ Some shall awake
to everlasting life.” The word in the original for
everlasting life is from the same root as the word'
Jehovah, or the self-existent being. The New Testa-
ment Scriptures, as was to be expected, teach still
more fully, clearly and conclusively the doctrine of


the immortality of the righteous. Our Lord says to
His disciples, “ Fear not them which kill the body,”
but have no more that they can do, implying that the
soul survives the body at death, that no human
agency could destroy it—that the Creator would not
destroy it, and that, therefore, it would continue for
over. Our Lord promises His disciples that they
should be received into everlasting habitations, that
they should receive everlasting life, that they should
reap life everlasting, that they should go into life
eternal, &c. St. Paul speaks of those who seek for
immortality, eternal life, and of the necessity of this
mortal putting on immortality. St. John says, that
the redeemed in heaven shall in no wise go out, but be
for ever with the Lord, and that they shall reign for
ever and ever. Jesus Christ indeed brought, not
only spiritual life, i.e., love, but the immortality of
that life, to light by the Gospel.
2. The righteous shall have bodies. They will not
■exist as thin ghosts and disembodied creatures, but
with their bones and flesh and limbs and features.
They will have true bodies differing in no essential
properties from their present bodies. They will
■undergo a change to fit them for their new conditions,
surroundings and habits. The material parts of plants
and animals change, so as to be adapted to changed
circumstances, &c. Vegetables transplanted to a
richer and more genial climate are changed as to
volume, form, colour, &c., and vice versa. Animals,
similarly transplanted, change in like manner, not
only as to form, size, and colour, but also as to dis-
position.
These changes, whether in the vegetable or animal
kingdom, do not involve a change of species. Species
cannot be destroyed. Insect life, except in the case
of the apterous tribes, illustrates a metamorphosis, at
their different stages of existence. The creature


passes the first part of its existence on the surface of
the ground, as a larva or grub, or caterpillar, having
a fleshy body, twelve eyes, and sixteen feet. At
this stage it crawls and voraciously devours food.
In the second stage it attaches itself to a leaf, and
encloses itself within a cone composed of material
drawn from its own body. In this state it may re-
main many months, during which it is torpid and eats
nothing. Finally, its cerements burst, and it comes
forth, a winged insect, wholly different in structure
from its former self. It has now six feet, two eyes
of at the least 20,000 lenses, and a proboscis, or
trunk, wherewith to extract liquid sweets from the
cups of flowers. Not only so, but the entire internal
organization has been changed. It is, in fact, a new
creature. If God so clothe, with a suitable garment,,
insect life, which to-day is and to-morrow perishes, will
He leave naked, during any stage of its existence and
development, the human soul—an emanation from
Himself, bearing His image and likeness 1
The body of man himself, in this present state, is
continually undergoing a process of change. Within
the period of every few years it is entirely renewed.
All the old matter passes away and its whole substance
becomes new.
What a great change of both body and mind does
one undergo, in passing from health to sickness, or
from sickness to health ! Whilst suffering from sick-
ness, one may be reduced to a mere skeleton, and
retain scarcely the rudimentary outline of the normal
human form, be incapable of either moving or think-
ing, and be unrecognizable by his acquaintances. Let
health return, one may become, in form and moving
express and admirable, in reason like an angel, in
apprehension like a god, and illustrate the beauty of
the world, and the paragon of animals.
Analogy therefore warrants the conclusion, that, in.
the future state, the righteous shall have bodies


identical, in all their essential properties, with their
present bodies.
Revelation declares plainly that they shall have
bodies, and informs us of the nature of them. St. Peter
says that the heavens and the earth are to be burned
up, and that there is to be a new heavens and a new
earth, wherein dwelleth righteonsness, that is, righteous
people. This passage will be referred to hereafter.
Meantime it may be observed, that the term heavens
means, not the assemblage of spheres which the key o
night unlocks to view in space, but the atmosphere,
which invests this globe to a height of about forty-five
miles. The earth and the atmosphere are to be sub-
jected to the action of intense heat, by which they will
be thoroughly and effectually purged of those poisonous
matters, solid and aeriform, which, by reason either of
ignorance of the natural laws, or wilful disregard of
them, man has caused to generate and accumulate, to
the detriment of health, the destruction of life, and
the deterioration of his physical, intellectual, and
moral powers. This process of purgation and purifica-
tion is to be for the benefit of the righteous thereafter
to inhabit the earth. How could they benefit by a
pure atmosphere, unless they breathed it 1 How could
they breathe it without lungs 1 What would be the
use of lungs unless to oxygenize the blood ? How
could blood be supplied without food 1 How could
food be assimilated without digestive organs 1 How
could blood nourish the body unless it were circulated
How could it be circulated without the heart ? In
a word, to what purpose would be the purifying spoken
of unless to maintain bodies, in organization and
structure, like our present bodies, and to minister to
their physical necessities and well-being ?
We are told in Scripture that Enoch and Elijah
were translated to Heaven in the very bodies in which
they were at the moment of their translation. St.


Paul says that at the second coming of Christ, those
who are alive and remain shall be caught up together
with the risen dead, in the clouds, to meet the Lord
in the air, in the bodies in which they then were.
Job says, “Though worms, after they have destroyed
my skin, destroy also my body, yet in my flesh shall I
see the Lord.” The very body of Jesus, which had
been crucified and pierced and embalmed, left the tomb
bearing the prints of the nails and the scar of the
spear wound. To Saul of Tarsus, on his way to
Damascus, He appeared, after His ascension, in that
same body, as Jesus of Nazareth. St. Paul, speaking
of his abundant labors and sufferings, exclaims, What
advantageth it me if the dead, that is, the dead body,
rise not ? He was caught up into the third heaven.
Whether he was in the body, or out of the body, he
could not tell, implying that he would not have re-
garded it as a strange thing if he had been caught up
in the body. As to their nature, the bodies of the
righteous will be incorruptible, for this corruptible
must put on incorruption. This is, indeed, a necessity,
since corruption and immortality are incompatible, and
since the spiritual life of the righteous is Love, which
never faileth.
As to their mode, their bodies will be fashioned
like unto Christ’s glorious body. The body, in itself,
is neither vile nor glorious. It is either the one,
or the other, according to the use made of its
members. It is vile, if they are used as the instru-
ments of unrighteousness unto sin, and glorious, if
used as the instruments of righteousness unto God.
The body of Jesus was glorious, because it was the
instrument of perfect love. The more closely our
spirit resembles His, the more glorious our body. Its
whole style, and especially the expression of the coun-
tenance, is moulded by the nature of our spirit. If it
is selfish, it is ugly and repulsive, if benevolent, it is


'beautiful and attractive. Hence, all masterpieces of
painting and sculpture illustrate the most selfish
natures by the lowest types of the human form, and
the most benevolent, by the highest. As if the highest
type of the human face divine fell short of their ideal,
painters add an aureole, halo, or glory. The sentiment
■of love will auimate the righteous in various stages of
development. According to the measure of which
will be the glory of their bodies. St. Paul says,
there is one glory of the Sun another glory of the
Moon and another glory of the Stars for one star
differeth from another star in glory, even so also is the
resurrection of the dead. The glory of the style of
the body, especially of the expressions of the counten-
ance, of those whose love is but as the bruised reed
and the smoking flax, and whose beneficence has been
limited to the giving to a disciple, in the name of a
disciple, only a cup of cold water, will be as that of a
star of the least magnitude, whilst that of those in
whom Charity supreme and whose service was the
sacrifice of body soul and spirit will be as that of the
Sun. These differing degrees of glory will not involve
even a modification of the essential properties of the
body. It will retain, as the Scriptures frequently and
plainly teach, its present organisation and structure.
The righteous, in the future state, are represented as
possessing the organs of manipulation and locomotion,
of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touch and speech.
They are said to be clothed in white raiment, to bear
palms and wear crowns, to stand and walk, to sit and
kneel, to converse and sing and harp, to eat and drink,
and to regale themselves with the most exquisite
delights of sight and sound.
St. Paul says (1 Cor. 15) “ Flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God.” The expression, in the
original, is sarxkai haima. Sarx in its primary sense
means the solid portion of the human body, and


haima, the vital fluid which circulates through it. In
this passage, as in many others, it means the casual,
or natural man. Such a one cannot inherit , for he is,
as to spiritual relationship, Jillins nullius, being born,
not of God, but of blood, of the will of the flesh and
the will of man. Not only is such a one not entitled
to inherit, he is, by the very constitution of things,
incapable of enjoying the inheritance.
3. The righteous will retain their personal identity
in the future state. That they should do so is doubted
only because, at death, the body perishes. But per-
sonal identity does not depend upon the identity of
the body, but on continuity of consciousness, which is
a property not of matter but of mind, not of the body
but of the soul. The body is mere matter incapable
of consciousness.
It has been shewn that the soul is immortal, so
that it may retain its consciousness for ever. The
righteous may, therefore, retain their personal
identity for ever. The mutilation of the body, to
any extent, nay its periodical renewal, by the re-
moval of every particle of its substance, even though
that process be indefinitely repeated, does not affect
personal identity. One who has either performed an
act of virtue, or perpetrated a crime, fifty years ago,
is sometimes, after the lapse of that period, either in
the one ease rewarded, or in the other punished. Both
the reward and the punishment imply the retention of
personal identity. The final judgment implies the re-
tention of it by those who shall be the subjects of trial
thereat. Otherwise, the wicked may be rewarded and
the righteous punished, and, so, the Righteous Judge
of the earth might not do justly.
Death, both by the sacred and the profane writers,
and by Christ Himself, is spoken of as a sleep.
We awake from sleep the same persons as we
were when we fell asleep; therefore, the righteous


shall awake from death the same persons as they
were when they died. God says, “I am the God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob. Quoting this passage, our Saviour says,
God is not the God of the dead, but of the livin.g
The three patriarchs had been dead for centuries, yet
they are declared to be still in existence, and in exist-
ence as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Moses and Elias
had been dead for centuries, yet they appeared on the
Mount of Transfiguration as Mose 3 and Elias. To the
penitent malefactor, on the cross, our Lord promised
that that day he should be with Him in Paradise.
4. The righteous will know each other in the future
state. That the departed recognise each other in the
state after death, even the ancient heathens believed.
Cicero, in the apostrophe before quoted, speaks not
only of rejoining his former friends and associates, but
indicates something of the nature of the reunion to
which he looked forward. The assemblage he desig-
nates a concilium , that is, persons called together, and
coetum, that is, persons who had responded to the call.
Not only so, he anticipates meeting with Cato, as
meum Catonou, his own Cato, the very Cato whom he
had loved and who had preceded him to the Consilium
and coetum. When his child, by the widow of Uriah,
died, David comforted himself with the reflection, that
though the child could not come to him, he would go
to the child. What comfort would this expectation
bring if David had not believed that he would not
only meet his child, but recognise him as his son, the
son of his love, and that his son would recognise him,
and that all the endearments of the relationship would
be renewed ?
When some of the Thessalonian Christians were
bewailing the death of their loved ones, St. Paul
sought to comfort them with the assurance, that those
whom they hadbeenbereft of would rise again and meet


the Lord and be for ever with Him. The apostle was
addressing men and women with like passions as our-
selves. What comfort would this assurance, even by an
inspired apostle, have afforded to the mourners, unless
they believed it to imply the certainty of their know-
ing or being known, by the departed, and of the
renewal of all the domestic and social bonds, and the
endearments they involve ! Unless understood to
convey this assurance, the apostle’s words would seem
to them as the words of one who mocked.
On the occasion of the ascension, angels said to the
disciples, “ this same Jesus which is taken up from
you shall so come, in like manner, as ye have seen
Him go into heaven.” The Jesus, who ascended, was
the Jesus who had gone out and in among them,
whom their eyes had seen, and their hands handled.
Jesus in heaven is, therefore, the same person as the
Jesus with whom they were familiar. As such, St.
Stephen recognised Him, at the right hand of God.
The rich man of the parable recognised Abraham and
Lazarus, proving that both had retained their personal
indentity.
5. The righteous in the future state, will renew
with each other, the relations, and converse compatible
with charity.
This they must necessarily do, because charity
necessarily seeks externisation, which finds its modes
in the good offices indicated and fashioned by the
relations of one human being to another, and charity
will be their ruling principle. All the attributes of
charity enumerated by St. Paul contemplate a social
state, involving relations and converse. She seeketh
not her own. She is the sweetner of life and the
solder of society.
The righteous will be progressive in the future
state, as in the present. In the present state the
relations and converse of life are absolutely necessary


to their progression. As in the future state the
righteous will be in all essentials identical with
their present selves, and be under the impulse and
law of charity, they will necessarily renew their
social relations and converse.
The future state is sometimes represented as a
Kingdom, involving the relation of ruler and subject,
as when our Lord says, that the twelve should sit
upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of
Israel; sometimes as a scene of feasting, involving the
relation of host and guest, as when our Lord says, the
twelve were to drink wine new with Him in the
Kingdom of heaven, when He says that they should
sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and when
He speaks of Lazarus being in Abraham’s bosom.
Heaven is sometimes spoken of as a house implying all
the relationships and endearments of family life, as
when David says, that after death he shall dwell in
the house of the Lord for ever, as when our Lord
says, in My Father’s house are mansions, and as, when
St. Paul speaks of mansions which have foundations
whose builder and maker is God eternal in the
heavens. The righteous, in reference to the future
state, are often spoken of as “ you and your children.”
To what purpose will be their organs of sense and
speech, their intellect and their sentiments, their
powers of prehension and locomotion, but to enable
them to see, hear, taste, smell and touch, to enable
them to converse, handle and move from place to
place ? To what purpose, but to enable them to par-
ticipate in the unspeakable and inconceivable beauties
and delights of their surroundings, and to have tin se
beauties and delights enhanced by the reflection of
them in looks • that they love, that they may see and
recognise their long-lost loved ones, may hear again'
their voice that was hushed, and touch again the
hands that had vanished ; that they may converse,.


with tongues in which is the law of kindness, with
those with whom on earth they had taken sweet
counsel; that they may accompany in God’s house in
heaven those with whom they had gone together into
His house on earth, that they may sing the song of
Moses and the Lamb, and by the service of clean
hands prompted by loving and pure hearts, praise God,
evoking the music of the spiritual spheres !
The righteous shall have, not only the remembrance
of those they loved on earth, but the friendships, from
which it is so painful to part, even in parting to
heaven, will be restored to them there, to unite
them again in affection more ardent, because un-
mingled with the anxieties of other cares, and in still
purer adoration of that great Being whose perfection
it was their delight to contemplate together, in this
state of preparation and imperfection.
True, our Lord says, in heaven they neither marry,
nor are given in marriage. This does not necessarily
imply that the relation of husband and wife shall not
exist, for there may be marriage in its true and highest
sense without either a marriage ceremony, or the
giving of a woman in marriage. The formal marriage
ceremony serves to give publicity to the union, and
to allay suspicion and secure fidelity. The giving in
marriage implies disregard of the woman’s feelings in
the matter. As charity, which will be the ruling
principle, never faileth, there will be no need of guard-
ing against change of affection in either partv. As
charity does not seek pre-eminence, there will be no
desire to interfere with the action of others. There
will be no necessity of interfering, since all action will
originate in, and be controlled and guided by, love,
which is the royal and perfect law.
6. There will be distinction of rank in heaven.
Distinction of rank has its ground in our constitution.
In the present state it is often based on false grounds,


as the accident of birth, wealth, ability to serve
righteously, or unrighteously, those in power. In the
future state, it will be based and graduated on the
only true principle—moral goodness in its several
gradations.
The righteous are represented as Kings, implying
some who reign and some who are subjects ; as Priests,
implying the discharge of priestly functions, and wor-
shippers for whom they are discharged. Abraham is
styled “father,” and Lazarus is represented as occupy-
ing the place of honor, although a lower room in the
family.
In the future state, none will be absolutely perfect.
All will be only going on unto perfection. All who
have passed the border line of selfishness, it may be,
so to speak, by a hairbreadth, will have passed from
death unto life, from the kingdom of Satan to the
Kingdom of God. These will be as babes, who have
need of the milk of education and instruction which
will be supplied through the agency of the teaching
of their more advanced brethren, by precept and ex-
ample. There will be the teachers and the learners,
the leaders and the led—and the strong to help and
cherish and uphold the weak.
7. The righteous, in the future state, will be con-
versant with, and interested in, the transactions of
earth. If, with the aid of the telescope and spectro-
scope, instruments imperfect for imperfect vision,
handicapped by prejudice and passion, the heavenly
bodies may be contemplated, and their size, structure,
and composition ascertained, what limit may be
assigned to the knowledge of the righteous in the
future state, when the senses will be perfect and pre-
judice and passion shall have been done away ! Death
does not shut the gates of knowledge. It opens them
more and more widely, for it removes obstacle after
obstacle to its inflow in ever increasing volume, and


of ever increasing accuracy. Science does not revolt
against the idea of the indefinite increase of the power
of vision, in the case of even the imperfect eye, with
all its hampering influences. Who shall say, that in
the future state, the power of vision of the righteous-
may not be so improved as to be a substitute for the-
wings of seraphim !
The righteous, in the future state, retaining their
personal identity, must retain the reminiscences of
their experiences here, and of the agents and events
that brought them about, and retaining these reminis-
cences they must be interested in the subjects of them.
Analogy suggests that there should be an intellectual
and moral link between earth and heaven, for in every
department of His work God abhors a vacuum. The
material world is linked with the vegetable, the vege-
table with the animal, the animal with the intellectual,
and the intellectual with the higher influences.
Revelation gives no uncertain sound on this point.
At the Olympic games thousands assembled of all
ranks, and from great distances. They were enthusi-
astically interested in the contests. Their presence and
sympathy stimulated the competitors to put forth
their utmost possible exertions. St. Paul (referring
to these games, after having enumerated the names of
many of the 0. and N. T. worthies, all of whom had
entered into their rest, some many centuries before)
says, seeing we also are compassed about with so great
a cloud of witnesses, let us run with patience the race
set before us, &c. It is plain that the apostle regarded
the righteous in heaven as conversant with the labour
and experiences of their brethren on earth, and as
profoundly sympathising with them.
Our Lord says, there is joy in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth; and elsewhere, speaking of
children, He says, their angels do always behold the
face of their father in heaven. That is, the celestial
messengers, who are specially charged with the care of


children, keep their eye on the Father’s face, as it
were, to learn, in its expression, His will, with respect
to the discharge of their functions, just as the Psalmist
says, the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their
master, and the eyes of maidens to those of their
mistress for a sign.
The rich man of the parable is represented as
acquainted with what was passing on earth, and as
most anxiously solicitous for the future of his five
brethren still there. If it is so with the wicked, much
rather should it be so with the righteous, whose ruling
principle is benevolence !
8. This earth will be one of the scenes of the hap-
piness of the righteous in the future state. Species,
says Buffon, is the constant succession of individuals,
similar to, and capable of reproducing each other.
Although this definition is redundant, inasmuch as
individuals constantly succeeding each other must
necessarily be capable of reproducing each other, yet
it implies that species is immutable, that is that one
species can never become another. A species must
either retain its essential characteristics, or perish.
At the same time, species may be modified, as to its
non-essentials, e.g ., size, form, colour, &c. But to
whatever extent its non-essentials may be modified, it
still demands certain conditions and circumstances
proper to it. Indeed, some say, that species is due to
condition and circumstance. The felidai could never
be changed into the boridce. However modified, they
would still continue to require a habitat, food, <fcc.,
proper to each species respectively. To whatever extent
their glorified bodies are changed, the righteous
will continue to be human beings—men and women.
They will, therefore, continue to have a habitat,
&c., proper to them as such. This earth furnishes
such a habitat, therefore, there is strong presumptive
proof, at the least, that it will be, if not the only
scene, one of the scenes of the happiness of the
righteous in the future state.


Revelation speaks clearly and conclusively on this
point. Our Lord says, in my father’s house are many
mansions. If, by “ His Father’s house,” is meant the
celestial spheres, then, this earth, being one of them,
will be one mansion of that house. God says, in
Isaiah, I create a new heaven and a new earth, that
is a new atmosphere, &c. That the renewal, and not
the annihilation of both, or of either is intended, is
plain from the passage itself. The renewal must serve
a wise and beneficient end, for God is infinite in wis-
dom and in goodness. What end could be more so
than ministration to the well-being and happiness of
renewed man !
St. Peter says, that the present heaven, that is, the
atmosphere, and the earth are to be burned up, and
that there is to be a new heaven and a new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness, that is righteous
people. He says, further, beloved, seeing that ye look
for such things, &c. To look, in this passage means
to hope for and expect, implying that those whom
he was addressing had a personal interest in the
matter, they themselves would be of the
number of the righteous, for whom the new atmos-
phere and earth were to be prepared. That they
themselves would, in their renewed state, inhabit and
enjoy the renewed atmosphere and earth.
St. John says, that the new Jerusalem will descend
out of heaven from God. Its resting place is to be
this earth. A city implies citizens. The righteous,
in the future state, are citizens of the new Jerusalem,
therefore they are to revisit this earth and abide
therein, at least for a season.
True, the same apostle speaks of the heaven and
the earth as having passed away, and of a new heaven
and a new earth. But this does not imply that the
atmosphere here and the earth are to be annihilated.
Their annihilation would involve, to the solar system,
and to the cluster of worlds, the seas of worlds, the


oceans of worlds, which fill the vast immensity of
space, fathomable only by the plummet of the
Almighty’s omniscience, derangement of that strong
attractive force, wherewith, as with a chain, they are
indissolubly bound, to an extent to be only approxi-
mated by the computation of the profoundest physical
scientist, and to every form of being results that could
be known and estimated only by Him, who, in the eternal
present, is the past and future. Besides, as before
stated, it is an axiom of science, that not an atom of
matter can be annihilated. It may be changed and
renewed but it cannot be annihilated. But the passage
quoted does not affirm that the heavens and the earth
are to be annihilated. The word translated ‘ ( were
passed away,” is in the original Patelthekai, which is
a relative, and not an absolute, term, since it signifies
to pass a point of space, or time, to surpass, <fcc. It
cannot, therefore, mean to “ pass ” into annihilation,
but merely passed a point of time in its existence.
The word translated “ new ” is in the original from
kainos, which means not only new, but renewed. That
this is its meaning in the present connection is plain
from all other parallel passages.
The renewed earth, then, will be, at the least, one
abode of the righteous, in the hereafter—one scene,
at the least, of their future happiness and glory.
What will be its fashion and their occupation ? There
is no reason to believe that either will be essentially
different from what obtains in the present state. The
earth’s surface will still be divided between land and
water. It will still be diversified by mountains and
plains, by hill and dale, by forest and glade, by ver-
dant mead and dewey lawn. Trees will still bud and
flowers will still spring, but beautiful as those of
Eden’s first bloom ; music, more harmonious and melo-
dious than the song of the nightingale (for she sings
with a thorn in her heart) will melt upon the air,
redolent of perfumes sweeter than the spices of Araby.
All that can fill and satisfy and delight the perfected


senses, where appreciation is enhanced by that beauty
which is in the eye and the ear of the observer, and
that self-exaggerating power possessed by all our per-
ceptive agencies, will be experienced by the righteous,
perfect in degree and endless in duration. The atmos-
phere, ministering health to the body and buoyancy
and transport to the spirits, will be o’erarched by no
bow, for hope will be swallowed up in enjoyment.
Retaining all the relationships, duties and obligations
compatible with love, the inhabitants will be occupied
much as at present. Every locality will have its
associations, connected with their former sojourn and
experience, especially Eden, where man fell, and Pales-
tine where he was recovered, over whose acres walked
those blessed feet, which, in the long ago, were nailed
for their advantage, to the bitter cross, Golgotha,
where the Saviour, being lifted up, drew them unto
Himself with the cords of love—the bands of a man—
the rock-house tomb, from which He rose—the monnt
from which He ascended to His Father and their
Father, to His God and their God, that He might pre-
pare the place for them, and might receive them unto
Himself, that where He was they might be also. If
we consider what would be the experience of men, if
they loved one another and looked not every man to
his own things, but every man also to the things of
others, we may form some conception of the experi-
ences of the righteous in the future state. But eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the heart ot man
conceived the good things prepared of God for His
people.
In view of all this, whilst, in bereavement, our tears
must flow, ought they not to flow with Christian
moderation ! In suffering for righteousness sake,
ought we not to reckon our afflictions, which are but
light, unworthy of comparison with the glory that is
to be revealed, and have respect to the recompense of
the reward ! May our death be with the righteous,
and our last end like his !




