

THE
REDISTRIBUTION
SCANDAL
A.L.P. Election Leaflet No. 1.
Democracy Defrauded
A Redistribution of Seats was long overdue, owing to the growth
of city population, the decay of mining centres, and other causes. The
method adopted in the Commonwealth and in other States, as also in
Great Britain and America, has been to ascertain the necessary quota by
DIVIDING THE NUMBER OF
ELECTORS BY THE NUMBER
OF CONSTITUENCIES,
and the result was adopted as the quota, with such margins as might
be. necessary to secure practical working.
Had this been adopted in Victoria, the quota would have been 14,963,
which, with a margin of 1000 up or down, would have secured a perfectly
equitable result, but instead, knowing that the metropolitan vote was
likely to give
A FAVORABLE LABOR MAJORITY
the Bill provided for an arbitrary distribution of political power on the
following basis: —
26 Metropolitan Seats, with 572,000 electors, giving a quota ©f
22,000 to each constituency.
3 Urban Seats —Ballarat, Bendigo and Geelong—with a quota of
15,000.
36 Country Seats, with a quota of 10,000.
Other provisions of the Bill make the anomalies still more pro-
nounced. For example, a 15 per cent, margin, up or down, is permitted
to the Commissioners, which enables them to give some Metropolitan
Seats 25,300 electors and others 18,700, or a difference of 6,600.
Between adjoining country electorates, the difference could be 1,500
up or down, or as low as 8,500 and as high as 11,500, or a difference of
3,000.
[P.T.O.


The Bill further provides (in Clause 5) that when any district is
mountainous and sparsely populated, a greater margin is allowed, which,
of course, permits of unlimited jerrymandering in the interests of in-
dividuals and parties. By such provision, opposition within their own
ranks was placated.
No more corrupt departure from the principle of democracy h&s
ever been recorded in Australia.
NO EFFORT SHOULD BE SPARED
TO DESTROY THE PARTY
RESPONSIBLE FOR IT
Labor moved for sixty representatives—three for each Federal con-
stituency—the boundaries of which are automatically adjusted after each
census, to secure equal representation.
This was defeated by a solid Nationalist-Country Party vote. The
same fate befel a later proposal for 35 country and 30' city seats, moved
by Mr. Lemmon, and the Bill finally became law, with the assistance of
the Speaker, who displayed his partisanship on more than one occasion.
Attempts were made during the debate to justify the Government
measure, by claiming that the Labor Government in Queensland had acted
similarly SUCH IS NOT A FACT. The Queensland measure was passed
by the Denham (anti-Labor) Government in 1910. The Act provides for
automatic readjustments whenever the number in an electorate rises or falls
blow a stipulated quota. This adjustment is done by an independent Com-
mission of high standing. There was no suggestion in the Queensland Par-
liament of any dishonesty or unfair manipulation when the Labor Govern-
ment redistributed the seats under this Act in the year 1922.
THE QUEENSLAND LABOR GOVERNMENT HAS .NEVER PASSED
A REDISTRIBUTION OF SEATS BILL.
The Federal Government provides for equal electorates, with a mar-
gin for adjustment only. The Queensland Acts provides for equal elec-
torates. New South Wales provides for equal electorates; there are
90 constituencies, and the electors are all divided by 90. Great Britain
provided similarly, with a* concession to Ireland, because the Act of
' Settlement provided she should have 41 seats. Tasmania follows the
Federal electoral boundaries.
EQUAL ELECTORATES, PROVIDING
ONE VOTE ONE VALUE, AS NEARLY
AS POSSIBLE, HAS BEEN THE IDEAL
OF DEMOCRACY DOWN THE AGES
It remained for the AUan-Peacock Government, utterly regardless
of the rights of the people, to openly flout this ideal in the interests of
their political party.
Under the present law, 332,049 persons will, in effect, be disfran-
chised, so that practically 24,000 more persons are disfranchised under
this measure than under the law as it-originally stood, which indicates
clearly the treachery of the Allan-Peacock Government, who seek to
retain office by the wholesale disfranchisement of the people.
,Labor Call Print
Patrick-st., Melb.
