

The Aberdeen Times.
“WHEN FOUND, MAKE A NOTE OF.” — Captain Cuttle.
ILLUSTRATED
SYDNEY, SATURDAY NOVEMBER 15, 1884.
PRICEe, Is. 6d.
CONTAINING
An Account of the Passage of the S.S. “ Aberdeen ” from Plymouth
to Sydney,
September 11th. to November 2nd, 1884.
Visit to St. Helena and Napoleon’s Tomb.
Advice to Immigrants.
Parliamentary Election.
&c., &c.
Sydney
PRINTED ADN PUBLISHED By BATSON & ATWATER, 195 CLARENCE STREET.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.


The Aberdeen Times.
“A CHIEL'S AMANG US TAK IN'NOTE, AND FAITH HE'LL PRENT IT.
At Sea, Friday, September 19, 1884.
Registered for trans«
L mission aboard.
Vol I.—No. I.]
Fellow emigrants and kind friends, grant a hearing to one whose
only thought is your comfort and welfare.
You seek a home in the Greater Britain across the water, and to
that end have placed yourselves under the care of the master and
surgeon of this good ship “ Aberdeen.”
God willing, the Captain will safely convey you through the many
dangers of the deep, and the Doctor will see that during the passage
you are well cared for.
You must, however, help yourselves, and do all that is asked of
you, willingly and well.
Remember that the greatest virtue, next to cleanliness, at sea, is
“ forbearance.”
. ” Bear and forbear.
Let this be your motto;
And this above all things.
To thine ownseif be true;
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.”
In starting the Abeedeen Times it is our intention to meet a
want felt in all large communities—that is, the interchange of
thought on matters of general interest. We therefore invite con-
tributions from our fellow voyagers, in prose or verse. Questions
relative to the ship, colonies, or other matters, will be answered to
the best ability of
The Editob.
THE VOYAGE
Under this heading we intend to give a general summary of the
week’s proceedings. Voila! Not that the depot-master was want-
ing in anything, but only that we were anxious to speed on, our
journey, were we right glad to wave ,our ’kerchiefs, and to shout
farewell to Mr. and Mrs. Gant and their staff.
At mid-day, September 11, 1884 (Thursday), we stepped from the
wharf of the Emigrants’ Depot, Plymouth, aboard the splendid
paddle-boat “Smeaton,” which conveyed us all, bag and baggage, to
our ship, lying at anchor just within the breakwater.
In a few minutes we were all stowed away, and so snugly that wo
overheard a sailor say—“ Where have they all got to ? evidently
ample accommodation for all.”
The next cry is—“ The anchor’s weighed,” and then we are speed-
ing at eleven knots an hour across the Channel.
Let us draw a veil over these first days. We do not wish to
remember them. Oh! the horrors of sea-sickness! begone. We
will not speak of them. Three days out, and we are all well. The
sun shines, the mind responds, and all is happiness.
On Tuesday, September 16, wo sight the first land, or, rather, rock,
by name the “ Salvages.” Towards evening, Teneriffe and the
Grand Canary are seen, and at 8 p.m. we pass the Peak, cloud-
capped. Nevertheless, the scene was grand, since one could form any
quantity of imaginary peaks from the clouds.
A would-be wit expressed an opinion that there was a man ascend-
ing the mountain with a cigar in his mouth. We saw only a light
to warn mariners.
September 19.—" A sail in sight appears.” We salute with the
British flag, but as we received no response, we cannot say what ship
it was. Immediately after we are overtaken by a tropical squall.
“All hands below”—that is the delicate ones —the S.W.
OUR SHIP.
The “ Aderdeen ” is an iron-built ship from the yard of Messrs.
Napier & Son, Glasgow. Both ship and engines are constructed to-
the highest class at Lloyds’. Her length is 330 feet, her beam
44 feet by 33 feet depth of hold. Her engines are designed on a
new principle, known as the “ triple expansion engine,” which has
given greater results, in the saving of coal, than any other at present
constructed. There arc two boilers (double ended), made entirely
of steel, with six of Pox’s corrugated furnaces in each. The total
heating surface is 7128 square feet. The construction of these
boilers, for so high a pressure (125 lbs. per square inch), was
facilitated by their being built of steel and to Lloyds’ rules, which
allow of the shells being thinner than the Board of Trade sanction,
although the internal parts are stronger. The high-pressure cylinder


“We are a happy family! we are!”
Of Girls, not a few—in fact, some
... 230
Children—eno’ ...
... 150
Infants (under 1 year)
... 15
Single Men ...
... 88
Harried Couples—C4
... 128
With the Crew
... 73
Stowaways ...
2
Saloon Passengers ...
2
Of good souls
... 688
Date.
Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Friday, Sept. 12th
46°41'N. .
. 7° 32' W. ..
. 268 knots.
Saturday, Sept. 13th ...
42° 32'
. 10° 9'W. ..
. 273
yy
Sunday, Sept. 14th
38° 3G'
. 12° 19' W. .
. 256
yy
Monday, Sept. 15th
34° 17'
. 13° 39' W. ..
. 267
Tuesday, Sept. 16th ...
29° 54'
. 15° 33' W. .
. 280
yy
Wednesday, Sept. 17th..
25° 29'
. 16° 45' W. .
. 273
yy
Thursday, Sept. 18th ...
20° 42'
. 18° 5'W. ..
. 296
yy
Friday, Sept. 19th
Total distance, 2195.
16° 00'
. 17° 54' W. ..
. 282
yy
Average per hour —11.7 knots —13.5 miles.
is not jacketed, the second is. This has a pressure of 50 lbs.; and
the low-pressure one, 30 lbs.
When the ship was complete, 2000 tons of dead weight were put
on board, and arrangements were made for testing the consumption
of fuel on a six hours’ run at 800 horse power. The coal used was
Welsh, and the result was a consumption of 1.28 lbs. per indicated
horse power. Another trial was made to find the maximum speed,
which in four runs on the measured mile, at the “ Tail of the
Bank,” was 13.74 knots.
{To he continued.)
OUR CREW.
Under the command of Captain Barclay, we have a crew of 73
hands. The Captain and officers will be noticed in future editions,
when we become better acquainted with their already recognised
estimable qualities.
OUR MEDICINE MAN.
“ A sound mind in a sound body.” The sea air shall make the
former, and our’ worthy Superintendent and Doctor, Huxtable,
will endeavour to keep the latter in good condition, and if not
already in that state will do his best to make it so.
OURSELVES.
Shall we recall our opening sentence ? Just before going to
press we had occasion to visit the M.P.C., and there found a child
suffering from a very effectual poultice, in the form of a chemise
damp with perspiration, and a flannel nightgown tight at the
middle. Suitable costume, this ? 88° F.
A gentleman among us has promised a series of papers upon our
British Colonies and allied subjects. Agreeable to our approach
to the Cape Colony, this latter he has chosen as his subject, and
has entitled it—
THE DIAMOND FIELDS, AND THEIE INFLUENCE
ON THE COLONY.
Business was in a deplorable state fifteen years ago; drought,
and constantly recurring wars with the natives, had produced
disastrous effects upon every kind of industry. Traders formerly
prosperous were daily nearing insolvency; others had already
become bankrupt. On every side ruin and despair seemed to face
the unhappy colonist. Trade had indeed come to such a state
that the Government of the day found it absolutely necessary, in
order to prevent an utter collapse, to pass an Act ruling that all
bills which could not be met at maturity should be renewed for a
further term of six months. This measure had the desired effect
of preventing many old-established houses from being engulphed
in the general distress. About this time, when there seemed to
be no hope for the future of the country, when hundreds, steeped
in poverty, were vainly endeavouring to find employment, vague
rumours became current of a largo stone purporting to be a
diamond having been found. This rumour was doubted by the
majority of hearers. But the matter was much discussed and
commented upon by the press, and the Governor of the colony
caused official enquiries to be made. It then appeared that an
interior trader had arrived with his waggons at Colesberg, a town
on the then remotest frontier. He had there exposed to the
admiration of all beholders a gem of extreme brilliancy, which
he said he had purchased for a trifle of a Boer farmer, whose
children had found it and played with as a toy. The stone was
eventually sent to Cape Town, where an expert pronounced it to
be a true diamond, and of great value. Upon this the Governor,
who had taken great interest in the matter, purchased it for
several hundred pounds, and the fortunate finder again wended
his way to the unknown region to seek fortune in the brilliant
carbon crystals.
(To he continued.)
INSPECTION.
Sunday, September 21, 1884.
All passengers must appear on deck before 10 a.m. Children to
be properly cleaned. The constables in the several compartments
to have all beds, &c., ready for inspection by the Captain and
Superintendent at the above time.
Divine service will be held on the quarter-deck at 11 a.m. Pas-
sengers kindly bring what books they may have.
VISITING.
The Surgeon and Superintendent has ordered the compilation
of a list of such people in the M.P.C. and S.M.C. who have
brothers, sisters, or mothers among the S.W. A constable at the
Port Alleyway gate will allow of such folk passing and staying
between the hours of 2 and 4 p.m.
Parents are advised to send their children twice daily to the
school, M.P.C. Mr. McCorquodale, Master.
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
“THOU SHALT NOT STEAL.”
It is with great regret that we have to impress the above
commandment upon some of our company.
Opera glasses do not walk, even if they are binocular.
Tins of milk do not dissolve in the bottom of lockers.
Brandy does evaporate, but not in pint bottles through port
holes.
Various other articles in both fore and after compartments
have lately exhibited a power of (in) voluntary motion unknown
before.
The Editor.
20/9/84.


The Aberdeen Times .
“A Chiel’s amano us takin’ Notes, and faith he’ll Peent it.”
At Sea, Friday, September 26,’ 1884.
Yol. I.—No. 2.;
C Registered for trans-
mission aboard.
BIRTH.
Monday, Sept. 22, 1884—The wife of George Barratt of a son,
mother and child progressing very favourably.
DEATH.
Tuesday, Sept. 23, 1884.—James, the infant son of Peter and
Sophia Dry lie. Aged 7 months. R.I.P.
NOTICES.
Fiest Afternoon Concert under the direct Patronage of
the Captain and Surgeon-Superintendent.
The musical portion of the S.W. compartment are arranging a
programme for the above, which will be placed before the public at
an early opportunity. It will (W.P.) take place on the quarter-
deck at three o’clock in the afternoon of Monday, Sept. 29.
Mothers admitted (free of charge) only, our accommodation being
limited.
It is desirable that we should form a band. Instrumentalists
please apply at the dispensary.
As it is possible we shall call in at St. Helena, persons wishing
to send a few lines home must have them ready by Sunday
morning.
S.S. "Aberdeen,” Sept. 26, 1881.
The great favour with which our first attempt was received
encourages us to proceed, and to send forth another number of The
Times. Let all take every advantage possible of this medium of
ventilating their opinions and hobbies. We must now turn to the
record of
OUR VOYAGE.
Saturday, 20th, saw our paper in the hands of our good people.
Sunday, Sept. 21st, proved a red letter day for most of us. To
commence the day all rose early and did their best to appear on
deck for the inspection. Remembering that it is our duty to lash
as well as stroke, we wish to say a few words about the compart-
ments. The constables and people of the M.P.C. must be credited
with a very clean and orderly compartment, and we urge them
strongly to keep up to this standard. We cannot speak in the
same terms of the S.M.C.; boys will be boys, and boys certainly do
not make good housemaids. We can only point out to them the
inestimable advantages derived from cleanly habits, and also the
great experience gained on board a ship so useful in after life. Of
the single women’s compartment it would be ungallant in an editor
to speak in any other terms than complimentary. Yet compli-
ments are wasted upon unwilling maidens. We trust they will
henceforth co-operate with the matrons in preserving order. At
11 o’clock prompt Divine service was held on the quarter-deck,
and, as one of our lady correspondents remarks, it made a very
striking scene. There was a good attendance from all compart-
ments. The singing will doubtless improve when a little practice
has inspired more confidence in the choir.
The Roman Catholic portion of our community held a short
service under the direction of Mr. Schrader.
At 2 o’clock the gates opening into what a facetious contributor
styles Maiden Grove (or better. Lovers’ Walk, as this is the
general direction given to this class of visitor by the Matron),
were thrown back, and youths eager to see their sisters, mothers
and fathers their daughters, were passed through. A very
pleasant afternoon seems to have been spent, and the two hours
seemed to all but a few minutes.
Many were the strategems to dupe the gate-keepers into
giving admittance to cousins and other doubtful relations. One
youth, McCarthy, betrayed by his extreme hilarity, was on
inquiry found to have entered by the name of Dillon. Dillon
the true himself turned up, which was of course followed by the
expulsion of the alias. Another case on like false pretence was
treated in the same summary manner.
On Monday, September 22nd, the first addition to our number was
made in the shape of a very healthy little boy. We would
suggest the following names to the fond parents, Aberdeen
Barclay Barratt.
On Tuesday, at 3.35 p.m., the engines were stopped, owing to some
bolts on the low-pressure crank-shaft coupling having given way.
After fitting new bolts in the engines, they were started at 9.30 on
the following morning. The engineer assures us that this will be our
last stoppage, bar accident.
The Captain had his cutter lowered, and, with the two doctors,
cruised round and surveyed us on all sides.
The sport of the day now commenced, which wo think deserves a
special notice—
CLEYEE CAPTURE OF SHARKS.
No sooner had the ship stopped than the pirate of the ocean put in
an appearance. The attraction was evidently the many scraps
thrown overboard by the passengers.
Captain Barclay and the Doctor very soon saw sport in this,
and no sooner the idea than it was followed by the preparation
for snaring Mr. Shark. A piece of pork at the end of the log
line passing through a rope in a running noose formed the trap.
After many unsuccessful, but highly amusing, attempts, one of
the monsters fell into it, and was hoisted aboard amid cheers.
Great excitement on deck, girls rushing all ways. Shark soon
despatched by the Captain and Mr. Taylor, who severed tail from
body, and made the hungry fish swallow, by way of relish to the
pork, a handspike. The body was then again consigned to the
deep, where doubtless he would become the prey of his fellow fish.
We forgot that previous to the snaring excellent sport was had by
way of revolver shooting. The odd thing is that the Captain
sent all his bullets down the shark’s throat, and the Doctor seems
to have hit the same fin time after time, whilst the other
sportsmen must have hit some such invulnerable part as the tail,
since no marks were found on deceased.
The indefatigable sportsmen were up betimes on the Wednesday
morning to continue their raid upon sharks. With the aid of
pork and log line another terror of the deep was hoisted aboard,
and made less terrible by the aid of handspike and axe.
Not a little curious is the truth of the old rhyme—
" Big fleas have little fleas
Upon their backs to bite ’em;
Little fleas have lesser fleas,
And so on, ad infinitum.*'
For both our sharks had a host of parasites, either clinging to or
following close upon their tails. The so-called pilot fish are
extremely pretty. The same cannot be said of the sucker, which
had an appendage below its head specially adapted for clinging to
the shark’s hide.
A monster blue shark, with many bonita, were observed, but we
failed to catch any.
The shock felt, no doubt, by the majority of us at 8.12 on
Tuesday morning, was occasioned by our crossing the line, which
every schoolboy knows encircles the earth midway between the
two poles.
Up to the time of going to press, nothing of interest has
occurred.
To the uninitiated the term triple-expansion, as applied to the
engines of the Aberdeen, requires some explanation. This type of
engine consists of three cylinders, each being over a crank, which
OUR SHIP . —Continued.


Lat.
Long.
Dist.
Sat., Sept.
20
11.271*
17.55W
273
Sun., „
21
7.16
16.15
267
Mon., „
22
3.28
13.58
266
Tues., „
23
0.33S
12.13W
264
Wed., „
24
1.28
11.48
58
Tliurs. „
25
5.26
10.5
260
Fri., „
26
9.16
8.24
262
Total distance
... 1650
makes it a very convenient engine for overhauling, and gives it a
uniform rotary motion. Next to explain, is how the steam is
expanded through the engine. Steam is admitted into the high-
pressure, or first cylinder, at the initial pressure of 118 lbs.; after
the piston has made a half stroke upwards or downwards, the
steam is entirely cut off that cylinder by a circular valve called a
piston-valve. During the next half of the stroke, the engine still
moving gives a greater area in the cylinder for the steam, which
has been admitted to fill up. This is the first expansion. The same
steam, which has done its work on one stroke of the high-pressure
cylinder, is exhausted into a receiver, with another piston-valve in
it, which admits the steam into the second or intermediate
cylinder, and cuts the steam off at Sof the stroke. It goes
through the same performance as the first cylinder, and so on to
the third. Prom the third cylinder it is exhausted into a surface
condenser, and is drawn thence by two sets of pumps and returned
to the boilers in the form of distilled water. The engine is fitted
with one of Weir’s patent feed water heaters, for the better
preservation of the boilers. The feed water passing through this
gets heated 180° F. before being delivered into the boiler.
I may say that the engines of the “ Aberdeen” are the first of
the kind which have been a success, there having been but one
other set of engines of the same kind made before these. In the
case of the “ Propontus” the boilers were at fault. The engines,
however, are now running with an ordinary set of boilers.
Since the success of the “ Aberdeen,” there have boon about a
dozen of the same style, some twice the size, and all give good
accounts.
As might be expected, when it was positively proved that
diamonds existed, and might be had for the trouble of picking up,
others followed in the footsteps of the first adventurer; and
having crossed the Orange Eiver, they advanced further up
country, and hearing that beautiful pebbles were found on the
banka of the Vaal, they sought at various spots along its course,
and several were amply rewarded by finding the precious gem.
The good tidings soon spread, and before many months had
passed, the river side, formerly visited only by the scattered tribes
of natives, a few missionaries, and sparse Boer population, became
a scene of excitement such as is rarely seen in any country. For
more than fifty miles, parties of diggers were dotted along the
shores, searching the river drift and patiently sorting over bucket
after bucket of gravel, an occasional shot from a revolver denoting
the find of a “ big ’un,” and perhaps a fortune for the happy
possessor.
Eeports of wealth so easily acquired tended to increase the
ever-growing excitement, and from all parts of the colony—
Orange Free State, Natal, and the Transvaal —long trains of ox-
waggons were constantly arriving, and at the richest spots towns
consisting of canvas tents were fast rising.
Canteens, stores, hotels, billiard-rooms, and all appurtenances
of camp life fast appeared on every side, and the dawn of pros-
perity so unexpected and providential had again broken over
South Africa. There were to be no more gloomy days of adversity
for several years to come.
A few months passed, with the results usually obtained by all
mining communities—hard work and small profit for the many,
luck and fortune for the few. Numbers had toiled for months
and obtained nothing; but game being plentiful, there was no
lack of sustenance for the unfortunate, and all men could obtain
employment.
At this time the news had spread to all parts of the globe;
gold-diggers and others from Colorado, Nevada, California, New
Zealand, and Australia began to pour into the colony in a con-
tinuous stream. All sorts and conditions of men were represented;
all nations seat their quota. Scions of noble houses and miners
from Cornwall there met on equality, a true republic, a most free
and happy life.
A change, however, was about to come o’er the scene; the palmy
days of the river diggings were to last but a few months, and sink
again into the obscurity from which they arose. Mushroom camps,
which had so quickly sprung up, were about to disappear as
suddenly as they had come, and the pleasant life amidst the
shady trees by the cooling river was to be abandoned for one of
more intense excitement amidst the blinding dust and torrid suns
of Griqualand West.
A discovery of hidden wealth, such as would transcend the dreams
of Croesus, was about to be made.
(To he continued ,)
CORRESPONDENCE.
We have received a most interesting letter from a lady correspond-
ent. Want of space and due consideration of the matter, which
was a kind endorsement of our last issue, prevents our publishing it.
We, however, trust she will favour us with one more strictly relating
to her compartment.
To the Editor of the, Aberdeen Times.
Sib, —It was with more than pleasure that I perused your first
publication, and it only remains for me to add that I consider
it one of the greatest boons that could be accorded to a lot of people
such as we are, isolated from the rest of the world for at least six
weeks. And I feel positive that under your efficient management
(for apparently you are no amateur in the editorial business) and a
small staff of correspondents, sufficient reading might be made to
enliven a few hours of our passage, and in years to come, a copy, if
retained, of this “ The ‘Aberdeen’s ’ Passage to Australia,” may awaken
happy reminiscences of incidents which transpired during the same,
for I fervently hope there may never be any but happy recollections
borne away by all. I would propose dividing the “Aberdeen” into dif-
ferent districts, and out of the many who constitute each district there
should be no trouble in finding a few suitable correspondents. For
instance, the saloon I would name “ The Courtthe S.W. quarters,
“ Maiden GroveS.M.C., “ Spooney Villa ;” M.P.C., “ Doubling
Fields;” the crew, “ Neptune Cellar;” the officers, “ Navigation Ter-
race;” cooks, stewards, bakers, &c., “ Mincing Lane.” By this
arrangement there would be a certain amount of competition brought
into play, and consequently criticism, which always imparts so much
pleasure to the reader. H.W.C.
We have also received a ballad upon a disaster which occurred on
this ship last voyage, which we will, space permitting, give to our
readers next week.
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
A FACT.
Scene : M.P. Hatchway. “ What dae ye ca’ that, Sandy ?” asked
a Scot of a fellow countryman, pushing a dish of marmalade, just
served at the stores, under his nose. Sandy smells it, puts his fingers
into it, finally tastes it, spits it out, and looks bewildered. An officer,
who happens to be passing, tells him it is pomade for the hair. Not
satisfied with this, he takes it to the mistress, who settles the question
thus : “ Oh! ye muckle gowk ! that’s for the weans to put on their
piece.”
HINTS.
Soap and water is one of the best medicines and disinfectants
known. A more extensive use of this plentiful commodity among the
juvenile portion of our people would tend to their greater comfort
and happiness.
Flannels are the best at all seasons, and now, in leaving the tropics,
it is advisable to keep to, or, if not already worn, to assume them.
Our single men must endeavour to rise earlier, not later than 7,
and to wash before the decks are cleaned. Constables, attend to
this !
People are strongly recommended to throw their refuse and slops
to the windward, it being so pleasant for all to receive them back
again, finely divided by the breeze.
N.B. —It is officially announced that wo shall stop for some time
at St. Helena. The officer in charge of the mails, Mr. Seward, will
receive all letters, and money in payment thereof. Postage to Eng-
and for £ oz., 6d.
THE DIAMOND FIELDS.— Continued,


Lat.
Long.
Run.
Fri., Sept. 26 ... 9.16
8.24
262m
Sat.. 27 ... 12.56
6.53
233m
Sun., „ 28 ... 15.54 ... 5.45
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, at anchor.
Fri., October 3, weighed
195m
anchor at 6.30 a.m. 16.30
5.9
48m
Total distance for week ...
-
. 476m
The Aberdeen Times .
“A Chiel’s aman& us takin’ Notes, and eaith he’ll Pbent it.”
At Sea, Friday, October 3, 1884.
[Registered for trans-
mission aboard.
Yol I.—No. 3.]
BIRTHS.
Wilkes —The wife of John Wilkes of twin daughters, on Tuesday,
September 30, at the Royal Aberdeen Maternity Hospital.
NOTICES.
The Abeedeen Times.
In consequence of our copy in the fore compartments being abused,
we have decided henceforth to keep one in the Dispensary, where, on
application, any person desiring to read it may have the loan thereof.
Divine service will be held on the quarter-deck at 11 o’clock on
Sunday morning. Everyone earnestly requested to attend.
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
S.S. "Aberdeen,” Friday, October 3, 1884. .
Our “ chiel” has now run three weeks, and having every appear-
ance of health and strength, he purposes continuing his march of in-
tellect and flow of soul to the end of the voyage. Having due regard
to his matured state, he chooses henceforth the motto, “ When found
make a note of”
CAPTAIN CUTTLE.
OUR VOYAGE.
Friday, September 26.—A strong headwind and a heavy sea made
our progress slow on Friday and Saturday, as is to be seen by the
Log. Worse than this, to many of us it brought again the horrors of
sea sickness, which we had thought banished for ever. Before break-
fast on Sunday (September 28) the island of St. Helena loomed in
the dim distance, and this proved an effectual cure to all our cases.
At 11.30 we cast anchor at rather less than a quarter of a mile from
shore, if a precipitous cliff, some 1500 feet high, can be so called, so
abruptly does this rock rise from the ocean.
What a fearful struggle Mother Nature must have had to have
necessitated such an upheaval! Boats came off in great numbers
—for seeing so many people on deck they expected quite a har-
vest. Unfortunately our necessarily strict rules do not allow of
the passengers going ashore; so that the boats, after lingering
about for some hours, returned to find customers in the many
islanders anxious to see a ship of our size outward bound.
In fact, we have created quite a sensation in all circles—mili-
tary, naval, and civil.
H.M.S. “ Opal,” lying at anchor in the roadstead, early sent her
second lieutenant aboard. This vessel was awaiting the arrival
of the Cape mail steamer “Mexican,” and had brought invalids, this
being the relief station of the west coast of Africa.
Our Commander, taking with him the Surgeon and Dr. Grant,
returned the visit during the morning.
Of course, in the excitement of anchoring. Divine service was
out of the question, and was put off until we should regain the
open sea, as also was the inspection. The afternoon visiting was
allowed, as usual.
Concerning St. Helena itself, it is our intention to publish a
special number, dealing solely with that island and our visit to it.
However, we must say a few words about the view from the sea.
Lying off the N.W. of the island, beneath the Ladder Hill Fort,
the latter seems perfectly inaccessible, and so it is from the sea.
The famous Jacob’s Ladder forms its approach from the city of
Jamestown, and good roads lead at the back into the interior.
Only a very small portion of the town is visible, our view being
blocked by the Ladder Hill. We just see the bottom of the
valley, with a few houses near the landing stage. About half-
way up the opposite hill Munden’s Fort bristles with guns, and
commands the town and roadstead.
By-the-by, talking of roadstead reminds us that ours was not
the only ship in it. Two American whalers—veritable old tubs—
and a very smart-looking provision boat for the same trade, were
anchored near the town. One or two interesting specimens of
shipbuilding, condemned as unfit for sea, comprised all the other
shipping in harbour.
Sugarloaf Peak, rising above and beyond Munden’s Point,
makes a very pretty finish to the scenery of this side of the
island. Towering far above these we see Diana’s Peak, which is
the highest point in the island.
On the Monday, fruits, consisting of the pear, guava, loquat,
banana, cocoanut and other, either grown on the island or im-
ported from the W. of Africa, were brought aboard, and found a
ready sale, notwithstanding the exorbitant prices. In fact, the
whole of our commercial relations with St. Helena and Helenians
partake of the nature of sharks and their victims.
The girls and other people on board deserve great credit for the
orderly manner in which they have behaved in port, and for their
cleanliness.
Among the single women we cannot omit mentioning Miss
Ward as having aided in a great measure to mitigate the tedium
of our stay. She has played upon the harmonium selections
from all our favourite pieces, to some of which the girls have
danced and caused no end of fun.
On Tuesday the day seemed long, and we were all regretting
our inability to go ashore. However, visitors, continually coming
and going, gave us at least something to look at. Early in the
day we saw a fine vessel steaming round the Sugarloaf, which
proved to be the TJ.E.M.S. “ Mexican,” bound for England via,
Ascension, from Cape Town. In another column we give the
most important news from Europe, received per cablegram before
the departure of the “ Mexican” from Cape Town. Our own letters
from home were conveyed aboard, and are now on their way to our
friends, and will probably be delivered on October 15.
On Tuesday night, at 8 p.m., two St. Helenians, or yamstalks,
as these islanders are nicknamed, were ushered into the world.
The happy mother of these promising girls expresses a wish to
have them named respectively (1.) Hannah Agnes Diana Aber-
deen; (2.) Isabel Barclay St. Helena (Wilkes). We give pub-
licity to this, but beg to disclaim its authorship.
Wednesday passed away very smoothly in the choosing and
buying of curiosities and mementoes of our stay.
On Thursday, Oct. 2, the Chief Engineer of the “Opal” inspected
the engines, and certified to their being fit for sea.
The Captain of our ship cannot help but feel flattered with such
courtesy as has been shown to us by the Commander and officers
of H.M.S. “Opal,” as also by the Governor and staff on the island.
They have done everything in their power to assist us and to
lessen the immense expense this accident to the shaft has entailed
upon the owners.
Thursday being the publishing day of the St. Helena Guardian ,
the editor of The Times received a copy from the publisher.
Not wishing to be parasitical upon a parasite, we quote directly


from the Cape Times, upon which the Guardian feeds. We do
not even acknowledge an equal to our own humble efforts in this
bifoliate representative of the tiers etat.
Learning that the evening was to be our last in St. Helena, we
made a desperate effort, successful beyond expectation, to mark it
by an entertainment.
We have, therefore, much pleasure in reporting the concert
which was, owing to the St; Heleniau excitement, postponed on
Monday.
THE CONCERT.
Thanks to the Misses Ward and Eobinson, who worked bravely
in getting up a programme, we were able at 7 p.m. to take a likely
list of songs to our worthy Surgeon and prevail upon him to pre-
side, which he did with evident pleasure.
A goodly company of friends was assembled on the after part of
the quarter-deck to hear this first effort of the musical portion of
the single women.
Not having had the honour of receiving a programme, we cannot
do justice, by name, to all performers. Miss Locke was encored
for her most amusing song, “ The Blighted Gardener;” and Miss
Mackenzie caused much fun by her splendid reading of two very
humorous highland episodes. “Auld Lang Syne” concluded a
most enjoyable entertainment. Hr. Huxtable thanked the girls
for the pleasure which the entertainment had given to himself
and others; and also desired to seize this opportunity of acknow-
ledging the general good behaviour of everyone aboard, under
the somewhat trying circumstances of the past few days. He
regretted that the strict regulations of the Emigration Depart-
ment prevented his permitting their visiting the island of St.
Helena. The proceedings terminated with the youthful portion
of the audience striking up, “ For he is a jolly good fellow, and
so say all of us.” At 6.30 this morning (Friday, October 3) we
got under weigh, and have, at the time of going to press, put some
100 miles between us and the land.
POLICE INTELLIGENCE.
We trust this is the first and last occasion upon which we shall
he compelled to publish the above. Two men, E and B ,
having refused to do duty as sweepers, were brought before a
court, consisting of the Commander and Doctor. Both perse-
vering in their obstinacy, were sentenced, and are undergoing
solitary confinement and a prison diet, until a better frame of
mind bo inculcated.
Desirous that this example might have a salutary effect upon
the other sweepers, the Doctor had them all assembled, and pointed
out to them the strictness of our rules, and the necessity of
bearing them out.
CHIPS HACKED FROM THE SCHOOL LOG.
We gather from the report of the schoolmaster, who commenced
instruction on September 19, that the average daily attendance
has been sixty. But we notice, with much regret, that many
parents, instead of seconding the efforts of our energetic, pains-
taking pedagogue, take pleasure in thwarting him in his earnest
endeavours to rescue their offspring from the depths of ignorance
into which the majority are plunged. Complaints of unoleanli-
ness, also absence during school hours, engage our attention. One
individual—Pike by name—we should regard as a rather " fishy”
character; and we should not be surprised at his being caught by
a rod, and eventually (if his ways do not mend) being suspended
at the end of a line, and thus expiating his youthful follies.
NEWS FROM EUROPE.
(Extracted from Cape Argue , September, 1881.)
Sept. 9, London. —Consul Hewell has annexed an important
oil district in the neighbourhood of Benin, west coast of Africa.
Sept. 10. —Lords Northbrook and Wolseley have arrived at
Cairo.
There were 800 cases of cholera in Naples yesterday, of which
300 proved fatal.
Sept. 13.—11. Jules Ferry has contradicted the report that
France contemplated an official declaration of war with China.
Sept. 17. —Sir Stafford Northcote has commenced a Conservative
campaign in Edinburgh.
Sept. 19. —General Gordon telegraphs from Khartoum, under
date Aug. 26, that he was then awaiting the arrival of British
troops. Later intelligence (Sept. 22) states that General Gordon
has gained a decisive victory over the rebels, inflicting heavy loss
upon them, between July 4 and Aug. 30, when the siege of Khar-
toum was raised.
Serious Nationalist riots have taken place at Castlewellan. The
rioters wrecked the police barracks, and were only dispersed on
being attacked by the police, and several wounded.
We learn that the German Government is still pursuing its
course of annexation, and that Mr. Gladstone has wished them
God-speed!
Apropos, the Pall Mall Gazette predicts the limitation of British
rule in Africa to a coaling station at Cape Town.
Sept. 18. —The 107th and 53rd regiments have been ordered to
proceed to Egypt, at the beginning of October.
It is officially announced that the Gordon Belief Expedition
under the command of Lord Wolseley, will leave Wade Haifa on
Nov. 1; Lord Wolseley directing from Cairo, and Major-General
Earle from Wady Haifa.


ST. HELENA SUPPLEMENT
TO
The Aberdeen Times.
"The proudest Sea-mark that o’eetops the ‘Wave.” — Byron.
Yol. I.—No. 4.
At Sea, Monday, October G, 1884.
C Registered for trans*
mission aboard.
ST. HELENA.
eleven of the crew were murdered. The pirate was afterwards
taken. Other interesting matter relating to St. Helena will bo
found scattered in the description of
An island in the S. Atlantic Ocean; lat., 15° 55'; long., 5° 42' \V.;
length, 10£ miles; breadth, 6 J miles; area, 47 square miles;
distant from W. Coast of Africa, 1200 miles; from Ascension
Island, 760 miles. Discovered by Juan de Nova Castella,
Commodore of a Portuguese fleet returning from India, on the
21st of May, 1501, the anniversary of St. Helena, mother of
the Emperor Constantine. The first inhabitants were some negro
slaves, landed by Fernandez Lopez, a Portuguese nobleman, in
1513. The first church was built in 1571; in 1588 the first
Englishman landed. Captain Cavendish; and in 1593, some
English merchants, returning from the pioneer voyage to India,
arrived. In 1645 the Portuguese abandoned the island, and the
Dutch then took possession. The English East India Company
ousted the latter from it in 1657, and were undisturbed until 1672,
when the Dutch again seized it, again to be expelled on the arrival
of Sir Richard Munden, on the 7th May, 1673.
Some ruined families from the great fire of London, 1666,
sought refuge here.
##»*#**#
In order to illustrate the form of justice in vogue amongst the
early British colonists, we record the following:—•
In 1694 a conspiracy of negroes was discovered; the two ring-
leaders were hanged, drawn and quartered; the third was hanged
alive in chains, and starved to death.
In 1731, to prevent depredations on young trees, the destruction
of all goats and sheep was enforced for ten years.
********
In 1806 great devastation was caused by the spread of
blackberry bushes, which prevented the growth of other vege-
tation.
A capture of a turtle weighing no less than 800 lbs., in the year
1819, is worthy of record. This reptile formed the staple article
of food at the mess tables of two regiments for three days, and
the shell afterwards formed the chief part of the roof of a cottage.
Another capture, by pirates, in 1830, of the Government schooner
“ St. Helena,” is also worthy of notice ; the Captain, Doctor, and
OUR VISIT TO THE ISLAND.
Viewed from the sea, St. Helena does not present a very inviting
aspect to the beholder; though picturesque, the bare volcanic
mountains rising abruptly from Father Neptune’s bosom, impress
one unfavourably, looking extremely sterile and devoid of
vegetation, a few pines on the higher hills being almost the
only trees visible.
Landing at Jamestown, however (the only town in the island),
the visitor finds on closer acquaintance that his first opinion in
this case is not correct, for, looking up the long, narrow ravine in
which the town is situated, he sees a luxuriant growth of tropical
and sub-tropical trees and plants in great variety, mingled with
those of the more temperate climes. This is not surprising when
one learns that the mean temperature is 61.4° F, at an altitude of
1765 feet, and 7° higher at sea level.
The lowest reading of the thermometer in September (mid-
winter) is 57°, and in March (midsummer) the highest 66.25° F.
On stepping ashore the visitor directs his course along the
substantially built sea-wall protecting the lower part of the town
from inundation, and after crossing a light bridge over a deep
fosse, leaving Government house to the left, finds himself in the
long, straggling, ill-kept village (we apologise, city), the buildings
of which have every appearance of having seen better days. On the
left is the only Post Office, with the Postmaster-General anxiously
awaiting that irava avis, a customer, and ws testify that the
advent of no less than three individuals at one and the same time
to purchase stamps caused utter disorganisation, and the staff was
immediately augmented by two additional clerks. Confusion
was worse confounded when change was demanded for the large
sum of a sovereign, and dismay spread over the countenances of
all officials—their sole capital consisting of stamps. A bright idea
flashed across the somnolent brain of the P.M.G.: “ Send to the
hotel for change.” A general levy of the inhabitants, and


contributions called for, and this Government loan was successfully
floated, and all was again happiness.
Leaving this busy scene, and advancing ever upwards, on the
right we pass that imposing structure, St. James’ Church or
Cathedral, with cemented spire and bam-like body. A few yards
further on is an incomplete tenement, constructed for Napoleon,
which we learn was set lire to by incendiary, and abandoned on
that account. It belongs to Messrs. Solomon, Moss, Gideon & Co.,
whose store adjoins; this firm deserve a word or two, as no
account of St. Helena would in any way be complete without
mention of them. We are not sure that the island would ever
have existed without them, or that they were not here before the
island. Before one arrives their name is by some means wafted
on the breeze, and once on shore the nauseated traveller is
surfeited with Solomon & Moss, or Moss & Solomon. In fact,
the inhabitants have a proverb “ As wise as Solomon,” and even
in church the words “ And Solomon in all his glory” are frequently
being uttered.
But to return : still wending our way up the main track—we will
not designate it street —we see on every side evidences of departed
prosperity, shops without customers, houses and stores burnt
down, and never rebuilt; but above all, the never-ceasing request
for “ pence,” of small boys who dog one’s footsteps.
The St. Helena Club, seemingly started without members, and
no prospect of getting any, arrests us for a moment. We mount
the steps and find a large bare hall, containing nothing but a
wicker settee; having entered, we see two cheerless, uncarpeted
rooms, with a billiard-table in one, and in the other a scanty
supply of pauperised furniture, garnished with a miserable
selection of uninteresting literature. Having gazed upon this
dreary spectacle for a few moments, and having admired the view
from the back, which consists entirely of a blank, once white, wall
and a dirty yard, we will again pursue our virtuous path, which
winds ever upwards, past three chapels, a temperance hall,
hospitals, civil and military cemeteries, overgrown with weeds and
other rank vegetation, dilapidated houses and cottages from one
to three stories in height, and past a few smiling cottages, and at
length into the open country.
Here, some 500 feet above sea level, we get a view such as would
delight the eye of an artist, and assuredly call forth a mead of
praise even from the most prosaic. High above, the pimple
mountains, now shaded on their topmost peaks by drifting mists,
anon standing out with clean outline against the azure sky, look
down upon a valley of surpassing beauty—cascades on either side,
falling many hundreds of feet from precipitous cliffs, eventually
mingle, and forming a purling stream in the vale below, pass
through a wealth of graceful date palms, banana plants, tobacco
trees, prickly pears, aloes, and wild geraniums, and finally find a
course through the town, and so on into the ocean.
As everybody knows, with the exception of born St. Helenians,
the only really interesting historical fact connected with the
island is that Napoleon I. was confined here after his defeat at
Waterloo, in 1815.
Elba not having proved sufficiently safe and distant from
Trance, the British Government sought a place that no sane man
would ever dream of escaping from or living in; and the con-
queror of Europe was consequently conveyed to this spot, and
having landed, very naturally, after five years of the pleasures of
solitude in the midst of solitude—died.
The Briars (now the property of Mr. Moss) was his first dwelling-
house. It is situated at the head of the valley described above, but a
new residence, called Longwood, was prepared for his reception, and
at this place he terminated his miserable exile. May 5, 1821 (set. 52).
As the distance to Longwood from Jamestown is only four and a-half
miles, visitors find no difficulty in viewing both house and tomb in
one day, the same road conducting the traveller to both spots, Long-
wood being on the sea coast, and the tomb a mile and a-half nearer
the town, almost geographically in the centre of the island.
Being desirous of seeing these interesting monuments, and having
chartered and mounted those fiery untamed steeds, Bricks and Eose,
the impatient animals immediately set to work with commendable
earnestness, and without any urging commenced to perform their
duties in an exceptionally satisfactory manner. Taking one of the
many mountain zigzag roads, in the course of a few minutes we had
ascended to a height of 500 feet or more, and looking down, had a
fine bird’s-eye view of the town, which exemplifies Euclid’s definition
of a line. Length, without breadth, a more attenuated village could
not be imagined —apparently about one and a-half miles long and 300
yards wide, evidently a pauper town, long, gaunt, and thin. Directly
beneath us we see St. James’ spire, a pigmy at this or any height, and
commencing behind the church and rising above us the world-famed
Jacob’s Ladder, consisting of 699 steps (ladder is misleading, it being
a substantial iron railed staircase), ascending at an angle of 39deg.
to the Ladder Hill Fort, a height of 602 feet, and a total length of
933 feet. Progressing upwards, along the roadway, we arrive at the
Artillery Barracks and Fort; passing the commanding and impreg-
nable redoubt at High Knoll on our left, we mount still heavenward,
until at last one of the very few level stretches of roadway is reached.
Our ponies here show their paces, and in the midst of a heavy shower
canter smartly past the Governor’s country residence. The latter is
surrounded by a magnificent park, a vista of bright flowers and
luxuriant foliage. This spot is about the highest point on this part
of the island, and is about 1800 feet above sea level. All the prin-
cipal mountains and ridges on the other side stand out distinctly as
one looks across the lesser hills and deep valleys which divide them.
Conspicuous by its sharp conical outline is Diana’s Peak, a giant
towering to the height of 2704 feet. Also High Peak, 2636 feet, the
highest point of a ridge overlooking the valley in which lies Napo-
leon’s tomb. Continuing our journey a short distance further along
pleasant but muddy lanes, shaded by high hedges, wherein the mag-
nolia and other gems of nature blossom, we enquire whither the road
will lead, and the reply being “ nowhere in particular,” we return by
the same route. The roads are nowhere much congested with traffic,
but as a rule a microscopic donkey, laden with oats, and completely
hidden by his burden, was enough to obstruct the by no means broad
highway.
Our object being to visit Napoleon’s tomb, we enquire our road,
and from the many diverse opinions expressed by a multitude of
advisers we extract such misleading information that wo are constantly
led astray, and find that, after riding several miles, we are almost
in stonethrow of our starting point; in fact, the perverse natives of
whom we hired our ponies, either from ignorance or malice prepense,
obstinately refused to allow us to proceed on the direct road, and
misdirected us, as is their custom, to parts of the island we had no
intention of visiting. At one place we pass a cricket ground at the
top of a round hill, no doubt considered by the St. Helenians as flat
as a stale joke, but to the eye of a Britisher, accustomed to a pitch
as dead level as a billiard-table, it would seem a most undesirable
spot for such pastime. Nevertheless, the players seemed to enjoy
their game, and so long as they are pleased what mattereth it to a
stranger. Time will fly and hunger will make itself felt, but every
endeavour to obtain refreshment for man or beast is doomed to dis-
appointment. The only hotel in this inhospitable part of the island
seems to have been placed there for the purpose of rendering the
famishing traveller ferocious. We dismount in a lifeless courtyard,
and having knocked, receive no response; the place seems deserted-
However, after waiting and again knocking, a slatternly female
appears, but can render no assistance, as they possessed nothing eat-
able —no meat, no bread, no cheese, and no com for the ponies-
Neither love nor money would evidently avail us here, so shakingthe
dust (or rather mud) from our feet, we once more mount our dis-
couraged steeds, and, with empty stomachs, continue our intermin-
able journey. That miserable shanty —yclept the Half-Way House,
half-way from and to nowhere—shall know us no more.
A dusty boy now undertakes to lead us to a haven of rest, and to
fresh annoyance. The guileless stranger, trusting implicitly in the
wily youth, is allowed to be conducted many a weary mile along
muddy mountain slopes and slushy vales, the ignis fatuus of a hotel,
kept by one “ Tim Tom,” being the bait held out and so eagerly-
snatched by the exhausted riders. This hotel, so the veracious youth
told us every few yards, was just over there, “ there” being some
quarter of a mile away; but when we arrived there, the place had
shifted a half-mile further on. The time to be occupied in the journey
was always to be a few minutes, but minutes developed into hours ;
at last, after several cheerful showers, the disheartened ones were
gladdened by the sight of the olive-complexioned and rheumatic, but
nevertheless welcome, “ Tim Tom,” of the “ Eose and Crown.” De-
parting from his extremely humble roof, after partaking of a repast
and short rest, we once more entered into the mist, which nearly
always envelopes the higher lands in this, the rainy season. This
mist happily dispersed speedily, and for a short time a clear new of
the road before us and the adjoining coast and country was obtained


Straight ahead, at a distance of a mile or more, we at last saw one
of the objeats of our journey—viz., Longwood, a by no means preten-
tious edifice, built almost entirely of wood. Approaching closer, we
passed the gates, and a long stretch of level turf infused our steeds
with energy quite surprising after so many miles of fatiguing climb
up extremely steep gradients, and carrying no “ light weights.”
Arriving at the house, we were admitted by a charming young lady,
daughter of the “gardien de domaines de Longwood etdu val Napo-
leon ’a Tile St. Helene,” so his card informed us, this personage
being an official appointed by the French to protect the property.
All the furniture having been sold and removed, there is little of
interest to be seen. A bust of the great Emperor, placed there by
the French Government, to whom the estates and tomb belong, is the
only object worth noting. Receiving an invitation to visit M. Moril-
leau, le gardien, at the new house built for, but never inhabited by,
Napoleon, his death occurring before completion of furnishing, we
took advantage of the opportunity so kindly offered, and were cordi-
ally received by M. and Madame Morilleau, who were only too glad
to see strangers from the outer world, and to hear news from Europe
and La Belle France, which M. had quitted 25 years ago. Bidding
farewell to our host and hostess, we were again on track, and soon
the mile and a-half between Longwood and the tomb was compassed.
The latter lies at the extremity of a prettily wooded valley, with the
usual zigzag pathway leading to it, and is in the centre of a grass
plot, the latter surrounded by sombre cypress trees and beautifully-
proportioned Norfolk Island pines. The weeping willows always
associated with this spot, are nowhere visible; one was blown down
some years since, and probably the others have been gradually des-
troyed by visitors taking souvenirs. The tomb itself is nothing more
than a few slabs of unpolished stone, cemented into one block. There
is no inscription on this hero’s grave ; the plainest of stones, sur-
rounded by tall iron railings, is all the French Government will allow
to mark the spot in which once rested the remains of their first Em-
peror.*
Affixed to a cypress tree is the following inscription on a brass
tablet: —“ Expedition de Chine, 18G0-2, la frigate ‘La Force.’ A
la memoire du premier Empereur. 30 Aout, 18G2.” Close at
hand, within the enclosure, is a spring, from which wells forth
water clear as crystal and of icy coldness, which in warm weather
must prove very acceptable to the thirsty pilgrim come hither to
pay tribute to the memory of the man who, three-fourths of a
century ago, held the whole of Continental Europe in fear and
subjection.
The evening drawing to a close, we again urge on our now
extremely jaded steeds, and, ascending the high ridge overlooking
a deep valley, we commenced our return journey through a fir
plantation, the majority of the trees of which have the appearance
of aged agricultural labourers, being bent nearly double by the
strong prevalent S.E. trade winds, which occasionally blow with
great fury across this high, unprotected slope.'oausing the bows of
trees to be all turned in one direction, regular sign-posts of nature
pointing the way the breezes blow.
Our course was now as persistently downward as previously
it had been upward, and before long the ravine, in which lies
Jamestown, at this part covered from top to bottom with Port
Jackson willows, prickly pears, and wild geraniums, came in sight.
Illuminated by the bright moonlight, our road was clear before
us, and ere long we, with much satisfaction, yielded up our tired
and almost immovable ponies to their owners, and, making our
way to the landing-stage, were soon again safely aboard the good
ship “Aberdeen.”
After the above cursory description of the town and interior of
the island, a few remarks respecting the inhabitants would not be
out of place; and as we had five days in which to note their
idiosyncrasies and chief characteristics, we set about the task to
the best of our poor ability. We will not commence by summar-
ising eplgrammatically, like the scholar when asked about the
manners and customs of a certain nation, by saying, “ Of manners
they have none, and their customs are beastly.” Quite the
contrary: people here seem hospitable, andl exceedingly clean in
their habits. The chief failing is the grasping, greedy lust of
filthy lucre which pervades all classes, from the aristocrats
and autocrats, the great ship and tallow chandlers, down to
the lowest stratem of society, in the shape of small and impe-
• The body was exh-med Oct. 30,1840, and taken to Paris.
cunious street arabs. The latter think it incumbent on the
part of the unsophisticated stranger to pay them at least the sum
of one penny for the unsolicited false information their untruthful
and extremely ignorant tongues may please to utter. The only
redeeming feature which the very numerous tribe of small boys
and girls and poorer inhabitants generally can score to their
credit is their neatness and cleanliness. Squalid misery such as
is seen in the large cities of Europe is unknown—in fact, there is
no actual pauperism on the island. Poverty is general, but decent
shelter and enough food and clothing for the requirements of a
tropical climate are obtainable by all.
* The opening of the Suez Canal and the gradual substitution
of steamers for sailing ships has of course been a heavy blow to
the prosperity of the islanders; but it is the duty of every strangd
observer to protest against the inertness, laziness, and general
inability to make the best of things which shows itself on every
side.
A few oxen and sheep, and enough fruit and vegetables to sup-
ply themselves and the shipping, seems to be the extent of their
producing capacity. An island on which grows cinchona, coffee,
cotton, and will doubtless bring forth all other tropical and sub-
tropical plants, exports absolutely nothing; and men who leave
hundreds of acres of rich volcanic soil uncultivated, complain
that times are hard, and will thankfully receive any small coin
one is good-natured or foolish enough to offer.
Compulsory education has done nothing here; ignorance is
rampant; boys and girls who have finished their schooling know
not their alphabet. One spoke of Napoleon as a living man,
others doubtless think him an animal; few know their own names
or ages, and all will answer any question put to them by a laconic
“Yes” or “No.” Negative and affirmative are matters of indif-
ference ; the same questions will receive both answers if a short
interval elapses between the asking and repetition of an enquiry.
The only thing one can be sure about is the inevitable demand,
“ Give me a penny,” after any question, however simple.
English is the only language spoken by the islanders, and
“ h’s” and terminal “ g’s” are not obsolete or extinct in this out-
of-the-way quarter of the universe. It is quite a pleasure to hear
most of the people speak; their intonation is agreeable, and their
language free from oaths and errors. There is a great diversity
of colour amongst the people ; purest white—very scarce—and
darkest ebony have each their representatives ; the neutral tints,
however, predominate, and are most fashionable, and one would
find no difficulty in matching any shade of olive or brown that
might be desired. This results from the blending of European,
Asiatic, and African blood. White people here do not consider an
off-colour complexion in any degree inferior to their own; so
marriages are much more frequent between the white and dark
portion of the community than would be the case in any other,
colony where whites and blacks live together.
Many of the ancient mariners of a sooty hue, with deeply
wrinkled faces and grey-black wool, were formerly slaves captured
by Portuguese and recaptured by British gunboats, landed and
set free here some five-and-thirty years ago.
As an article of export, we might suggest to the barber, if there
be one, the propriety of shipping a few bales of niggers’ wool and
trying if it would “soot’’the English market; anyhow, it would be
something fresh, and anything novel at home would certainly
attract attention, especially in this, the silly season. Large goose-
berries and sea-serpents are neither of them appetising; the
former are now stale, and the latter ditto, so much so that they
stink in the public nostrils.
A striking notice, and one typical of the island, is to be seen on
several poverty-stricken cottages, and that is, “ Licensed to Sell
Gingerbeer.” Now, on this island is to be seen an unpretentious
building labelled “Temperance Hall,” so we must presume that
this organisation has at least one or more members amongst the
population. How this member can permit such a premium to be
placed on the sale of intoxicating liquors goes beyond our dull
comprehension. If there were only an island G. O. M., surely
such things would not be. Agitation, Midlothian speeches,
Bulgarian atrocities, would pale before the all-fired eloquence of
a rhetorician inebriated with a single bottle of the exhilarating
♦ In 1872-3 about 1300 persons emigrated to the Cape, in consequence of the
depressed state of trade.


ginger-pop. We regret we did not purchase a bottle of this
revenue-raising, but soul-depressing fluid. We feel we will
have no other opportunity of quaffing this nectar of ye gods, and
that the price thereof will for ever remain a mystery. St. Helena
is that bourne to which no man retumeth—at least, willingly.
As far as we could j udge by a short visit to the market build-
ing, an extensive trade is at no time carried on. Wo were received
with apathy, and our enquiry as to the price of bananas led to
the exit of one of the numerous loafers in quest of the owner,
who might be within any distance not exceeding five miles of
his place of business. Not wishing to wait many hours for the
absent merchant, we accosted, without delay, the only person pre-
sent, an aged market woman, who had, up to that time, made no
sign that she had anything for sale, although we were the only
customers present j having made our choice, and having obtained
a smaU discount on price asked, we retired not much impressed
with the business capacities of the vegetable vendors ; evidently
competition is reduced to a minimum, anxiety to realise not being
one of their characteristics. Farming on a small scale is the
occupation of the interior populace; cattle seem to thrive; and if
we are to believe hearsay evidence, the finest vegetables in the
world are produced. No doubt this is quite correct, as we read
that the island, when first discovered, was clothed with verdure
down to the water’s edge ; and it is only recently that the last of
the ebony trees, which grew abundantly, has been destroyed.
These valuable trees were actually used as firewood, the soldiers
finding that the hard wood burnt well. As the forest disappeared,
so also did the soil. It is a well known fact that timber causes an
even distribution of rainfall, even in tropical countries ; and the
trees having been cut down, the rain, when it fell, came in tor-
rents, and there being no roots to bind the earth together, all
the finest mould, caused by decaying vegetable matter, was washed
into the sea. This denudation left barren hillsides in the place of
fertile slopes; and in lieu of steady, refreshing showers, there
came heavy floods, and, after the floods, long droughts. Thus it
is Nature revenges herself on man’s wanton destructiveness. If
our humble opinion is worth anything, a bright oasis in the desert
of water might be made to arise by the expenditure of a little
energy in judicious tree planting. Every year the price of timber
is advancing; and, in Scotland, the plantations of a nobleman,
although only set 30 years ago, already pay, from the waste trees
which it is necessary to cut down, more than enough to cover the
rent and interest which he would have received had he let the land
for farming purposes. Our readers must excuse this last digres-
sion ; it is written with the intention of showing what could be
made of the land, if the inhabitants were not so lazy. It is annoy-
ing to see what uses can be niade of the isle, without the people
bestirring themselves, or making any effort to take advantage of
Nature’s lavish gifts; and now to continue:
The city, with a population of 2249, has considerable difficulty in
our days of making enough income to supply the wants of its in-
habitants. It is supported chiefly by the troops, shipping, and
fisheries. American whalers and the officers and men of the
Eoyal Navy of the West Coast Station are the principal mainstays
of the port; but every year trade declines, St. Helena being out
of the track of Cape or Australian steamers. Travellers are very
apt to exaggerate and gather false information respecting the
various peoples they visit; but if an innocent were cast adrift in
Jamestown, or any part of St. Helena, aud enquired to whom the
ships, houses, estates, carts, and cattle belonged, it is almost a
certainty the answer, if correctly given, would be Solomon and
Moss; thus a man who had never before set foot on this land
could, without hesitation, put his hand on anything and any-
body, and say, “This is the property of Solomon and Moss.” We
have endeavoured to sift the truth of this matter; and when we
say one-third of the entire island belongs to that notorious firm,
we are fully within the mark. Sharks abound in these coasts.
land sharks especially, and they are not satisfied, as a rule, with a
pound of flesh, but, like Oliver Twist, hanker after more.
The morals of St. Helena, commercial aud otherwise, are, to say
the least, somewhat lax; we believe it is not usual in other coun-
tries to get a vessel condemned as unseaworthy, and afterwards
purchase the same for the trifling sum of .£2O, paint her up a
little, re-register and send her to sea with a crow of 30 souls upon a
voyage to the guano deposits at Ascension. Neither is it usual
for a man who has accepted the sum of £2OOO from a rival house,
on the condition that he will cease trading, to do so, when he has
an opportunity of gaining an unfair advantage over his com-
petitor, although said competitor may only be a marine store
dealer, and a grasping monopolist. The name of the above-men-
tioned vessel is the “ Eoyal Harryit should have been regis-
tered “Old” instead of “Eoyal” Harry, as the transaction savours
much of his Satanic majesty’s handiwork. Before finishing our
sketch of St. Helena, we must mention the St. Helena Guardian, a
so-called newspaper; we had almost forgotten it; being so very insig-
nificant, we could well have been excused had we done so. This
miserable literary rag appears once weekly, which is just once in
seven days too often. It is equal in size to one-half of a half sheet of
the London half-penny Echo ; the price is fourpence. The unfortu-
nate readers, if there be any, might be spared the infliction of
perusing its few columns of advertisements and local twaddle, if the
publisher had any compassion for his fellow islanders; but that
greed which destroys every spark of kindly feeling for his neighbours
causes him to continue his nefarious undertaking; and as long as
“ Holloway’s Pills,” “ Keating’s Flea Powder,” Brown’s Chlorodyne”
and “Lea and Perrins’ Sauce” exist, so long will this hardened-
monster bring forth his vile and demoralising publication. The
impudent title alone is an affront to common sense— St. Helena Guar-
dian, forsooth. Guardian of what ? Solomon and Moss require no
defender; they know how to take care of themselves; Napoleon’s
tomb wants none —it already has its “ gardienSt. Helena morals,
perhaps!—there are none to guard ; and the island itself certainly
needs no protection from this paper bulwark. It has no right to
exist; it stands condemned by its title. We notice the publisher is
also a chemist, and he has hit upon the brilliant idea of asking the
public to subscribe fourpence for a list of his patent medicines. This
device is worthy of an individual who can charge Is. 3d. per pound for
an article which can be purchased in England almost for the same
price per cwt.
A few words about the church and Government, and we will allow
the wearied reader to cast aside this tedious trash. He has already
suffered much at our hands, and we feel that another page would ex-
haust his patience ; so, not being insured, aud for the sake of our wife
and family, we will desist, pray forgiveness, and trust his anger will
bo of short duration. The civil and military jurisdiction of the
island is placed in the hands of H.E. the Acting-Governor, Colonel
Blunt, of the Eoyal Engineers, Commander-in-Chief of the forces,
whose kindness and courtesy is much appreciated by the inhabitants.
The late Governor, Mr. Janich, is cherished in fond remembrance
by the people; “he always gave us threepence,” was the remark
of a small boy, when questioned concerning him. The church is
under the guidance of the Honourable and Eight Eeverend T. E.
Welby, D.D., Lord Bishop of the diocese, which consists of ten
churches, scattered in various parts of the island. The übiquitous
salvation army bombarded Jamestown, a few months since, but
abandoned the place, after a severe engagement; one convert, an
old black woman, still remains, and was repulsed in an attempt to
board the “ Aberdeen.” All sects and denominations have their
chapels; places of worship seem almost as numerous as the in-
habitants. There being no workhouse, habits of thrift are rife; all
the poorer people belong to benefit societies, of which there are
many local as well as English orders, such as Foresters, Ac.
And, now, sweet isle, farewell! —Solomon, Moss, and Gideon,
adieu! Our tear-stained decks testify our grief at quitting thy
hospitable, but expensive shore.


The Aberdeen Times.
“When found, make a note of.”— Captain Cuttle.
Yol I.— No. 5.]
At Sea, Friday, October 10, 1884.
[Registered for trans-
mission aboard.
NOTICES.
CHANGE OF CLIMATE.
Parents are requested to put additional clothing upon them-
selves and children, as we can expect nothing but cold weather
until Port Jackson is reached.
CONCERT.
The third grand Concert will he held on the quarter-deck
(W.P.), Wednesday, Oct. 17, 7 o’clock. Talent from the fore
and aft compartments will be represented.
THE ABERDEEN TIMES.
It is the intention of the Editors of the above periodical to
have a limited number of copies printed on our arrival in Sydney.
The small sum of one shilling will be asked for each copy, and
any surplus over cost of printing will be handed to the Captain
for the benefit of the various charities for seamen. We hope that
all will subscribe to this memento of their migration from worked-
out fields to pastures new.
GBAND CONCERT,
To be held on the Quarter Deck,
■WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 15, 1884.
Doors open 7 o’clock.
Programme :
Pianoforte solo ... "The Maiden’s Prayer” ... Miss Pickering
Song ... “Juanita” ... Miss Ward
Song ... “Forty-twa” ... Mr. Cain
Reading “A Gouk’s Errand, and what came o’t”
Miss McKenzie
Duet “ What are the Wild Waves Saying ”
Miss Kinghorn and Mrs. McCorquodale
Song “The Village Blacksmith” ... Mr. Hughes
Song ...“Kathleen Mavourneen” ... Mrs. Shakspere
Song ... “ Barney O’Hea ” ... Miss Robinson
Violin solo ... ... ... ... ... Mr. Hughes
Song ... “Dreamland Faces” ... Miss Locke
Quartette “ The Bonnie Wood of Craigielea”
Miss Kinghorn, Mr. Cain, Mr, and Mrs. McCorquodale
Song ... “In the Gloaming ” ... Miss McCarthy
Recitation “ The Bridgekeeper’s Story ” Mr. Marrs
Song ..." The Lover and the Bird ” Miss Ward
Song “ Whistle, and I’ll come to you, my Lad ” Miss Kinghorn
Song ... “ Angus McDonald ” ... Mrs. McCorquodale
Reading " How Mrs. Bodkin was Kissed in the Tunnel ”
Miss McKenzie
Song ..." The Anchor’s Weighed ” Mr. Barlow
God Save the Queen !
THE ABERDONIAN MINSTRELS.
Under the Patronage op
CAPT. JAMES BARCLAY and DR. HUXTABLE.
The above Troupe of Christy Minstrels will make their First
Appearance this season on Friday and Saturday first. After
making a tour round the world, they are expected to arrive up to
date.
Under the Management of
MESSES. STEWART, WESTBROOK AND SMITH.
P.S.—Children in arms must be previously fed, and no dogs
allowed.
Carriages ordered for 10 p.m. prompt.
Collection on behalf of
SEAMEN’S INSTITUTE FOE WIDOWS AND ORPHANS.
Scenic Artist—Mr. BONES.
Printers —Messrs. Spottiswood, London.
S.S. "Aberdeen,” Oct. 10, 1884.
We are now nearing the “rolling forties,” as the latitudes
below 40deg. are known, and are already feeling the effects of the
roll.
Our position is now S. of Cape Town, which we passed yester-
day, about 200 miles to the east. With the present fair wind and
a sound crank shaft, we should be across the great Southern
Ocean in at most 16 or 17 days.
The St. Helena edition has gone forth, and we trust will receive
the attention which it merits, considering the immense amount of
trouble which we have had in preparing it.
A most interesting study may now be made of the many sea-
birds which follow closely in our wake, amongst which we recog-
nise several varieties of the petrel tribe, known to sailors by the
names Cape hens and pigeon, stinkpots, parsons,~ nrtdlymauks,
&c., and the true albatross, which sea-going folk allege are the
spirits of departed captains seeking that rest which they never
find, having a stretch of wing from 10 to 16 feet, sustaining their
immense weight for hours together, and passing continually
over the stem of the ship, skimming through the air, with only
a rare flap of the wings.
Let us now chronicle
THE VOYAGE.
Saturday, October 4, 1884. —At 5.43 p.m. great consternation
was felt amongst the feminine portion of our community by the
stopping of the vibration of the propeller, and the violent blowing
off of steam from the engines, which condensed and formed a
miniature shower, mingled with coal dust. Another screw loose
somewhere, which was righted in a few minutes. One accustoms
oneself-to most things, so that when we again stopped on Sunday
no alarm was felt. The service on Sunday was well attended, and
the singing a decided improvement on the last.
Monday, October 6, 1884.—A concert, the programme of which
was arranged by Messrs. Cain and McCorquodale, took place on the
main deck forward, under the chairmanship of Dr. Huxtable. For
variety of entertainment, no London music-hall could surpass it.
We had the tragic in Mr. Marrs’ “ Bernardo and Alfonso,” the
comic in Pat. Murray’s interpretation of the “ Throubles of Oire-
land,” and the sentimental in Mrs. Shakspere’s exceedingly well
rendered “Kathleen Mavourneen.” Mr. Cain’s “Bonnets o’
Blue” was well received ; and we shall never forget Master
Chapel’s brave attempt (on his knees) of “ O touch those chords.


Sat.,
Oct. 4
Lat.
20.10S.
Long.
2.41W.
Dis.
259
Sun.
„ 5
23.43
1.3E.
258
Mon.
„ 6
27.9
2.35
254
Tues.
.. 7
30.42
6.5
282
Wed.
8
34.32
9.44
273
Thur.
.. 9
36.24
13.11
222
Prid.
„ 10
38.56
17.22
251
Total distance for week
Prom Plymouth
...
... 1799
... 6120
again,” which we trust he never will. A " Virgo” should choose
modest songs, and would doubtless be better appreciated.
On Tuesday the S.W. were all excitement, preparing for the
grand concert. Accompanied by two sub-matrons, the young
ladies were conducted to the saloon, where, with the aid of the
piano accompaniment, they practised their songs. The result of
this rehearsal was the discomfiture of a few, and the encourage-
ment of most of the artistes.
Wednesday dawned, and many of our fair talented ones, being
nervous, wished their names erased from the programme. This
could not be thought of in the face of the preparations which the
Chief Officer was making for our comfort.
The whole of the quarter-deck abaft and alongside of the saloon
hatchway was effectually screened off, and one entrance only made.
All around and above flags of all nations and cities were displayed,
and when illuminated by the red and white ship’s lamps, it formed a
pretty scene, and a very.'good concert-hall. The Captain had, at the
cost of no little trouble, the piano hoisted on deck. Carpets were
laid around the chair and piano, and, in fact, everything that could
be was done. At 7 the public were admitted, the girls being arranged
on benches on the starboard side.
THE CONCEET.
Dr. Huxtable took the chair, and commenced the proceedings by
apologising for Captain Barclay, who was to have presided, but
whom urgent duties called elsewhere. The concert opened with a
pianoforte solo by Miss Ward; we may congratulate ourselves upon
having such an accomplished pianist aboard. A duet, “ Erin on the
Ehine,” by Misses Ward and Gee, was very creditably executed.
Miss Mackenzie, our little “Scot,” read a very humorous piece,
“ Gutty Perky,” and towards the close of the entertainment another,
“An electric trip to London.” A reader of her ability among so
many of her countrymen and women is quite an acquisition, and we
thank the town of Aberdeen for rearing such an one for the benefit of
Aberdonians on sea and land. Miss Hughes’ “ Come, birdie, come”
was rendered very sweetly, as also Miss Gee’s “ Darby and Joan.”
Miss Kinghorn excelled herself both in the “ Laird of Cockpen” and
in a duet—“ When ye gang awa, Jamie” —with Mrs. McCorquodale.
“ My Father’s Fortune,” an original sketch by Miss Sexton, was,
on account of her nervousness, inaudible to the larger proportion
of her listeners. She has kindly favoured us with a copy of this
interesting tale, which we give to our readers in another column.
We forgot to mention Miss McCarthy’s “Put me in my little
bed,” which was sung with great pathos. The. Doctor thanked the
performers in the name of the audience, and the proceedings ter-
minated with three cheers for the Doctor and Mr. Taylor, who
both did their utmost to ensure the comfort of all present.
We attach herewith the programme for concerts on Wednesday
and Friday next.
Wednesday, the Bth.—Another stoppage for an hour, reason un-
known to Editor.
On Thursday a barque, evidently bound for the Cape, was
sighted; but as we were on a different course, we soon lost her.
We append
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
MY FATHER’S FORTUNE.
About twenty years ago—that time when I was young—my father
being a farmer, and somewhat reduced in circumstances, was
growing anxious concerning the increasing number of his family;
and his health being impaired thereby, he was ever and anon on
the look-out for some easy means to attain to fortune, beside his
so-called horror—farming.
One afternoon, as he was returning from the neighbouring
" villa,” he unexpectedly came up with a peculiar looking fellow,
who accosted him after this manner—
“ I say, you, old fellow, could you give a man work ? ”
“Me give a man work!” said my father. “ Garra wisha ! what
kind of work are you able to do ? ”
“ Any kind of farmer’s work by day; and more nor that, if
you hire me, you will not be sorry, for besides being a good
farmer’s man by day, I can assure you I work a profitable trade
by night.”
My father listened attentively to this, and it had more attraction
for him than farming.
“ Maybe, then, it is not any harm to ask you what is the good-
paying night business you practice ? ”
“Well, then, it is’nt,” said he; “ but if you hire me you will hear
it all in good time.”
All things being considered, the bargain was soon completed,
for you all know it is an easy matter to make a bargain with an
Irishman ; and a genuine Irishman was my father.
“ Don’t you think you had better come with me to-night ? ” said
my father.
“ It’s not possible to comply with your request ‘ under the cir-
cumstances ’ ” replied the man; “ but, however, I will make a man-
age to finish my moonlight business this night, and bid good-bye
to master, us his last servant died of hunger, and I will be over
with you early next morning.”
And Jack, for such was his name, good as his word, putin an ap-
pearance with the lark next morning.
My father taking the first opportunity of asking Jack what
at all could be the goo ' laying night business; and becoming
somewhat impatient of t ,ing any longer in suspense, and Jack
perceiving such to be the case, commenced by way of preface—
“ Sure, I know you want money, as everyone wants money now-a-
days.”
“ Indeed, then, I do,” interrupted my father, " as bad as any
other man, for sorra a halfpenny have I; and more nor that, since
the spuds took the blight and myself the rheumatism, and the chil-
dren the chin cough, times have been hard.”
The loss of the potatoes, together with the doctor’s bills, and
the dainties we required under the circumstances, made Paddy and
his money soon part.
“ Cheer up, man,” said Jack, “ maybe it is’nt the worst of your
days that are over, and hard times will come again no more.”
“ God send you are telling no lies,” said my father, " but surer
use the old proverb, ‘ Don’t shout till you’re out of the wood.’ ”
“Well, Paddy,” said Jack “that business I was hinting to you about
is that royal stuff that often trembled in the barrel for fear of the
gauger; and lam as good a hand as ever lived at that, and there is
nothing wanting to make it a regular success ; not a house within
miles, and what a splendid spot in the valley near the fort. One
would think,” continued he, “it was made designedly for a distillery;
and better nor all, it would be there until 2 o’clock on the day of
judgment before the Boobs ’ud find it out.”
“Faith ’in,” said my father, “them are the very fellows that
would makeout less secrets than that now-a-days. Jack! ”
All things being settled, it was agreed to go for the stuff to com-
mence business with as soon as possible. So off go father and
Jack for the convenience, which consisted of treacle, hops, and I
believe barley; but I don’t know that Jack and father did not
make their whiskey without it. Early that same night we child-
ren were ordered to bed, and shortly afterwards I heard a noise in
the pantry like that of pots and water; and it being unusual, I got
up to see what it could be; and what did I see but father and
Jack carrying out a large pot, and it filled to overflowing with
water, and takin git right down valley! Immediately after-
wards Jack returned for a match and a sod of turf to light the
fire to commence the good-paying business. After some time father
also returned, apparently in good cheer, and began to tell mother
what a clever distiller Jack was, and now that he need not work
any more; and if able to keep him going, in less than no time we
will be as rich as a “ darner.” ’
“ Oh, then, Paddy,” says my mother, "it’s all fine soft talk; Jack
and you haven’t got your feskey made yet; and whether or not, it’s
that very same business I don’t like at all, at all, for shure any


fool knows that it is not honesty to be taking money out of her
gracious Majesty the Queen’s pocket.”
“ Ah, then,” says my father, “if she cannot live without what
Paddy and Jack make she cannot live with it.”
“ And secondly, it makes a man forget his own business,” said my
mother.
“ But sure you’re forgetting entirely that I need not work any
more now.”
“ And lastly it will make an intemperate man of you, for any-
one knows one could not be making it and not tasting it.”
“ Hold your whist; no one over would have any luck that would
consult a woman about anything he would be going to do."
“ Have your way, and you will live the longest,” said my mother.
About a week it took to make the first batch, and two other days
later on it was considered saleable. They got it into barrels, and
conveyed it to the nearest town to sell it. But don’t you think
that they met with agreat surprise, as they could get no purchaser,
since each one as he tasted it would one and all say, “ Is that pot-
teen ?” and “ if so,” they would say, “ it is the potteen Jack made.”
But eventually they met with some broken-down merchant, who
bought that so-called whiskey at the reduced price of ss. per gal-
lon ; and father being so disheartened at seeing it going so cheap,
said to Jack, “We had better keep some to help us homebut it
only added to their misfortune, for surely they must have taken
a sup and a half too much, for they began throwing somersaults,
and father went the wrong way about it, and got what he called
his “ uncle” out of joint, but it was only his ankle; and home he
comes, not with one trouble but many, his fair anticipations for
the future blighted, another increase in the family, and to turn
back on his old horror—farming—wit?-ha broken leg, and no way
to mend it. The price they got for thorjuincipal did not pay the
expenses of the stuff required for the making. So you must aU
see that Jack’s “ good paying business ” turned out a failure, and
as you all know experience teaches a dear lesson. Jack and his
potteen had taught father a lesson which years will not erase; for
now he has returned to his old aversion (a tiller of the soil) with
all his energies, and has now realised fortune sufficient to main-
tain his large, though now decreasing, family. Somehow or another
it got abroad about his potteen, and now he goes by the name of
“ Paddy the Failure.”
The above subject not being of general interest to those who
intend making their home in Australia, and in order to make room
for other and more interesting contributions, our space being
limited, our readers must excuse our curtailing and condensing
matter as much as possible.
Before raising the veil from the mysterious termination of our
last paragraph of a previous issue, we will make a short summary
of the effects produced by the river diggings upon the colony
generally, and at the same time apologise for a small error which
must have crept into our first chapter inadvertently. We stated
that the first stone, said to have been an isolated diamond, found
on a farm, was purchased by the Governor. This is incorrect;
it is in the possession of the Earl of Dudley, who bought it at
an extravagant price. It is called “The Star of South
Africa,” but as dozens of gems surpassing it in size,
brilliancy, and colour have since been discovered, it no longer
deserves the title. The stone, exhibited by Mr. Porter Rhodes some
time ago, and valued at <£loo,ooo, has greater claim to the name;
and another, only lately placed in the market, exceeds all others in
size, being over 400 carats in weight, and, therefore, by far the
largest in the world. We may here state that the Emperor of Brazil
has an egg-shaped stone of great weight, sold as a diamond; but
doubts have been expressed as to its genuineness. Like a garrulous
old woman, we have been wandering from the point; we were going to
say that the emigration attracted to the field had again restored the
commercial equilibrium, and all colonists were recovering from their
lethargy, and trade resuming a more healthy aspect. This happy
change was soon to be followed, in the words of a great politician,
“By leaps and bounds of prosperity,” caused by the discovery of the
hitherto unknown fact that diamonds existed in mines as well as in
river beds, where they had always been searched for previously.
The great event occurred in this wise : Two men, travelling to the
River Diggings, found, when distant some thirty miles from their
destination, that the shades of evening were fast gathering, and
seeing close at hand a small farmhouse, in which dwelt a Dutchman
and his family, they begged a night’s shelter, which in those days
was readily granted to any persons who were fortunate enough to
find any habitation in those unsettled regions, it being the rule among
farmers to supply food and lodging gratis to all strangers. (Since
the Transvaal war, however, all this is changed; houses are closed
against Englishmen, and neither food, water, nor lodging can be ob-
tained, even by offers of excessively large payments; and if in the
wilder parts, one is glad to escape without ill-treatment.) After a
repast, the two weary travellers were shown into their sleeping apart-
ment, it being the custom of Boers to retire at sundown and rise at
dawn. One of the men had just lain down, when a bright, scintilla-
tion on the wall attracted his attention. Rising, and taking the
candle, he examined the spot closely; and the gleam still shining out
as a star, he, with his penknife, extracted the object, and showed,
to the astonished gaze of his companion, a small bright crystal.
Continuing the search, they found another; but failing to obtain
any more, they retired to rest. The next morning they continued
their journey, and having safely arrived at the Vaal River, they
showed the two specimens to a diamond buyer, who, with a party of
several others, returned to the farm, which is named Bultfontine.
Inspecting the outer walls, another diamond was found, and having
been told by the Boer that the mud of which the plaster was made
came from the ground immediately surrounding the house, a close
investigation of the soil ensued, and for some distance round a party
of men, presenting an undignified and ludicrous spectacle, was seen
crawling on their knees, searching for the sparkling and valuable
gems. Several were successful, and before many hours had passed,
the news had gone forth to the diggers on the river, and the first
dry diggings was rushed.
This day marked a new era in the history of diamonds; such a
thing as a mine in connection therewith had never been dreamt of-
In India, Brazil, Borneo, and Australia, they had always been found
in old river deposits; but here, in the midst of a sandy plain, and no
river near, they were picked up, without the trouble of turning over
large quantities of gravel and boulders. Many of the river diggers
declined to credit the tale at first, and continued steadily at their old
occupation; but gradually being convinced, and hearing seductive tales
of riches acquired at Bultfontine, nearly all deserted the waterside,
and swelled the already large number of fortune-seekers at the new
camp. Crowds of fresh arrivals, inspired with bright hopes of wealth
to be quickly earned, were constantly coming in, and prospecting
parties scoured the country in all directions. Du Toits Pan, within
stonesthrow of Bultfontine, was next rushed; and then De Beers, a
farm about a mile off. The “ New Rush” at Colesberg Kopje, now
called Kimberley mine, however, was destined to be by far the great-
est attraction, and more money was to be made out of this now world-
famed spot than out of all the other mines put together. The British
Government had judiciously waited until they had received confirma-
tion of the discovery of diamonds, and then conveniently turned up
an old treaty with a Bechuana chief named “ Waterboer,” which had
lain dormant and almost been forgotten. They then annexed the
whole of the country lying to the north of the Orange River, and
extending up to the Vaal, calling the new territory Griqualand West,
and carefully drew the frontier line so as to) include Bultfontine,
which had formerly belonged to the Orange Free State, a Dutch
Republic, which had to submit to the rectification or robbery without
protest.
Round all the four mines camps were formed, and men, with
trousers and red flannel shirts by way of habiliment, were every-
where thronging the thoroughfares. The “Newßush” having proved
a veritable “ El Dorado,” the greatest crush of diggers was always to
be found there. The canteens, gambling hells, and billiard-rooms
were always one scene of excitement and intoxication, and on Satur-
day nights, when the week’s work was over, the streets were so
densely packed that it was with difficulty one could progress along
them. Lynch law, happily, was the only law extant on the fields,
and woe betide the unfortunate victim who fell into its clutches ;
justice, rough and ready, was soon meted out. Most of the offen-
ders were low canteen-keepers; these loathsome reptiles, not con-
tent with plundering the public byjvending inferior and poisonous
liquor, used to demoralise the too willing natives and induce them
to rob their employers of any diamonds they could lay hands on
without being observed, and then purchase them at a nominal
price. These publicans and sinners and their native allies met
THE DIAMOND FIELDS. — Continued.


with scant mercy from the wrathful diggers. Frequently the
Vigilance Committee, supported by a large mob, would go round,
denounce the culprits, and then burn down and destroy both can-
teen and stock ; the miserable owner would deem himself fortunate
if he escaped without severe handling from the crowd. These
scoundrels, now termed 1.D.8.’s (i.c., illicit diamond buyers), are
still as plentiful as over, and, notwithstanding the enactment of
most stringent laws, continue to grow fat on the spoil obtained
from the honest digger. Scarcely a week passes without the
arrest of two or three culprits, whose sentence is seven years’ penal
servitude, with a heavy fine, amounting in some eases to £IOOO. The
majority of these criminals are recruited from the most degraded
portion of the tribes of Israel, who, from the very early days, began
to arrive like locusts from the lowest slums of the large cities of
Poland, Germany, and England. They have at all times been the
greatest curse and drawback the diggers have had to contend with, and
many an one has had to give up. his occupation, perhaps labouring in
vain, without being any the richer, and at last, stricken in health and
broken hearted, has died a victim of these vampires.
At least one-third of the total value of diamonds found have been
stolen, and the greater proportion of the profits of the industry have
found its way into the pockets of these mean and execrable villains.
Undeterred by the severest punishment, there are always hundreds
who follow in the footsteps and fill the gaps of those convicted.
{To he continued.)


Lat.
Long.
Dist'
Sat., Oct. 11
39.11
23.54
306
Sun., Oct 12
39.13
29.59
283
Mond., Oct 13
39.43
36.21
294
Tues., Oct. 14
40.7
43.6
310
Wed., Oct. 15
40.7
49.35
298
Thurs., Oct. 16
40.39
56.8
302
Friday, Oct. 17
40.38
62.25
••
288
Total
...
.. 2081
Winds : S.M.T.W., South-easterly; T.
& F., North-westerly.
Average run of 301.6 per day, 12.56 knots an hour, or 14.39 miles.
The Aberdeen Times.
“ When found, make a note op.”— Capt. Cuttle.
Yol. I.—No. 6.]
At Sea, Feiday, Octobee 17,’1884.
C Registered for trails*
mission aboard.
BIRTH.
Buens. —Monday, Oct. 13, 1884, the wife of Eichard Burns, of
a son.
DEATHS.
Scholpield. —Sunday, Oct. 12, 1884, Jeremiah Seholfield died
from heart disease. Aged, 51 years.
Wilkes. —Wednesday, Oot. 15, 1884, the elder of the twin
children died; bom at St. Helena, Sept. 30,1884.
NOTICES.
THE CONCEET,
Announced for Wednesday evening, Oct. 15, is postponed to Mon-
day, the 20th, on account of unfavourable weather.
THE ABEEDONIAN MINSTEELS.
This justly celebrated company have issued a placard, setting
forth no end of fun, to take place on Friday and Saturday evenings
on the quarter-deck.
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
Aberdeen Court, Oct. 17, 1884.
We commenced our undertaking, intending a weekly issue of
only four pages ; the first number ran to five, and soon it had in-
creased to ten; and now we send forth a still larger edition of
sixteen pages. Our; friends will, therefore, under such circum-
stances, excuse inferior caligraphy.
The days are now cold, damp, and dreary; and most of our time
is spent below, so that anything in the shape of amusement or
change is acceptable as a break in this dull monotony; and we
have great pleasure in reporting the efforts of our Storekeeper and
Chief Steward, who are at the head of a minstrel company, styling
itself the “Aberdonian,” and who are, this night, amusing us.
Had it not been for the unfavourable weather, we should have
had two entertainments to report this week. The concert, which
was to have been held on Wednesday evening, will take place on
Monday or Tuesday next. We almost regret the amount of trouble
to which we put Captain Barclay and his officers, in the prepara-
tions for these events ; but when he assures us that far from being
a trouble, it is a positive pleasure, what more can we do than please
him.
A reference to the Track Charts (so carefully marked by our
navigating officer, Mr. Seward) will show us that southward of
our course lie three groups of islands—the Prince Edward, the
Crozets, and the Kirguelen. They are, for the most part, of vol-
canic origin, bold in outline, and contain abundance of food, in the
shape of wild fowl, seals, and vegetables.
The Crozets were the scene of the wreck of the “ Strathmore,”
when the crew and a large number of passengers were cast ashore,
and lived there some three months before being rescued. The
“ City of Sydney,” and many other ill-fated vessels, have been
wrecked on these rocks. The Kirguelen are noted for their cab-
bages, which grow to a height of ten feet. It was there that the
transit of Venus was observed in 1874.
To the northward we also notice, about midway across the
ocean, two uninhabited islands —Amsterdam and St. Paul—which
are volcanic and sterile. On the latter the crew of the “ Megcera”
were wrecked, and lived until rescued, which was some time after.
Let us now proceed on
OUR VOYAGE.
Friday, Oct. 11. —The night was very rough, to the great terror
of the inhabitants of “ Maiden Grove,” which was in no degree
lessened when the main trysail was blown away directly over their
heads, making a tremendous noise. The fore-topgallant sail was
also sacrificed to the fury of the -wind. The capture of an excep-
tionally large flying fish is also worthy of note. These fish are
rarely seen in such cold waters ; and it was probably blown aboard,
since they cannot fly to the height of our deck. It measured 18
inches from the snout to the tip of the lower extremity of the tail;
its wing-like fins measured five inches across, and it weighed some
three pounds. The flying fish are the prey of both the denizens
of the aqueous and aerial oceans. The bonita and dolphin attack
it under water, and the frigate-bird above. In our case, the fish
decidedly jumped from fryingpan into fire, and made a very good
dish on the following morning. Their appearance is that of a
mackerel, but their flavour much superior.
At the service, on Sunday, our choir, for the first time, chanted
the Te Deum and the Glorias; Miss Ward being at the harmo-
nium.
The death of Mr. Scholfield, at 3 o’clock in the afternoon, threw
a sad shadow over the rest of the day. We sincerely sympathise
with his wife and children, six of whom are aboard, and, we believe,
six others await their arrival in Australia.
Monday, Oct. 13. —Truly, in the midst of life are we in death.
Shortly after the burial service and the consignment of the re-
mains of Mr. Scholfield to the deep, a remarkably healthy and
well made male child was ushered into the world. This makes
the fourth disclosure of what a witty officer styles " stowaways.”
Tuesday, Oct. 14.—We noticed two or three of the sportsmen of
the ship trying to snare birds with a length of thread and a piece
of paper attached to the end. The birds were shy, and the sport
fruitless, or rather birdless. Talking of birds, a short description
of those following us will not be out of place.
THE BIRDS
Which are met with in mid-ocean are mostly of the great petrel
tribe, which are always on the wing, and only make the land in
the breeding season. How or when they sleep is unknown, since
the same birds follow the same ship throughout, and feed from the
refuse thrown overboard. The smallest representative of this great
tribe is the stormy-petrel, or “ Mother Carey’s chicken.” This
bird frequents both tropical and the colder seas; and we have at
least two or three among those astern. We do not notice any of
the whale birds, which, feeding upon the same food (jelly fish)
as the whale, generally, by their presence, indicate that of their
air-breathing mammalian sea-consorts and namesakes.


The commonest bird is the Cape hen, which has a uniform dark
hue, nearly black, and going, according to the marks upon its head,
by the several names of parsons, stinkpots, &c. Then comes the
mollymauk, the smallest of the albatross tribe, to be dis-
tinguished by the black upon the top of the wing being carried
across the body.
In the true albatross, of which we have twoor three following us,
there is a pure white back. We have not seen a specimen of the
dusky albatross, which is brown all over, speckled with white.
The usual stretch of wing is from 10 to 14 feet, but in rare in-
stances 17 feet. It is the noblest and handsomest bird existing,
having a bold carriage and a wonderfully grand eye and counte-
nance. They are timid, and rarely approach a ship closely; and we
should say it is a fallacy to suppose that they attack men over-
board.
The prettiest of all the birds we have yet seen is the Cape
pigeon, which flutters backwards and forwards, butterfly-like,
much resembling the latter, in its mottled black and white
appearance.
Wednesday, Oct. 15,1884. —A very moist day,indeed, resembling
the worst in the West of England and Scotland ; and we under-
stand that in these latitudes rainy is the chronic condition of the
weather. Perfectly insufferable, except in conjunction with a
warm fireside, which is, unfortunately, unattainable to most on
board.
A perfect epidemic of sore throat and cold is the result of sitting
about on deck, which should never be indulged in. Sharp pacing
of the deck, well wrapped, is bene cial ; but all sitting must now
be taken below.
Thursday, Oct. 16, 1884. —Fire ! fire! The bell rings. All
hands to the stations, and in a few minutes we are enlightened by
the merry countenances of the firemen that the fire is a hoax, and
that it is merely fire-practice.
Friday, Oct. 17, 1884.—Yesterday and to-day we have had a
marked change in the weather—cold, bracing, dry winds, from
exactly the contrary direction to those of a few days ago.
THE DIAMOND FIELDS .-CONCLUDED.
We hope our readers will not receive a false impression from
the remarks in reference to illicit diamond buyers, and not run
away with the notion that they are all Israelites—far from it;
there are only too many others engaged in the traffic. We would
also particularly draw attention to the fact that we only mean the
lowest portion of the Jewish community; those of the better
classes, we are pleased to say, are as much opposed to the mal-
practices of their co-religionists as are all other honest-minded
citizens. We would also wish to give our experience of the
much-maligned Jew: we have found his character to be quite the
contrary to the generally accepted theory. Instead of being
sordid, greedy, grasping, mean, hard-hearted, ungenerous, and
given to all uncharitableness, we have found in most cases that
the most lavish donor, the greatest spendthrift, and the man
most ready to assist his neighbour, and the man with whom it
was easiest to conclude a bargain was the Jew.
Having traced the history of the mines thus far, a short descrip-
tion of one of them will suffice to picture all, as each is, in all
main respects, geologically similar, excepting size and shape. As
this is the concluding article, we can only give a rough outline,
without entering into details. We will take Kimberly mine, as
being the richest and deepest, for our example. We may here
state that in all probability this and the other mines would have
remained undisturbed for ages to come, if it had not been for the
industry of ant-bears and small animals called mere-kats, a sort
of ground squirrel. These beautiful creatures, with their long,
bushy tails curled over their backs, everywhere abound in the
South African veldt, and are continually burrowing holes like
rabbits, and scratching up earth from the strata beneath the red
sand, which everywhere forms the surface-soil. This sub-strata is
in all mines composed of yellow sand, in which the diamonds
were embedded. Thus has Nature chosen to reveal her secrets by
means of these animals. AVhen originally discovered, the surface
of the earth presented nothing different from the rest of the sur-
rounding country—a small kopje, or hill, similar to many others,
alone attracted the eye, a little more vegetation, perhaps, on this
■spot; but there was nothing that would lead one to suppose that
beneath lay hidden a mine of such fabulous wealth that it has
already produced more than £25,000,000.
Prospectors having declared Colesberg Kopje a diamond mine,,
it was proclaimed a public diggings and immediately rushed. The
slightly raised hillock on which the mine was situated was then
divided into about four hundred claims of 30 square feet each,,
and the miners commenced operations. The red surface-sand
contained a few diamonds, brought up from underneath by the
animals, as described above. But when the yellow sandy soil was
reached, many people turned out the precious gems, in the words
of an old digger, “like potatoes,” and such large quantities were
then found that the value, which up to this time had only slightly
declined from the original prices paid at the river diggings, fell
quite 50 per cent., and of course never recovered their first quo-
tations, as the supply was nearly always equal to the demand.
The modus operandi at this time was as follows :—A minor and
his “pardner” would work the whole or portion of a claim,.
assisted by several “ boys,” as niggers are termed, irrespective of
age.
The implements required were a wheelbarrow, pick and shovel,
and rough sorting table. They would dig out a quantity of yellow
ground, then fill the barrow and convey several loads to a spot
outside the mine j then, after breaking up the lumps, they would
pass the soil through a riddle, and taking a piece of iron
hoop called a scraper, they would gradually sort through the
heap on the sorting table, passing a small quantity under the
scraper at one time, the number of stones found of course vary-
ing with the richness of the particular ground worked. The-
larger stones were usually found when picking in the claims.
In time an immense mound, called Mount Ararat, was formed
of the sortings, and after the process of elutriatiou was introduced,
this mound was washed, and produced a handsome return. For
miles the fine white dust arising from the constant oscillation of
the sieves was visible, enveloping the “New Eush,” as it was then
called, in a white cloud. After working in this way for some
time, and the claims growing deeper, it was found necessary to
erect a small windlass and hauling gear, with bucket attached
the latter descended to the bottom of the claim, and when filled
was hauled along the wire and emptied into a cart standing on
one of the roads crossing the mine, which had been provided to
give access to the claims furthest from the outside.
The diggers had dug down some thirty or forty feet through the
yellow ground, which, being of a sandy nature, was not difficult to
work, and were now in daily fear and expectation of coming to the
bottom of the mine, as up to that time they had supposed it was
some very ancient river deposit, previous experience in all
countries having shown that diamondiferous soil was never of great-
depth, and geologists had agreed that such was the case here.
Many sold out their interest for a small amount, but others held
on, and quite a panic took place when it was rumoured that in one
of the deepest claims they had struck the solid rock. This cer-
tainly proved to be the case, but the excitement was allayed when
diamonds were found to be in this stuff also. It was
apparently a bluish coloured rock, and is now called “ blue
ground.” It was found that on exposure to the weather for a few
weeks this rocky substance disintegrated, and could then be-
worked with as much facility as the yellow ground, which is now
recognised as having been formerly in the same condition as the
original matrix, the change from blue to yellow, together with
the°softening of the latter ground, being entirely due to atmo-
spheric action through countless ages.
Shortly previous to this time a new system of obtaining the
stones had been adopted. It was perceived by some that elutria-
tion should be tried; diamonds, being of a greater specific gravity,
would, if the diamondiferous soil were washed in water, sink to the
bottom j and this idea being put in practice, and a washing being
erected and found to answer, the old wasteful system of hand-sort-
ing was superseded. As time went on, the depth of the mine
further increased, and it was found necessary to incorporate all
the roads which crossed it with the other claims.
At this period the appearance, looking down from the edge of
the mine on a moonlight night, was that of a ruined town, square
blocks standing up like towers, some high, others low, casting
their shadows on the deep cavities between, seeming to an onlooker
like the castellated remains of a deserted Eastern city. By day
the great excavation was filled by a busy multitude of men, black


and white, numbering, with those engaged outside, about this
time as many as 10,000 persons ; but to-day there are considerably
less than half this number engaged in the industry, as steam
power has supplanted manual labour in both washing and hauling
the diamondiferous soil.
Having sunk many claims some two hundred feet or more, diffi-
culties at first unforeseen arose. The sides of the mine, which
were composed of shale, locally styled “ reef,” were constantly
falling in on the blue ground, covering many claims over, some-
times to a great depth. This often entailed months of unprofit-
able labour to clear away; and then, again, water was constantly
collecting, and at one time work ceased for some months on this
account, the mine becoming a lake. Necessity caused the adop-
tion of improvements of all kinds, and the substitution of steam
pumps and hauling gear for the older machinery in time somewhat
alleviated the troubles. But as years went by these dangers grew
indirect ratio’to the depth sunk, and at the present time the
mine, which is now at the deepest part 500 feet beneath the level
of the surrounding country, is suffering from one of the constantly
recurring falls of reef, many thousands of tons every few months
sliding down and filling up spaces which had only just been cleared
away at enormous expense and much labour. The open system of
excavation has as yet been the only one attempted; shafts and
tunnels there are, but they are only used as a handier method of
raising the new ground to the surface. The mine having
originated in an upheaval of mud caused by volcanic action, and
being one solid mass and not running in veins, as in other mines,
no other means have as yet been devised of satisfactorily getting
the mineral, whilst avoiding the necessity of leaving the greater
bulk of the valuable matrix to support the sides of the mine.
In 1880-1 a speculative mania set in, which resulted in most of
the claims, which then belonged to comparatively few proprietors
(the latter having by purchase obtained possession of blocks),
being amalgamated and formed into several limited liability com-
panies, whose shares were immediately in great demand, and
forced up to a ridiculous premium, the end of which was panic
and insolvency to vast numbers of people throughout the colony,
and to this day the effects are being felt. To-day the mine pre-
sents a vastly different appearance from its aspect five or six years
ago j looking down from the roadway, which runs part of the way
round the edge, we see a vast hole, nearly circular and some 400
yards in diameter, and, gazing down, one grows dizzy at the tre-
mendous depth, and is struck with amazement to think that in
only thirteen years this enormous excavation has been made by
the energy of man. One smiles to think that a geologist, sent out
by Government, reported in the early days that the mine would
be worked out in a few months. Down below one sees hundreds
of men, seemingly only an inch or two high, breaking up the
“ blue ground” which has been blasted down by dynamite, and
piling it up in large iron tubs containing about half a ton,
which are drawn up an aerial wire tramway by stationary engines
on the surface. This “ blue ground” is then emptied into trucks
containing sixteen cubic feet, which are drawn along tramways to
large spaces called floors, where it is spread out and allowed to
“ weather,” and when reduced to a kind of granulated earth is
again collected and put through a large washing machine, where
it is converted into a thick, muddy water, which runs off and
forms great heaps of what are termed “ tailings.” All heavy sub-
stances are deposited at the bottom of the washing machine, and
among numerous other pretty stones the diamond is found. These
diamonds are of all shapes, colours, and sizes. The true form of
the crystal is octahedron, but every variety of shape is found ; the
colours also present great diversity, those of a yellowish tinge
being the commonest, purest white most valuable; black, brown,
and dull green and pink have also been met with. The sizes vary
from a pin’s head to a hen’s egg, the latter size being rarely seen.
Before closing this article we may mention that there are two
other mines in the “ Orange Free State,” one about 100 miles
and the other 70 miles distant from Kimberley. These are called
Jager’s Fontine and Koffy Fontine ; they are very little worked,
but produce stones excelling in whiteness and brilliancy any others
found in the world.
It is estimated that for every foot sunk of the entire superficial
area on the Kimberley mine alone, £lOO,OOO worth is obtained;
and the total production of all four mines for the half-year ending
-August 31, 1884, is as follows :—Kimberley, 283,780 carats; De
Beers, 220,642 carats j Du Toits Pan, 233,621 carats; Bultfontine,
271,785 carats j of a total value of .£1,357,725. So it will be seen
that, even when production in the chief mine is less than half its
normal amount, and is checked in the others by the unremunera-
tive rates now ruling for precious stones, the trade is still
enormous. Over 40 millions sterling worth has been realised by
these mines within the last fourteen years, and out of the total
exports of the Cape Colony; which are about 9 millions annually,
nearly half is represented by diamonds.
THE ABERDONIAN MINSTRELS’
ENTERTAINMENT.
OCTOBER 17 & 18, 1884.
Overture ... ... ... ... Band.
1. Good old Jeff ... ... ... ... Mr. Smith.
2. The Irish girl ... ... ... ... Mr. McCarthy.
3. The ground she walks upon ... ... Mr.Cullingford
4. Put me in my little bed ... ... ... Mr. Martin.
5. Mary Jane ... ... ... ... Mr. Doyle.
6. Oh! Dem golden slippers ... ... Mr. O’Brien.
7. Gum-tree canoe ... ... ... ... Mr. Cain.
8. O, Cary ... ... ... ... Mr. Stokes.
9. Lucy Crow ... ... ... ... Mr. Stewart.
10. The sporting man ... ... ... Mr. McCarthy.
11. A little more cider ... ... ... Mr. Westbrook.
12. There’s a smile that awaits me at home ... Mr. Hughes.
13. Bully boys ... ... ... ... Mr.Cullingford
14. Kiss me, mother... ... ... ... Mr. Cain.
15. Hallelujah ... ... ... ... Mr. O’Brien.
16. Cabin in the dell ... ... ... Mr. Stewart.
17. Dixey laud ... ... ... ... Mr. Hughes.
18. Song and dance ... ... ... ... Bros. Doyle.
19. Good-bye! farewell! ... ... ... Mr.Westbrook.
20. Sword dance ... ... ... ... Mr. Stewart.
21. Hottentot Family Messrs. Westbrook, Stewart & O’Brien.
God Save the Queen.
THE ABERDONIAN MINSTRELS.
This justly celebrated company of niggers gave their first enter-
tainment in aid of the various Seamen’s Charities this evening
(Friday). Notwithstanding the boisterous weather, a perfect
gale blowing, a very pleasant evening’s amusement was afforded to
the girls, who showed their appreciation of the black company’s
efforts by putting the handsome sum of £2 2s. 4Jd. into the plate
at the conclusion of the performance.
Mr. Taylor, our chief officer, and his men again showed their skill
in excluding the wintry blast, and making the after deck look as
comfortable as a modem music-hall.
Seven o’clock beheld such a galaxy of beauty assembled as to
scare away all bashful members of the rougher sex—at least so
thought our " chiel,” but he afterwards learnt that limited space
did not allow of all being accommodated on one evening; and it
is intended to repeat the entertainment for the benefit of the
married folk, who will be allowed to stray from the folds of “ Coup-
ling Fields ” through the “ Maiden’s Grove,” together with the
virtuous occupants of ", Spoony Villa,” and if their officers permit
it the hard-worked members of “Neptune’s” and “Vulcan’s”'
quarters.
A little time being allowed for the get-up of the Minstrels, we
had leisure to look around and see how nicely all was arranged.
A half-circle of chairs in front of footlights, capitally improvised
from meat tins with the side cut away, and candles placed therein ;
the audience forming a smiling phalanx of female loveliness,
dressed in its Sunday-going attire, the brightest gem of which,
shedding its brilliant lustre on all assembled, was our “ massive ”
and (unlike Gilbert’s “Lady Jane”) handsome Matron.
Presently a general titter announces the approach of the dusky
songsters, and behold our chief cook, in frills, exquisitively got
up, and a small brigand-like doll’s hat on the top of his (shall we
say “ big,” or grand ?) head, marshalling his black nightingales to-
the front. Oh! I say! a “ Eose ” from the audience—and this was
the general sentiment, for they had evidently “ got ’em all on.”


Bones and Snowball, tbe two corner-men, opened the proceedings
by a dance, followed by a score of songs, all fairly well sung,
especially the choruses, in which the whole of the company took
a part.
O’Brien and Westbrook were certainly the fun of the evening,
both for their songs and mimicry. “ Oh! dem golden slippers "
and “ Hallelujah ” by Bonos (O’Brien) were extremely amusing.
The songs w r ere interlarded with conundrums, tales, and dumb
show from the corner-men, more or less side-splitting. For in-
stance :
“In what are the Queen and single women alike ? ” “ Are they
not both blessed with an ‘ Osborne ’ ? ”
“ Why are the girls like their boxes ?” “ Because when taken
below they got too much ‘Bant’ (bent).”
This sally created roars of laughter, since both Matrons were
present.
Another good hit was this : “ Where would the Devil go if he
lost his tail ? ” “To a gin-shop, of course, where they ‘ retail ’ bad
spirits.”
A clog dance, by Mr. Doyle, was followed by a really good sword-
dance by the chief Stewart ” (wo think ; but it may have been
Miss P ), which brought forth rounds of applause. As we failed
to see Mr. Stewart .among the audience, we imagine he had made
some arrangement with that young lady for the loan of her attire.
The representation by this fair damsel, with Bones and Snowball,
of a Hottentot family, concludes the programme.
After the usual votes of thanks and general uproar of clapping and
cheering, the girls began to make their exit; and a man stationed at
the entrance of the hall received the bountiful offerings of the will-
ing and grateful dpnors, who thus showed that they sincerely sym-
pathised with the old salts, and the wives and children of those men
who, having braved the dangers of the deep, have found a watery
grave.
The Editor himself wishes to express his thanks to those members
of the crew and passengers who so heartily took upon themselves to
■entertain us so well this evening.
We publish, this week, a ballad written by one of the quarter-
masters, who apologises for sending matter not relating to this voyage ;
but we think its insertion justified by its referring to the “Aberdeen.”
LINES ON THE EXPLOSION ON BOAED THE S.S. “ ABEEDEEN,"
AT GEAVESEND, ON MARCH Ist, 18Si.
By Henry Wm. Campbell,
The s.s, “ Aberdeen,” of the famous White Star Line,
Who out of the Australian liners completely takes the shine;
On the 29th of February she left the East India dock.
And hundreds on the pier heads to see her there did flock.
As majestically she floated on old Thames* muddy breast.
With many a silent prayer from the pier head she was blest;
She towed away at half-past two, 'midst a hearty ringing cheer.
And at four p.m. brought up again, abreast of Gravesend pier.
At half-past one, next afternoon, our passengers did embark.
And at half-past two got under weigh, again to make a start;
Our visitors had left us, and gave a parting cheer,
Which we returned lustily as the steam-boat olf did sheer.
Still parting friends kept waving their 'kerchiefs, snowy white.
And fond adieus were fluttering until lost to sight j
When, just as dear kind memory past fond scenes brought to view,
A sad catastrophe happened, which caused us much ado,
A sound —*twas loud as thunder—was rung in every ear.
And each heart at the moment was filled with doubt and fear:
Yes! filled with doubt and fear, and direst of dismay.
For what had caused the trouble, not one on board could say.
It was but for a moment, for quickly I did spy
Our chief mate (now Captain Barclay), who to the bridge did fly;
For there presented to our gaze was a sad and smoking wreck.
And our brave and kind commander lay writhing on the deck.
Yes ! our much beloved commander, Matheson by name,
The pilot and our sec. mate, the shock did sorely maim;
The quarter-master also was injured in the eye;
The dust and smoke above them hung ’twixt them and the sky.
Pm sure the hardest heart at the sight did feel distressed.
But that heart suffered most who knew the sufferers best;
For a burnt, charred, disfigured mass was all we could define
Of our captain and our sec. mate, both men in manhood’s prime.
As I looked towards the bridge, when I first heard the sound,
I saw the third mate (Mr. Seward) in the air make a bound;
But Providence intervened, for he was landed safe
On the then weak and shattered bridge, his weight caused it to quike.
If e’er man should be thankful, I think myself it’s he.
For when I saw the others, they almost sickened me ;
Yet he received a scratch or two, was confounded by the'shock.
For I don’t believe he now could tell how oft the bridge he got.
stop ! stop ! the engines quickly, our chief mate he did cry;
And let her go astern and make fast to the huoy.
He shouted from the shattered "bridge—no telegraph was there.
For compass, wheel, and telegraph, in the explosion did disappear.
In a short time things were righted, we soon put out the fire ,
It was then one of another began for to enquire:
Oh ! what has made this havoc ? What’s caused this dreadful scene ?
The truth was soon unfolded, “ The blowing up of the magazine."
The wounded they were taken to the hospital on shore,
Bat, alas ! out of the four three of them are no more;
The pilot was the first to succumb to death's rude dart,
At half-past nine next morning his spirit did depart.
Late on the next evening, just as the day did close.
The second mate in his sleep of death peacefully did repose ;
We still hoped that our captain would recover and survive,
But, alas I our hopes were vain, at eleven next day he died.
May God, in His kind mercy, give to them heavenly rest,
And receive them in His mansion among the good and blest;
May He, too, extend His soothing hand to those they’ve left behind,
I mean their wives and children, dear Lord, to them be kind.
For they have received a dreadful blow, yet. Lord, the act was Yours ;
' Then grant them grace and strength, their hardship to endure;
And when their toil is ended in this unhappy sphere.
Take them. Lord, unto Thyself, and those they loved so dear.
CORRESPONDENCE.
A YIND[CATION OF “THE COMMON SAILOK.”
TO THE EDITOR OP THE ABEEDEEN TIMES.
Sir, —It is my desire, through the medium of your columns, to try
and acquit, or, in other words, refute, an ungenerous slander, termed
“ the common sailor.” I find, as a rule, all who permanently reside
on terra firma labour under the idea that all whose lot it is to have
to sail before the mast, and who are classed under the heading of
seamen, constitute a class of beings entirely different from themselves
—in fact, a species of amphibious bipeds—who were never nurtured
with a fond mother’s care; never were taught or instructed in the
holy doctrine of our Lord, by loving parents’ lips ; never had a child-
hood or boyhood; their merry laughter, on their return from
school at eve, never made that joyous music which gladdens a
parent’s heart; never were they then received with outstretched
arms, clasped to the bosom of a loving mother, and had the maternal
kiss of love imprinted on their youthful brows. Oh, no! Impossible !
Sailors never could have been brought up like that. They are only
the castaway waifs and strays of the lowest society. They know
nothing; everybody on shore can cheat and rob them in their busi-
ness transactions; in trading, they are so ignorant that for an
article worth sixpence the shopkeeper will ask two shillings and get
it from a sailor—the sailor being honest in his dealing with his
shipmates, never suspects anyone of cheating him on shore; nor does
he imagine himself “the flying fish among the dolphins,” until he
gets bit. From such suppositions I draw the conclusion that they
apply the word “ common,” as every sailor can be so easily cheated.
Well, I suppose there is not much harm in this term itself. No!
I admit it; but if a physiognomist (and it would not require a very
clever one) were to behold the facial changes of the “ he” or “ she”
making use of the expression, it would not take him long to deduce
the result. It is generally used with such a disdainful look, that
each contraction round the eyes would be capable of containing
enough venom to annihilate the whole fraternity of seamen, so angiy
was the look beheld, but a few days ago, on the face of a certain lady
on board this vessel, as she made use of the phrase “ common sailor.”
(God defend and keep seamen !) And this very woman (who may,
perhaps, in after years find one of her own sons numbered amongst
the common sailors) forgets that it is to the sailors who, under the
guidance of our able Commander and officers, she, for the present,
owes her safety —and that safety means life. She also forgets that
were it not for the common sailors she would not be now
nearing that land which, in her mind’s eye, is supposed to
be a land flowing with milk and honey. (I hope she
may not be disappointed.) I would also ask what would
England be were it not for her navies ?—the royal and commercial.
The seamen of England are her mainstay and strength. It is they,
and they alone, who have placed her on the highest pedestal pos-
sible for any country to rest upon. England without commerce is
like unto a ploughed field without com to sow therein. ■ Again,
what would those fashionable ladies (as also those of an humbler
caste, who ape the ways of the upper world) do were it not for
the sailor, who, voyage after voyage, must go to the further
extremities of the habitable globe to furnish them with the finery


(silks, &c., &c.) to deck their persons f " Fine feathers make fine
birds ” is a proverb not inapplicable in a great many instances.
They also forget that to obtain all these luxuries and necessaries
of life, not only for covering the body, but also for sustaining it,
the poor sailors ofttimes risk—yea, and how many lose—their lives
undergoing privations almost impossible to describe. Standing
oft on the very threshold of eternity, he can gaze on that abyss of
darkness calmly until lo! the mind—how fleet and expansive it is
when death threatens —can be at home in a moment, where, per-
haps, he parted from wife and children, father and mother, sisters
and brothers, and many others who are dear to him (and few love
with a warmer heart than Jack). It is then he sees the form of
death, in all its ghastliness, and for the sake of once again seeing
those loved ones, he will fight boldly to conquer (or nobly perish
in the effort) the elements (the hand engines of destruction of
the Lord), wind, fire or water; he will work with that untiring
energy and persevering hardihood which is every day exemplified
by the British sailor. Few you will find more generous than the
sailor when appealed to in the cause of humanity, and yon will
find few bolder when danger threatens. Look, for instance, at our
fire brigade-—who do they want as members? Why, sailors, of
course; for too well they know that but few others can be found
who will fill a station where life and death are so closely allied
better than they can.
I will now ask if it is just or fair that a class of men (some, to
my knowledge, of as respectable a descent as many who fill posi-
tions of a far more lucrative nature; yes, some of the same
family! I have seen a minister before to-day come to see bis
brother, who happened to be like myself, before the mast) should
be branded with that expression, which to a seaman is a gross
and gratuitous insult ? I will admit that ofttimes, and there are
exceptions to all rules (as the song goes, " Jack’s come home to-
day”), after a long voyage, on our first landing it takes but little
to upset a man, when, of course, the gazing public may .at once
designate us “ a drunken lot.”
But let mfe give a word of advice to all you people here on
board: Be careful someone does not sing “Jack’s come home
again ” on seeing some of you rolling up George-street, Sydney.
As also the Sydney people are rather exacting in their attentions
when they observe any persons trying to kick off the heel of the
left boot with the right, I’ll again say be careful.
Hoping the lady who was so kind as to make use of the objec-
tionable expression in my hearing will kindly peruse this, and
give it that consideration which it may merit, and trusting in the
future she may not judge us so harshly as
“ The dirty common sailors,”
I will subscribe myself.
Yours respectfully.
H. W. C.
The happy mother of the noble boy bom last Monday has
intimated to the Editor that she wishes him to be named
Eobert Aberdeen Huxtable Bums.


The Aberdeen Times.
" When pound, make a note of.”— Capt. Cuttle.
Yol. I.— No. 7.]
At Sea, Friday, Octobee 24, 1884.
C Registered for trans-
mission aboard.
NOTICES.
The Editor is glad to announce the hearty reception which his
proposal to print the Aberdeen Times has met.
No fewer than 350 have already subscribed. For convenience
of payment, the subscriptions may be handed in to -the School-
master, who has kindly undertaken to enter names and amount in
a book. Miss Eose will doubtless oblige us by doing the same in
her compartment. The address, if known, of your Australian
home must be given. Those who have no friends, or who do not
know to what part they may be going, must address to
Fred. E. Johnson,
Care of G. F. Wise, Esq.,
Macquarie Street Depflt, Sydney, N.S.W.,
Within eight days after our arrival, sending the name of some
place where their copy of the Times may be sent in order to find
them, and if postage be needed, enclosing amount.
GENERAL ELECTION, 1884.
Boeouoh of Aberdeen.
S.S. “ Aberdeen,” Oct. 24, 1884.
To the passengers and crew of the steamship “ Aberdeen,”
electors, burgesses, and citizens.
"We, the co-editors of the Abeedeek Times, think that before
parting with our “Aberdonian” friends, there should be some
expression of political sympathy, and, therefore, offer ourselves as
candidates for the representation of the s.s. ‘‘ Aberdeen,” in the
Parliament of King Neptune, in the Liberal and Conservative
interests respectively, without, however, committing ourselves
fully to the politics of those parties. An attentive reading of the
two addresses enclosed will enable you to vote straight for either
of the candidates.
Eobt. N. Eothwell.
Peed. E. Johnson.
Dieections foe Yotino.
All persons above the age of 15 years, having arrived at years
of discretion, may vote.
Having fully considered the weighty interests at stake, you
must decide for which party you are going to declare; and then,
on a slip of paper, afford the particulars, as example appended :
Name Tom Thumb
Age 21
Nationality Irish
Name of Candidate Eothwell or Johnson.
And having done this, fold the slip up, and give it to Constable
Carwardine, who will bring them to the Dispensary.
Tuesday morning has been fixed for the balloting.
Stokes, the hospital assistant, will be stationed at the top of the
port alleyway, on Tuesday, at 2 p.m., to receive the votes of the
forward compartments.
THE DOMINIONS OF KING NEPTUNE.
GENERAL ELECTION, 1884.
Boeouoh of Abebdeen.
Ladies and gentlemen,—lt is with some diffidence that I offer
myself as a candidate for election in the Conservative (Liberal
Conservative) interest. Without further preamble I will give my
opinion upon current topics, and leave you to judge between myself
and that representative of the most fruitful cause of England’s
present condition —shame abroad and ridicule at home.
I.—Although I have addressed myself to the female sex in this
an election, under peculiar circumstances, do not suppose that I
sympathise with female suffrage. No! Let woman fulfil her mis-
sion, and rear men to vote; but on no account let her enter the
political arena herself.
2. —I think the House of Lords a necessary check upon the
Crown and Commons.
3. —I believe in the existence of a privileged class—that is, one
removed from the ordinary cares of life —which can devote itself
entirely to the study of politics.
4. —The time, in my opinion, has not yet arrived when a more
liberal extension of the franchise would be justified. The next
generation, better educated in its political rights, will doubtless
benefit from such legislation.
5. —The Liberal Government, in their present Egyptian policy,
are dilatory and luke-warm; and should either retire to make way
for better men, or else expedite some measure for the settlement
of this by no wise difficult question.
6. —The increasing local taxation, greatly due to the extrava-
gance of the school boards, is only to be met by retrenchment and
adaptation of means to ends. Teach ploughboys to plough, and
not to speak French.
7. —The city of London needs reform; but we must bear in
mind that before pulling down an old and withal good building,
we must first erect an equally substantial new one, and this has
not yet been done.
8. —I must not waste your time in asking your advocacy of such
a self-evident benefit as compulsory vaccination.
9. —The redistribution of seats deserves our earnest considera-
tion ; but in a country where towns rise and fall so rapidly,
would it be wise to grant additional members ?
I am, ladies and gentlemen.
Tours respectfully.
FRED. E. JOHNSON.
GENERAL ELECTION.
Boeouoh op Abeedeen.
Ladies and gentlemen,—ln coming before a constituency such
as this, where all nationalities and all classes are combined, I feel
that I am treading dangerous ground in advocating those
advanced principles which are only now beginning to exercise the
minds of men. But feeling sure that the righteousness of my
cause and the triumph of my principles will, in some measure,
tend to alleviate some of the wrongs under which society suffers,
I boldly display the banner on which my tenets are inscribed, and
trust they will prove acceptable to the suffrages of the majority.
I am, ladies and gentlemen.
Faithfully yours,
R. N. ROTHWELL.
A. I would support any just measure brought forward by either
party for the following purposes :
1. —Abolition of the House of Lords.
2. ~ „ State supported Church.
3. ~ „ private holding of land.
4. ~ „ all Customs dues.
5. „ „ City Guilds.
6. —To establish a Eepublican Government.
7. „ ~ National Emigration Department.
8. „ „ Powerful Army and Navy.
9. „ ~ single Government for London.
10. „ „ Eeciprocity and Fair Trade.
11. „ „ Federation of Empire.
12. ~ ~ more Colonies.
13. „ „ severer Punishments for robbery with violence-
-14. —For reducing punishment for small theft.
15. ~ „ School Board Expenditure.
16. —,, „ reorganising the Magistracy.


Friday, October 17, to Friday, October 24.
Lat.
Long.
List.
Saturday
40.39
69.26E
320
Sunday
40.23
75.10
264
Monday
40.3
82.13
325
Tuesday
39.39
88.52
306
Wednesday
39.24
95.19
310
Thursday
39.27
100.56
262
Friday
39.31
...
107.41
266
Total distance for week
• ••
2053
SHOW OF WORK.
By permission of the Matrons, the work done by the single
women during the passage will be placed on view on the quarter-
deck in the afternoon of Tuesday, Oct. 28. The parents of the
girls only admitted.
FAREWELL CONCERT.
We are endeavouring to arrange a programme for Tuesday
evening (Oct. 28), at which time we shall be nearing Sydney, and
it will, therefore, partake of the nature of a farewell entertain-
ment. Our musical friends must do their utmost to make this
last a grand success.
DISTRIBUTION OF PRIZES.
Dr. Huxtable will distribute prizes to all the school children
who have attended regularly during the voyage, on Wednesday
afternoon next (Oct. 29). Recitations and songs, by the pupils,
will be given.
Parents of children and single women allowed on the quarter-
deck.
We trust the babies will not be left entirely in the background,
but that Captain Barclay will institute and patronise a show of
the pickaninnies.
SYDNEY SUPPLEMENT.
This, dated from Saturday, will be placed in the hands of our
readers at an early date; and we should recommend careful
perusal, and, in some cases at least, acceptation of advice therein
given.
For the credit of the ship we must urge the free use of soap,
sand, and holystone upon tables, forms, the deck, and on the mess
utensils. Let it not go forth that the “ Aberdeen” was in any
way behind its predecessors in cleanliness and order.
Aberdeen Court, Oct. 24.
It is now rather late in the day to regret the paucity of contri-
butions sent to the Editor, for as one of our Irish friends re-
marked, “ ’Tis of no avail to plead poverty where no remedy is to
be had but we certainly do deplore the fact that, excepting in a
few cases of correspondence and two contributions, we have been
left unaided in the running of this venture. The past week has
been characterised by its monotony and lack of anything to fix it
in our minds, and the Editor finds it somewhat difficult to say any-
thing which may distinguish it from others. By a glance over
the log which we publish below, we see that some of our best runs
have been made this week, on account of the stiff breeze and fre-
quent squalls; and our engineer’s mess has revelled over its bottle
of champagne almost daily, for the captain makes it a rule to pro-
vide this mirth-giving wine on those days when the run exceeds
300 miles.
LOG FOR THE WEEK.
THE VOYAGE.
So little is there to chronicle that the capture of a Cape pigeon
is quite an event in our " chiefs” experience of this week. This
pretty bird, too bold, got entangled in the meshes laid for him by
our wily sportsman, and was by a thread drawn aboard. Its legs
were quite weak, and evidently had never been used to pedestrian
exercise; nor did the motion of the ship agree with it, for it was
as sick as the worst of us in the Bay of Biscay. He was, however,
released, and flew swiftly away from the ship. On Sunday we
stopped between the hours of 9 and 10 a.m. to pack the high-
pressure cylinder.
The remainder of the week up to Thursday was exceedingly
rough, the girls beingkept below; and it any stray one did happen
to venture on deck it was only to fall and to give amusement to
the lucky fellows having sea legs, or a sea would be shipped and
give them an unlooked-for bath.
Frequent showers of hail, rain, snow, and sleet occurred; but on
Thursday the wind altered, the sea moderated, and the cold
became less intense, so much so that we felt justified in asking
those ladies and gentlemen who had formed the list of singers for
the concert announced to take place on October 15, but which was
indefinitely postponed through stress of weather, to take their
part on this (Thursday) night, the result being a most successful
CONCERT.
In the unavoidable absence of Captain Barclay and Dr. lluxtable,
the chair was taken by our Dispenser, Mr. Johnson. ' The
harmonium was placed at the disposal of the performers in
lieu of the pianoforte, which is too heavy and troublesome to move
up the narrow companion-way from the saloon. The proceedings
opened with a duet—“ Par away”—by Misses Kinghom and
Pickering, which was very pleasantly rendered. The former
young lady was called upon no less than five times to display her
talent before an appreciative audience. The " Wild Waves” and
“ Bonny Woods” received their share of applause, and the affect-
ing duet, “ When ye gang awa, Jamie,” sung when mated with Mr.
Taylor, fairly brought down the house. “ Whistle, and I’ll come
to ye, my lad,” exhausted this lady’s portfolio. “ Barney O’Hea,”
that impudent favourite of Miss Robinson's, was warmly encored,
and we regret not having had the pleasure of hearing her at pre-
vious concerts. The forward compartments were well represented
by Mrs. Shakspere and Mrs. McCorquodale, with Messrs. Cain,
Marrs, Hughes, and McCorquodale. All these performed their
selections to the evident satisfaction of the listeners; but special
mention should be made of the excellent manner in which the
“ Bridgekeeper’s Story” was told by Mr. Marrs. The irrepressible
little “ Scot,” Miss McKenzie, again gave us some of her delight-
ful and amusing anecdotes by way of readings. “ Juanita” and
" The lover and the bird” were well received, as any song sung
by Miss Ward deserves to be. The usual cheers terminated a
pleasant entertainment.
Friday, October 24, 1884. —This day opened with seemingly no
prospect of any extraordinary amusement. Judge our surprise
when a notice was posted up announcing a
“ SPELLING BEE,”
The hive being set up on the quarter-deck, where the bees assembled
at 2.30 to imbibe whatever of honey may be found in a “Johnson’s ”
Dictionary.
Considering the celerity with which this entertainment was
arranged, it proved a marvellous success. Dr. Huxtable and the
Captain were the j udges, with Dr. Grant as referee.
Some thirty odd bees swarmed around the flowers of literature ;
the drones idly listen and laugh at the blunders of any
unfortunate speller. Very simple words were given for the first
round, gradually increasing in difficulty, until several of the girls-
had three or more crosses to their names, when they were weeded
out. The “survival of the fittest” was the order of the day; and
this process of selection soon left us with some half-dozen demure
maidens. We apologise, “Fair Maid of Perth;” thou, at least,
wast not spiritless. Even “ bloater,” though it failed to overthrow
you, overturned the forms of your neighbours.
Miss Salter was now declared “ Queen Bee,” and her subjects.
Misses Keatly, Cox, Will, McKeogh, and McKenzie, wore 2nd,
3rd, 4th, sth, and 6th prize winners.
The prizes were one sovereign, half a sovereign, and six shillings,
in purses; four shillings, a carved sandal-wood card-case, and a
bottle of Florida Water, which the winner (Gutty Purky) regretted
was not wine.
The prize of the day was awarded to Bessie R , who, in
her anxiety to gain a reputation as an orthographer, carried off a
feeding-bottle and a dozen teats by way of consolation.
The Captain, incited by the marvellous execution of hard words,
offered Misses Salter and Keatly—the first and second prize win-
ners—a sovereign it either of them wrote from his dictation a cer-
tain paragragh correctly, to wit:—


“ A harassed pedlar met an embarrassed cobbler in a cemetery,
gauging the symmetry of a lady’s ankle with unparalleled
ecstasy.”
This proved too much for the efforts of the fair victors, who retired
defeated with four and seven errors respectively.
In the evening the chairman of the “ Aberdonian Minstrels” led
his troupe to the back (astern) —by this we mean on the quarter-deck
—where, decked in costumes motley, our black-faced entertainers
once more used their untiring efforts on behalf of the charities. If
the appreciation of the audience, composed of married folk and
single men, may be judged from the noise they made, wo must
conclude that a very enjoyable evening was spent. The performance
was, except in one or two jokes, the same as described in our
previous criticism. The amount collected was 13s. 2d., making a
total of £2 15s. 7d. for the two evenings.
WHY DO WE EMIGRATE?
We are now nearing our journey’s end, and only two more copies
of the Times are fated to see the light, and as it has been suggested
that a few words would be appropriate, setting forth some of the
reasons why wo emigrate, before its pages are finally closed, we
hasten to adopt the hint. We must necessarily confine our remarks
to a few lines; but the problems opened out by the question are of
such an expansive field that many tomes would be inadequate to fully
answer the query, even if written by a lucid and brilliant economist.
As the greater number of passengers on board of this vessel are
natives of the United Kingdom, we will confine our attentions, as
far as possible, to affairs concerning them j although, in some degree,
the same questions are raised, the same effect produced, in other
lands.
We may well ask why we emigrate. The vast majority would
answer, if questioned, because we cannot obtain work at home;
others would say wages are unremunerative; others, the old country
is played out; and others, because they hear of aland flowing with
milk and honey, where wages are high, and where there is work for
all who wish it. A few would say, on account of ill-health.
We will now endeavour to find reasons why this lack of employ-
ment at home, and why there is not plenty for all, and how it is
that some 200,000 persons have to quit their native shores annually
for distant colonies.
The nineteenth century has been more prolific in the invention
of labour-saving machinery of all descriptions than was ever the
case in the world’s history ; steam and electricity—those mighty
giants who daily perform such miraculous works in the manufac-
ture and distribution of every necessity and comfort of modern
civilisation —have been subdued to the service of man, not only
increasing the productive power to an extent undreamt of a cen-
tury ago, but also in a great degree reducing the cost of living, and
enabling a large proportion of the masses to obtain luxuries
formerly unknown or out of their reach. Yet it is doubtful
whether there has been any real gain to the people by these same
inventions. Work is just as hard, hours just as long, and the life
led in all manufacturing towns much more unhealthy than was
the case some four score years ago, and yet the contrary result to
this ought to have been effected. This can readily be seen by
.applying the case of a farmer of the present day, by way of example.
He can, by the use of steam and improved agricultural implements,
plough the ground, sow, and reap his crops with an expenditure of
•only half his former labour, and yet, strange to say, the agricultural
labourer is in no degree benefited; in fact, the body of them
are placed at a disadvantage; finding that the use of
machinery has rendered their services unnecessary, they crowd
into the large towns, and, as political economists will inform us,
find more “ profitable employment ” there. This more profitable
employment is especially noticeable to any observer who chooses
to seek out what it is. In London it usually commences at the
waterside warehouses and docks; here, gathered round great
gates, are to be seen any morning large crowds of ragged, shivering,
starving bags of skin and bone, looking more like packs of raven-
ous wolves than human beings ; these wretched creatures were,
many of them, agricultural labourers, and they are awaiting very
anxiously to be employed at the rate of sixpence per hour for a
portion of a day. Some twenty per cent, of these “miserables”
will have their desire; the remainder will starve for that day—he
is a happy man who can earn 15s. per week at this work, which is
such that it would tear a strong man in good health to pieces in a
few months. The end of this employment is the workhouse. As
the banner of a procession of a Kentish Labour Union so justly
showed forth, “ We grow the wheat, but eat no bread. We grow
the hops, but get no beer!” We cannot vouch for the accuracy
of the latter clause. Now it necessarily follows that the bulk of the
profit obtained by the use of labour-saving machinery (the gene-
ral public get a small advantage in reduced prices) must go into
the pocket of the landowners, who can, of course, let their farms
at increasing rentals, proportionately to the lessened cost of pro-
duction ; thus the ingenuity of some poor man in perfecting some
invention only operates against his own class. Perhaps he per-
sonally may gain fortune, but it will be at the expense of his fel-
lows. It will produce exactly the same effect whether it be an
improvement in farming or manufacturing machinery: it will result
in great profits to the few and lower wages to the many.
And now we will proceed to find out how these landowners
came into the possession of the people’s property, and how the
inheritance of millions was stolen from our ancestors.
As we all know, after the Norman Conquest, and in the succeed-
ing centuries, the whole of England was divided out and given to
various favourites and ecclesiastical bodies (might in those days
taking the place of right, as in the present) ; but these grants in no
way interfered with the cultivation of the soil, as all that was
demanded of the people was service as retainers in case of need,
and the barons or other dignitaries were, in their turn, bound to
supply the King (as representing the nation) with a certain number
of armed men in time of war. The monasteries supplied religious
education, medicine, and alms to the sick and helpless, and as a
rule stood in place of the modern hospital and workhouse. As in
these days, all land was common, unenclosed, and free to all.
The people obtained a quid pro quo from the barons in being pro-
tected from invasion, and from the monasteries obtaining help in
times of trouble, all of which was absolutely necessary. Tithes,
and other iniquitous taxes upon labour, were introduced, which, if
they had been paid into a common fund for the protection of the
commonwealth, would have been justifiable, as law and order must
in every community be maintained.
In the reign of Henry YIII. the barons and other landowners
first began enclosing the estates, which, instead of reverting
to the Crown, as they did when originally granted, had now
become the possessions of the landholders, the estates, having
passed from father to son for many generations, had at last
passed out of the hands of the people, thus establishing two
injustices, the law of primogeniture, and the right of individuals to
seize the inheritance of unborn generations. As no considerable
tract of country was enclosed at one time, and there being still a vast
extent of common land and a small population to live upon it, the
effects of these annexations was of course not felt by the bulk of the
people. The spoliation of the monasteries by the Defender of the
Faith, and the handing over of the enormous lands attached thereto
to a number of Court favourites, gave another blow to the liberties
of the people. Crime and immorality were passwords to fortune and
estate, as they have been down to the commencement of the present
Queen’s reign. The histories of all our great families form an interest-
ing study to anyone who wishes to read the future by means of the
past; the seeds of crime are bearing and will bear bitter fruit.
The Long Parliament, however, struck the most fatal blow at the
people’s rights by abolishing military tenures (that is, holding land
on condition of performing and paying for military services), and
substituting in lieu thereof taxes upon imports and exports, thus sur-
rendering the last hold the people had on the landowners, and taking
upon themselves the expense of defending that land, a great deal of
which was not now theirs. As time went on more kings and more
favourites had to be provided for, and more common land had to be
enclosed. Kent had taken the place of tithes, and landholding had
become a most profitable pursuit, especially as increasing population
rendered this land still more valuable. The accessions of the four
first blackguards of Europe to the English throne brought -with
them whole trains of starving place-hunters, who had to be fed, and
they were fed, at the expense of the English peasantry. It is the
pride and boast of England that her constitution is better'than that
of any country in the world, and that it could not be improved upon.
In our opinion the pride is false, and the boast empty rhodomontade.
We talk of liberty and the free people of England, when we know


that the great majority are to all intents and purposes slaves, not
having even the power to vote.
Previous to the passing of the Reform Bill, both Lords and Com-
mons consisted almost exclusively of landowners, who with easy
consciences passed bills filching the people’s property and enriching
themselves. Even to-day Parliament is little better than a nest of
landlords; and we talk of the Commons as a representative institution,
when we know that the persons it represents are not the people of
England, but a select few, numbering some twelfth part of the whole.
The House of Commons was intended to be the protector of the
people’s rights; it has proved to be the reverse; selfishness and
corruption, with abject servility and flunkeyism to royalty, have
been during the past century its chief characteristics. It is this
same Commons that saddled the British nation with a debt of
some 700 millions; and not thinking this a sufficiently heavy millstone,
hit upon the device of granting perpetual pensions to a number of
persons, who if they had lived in the present generation would have
been refused admittance into any decent society.
Having despoiled the people of their land, and having thus
practically deprived them of their means of living, and finding the
multitude of starving and semi-starving people ever on the increase, the
landlords and richer classes who live on the masses recommend the
unhappy ones to emigrate—to become exiles. Very little different,
this, from a sentence of transportation, which a few years ago was
considered punishment next to the capital one. Emigration being
recommended by the landowners in order to render their position
safe, as the vast crowd of paupers, if allowed to grow much larger,
would create such an element of danger, that their position would
be untenable, one would suppose that they would supply the means
of opening the safety-valve, by providing the money wherewith to
send the people abroad; but no! they advise thrift, and tell the poor
to save out of their miserable wages enough to quit their country, or
allow some colony to provide for their conveyance with money
which is borrowed from the landlords and on which they obtain good
interest, which the emigrant has to pay in the form of taxes in the
colony.
It may not generally be known that in the United Kingdom as
many as 150,000,000 people —four times the present population —could
find a comfortable living, if the injustice in private property in land
were done away with. At present some 30,000 landlords have the
legal right to turn into the streets four-fifths of the entire popu-
lation of the British Isles.
The Victorian era has been undoubtedly the most prosperous
that England has ever seen, and this prosperity has been ascribed
to the operation of what has been humorously called “ Free Trade.”
“■ Free Trade” is a levying of dues on certain productions that
cannot be grown in England, and the admittance free of duty of
all manufactured goods than can be made at home. Now, the
real cause of this prosperity has been due to a series of lucky acci-
dents, the principal ones being the discovery of steam, the opening
up of the vast territories incorporated in the British dominions,
and the finding of the enormous gold and silver deposits in Aus-
tralia and America. The discovery of steam as a motive power
gave to England that predominant position as a manufacturer for
all nations which she has held up to the present time, but which
she is now fast losing. Germany, Belgium, France, and America
have each proved within the last twelve years that they are not
only capable of supplying their own wants, but those of other
nations as well; and even India is now producing enough of the
rougher cloths to supply home wants. It is said Bombay
resembles a second Manchester. England, with her extensive coal
and iron deposits, is rapidly losing her grand position, other
•countries having found equally large supplies of the same
minerals ; and it is this cause, combined with the injustice of the
present land tenure, which has caused the commercial depression
which hangs so heavily, like a cloud, over the British Isles. Great
competition is engendered by the ever-increasing population, and
as a consequence rates of wages are low, and the difficulty of find-
ing employment is enhanced. The last decade has been marked
by constantly declining prices in all values, and probably this
year and last have witnessed lower quotations for all articles of
■commerce, both in raw material and manufactured goods, than has
■ever been known; wages also have touched the lowest limit ever
recorded. The enormous depreciation in all securities is exempli-
fied by the Stock Exchange returns for 1883, which exhibit a
•decline in value of all stocks quoted of six millions sterling.
although in the year capital has been added to the extent of 150
millions, thus showing a total loss of 156 millions. England is
said to he the richest country in the world, yet by far the larger
proportion of the inhabitants find it no easy matter to earn a live-
lihood, and one million actual paupers are supported by the in-
dustry of others.
There is hut one remedy for this—restitution of the land to its
rightful owners. This can he done without in any way disturbing
the present occupants; rent, instead of being paid to landlords,
will revert to the Government, who will raise revenue by this
means solely. The landlord will still have left to him the
improvements on land, such as dwelling-houses, barns, irrigation
works, &c. The entire rent of all lands will produce enough
annually to provide funds sufficient to banish poverty from the
land Poor rates, customs, excise duties, and taxes of all other
descriptions would be abolished, and ease and comparative afflu-
ence would accrue to all. Hours of labour would be relatively
short, as machinery, instead of being a curse, would prove a
blessing; every new invention would tend to ease the sweat of the
brow, and not, as at present, enrich those who neither toil nor
spin. Scotland suffers more than England in land monopoly, large
tracts of country being converted into deer forests and parks by
American millionaires and British cotton-lords; as a consequence,
the sons and daughters of Scotia are displaced, and emigrate. But
the country that has suffered most is that foully wronged, slan-
dered, and misrepresented isle, “ Poor Quid Oireland!” Here
700 years of tyranny and despotism of English rule have left their
mark; abject poverty is to be seen everywhere, and a powerful
military police rides roughshod over the discontented and justly
rebellious people. The reason that a country which was much
more advanced and enlightened at the commencement of the
Christian era than England herself has been reduced to its present
deplorable state, is not far to find. The whole profits of labour, in
the form of rent, for centuries has been extorted from groaning
millions, by means of sword and bloodshed, and spent by absentee
landlords in any other country but their own. These landlords
are mostly the descendants of the English conquerors. This
accounts for there being no capital in Ireland. Without labour
capital is not produced—it is the profits of labour. Capital being
continuously extracted from Ireland and expended elsewhere, no
fund has been collected in the course of years by which improve-
ments in agriculture or manufactures could be accomplished; and
it is surprising that a country which has borne so many years of
terrible oppression should still be in a high state of civilisation—
it is a wonder that it has not relapsed into barbarism. A country
that has supported a population of seven millions now finds as
much difficulty in maintaining five millions; this shows evidence
of decay. Injustice to Ireland has ever been the policy of Eng-
lish Ministers. Why Home Buie should not be granted, when it is
undoubtedly the demand of the populace, we cannot understand.
The colonies, Channel Islands, and the Isle of Man testify that the
notion of the unity of the empire being destroyed by local self-
government is false, and it is only prejudice and the power which
landowners exercise at Westminster that refuses this justice to
Ireland. As for the other claims advocated by the Land League,
they are, on the face of them, almost as unjust as the present sys-
tem of landlordism. The demand of the League is for the soil to
be surrendered to a large number of farmers, who will become in
their turn landlords on a small scale ; this will only create another
injustice in substitution of the older one. The land is the pro-
perty of all—not of a select few; let this be clearly understood—
not of a select few !
We hope the above arguments will make clear the principal
cause of our emigrating. Few in this vessel can be called
labourers in the ordinary sense of the word; but all the classes
above suffer on account of their poverty, and give up the struggle
in the old country to try the new, simply because we are defrauded
of our inheritance. In the Australian colonies the same monopo-
lisation of land is being carried on, thus robbing unborn genera-
tions of what is theirs. The hands of the toilers there are enfran-
chised ; let the voters see the wrong is righted, and that in future
all lands shall be leased only from the Government, to whom they
shall revert on expiry.
To extirpate poverty and bring comfort to the masses, we must
establish a Republican Government, federate the empire if possible.


establish a commercial union with the United States, and, above
all, dispense with private property in lands.
Such useless extravagance and remains of savagery as royalty
would naturally pass away; vice and corruption of all kinds would
diminish ; the desire to acquire rapid fortune would not manifest
itself, as, having no fear of poverty, we should take no heed of tho
morrow —what we shall eat, what we shall drink. Every man
would know that there was work for all and ease and plenty in old
age and sickness, and that when death overtook him his children
would not want.
Most of the ideas promulgated here emanate from that wonder-
ful genius, Henry George, who has within the last few years
startled the world withhis grand and wonderful work, “ Progress
and Poverty.” The author of this book is destined to shine
through forthcoming centuries as one of the most enlightened
apostles of that crusade which was first preached in Palestine by
the only Euler of Princes, some 1800 years ago.
CORRESPONDENCE.
TO THE EdiTOE OP THE ABERDEEN TIMES.
Sib, —Having perused the Aberdeen Times for this week ending
October 18,1 was certainly astonished to read the phrase used by
some person, evidently in the single women’s department, “a
common sailor.” Would it be possible for you to insert the name
of the person in the Times who applied such words to our jolly tars?
I, for my part, think it utter ignorance of any person to use such a
term when speaking of sailors especially, as we must all begin at
the bottom of the ladder ere we can expect to reach the top. We
may say we owe our commerce and the import and export of all
goods to and from other countries to our sailors. They are a
“ community” to be respected, severed as they are from home and
all loving ties to brave the dangers of the deep, only hoping to
return and find all unaltered. The efforts of our Captain and crew
to land us at our destination in safety, and the trouble they have
had to make us comfortable throughout our voyage, deserves great
commendation, especially from the single women. Hoping the
person will take a lesson by perusing the Times,
I am, yours respectfully.
A SINGLE WOMAN.
[We do not know the girl who made use of the epithet referred
to.— Ed.]


THE SYDNEY SUPPLEMENT
TO
The Aberdeen Times.
“ When found, make a note op.”— Capt. Cuttle.
C Registered for trans-
mlaslon aboard.
Yol. I.—No. B.]
At Sea, Saturday.
-, October 25, 1884.
The position of the “Aberdeen” on the chart is now just abreast
of the westernmost point of Australia—Cape Leuwin; and we
think it a most opportune moment to bring out this special edition
of the Time*, treating, as it does, of the land to which we are
bound, and which now lies about 300 miles to our left.
Allow the Times to forerun the engines, and prepare you in
some little degree for the time to come. We shall endeavour, in
as few words as possible, to give an idea of Australia, more
especially of New South Wales and its resources; also to advise
you as to conduct, and what to expect on your first arrival in
Sydney.
The Editor will only be too happy to answer any questions
about any thing or place, and to give fuller particulars to the
best of his ability. •
After passing King George’s Sound in the distance, we enter
the great Australian Bight, or antipodal Bay of Biscay, for in
general characteristics it is not unlike that terror of the Atlantic.
The country running along its shore is wild and uncultivated,
until the territory of South Australia is reached, where vines,
olives, and all good things flourish.
Cape Otway will be the first land sighted from our ship, and
then we cross the entrance to Port Phillip, and see Wilson’s
Promontory. Our course is now N.E., and we soon behold Cape
Howe, the easternmost extremity of the continent. Thence until
we reach Sydney Heads the course is direct North, and we see the
land almost the whole way. Do not let the aspect of this land
dishearten you; it certainly looks cold, sandy, rugged, and bare,
but within it contains mines of wealth, not only on the surface,
but buried deep in its bosom. If we make Sydney Heads at
night, what will strike us most is the brilliant electric light on
the South Head, almost too intense for the safety of ships. The
illumination is so dazzling it almost blinds one; and the darkness
which follows is appalling. Better let us hope we approach this
haven of rest in the daylight, and see before us all the glories of
this eastern paradise. We understand that our Commander,
Captain Barclay, takes upon himself the double responsibility of
piloting his own, ship into harbour and of commanding her;
otherwise a pilot would board us some distance from the Heads.
The entrance is very narrow, and so land-locked is Port Jackson,
that Captain Cook passed it by after naming it, thinking it
only an anchorage for small boats. However, as soon as we
get within, this idea is dispelled, and a panorama opens out
before us unparalleled by anything in the known world. On our
right we pass Manly Beach, situated on a tongue of land forming
the North Head, and having good beaches looking to both land
and sea. Opposite Manly opens a wide estuary. Middle Harbour,
unused for shipping. On our left we see Watson’s Bay and the
South Head Lighthouse, a favourite holiday resort of Sydneyites.
We are surprised at the number of gay pleasure-boats plying up
and down the stream, and it warms our hearts to hear the happy
holiday-making colonials welcome us in their midst with loud and.
long huzzas as they pass. We now steam between two most lovely
banka until we reach Neutral Bay, which looks upon that Sydney
clerk’s paradise, the North Shore; and Garden Island in mid-stream
lies between us and the most opulent and beautiful suburb of
Sydney, Darling Point. Our anchor goes here, and presently the
Medical Officer comes aboard, and if we remain in our present
condition we shall soon obtain pratique—that is, a clean bill of
health.
Should it be day time, and early, that well-cared for portion of
emigrants (the single women) will be taken on shore at once; As
it is our intention to say a few words to each of the three classes—
single women, married people, and single men—we will commence
with the unattached females.
Under the care of the Matrons they will bo conducted through
the streets of Sydney, probably by way of the Domain or Park.
As they are passing along, mayhap somewhat downcast, they will
hear from the passers-by many expressions of sympathy and en-
couragement, to cheer them on.
The Maequarie-street depot, which is to be their home for some
days, has had a remarkable history. It stands at the top of
King-street, a barrack-like abode, in a most prominent position,
and is one of the oldest buildings in Sydney. It was built as a
convict house, and we hear that at various times it has done duty
as a hospital barracks, and is now an asylum for the reception of
decrepit old age, a portion being set aside for new comers. It is


under the charge of Mrs. Hicks, who in geniality and goodness
is the counterpart of the Plymouth Matron. At the depfit a girl is
safely housed until her friends claim her, or until she obtains
employment, the regime being very similar to that at Plymouth.
The day after landing the friends of those girls fortunate
enough to have any call at the depflt, and after establishing their
identity to the satisfaction of Mr. Wise, the emigration officer,
they are allowed to take away their friends.
The next morning a hiring day is advertised in the Sydney
papers, and employers of labour approved by the Emigration
Department are allowed into the hiring room, where girls may
make th6ir own terms. We should advise them to take the advice
of Mrs. Hicks, who is in most cases acquainted with the frequenters
of the depot, and will give every information relative to scale of
wages, position, and prospects of towns, &c. It is our experience
that the single women are the want of the colony, and are readily
and speedily employed on good terms.
Girls of England, Scotland, and Ireland, aboard the “Aberdeen”!
The reason of this is, that our predecessors in immigration have
earned a splendid reputation, which we trust you will fully bear
out. We might say much upon the importance of a good class of
single women emigrating, but think you will admit this, and in
your turn make good servants, good teachers, and mayhap in
years to come good mothers of future natives of Australia. What
nobler fate or grander destiny than to rear a people destined to be
one of the first nations in the world, and which, when London is
in ruins, will doubtless be in the zenith of its power.
We will now suppose all the girls either safely installed
amongst their friends, or happy in some pleasant and lucrative
situation, and we will turn to the single men. This latter class of
emigrants are the most fortunate of all, being entirely free from
incumbrances. All their kit may be on their backs, and the less
they have the better, since it is easier thus to travel and seek
work, and this, for the willing, is always to be had. They are
allowed to stay aboard five days after our arrival in Sydney, under
the same regulations as when at sea. Steamers ply between shore
and ship every hour, and carry passengers gratis. A Government
hiring day is proclaimed and advertised, and men go early
in the morning to the Macquarie-street dep6t, where employers
of all kinds of labour are to be seen. A word of advice, young men !
Take the first likely thing that is offered. Do not refuse
work because it is not so well paid as you thought. You must wait
a little, and your worth becoming known you may claim more
wages; and if it be not given, then is the time to seek another
employer, and with more likelihood of success than before, since the
place will be known to you, and you will not be so much of a
" new chum.” The best thing for men is to get out of Sydney
right into the bush, where good seats of labour are found, such as
Armidale for agriculturists, Grafton, and the Richmond and
Clarence Rivers.
It is a well-known fact that if a youth be not employed in less
than a week there is something wrong, and he is not likely to get
work for some time, especially if another ship arrives in the mean-
time. The newer the chum the better he is liked.
Now, a few words to those who have wives and families to pro-
vide for. As in the case of the single men, you are allowed five
clear days in which to seek work; and the remarks made concern-
ing men without family are applicable in the main to those with.
You will go to the depot on the two hiring days, and will do
well to close with any reasonable offer which will keep the wolf
from the door for awhile, and will allow of you looking around.
The day after our arrival the Emigration Board meets on the
deck, when every person is interviewed. When this is over, all are
at liberty to take their departure. If returning on board at night,
they must do so before sundown, the last boat leaving the Quay
for the ship between five and six.
The luggage is discharged upon a wharf, and left under the
charge of a constable, where it may be claimed.
We believe that persona having drafts on the New South Wales
Bank may have them cashed aboard, clerks being sent for that
purpose.
Balmain, Leichhardt, or Waterloo are suitable places for
families wanting houses in Sydney, and have the advantage of
being away from the town, but easily reached by steamer, tram,
or boat.
Having obtained employment, and should it necessitate your
.going up country, free passes will be granted to all places having
a station in New South Wales. This is a great boon, and one
which should not be abused; you must decide upon the town you
intend staying at, and thus save the officials trouble.
Having said thus much for your guidance in Sydney, we will
now say a few words about Australia generally.
To relate the history of Australia is for many years but to
chronicle events taking place at Sydney or in its environs j and
until the discovery of the precious metals. New South Wales was
the only colony, and the great Governments, Victoria and Queens-
land, are members of its body detached for purposes of better
local self-government.
The Portuguese, here, as in many other places elsewhere, seem
to have been the pioneer voyagers; and so early as the year IGOI
had they sighted and named this land, but made no use of the
discovery. The Dutch, who had great interests in the East, sent
an expedition southward, and discovered New Holland, or Terra
Australis. The Dutch East India Company, however, kept their
discovery a profound secret, which was their ruin, for on its visi-
tation, in 1770, by Captain Cook, who explored the greater part
of the eastern coast, it was annexed to King George’s dominions,
and a few years after, in 1787, the Government sent out Commo-
dore Philip to found a colony on the spot where Captain Cook had
lauded, named Botany Bay. The elements for this enterprise
were the ruffians of England, to be governed by martial law, in a
land where at first the bare necessities of life had to be imported.
Governor Philip and his successors had a difficult task during the
first twenty years; and Hunter superseded Philip, and then King
and Bligh came in quick succession. In 1813 the narrow strip of
land then known to the colonists, lying between that most beauti-
ful range of mountains, called Blue, and the sea-coast, was
extended beyond, and pasturage found for the increasing flocks of
sheep belonging to the settlers.
A word here about convicts. The early colonists were exiled
from the United Kingdom for what would nowadays be simple
misdemeanours, and were not the scum which comprises our pre-
sent convict gangs. Moreover, the worst and most violent con-
victs were removed to Norfolk Island; and in 1805 Van Dieman’s
Land was settled by their removal thence, and thus was founded
the present prosperous colony, Tasmania.
Victoria is the next child of Sydney out of arms, and in 1851 it
runs by itself. In 1884 it is, in its own estimation, at least, the
premier colony. New Zealand also separated from its parent in
1840; and Queensland, with a capital at Brisbane, was formed
into a separate Government in 1859. The other large colonies—
South Australia and Western Australia —have been established by
enterprise from home.
Thus, in 1856, when first a responsible Government was estab-
lished in Sydney, we find New South Wales well defined, and
surrounded by children as prosperous as herself. Her superficial
area is 310,937 square miles —three times the size of Great Britain,
and larger than any one State, except Russia, in Europe.
Let us take her metropolis—Sydney —as our topic, and let us
begin by again lauding her harbour, destroying the idea of Naples
being the finest in the world, and admitting at last that Port
Jackson cannot be beaten. What do you think of our harbour?
is the first question of a proud colonial; and a friend of ours ad-
vises the wearing of a small ribbon or badge, bearing the motto,
“ Your harbour is matchless.”
Hailing a small boat, or taking one of the tugs from our ship,
we are rowed from Neutral Bay past Pinohgut Island—so named
on account of some convicts imprisoned there having been for-
gotten and left to starve—until the Circular Quay is reached. This
wharf runs all round Sydney Cove, and is a very busy spot—plea-
sure steamers, launches, and boats of all descriptions coming and
going. Throw the mind back a century, when this was first
settled. The surroundings, a wild rocky country, covered with
low scrub and bush, and unfit for the growing of anything which
an Englishman had been accustomed to, inhabited by a savage
people, certainly not dangerous, but unfriendly to the white man,
who thus came and drove them from their most favoured haunts.
To illustrate the treatment of the blackfellows by the English, we
publish the pictorial proclamation of Governor Davy to the natives.
It had first been sent out printed in the ordinary way, but when
an aboriginal comes to the Governor, and says:—


“Me no understand that, blackfellow he no leam to read.” ■
" Then look at that,” says the Governor.
The picture speaks for itself, and we leave the brains of our
readers, certainly as bright as those of the black aboriginals, to
ponder over it.
The following lines, by E. N. E., have been sent to u*
The pictures traced in black and white
Explain to niggers* darkened sight.
In new and strangely clearer light
Than if he’d known to read and write,
The facts contained in a proclamation
Issued by the British nation.
Together the white and black man follow the chase 5
And to show there shall be no distinction of race.
Hand in hand the two nations* children shall range.
While black and white women babes nurse in exchange.
Heres de merchant come to trade.
Golly 1 Massa’s fortune’s made;
Gib de nigger lots of new rum,
Black man yield de land and blue gum*
Nigger knows what he is ** arter,”
Come to change and make de barter;
Gib for possum skin de gum.
Shoot de kangaroo like fun.
Eat him every day for dinner.
Black man neber get no thinner;
All de nigger wants am powder,
White man bangs his guns no louder*
To finish up our little rhyme,
Next we see what comes of crime.
If whitey man shoot ’em black,
De Gub’nor Gen’ral has de knack
Of letting him suspended be
From any large, convenient tree.
If blackey man kills de white,
Of course de Gub’nor am quite right
To put around his neck a twine,
And let the birds upon him dine.
*Tis better far to use the noose
Than to have such men upon the loose.
The moral of it all is clear,
The “sons of night” have nought to fear
If they the pale one do not harm, ,
Peace will reign, not war's alarm.
A man is still living, we believe, in one of the Government asy-
lums, who, at one time, owned part of this same Circular Quay,
and who sold it in consideration of a bottle of rum and a small sum
of money.
On landing we will avoid the busy crowd, and take a turn to
the left, which, after awhile, will bring us to a sea-wall, which
runs all round a pretty bay, wherein are anchored several of Her
Majesty’s ships of war, as far as Lady Macquarie’s Chair, hewn
out of the solid rock on a spot at one time sacred to the savage
breast as the place where the pipe of peace was smoked, and
where the boomerang was first thrown. Wo have now entered the
gates of the Botanical Gardens, and find ourselves in a perfect
Eden. In no other place will such a combination of natural beauty
be found in the heart of a large city. We spend a few hours here,
admiring the many strange flowers and stranger trees, and then
make our way out through a part of the Domain, passing the
Government House, which is a splendid mansion, surrounded by
private grounds. We are now in Macquarie-street, opposite a
handsome building—the Colonial Secretary's office—and walking
along this street past houses very English, except in the large
verandahs, to the Hyde Park-square, in which the Government
Depot is situated. At the entrance of the Hyde Park is a fine
statue of the Prince Consort; and in the centre of the square a
lonely marble pedestal, awaiting doubtless the figure of Her
Majesty the Queen.


From the Macquarie Asylum, we proceed along King-street, where
stands St. James’ Church on the left, the oldest church in Sydney,
where the Governor has his pew, and whose copper-clad steeple
serves as a guide to mariners navigating the harbour. This church
was first intended for a law court, but a new Governor thinking to
remove the cause, rather than punish the crime, had a spire added
to the hall, and behold the church.
Note how all the names of all streets recall the history of the
town. Here is Phillip-street, running to the water’s edge; below this
we first make our acquaintance with the steam tramway, and are
surprised that many accidents do not occur, seeing the speed at
which they run along Elizabeth-street. Crossing Pitt-street, we
come to George-street, the business street of Sydney. Walk along
it, and one thinks one is in the High-street of some large English
town. The crowd hurry in the same way, with like expressions;
and looking into shop windows, there is nothing to remind one
that we are on the opposite quarter of the globe. We probably
wish to post our letters, and here is the Post Office—one of the
finest, and certainly the most convenient building in the colonies,
reaching from George to Pitt street, and under whose colonnades
one meets every shade of society, hears every tongue, and mayhap
chances upon many a friend whom we never expected to meet. The
further end of George-street is almost given up to Chinese trades-
men, so, not wishing to trespass upon the Celestials, we will
retrace our steps up George-street, and look for the Town Hall—a
magnificent structure in the Italian style—and next to it the
Cathedral, which is bold, but bare withal. The Bishop, Canon
Barry, is a well-known ecclesiastic, of Westminster Abbey celebrity.
Having seen this, let us pass through one of the glories of Sydney
tradesmen, the electrically-lighted and musically-entertained
Arcade, and again find ourselves in King-street. We wish to seethe
Roman Catholic Cathedral, which, although incomplete, is planned
in a really grand style, and will, when finished, be the finest place
of worship in Australia, being as large as Durham, and larger than
many of the English cathedrals. It stands on a plot of ground
between Hyde Park and the road to Woolloomooloo, a very pretty
suburb, or, rather, town. Going along this way we see the harbour
running into a number of pretty bays, on the banks of which the
most romantic dwellings are situated. Darling Point reached
through the pretty Darlinghurst, we aro surprised at the evident
wealth of all around, this being the Belgravia or Kensington of
Sydney, of which dwellings Mr. Tooth’s, the brewer, surpasses
in sumptuousness of design. The view down the stream from these
points is beautiful, dotted as it is with large and small islands,
making it a perfect puzzle to navigators, and one wonders how
they find their way. We understand that all these islands are
reserved for strategical purposes by the Government; and one of
which forms the dwelling-place, wo hear, of the great oarsman—
Laycock. We are tired, and take a coach back to Sydney, which
will put us down in Hyde Park-square.
Walking through the Park, we may first see the statue erected to
the memory of Captain Cook, and then have a running glance at
the contents of the Sydney Museum, Grecian in architecture, and
sinister in appearance. Crossing to Elizabeth-street, a Byzantine-
like building strikes us ; we learn that it is the Jewish Synagogue.
The Market is not worthy of Sydney, being a very old and in-
commodious building. Doubtless the energies of the authorities
will soon build one to rival the Eastern Market, of Melbourne,
for one knows that such rivalry exists in most other things, and
we should not like to be the parties to decide between them. In
Sydney the streets are after the English style, occasionally losing
themselves in a turn; but one never finds a Melbourne street guilty
of such a thing; perfectly parallelogrammic and rectangular is it.
We prefer the crooked streets and pleasant byways. Taking a
boat from the Circular Quay, we are in a few moments paddled
across to Lavender Bay, a most beautiful introduction to the North
Shore. Here ladies and gentlemen may have splendid bathing
and swimming without fear of sharks Walking up the stairway,
cut from the rook, we are surprised to find the North Shore such
a lovely place. Not so aristocratic as its vis-a-vis Darling Point,
but yet eminently respectable. Balmain is rough, very rough—l
mean the roads, not the people. Hewn from the solid stone, the
streets need no macadamising, and one may see veritable
houses on rocks. A very healthy suburb, however, and one
we can recommend any of our friends to live in. Also Leich-
hardf, a little further off, is noteworthy, not only for its
salubrity, but for the reasonableness of the house rents. A tram
connects this latter suburb with the centre of Sydney. We will
take this boon of the working man, and in a very little time shall
find ourselves in King-street, whence we started.
Let me now take you to a spot where we trust many of our
number will spend their first really happy days: this is Coogee, a
place noted for its honeymoons. It is marvellous staying at this
delightful seaside resort, one meets so many young people, of
course in pairs, and of different sexes.
To get to Coogee one passes through Moore Park—a very
extensive, but not fully laid-out domain—alongside the racecourse,
through a sandy country now rapidly being built upon, until we
see, as the tram rushes down the hill, the ocean once more. A
word of caution: don’t bathe at Coogee !
Walking north along the wild coast, through cattle runs, from
Coogee one gets to Bondi—not half so pretty, yet it is so in some
degree. A tram will now take us to Sydney through the pretty
suburb Woollahra, a town of villa residences.
Because I have not mentioned a theatre, do not think they are so
puritanical. Oh, no ! One may see all the best operas soon after
their appearance in London, and the drama has much of histrionic
art; and concerts are an every-day occurrence. We cannot help
regretting the use to which these halls are put to on Sunday, which
is the preaching of Anti-Christ. A good library, opened every day
to the public, nearMacquarie-street, is a boon not only to strangers
seeking information about the colony, but also to the Sydneyites
themselves.
Having strayed to the Public Library, we are not far from the
Lands office, and this again is near Pitt-street, the purlieus of
the Stock Exchange, and this again leads us to the Circular Quay,
where wo soon find ourselves safely aboard the “Aberdeen.”
Another day dawns, and we decide upon a trip to a town which
is now almost a suburb of Sydney. Parramatta is the oldest agri-
cultural settlement in the colony, and it is here that the Austra-
lians found the inutility of sowing wheat in a rocky soil, and so
became disheartened. At the present time bright orange groves
flourish where our cereals could not obtain the wherewithal to live,
and a visit to these groves is a thing to be done by all visitors.
We proceed thither by train, which, if you are in a hurry,
do not take, but if you wish to “select” as you go, do so. We
find Parramatta a large village quite English, with no colonial
faults; and when we see a swinging signboard, whereon is depicted
“ The Woolpack,” who can blame us if we then patronise such
a thoroughly British-looking inn ? The dinner here reminds one
of the country hotel market ordinary. There is the Park to bo
seen, and, as was said before, the orange groves. A tram takes us,
through a wild, bushy, boggy, dirty country, to a pier on the Par-
ramatta Liver, where a steamboat awaits us. This river is really
an arm of Sydney harbour running some sixteen miles up, and is on
both sides extremely picturesque. It is the “castled Rhine,”
minus the castles. We pass Eyde and Gladesville, and at this
latter place there is a large lunatic asylum, very prettily situated.
After crossing and recrossing from one pier to another, we are not
long before, we are again amid the maddening crowd of the streets,
where we will leave you. We have now said enough of Sydney and
its suburbs, and a few words will suffice me to conclude my sub-
ject.
Hew South Wales abounds in every kind of wealth, iron in abun-
dance, with coal to work it, the districts being north of Sydney,
around Newcastle, and south in the Hlawarra districts. Copper
and tin, mostly from the far west (Wiloannia and Mount Brown),
are both extensively exported.
Gold mining in this, as in any other country, is a precarious
living, and we should advise you not to take the fever. Sugar
grows in the north above the Clarence and Richmond Kivers, and
our young men will find a refuge there when work is scarce near
Sydney. Twenty emigrants from aformer ship, the “ Belgravia,”
engaged themselves to sugar planters for A4O per annum, and
rations and lodgings.
On the banks of the Hawkesbury and other rivers east of the Blue
Mountains a rich alluvial soil supports all imaginable crops.
An extensive district on and about the Murray and Darling Rivers
—the Eiverina—is given up to sheep runs; but we understand that
most of the wool finds a more convenient market at Melbourne or


Adelaide, which are both easier of access than Sydney. This has
been advanced as an argument in favour of the erection of this large
district into a separate colony.
The Government of New South Wales is strictly on the home
plan._ A Governor, responsible to the Colonial Secretary at Downing-
street, is the representative of the Queen. An Upper House formed
of members chosen for life by the Ministry, as a rule from the Lower
House, takes the place of our House of Lords. The Legislative
Assembly is in all respects similar to the House of Commons.
Polities there are none, and the line of demarcation between Whigs
-and Tories is difficult to draw, so that the incentive to political life
is not so great as at home. The Distribution of the Land, the
Eecidiviste Question, and What’s to he done with the Unemployed,
are amongst its most important subjects for discussion. There is
happily no State church in New South Wales, so that all religions
have a due amount of support from the Government. The schools
also are unscotarian, and education being compulsory and of a very
high order, we may look for great things from the rising generation.
Now, good friends, adieu! and grant that you may never regret
having sailed
EASTWARD, HO!


We
will precede our
account by inserting the log,
kindly
furnished every week by Mr. Seward.
Lat.
Long.
Dis.
Sat.,
Oct. 25
39.27
112.44
281
Sun.,
Oet. 26
39.26
118.28
267
Mon.,
Oct. 27
39.34
125.3
304
Tues.,
Oct. 28
39.8
131.17
292
Wed.,
Oct. 29
38.52
137.22
284
Thurs
, Oct. 30
38.56
143.16
285
Total run for six days
...
1713
The Aberdeen Times.
“ When pound, make a note op.”— Capt. Cuttle.
Yol. I.—No. 9.]
At Sea, Thuesday, Ocxobee 30, 1884.
C Registered for trans-
mission aboard.
DEATH.
Wilkes. —The infant daughter of John Wilkes, died Oct. 27,
1884. This was the twin sister of the little St. Helenian which
died a short time ago.
NOTICES.
The Aberdeen Times.—Thanks to the perseverance of Mr.
McCorquodale and the governess of the after department, the sub-
scriptions for a reprint of the above are being collected.
Our stay at Port Jackson being limited, the copies of those sub-
scribers who fail to send their addresses within ten days will be
posted to the Sydney General Post Office, where application may
be made for them. The more satisfactory way will be to send
addresses, that we may be quite sure of their receipt.
LETTERS.
Any person wishing to communicate to their friends in the colo-
nies, may have their letters posted as soon as convenient after our
arrival.
CHILDREN’S ENTERTAINMENT.
Hymn.
Opening Address ... ... Dr. Huxtable.
Theresa Schrader “ The well of St. Ken.”
Geo. Davidson... ... ... " Oscar.”
Maggie Rennox “ Lucy Gray.”
James Davidson Song, “ There was a lad was bom in Kyle.”
Ada Wales “The Quarrelsome Three.”
Stephen Gee “ The Ranger.”
" Bonnie wood o’ Craigielea.”
James Craddick “ The burial of Sir John Moore.”
Geo. Barratt Song, “Taffy was a Welshman.”
Rhoda Wales , ... “Poor Mary.”
James Davidson “ Casabianca.”
Rhoda & Elizabeth Wales Duet, “ How sweet to be roaming.”
Bridget O’Hart “I’m a pretty little thing.”
“CLEANLINESS” (an exercise by the children).
Thomas Green ... ... “ The lost child.”
Rhoda Wales Song, “ Little Jane.”
James Dixon “ The Irish maiden’s song.”
Song Geo. Davidson.
Concluding Remarks.
God Save the Queen.
GRAND FAREWELL CONCERT.
Programme.
Harmonium Solo Miss Ward.
Recitation : “ David’s lament of
Absalom ” Miss Pickering.
Comic Song: “ Father, dear Fa-
ther, who broke a rib” ... Mr. MoQuean.
Song :“ Home, sweet home ” ... Miss Wright.
Song: "The dear little shamrock” Miss McMahon.
Reading:“ThetragedyatSloan’s”... Miss McKenzie.
Song: “The anchor’s weighed” ... Mr. Barlow.
Song: “Killamey” Mrs. Shakspere.
Song : " The Friar of Orders Grey ” Mr. Murray.
Song: “ Nancy Lee ” Miss Locke.
Song: “A weedrapieo’t” Mr. Stewart.
Song: “Tapping at the garden gate” Miss Kinghorn.
Song : “ When other lips ” E; N. Rothwell, Esq.
Song: “ Write me a letter from
home” Miss Ward.
Recitation; “The League of Luck-
now” ... Mr. Marrs.
Song: “ The Gipsy’s warning ” Miss Robinson.
Duet: “ The larboard watch ” ... Messrs. Murray and Jolley,
Song: “The skipper and his boy” ... Miss Richardson.
Duct: “ Silver moonlight winds are
blowing” ... ... ... Misses Brebner.
Song:“Chatting by the dopr ” ... Miss Walsh.
Song; “Emigrant’s farewell” ... Mrs. McCorquodale.
Song: “Deck my brow with roses” Miss Wood.
“ Auld Lang Syne ” ... Company
God Save the Queen.
Aberdeen Court, Oct. 30, 1884.
It is opportune that we issue this, our last, manuscript
copy of the Times, being at this moment abreast of Cape Otway,
where we have been signalled, and our probable arrival on Satur-
day morning is already known to our Sydney friends.
Our second officer, Mr. Seward, sighted the new light on Cape
Nelson early this morning, and we had land on the larboard as far
as Cape Otway, all this territory being part of the colony of Vic-
toria. We are now crossing the entrance to Port Phillip, and shall
lose sight of land for some hours, until Wilson’s Promontory is
reached. Cape Howe, which is the first land after passing Bass’
Straits, is bisected by the boundary-line between Victoria and
New South Wales. We take this opportunity of acknowledging
our indebtedness to Mr. Seymour, the third officer, who has, at the
cost of no little trouble and time, embellished our weekly issues
with appropriate headings, notably the St. Helena and Sydney
editions.
THE VOYAGE.
Our last Sabbath was passed in the usual quiet way, and, except
for a stoppage of fifty minutes in the morning, nothing noteworthy
happened.
Our paper, owing to the quantity of matter and limited time of
the Editor, although dated the 24th, did not appear until
Sunday morning, and thus partook very much of the nature of a
Reynold's or a Lloyd’s, especially politically. It was eagerly dis-
cussed over tea and cake among the visitors in the afternoon, and
forward the Schoolmaster held forth to an amazing extent,
whilst in the Court itself it created even a more profound sensa-
tion. If a cannon ball had fallen in our midst, it could not have
changed the current of conversation so effectually as did this
innocent paper. Of course the portions of the paper under dis-
cussion were the announcements of an election, and the addresses
of the two candidates. The result of all this excitement was the
formation of a committee, who had, before morning, effectually
placarded the ship with more or less suitable mottoes, such as
“ Roth well and Republicanism,” “ Rothwell and down with Land-
lordism,” "Rothwell and Woman’s Rights,” "Rothwell and Cre-
mation ,” and soon. For the other candidate, “Johnson and Common
Sense,” “Johnson and Vaccination,” “Johnson and Every Man a


Landowner,” and another, which militated very much against this
would-be member—“ Johnson and Early Closing—of the Single
Women’s Hatchway.” Many were the witty parodies upon these,
and skits upon all and everything were flying about on Monday,
unmercifully—“ Johnson and Starvation,” “Johnson and Black
Draught,” coupled with many words not found in his dic-
tionary ; and Mr. EothwelTs name was also bandied about, but not
quite so cruelly, as he was not known, and had not the disadvan-
tage of having had to instil holystone and soap into the minds of
the voters.
The following notice was posted by the chief magistrate:—
FELLOW CITIZENS !!!
We are invited in this day’s issue of the Aberdeen Times to record
our votes in favour of one or other of two candidates, one of whom
puts himself forward as representing the Eadical and the other the
Liberal Conservative views in matters political. We understand
that it is not the intention of either candidate to give us theoppor-
tunity of personal explanation and enlargement of their views,
which are but vaguely set forth in to-day’s paper.
Considering the importance of the matters there touched upon,
and the impossibility of forming a just and reliable opinion of the
views of these candidates without an opportunity being given us of
full personal explanation, we are of opinion that a public meeting
should bo held of all citizens and voters of Aberdeen, at which both
candidates should be invited to meet, and explain and defend their
opinions.
In the event of their failing to meet us in this manner, we are of
opinion that two other representatives of the respective parties should
be requested to come forward at the meeting ; and
A PUBLIC MEETING
is hereby convened on the fore deck at 2 p.m. on Monday, October
27.
God Save the Queen !
Printed at the office of Davy Jones and Co., Limited.
[We think this synonymous with the Chart Boom, and Davy Jones,
as chief partner, is represented by our worthy Commander.}
Agreeable to this, the two candidates were upon the bridge at 2
o’clock, supported by the committee, Captain Barclay, Doctors Uux-
table and Grant, and tho Chief Engineer, Mr. Murray. A chairman
was called for, and a gentleman, well known as an orator, was carried
nolens volens up the gangway, and placed, after much resistance, in
the chair, the struggle forming a most ludicrous scene. Mr. Schrader,
finding by this time that he really was expected to preside, and that
it was not a hoax, took all in good part, and addressed a few words to
the meeting, declaring the objects of the election. He then intro-
duced Mr. Both well (in the Eadical interest), who was received with
cheers.
This gentleman opened his remarks by a reference to a paper in the
Aberdeen Times, entitled “Why do we emigrate ?” in which most of
his views, especially those relating to the land question, were fully
ventilated. The election was evidently going to turn upon landlords
or no landlords, and Mr. Eothwell struck hard at the House of
Peers and Boyal Family, also touching upon those questions which
he had made the subject of his address. We will not publish his
speech in full, since it was an endorsement of his contribution to
the Times, which we recommend to our readers’ perusal. After
one or two questions put to the candidate and answered by him,
Mr. Schrader introduced Mr. Johnson to the assembled multitude,
as representing the Liberal Conservative interest, and whose
speech we give in extenso, since he has had no former opportunity
of expressing his opinions. He began as follows :
Totally unaccustomed as I am to speaking before a large con-
course of people, it will require the exercise (3 no little patience on
your part and sympathy with my strange position to enable you
to listen to my stammering speech.
Friends, Countrymen, Aberdonians ! I come not here, like the
ancient Eoman, to bury Cmsar, but to praise him, and that Caesar
the Kaiser of India and England’s Queen. If any of you were to
ask me how I came in this position I should tell him I did not
know. A curiosity in my editorial capacity to know the opinions
of the mass in this ship led to the idea of polling, but with no
intention, at least on my part, of its assuming the present formid-
able appearance of an election duly proclaimed by the Chief
Magistrate, Captain Barclay, and advertised in such a variety of
ways. I must beg of you not to ask me to justify all the flaming
placards posted over the ship in my name, for I plead ignorance of
their issue, and trust they will in no way influence the election.
Now, what I do want to know is this—and upon this the election
should turn—are the majority of you in favour of a settled consti-
tutional Government, surrounded on all sides by checks to all
three estates, or are you supporters of that ultra-Eadioal,
property-stealing, order-destroying party of which Mr. Eothwell
comes forth as the champion ? Most of you have read his paper,
asking “Why do weemigrate ?” Had I known an election was going-
to be decided upon the very principles upheld in this paper,
certainly another article, looking at the other side of the picture,
should have been given. However, our adversary has gained a
march upon me, and it will only be by forced speeches upon
this question that I shall be able to refute him.
Why do you emigrate? Certainly not on account of your
hatred to landlordism, and it is for the very purpose of becoming
landlords that you are now seeking a home in Australia. (Cheers.)
I see by your faces that you intend working hard, selecting your
freehold, and becoming lord of all you survey, landlords in every
sense of the term.
There are many reasons for emigrating, but the one my
opponent advances is rarely given. How many of you are enticed
by the letters of your already well-to-do colonial friends ? Unfor-
tunately, the very class who should be driven to emigration by the
exactions of the lords of the soil are the want of the colony: farm
labourers are a scarcity in New South Wales.
To revile the inventors of machinery for lessening the cost of
labour is really to go back to the dark policy of the middle ages,
and we should not be surprised to hear the advocate of such
narrow-mindedness believing in witchcraft.
But the great cry above all this is—Down with landlordism!.
Who has made the greater part of England a veritable garden,
terraced with highways and free from robbers ? —the landowners.
Who has converted the mud hovels of our ancestors into lovely
cottages ? —the proprietors of the soil. Who has kept famine from
our doors by providing for the sick and poor ? —the aristocracy.
What would morality and temperance do without its Shaftesbury
and its Westminster ? What a wilderness Derbyshire would be
without its Cavendishes, no Edensor, no Chatsworth. Where
would capital needed for the making of railways and floating all
concerns come from if the land were subdivided in the Eadical
way ? Where would security be found even for tho payment of
the smallest loan from a peasant proprietorship ? Primogeniture-
has done much to keep England intact, and the division of the
land among the many would mean the downfall of England’s
greatness, and the triumph of such pessimists as the other candi-
date. It shows a great want of historical knowledge to suppose
that the abolition of military tenure by the Long Parliament was a
death blow to the people’s rights. If the landlords are a terror now,
were they not a greater one when surrounded by hundreds of
retainers ? Our friend next has a knock at tho House of Hanover.
Mayhap they are an alien race, but was it not better for the Govern-
ment of that day to take even a foreigner as king rather than have-
civil war ? Besides, “ the King can do no wrong.” Our constitution
is such that a man chosen by ourselves is the Executive, and from
him emanates all Queen’s speeches and orders. Far better have such
a useful and harmless political tool (forgive the word) as Her
Majesty, than have all, from pot-boy to Prime Minister, striving for
Presidentship. Moreover, our Eoyal Family supply a social want—
a standard of etiquette in all matters non-political.
Again, the Eadical candidate speaks about the House of Commons
being intended to protect the people’s rights. Before this, I never-
knew the beginning of this House, or that it had any set functions.
It has been the growth of ages, and to-day it is quite different in con-
stitution and intentions to what it was fifty years ago.
This is the great merit of our English Government—they are
adapted to our wants, are like the wings of the bird, specially pro-
vided for the element in which they live.
He speaks of the national debt of 700 millions. Do you not think
that a nation owing no money to any other people cannot really be
in debt, and the many millions quoted are only a safe investment for
our idle capital and as sound as the Bank of England, which is, by
the way, dependent upon it ?


The theories of our friend about restitution of rights which we
never had, regretting days in which (excuse my saying it) people
were no bettor than cattle, are Utopian, destined only to fill the dis-
eased brains of maddened enthusiasts. (Cheers.)
Now a word for " Quid Ireland.” You have beenjfoully wronged;
and Irishmen before me, you have taken the right step in migrating
from a country which at present is made the field for the utterance of
treason against the Queen by men who can by no means claim Erin
as their country. (Cheers.)
A few words more, and I shall conclude. I do not believe in
woman forgetting her mission in this world, and constituting her-
self man’s equal. “Thoushalt honour and obey him,” and not
contest his opinions. What more unhappy spectacle than that of
a house divided against itself, and surely man and wife could never
agree on the dangerous grounds of politics.
I leave you, friends, to put any question to me on any subject
relevant to the objects of the election, and will answer them
strictly to my principles.
Good-bye, and show by your vote to-day that you are no friends
to treason, anarchy, and communism.
God save the Queen.
The chairman then announced that a poll would be taken at
once, and pencils and paper were greatly in request. A man was
stationed at the top of the gangway, and as the voters filed by
they dropped their voting-papers in the box. A delay of some
few minutes, during which intense excitement prevailed, and the
votes were counted, with this result:—
Johnson (L. C.) 99
Eothwell (R.) 69
After three cheers for the Queen, the speakers and the com-
mittee retired to address another portion of the constituency, the
fair and fickle daughters of Albion and Erin.
Mr. Schrader took the chair, after a “ wee drapie o’t,” upon the
quarter-deck, and when all the electors (and this is the first time
we have heard of female suffrage being un fait accompli) had
assembled, Mr. Rothwell, addressing the meeting from the wheel,
in his most courteous style, began his speech by comparing him-
self to the modest violet, fain to retire before such an assembly of
roses. (Derisive laughter.) The remainder of the speech was
almost in every particular identical with that given to the married
folk. The girls paid great attention, and had already voted in
their hearts for Eothwell when he sat down ; woman suffrage,
which he supported, taking their fancy entirely. One girl, show-
ing the bent of her thoughts and those of her sex generally, asked
the speaker if he would support a measure for making it compul-
sory upon bachelors over twenty-five years of age to pay at least
•one-tenth of their income for the support of the single women.
This was received with much laughter, and more when Mr. Eoth-
well acknowledged himself above twenty-five, and, therefore, liable
to be himself rated for the support of spinsters, and on that
account declined to give his vote in favour of such a measure.
Mr. Johnson next addressed the fair meeting, and opened his
remarks by declaring it contrary to his principles to solicit votes
from the weaker sex. This, of course, was not well received; and
although he explained that the special circumstances allowed of
his now addressing them, it was evident his chance was very poor;
and his position became more shaky when the following questions
were put to him: —Do you uphold'holystoning, early rising, and
early closing ? —which he had to answer in a manner no way calcu-
lated to assuage the female wrath., ■ ■
Holystoning, he said, was a, capital exercise, and far better than
all medicine; whilst early rising was necessary for the discipline of
the ship ; and as to the latter clause, he put it to them whether they
did not think it necessary to be carefully looked after when there
were some 250 girls under the Sole protection of two gentlemen, the
Captain and the Doctor.. . (Groans and cheers.) He then gave
them that part of his speech: which he thought likely to influence
the ladies’ vote; especially, pointing out the fact that they were
going to find liusbands among landlords or free selectors of Aus-
tralia. ' ,' , .
A poll was now r taken of this ;department, and was quickly got
through. The counting of votes took, some little time, and the
result in no way astonished the girls, who were evidently injured
at being told to “ honour and obey their husbands! ”
Rothwell (E.) ... ... ... ... ... ... 141
Johnson (L. C.) ... ... ... ... ... ... 54
Thus the weaker sex turned the election, and Eothwell was
declared member for the s.s. "Aberdeen” (the total number going to
the poll being 363) by a majority of 57, all won from the after
compartment, and by the active canvassing of our pretty Home
Euler, who evidently took great interest in the proceedings.
The successful candidate received hearty congratulations from
all sides, took them with grace, and responded to them with
pleasure.
So ended one of the best pieces of fun aboard a ship, and one of
the best afternoons it would be possible for any ship’s company to
enjoy, and which had kept us in one continuous vein of suppressed
mirth from the time of going to the hustings to the declaration of
the poll.
We think it right that we should here declare it our opinion that
this election was totally uninfluenced by personal feeling, and that
the result of the poll is a natural consequence of the favour with
which “Justice in Land” and Republican views are received by the
public, and the more especially by the fair sex, who invariably
side with the weaker.
Tuesday had been advertised as the day on which the Matrons
would show their work, and also as a concert evening. The boxes
of the single women, however, so encumbered the deck, and the
crew were so hard pressed, that it was with some difficulty they
got all down before teatime, without thinking about concerts.
The show of work had also to be postponed, unfortunately not
only on this account, but because Mrs. Osborne, the Matron, met
with an accident, which had likely been serious had she not fallen as
she did. Her fall was some eight feet down the hatchway, yet
she escaped with a few bruises, and a severe shaking. We
understand that it was in an effort to check a child from falling
that she fell herself, and that on her arrival at the story below,
she made a joke upon the occurrence. Certainly this good lady is
an incorrigible punster, and the worse we wish her is once more
to hear her unstudied bon-mots.
Wednesday was proclaimed a fete day, and our company
therefore came forth in festive costume. Miss Bant arranged her
large and varied assortment of work upon the saloon skylight,
and many were the pretty things we cast longing eyes upon; but
of no avail, for nothing was allowed to be sold. Mrs. Osborne’s
indisposition prevented her showing the work of her girls, which
is much to be regretted. At 2 o’clock Mr. McCorquodale
marshalled his boys and girls on the quarter-deck, and after they
were seated, the happy parents and single women were allowed in
to witness
THE DISTRIBUTION OF PRIZES TO THE SCHOOL-
CHILDREN.
Dr. Huxtable took the chair, being supported by Captain
Barclay, and having arranged before them a goodly array of books,
which gladdened the hearts of those little ones whose consciences
allowed their expecting a prize. A hymn opened the proceedings,
after which the Doctor announced that four additional prizes had
been placed at his disposal by two gentlemen whose names he was not
allowed to divulge, but one of whom was high in command and the
other had been recently elected member for the s.s. “ Aberdeen.”
These prizes, each of 55., were to go to best recitations.
Mary Rennox recited “ Lucy Gray” very well and without a single
error, and was adjudged the winner of one.
Theresa Schrader gave the “Well of St. Ken” with evident
appreciation of its points, and was with acclamation awarded another.
Stephen Gee carried the third crown with his laurels, justly won
by his “ Ranger.”
James Davidson, a wee. laddie, was declared the winner of the
fourth. “ The bonnie wood of Craigielea” was then given by the
children. After a few words from Dr. Huxtable, the business of the
day commenced—that is, the distribution of prizes placed on boabd
by that most paternal of all Governments, that of New South Wales.
As the little ones were one after another handed to the platform to
receive their rewards, the Doctor made appropriate and happy
remarks, which sent the successful scholars away proud and contented
with their achievements.


The prizes having been given—and every.child who had attended
received one—the Doctor rose and asked the parents to thank the
Schoolmaster and his wife for their services under exceptionally
disadvantageous circumstances; and also Miss Bose, who had quite
voluntarily, and with great success, undertaken the teaching of
the girls in her compartment. This was carried unanimously,
both young and old joining in the cheers.
Mrs. Wales moved that a vote of thanks be given to the Captain
and Doctor for their kindness and attention during the passage,
which, when seconded by the Schoolmaster, and carried with those
peculiar and laughable claps demonstrated by Constable Wales,
terminated the proceedings.
THE CONCEET.
Mr. Taylor’s arrangements for this our final and farewell enter,
tainment were only equalled by the performance itself. Un-
doubtedly the programme contained the chosen and collective
talent of the ship.
Miss Ward commenced with a harmonium solo, and was, owing to
the “ Eair Maid of Perth ” changing her song for a dance, followed by
Miss Pickering’s affecting recitation, “ David’s lament of Absalom.”
Mr. McQuean wiped a tear from every eye after this, by humorously
rendering “ Father, dear Father, who broke a rib,” a parody upon
the well-known sickly sentimental song. Miss Wright, scarcely
happy in her choice of songs, gave us “ Home, sweet home,” at a
period of the voyage when we are the furthest removed from any.
Erin, represented by Miss McMahon, resplendent in her native green,
gave a somewhat scarce version of “The dear little shamrock."
A domestic tragedy, showing forth the horror of women lecturers,
was given by Miss McKenzie, called “ The tragedy at Sloan’s.”
Constable Barlow next sang “ The anchor’s weighed,” which, when
concluded, was a weight off his shoulders. The sweetest voice in the
ship then sang “ Killarney,” and, when encored, Mrs. Shakspere gave
“ ’Tis but a little faded flower.”
Who is this whose approach calls forth so much applause ? Behold
our estimable friend, the chief screw driver and crank shaft surgeon,
Mr. Murray, who, in his well trained basso profundo, sang “ The
friar of Orders Grey.” An encore was called for, and “ The Sexton”
was given. Miss Locke, arrayed as Britannia, in a British ensign,
regulation helmet, and trident, introduced herself with a Jingo song,
and then gave the piece on the programme, “ Nancy Lee.” Although
this young lady suffers from a painful throat affection, she sang both
songs admirably, and when called upon for another, created roars of
laughter by bursting forth, “ Over the garden wall.”
Scotland now came to the fore, cleverly represented in tartan and
buckles by Miss Will, who belongs to the clan Macpherson, and who
is so generally known as our “ Fair Maid of Perth.” Placed upon the
skylight in the centre of the company, she gave the Highland Fling
in all its perfection, and with, may we add, all modesty. A Stewart
follows on, and takes “ A wee drapie o’t,” which, although not shared
amongst the audience, was yet duly appreciated by them. After
this, he exhorted his hearers in a song with a moral, “ Not to get
into a stingy way.” The Highlanders having had their fling. Miss
Kinghom comes forth as a Lowland llsherwife—and how she got this
costume will ever remain a mystery—who, with her cry of “ Caller
Herrin’,” could have sold all the fish her basket might have held.
Mr. Eothwell then sang “ When other lips,” and, as an encore, at-
tempted “ TJhe harp that once through Tara’s Halls,” but the chords
being broken, he retired through loss of voice. A heartfelt wish of all
present was prettily expressed by Miss Ward, who sang, “Write me
a letter from home.” “ The Leaguer of Lucknow” was certainly
“ Marred,” but not in the ordinary acceptation of the term, and Mr.
Marrs deserves the thanks of all for so splendid a display of elocution.
A timid damsel now ascends the platform, and, throwing back her
cloak, displays the pretty costume of the ideal Gipsy, with cards in
hand, and sings “The Gipsy’s warning,” which was vociferously
applauded; and in deference to the shouts of “ Barney O’Hea,” our
little Cambrian, Miss Eobinson, again pleaded her cause against that
impudent suitor. Mr. Murray, with his jovial second, Mr. Jolley,
next hailed “The larboard watch,” and this afforded so much
pleasure to the audience that they were obliged to repeat it. “ The
skipper and his boy,” by Miss Eichardson, makes us regret not
having known of this lady’s talents before.
The Misses Brebner and Miss Walsh next entertained the company,
and then Miss McKenzie, by special request, read “ The Courtship of
Bauldy Balwuddie.” Mrs. McCorquodale sang “ The emigrant’s
farewell,” a most appropriate song for the occasion. The people
heartily sang the chorus with Miss Wood, of her sweet song, “ Deck
my brow with roses.” “Auld Lang Syne” was led off by Mr.
Murray, and perseveringly carried on for some time by all present.
All the characters in costume now stood up, and “ God Save the
Queen” was sung.
Now the constabulary duties do begin, and are so effectually borne
out that in a few minutes all girls are below, young men have retired
to roost, and the married folk are attending to their chicks.
Thursday, October 30, 1884.—We are now in civilised parts, as-
the man in the last century said when he came across a gallows with
its grinning burden, erected to the memory of some criminal; and
just before sundown a very pretty steamboat crossed our bows, bound
for Tasmania, and was evidently making a very rough passage.
Our “chiel” having had to sit up late in order to collect his notes,
was the happy spectator of Wilson’s Promontory at midnight and'
the pyrotechnical display instituted by Mr. Taylor in order to attract
attention at the lighthouse. No response was received from the
land, notwithstanding the shrill shrieking of the whistle.
It is our intention to give the conclusion of the voyage in a special,
number, which may be read in the printed edition.


Lat.
Long.
Dis.
Fri., Oct.31 ... 38.3S ...
149.14E .
291 miles.
Sat., Nov. 1, to 6 o’clock
260 „
The Aberdeen Times.
“ When found, make a note of.”— Capt. Cuttle.
Yd. I. —No. 10.]
In Port Jackson, November 3, 1884.
L Registered for trans.
mission aboard.
NOTICES.
Many of our friends will doubtless be desirous of obtaining an
extra copy of the Aberdeen Times ; and we have arranged that a
few may be left in our printer’s hands, who will forward them to
any address on receipt of price and postage. Address to Messrs.
Batson and Atwater, 195 Clarence-street, Sydney.
LOG.
The total distance traversed has been 12,432 miles; and it is an
interesting fact to note that the screw has made 4,212,770 revolu-
tions in this distance.
Mr. Murray also informed us that 1700 tons of coal have been
burnt—a remarkably small consumption for our speed; and this he
accounts for by the high-pressure cylinders, concerning which he
contributed an article in one of our earliest numbers.
Sydney, Monday, Nov. 3, 1884.
The most trying part of the Editor’s work is now before him—
that of farewell taking. Were we not assured that it is to fortune
it leads you, we might feel no little sorrow in parting from such a
number of friends—for are we not all friends aboard a large ship ?
further, are we not all members of one family, with a benevolent
autocrat in the Captain for a father ?
Good-bye, brothers and sisters all, and may you ever have a
kindly thought for the “ Aberdeen” and the good folks whom you
met there j and do not, we pray you, forget the Editor of the Times,
who has, as far as possible, fulfilled his promise when he com-
menced his undertaking to amuse, and, if possible, to instruct you.
We will now terminate our record of
THE VOYAGE.
On the morning of Saturday, November 1, 1884, we steamed along
the coast of Now South Wales. The bold cliffs, sandhills, and
mountains beyond present a very picturesque appearance, but do not
seem to be very thickly covered with vegetation. What there is, is
termed “ bush” j this is a mixture of various sorts of trees and
undergrowth of other plants, and is the general covering of nearly
the whole of the land.
Time passes on, and now the excitement of nearing our destination
is intensified by the lighthouse at Sydney Heads becoming visible j
and all our girls, who are so beautifully dressed and look so capti-
vating that it makes one’s heart grow sad to think we must part so
soon, look eagerly towards tha spot where many are to find their new
home—and we hope also good husbands. The latter will be fortunate
and happy indeed if they secure the affections of any of our girls.
One who has seen them every day for seven weeks must confess that
for beauty, charm of manner, and all those qualities of the heart
which endear woman to man are possessed by them in no ordinary
degree; and for our part we think that they will do the greatest
credit to the glorious colony to which they emigrate. We doubt if
any vessel has ever brought to New South Wales such an assembly
of those pearls of priceless value—good, beautiful, and loving women.
Now we pass the lighthouse, and the spot where the terrible
wreck of the ill-fated " Dunbar” took place, and see before us the
other Head and the entrance to Sydney harbour. In a few
minutes black smoke appears behind the cliffs, and the pilot
steamer comes round the Head, plunging and tossing to such an
extent that one fears for her safety; every other moment she
takes a dive apparently straight down to the bottom, but always
comes up again none the worse for the dip. A whale-boat puts
off, and soon the time-honoured question, "Any sickness aboard?”
is replied to with the satisfactory assurance that there is none: we
have been a healthy lot, taking us all round. Our happy-looking
pilot mounts the bridge, and soon the screw once more revolves, and
we swing round between the Heads. And what do we behold ?
Surely, paradise on earth. An exquisitely lovely panorama—lovely
islands, romantic cliffs, beautiful trees growing to the water’s edge,
happy homes nestling therein, bays and creeks innumerable
extending for miles, yachts, launches, and pleasure steamers crowd-
ing every part; and beyond, a magnificent city, which adds to,
rather than detracts from. Nature’s grandest efforts. Such a scene
of life and beauty is indescribable. No poet could, with sweetest
verse, sing the praises of this happy land, and do it justice. It
must be seen and felt. We had been told it was the finest harbour
in the world, and the most beautiful; after having seen it, one
wonders that any mortal could live in any other place but its ver-
dant shores. We have seen the beauties of nature in many lands,
but not one fills the heart with such rapture as this.
We travel onwards past Manly Beach and the Quarantine
Station—the horrors of which we are spared, another ship occu-
pying the ground—and at last drop anchor, and are boarded by
the health officer, who inspects all our emigrants; and we feel
certain he must entertain a very high opinion of the manner in
which our surgeon has fulfilled his onerous duties. As our pilot
remarked, “They don’t look as though they had come a long
voyage.” A more healthy-looking body of men and women it
would be impossible to find. It was quite evident this opinion
was endorsed by the “Board of Health,” as pratique was soon
granted, and we are once more under weigh. Returning nearly
as far as the Heads, we swing completely round, passing under
one of the numerous batteries. Target practice by the volunteers
is being carried on, and the scream of the balls as they fly
unpleasantly near our mastheads somewhat alarms some of the
members of the gentler sex. The practice is not very good, the
endeavours to hit a buoy some half-mile from the fort not
succeeding once while we were near. Having passed the target,
being once in the direct line of fire, one shot being apparently
right above us, we made for Neutral Bay, constantly cheered
by yachtsmen and other pleasure-seekers of all sorts. One would
think every person in Sydney owned a steam-launch or sailing
yacht, by the vast numbers on the water. A regatta is taking
place, as usual on Saturday afternoons, and to see the amount of
sail carried speaks well for the evenness of the winds in the
harbour. They carry more sail here than in any other place, and
the boats are pictures of grace and quite swan-like in their move-
ments. We pass through a fleet of them, and also pass by H.M.S.
“Nelson,” a despatch-boat going to the recently annexed territory
of New Guinea.
On Saturday afternoon and Sunday we were visited by numbers
of people,' who cruised round about the ship, hoping to catch a
glimpse of some friend from the dear old country; and many were
the affecting scenes on deck, one young lady being with difficulty
restrained from going over the side to her friends; and others
caused a deal of heart yearning when they received the hearty
greetings of their relations, who obtained passes to board us.
After breakfast on Monday morning all the girls were taken
ashore to the depfit, and when the steamer which bore them
shoved off, we noticed many weeping. This was certainly a com-
pliment to those left behind —and so we took it.
At noon the Emigration Board met on the after-deck, and in-
spected the single men and married people, with the result that
not a single complaint was forthcoming. This naturally leads us
to the duty of thanking those persons who have most to do with
making everyone happy. What makes a happy home happier?
A good cook, we say; and therefore we must thank our cooks—
Westbrook and Bayley, with their assistants.


Mr. Smith, the storekeeper, and Mr. Stewart, the steward, also
■deserve high commendation for their attention to all.
We have already expressed our appreciation of the Captain’s and
the Doctor’s kindness, home out as it has been by their officers.
A numerous staff of correspondents attacked our ship on Saturday,
-and considering the amount of information we afforded them, not
mentioning the loan of our manuscripts, their notice of our arrival
and account of our passage was very meagre. However, we decide
to publish that of the Daily Telegraph : —
OUR NEW COLONISTS.
Shortly afternoon on Saturday last the fine steamship “ Aberdeen ” entered
Port Jackson for the sixth time. Never before had she brought so many
people to these shores, and consequently never had her arrival here been
looked forward to with so much interest, not only on the part of those on
board, but also by numerous relatives and friends ashore, anxiously awaiting
their coming. Indeed, many who at the present moment are perfect strangers
to those who have just finished their long voyage from the mother country
have for some weeks past felt a keen interest in them, and during the last few
days have eagerly scanned the daily papers in order to glean, if possible, infor-
mation telling of the near approach of the *' Aberdeen” and its living freight.
The reason why is not far to seek. On this trip the “ Aberdeen ” was chartered
by the Orient Company in connection with their contract with the New South
Wales Government, to bring British emigrants to this colony; and as news
travels faster than even steamships do, it became known soon after the “Aber-
deen ” left the “ right little, tight little island,” that among those who crowded
her decks was a larger number of unmarried women than had ever been
brought to Sydney by any vessel on a single trip. What visions immediately
rose before the eyes of would-be mistresses of the bonnie lassies that were
coming to this land of promise for such as they. Was it not natural, there-
fore, that among the good housewives of Sydney, at any rate, there were many
who rejoiced greatly last Saturday when they learnt of the safe arrival of the
41 Aberdeen ” ? To-day they will readily unite with everybody else in offering a
hearty welcome tojour new colonists.
It was at mid-day on Thursday, September 11, that no less than 611 men,
women, and children stepped from the wharf of the emigrant depot. Ply-
month, on board the well-known paddle-boat, “ Smcaton,” which conveyed
them, bag and baggage, to the “Aberdeen,” lying at anchor just within the break-
water, under the command of Captain J. A. Barclay, and manned by a crew of 73
hands. It was at once found that ample accommodation had been provided
for everybody and everything. Whilst many were busily engaged below in
making their temporary homes as snug and comfortable as was possible under
the changed, and to them extraordinary, circumstances of their mode of
living, the anchor was weighed, and the “ Aberdeen ” sped away at the rate of 11
knots an hour across the Channel. Mr. George Thompson, chief partner in
the firm of George Thompson and Co., the owners of the “Aberdeen,” saw the
vessel off. The commencement of the voyage was, of course, rendered ex-
tremely enjoyable—we mean far from agreeable and inspiriting—by the usual
:attacks of vud-de-mer ; but, fortunately, after the lapse of three days, all, or
nearly all, were well again. Almost a week passed by after the coast of Corn-
wall became lost to view before land was sighted again. On Tuesday, September
16, the Salvages were seen early in the day, towards evening Teneriffe and the
grand Canary Islands were left behind, and at 8 p.m. the cloud-capped Peak
was looked upon for the last time perhaps by many in all its grandeur. Days
slipped by until September 19, when a heavy squall was encountered, and
necessitated the retirement “below” of many who perhaps had already
begun to think that they had become almost as accustomed to the dangers of
the deep as were their friends the storm-tossed mariners. They found out
their mistake, or rather were quickly convinced of it. Nothing out of the
ordinary routine occurred until Tuesday, September 24, when at half-past
three In the afternoon the engines were stopped, owing to some bolts on the
low-pressure crank-shaft coupling having given way. New bolts having been
fitted, the engines were started again at 9.30 on the following morning. During
the stoppage some excellent sport was had with the “ pirates of the ocean,”
•who were fished for with the (to them) ever seductive piece of pork at the end
of a log line. Mr. Shark, No. 1, was caught after many unsuccessful, but
exciting attempts, and was hoisted on board amid loud cheers. He having
received his quietus, his carcase was returned to what had been his natural
element. The same modus operandi was followed in the case of Mr. Shark,
No. 2. On September 26 a strong head wind and a heavy sea made progress
slow and patients for the doctor. They again felt inclined to say, for they
could not sing—
A queer sort of up and down motion
Which comes from the treacherous ocean.
Has inspired me with the notion
That I never was meant for the sea.
Before breakfast on Sunday, September 28, the historical rock of St. Helena
■ came in sight, and at 11.30 a.m. the “ Aberdeen” cast anchor at rather less than a
quarter of a mile from shore. Natives, or other residents of the place of exile
of Napoleon the Great, unaware of the cause of the vessel’s visit, and perhaps
thinking that those on board the “ Aberdeen” were some “new chums,” lost no
time in paddling to the steamship’s side, but alasl for their disappointment.
The voyagers were bound for another clime, and were restricted by the ship’s
regulations from landing before they reached sunny New South Wales. So the
St. Helenian boatmen did not reap the rich harvest they had anticipated, but
were obliged to “ pull ” back to the island sadder and not richer men. They,
however, obtained some compensation at the hands of their fellow-islanders,
who delighted themselves by being rowed to and from and roundabout the
noble “Aberdeen,” which stayed at St. Helena five days. Repairs rendered
necessary by the mishap to the engines on September 24 having been completed—
and it was for this reason the vessel “made” St. Helena —the “Aberdeen”
steamed away from the island on October 3at 6,30 a.m. Six days afterwards
Cape Town was passed, 200 miles off. During the next few days the weather
was exceedingly rough, there being frequent showers of hail, rain, snow, and
sleet. On October 25 the “ Aberdeen ” was abreast of the westernmost point of
Australia —Cape Leuwin —and on October 30 she passed Cape Otway. Finally,
os already stated, she reached Port Jackson on last Saturday, and at a quarter
to 1 anchored off Watson’s Bay,
The tale of our new colonists’ life on the ocean wave, as told by several of
them to our representative on Saturday afternoon, is, on the whole, a very
pleasant one. But whilst every cloud has its silver lining, so joy is sometimes
linked with sorrow. The sorrowful circumstances connected with this voyage
of the “ Aberdeen ” were, happily, few; but one was very sad, forthe death of a
male emigrant from heart disease, on October 12, deprived a wife of the bread-
winner for herself and a large family. Three other deaths occurred on various
dates from natural causes. One child died, aged seven months, and twins born
whilst the “Aberdeen ” was at St, Helena, lived only about a fortnight. Through-
out the voyage the general health of the emigrants was very good, and there
was an absolute immunity from accident. The professional services of Dr, L,
Ealston-Huxtable (formerly of the s.s. “ Belgravia” and the ship “Illawarra”),
and his assistant, Mr. F. B. Johnson, were, therefore, not called into much re-
quisition. The hospitals, of which three had been provided, were not used at
all, except for maternity cases, four children being horn. Thus the number of
births equalled that of deaths, and the “Aberdeen” arrives at her destination
with as many souls on board as embarked at Plymouth. The satisfactory health,
statistics doubtless resulted from the excellent arrangements, both for the
accommodation and the dieting of the emigrants. The single women were
berthed aft, the single men amidships, and the married couples and their
children forward. The after part of the vessel was barricaded off from the rest
of it by gates in the alleyways underneath the bridge-deck. These gates were
kept locked, the sailors having, in order to get from aft to forward, and fice-
versa, to pass over the bridge-deck. To assist in preserving order, 12 con-
stables, selected at Plymouth from among the male emigrants, were distributed
in the various “ quarters.” The diet supplied to the emigrants was, as to
quantity, strictly in accordance with the scale sanctioned by the New South
Wales Government, and the quality was, without exception, very good. In-
deed, there has been no cause for complaint of any kind whatever. This
remark applies equally to the manner in which the emigrants have been treated
and to the way in which they have conducted themselves. Miss Bant, who,
with Mrs. Osborne, has been in charge of the single women, states that she
never before had such a “nice lot of young women” under her supervision,and
she acted as matron on board emigrant ships for several years past, the pre-
sent being her fourteenth or fifteenth voyage in that capacity from England to
these colonies. As to amusements, the emigrants fared exceedingly well.
Among the entertainments were some very enjoyable concerts given on the
Suarter-deck. The perusal of the Aberdeen Times, which, under the conductor-
tip of Mr. F. E. Johnson, appeared weekly, and contained, among other con-
tributions, a capital paper on New South Wales and the other Australasian
colonies, also assisted to while away the time as well as to afford interesting
and valuable information. Those who had relatives in any other portion of
the vessel than that in which they were themselves quartered were permitted
to visit them each Sunday afternoon for a couple of hours—a concession that
was much appreciated. For the youngsters there were two schools, one under
the mastership of Mr, McCorquodale. and the other taught by Miss Bose. A
few days before the “ Aberdeen” reached Port Jackson, prizes were distributed
among the most deserving scholars, and there was also an attractive exhibition
of fancy work done by the single women.
When the “Aberdeen” anchored off Watson's Bay, she was boarded by Dr,
Sibley, the assistant health officer, who finding everythingin a satisfactory con-
dition, advised Dr. Mackellar, the health officer, accordingly, and in reply
received permission to grant the vessel pratique. After about two hours’ deten-
tion, the “ Aberdeen” steamed up to her anchorage in Neutral Bay, where Dr.
Mackellar came on board, and after an inspection of the immigrants and their
quarters expressed himself as being highly pleased. So, of course, were our new
colonists with the magnificent view they obtained whilst the “ Aberdeen” rode
at anchor in “ our beautiful harbour,” whose surface was crowded with nume-
rous yachts taking part in the Double Bay regatta, and other craft of various
sorts and sizes. The latest arrivals in this land of peace and plenty were, how-
ever, not a little startled by the booming of heavy guns being fired on land by
some of our brave defenders at practice, and they were quite as much unpre-
pared for the information kindly volunteered by one of the visitors from the
city, that this colony maintained a standing army and a gallant navy, to strike
terror into the hearts of our enemies.
Early to-day the unnominated single women will come ashore, and be taken
to the Immigration Depot, at the top of King-street, where they will bo open
for hire in the course of a day or so. To-day, also, the Immigration Board
will meet as usual, on board the “Aberdeen,” and if everything be considered
satisfactory, the other immigrants will be allowed to land as soon os possible.
It may be mentioned that the single women are mostly domestic servants,
and are principally Scotch or Irish, There are very few English. The
majority of the single men are labourers, and most of them hail from the
Emerald Isle, The following is the classification: —Assisted: 26 married
couples and children; 26 single men; 166 single women. Nominated: 38
married couples and families, 61 single men, 107 single women. Total number
of souls, 611, equal to 520 i statute adults. Trades ore represented as follows:
Farm and other labourers, 88; gasmaker,!; carpenters and joiners, 10; miners,
12; bricklayers, 5; blacksmiths, 2; carriage builder, I; tailors, 4; brickmaker,
1; carvers and gilders, 2 ; butcher, 1; dyer, 1; signwriter, 1; cabinetmaker,
1; clerks, 2; schoolmaster,!; patternmaker,!; engineer,!; baker, 1; plas-
terer, 1; warehouseman, 1; compositor, 1; potter, 1 j painters, 4; grocers, 2;
telegraph operator, 1; brickmakers, 3. Total, 151.
It is our duty, before concluding our paper, to return our thanks
to the printers, Messrs. Batson and Atwater, who have brought it
out so quickly and so well.
We trust our Sydney friends will subscribe liberally for copies,
as this is the best of ways to repay us for our trouble.
The sketches have been drawn on stone, by an old shipmate of
ours, Mr. R. F. B. Lowe, artist, Te Anau, Milson*s Point, North.
Shore.
