

The David Jones' Brides Book


€HIS little book aims at answering general questions you would
like to ask about your wedding. You will find some of the
newest and the oldest ideas about wedding frocks and veils,
about the bridesmaids, the wedding breakfast and the reception.
All the formalities are clearly set out —from the time when you begin
to make out lists of guests to the crowning moment when you drive
away amidst a shower of rose leaves and good wishes. As you read
through the book you will find the information about your new home
and its furnishing, a full list for the kitchen and the linen press, and
many hints to save making mistakes in the rush and excitement of
getting married.
But no book could answer every question ; after you have read it
from cover to cover there may still be questions of your own that
require special working out, and our free Wedding Advisory Service
is there to give just that help you are needing.
DAVID JONES'
WEDDING ADVISORY SERVICE
Second floor
Castlereagh St. Store, Sydney


INDEX
Page
How to Get Married . . . . . . . . . . 3
Choosing Your Ring . . . . . . . . . . 3
About Your Presents . . . . . . . . . . 4
How the Expenses are Shared . . . . . . 4
Invitations . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
What Should the Bridegroom Wear? . . . . 7
If You are Having Ushers . . . . . . . . 7
Your Wedding Frock . . . . . . . . . . 7
New Way With Flowers . . . . . . . , 9
Your Crowning Glory . . . . . . . . . . 10
Building Up Your Trousseau . . . . . . 12
A Word About Bridesmaids . . . . . . . . 15’
The Best Man . . . . . . . . . . ..17
At the Church . . . . . . . . .. 17
And Afterwards at . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Giving a Reception at Home . . . . . . 20
The Wedding Cake . . . . . . . . 21
What Happens at the Reception . . . . 22'
If You are Having a Chairman . . . . 23
The Cars for Your Wedding .. ~ . . 24
Photographs . . . . . . . . . . 24
Honeymoon Plans . . . , . . . . . . 29
The Complete Linen Press , . . . . . . . 25
List for the Kitchen . . . . . . . . 27
When You Choose Your Home . . . . . . 28
Points to Remember . . . . . . . . 29
A Word About Carpets . . . . . . 30'
The Dining Room . . . . . . . . 30
The Lounge Room . . . . . . . . 30
In the Kitchen .. .. . , . . . . 31
In Furnishings . . . . . . . . . . 31
Jobs You Can Do Yourself . . . . . . 31
And Then—lnsurance . . . . . . . . 32
Many Happy Returns of Your Wedding Inside Back Cover


HOW TO GET MARRIED
When two people decide to get married there
are certain definite formalities to be observed.
Most marriages are by licence these days, and
the clergyman will require the following par-
ticulars for entry in the Marriage Register;
1. Full names of bride and groom.
2. Whether spinster or bachelor, widow or
widower or divorced person.
3. Birthplace and date of birth.
4. Full name of father, and Christian and
maiden surname of mother.
5. In cases where either the bride or the
bridegroom is under the age of 21 years
the consent of the parents (if living to-
gether) must be obtained on the form
provided.
Be prepared with these details so that no time
will be wasted at this busy period re-visiting the
clergyman. It is usual to give the clergyman
at least 14 days’ clear notice of your intention
to marry, but he must have at least three clear
days. If there is urgent need of marriage in
less than three days, an affidavit must be sworn
before a Justice of the Peace.
The wedding ceremony differs according to the
ritual and custom of the different churches, and
while it would not be possible to give a com-
plete account of these differences in this book,
the Wedding Advisory Service will be glad to
set your mind at rest on any point which
puzzles you in connection with church
formalities.
Marriage by banns is rare nowadays, but if you
prefer this w r ay, the banns must be read on
three consecutive Sundays in the parishes of
both bride and bridegroom, w r ho should have
resided in these parishes for at least 15 days
before the commencement of the reading of
banns.
The usual fee accorded a clergyman officiating
at a wedding is three guineas, but in no church
is there a hard and fast rule about fees. The
amount given will vary with the bridegroom’s
wishes.
It is not now essential to use the exact form of
service printed in the prayer book ; if you wish,
you may use the revised, modernised form
which excludes the promise to obey.
Marriage During Lent
Most churches are not in favour of weddings
during the Lenten period ; under certain cir-
cumstances, however, a marriage may be
arranged, and in this case no flowers are per-
mitted and frequently there is no music. Lent
extends from Ash Wednesday until 12 o’clock
on Easter Saturday.
Civil Marriage
Civil marriages in Sydney are conducted by a
District Registrar, with whom an appointment
should be made at least three days in advance
of the date decided upon for the ceremony.
The usual legal forms must be filled in, and if
either of the parties is under age the consent
of the parents (in writing) must be produced.
If being married by the Registrar, it is usual to
take two witnesses, both over the age of 21.
The bride wears a simple suit or day frock
and may wear or carry flowers. There should
not be a best man or bridesmaids.
CHOOSING YOUR RING
This ring that you will wear all through your
life is an important and a sacred symbol; but


at the same time you must not forget that it is
a piece of jewellery of which you will want to
be proud. Perhaps it is for both reasons that a
bride is allowed to accompany her fiance to the
jewellers on the day it is bought. Allow your-
self plenty of time to have the initials engraved
inside. Your wedding ring should be narrow,
and made of white or yellow gold or the more
expensive platinum , it may be either plain or
chased. And, of course, the very last word in
modern luxury is the wedding ring of white
gold set with tiny diamonds or alternating
stones all the way round.
ABOUT YOUR PRESENTS
The wedding presents are usually sent well in
advance by the invited guests, so you should
have ample time to arrange them on a spare
table ready for inspection. Leave the sender’s
card attached to each present and group them
as attractively as you can. If you are not hav-
ing the wedding reception at your own home,
you may have to make a list of the presents and
senders’ names and take it to the place of the
reception, where it should be displayed in a
place conspicuous to everyone. The expense
of having the presents packed and moved is
quite considerable, and when the breakfast is
held outside the home, the usual way is to have
only the gift list at the reception, meanwhile
inviting friends to come to your house a day or
two before for a view of the wedding presents.
You need not acknowledge the gifts until you
return from the honeymoon, and then it will
only be necessary to write a very brief note of
thanks. It is important to keep a written
record as each gift comes in, so that there will
be no chance of making a mistake later.
Bride’s Gift Register
In the choosing of presents, the Wedding
Advisory Service can be invaluable. It gives
one service that eliminates the faux pas of so
many weddings —the duplicating of gifts. The
Bureau will keep for the bride a Bride’s Gift
Register. In this, friends may enter their
presents as they buy them, or the bride may
ask that a gift just arrived at her home be
recorded. Friends can consult this book and
see that they are not buying something the
bride already has. If this is done the possi-
bility can be dismissed of a perplexed bride
facing a half-dozen toast-racks or cocktail sets.
Personal Gifts
Presents are given by bride to groom and bride-
groom to bride —gifts which are usually of a
permanent and personal nature. A travelling
rug, cuff-links, cigarette case or suitcase would
be the type of present the bride would give, but
naturally, much will depend upon the tastes
of the bridegroom, and you may choose a gift
connected with his particular sport or hobby.
The bridegroom must present each of the
bridesmaids with a small present to mark his
recognition of their services. Very often the
bridegroom’s gift forms part of the wedding
ensemble. Perhaps an evening bag or a string
of really good pearls. Then there are bracelets,
dress rings, earrings, handbags and many other
acceptable gifts —all somewhere about the
price usually paid by the groom for this little
token of gratitude.
Sometimes the bridegroom makes a small gift
to the best man in appreciation of all he has
done, but this is not absolutely necessary, and
with all the expense of getting married, the
simplest of gifts are in order.
HOW THE EXPENSES
ARE SHARED
Although the wedding day is definitely the
bride’s day, she has really very little to do
except look her best and keep calm! It is the
bride’s relations and friends who carry the
weight of the wedding itself.
The bride’s father will have the greater part of
the expenses to pay, and the bride’s mother
will undertake most of the planning and
arranging.
The expenses of the bride’s family are:
The house linen and trousseau.
The wedding invitations and the wedding
announcements in the press.
The wedding reception.


The cars to convey his daughter and her
attendants to the church, and later to
the place where the reception is to be
held. Often the bride’s father must
also arrange a car for the clergyman and
his wife.
The bridegroom pays for:
The wedding ring.
The music (if the ceremony is a choral one).
The clergyman’s fee, the marriage licence
and tips (to his chauffeur and the verger
of the church).
The bride’s and bridesmaids’ bouquets, the
bridesmaids’ gifts and often a gift to the
best man.
His own car to and from the church.
We are not including the special gifts exchanged
by bride and bridegroom under the heading of
“expenses.”
With regard to church decoration, this is also a
matter for the attention of the bride’s family,
whose friends usually help in some degree.
INVITATIONS
On the next page you will find a wedding
invitation that is the last word in correctness.
The Advisory Service will be able to show you
a series of different styles in wedding invitations,
and if you would like to save a little more
time, our Wedding Advisory Service will let
you have the price of any number in any style
and have them printed and posted for you.
Individual Problems
The correct wording is always the same, but
many questions come from brides who cannot
use the conventional wording. Perhaps the
bride’s mother has married again, or an elder
sister is giving the reception, or, again, you
may wish to invite only a small number of
intimate friends to the breakfast, while others
will be invited to dance later at 8 o’clock. Of
course, both the clergyman and his wife should
be asked to the reception, even if you do not
know them very well.
The wedding invitations may be printed in
silver or any colour to tone in with your wedding
scheme, and you must see that they are sent
out a full month before the wedding. Your
family is responsible for the cost of the wedding
invitations, sending them out and checking the
lists later.
If the bride’s parents are not living, the invita-
tions are sent out in the name of the person
from whose house she is to be married. A
widow should send out invitations in her
parents’ name if married from their home, and
in her own name if married from her own home.
When ordering the invitations, it is quite usual
to provide small white boxes for the distribution
of the wedding cake. These save a great deal
of trouble at the reception, and may be mailed
later to friends who were not present. Silver-
printed cards can be secured to send out
with these.
One word of general advice about your
invitations: When you and the bridegroom’s
family are making out the lists, don’t forget
that family quarrels should all be forgotten at
this time; deliberate omissions may well cause
bitter words in the near future. Also, invita-
tion cards should all be sent out on the same
day, to avoid the possible reproach of having
asked some people before others.
Newspaper Reports
of the Wedding
If you are having a big wedding and would like
a journalist to attend, it is correct to send a
formal invitation; the same applies to press
photography. However, this is rarely necessary
and the Advisory Service will be glad to write
an account of your wedding and send it to any
papers you choose.




WHAT SHOULD
THE BRIDEGROOM WEAR?
Or, perhaps, we should say, “What should the
men wear?” Because the best man, the grooms-
men, the ushers, and the bride’s escort should
be dressed exactly like the bridegroom.
The correct dressing for the men at a formal
daytime wedding is, of course, a morning coat
in black or dark grey material, with an outside
breast pocket just showing a corner of white
handkerchief. The vest is of the same material,
and the trousers of striped worsted or cashmere.
The shirt is white and the collar white dress
with a medium point. Although an ordinary
knot tie may be worn with this, the smartest
cravat is the four-in-hand, which has wide,
crossed ends, and is usually held in place with
a plain centre pin. The shoes and socks are
black, the gloves white or grey; white or grey
spats may be worn, and a silk hat.
For an informal daytime wedding, the bride-
groom and other central figures may wear
ordinary lounge suits of dark blue or grey with
single-breasted fastening. White shirt and
white linen collar are worn and the tie is usually
in a medium grey. Black shoes and socks of a
quiet toning complete the ensemble. Grey-
gloves may also be worn. If you are being
married in the late afternoon and the breakfast
will continue after six o’clock, the strictest
etiquette says that full evening dress should
be worn by all the men in the wedding party,
that is—dress coat with tails and outside breast
pocket showing a white handkerchief, the
white dress vest, single or double-breasted, and
the black dress trousers braided down the sides.
A dress shirt, a white tie worn with peaks out-
side the collar, black silk socks and black pumps
are the correct accessories.
The Question of Dinner Suits
But Australians are not always so strict over the
matter of formal evening dress, and at many
wedding parties dinner suits are worn, of course,
with a black tie, which should be tied by hand
if you want to be quite correct.
The men may wear buttonholes at any time of
day, and the usual choice is a sprig oi orange
blossom or a small white flower, such as the
gardenia or carnation.
IF YOU ARE HAVING USHERS
They are usually chosen from brothers, cousins
or young men friends. The ushers arrange
with the best man and the verger (after consult-
ing the lists of acceptances to see how many
guests are expected) so that each has charge
of several pews. The bride’s family and friends
are seated on the left side of the church, the
bridegroom’s on the right. Nearest relatives
are placed in the front pews. Each usher
should have a written list of the guests for whom
he will be responsible; he should stand at the
door to receive their tickets, or if there are no
tickets and he does not know them by sight, he
should ask their names and show them to their
places. If you have ushers, they are also
responsible for seeing that the cars are ready to
convey the party from the church.
YOUR WEDDING FROCK
Satin, lacc and velvet . . . crepes and mate-
lasses, chiffon, organdi and materials with a
gold or silver design —you have an endless
range of lovely fabrics for your wedding frock.
Which are you going to choose?
First of all —perhaps it would be best to decide
which of these materials will not be particularly
suitable for you. Any shining material has a
tendency to emphasize extra thinness or plump-
ness. Patterned and flowered materials may
have a far from slenderising effect, and taffeta,
with its stiff folds, also looks best on a really slim
figure. Remember, when you are choosing
your frock, that lace is softening and drapes
beautifully; that lace is becoming a fashion
highlight, and that lace may be combined in
your wedding gown with satin, taffeta, chiffon
or net in many charming ways. Perhaps you
have always thought of being married in satin,
but you are not quite sure whether you will look
your best in it; try lace over satin, you may find
that the pearly gleam of the satin under a soften-
ing veil of lace is just what you are needing.
A gown of fragile stiffened lace in ivory or deep
cream or magnolia over a matching satin slip
always has a slenderising effect.


Romantic Sheers
For a really romantic wedding—particularly
a Spring or Summer wedding—there is nothing
like sheer chiffon or organdie, but you must be
careful to see that your headdress is just right
and that the bridesmaids make a perfect back-
ground for you. Or you may surround yourself
with masses of foaming tulle over the silky rustle
of taffeta. Georgette, too, has beautiful possi-
bilities. Choose a fabric and design that will
bring out all the most attractive qualities on this
day of all days. A tall, dark stately girl may
even surprise herself when she sees the effect of
a sheath of silver lame ; and another girl who
is small and quiet with rather straightish hair
might blossom with all the charm of an old-
world picture in a full-skirted gown of satin
brocade. Your height and your figure, your
colouring, the way you do your hair, the subtle
differences in the way you walk and talk —these
are all important when you come to discuss
your wedding frock.
Beware of Mistakes
Now aword or two to save you making mistakes.
If you are thinking of lame or any metal fabric,
be prepared to have a really good one; all these
gold and silver materials tend to look tinselly in
strong light if you economise on the price. Don’t
have too many frills and furbelows on your
wedding dress unless you are really going in for
a “picture” wedding ; a church is a rather severe
setting, and at the altar we always find that
classical and simple dressing looks best—par-
ticularly for the central figure—the bride.
Even for bridesmaids’dresses avoid hard pinks
and blues in satin, hard designs in taffeta and
hard necklines all the time.
Your Own Idea
And, even that is only a quarter of what can
be said about your wedding frock. Perhaps,
if you live too far away to come yourself, you
could write and ask all you would like to know.
If you would like ideas for the wedding frock,
tell the Advisory Service all you can about your
appearance, what you feel you can spend and
what sort of a wedding you are having. Don’t
forget to say if there is something you have
always longed to wear, and may be made to fit
in with all the other requirements. Each of
us would like to forget expense on this occasion
of occasions, at least, and have our dream
wedding dress regardless of cost. But few of us
can fulfil our wishes. Happily, to-day beauti-
ful wedding gowns can be made for quite
reasonable outlays. You may choose from a
range of individual wedding gowns which we
have in stock from 69/6 to 8 gns., or for as little
as 10 gns. you may have your gown made to
order in our own workrooms.
Beauty in Line
One of the greatest comforts of all is to know
that your new foundation garment is going to
make many things possible. Just consider the
word “foundation” ; it means that the garment
you choose is going to be the very basis of your
beauty, and unless it is chosen with expert care
all your well-laid schemes may go awry and
your lovely frock only look half as effective as
it should.
Your wedding is the time to treat yourself to a
really good foundation garment —fitted to bring
out all that is best in your figure and smooth
away the faults. It is so vitally important.
Every figure can be made a better figure if it
is properly controlled ; it is not a question of
size ; it is a question of moulding the lines into
the correct proportion. Especially if you are
wearing a close-fitting frock you may need
some advice on these matters, and you may
want to know something about this new defined
waistline that is so flattering to us all. A clever
uplift bustline will add much to the beauty of
your figure, too —and, remember that as you
stand at the altar, the centre of attraction for
every eye in the church, the beauty of line is very,
very important.
More Informal
Many think that every girl should be married
in bridal attire, for the picture of a girl in her
wedding dress, veiled in a soft cloud of tulle,
has an unforgettable beauty.
But sometimes that is impossible, and so, in this
talk about wedding attire, something should
be said about informal weddings, too. Don’t
choose too deep a colour if you are being mar


ried in dinner or afternoon dress. Choose a
pastel shade that has always suited you well
and build up ideas around it. A dinner frock
may be turned into a useful evening frock if
you don’t feel you need an ankle-length long-
sleeved dress, and there are various ways of
having a frock like this designed. Then, a full-
length afternoon frock made on simple lines
and with a fairly high neckline may later be
shortened to add to your honeymoon wardrobe
for daytime. You might wear one of the new
short veils or a specially designed headdress
with a dinner dress. With an afternoon frock
you could wear either a wide-brimmed felt or
a large stitched hat, or any type of cocktail
toque that suits you.
Of course, if you are having a very quiet
wedding or rushing straight away on a boat or
train, you may decide to be married in a
travelling suit or ensemble. This is when it
would be nice to have a lovely fur with a spray
of white gardenias nestling at the throat or a
few sprigs of sweet-scented lily of the valley.
It doesn’t matter what you decide on —you
must be sure your accessories are absolutely
perfect.
Careful planning can make your wedding day
something that will remain in your heart as the
loveliest memory you possess : it is something
the bridegroom would like to remember, too.
NEW WAYS WITH FLOWERS
It is safe to say that for the simple, effective wed-
ding of to-day, success lies in the choice of the
flowers you carry against the lovely back-
ground of the dresses. If possible, frocks and
flowers should be planned together.
Make a note of the flowers that will be in
bloom on the date of your wedding—or, per-
haps, it should be said —the flowers that should
be in bloom, for sometimes rain, frost, wind or
dry weather comes just at the wrong moment
and plans for flowers must be changed in a
hurry. It is often necessary to think of an
alternative for roses or camellias or water lilies
that either would not come out or would not
stay out according to calendar.
The Cost of Flowers
Unless you are willing to pay hothouse prices,
the first thing to consider when you are plan-
ning your wedding flowers is the time of the
year. People make strange requests to florists
for out of season decorations, and it must be
remembered that such flowers as lily of the
valley, orchids, gardenias and cyclamen, which
can be forced to bloom out of season, command
far higher prices than the natural flowers of the
season.
What is the usual cost of the bridal bouquet?
The average cost is somewhere between one
guinea and three guineas, but beautiful wedding
bouquets are obtainable in the city and
suburbs for 15/-, and, of course, looking on the
other side of the picture —the bride’s flowers
often cost from five to ten guineas.
Bouquets are Simple
Flowers for each bridesmaid usually cost from
7/6 to 30/-, and there are many new ideas for
arranging them in harmony with the new frocks.
In general, modern wedding bouquets are
smaller, more compact and simpler in their
beauty than the ones our mothers carried.
Less fern is used —sometimes just a few pale
sprays of maiden hair, very rarely asparagus
fern —and more attention is paid to the
accentuation of the frock. Every wedding
gown is different, and each requires its special
type of bouquet. For one, a tall sheaf of ex-
quisite gladioli; for another, a sheaf of rose-
tinted waterlilies held flat along the hand and
arm. Frangipanni trailing —but not carelessly
as it used to —against a classical frock of mag-
nolia satin, and blended as only a modern
florist can blend it, with golden roses. No
longer a formless “shower” of flowers and fern,
each flower in the bride’s and bridesmaids’
bouquets is wired in its separate place —trans-
parent azaleas mixed with slim stalks of lily of
the valley, tulips and roses with a touch of pale
blue hyacinth, gorgeous chrysanthemums
tipped with pink, tiny old-fashioned posies of
rosebuds and forget-me-nots held high at the
neckline. Fiery roses open full against a frock
of pale green taffetas. Gerberas together in a


riot of pink and red and gold and apricot.
Single white camellias alone with their dark
green leaves. Delphiniums in every blue
imaginable ringed with green hydrangea, ringed
again with multi-coloured sweet peas.
You may be Original
Beautiful effects may be created by having your
flowers pinned or sewn on to the gown as a
corsage and carrying a tiny replica in your
hand. Wedding flowers are always different
and always individual —seven gardenias in a
hand-spray; two perfect orchids falling from a
prayer book; a trail of exotic madonna lilies
inside the curve of a cowl neckline; a bride in
organdie with La France roses clustering on her
hat; a lei of Spring flowers carried over the
arm ; a bride in chiffon with a posy of carnations
at her waist.
YOUR CROWNING GLORY
Our grandmothers who walked down the aisle
with faces discreetly veiled would be surprised
to see that this sweet old fashion has now be-
come one of the smartest coiffures for the
modern bride. The veil has a short front sec-
tion falling just clear of your bouquet. As you
walk down the aisle on your husband’s arm,
your face will be revealed for the first time
during the ceremony. If you are wearing this
type of over-the-face veil with flowers or a
coronet, the front section may be attached by
tiny hooks or loops and completely removed
in the vestry. But there is really no need for
hooks or fastenings if the headdress is arranged
in the right way, for it is possible to attach the
front part of the veil in such a way that the
head decorations are not veiled during the
taking of photographs.
A lovely fragile veil of old lace —if you are lucky
enough to have it in your family —can look
beautiful with a cluster of orange blossoms in
your hair.
You Need a Special Veil
A bride’s veil should be her crowning glory,
very soft and feminine —every line of it designed
to heighten her charm.
There are so many things to consider. Are you
a little taller or shorter than you should be?
Would a high headdress make you look
“dumpy”? Or would it make the bridegroom
look short beside you? These are important
questions when you are deciding about your
veil, and you must take into account the fabric
and colour of your wedding gown and how you
will have it made. Satin or lace? Chiffon or
matelasse? Velvet or lame? White or ivory
or magnolia? You see, quite a different type of
headdress would be necessary in each case, and,
while with one frock you could wear the new
floating circular veil of three-quarter length,
with another, perhaps, you would need the
long classical lines of a train. If you were to
plan your frock in one of the lovely stiffened
laces, only the filmiest veiling of tulle should
be used —perhaps even two vards less than we
would use for a frock of satin.
Primroses Decide the Matter
Just imagine you are planning a Spring wed-
ding your friends will never forget. You want
to look like the spirit of Spring, and so we
discuss every possibility of flowers and brides-
maids’ frocks. Primroses decide the matter.
Bridesmaids in primrose organdi with sheaves
of daffodils, and yourself in a foaming frock
of stiffened chiffon —a creamy shade to match
your bouquet of primroses and freczias. Then
your veil —tulle with a faint touch of magnolia
—standing out round your head and shoulders
like a cloud and reaching only to the hips.
Perhaps, you will have your veil caught with
a trail of orange blossom buds set at the base
of the crown. Can you see it?
Or are you feeling just a little unconventional
about your wedding? Would you like to wear
blue as pale as a whisper—tulle for your frock
and veil, bridesmaids in blossom white with
shepherdess hats of deeper blue and armfuls
of peach blossom. There is a lovely shade
called “Mother of Pearl” —very much worn
here and overseas —and this is another possi-
bility for weddings all the year round.


With mother of pearl is worn a veil in pearl-
pink tulle, and one of the loveliest headdresses
is a creamy velvet flower with an opalescent
centre. Both dress and headdress should be
planned together.
History Makes Headdresses
There are many ideas for headdress —new
arrangements of orange blossom and buds,
the “top-knot” and how it should be carried
out, and then, the variety of “period” head-
dresses that come to us from every country in
the world.
Your veil may drift from a Juliet cap or a Dutch
halo or a Medici twist of pearls and satin. It
may be pointed up with a crown of stones or
held flat to your head with a rope of blossom
buds. Perhaps, you should have a close-
fitting cap set far back on your head and
holding a stand-out veil of tulle. There are
wreaths of miniature arum lilies, Mary Queen
of Scots caps with that little heart-shaped peak
—veils and veils and veils, each one for a special
type of person. And if you are being married
in an afternoon frock, it may be a small straw or
featherweight felt to match your chosen colour.
It is surprising that these lovely headdresses
add very little to the cost of the bridal outfit
if they are planned carefully. For 29/11 you
can have a veil specially designed to make you
look your loveliest. Even six months before
the wedding is not too early to think about
your veil.
Plan Ahead
In fact, planning ahead thoroughly is a secret
of a successful wedding ceremony. If you are
careful to see that everything is ready before-
hand, you will leave the important day for the
most important part of the prelude —the pre-
paring of the bride herself. For the past six
weeks you will have been paying particular
attention to your skin, hair, nails, feet, and
figure. You will have had several scientific
scalp treatments to tone up the hair and im-
prove its lustre. At least three weeks ago you
have had your hair permanently waved. (Un-
less, of course, you have naturally curly hair).
Two or three settings since then have taken all
stiffness out of the hair, so that it now falls softly.
You will have had as many facials as your
budget will allow for, remembering that a
white veil accentuates every tiny blemish on the
skin. Regular pedicures and massaging con-
dition the feet, and keep them supple over the
pre-wedding party period. Lacquered toe-
nails enhance the charm of the prettiest feet.
While having the pedicures, you will also have
had several manicures, clearing the cuticle,
bringing your hands to the right softness. You
will have been following a sensible diet —plenty
of greens and salads and water for the slim
figure.
Day of Days
Now, on the day of days, you are ready for the
beauty ritual. You must give yoursell two or
three hours. Nothing shows so quickly in the
face as the strain of hurry. Taking your time,
you have a facial, perfect, natural, demure
make-up ; a manicure; and the hair set and
dressed. The coiffure will, of course, be de-
signed with the headdress in mind. When
your toilette is complete you turn from those
professionals to the final expert who puts on
your wedding gown and adjusts the headdress
and veil. It is desirable that this expert con-
tinues on to the church and places your veil and
train correctly.
Experts at Home
It is better to have experts to do these final
treatments for you if possible. Few of us ever
take part in more than two or three weddings,
and it is difficult to familiarise yourself with
every little practical point. The experts, on the
other hand are thoroughly versed in the routine,
and know from practical experience what is
really necessary and desirable. The Wedding
Advisory Service will arrange for experts in all
departments —hairdressing, facial, manicuring
and dressing—to be at your home at the right
time, and for the dresser to go on to the church
to meet you. The deft touches of experts mean
that the ceremony goes off smoothly —and your
wedding is the one ceremony in which you
want no sorry mishap.


Bridesmaids with
a Difference
Now, the bridesmaids. One of the most popular
headdresses is the short eye-veil of tulle to match
the frock. It may be caught with a trail of silver
leaves, a cluster of flowers to match the bouquets
or a twist of material, or, again, it may be
finished with a halo of curled ostrich or pearls.
Tulle may be pleated into little Juliet caps or
stiffened into flower-crowned picture hats.
Flowers, again, may make a flat shepherdess
hat; sometimes tiny blooms are clustered all
over a Mary Queen of Scots’ headdress.
Have your own and the bridesmaids’ headgear
safely fixed before the wedding day, so that
nothing can possibly go wrong. Real flowers
are often unsatisfactory, being difficult to
adjust and likely to wilt in the warm atmos-
phere of a crowded room, while artificial
flowers, which are so beautifully made nowa-
days, have none of these disadvantages.
And the Practical Details
For a bridal veil of lace or Brussels net, three to
eight yards of tulle, according to length of
train, would be required to make an effective
mounting. This can usually be arranged to
suit you without cutting the fabric. If the veil
is very old and showing signs of tearing away,
it may be necessary to strengthen it with new
tulle. Cost of from four to eight yards of tulle
must be added if the veil is a new one, and the
cost of a headdress —usually from 10/-. Tulle
is obtainable in white, ivory, magnolia and
parchment, but it can be dyed any colour. It
should be remembered that the special bridal
tulle is 108 inches wide. So you will see that a
new wedding veil will cost from two guineas,
according to whether the tulle itself is of special
fineness, and also whether you wish to add the
cost of an over-veil of lace. This will all
depend on your own feeling, and, while one
bride likes to save money for the trousseau,
another desires the best of everything for the
great day of all days when she will appear more
beautiful than ever before, at the altar.
BUILDING UP YOUR TROUSSEAU
Your trosseau is one of the most difficult things
to talk to you about. So much depends on
what you personally like in the way of under-
things, what you have already gathered to-
gether, and where you are intending to live. If
you were going to the tropics there would be
nothing better for the greater part of the
trousseau than pure silks and voiles, which
launders so splendidly and feels so cool. And
of this you would need a plentiful supply.
Mysteriously Feminine
But most of us do not go far away when we
marry, and the ordinary trousseau will consist
of one or two luxurious sets, some very extra-
vagant nightgowns several under-sets for every-
day, two warm dressing jackets, three sets of
woollens, two woollen sleeping garments and
one or two dressing gowns. This list may be
elaborated in any way you like, but these are
the essentials to consider when you are getting
your trosseau of underwear together.
Satin, crepe de chene and triple ninon make
the loveliest undersets. With their delicately-
shirred yokes, pin-tucks, appliqued flowers and
inlets of lace or net, these “luxury” sets are
irresistible to the feminine heart; for once you
may He tempted to forget expense and have
two or three under-sets such as you have always
longed for. There will be no time in your life
when you want to feel more feminine and
attractive, and there is nothing like really lovely
underwear to give a woman this mysteriously
feminine air. Your wedding set will, of course,
be in white, ivory or magnolia to match the
bridal gown, and its lace should be either the
same shade or a very pale ecru, for it is sur-
prising how deep-coloured laces show through.
Sets for Every Day
For everyday underwear, there are some
eautifully btailored garments in silk milana
which deserve your attention—nicks and vests,
slips and all-in-ones, nightgowns and pyjamas,
trimmed with exquisite laces and graded to fit
every measurement. Then there are night


gowns and under-sets in fine voile and in
flowered marquisette—a material like geor-
gette with a narrow, self-stripe and scattered
flowers giving an old-world effect; you will find
underwear of this type inexpensive, and it will
keep its dainty freshness after many launder-
ings. Silks are economical, and you might
easily make them the basis of your trosseau, for
they conceal a great deal of service behind a
sheer and crisp appearance.
Be Sure You Know
Ever since your engagement you have probably
been buying and making lovely underwear for
your trosseau, but before you add any more to
your stock, look about for the latest ideas for
the bride —there may easily be things neither
you nor your friends have heard about. There
are some satin brocades that are very beautiful,
self floral satin for pyjamas, new contrasts in
lace, and dozens of ways of making your trous-
seau more glamourous. To your special
“treasures” you should add four or five sets of
underwear for every day, and perhaps one or
two of the all-in-one garments that are so cool
and comfortable for Summer wear, as they
combine scantees with a well-cut uplift brassiere
—all you need under a light frock.
Have plenty of incidental nighties—not neces-
sarily matched with your sets —and plenty of
stockings both sheer and serviceable. For
your stockings, choose two pair of the same
colour to tone with each ensemble, and you
will get double wear from them by the elimina-
tion of the wasted “odd stockings.”
In making things for your trousseau see that the
material you are using is worth all the time
you are putting into it; it is better to make up
a good-quality spun silk than an inferior crepe
de chine or satin. Good washing satin should
cost about three or four shillings a yard, other
reliable silks being obtainable for as little as
1/11. Whatever you choose, let it be the best
of its kind, for only then can you be sure that
it will save expenditure later on.
Making Your Own
Try combining the new ecru lace with white,
or sunbrown with an amber shade of silk.
Most of the latest underwear is cut on
the cross to ensure good fit, and, although this
means buying a little extra material, it is by far
the best way to make everything. The bias cut
moulds the garment to every line of the figure
and gives you the smooth line that is so neces-
sary under modern frocks. The Wedding
Advisory Service will help you about the
amount of material needed for a complete
under-set, a slip, or a nightgown. Shoulder
straps should be made of strong ribbon, or a
narrow rouleau of the material cut on the
straight (after machining you can pull the
rouleau right side out by attaching a small
gold safety pin to one end and drawing it
through).
Dainty medallions and motifs of lace are not
expensive, and will add greatly to the appear-
ance of your hand-made underwear. If you
want to embroider, it is a popular idea for a
bride to work her new initials on everything
in the trosseau.
Woollens and Housecoats
Are you going to be a Summer bride? Then
don’t forget that cold weather must come
sooner or later, and be sure you are prepared
with several sets of cosy woollen underwear.
To-day’s smart and well-cut woollens are not
even distant cousins to the old-fashioned and
bulky “woollies” of yesterday. You will find
your woollen underwear an endless comfort and
delight. Woollen pyjamas are made in fas-
cinating designs and colours now —clear apple
green in an unusual pineapple stitch, shell-pink.
Cosy little bed-jackets of knitted Shetland wool
can be bought in pastels to match your pyjamas.
For your dressing gown you will probably want
to pay between 30/- and three guineas. You
must have a dressing gown, of course, for the
bedroom and bathroom, but you must allow for
the important house-coat for informal enter-
tainment. If you have never felt justified be-
fore in buying a really well-tailored house-coat,


you will get a special thrill out of its selection
for your trosseau. For boudoir wear there is
a third very feminine gown, the negligee. This,
with its delicacy and softness enhance every
woman’s charms.
For your house-coat you should have plain
toeless sandals, and for the dressing gown and
negligee, feather or fur-trimmed slippers.
Everyone will want to see your trosseau, and
indeed this is part of the fun of getting married.
But many a bride could wish that all her friends
would come at once, for, however much she likes
her things to be admired, she does not like the
continual passing from hand to hand. Here
is a way to keep the “bloom” on the lovely
things in your bridal box ; have each garment
wrapped in transparent cellophane, showing
the design of the prettiest part. If you do this
it is quite probable that people will not ask you
to unwrap them, and that you will not have all
the extra trouble of pressing and folding them
again during the rush of packing.
The Honeymoon Wardrobe
Actually, everything you buy to take away on
your honeymoon is part of the trousseau. All
tastes and requirements are different, but some
idea of the absolute essentials will give you a
clear conception of money that must be allotted
before you think of extras.
Here are the items a bride usually chooses first
of all; her going away outfit with its accessories
—the hat, bag, shoes and gloves ; a well-cut top
coat —and here is your chance to have exactly
what you have always hoped to have ; one
new evening frock and a frock you will be able
to wear for informal parties, an evening wrap
—if you are economising have it in velvet so
that it will do duty all the year round, and if
you won’t be needing an evening wrap at all —
put the money into a frock that will be suitable
for entertaining at home. Now, besides these
more important items you may need a travelling
coat of tweed, a light Summer coat to wear over
frocks in the street of sheer wool; naturally
your choice will depend on whether you are
going to live in town or in the country and on
the way you are intending to spend your
leisure.
Your “going away” outfit will be described
later, but with regard to the wedding frock,
there are many ways of designing this so that it
may be transformed into a new evening or
dinner dress after the wedding.
Ideas for Saving
For daytime, besides the “going away” frock
or suit, you will need one or two street and tea-
time frocks—in winter they would be in light
woollen or knitted fabrics, in summer just the
usual silks and cottons. If you are choosing a
one-piece frock for the wedding day you
might include a well-tailored two-piece suit
in your honeymoon wardrobe, and you will
find this indispensable all the year round.
Ensembles comprising a full-length or shorter
coat and matching dress are well worth con-
sidering. But whatever you are choosing for
“going away” on the day, be sure it is suitable
for the journey you are to take. A slim, tailored
suit with a fur and extremely smart accessories
—this seems to be the ideal outfit for the bride’s
“going away.”
Clothes and accessories should be as incon-
spicuous as possible if you are trying to econo-
mise—especially such things as coats and suits
which are going to last for several years. Try
and arrange your new wardrobe so that
accessories will be interchangeable, choosing
either navy, brown or black as the basic colour
of your scheme and building up your colours on
this sure foundation. It is really difficult to
discuss on general lines about honeymoon,
clothes, since every bride is different in her
appearance, her tastes, interests and sporting
inclinations.
It Pays to be Careful
Just as the planning of a wedding reception
requires experience, so it is with a honeymoon
wardrobe; everything you buy must be part of
the whole picture, and every penny must be
made to do its full duty.
Just one word more about your clothes for the
honeymoon. See that your luggage contains a
few warm clothes, even if you arc being married
in the height of summer, and take with you at


least one pair of strong walking shoes with flat
heels. A pull-on felt hat will also be useful.
Sports clothes, tennis, golf, beach or riding kit
will also form part of your stock according to the
way you intend to spend your trip. If it’s to be
a summer holiday—just before you press down
the lid of your new trunk—slip in a cool crisp
evening frock of cotton.
When you’re getting the trunks to put all these
things in, don’t buy for one trip only. There
are holidays and week-ends away. Good solid
travel goods will always be handy, and will pay
for themselves in many ways.
A WORD ABOUT BRIDESMAIDS
Your bridesmaids should be chosen from your
own and the bridegroom’s sisters, your near
relations and closest friends. Remember that
on this occasion sisters come even before friends,
and that it is a matter of etiquette for the bride
to include one of the bridegroom’s relations if
she can. The chief bridesmaid is usually an
unmarried sister of the bride ; if she is already
married, she will be called the matron of
honour. Four to six maids are the usual
retinue, but you may have from one to twelve
attendants, together with flower girls and
pages; and in this choice your decision must
not be questioned.
What are their Duties
If there is only one bridesmaid, it might be
more convenient for her to accompany yourself
and your father to the church, but usually the
bridesmaids go to the church a few minutes
before the bride, and there await her in the
porch. It is the duty of the chief bridesmaid
to see that the bride’s veil and train are properly
adjusted before she enters the church, and if
there are any small attendants, she must tell
them what they have to do. Flower girls often
walk in front of the bride, or, if one is taller
than the other, the smaller may go in front and
the taller follow the bride. If there is a train
to be carried, the chief bridesmaid follows the
trainbearers down the aisle and the other maids
fall into pairs behind her. At the altar, the
chief bridesmaid stands a little behind the
bride and to the left, ready to take her flowers
at the right moment.
At the conclusion of the ceremony, the best man
offers his left arm, and they follow the couple to
the vestry. Actually, the other bridesmaids
should remain standing in the aisle, but this
point of etiquette is not always observed in the
excitement of the moment. Bride and groom
are followed down the aisle by their attendants,
and, when they reach the church door, if there
are no groomsmen to partner the other brides-
maids, the best man must escort them all to
the reception.
“Second” to the Bride
At the reception the chief bridesmaid resumes
her role of “second” to the bride, helping to
distribute the wedding cake and entertain the
guests. Her last official duty is to help the
bride to change into her going-away dress.
But your chief bridesmaid must not think that
her part is played at the wedding alone. True,
she generally helps the bride to dress and keeps
her company on the morning of the wedding,
but for many weeks before the actual day she
must be ready to help the bride in every way
she can. She is really the bride’s maid, and
there will be lots of little duties for her in
connection with packing the trousseau and
assisting at pre-wedding parties. The bride
will want her to undertake responsibility for the
bouquets, and will most likely find her a great
help in connection with the reception. This
is the time when the chief bridesmaid puts
aside all her own considerations, and, if you
who are reading this now have been chosen
for this privileged role, remember to try to
relieve the bride of all possible worry. Do all
you can for her, and to you will go a great deal
of the credit for a happy wedding day and a
lovely bride. Now, the next is for your own
as well as the bride’s attention.
A Background for the
Bridal Gown
When you are planning the scheme of the
wedding together, remember that in every way
you are secondary to the bride on this occasion.
On one important point all bridesmaids will be
emphatic —their frocks must not on any account
eclipse the wedding gown. Everyone’s ideas


can be blended in such a way that all are
satisfied on a scheme which will ensure that
everyone looks nice, while the effect is of one
central figure standing out against a lovely
background.
The bride is always just as anxious to see that
her choice fits in with that of her maids, and
she must be sure, when she makes the final
decision, that the frock will be suitable for
use afterwards as an afternoon dress or evening
gown, or that it could easily be converted to
such use.
Many brides-to-be have asked whether they
are responsible for the cost of the bridesmaids’
outfits. This is not so, unless you are having
a definite “picture” wedding and wish to
include frocks that could not be worn after-
wards. In that case you might offer to share
the cost or make a gift of some accessory that
will be w’orn with the ensemble.
So Many Possibilities
The bridesmaids’ frocks may be planned in
harmony with your own, or they may make a
lovely contrasting background against which
the wedding frock will stand out. You may
achieve this contrast by using one or several
colours, or again by varying the shades of the
same colour. The design of the frocks must
be harmoniously uniform, but sometimes slight
variations in detail will add an unusual touch.
Sheer white shows at its best against delphinium
blues, pale lavender and shades with a bluish
undertone. Magnolia, with its hint of gold,
looks even richer against shades with the same
golden undertone —turquoise blue, apricot,
primrose, gold, flame or yellow-green. Ivory-
wdiite satin or lace calls for the true pastel shades
of rose, apple green, maize colour and misty
blue, and you may use all these shades together
if you have chosen the exact harmonising tones.
The all-white or all-magnolia wedding is most
effective when it is carried out in two contrast-
ing fabrics —chiffon and satin, georgette and
net, cobweb lace and taffeta, heavy lace and
malelasse.
There is the all-lace w'edding in contrasting
shades; the magnificent all-gold or all-silver
W'edding ; the wedding with a bride in faint
pearl-pink and bridemaids in three shades of
rose, and the wedding in glimmering moonlight
blue and green and oyster-shell. And even
that is only a suggestion of the possibilities. If
you are having your frock on simple lines you
might make a contrast by a soft and rather
fluffy style for the bridesmaids, but if your
wedding gown is made in a material such as
chiffon or lace the bridesmaids would look best
in simple frocks.
Hats or Wreaths?
Is it more correct for bridesmaids to wear hats
than wreaths in church? It is the rule of most
churches nowadays that some head-covering
be worn, but the rule is liberally interpreted,
and there are many attractive headdresses for
the bridesmaids wffiich are both sufficiently
covering and beautiful to wear. Often only a
slight wreath or cluster of flowers is W'orn, but it
must be remembered that some churches are
stricter than others on this point. All the veils,
hats and caps described on page 12 in the sec-
tion on bridesmaid’s headdresses are accepted
for w'ear in any church.
Small Attendants
When flower-girls and pages are chosen to carry
the bride’s train, or, perhaps, just to give an
additional picturesque touch to the proceedings,
they must walk immediately before or after the
bride. Little girls look very attractive in slim-
fitting frocks wdth puffed sleeves and skirts gener-
ously frilled around the hem, a charming style
named after Kate Greenaway. These frocks
are made to touch the ground, but if they are
simple in design, they may be shortened after
the wedding and w'orn as party dresses. Either
a wreath or cluster of pink rosebuds can be
worn on the head. Pages are often dressed in
the fashion of little Lord Fauntleroy, or in
period costumes recalling Tudor or Jacobean
days, in miniature hunt dress; or, if appro-
priate —there being some Scottish blood in
either of the families —in tartan and kilt.
If you want to add a touch of originality —give
your flower-girls baskets wdth roseleaves hidden
underneath the flowers, and, as you step from
the church porch wdth your husband, they
scatter the petals in your path. If they are


carrying the train, don’t risk bouquets, but
have a tiny posy tied on to the wrist. Remem-
ber, a little attendant of four or five can think
of only one thing at a time, and even the
carrying of the train may need a rehearsal or
two.
THE BEST MAN
The best man has more to do than anybody
else at the wedding. He helps with all pre-
liminary arrangements at the church and the
florist’s, and it is his duty from beginning to
end to relieve the bridegroom as much as pos-
sible from anxiety about details.
He will help him to dress and see that nothing
is forgotten, for bridegrooms are traditionally
supposed to suffer from lack of memory on this
occasion. It is also traditional that the bride-
groom is incapable of remembering all the
details of packing and arranging the honey-
moon trip ; the best man will see that everything
is properly packed and that street clothes for the
wedding journey are taken to the reception
place, where the bridegroom will most probably
be changing from dress clothes to travelling
clothes. With an efficient best man in attend-
ance, nothing can possibly go wrong. He must,
of course, annex the wedding ring and keep it
in his charge until the moment the bridegroom
needs it at the ceremony.
Running the Wedding
The best man escorts the bridegroom to the
church and stands at his right hand throughout
the service ; afterwards, he offers his left arm
to the chief bridesmaid, and together they
follow the married couple to the vestry to wit-
ness the signing of the register. He attends
personally to the clergyman’s fee and hands on
the bridegroom’s tips to the verger and chauf-
feur. Now he must manage to see that the cars
are ready in proper order to convey the wedding
party from the church to the reception, and as
soon as he has closed the door upon the depart-
ing couple, he returns to escort the bridesmaids.
At the wedding reception the best man sits on
the left of the bride and places before her all
telegrams and messages of congratulation.
These are opened and read by him at the com-
mencement of the breakfast. It will be his duty
to respond to the toast of “The Bridesmaids,”
and he must keep an eye on the clock if the
couple are catching a boat or train. The car
must be there at the right moment, with all
necessary baggage on board, and if they are
leaving by boat or train, he may think it best
to bring the tickets himself.
Usually the details connected with the photo-
graphs are arranged by the best man, and he
must be ready at any time, early or late, to give
the wedding story to the press reporters. So —
see that your fiance chooses his best man
carefully!
And, of course, if there is no best man, the
bridegroom must attend to all these matters
himself.
AT THE CHURCH
The bride is given away by her father, or the
nearest male relative. Congratulations should
be reserved until the bridal couple are outside
the church, and confetti should not be thrown
inside the building. Perhaps you may find
that the church you have selected has made a
rule prohibiting the use of confetti.
The Exact Procedure
The guests arrive early, being shown to their
appointed seats by the ushers. A few moments
before the bride is due to arrive, the bridegroom
and best man enter the church through the
vestry and take their places in front of and at
the right of the altar, facing it. The brides-
maids, who have awaited the bride in the
church porch, must see that her train and dress
are arranged before she enters the door.
Arrangements can sometimes be made for an
expert to go to the church to place the train


as it should be. This, of course, is much better
than leaving it to bridesmaids who may be
nervous. Holding the right arm of her escort,
the bride walks up the aisle followed by her
bridesmaids, and the guests stand as she ae-
pears. As the bride takes her place beside the
bridegroom at the altar, the person who is
giving her away falls back directly behind her,
the chief bridesmaid standing slightly behind
and to her left, and the other bridesmaid on the
left again. Usually this is the moment when
the chief bridesmaid takes the bride’s bouquet
or prayer book in order to leave her free during
the marriage service. There are many ways of
arranging the wedding party at the altar, but
certain rules are fixed ; here is a table showing
the usual positions of those taking part, in this
case there are three bridesmaids and no
groomsmen :
Bridal Parties Differ
If there were one groomsman beside the best
man, he would stand behind the bridegroom.
But it is almost impossible to lay down definite
rules on the arrangements of the wedding party
at the altar; every case is different. Some-
times flower girls are arranged so that they
are near the bride, although the positions for
the chief bridesmaid, the bride’s father, and
the bridegroom, of course, are absolutely
fixed ; or there may be six pairs of bridesmaids
and groomsmen; there may be little pages, or
two trainbearers, one short and one much
taller. And these difficulties seem quite in-
superable when you try to worry them out for
yourself, don’t they? The Wedding Advisory
Service will draw up a plan for you if you are
at all worried about the best arrangement at
the altar.
1. Bride.
2. Bridegroom.
3. Clergyman.
4. Best Man.
5. Chief Bridesmaid.
6. Bride’s Father.
7. Bridesmaid.
8. Bridesmaid.


The clergyman will instruct you in the details
of the marriage service ; when the bridegroom
places the ring on the book, he will take your
left hand, and, with his right hand place the
ring on your fourth finger, holding it there while
he repeats the vows after the clergyman.
When the ceremony is concluded, the bride, on
the left arm of the groom, proceeds to the vestry.
The chief bridesmaid follows, on the left arm
of the best man, and the parents of the happy
couple leave their seats —the bride’s mother
joining her husband.
Usually the chief bridesmaid and the best man,
provided they are over the age of 21 years, are
required to sign the register. Either the wedding
march or any other suitable music you may
choose is played as the couple reappear from
the vestry, attended by their retinue and fol-
lowed by their parents. The bride usually
holds the left arm of the bridegroom, but,
curiously enough, there is no definite ruling
about this.
Their car is followed to the reception by the
car conveying the bridesmaids and best man.
A rehearsal of the ceremony may be arranged
with the clergyman, if desired, and it is often
wise to run through the church procedure in
your own home, especially if there are to be
children among the attendants.
The marriage certificate is by custom considered
the property of the bride.
AND AFTERWARDS AT . . .
When you have considered everything and
reckoned up possible costs, you may decide to
leave the whole matter of the reception in the
hands of a hotel, or one of the many establish-
ments that are specially equipped for parties.
Or you may hire a hall and entrust the catering
to a well-known firm.
Catering costs vary considerably, but once you
have decided on the type of breakfast the Wed-
ding Advisory Service will be able to give you
an idea of the cost per head. This becomes
lower as the number of guests increases, and
should be somewhere between 2/6 and 6/-
per head, according to the menu, the setting
and the extras. If your reception is continuing
until late evening, you will, ol course, have to
consider the additional cost of providing the
guests with supper.
Flowers, Wines and Orchestras
Many modern wedding breakfasts are taking
the form of a buffet or semi-buffet service, and
often this is by far the least expensive way of
giving a reception. Then, it is well to remem-
ber that some hotels and halls make an extra
charge for flowers and decorations (usually
about 10/6) ; also, if you are having wines or
other drinks, there may be an extra charge.
For the music, a good orchestra usually costs a
pound for every member (from 8 o’clock till
midnight). Certain orchestras will provide
an entertainer or master of ceremonies without
extra charge.
There is something specially enjoyable about a
hotel reception ; everything is arranged for you
to the last detail, and if you choose this setting
you should have a perfect background for your
great day, besides having complete ease of
mind from the moment you book the date
with the hotel manager. You have nothing
ever to worry about —the flowers, the wines,
the music, the smooth service, all these things
without the bother of arranging them are the
assets of the hotel reception. Changing rooms
are provided free, and often the services of an
announcer are also part of the business.
Wedding luncheons, dinners and dances are
always sure to be fun if a capable hotel has the
programme in hand.
The Buffet Moderne
Now, a little about the menu. The semi-buffet
service is a very modern way of celebrating your
wedding, and especially if you feel that your
guests would enjoy an unusual party. You
may have a menu consisting of the usual buffet
savouries, sandwiches and cakes, and probably
sweets and ices too, or, with the semi-buffet,
include special courses which are served to the
guests by waiters from a side buffet table. The
atmosphere is informal and intimate, speeches
must be short, and guests may dance, sit or stand
about chatting while the breakfast is served.
At a buffet breakfast you may dispense with the


wedding cake if you like, but it is quite in order
to have the ceremony of cake-cutting just as
usual. Of course, there is no room to tell you
all about everything in a little book like this,
but if you like the idea of a buffet for your
wedding, the Wedding Advisory Service will
be glad to arrange all the details for you after
suitable times and places have been settled.
GIVING A RECEPTION AT HOME
If you can give the wedding reception in your
own home or garden, it will have a far more
intimate and friendly atmosphere and, at the
same time, can be carried out with less expense.
In these days of flats and apartments we do not
often enjoy the pleasure of a home reception,
but if you have sufficient room there is no better
way of celebrating the occasion of the wedding.
The Caterer Provides
Of course, it will mean a good deal of extra work
for you and the family, but even if you call in
the help of a caterer, a florist and a cleaner,
there should be a saving in expenses when the
breakfast is given at home. Unless the party
is to be very small and intimate, it is best to
leave all the worry of the menu to a reliable
caterer and let him provide you with the extra
glass, crockery and silverware, and the addi-
tional seating accommodation you will need.
Every individual case requires separate con-
sideration in the estimation of cost per head.
So much depends on making the best use of your
home and its resources ; meanwhile, the first
essential will be to decide what you can afford
to spend, inclusive of everything.
Wines and other drinks will add considerably
to the expenditure —perhaps even doubling the
cost per head, but you could always have just a
few bottles for the toasts, or drink the healths
in one of the many tempting varieties of fruit
cup, claret cup or punch. Drinks are usually
served from a side buffet with the assistance of
the male guests.
One particular advantage of the home reception
is the facility for displaying the wedding pre-
sents. They may be set out on a large table in
one of your rooms —perhaps a bedroom might
be transformed for the purpose in order to save
space.
The menu need not be elaborate ; it usually con-
sists of light buffet foods, such as sandwiches,
savouries, cakes and fruit salad or trifle. But
there are many variations that make light
refreshments interesting.
All in the Way You Do It
Sandwiches become mysteriously appetising
with fillings of sweet corn, devilled chopped
kidneys, green peas, fried bacon ; savouries may
add many a tempting touch to the menu in the
form of oyster patties, stuffed celery sticks,
cheese straws, curried eggs, asparagus rolls,
gherkins rolled in sausage, little cheese souffles
cooked individually. Sweets may include,
besides trifles, fruit salads and jellies, such
“special” delicacies as orange cream, apple
flummery, chocolate meringue, charlotte russe,
peche Melba ; chocolate logs and brandy snaps
and little mince pies could be mixed among the
cakes. Devilled almonds have an irresistible
appeal, and luscious stuffed prunes will vanish
just as quickly. Add two or three of these little
extras to the wedding menu and you add that
“something more” to your hospitality that
makes people remember you as a hostess.
Grape fruit stuck with titbits of every variety
make an attractive decoration for the wedding
tables ; use little toothpicks for olives and
gherkins, nuts and prunes, cherries and pre-
served fruits, and lacquer the grape fruit to
match the colour scheme of the wedding party.
Lately, even the wedding cake itself has some-
times been replaced by a huge decorative
pumpkin spiked with small dainties in every
colour and set as the centre piece of the bridal
table.
The menu need not be elaborate —and if you
study the suggestions above, you will notice
that none need be expensive; if the caterer
cannot provide them you might spend an hour
or two the day before the w'edding in your own


kitchen, and, without trouble, add two or three
'“different” touches to the wedding menu.
Meanwhile, if you do want an elaborate break-
fast there are ways of working with your
caterer along these lines, too. Your bridal
feast—a considerably more expensive one —
may run through all the gamut of courses
between soup and dessert; or you may serve
a three or four-course meal to the wedding
party and provide lighter foods for the re-
mainder of the guests.
Make it Memorable
Tables are usually arranged in the shape of a
horseshoe or T, and guests are seated so that
all can see the bride and groom. Even at the
buffet type of breakfast described on the pre-
ceding page, the guests may stand while the
bridal party is seated, or everyone may stand,
including the bride and groom. But if you
plan an informal buffet it must have something-
more than the atmosphere of a “5 o’clock”
party. It is to be the most memorable
occasion in at least two people’s lives, and the
planning of food, decorations, music and toasts
should help to make it so.
In summertime, a garden and marquee make
the perfect setting for a wedding reception, and
there is no need to possess a palatial home to
carry out this effect. Having a marquee out-
side on the lawn saves a great deal of trouble in
the house and the bright colours lend a gay and
festive atmosphere against which summer
clothes and flowers make a brilliant scene.
Wedding presents could be displayed inside in
the dining room, where the guests may view
them at any time before or after the breakfast.
If you want your garden to look brilliant on
the day, engage a nurseryman to supply potted
flowers in full bloom ; the flower-pots are sunk
underneath the earth in the garden beds—
and, presto! no one will guess that they have
not been there since they were seedlings! There
are many new ways of decorating the marquee ;
inside, it may be panelled with bright paper or
festooned with coloured hangings; sometimes
ropes and clusters of flowers decorate the sides
and little low bowls of the same flowers are set
on the tables. Festoons of fairy lights may
be hired to add glamour to the garden after
dark —a matter your caterer might attend to.
For the question of service—you will, of course,
need a number of extra waiters or waitresses
to serve the guests at the breakfast, and, again,
you may safely leave this to the caterer, who
has had years of experience in knowing just
what he needs at a home reception, and just
how to dovetail in with your own arrangements.
THE WEDDING CAKE
Your wedding cake will be a most important
feature of the breakfast, and the usual thing is
to have it made by an expert or to let your
caterer arrange this for you.
Some of the most beautiful of modern wedding
cakes are not expensive, and there need be no
more than one or two tiers if you wish to reduce
the cost. Certain makers are wonderfully
clever in copying your own wedding flowers
in delicate tints for the top decoration ; certain
caterers will hire this special top decoration for
you or even make no charge at all for it.
The average cost of a nice wedding cake is
from two guineas upward, but it is quite
possible to make your own cake and have the
decorations done for a little over a pound.
Fairy Stories in Icing
No decoration is too elaborate for the wedding
cake if you really want to create a sensation —
ships, aeroplanes, fairy stories, houses, gardens
and many other intricacies are copied in icing
for this centre-piece of the bridal table. One
cake has a perfect representation of a great
organ, another shows the sleeping beauty in
a moated castle, another is a miniature of the
bride and her maids carried out in subtle
colours.
This sort of wedding cake is really a luxury ; it
might cost almost anything and it will surely
make a difference to the expenses of the
breakfast.
Looking on the other side, you might follow the
suggestion made above, call in a party of friends
a week or two before the wedding, and have an
amusing afternoon creating your own wedding
cake.


WHAT HAPPENS AT THE
RECEPTION
Bride and groom leave the church first, and the
rest follow in the usual order —bridesmaids,
bride’s parents, bridegroom’s parents, relations,
chief guests, and so on. If the bridal party is
not going direct to the photographer’s, your
mother will have to hurry back to the house,
or w'herever you are having the reception, to
be in time to receive the first arrivals. She
usually stands with the groom’s mother beside
her, and you and your husband may either
take up a position across the room, or group
yourselves beside the hostesses with the best
man and the chief bridesmaid. As the guests
arrive, they wall greet your mother first, and
then pass on to congratulate you and the
groom ; then, if you are having a “sit-down”
breakfast, they will immediately find their
places at the table. The bridal table is usually
placed at right angles to the others, and the
w'edding party is seated along the top side facing
the guests. Imagine you are already seated at
also at the bridal table, or the clergyman may
not be able to come —really there are just
hundreds of different problems about arranging
the bridal table. Don’t worry about it! You
know', whole families rack their brains about
the seating of the wedding party, and meals
become a perfect trial! With the Wedding
Advisory Service arranging so many receptions,
to plan this is just part of the day’s work.
Drinking the Healths
Then, the order of the toasts. Letters come in
from clients with all sorts of questions about
them —and, again, every problem must be
solved differently. The general rule is that
the breakfast starts with a toast to the King,
and this is followed by the health of the Bride
and Bridegroom. Sometimes before the health is
proposed the best man starts the party going
by reading the telegrams and messages of
congratulation, and he should certainly do this
very soon after the guests are seated. The
remainder of the wedding toasts follow during
the course of the breakfast, and it is often the
1. Bride.
2. Groom.
3. Chief Bridesmaid.
4. Other Bridesmaids.
5. Best Man.
6. Clergyman.
7. Bride’s Mother.
8. Groom’s Mother.
9. Bride’s Father.
10. Groom’s Father.
11. Clergyman’s Wife.
the bridal table and you wall understand from
the diagram how the party should be arranged.
Now' all bridal parties are not as symmetrical as
this one ; you may have five bridesmaids and
five men to support the groom, or you may have
five bridesmaids without partners, or four
flower girls and one bridesmaid. Then, many
brides wish to have a special friend or relation
bridegroom who proposes the health of the
bridesmaids and best man when he is replying
to the bridal toast. The best man responds
on behalf of the bridesmaids, saying all the
charming things he can think ol .; if the best
man proposes this toast you should ask the
humourist of the party to reply to it, as this is
always treated in a light, amusing vein.


Now comes the toasts to the bride’s and bride-
groom’s parents, often included in one. The
former, if you are having them separately, is
proposed by the bridegroom’s father and
answered by the father of the bride, and the
latter, proposed by the bride’s father and
answered by the father of the groom. Try to
make the speeches as short and simple as you
can.
It is sometimes puzzling to know just what
should be said by the speakers at a wedding,
so you may find that you need help, but be
sure to make it clear to everyone that you
think formal, set speeches are unnecessary.
Roseleaves and Kisses
About a quarter of an hour after you have cut
the cake, you and the chief bridesmaid will
vanish to prepare for the “going away.” That
is, of course, unless you are remaining for a
while to dance with the guests. As you come
downstairs someone may shepherd the guests
into two long lines through which you and your
husband must pass to the waiting car. Try to
have roseleaves instead of confetti—your family
might see to that for you.
And all those other Questions
How long should the reception continue?
Should the bride remove her veil to dance?
What should she do with her bouquet? Is it
smarter for the hostess to wear or carry her
flowers? These are some of the questions that
puzzle brides and mothers when there is a
W'edding in the air. The most frequent query
is about suitable head-covering for the bride’s
mother and her friends—“something not too
gay and noticeable, yet smart!” There is
always just the right thing, and before helping
you with suggestions, the Bureau will need to
know' about your mother’s dress. Clothes can
lie just as worrying as the w'edding menu, and
mcsc important little matters of etiquette can
be more puzzling than either.
IF YOU ARE HAVING
A CHAIRMAN
The duties of a chairman at a wedding are fairly
simple, but upon him will fall the responsibility
of keeping things going.
He usually dresses similarly to the men in the
wedding party, and should arrive at the place
of the reception in time to manage the placing
of the guests. Sometimes the Chairman is
also an announcer, but rarely at an average
wedding. If there are ushers, he will keep an
eye on the seating of the guests ; if there are no
ushers, he will probably be expected to show
the guests to their places, acting as an assisting
host at this stage.
He will arrange for the telegrams to be handed
to the best man shortly after the guests have
found their places, and just before these are read
out, the chairman will propose the health of
the King. This toast is unresponded.
Introducing the Speakers
As soon as the best man has read out the last
telegram, the chairman will rise and introduce
the speaker who is to propose the Bride and
Bridegroom. Sometimes it is the clergyman,
sometimes an old friend of the family or a rela-
tion. The bridegroom will, of course, respond
to this toast.
There are no set rules for the introduction of the
speakers at a wedding, but the chairman may
allow' ten minutes or a quarter of an hour to
elapse before introducing the toast of “The
Bridesmaids.” This will be proposed by the
best man or one of the most amusing speakers
of the party ; in the latter case the best man will
respond. The toast may also be proposed by
the bridegroom while he is answering for the
bride and himself.
After an interval of ten minutes or so, the chair-
man asks the bridegroom’s father to propose the
health of the bride’s parents. This is followed
by the response of the bride’s father, who, in his
turn, proposes the bridegroom’s parents. All
speeches should be short.


Cutting the First Slice
Towards the conclusion of the breakfast, the
chairman hands the cake-knife to the bride,
who then cuts the first slice. The cake is cut
up by the waitresses or bridesmaids and handed
round to the guests. About ten minutes later,
if there is no dancing, the bride leaves to dress.
During this interval the chairman keeps the
party entertained. If there is dancing, he
sometimes acts as Master of Ceremonies, urging
the guests to join in whatever has been planned,
and seeing that they enjoy themselves.
When it is time for the actual “going away,”
the chairman gets all the guests together and
shepherds them into two long lines through
which the bride and groom will pass on their
way to the waiting car. It may be his task to
see that the bride and groom are not altogether
overwhelmed by their well-wishers. If the
party is continuing afterwards, the atmosphere
of gaiety must be kept up, but not until too
late an hour.
THE CARS FOR YOUR WEDDING
Your wedding day is the day of all days in your
life when you will desire to ride in luxury.
Perhaps you will be surprised to find that it
actually costs no more to indulge your cham-
pagne taste in wedding cars, and a good car
service, with its courteous and well-trained
chauffeurs, will do a great deal to add to your
happiness on this great day.
Chauffeurs in Livery
The bridegroom should arrange with the best
man about the lipping of his own chauffeur,
and he will be responsible for the cost: of the car
which takes him to the wedding. This car will
be used after the ceremony to convey the bride
and groom to the reception. If you desire it,
your car service will decorate the wedding
limousines without extra expense, and the usual
choice is the white streamer decoration from
radiator to windscreen. White flowers are
sometimes placed inside. Many people prefer
to travel, as it were, incognito on the wedding
day; if you share this feeling there will be no
need to have decorated cars.
An Idea of Cost
Now—how many cars will you need? If you
are having several bridesmaids they should be
given a separate car, but with one bridesmaid
only, rules are sometimes cast aside and the
bridesmaid travels in the car with the bride
and her father. Sometimes the bridegroom’s
car is sent back for the bride—a method that is
usually found to be more economical. Your
mother will almost certainly have many friends
who wish to drive her to the wedding, so there
should be no need to hire a special car for her.
Costs of wedding cars vary greatly —the
average charge being about 15/- for the first
hour for every car hired, and slightly less for
every hour following. Much depends on the
length of the journey, the number of cars re-
quired, and the place where the wedding is to
be held.
If the clergyman and his wife are coming to the
reception, the bride’s father should see that
their conveyance is properly provided for.
It is the duty of the bridegroom’s attendants to
see that the cars are ready in convenient order
after the church ceremony. The bride and
groom travel alone, followed by the brides-
maids and the men of the wedding party in the
second, or second and third cars.
The cost of bringing the photographer to the
reception must be weighed against the cost
of keeping two wedding cars waiting if the
photographs are taken between the ceremony
and the breakfast.
PHOTOGRAPHS
It is a matter for your own choice whether you
prefer to have your wedding photographs taken
before or after the ceremony, during the recep-
tion, or after the breakfast. You may ask the


photographer to call at your home before the
wedding or the whole wedding party may go
straight to the photographer immediately after
the church service. There are many disadvan-
tages to almost any plan —for, at the convenient
time when you are waiting with your brides-
maids at home, there is no bridegroom.
Between the ceremony and the reception a visit
to the studio always creates somewhat of a
hiatus in the proceedings. By far the best
way is to have the photographs taken at the
reception just before you are ready to change,
but this always means extra cost for the photo-
grapher’s time. As before stated, the question
of the wedding photographs is invariably a
difficult one.
Hatching the Glamour
You will he looking your most beautiful on this
day, and, to catch the excitement and the im-
portance of the occasion, the photographer
you choose must be imaginative and under-
standing. There is a special glamour which
surrounds every woman on her wedding day —
it has been called “radiance,” and there is no
doubt that you, too, will have this mysterious
added beauty. A photographer who really
knows his work is able to catch this moment and
perpetuate it for you. He also knows clever
tricks of modern grouping. In all, he will be
able to produce a happy, natural photograph
of happy, natural people, irradiated with the
glow that comes only on a wedding day. For
all time, a picture like this will be among your
most treasured possessions.
HONEYMOON PLANS
This will be the most romantic holiday of your
life, a spell of happiness you will always look
back to. This is the one time when there must
be nothing to mar your joy. The Wedding
Advisory Service will take timetable and
booking worries off your shoulders by planning
and arranging the whole trip for you through
the Travel Service. This service wall suggest
resorts that will cater in swdmming, golfing or
whatever you choose.
THE COMPLETE LINEN PRESS
Part of the fun of starting out in a new home is
fitting out your linen press with a stock of brand-
new bed linen, table linen and bathroom acces-
sories which will make your house beautiful.
Choose carefully, and you will be proud of your
linen for many years to come ; more than that,
there will be no need for replacements at a
time when you are just realising how many
more things you need in your new home.
The Price of Good Things
Perhaps you have saved a certain amount of
money for your linen trousseau; perhaps your
family is providing it for you —but in either case
there will almost certainly be no money to
waste, and you must make certain that, while
you have a comfortable stock of sheets, towels,
and so on, you buy carefully and buy for the
future. Do you know what is meant by “buy-
ing for the future?” You must pay enough for
every article of linen if you want to save money
over the space of years. The Wedding Ad-
visory Service will be very glad to go into the
matter with you and explain just what price
must be paid for good things without running
yourself into extravagance. Meanwhile, here is
a summary of the necessities of a linen closet for
two people starting a home, bearing in mind
that a good housewife likes to be ready for an
extra guest and a “rainy day.”
Sheets A Few Hints
Allow two pairs for each bed in use, and, if
possible, two extra pairs for emergency. The
most useful size in a single sheet is 72in. x lOOin.,
and it is best not to buy three-quarter size
sheets unless they are to fit a standard three-
quarter bed. Used on a single bed, the width
is wasted, and on a double bed there is no
allowance for the “tuck in.” Whether you
choose white or coloured bed linen is a matter
for your own choice ; coloured sheets lend a
pleasant touch of harmony to the bedroom,
the dyes are fast and will stand up to boiling.
By far the most satisfactory sheet is one with
a fine even weave, medium weight, with
smooth linen finish. Hemstitched and mono


grammed sheets are always nice to have, and
you would find that it costs very little more
to buy them.
Pillow Cases Have Improved
These should match your sheets —perhaps half-
a-dozen hemstitched and a dozen plain ones.
The hemstitched cases cost about 3 i- or 4/—,
and the plain ones should not cost less than
1/3 each. Of course, the envelope pillow
slips are almost universal now, and a great
improvement on the old-fashioned type, which
fastened with ties or buttons.
Blankets are Beautiful
Plain blankets are quite popular, and you can
buy these in lovely shades to match your bed-
room. Now, here is something you should
remember when you’re choosing them. A
good blanket has been pre-shrunk from 9in.
larger than its size when you see it in the shop,
and if you select these good quality blankets
you can be sure that the 16 years’ guarantee
means what it says. The blanket will keep its
warmth and softness always. The best width
for a double bed is the larger size of 99in. x 81 in.,
which will allow a comfortable 18in. on each
side. With an eiderdown, you would need at
least two blankets on each bed, and since it is
much better to buy' these things in the begin-
ning, it is advisable to have at least one more
pair put away. Underblankels will also be
necessary.
Towels and Towels
The closer and finer the weave of a towel, the
softer and heavier it becomes after laundering
a few times. Towels that look soft and thick
when you buy them are all too often the
coarsely woven type —and when you see the
texture underneath the pile, you will under-
stand why these are the cheapest of the two.
You should provide yourself with at least two
dozen towels, and it would be best to have
some of these in plain white. On the im-
portant question of linen, most people have a
preference for colours, but it all depends on
the special colour scheme of the bathroom.
The standard size for the modern bathmat is
two feet by three, the right price is from 5 to 7
shillings, and you will be glad if you add at least
three to your stock of linen. Two or three
roller towels and a few hand towels complete
the list —and in the case of the latter you can
afford to count half a dozen or more as gifts
from linen teas to come. But, again, referring
to everyday towels, a coarse texture and an
open-looking weave in the selvedge are warn-
ings of inferior quality ; be sure that the linen
you are buying now is good enough to save
money in the long run.
lea Towels
Buy yourself at least a dozen tea towels, more
if you can, and add to them half-a-dozen special
glasscloths. It is quite possible that you will
want to rinse out three or four a day.
Table Linen
The First Question
F.ven if you are not going to entertain a great
deal, an amazing toll will be levied on table
napkins, d’oyleys and other small items, and
you will need a generous stock of matching
pieces in table linen. The big question to be
decided before you start collecting pieces is the
cpiestion of mats versus large tablecloths ; in
either case, vou will need the same number of
table napkins, and the same supply of supper
cloths, breakfast cloths and incidental mats.
F.ven if you decide to use small mats on your
dining table, there will always be plenty of use
for one or two attractively checked or patterned
breakfast cloths, which may be throwm across
one end of the table or used on a small afternoon
tea table or auto-tray. You would need at
least three or four sets of small mats—plain
hemstitched linen, cream linen worked in
designs to match your room, and for special
occasions, perhaps a dozen lovely mats of lace
with table centre to match. Table mats look
well on the polished tables of to-day, and are
easily laundered. If you are going to use
double damask or hemstitched linen table-
cloths, allow four —three for general use and
one for reserve. Coloured table linen is both
attractive to the eye and easy on the laundry
bill, but the shades should be quiet and restful.


White damask still holds its pride of place with
modern housewives, and will show up your
crystal and silver effectively.
Let your table-cloths be large enough to come
well down on all sides of the table.
Have eight napkins to match each table cloth
or set of table mats, and include matching nap-
kins for your supper and tea cloths.
One or two special supper cloths in lace or
handwork, three cloths for the auto-tray, extras
for the sideboard or buffet, and a dozen
d’oyleys complete your collection of fine linen.
Hostesses who possess attractive and delicate
china are dispensing with d’oyleys to a great
extent, so that the designs of plates can be seen
and admired. Remember that the purchases
of to-day are the heirlooms of to-morrow.
The Finishings of a
linen Trousseau
Before leaving the question of your linen, there
are various extras with which you will have to
provide yourself and your kitchen. Pinnies —
so attractive nowadays with their peasant de-
signs, or, if you prefer them, comfortable,
easy-to-wear smocks, or cottage coats in colour-
ful designs. Two pairs of washable house-
maids’ gloves to wear when you are cleaning
silver, brass or firegrates ; rubber gloves are also
useful for protecting the hands. Two chamois
leathers for polishing, dusters of some lintless
material —about a dozen oven cloths ; kettle
holders, pudding cloths and a jelly bag. The
pudding cloths should be of strong calico. One
ironing blanket and sheet; little clips may be
bought to hold these to the table, and if you
place layers of newspaper between the sheet
and blanket there will be no awkward wrinkling.
You will need a number of beaded covers for
i-ijd; jugs, and a large cover of netting edged
with beads or shells for the auto-tray. Two
tea cosies with suitable coverings that may be
laundered. Two sets of mats for your own
dressing table and two sets in reserve. Heat-
proof mats for the dinner-table —the latest
made of asbestos and slipped into linen cases.
Collect It Gradually
Now, although this linen list looks most for-
midable at first sight, and really constitutes a
minimum for comfortable living —don’t forget
that by collecting things gradually, week by
week, and using lay-by, much may be bought
over a period of time. That is one reason for
discussing this many months before the wed-
ding, so that you can collect your complete
linen press without feeling the expense all at
once. Every shilling you waste between now
and the wedding might have bought a tea towel,
three or four shillings might have been turned
into an attractive breakfast cloth, and every
odd sixpence might have gone towards the
lay-by on a supper cloth. These small amounts
of money are infinitely important in building
up for the future, and it is surprising how
quickly blankets, sheets, and other expensive
items become yours if you pay for them
like this.
LIST FOR THE KITCHEN
The comfort of a house depends a great deal on
having the right equipment for cooking, wash-
ing and cleaning, and the list should be a useful
one to refer to when your kitchen teas are over.
Further on in the book are notes on labour-
saving ideas for the kitchen.
General
Salt and pepper
shakers.
Dust bin.
Bucket.
Kitchen tidy.
Pair of steps.
2 or 3 trays.
Soiled linen basket.
Clothes horse.
Skirtboard.
Sleeveboard.
Ironing blanket and sheet.
Electric iron.
Electric jug.
Iron stand.
Dipper.
Washing-up dish.
Dish mop.
Soap saver.
Bottle brush.
Mystic mits (6).
Meat safe.
Cool safe (or refrigerator)
Set of canisters or jars.
Set of spice tins.
Biscuit boxes.
Cake box.
Sugar bin and scoop.
Flour bin and scoop.
Chopping board.
Bread board & bread saw.
1 wire meat dish cover.
Preserving pan.
Jam jars.
Set of scales and weights.
A food mincer.
A meat mincer
Lemon squeezer.
Knife sharpener.
Knife box.
Meat saw and chopper.
Set of skewers.
Match holder.


Cooking
Wooden spoons (large
and small).
1 cook’s knife.
Vegetable knife.
1 round-bladed pastry
knife.
Fish slice.
Tin opener.
Kitchen scissors.
Corkscrew.
Bottle opener.
Potato masher.
Bean cutter.
Apple corer.
Orange sheer.
2 egg whisks.
Colander.
Pastry board and roller.
Pastry brush.
Flour sifter.
Biscuit or scone cutters.
2 enamel plates.
Coffee strainer.
Tea strainer.
Casserole (large & small).
1 large mixing bowl.
1 small mixing bowl.
3 pudding basins
(different dizes).
Cleaning
Vacuum cleaner, brooms,
floor mop, kitchen mop ,
straw broom and hair
broom.
Dusters.
Dust pan and brush.
1 lamb’s wool duster.
Laundry
Washing machine.
Washing board.
Laundry basket-
1 or 2 glass mixing bowls.
3 pie dishes (differentsizes.)
2 baking dishes.
2 jelly moulds (different
sizes).
1 dozen patty tins.
2 cake tins.
2 sandwich tins.
3 wire cooling trays.
1 tart tin.
Electric toaster.
1 set of saucepans (at least
three).
1 double saucepan.
1 wire frying basket.
1 steamer (adjustable).
1 frying pan.
2 kettles (1 small, 1 large).
Teapot.
1 kitchen jug.
2 rubber scrapers.
1 scrubbing brush.
1 nail brush.
Kneeling pad (rubber).
1 graduated pint measure.
2 gravy strainers (I rein-
forced, 1 pointed).
Asbestos mats.
Long-handled cornice and
wall broom.
1 floor mop.
1 dustless mop.
1 set of blacklead brushes.
1 set of black bool brushes.
1 set of brown boot brushes.
Peg bag, G dozen pegs.
Large enamel basin.
Clothes wire.
WHEN YOU CHOOSE
YOUR HOME
Whether you are buying or renting your new
house, remember that it will be your home
for many years to come.
When you have decided on the district —with
regard to happy surroundings, privacy, proxi-
mity to train or tram (and eye to the possibility
of other houses springing up round you), when
you’ve decided how an inexpensive outer
suburb compares with the higher cost of fares—
the next thing is the general aspect of your
house. The direction of its facing is vitally
important if you want to make the most of
sunshine and avoid cold dark rooms. Also
everyone should have some sort of a garden,
although you must be sure it is not going to be
too big to manage, because a neglected garden
will give your house the dejected appearance
which in time will react on you. If there is
enough room to grow some vegetables at the
back, so much the better for your housekeeping
bills.
However much you like certain things about
the house, don’t let them outweigh matters
such as sufficient accommodation (there is.
nothing worse than being really cramped in
your living), good drainage, good windows,
plenty of cupboards, handy fixtures for gas
and electric appliances and good fuel-saving
fireplaces.
Keep a sharp look-out for patches eaten into
wallpaper—this means silverfish; don’t be
talked into buying or renting a house with any
signs of dampness ; if you are buying, examine
the quality of the woodwork very closely—
doors should be firm and solid and quite smooth
running. Look out for a steep staircase and a
gloomy one. See that the kitchen is handy
to the dining room (preferably with a servery
window between). It is better if the house has-
a separate back door, so that all traffic does not
pass through the kitchen.
Try to avoid a house with definite leadlight
colours, because these may worry you when
you are planning or changing your colour


scheme. If the linen press is in the bathroom,
make sure that there is another cupboard suit-
able for linen so that you can use this one
for china or something which will not absorb
dampness from the steam. Remember that
steps between rooms and in passages make
it very difficult to wheel a loaded auto-tray.
And finally, when you are quite satisfied you
have found the right house —go back and
inspect it again.
POINTS TO REMEMBER WHEN
YOU FURNISH
You have decided whether you want antique
or modern furniture ; you have probably de-
cided on the wood you like best. Now —don’t
go a step further until you have made up your
mind just how much you will have to spend
on furniture.
Let us say it is £lO0 —it may be £2OO or it may
be more like £BO, but you will have to be sure
that you are dividing the money up fairly
between the rooms you have to furnish.
Now—some hints on what to look for in the
furniture you are buying, so that you will
choose really good pieces that will last you a
lifetime.
Let’s take your bedroom first. In your bed-
room you will want a spacious mirrored
dressing table and a good deep wardrobe. Don’t
sacrifice usefulness to beauty; see that the
dressing table has plenty of drawer space, and
a large bevelled mirror (or mirrors). See that
the mirror supports are firmly fixed, and test
the quality of the glass by putting a coin
against it. The greater the difference in
depth between the actual coin and the reflec-
tion the better.
By the way, bevelled mirrors will always set off
a suite better than the ordinary, ground-edge
type of glass, and a glass top on the dressing
table is well worth the extra usually charged.
You have probably made up your mind about
the colour of your suite—whether it will be light
or dark walnut, mahogany, maple, sycamore,
or one of many other beautiful veneers ; but
whatever you do, be sure that the furniture you
choose is veneered on good core-stock. The
furniture salesman will explain this, and certain
firms will be glad to make up just what you
want in each piece of the suite. You may
choose a dressing table from one suite and a
wardrobe from another, and the slight extra
cost of having them made up is well worth
while. Here are some of the new veneers a
good furniture house will be able to show you:
American myrtle, Queensland black bean,
zebrano, mazur, weathered sycamore, Macassa
ebony and Italian walnut.
Now, to return to the dressing table ; one of the
main essentials is a good solid top. You will
also find out a lot about its quality by looking
closely at the corners of the drawers, where
the sections of the dovetails should fit well
without wood or glue plugging.
Unless your wardrobes are of the built-in
variety you will be buying these important
articles of furniture. You will want to be sure
that your wardrobe is a good deep one, and
that the hanging rod is high enough for your
evening frocks. It must also have good solid
ends. Have one side fitted with drawers (you
will find these invaluable) and you could also
arrange for one door to be fitted inside with a
full-length mirror. Then, your husband-to-be
will probably have something to say about his
own wardrobe, and for your own sake, see that
he selects one that is fitted with at least four
deep drawers.
Buy a capacious and “comfortable” wardrobe,
and you will find it adds greatly to your enjoy-
ment of your bedroom. Again see that the
veneer is laid on good core-stock.
Just before we leave the bedroom, remember
that an adequate shoe-cupboard goes halfway
towards keeping a room tidy. Have one
specially made if necessary; it will not cost
much. The shoe-cupboard should be made
with slatted back and shelves so that the air can
circulate freely round your shoes. Another
convenient addition to the room will be a
bedside table holding a soft shaded reading
light.


A WORD ABOUT CARPETS
Actually, a wall-to-wall carpet is not as expen-
sive as you may think —especially if you choose
it in a useful monotone colouring. It will
subdue noise and keep your house much
warmer in winter, besides saving all the work
ol polishing. That luxurious deep feeling
under foot may be obtained even with an
inexpensive carpet by putting down a thick-
ness of cow-hair underfelt, and this will double
the life of the carpet.
To save your carpets and floors, you must see
that good castors or domes of silence are fitted
to every piece of furniture, so that it may be
easily moved about.
THE DINING ROOM
Your dining table will be the centre of attrac-
tion for this room, and you may be tempted to
choose it more for its good looks than its
character. Remember that the ideal dining
table has plenty of knee-room beneath it.
Remember also that furniture of a simple design
and finish is very much easier to keep free from
dust.
It is good to know that several furniture firms
in Sydney will make your furniture exactly as
you want it. If you see a dining room or
lounge suit—let us say on the moving picture
screen —just go home and make a sketch of it,
take your rough idea to one of those up-to-date
furniture houses and they will copy it exactly
for you.
About the dining table in particular —there
are people who can actually polish your
dining table so that the hottest things may be
put down without leaving a mark. At a demon-
stration recently, a pot which had been boiling
on the stove for half an hour was taken off and
placed directly on the polished surface. It
remained there till it had cooled, and when
taken away there was no sign of a mark. This
is done by a new polishing process, and you
should consider it seriously if you are thinking
about having one of the modern dining suites
with a highly polished veneer. Perhaps, if
you are having an oblong dining table, you will
prefer to have the comers cut off for safety.
Six standard dining chairs (it is not necessary
to have carvers) and a solid buffet complete
the actual suite ; you will find it useful to have
the buffet fitted with a special cutlery drawer
which is felt lined and partitioned off into
sections.
DON’T FORGET THESE
There are five articles without which your home
is not fully furnished —a radio (or radio-
gramophone), a vacuum cleaner, a radiator, a
sewing machine and an auto-tray. All five are
virtual necessities, but as they come under no
particular list are often overlooked when the
budget is made out. These are largely
dependent on the money available, but, as with
the linens, it is better to buy makes wltich will
give long service.
The auto-tray is very handy, enabling vou to
entertain with more than a semblance of
elegance under any conditions. With it you
can manoeuvre the courses at dinner so that
your guests are hardly aware of the absence of
a maid. For your own lunch, the auto-tray
is a table and waiter at once, and it may be
wheeled into the garden or by the fire for a
change. By the way, just try the auto-tray
as a labour-saver wdien you’re cleaning out
cupboards or ironing or making jam.
THE LOUNGE ROOM
If you have double doors opening into your
lounge you are lucky, for you can add space to
the general effect by carpeting the lounge,
dining room and hall in a soft monotone and
carrying the colour of the walls right through.
When you throw the house open to entertain,
you will have the effect of one spacious room.
Of course, it is hardly necessary to warn you
that whatever colour scheme you choose, rooms
opening into each other must harmonise. Also
that it is impossible to mix several startling,
original effects in one room.
Choose one thing as your central theme and
build up to it. Many couples decide first
on their floor-coverings. That completed, they
formulate the color scheme for curtains and


coverings. Whether you have a contrasting
or matching plan is a matter of individual
choice. There are lovely damasks in shades
that blend in well and lend a feeling of warmth
to the room. But whatever you choose, see that
the backs of the chairs and settee are covered
with the same material.
Feel the arms and backs of every piece to see
that it is properly sprung and make sure you
are buying a suite with spring edges as well as
a firm framework. There should also be plenty
of depth to the seats. If you are considering
a suite with loose cushion seats, pay a little
extra and see that the cushions are of latex
rubber; these cushions are the most comfort-
able, and will outlast any other type.
A few small tables in your lounge room will
make it twice as interesting—perhaps you
could spend one of your wedding cheques on
a nest of little tables; placed conveniently
about the room, they will also save many a
spill on your carpet. Indirect lighting on the
walls will add space to the room.
Remember that some books and a few pottery
bowls of flowers are the things that make a
house into a home, and, above all, don’t be
afraid to use your lounge room. Please don’t
plump up the cushions and space out the
ornaments and furniture —let the house look
as if someone is living in it!
IN THE KITCHEN
First —see that you have a draining rack for the
china. This will save you half an hour’s “dry-
ing up and putting away” every time you wash
up; at the same time your draining board
serves as a storage place for china, keeping your
cupboards free for other things.
Besides the usual kitchen furniture you will need
a refrigerator to keep milk, butter, drinks and
sweets cool in summer-time.
Another great convenience is the tradesman’s
box, into which things can be delivered from
outside when you are away.
Or course, most of us have definite ideas about a
servery window between the kitchen and
dining room, and you will do all you can about
this without any advice. The ideal way is to
arrange for a drawer running through under
the servery, so that silver may be dried and put
away in the kitchen and taken out in the dining
room. A shelf on each side of the servery win-
dow will make a very useful table.
IN FURNISHING
Remember that simple things are the most
beautiful and the best in the end. They are
also the most expensive ; but even if you have to
wait a while for the extras it will pay you to lay
a good foundation. You may be able to buy a
refrigerator in a year, but it will be a long time
before you can afford another suite.
And apart from the actual furnishings, this
applies to everything you are buying. Have a
few good pictures rather than many indifferent
ones; the Japanese prefer to have only one
picture on the wall, just as they will spend hours,
arranging one bowl of blossom to be the most
beautiful and the central feature of a room.
JOBS YOU CAN DO YOURSELF
Among those jobs about the house which you
can do for yourself before the furniture arrives
are distempering, staining and painting.
Floor staining should be left until the carpet is
down (but not tacked) unless you are very sure
about where the edges will come. In staining
floors, most people prefer an oil stain to a water
stain, because it is more durable and does not
tread out so easily. But an even better way is
to use an ordinary hat-dye, followed by three
coats of raw linseed oil.
Distempering is not at all difficult to do, and has
many advantages. It can be washed


periodically and it is inexpensive. Consult a
shade card very carefully —there are some
lovely new colours in distemper for your walls —
and then when you are actually mixing the
distemper, test it on the inside of a cupboard
so that you are sure it is right. It is wise to
purchase a well-known brand of washable
distemper.
Before starting work on the walls you must see
that they are absolutely smooth ; nail holes and
similar blemishes may be filled up with plaster
of Paris that has been mixed with cold water to
the consistency of thick cream. If the walls
are old and hopelessly rough, cover them with
a plain wall paper first.
The distemper must be mixed very thoroughly,
to ensure an even texture, and as different
makes vary, the directions for use should be
followed very carefully.
Apply the first coat with a distemper brush,
using horizontal strokes and holding the brush
at arm’s length, working the distemper well
into the wall. Don’t let the distemper settle
in the bucket.
In painting new wood, all the knots should first
be brushed over with knotting, and then given
a coat of priming. It is essential that there is
a good smooth undercoat before the final coat
is applied. If the surface has already been
painted, a rub-down with sandpaper should be
sufficient, but if you are applying a light colour
over a dark one, an undercoat as well as the
sandpaper may be necessary. If stripping the
old paint is essential, you can use a paint re-
mover and a stripping knife.
Perhaps you are making your own curtains, too.
Don’t forget to allow plenty of turnings and to
measure the height and width of your windows
very carefully before you cut into the material.
Curtains and soft furnishings must be made of
material that is guaranteed fadeless.
AND THEN - INSURANCE
This is a most serious page. It concerns not
only your future happiness, but your future
safety.
Because you have proved yourself willing to face
the great responsibilities of marriage, you
should be ready to face the one greatest risk and
provide for it. When your husband speaks to
you about the necessity of insuring his life, you
must be prepared to stand by him, even if it
means doing without something you need in
your home. If anything happened to him
your income might disappear entirely, and this
might occur at a time when two or three
children have to be provided for. In any case,
you have to think of your old age, so go
together to a good assurance company, have
the full particulars explained so that you may
be sure of the best terms, and then prepare to
enjoy life with a mind at rest.
Now with regard to the house on which you
have spent so much time and thought and
money. Unfortunately there are so many
awkward things that may happen, and these
are dangers too real to be gaily forgotten during
the excitement of getting married. The house
might be damaged by fire or lightning, and, of
course, there is always the risk of serious loss by
burglary. Even if the house itself is not your
own concern, you still have the contents of your
home to consider—furniture, pictures, books,
clothing, jewellery —-possessions that mean a
great deal to you because they really ARE your
home. It is so easy to be sure, and whatever
happens, you should spend that little extra
money to see that your new property is insured.
Fortunately, the insurance companies have
made the whole business as simple as possible.
It should only cost you about a shilling a year
for every £2o’s worth of property.
Remember that with the exception of furniture,
no single article is valued at more than 5 per
cent of the total insurance—if you have any-
thing especially valuable it should be described
and valued in detail. And remember, too, that
insurance will be automatically suspended if the
house is left unoccupied for too long ; also that
certain parts of the insurance do not cover
letting or sub-letting.
WAITE 4 BULL, SYDNEY


MANY HAPPY RETURNS
OF YOUR WEDDING
Ist Anniversary Cotton Wedding
2nd Anniversary Paper Wedding
3rd Anniversary Leather Wedding
sth Anniversary Wooden Wedding
7th Anniversary Woollen Wedding
I Oth Anniversary Tin Wedding
12th Anniversary Silk and Linen Wedding
15th Anniversary Crystal Wedding
20th Anniversary China Wedding
25th Anniversary Silver Wedding
30th Anniversary Pearl Wedding
40th Anniversary Ruby Wedding
50th Anniversary Golden Wedding
60th Anniversary Diamond Wedding


