

THE
PRESENT STATE OF MORAL PRINCIPLE
IN THE
SUPREME GOVERNMENT
OF THE
BRITISH COLONIAL EMPIRE,
Descritetr in a petition to the Queen,
WHICH WAS LEFT FOR PRESENTATION TO HER MAJESTY ON
THE 3D JULY, 1850.
B Y
COLONEL GEORGE GAWLER, K.H.,
DATE GOVERNOR AND RESIDENT COMMISSIONER OF THE PROVINCE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Not Published.


LONDON:
Printed by G. BARCLAY, Castle St. Leicester Sq.


INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
My object in printing the following Peti-
tion for, if it be possible, a very limited and
private circulation, is, primarily, to draw the
attention of some from among the Peerage to
the grievous wrong that has been done, and
is still doing, to their Sovereign and their
order, as well as to me, by the proceedings
described in its pages.
My first intention was to have presented
the Petition myself to her Majesty, at the
levee of the 3d of July; but at the request
of Lord John Russell, on an application to
his Lordship from the Lord Chamberlain, I


changed to the course of leaving it on the
same day with Sir George Grey.
On the 22d of July I was informed by
Mr. Hawes that the Petition had been trans-
ferred to Earl Grey, and “laid before the
Queen, but that Lord Grey could not advise
her Majesty to give any orders on the
subject.”
To me the conclusion is clear, that every
right-minded man in the civilised world who
may take the trouble to read the document
with candour will come to the opinion, that,
for the honour of the British Crown, Peerage,
and Nation, it is imperative that, from some
supreme quarter, orders should he given on the
subject.
The case does not affect my interests
alone. The following extract from a work
now publishing, will show that the reputation
and well-being of officers of the army and
navy at large are concerned in it: —
“ The next recommendation of the Commis-
sioners of a Governor was even more unfortunate
than the preceding. One of the chief claims of
Captain Hindraarsh was, that he had distinguished
himself at the battle of the Nile, and fought under


Lord Nelson. So, also, his successor, Lieutenant-
colonel Gawler, had been ‘present at many of the
great sieges and battles in the Peninsula—Badajoz,
Vittoria, Nivelles, Orthes, Toulouse, and lastly at
Waterloo, where he commanded the right flank
company of the 52d, during the great charge on
the Imperial Guards.* What evidence the meri-
torious conduct of a midshipman or captain of a
company, at the Nile and at Waterloo, could afford
of the adaptation of the individual for the peculiar
duties of civil governor in a young agricultural
settlement it would be hard to divine. It is quite
true, that naval and military officers have occa-
sionally (though seldom) made efficient governors of
colonies; but they are exceptions to a rule. Much
of the long-protracted misrule of some of our colo-
nies may be traced to the evil of appointing soldiers
and sailors as civil governors, irrespective of their
aptitude and fitness for such important and difficult
duties. But another opportunity will occur for the
examination of this subject when treating of the
Colonial Policy of the British Empire.
“ The recommendation of the Commissioners
was, however, adopted; and Lieutenant-colonel
Gawler was appointed by the Crown Governor of
South Australia; the resident commissioner, Mr.
Fisher, was removed, and the duties of his office
were entrusted to Colonel Gawler, who thus repre-
sented, in his own person, the interests of the


Crown and those of the South Australian Commis-
sioners.” *
That publication, from the pen of a
former civil officer of the Crown, is “ dedi-
cated by special authority to the Queen/'
The author has access to the records of the
Colonial Office, by Earl Grey's permission;
and the Queen, the Duchess of Kent, the late
Duke of Cambridge, Earl Grey, the Right
Hon. Fox Maule, “the Colonial Office,” and
“ the War Office,” appear in the published
Lists of Subscribers.
The pretended facts by which the mis-
chievous attack on myself in particular, and
the officers of the army and navy in general,
is supported through seven double pages, are
principally statements which for nine years
past I have described to her Majesty’s Go-
vernment as most gross misrepresentations,
which I stood ready to exhibit as such before
any fair and equal public tribunal.
* “ Dedicated by special authority to the Queen, containing
the most recent official details, by permission of the Secretary
of State for the Colonies, The British Colonies, by R. Mont-
gomery Martin, Esq., late Treasurer to the Queen at Hong
Kong, and Member of her Majesty’s Legislative Council in
China.”


The following Petition will bear evidence
to the truth of this declaration; and Mr.
Montgomery Martin’s book will unite with
the circumstances detailed in the Petition to
show, I trust, to every candid reader, that I
have not adopted a strong course without
peculiarly strong necessity, and that reasons
of the highest class require me now to bring
the matter without delay to a full issue.
GEORGE GAWLER.
6th August, 1850.




TO HER MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY VICTORIA, by
the grace of God Queen of the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Ireland, and of its
Colonies and Dependencies throughout the
Earth.
The Petition of George Gawler, very recently a
Colonel in the Army, and still bearing the honorary
rank of that office; a Knight of the Guelphic
Order, wearing, by royal permission, a medal with
seven clasps for the Peninsular war, and a medal
for Waterloo; and lately Governor and Resident
Commissioner of the Province of South Australia,
by commissions under the great seal and sign
manual,
Most humbly sheweth, —
Military Services.
That your Petitioner, educated at the Royal
Military College, passed, in the year 1810, at the
early age of fifteen, to a commission in the 52d
Light Infantry, with high testimonials for conduct
and progress.
That your Petitioner served on full pay in that
distinguished and most actively employed regiment
B


until the year 1834, when (after having also pre-
viously expended a large suni of money in pro-
motion) he purchased an unattached Lieutenant-
colonelcy, from sincere affection to the service of
the Crown, and with the desire and intention of
continuing to devote his life to it so soon as an
opportunity should offer of renewed employment.
Civil Colonial Services.
That, in the early part of the year 1838, your
Petitioner received from the original body of Co-
lonisation Commissioners, in opposition to several
rival influential candidates, through the high testi-
monials produced by him from the General com-
manding in chief (Lord Hill), the commanding
officer of the s°2d regiment (now Major-general
Ferguson, colonel of the 43d Light'lnfantry), and
from other important quarters, civil as well as
military, a unanimous recommendation to Lord
Glenelg (then Secretary of State for the Colonies),
for the office of Governor of the newly-created pro-
vince of South Australia, and shortly afterwards
for that of Eesident Commissioner of the same
colony ; these two high offices, under commissions
directly from your Majesty, uniting in one person,
through the peculiar, novel, experimental, and very
rapidly fulfilling plan of colonisation adopted,
amounts of authority and of responsibility very


seldom equalled under any emergencies in British
modern colonial government.
That your Petitioner did not ask for these
almost absolute powers, but took them upon him-
self at the request of the Commissioners without
increase of pay or emolument; nevertheless under
the conviction that true wisdom requires the con-
cession of something near to absolute authority, to
the supreme local director, in all proceedings which
combine with great risks the possibility of great
rapidity and of sudden extensive changes—a rule
which holds good alike for an army in the field, a
bateau on the rapids, a ship on the ocean, and a
very distant, new, and rapidly increasing colony.
That, moreover, from the circumstance that
some of the most fundamental articles of the regu-
lations for the settlement of South Australia, de-
vised in England, for an unexplored wilderness,
an unknown climate, and a then most imperfectly
understood state of society, were found on trial to
be (as a parliamentary committee has since declared
them to have been) “ totally inadequate, and bear-
ing no proportion to the reality” (“ Second Keport
on South Australia,” 1841, page ix.), your Petitioner,
under the before-mentioned combined high commis-
sions, and with emergency powers in the letter un-
limited, and extraordinary official encouragements,
was made, at a distance then of nearly twelve months
in time for communication with his only point of


reference, not only absolute in tbe exercise of his
judgment on most leading points, but, to a degree
not describable in a limited petition, responsible to
your Majesty, to tbe British nation, and to the
thousands of settlers most rapidly poured upon his
hands, to exercise that judgment with freeness,
activity, and decision—looking to the high in-
telligence, consideration, honour, and integrity of
the Government at home for his justification and
reward.
That, on describing by letter to the authorities
in England the very great difficulties of his posi-
tion in the colony, your Petitioner was merely re-
ferred hack again to the emergency powers as his
remedy ; a reference which was never modified 01
cancelled so long as it could, in any important
particular, affect his proceedings.
That, to so extreme a point was this practice
of throwing your Petitioner upon his own responsi-
bility carried out, that even his proffered resig-
nation of office, sent to England after his principles
of proceeding in the colony were developed and
well known, was returned to him at that immense
distance in time and space for reconsideration.
That your Petitioner was soon driven to per-
ceive the most utter fallacy of one of the principles
at first attempted in regard to South Australia,
and up to that time generally adopted in other
colonising proceedings, viz. that the ratio of 'public


expenditure, low at first, should increase with
the increase of the prosperity of the colony.
That your Petitioner, compelled (especially by
the most rapid influx of immigrants, which formed
a European population of 15,000 souls at the close
of the fourth year of the colony’s absolute existence,
with the prospect of being even more speedily
doubled in numbers) to act upon his own judgment,
reversed the foregoing commonly received principle
of colonisation this his unavoidable proceeding
being, moreover, supported by the clear conviction,
that, in a territory of which the capabilities are
good and sufficient, an early very liberal public
outlay is the true rule of wisdom and of really
SOUND ECONOMY.
That the foregoing is a rule which holds good
in regard to other undertakings—as, in the con-
struction of a line-of-battle ship or the erection of
a large public building, early comparatively expen-
sive outlay in preparations is the true principle of
final and total economy—and that the opposite of
this rule, attempted in the earlier proceedings in
New Zealand (parsimony in respect to arrange-
ments for the settlement of disputed land-titles,
and to the proper means of defence, naval and
military), has produced the subsequent really ex-
travagant and still current expenditure, exceeding
already a million sterling , upon a colony which
now, after eleven years from the date of its regular


formation, and of, perhaps, forty years horn the
time of its first settlement by Englishmen, has not
yet attained to the statistics which South Australia
showed in the fifth year of its absolute existence,
after a cost to the parent treasury of less than two
hundred thousand pounds.
That your Petitioner, acting boldly upon the
principle to which he was driven and which he
advocates, while satisfying himself also, with great
personal exertion and much risk, of the real nature
and value of the surface of the province, laid
broadly, deeply, and solidly the foundations of that
which well and truly showed itself to be before he
left it, and which has most fully continued to prove
itself to he, the only cheap and brilliantly successful
new colony in modern British history.
Fourteen thousand six hundred, and ten souls
in less than five years , with accompanying bene-
ficial fruits of progress in unprecedented abund-
ance, and, built upon this foundation,* above
* Some thoroughly established statistical facts in proof that
the foundations of the unprecedented cheapness and prosperity
of the new colony of South Australia were broadly, deeply, and
solidly laid when Colonel Gawler left the colony in 1841:
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
In the fifth year of its absolute existence (1841) as a British
settlement.
Total white population (census of 1840) .... 14,610
Of which there were in Adelaide, in the middle
of 1841, about 7,110


49,000 souls now, at the end of fourteen years only,
in high security and prosperity, supporting itself
wholly upon its own resources, after a total cost
to the British treasury of 225,000/., anything
near to such an instance of success in the price
and progress.of a new colony is not to he found
elsewhere in modern history.
And in the rural districts about . 7,500
Of these there had been of the class of labour-
immigrants, imposing great trouble and ex-
pense upon the Government 11,208
A district as large as the home principality of
Wales closely explored, its leading features
mapped down, and surveyed into small sec-
tions for sale. This in itself an immense Acres.
work 589,114
Nearly the whole of the most irregular coast-line, and about
one-third of the very difficult interior of the province, explored
and generally mapped down.
The lines of country from New South Wales (1000 miles),
Port Phillip (800 miles), and Western Australia (1300 miles),
explored, and the first two open for traffic.
Land sold, 297,868 acres, yielding a price of 277,039/. 9s.
Acres.
Under crop, by official returns 7,092
Enclosed for cultivation, about 25,000
Sheep, about 220,000
Cattle, do 16,000
Horses, do 1,100
Large portions of the Government-house, public offices, and
gaol, built of permanent materials, on models for enlargement.
Infirmary, custom-house, court-house, police barracks, public


That the sum contemplated in the original
scheme of the colony as the price to be advanced
from the mother-country for its foundation was
375,000/. (“ England and America,” by E. Gibbon
Wakefield, vol. ii. p. H9)> and that, towards this
amount, the raising of 200,000/. was actually autho-
rised by Act of Parliament before your Petitioner
undertook the government.
That your Petitioner had, moreover, just and
honourable reason to understand, from emphatic
instructions given to him before he left England,
in the course of interviews with the Under-Secre-
tary of State, Mr. James Stephen, that your Ma-
jesty’s Government expected that the 200,000/.
already authorised by Act of Parliament would not
be sufficient for the foundation of the colony, but
that, nevertheless, it was your Petitioner’s duty to
go on to make “ a fine colony ”of it; depending, if
the means of the Colonisation Commissioners should
stores, aborigines’ location, emigration depot, and various out-
stations also built.
The harbour accurately surveyed and buoyed, and a good
road constructed across the large swamp surrounding it.
Communications well opened, with much labour, to the
country districts. Letter-posts on some of them.
An admirable town and country police, trained, clothed,
equipped, and a part of them well mounted.
The “ Wheal Gawler” mine opened, and mineral search
commenced.
Exports of colonial produce to the value of 40,561/. I7s.
Revenue, 1841, 28,549/. 3s, 6d. &c. &c. &c.


fail, upon the British Government itself for the
necessary surplus.
That unquestionably pecuniary difficulties very
severe, though comparatively very transient, came
at one time over the colony, but that concerning
these your Petitioner would have shown, if he had
ever enjoyed that sacred right of man the liberty
of fair and equal reply to accusations , first, that
severe difficulties of the same kind were about the
same time common to all the Australian colonies;
and secondly, that almost all that was peculiar in
those of South Australia had its origin in the very
had management and very bad faith of your Ma-
jesty’s Colonial Office at home: bad faith from
misconception and want of information possibly,
but still, bad faith.
That these transient severe trials, however,
tested and exhibited the stability of the foundations
of the colony, which, by far the finest according to
its age before them, quickly rose above the storm,
and became again the finest in proportion to its age
after them; the only cheap and brilliantly-
SUCCESSFUL NEW COLONY IN MODERN HISTORY.
That your Petitioner sought your Majesty’s
honour, the unity and interests of the British em-
pire, and the well-being of the colonists; not only
by activity in the class of duties commonly termed
official, but by labouring unceasingly to place broad
and deep beneath this formal and mechanical foun


dation, the rock-bases of sound religion, enlightened
and conscientious loyalty, pure and simple morality,
and honest, honourable, scriptural, and faithful
political government.
That your Petitioner had also the gratification
to enjoy the fruits of this portion of his system, by
seeing, as he did, the settlers pass from the state of
fierce dissension among themselves, and of over-
bearing republican contention with the Government,
in which he at first landing found them, to a condi-
tion of social harmony as great, and attachment to
the Government as warm, loyal, and cordial, as was
ever witnessed in any political community upon
earth. Your Petitioner, moreover, maintaining the
peace and security of the province, very far removed
though it was from other portions of your Majesty’s
civilised dominions, by moral influence and civil
arrangements only , without the presence, at any
time, of one regular soldier in arms.
That, moreover, the progress of South Australia
extending its influence beyond the province of
which your Petitioner was mainly the supreme local
founder, communicated a stimulus and system before
unknown to colonisation at large, and contributed
greatly to produce the amount of general success
still current, which enabled a committee of the
Lords in 1847 to record the following public
opinion:—


“ The unexampled progress of the newly-planted
Australian provinces is well calculated to warrant a hope
that the great principle of colonisation, so often treated of
as among those ‘ ancient, primitive, and heroical works,’
for which modern times are unfitted, not only has been
realised in some British possessions, but has been exem-
plified on a greater scale, and with more extensive success
there, and of late years, than has been manifested else-
where in the past history of mankind.” — Report of the
Select Committee of the House of Lords on Colonisation
from Ireland , 1847, p. 16.
That one of the highest perhaps the highest
—of British authorities, has declared, that “ Plan-
tations (colonies) are the very nativities or birth-
days of kingdoms and that “in kingdoms, the first
foundation or plantation is of more noble dignity
and merit than all that followeth.”— Lord Bacon ;
Considerations on Plantations.
Reward received for Colonial Services , and the
causes of it.
That the reputation of having laid, after a long
period of time, in which “ the art of colonisation ”
was reputed to be “lost,” in the face of immense
difficulties, the local foundation of the prosperity of
the only cheap and brilliantly-successful colony in
modern history, is, to a public functionary espe


daily, property of very high and substantial value,
and not merely empty honour.
That from the supreme local part your Peti-
tioner took, with foresight of beneficial results and
devoted loyalty to your Majesty and to the nation,
in events so fraught with high importance to the
character, interests, and integrity of the British
empire, your Petitioner had most just reason to
expect from your Majesty’s civil Government a con-
tinuation of the favourable consideration which had
attended his military course, employment, promo-
tion, and an increase of his powers for public use-
fulness, and for making provision in life for his
family, from whose private funds a considerable
sum had been necessarily abstracted to meet, with
a very low salary, the extraordinary expenses of
South Australia.
That, however, on the contrary, your Petitioner
is now forced to the most painful duty of repre-
senting before your Majesty’s throne, that through
the nine wearisome years which have elapsed since
his return from that province (nine necessarily in
themselves of the most valuable years of his life),
his former services, character, and prospects, have
been, up to the present time, destroyed by three of
your Majesty’s Ministers, viz. Lord John Russell,
Lord kStanley, and Earl Grey.
That the causes of this most unjust, most de


structive, and most prolonged oppression of a
faithful public servant, appear to have been, —
Ist. That circumstances which your Petitioner
in South Australia judged to be emergencies,
calling for the exercise of extraordinary powers,
were not at first regarded in that light by many
persons who contemplated them from England,
through the medium of the very gross cloud of
misrepresentations which have usually attended
early distant colonisation, and who were without
any personal experience in regard to a state of
things so indescribably different to that about them
at home.
2d. That Secretaries of State for the Colonies
having once committed themselves in public acts
and statements adverse to your Petitioner, were
afterwards hindered from doing him the public
justice they at last perceived to be his due, by the
most unwise and most unfortunate policy so preva-
lent among statesmen of this age—that of main-
taining before the public, at all sacrifice and all
risk, the appearance of infallibility, when the
reality of it has ceased to exist.
And, Sdly, That when the brilliant and unpre-
cedented prosperity of South Australia began to
develope itself, in features so hold that it was no
longer possible for the blindest eyes and dullest
ears in Europe to mistake it, it became an im-
mense object for the Colonial Office to grasp for


itself the reputation of the creation of that pros-
perity —so much the more so, as, without any ex-
ception, its own attempts at founding new colonies
had been instances, either of excessive outlay, or of
extraordinary failure. New South Wales, Van
Diemen’s Land, and New Zealand, coming under
the first class, and Northern and Western Aus-
tralia under the second. Port Phillip (Victoria)
never having been a new colony at all, but in its
commencement a mere branch, thrown out from
and by New South Wales, under, not even a Lieu-
tenant-governor, but a mere “ Superintendent.”
That, acting apparently under the influence of
these three causes, and especially of the last of them,
your Majesty’s Ministers have committed them-
selves (according to your Petitioner s conviction,
and as will be shown immediately by some specific
evidence), by conduct most unsuitable to the honour
of your Majesty’s crown, of which they were or are
the representatives; most unbecoming to the cha-
racter of the peerage, the especial guardian and
example of high honour and principle to the nation ;
and moreover (as such conduct in probability forms
a portion only of proceedings directed upon similar
principles), most dangerous in these momentous
days to the peace of the nation, the welfare of the
colonies, and the holding together of the empire.
That if it he true (as your Petitioner has reason
to think it is true) that Lord Stanley has, since his


sudden retirement from office, endeavoured to clear
himself from the most cruel misrepresentation, op-
pression, and spoliation to which your Petitioner
has been subjected, by procuring for him at least a
portion of specific redress from the ministry now in
power, these charges only rest the heavier on Lord
John Russell and Earl Grey, who, having that
power of redress in their own hands, and the re-
sponsibility of the honour of your Majesty’s crown
and of the nation upon them, have not only with-
held payment of the debt of justice, which they
knew to be due from your Majesty, through the
acts of their predecessor Lord Stanley, but have
subsequently most grievously augmented that debt by
their own personal conduct as Ministers of the Crown.
Some Details of the Case.
That as to go through the whole of the details
of a case so long and complicated, would surpass
altogether the limits of a petition, your Petitioner
would, for the present, only solicit attention to a
portion of them, sufficient to convey to your Majesty
an idea of the gross nature of the treatment he has
received, and to procure for him the object for
which he in conclusion will make his prayer.
That this portion of the details of your Peti-
tioners case is as follows :
1 st, As regards Lord John Russell primarily.
A young officer of the army, (Captain Grey, of


the 83d Regiment,) who had been employed, with-
out effecting any of the great objects proposed, (in
an exploratory expedition, in the years 1838-39,)
on the western coast of Australia, arriving in South
Australia, on his way hack to England about a
twelvemonth before your Petitioner quitted the
government of that colony, was received by your
Petitioner with all the cordiality he would manifest
towards any public servant of your Majesty, and
with all the confidence and regard he had been
accustomed, through a long life, to feel towards a
British military officer. Captain Grey and his wife
were for five days guests in your Petitioner’s house,
and at his (Captain Grey’s) request, the government
offices were thrown open to him to collect any in-
formation in them he might deem useful or in-
teresting.
Captain Grey at length reached' England, was
in communication with the Colonial Office, at that
time under Lord John Russell, and, four months
afterwards, was gazetted as Governor and Resident
Commissioner of South Australia, superseding your
Petitioner.
A considerable time before Captain Grey’s
name appeared in the London Gazette , he had ad-
dressed written statements to Lord John Russell in
reference to your Petitioner’s proceedings, public
and domestic, in South Australia,* which were cal-
* 18th November, 1840.


culated, as much as statements could be calculated,
to destroy your Petitioner’s reputation ; and which
were, moreover, most grossly erroneous and exag-
gerated. Lord John Russell received, and acted
upon publicly, in a manner severely adverse to your
Petitioner, and in other ways besides that of re-
moving him from office, these most one-sided mis-
representations. Your Petitioner does not assert
that other pleas (founded, however, on very great
misconceptions) were not advanced as the causes of
his removal; but only that Captain’s Grey’s state-
ments were in themselves fully sufficient to accom-
plish it, and, of course, at least to confirm and give
full effect to any other gross mistakes.
From that time, in 1840, up to the very recent
event of the publication, as a pamphlet, by Ridgway,
of Lord John Russell’s speech on “ Colonial Policy,”
of the Bth February, 1850, the persevering public
practice of your Majesty’s Government has been,
either directly or by express inference, to cry up, with
an enthusiasm altogether unusual and marvellous,
Governor Grey, and to overwhelm, with unsparing
and unmitigated reproaches, Colonel Gawler.
To conceive the possibility of such a determined
and prolonged course of oppression, it must be par-
ticularly borne in mind that your Petitioner, as
having been recommended by the unanimous voice
of the original body of Colonisation Commissioners,
and as having been, also, as Resident Commissioner,
c


one Of their body, and their representative in the
colony, reflected by his conduct honour or disgrace
upon them ; while Governor Grey’s praise returned
back again upon the Colonial Office, of which {the
original body of Colonisation Commissioners having
been also summarily removed by Lord John Rus-
sell) he was the selected and especial instrument.
Avowed personal acquaintances of Governor
Grey have supported, with great eagerness, in
periodicals and other works from the press, his
reputation in contrast to that of your Petitioner,
coupled with vehement attacks upon the latter,
founded, to a serious extent, upon gross errors, of
which Captain Grey had been the source.
Your Petitioner has also some solid grounds for
asserting, that Captain Grey was not more scrupu-
lous on this subject in private conversation than he
was in statements of a more formal character.
Captain Grey’s habits in regard to accuracy of
statement on public matters (which might also be
strikingly illustrated by contrasting his almost total
failure in geographical discovery in Western Aus-
tralia, with the reputation and profit which the
narrative of his journey acquired for him ; and by
reading his description of the supposed beautiful
province that he named “ Victoria,” (vol. ii. page
117,) side by side with the accounts of the severe
losses and disappointments of the body of settlers
which started from England to found an “ Austral


indin ’ in it, but who were afterwards glad to ex-
change the site of their Indies for some of the
refuse lands of the old Swan River settlement).
These habits have been just described as follows,
by a public meeting of the settlers, at the seat of
his present government.
Your Petitioner has this strong reason for be-
lieving the statements of the meeting to be correct,
that they agree with the remonstrances which your
Petitioner, commencing nine years ago, has, in his
own most necessary defence against Governor
Grey’s very gross misrepresentations, explicitly
made to the Colonial Office, and other branches of
the British Government.
Extracts from the “ Morning Chronicle ”
11 th February , 1850.
“ NEW ZEALAND.
“ The Auckland papers publish the following memorial,
adopted at a public meeting at that town :
“To the Right Honourable Earl Grey, her Majesty’s
Secretary of State for the Colonies.
“ That the representations of its (the colony’s) flourish-
ing condition during the last three years are founded on
false and deceptive bases , calculated, only to mislead your
Lordship and others at a distance. .....
They (the Petitioners) have now lost all confidence in
Governor Grey’s policy, and all hope of his making any


beneficial change therein ; further, that they have lost
respect for his official character for veracity, on account
of the systematic misrepresentations of his despatches.
May it therefore please your Lordship to recommend to
her Most Gracious Majesty, forthwith to remove Gover-
nor Grey from his appointment, and to replace him with
one who may, at least, have straightforward honesty of
statement in communications with her Majesty's Govern-
ment, and whose proceedings in the colony .... may
at least bear upon the face of them integrity of purpose.”
This is the character for accuracy, in public
narration, of the young functionary whose state-
ments, severely adverse to your Petitioner, were
received and acted upon by Lord John Russell
before your Petitioner had the possibility of a
reply ; although only four months previously Lord
John Russell, after detaining your Petitioner’s
proffered resignation until nine months had elapsed
from its date, had, in the most complete knowledge
of your Petitioner's colonial system , returned that
resignation to him in the colony for reconsideration.
These misstatements, so received, were the [first
step towards*] the mass of prolonged misrepresent-
ations which have followed, as will be seen more
clearly in the narration of Lord Stanley’s conduct.
The great head of modern practical local colo-
* A slight variation is here made from the terms of the
Petition, from no motives of unfairness.


nisation, Columbus, was removed from his colonial
government of St. Domingo by a commissioner,
Bobadilla, sent out to investigate representations
against him, and to succeed him in the government
if he found them to be true. Captain Grey, a
voung man eager to recommend himself to the
British Ministry —'perhaps to repair his late failure,
and certainly to obtain employment in Australia—
was allowed to make strong adverse representations
against, and to succeed the Governor of South
Australia, under whose roof he had been but a
short time before residing, receiving then and
afterwards from the British Government most
determined and one-sided support, in defiance of
counter-remonstrances, for any statement that he
chose to advance concerning another man’s pro-
ceedings, to whose interests his own were of course
diametrically opposed.
The two cases above cited are not very far from
parallel. The first, including the subsequent treat-
ment of its victim, has left a blot of disgrace upon
the Spanish Government and Crown, which age,
instead of obliterating, has made darker and more
indelible.
Secondly, as regards Lord Stanley.
When your Petitioner arrived in England from
South Australia, in January 1842, he found Lord
Stanlev at the head of the Colonial Office.


Previous to his acceptance of office, his Lord-
ship, misled by false representations, and certainly
also hy his own deficiency of consideration, had, on
the 15th of March, 1841, made some very strong
statements in the House adverse to your Petitioner,
which, taken up by one of Governor Grey’s per-
sonal friends in the periodical press, and hy Mr.
Merrivale (then Professor of Political Economy at
Oxford, now Under-secretary of State for the Colo-
nies), had a large share in the gross injury done
to your Petitioner’s reputation.
The extreme erroneousness of these statements
was pointed out by your Petitioner in a letter to
Lord Stanley, and in one serious point admitted
in a reply from his Lordship; but from that time
to the present this mischief, very great though it
was, has been allowed to remain before the public
uncorrected.
Your Petitioner, soon discovering, unavoidably,
the system of misrepresentation which Governor
Grey had been practising before he left England,
and was still supporting and carrying on with in-
creased diligence from South Australia, earnestly
entreated in a written communication that Lord
Stanley would not allow his mind to he influenced
hy any representations from Governor Grey ad-
verse to your Petitioner , until your Petitioner had
heen allowed the opportunity of making his reply
to them.


This appeal, most just and reasonable though
it was, was, under the course of one-sided policy
which the Colonial Office had adopted, unavailing.
A very few communications from Governor Grey
were shown to your Petitioner; but the great body
of his despatches, although they were framed almost
invariably upon a system of comparison between his
proceedings and your Petitioner’s, were kept back.
At length the animus of this correspondence, which
had taken possession of Lord Stanley’s mind, broke
forth from his Lordship on the sth of July, 1842, in
a long speech in the House of Commons, calculated
to destroy the public hopes and the private advan-
tages (so far as these last depended on official
employment and influence) of any public officer. It
contained an unhandsome comparison of Governor
Grey’s conduct with that of your Petitioner, and
strong allusions to your Petitioner’s faults, real or
supposed, without any of consequence to the most
extraordinary amount of concomitant beneficial
results ; the whole being elucidated (if darkness
may be called light) by very gross misstatements.
Your Petitioner (in Derbyshire at that moment),
shocked and astonished at such an unwarrantable
systematic attack, made in total rejection of his
previous earnest expostulations and statements, and
not having time to discuss in writing the whole
subject, selected the most injurious misrepresenta-
tion, and by return of post (July Bth) pointed it


out ill full to his Lordship. It not only menaced
most seriously your Petitioner’s own interests, but
affected also, to a very large amount, the property
of private colonists of South Australia, forming, as
it was made to do, the ground for a most injurious
exception, and a particular clause (the IOth) in an
Act of Parliament* Lord Stanley was then about
to introduce.
The misstatement above referred to was too
gross and glaring to be maintained in reply to
your Petitioner, who had immediately proceeded to
London to take other measures if such should be
required. Lord Stanley answered the appeal by a
written official promise of correction at the first
opportunity. That promise, made by a repre-
sentative of your Majesty's crown and honour , to
a public officer whose reputation is to a great
extent his bread and the bread of his children , and
(what is even more than these ) his power of useful-
ness in life , has never to this hour been ful-
filled.
Your Petitioner does not mean to state that
fulfilment has not been attempted honourably by
Lord Stanley: that is a point which rests particu-
larly between the representatives of your Majesty’s
honour, Lord Stanley, Earl Grey, and Lord John
Russell. Your Petitioner only declares that his
* “ An Act to provide for the better Government of South
Australia. 30th July, 1842.”


purse, containing property invaluable to him and to
his family, was taken eight years ago (by mistake,
perhaps, but it was taken); tliat its return to him
has been imperatively required by two of the
MOST SACRED PRINCIPLES KNOWN TO MAN the
duty of restitution , and a formal promise ; and
yet that , to this moment , he has never received
ANY PORTION OF IT.
Moreover, the legislative spoliative clause founded
on that great misstatement passed both Houses, and
finally received your Majesty’s sanction on the 30th
of Julv, 1842.
%! *
Not a word appeared in any of the subsequent
reports of Lord Stanley’s speeches in correction of
it, or of other great misstatements in Lord Stanley’s
speech of the sth of July, 1842, of which your
Petitioner, on arriving in London, had given a list
to Mr. Hope, Under-secretary of State, at his Lord-
ship’s office.
This was not all. About fourteen months after-
wards, a parliamentary folio was issued from the
Colonial Office (“Papers on South Australia,” 1843),
which consisted almost wholly of despatches from
Governor Grey, drawn up in that very unbecoming
style of comparison between the proceedings and
effects of his government and of your Petitioner’s,
to which your Petitioner has before alluded, sup-
ported by very gross misrepresentations. Among


these were introduced despatches from Lord Stan-
ley, some of them highly laudatory of Governor
Grey and his proceedings, and necessarily encou-
raging his style and tone of correspondence, and
others declaring at full length , without the least
correction or explanation , that most mischievous
misstatement of your Petitioner's conduct which
Lord Stanley had given his official promise in
writing to correct.
In this Parliamentary folio, moreover, there did
not appear one letter, of the considerable number
your Petitioner bad written to your Majesty’s Co-
lonial Office, during the very period embraced, and
upon the very subject so continually in invidious
comparison introduced— the proceedings and con-
current effects of your Petitiojiei''s own govern-
ment, which he ought to understand better than
any other person in existence.
It was one of the most cruel, most oppressive,
and most utterly one-sided publications that was
ever laid by a Minister of the Crown before his
Sovereign, a legislature, and a nation, and as such
did to your Petitioner, the especial victim of it, in-
calculable injury—injury which, if it he not most
completely corrected by extraordinary acts, will not
end with your Petitioners earthly existence, but
will descend in the page of the history of the world
as an heir-loom of reproach and disgrace upon his


family for ever. Experience has shown that the
narrative of the foundation of colonies is among the
most imperishable of human records.
Your Petitioner was willing to receive his re-
dress from the acts of the British Government
rather than from words. He did not desire either
to make vengeful retaliation on Governor Grey
(with whom, indeed, he has no controversy), or to
subject the Government to the humiliation of un-
ravelling in words before the public such a web of
utter and gross injustice. Your Petitioner, there-
fore, submitted to wait for the realisation of a pros-
pect of redress in acts from your Majesty s Govern-
ment, which, in answer to a strong appeal that on
this occasion your Petitioner made, was set before
him.
Lord Stanley rather suddenly left office, without
having accomplished this redress. If his Lordship
transferred his obligations to the present ministry
his honour is cleared in this particular, and the
responsibility and further blame of delay rests very
heavily upon them. If his Lordship did not do so,
your Petitioner would most humbly plead that,
while the fault lies with his Lordship, the whole
weight of the debt of honour in itself, and of its
most ruinous consequences to your Petitioner for
the last eight years, is incumbent upon your Ma-
jesty’s crown, of which Lord Stanley stood before
your Petitioner as the representative.


3dly. As regards Earl Grey.
When Lord John Russell’s administration took
office, your Petitioner addressed an application to
the Premier (who in his former post of Secretary
for the Colonies had stood in such close connexion
with the events that had befallen your Petitioner),
and received in reply, and subsequently, indications of
favour, of the mysterious kind too commonly given,
from which your Petitioner had reason to think
that the obligations incurred by Lord Stanley had
been honourably transferred to the present admi-
nistration. Sincerely desiring, therefore, a quiet
settlement of this very painful affair, he refrained
for a considerable time from any further effort.
It soon, however, became evident, that the
system of judging of your Petitioner’s proceedings
by the opinions of Governor Grey, and that also of
heaping the reproach of failure upon the period of
your Petitioner’s government, for the purpose of
appropriating the reputation of the prosperity of
South Australia for the Colonial Office, still existed
in that office in full force.
A complaint sent to England after your Peti-
tioner had left the colony, by a removed public
officer, upon whom your Petitioner had, by express
orders from the Colonial Office, instituted a Court
of Inquiry, and which complaint included strong
accusations against your Petitioner, was, without
the slightest communication to your Petitioner,


returned to the colony to Governor Grey for his
Report. That Report, upon matters entirely be-
longing to the period which preceded Governor
Grey’s assumption of office, was, like the great
mass of his other statements, adverse to your
Petitioner.
In this stage, the case came back again to
England. Judgment was then, of course, given
entirely on the side of the removed public officer,
and a strong censure was passed upon your Peti-
tioner, by name , who had done nothing but to fulfil,
in circumstances of great difficulty, and in opposi-
tion to his own feelings and judgment, his unquali-
fied orders from your Majesty’s Government.
Without, again, the slightest communication
with vour Petitioner, the documents and decision
were finally returned to the colony, under Earl
Grey’s sanction and signature.* The first notice
your Petitioner had of any part of the affair was
through the publication of the correspondence and
censure in the newspapers of South Australia, sent
to your Petitioner in England by private friends.
Your Majesty must perceive that the reputation
of no man that ever lived on earth could stand
before such a system as this. The most ancient,
most invaluable, and most sacred rule, Audi
* Earl Grey to Lieutenant-Governor Robe, 14th Aug. 1846.


alteram partem, evidently from your Petitioner’s
whole case, has no place among the fixed principles
of the British Government.
Again, on the 14th July, 1847, the Chairman
of the Emigration Board, now Assistant-Under-
secretary-of-State, in the Colonial Department,
made, before a Committee of the House of Lords,
a very strong (it may be said, bitter) and lengthy
direct attack upon the period of your Petitioner’s
government in South Australia; for the most
thoroughly avowed purpose of claiming for the
Colonial Office, himself, and Governor Grey, the
reputation of producing the extraordinary pros-
perity which in that colony has been manifested to
the world.
That attack and claim was supported by returns
which, with the evidence in general itself, your
Petitioner, about a twelvemonth since, found him-
self driven to declare, in a letter to Lord John
Bussell, he stood ready to prove to be “ false and
fraudulent before any public tribunal.” He had
expressed the same truth, in measured terms, in a
communication to his Lordship’s office a very long
time before. Mr. Elliot’s evidence, before the Com-
mittee of the Lords, is, in fact, to a considerable
extent, a condensation of the Beports of the public
functionary, concerning whom the New Zealand
colonists offer the opinions quoted at page 19 of this


petition. Mr. Elliot possessing abundantly the
means of knowing their gross erroneousness.
A substantial portion of the very same “ false
and fraudulent” returns produced by Mr. Elliot
before the Lords, was reproduced on the 25th July,
1848, by Mr. Hawes, in the House of Commons, for
the very same purpose of claiming the reputation of
the foundation of the extraordinary prosperity of
South Australia, for the Colonial Office; and the
same evidence, in substance, for the very same object
again, with strong commendation on Mr. Elliot by
name, for that evidence, was given, twice in one night,
to the House of Lords by Earl Grey (August 10th,
1848, pamphlet of Earl Grey’s Speeches, published
by Eidgway.)
Your Petitioner cannot of course speak in
regard to the memory of these two high authori-
ties, Earl Grey and Mr. Hawes, but he can posi-
tively declare that not many weeks before their
speeches were delivered he had made statements to
them respectively in reference to this subject, which,
if remembered, would make their reported parlia-
mentary observations most unwarrantable.
Moreover, Governor Grey, who, before he went
to South Australia, had almost utterly failed, at a
considerable waste of public money, in an explora-
tory expedition he had procured permission to con-
duct, in association with Lieut. Lushingfcon, on the
western coast of Australia—who had afterwards, in


South Australia, in the sunshine of Colonial Office
protection, gathered and appropriated to himself
and his patrons the fruits of a tree which others,
with great risk and labour, had well planted in an
untried soil and climate, and amid a storm of un-
certainties —and who after that again had succeeded
in tranquillising New Zealand with the army and
fleet which had been most liberally supplied to him,
infantry, artillery, and vessels of war, in contrast to
his predecessor, who had been expected to keep
quiet 100,000 New Zealanders by the force of 200
English muskets—was advanced by Earl Grey to a
singularly exalted standing for him in the Order of
the Bath, high up in the second class, at the first crea-
tion of the civil branch ; and thus, with a repetition
and consummation which, in connexion with like
circumstances, are, perhaps, unparalleled, held up
for the admiration of the British Empire, and for
the proportionate public disgrace and destruction of
those, from the ruins of whose reputation his fame
had been created and built up.
4thly, As regards Lord John Russell finally.
Upon his Lordship repeating in the House of
Commons, at the Easter adjournment of 1849, the
same emphatic commendations of Governor Grey
for his three sets of services in Western Australia,
South Australia, and New Zealand ; and thus, in
regard to the second particular, continuing, in the


face of the most earnest remonstrances, the spolia-
tion which had been made of your Petitioner’s
reputation. Your Petitioner declared in a letter
to his Lordship, that the evidence upon which his
Lordship’s observations were based was “false and
fraudulentthat your Petitioner had been judged
by what were equivalent to three great public one-
sided trials , the second Committee of the Commons
on South Australia, 1841 ; the parliamentary papers
on South Australia, 1843 ; and the Committee of
the Lords on Colonisation from Ireland, 1847,
which he had not been enabled or permitted to
reply for himself; that the conduct of a supreme
Government was not “manly,” which thus by su-
preme arbitrary power, and most gross injustice,
seized for itself the reputation, crushing at the
same time the prospects in life of one of its func-
tionaries ; and that your Petitioner was ready to
give up a journey to Syria, for which he was then
engaged with Sir Moses Montefiore, to prove his
charges before any public tribunal his Lordship
would appoint.
His Lordship’s reply was as follows:
“ Downing Street, 20th April, 1849.
“ Sir, — I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letters
of the 11th and 19th instant respectively, and in reply to
state that I do not think it necessary that you should
postpone your journey to Syria, in order again to open
D


the case of the differences which have unhappily existed
between yourself and the colonial administration of this
country.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your obedient servant,
(Signed) “ JOHN RUSSELL.
“ Colonel Gawler, K.H.”
His Lordship thus took upon his own head
the deplorable charges which were made against
his government by a reputable witness (the member
of a most honourable profession, holding her Ma-
jesty’s commission, and receiving public half-pay),
with most full and free offers of proof in regard to
a subject, moreover, which that witness ought to
understand better than any man in the world —the
proceedings of his own government.
His Lordship allowed the charges to remain on
himself, on the crown of which he is the first
minister, and on the peerage of which he is a
branch, without either giving redress or granting
an investigation (leaving, indeed, the application
utterly without further notice), for nearly a twelve-
month, i.e. until the middle of February 1850.
His Lordship, then, if he did not include in his
own speech on “ colonial policy ” a repetition of
the very proceedings which your Petitioner had so
strongly stigmatised to his Lordship, at least al-
lowed them to be included at considerable length
in the appendix to that speech (pages 60-62) pub


lislied as a pamphlet by Ridgway; thus perpetu-
ating and circulating throughout the empire, by
one of the most wide-spreading and authoritative
channels, statements which his Lordship, after such
an offer as he had had, was bound to consider to
be, until fairly proved to be otherwise, “false,
FRAUDULENT, and not MANLY.”
That the foregoing descriptions, under the
heads of “ Statements in reference to Lord John
Russell, Lord Stanley, and Earl Grey,” present a
faithful and honourable, though , of necessity, very
inadequate view of the means through which your
Petitioner has been despoiled of the invaluable
reputation (described especially in pages 2-11 of
this petition) which does belong to him, —has been
borne down by the reproach of very discreditable
failure which does not belong to him, —has been
kept out of official employment for nine of the best
years of his life, to the great reduction of his private
pecuniary resources, the severe trial of his health,
and the great disadvantage of his children, just
entering upon adult avocations, —and has had his
powers of public usefulness in the world diminished
almost to total destruction.
That after continuing for so great a length of
time in vain, in utter fruitlessness, in applications
to the justice, honour, and consideration of your


Majesty’s Ministers, your Petitioner has now no
course left to him, but that of solemn appeal to
the supreme head and source of justice and honour
to the empire—the Throne.
That your Petitioner has no controversy with
Mr. Elliot, or Governor Grey. If these subordi-
nate functionaries had not been encouraged by the
supreme authorities their misstatements might
have been very much more limited than they are;
or even if they had attained to their present extent,
without the receiving, acting upon, and propagating
of them by the three Secretaries of State, no very
serious public effect would have followed—nothing
that your Petitioner might not have easily reversed.
It is against those Ministers of the Crown, there-
fore, and against- them only, that your Petitioner
prefers before the Throne his deep, and solemn
complaint.
That your Petitioner has no vindictive or re-
taliatory feelings to satisfy against any of the
persons opposed to him, desiring nothing beyond
just and honourable redress, and no other publicity
for this most painful subject than that which the
obtaining of this just redress compels. With these
motives the contents of this petition have scarcely
been described to any other persons, or the docu-
ment itself committed to any copyist or shown to
any one ; circumstances which your Petitioner trusts


will plead his apology with your Majesty for the
roughness of its execution.
That your Petitioner most humbly hopes that
these last remarks may not be attributed to un-
worthy motives. He stands ready to support his
statements, faithfully and honourably made, to the
utmost extremity that the case may require.
Prayer of the Petition.
That your Petitioner most humbly claims
plenary redress, in acts of favour from your Majesty,
for all that, as described in the foregoing pages,
he has lost and suffered.
That, in particular, most distinct from every
other consideration , as a thing by itself, your
Petitioner claims humbly of the high honour of
your Majesty to he put immediately in a posi-
tion of advantage, in all respects and in all rela-
tions equivalent to that which your Petitioner
in just and reasonable probability would now have
occupied, if the official promise made on the 11 th
July, 1842, to your Petitioner, by Lord Stanley,
had been broadly and effectually fulfilled, either at
the first opportunity (as its terms were) after it
was given, or in its equivalent obligations, if these
were transferred by Lord Stanley to the ministry
now in power.
Such an immediate, broad, and effectual fid


filment of the correction of a most public, most
gross, most injurious, and thrice-repeated misre-
presentation, must in probability have carried with
it a simultaneous correction of the highly invidious
comparison, supported by other grievous misstate-
ments in the same speech, of which your Petitioner
(as he has described at page 25) gave in a list; or,
if these had not been thus corrected by Lord Stan-
ley, a leading and vantage-ground would have been
given for their exposure by your Petitioner s public
friends.
Moreover, the Parliamentary Papers of 1843
(from the despatches contained in which Lord
Stanley’s misstatements had been principally
drawn) never could have appeared before the
nation, or the vast mass of most unhandsome com-
parisons and most injurious misrepresentations
which thev contain have been made the means,
•/
in the hands of statesmen, legislators, and public
writers, periodical and permanent, of the indescri-
bable amount of evil which has been mercilessly
heaped upon your Petitioner up to the publication
of Lord John Russell’s speech of the Bth February,
1850.
That in regard to the colonists who suffered by
the failure of the effectual fulfilment of Lord Stan-
ley’s promise, your Petitioner would humbly submit
that, having laid their case and his own before
Mr. Secretary Gladstone, (who, for a short interval.


occupied the Colonial Office between Lord Stanley
and Earl Grey), that gentleman replied in sub-
stance, that, in regard to your Petitioner, Mr.
Gladstone’s tenure of office being limited, time did
not allow him to investigate the subject, although
he was persuaded of Lord Stanley s favourable
intentions; and that, in respect to the colonists who
had suffered, the right to the property must have
become so altered through the many changes of
hands which the bills that represented it must have
experienced, that the discovery and relief of the
real sufferers appeared then to be impracticable, if
the general claim could be established. Your Peti-
tioner, recognising this truly formidable difficulty,
could only leave the subject in Mr. Gladstone’s
hands.
Conclusion.
That your Petitioner would most humbly con-
clude, —
Ist. By supplicating your Majesty to believe,
that there is not in your Majesty’s dominions an
individual more loyally attached than is your Peti-
tioner to your Majesty, your royal Consort, your
family, or the constitutional order of things of
these, under your Majesty’s sceptre, hitherto happy
realms, —or that there is one more desirous of
maintaining and manifesting all due respect to con-
stituted authorities, —or any person to whom it


could have been more revolting and harassing to
have occupied the position of antagonism to the
British Government, and to members or branches
of the peerage connected with it, into which that
Government, through a space of nine years, has
forced him.
And 2dly, By laying before your Majesty some ,
from among the large number of testimonials your
Petitioner could produce in general support of his
statements and of their character:—
Lord Fitzroy Somerset to Colonel Torrens , Chairman of
the South Australian Commission.
“ Horse Guards, March 27, 1838.
“ Sir, —I have had the honour to lay before the Gene-
ral commanding in chief your letter of the 22d instant,
and I have great satisfaction in acquainting you that his
Lordship entertains a very high opinion of-Lieut.-colonel
Gawler, who, during the course of his military service,
has conducted himself in every situation in which he has
been placed with great credit to himself and advantage to
the public, and has rendered himself conspicuous by his
zeal, judgment, and intelligence.
“ Lord Hill has, therefore, no hesitation in recom-
mending Lieut.-colonel Gawler to the Colonisation Com-
missioners for South Australia, as an officer in every
respect qualified for the high and responsible appoint-
ment which he is desirous of obtaining through their
kind offices.
“ I have, &c. &c. &c.
(Signed) “ FITZROY SOMERSET.”


Extract of a Letter from the new and final body of Colo-
nisation Commissioners ( Torrens, Elliot, and Villiers ,)
to James Stephen, Esq., Undersecretary of State »
20 th May, 1840.
We cannot too strongly express the
gratification with which we have observed the mingled
firmness and moderation of Colonel Gawler’s proceed-
ings; qualities of which the continued exercise in the
same manner must not merely act beneficially on the
future concord, tranquillity, and success of the settlement,
but will also, we feel persuaded, meet with due recog-
nition and respect from the good sense of the existing
community.”
Extract of a Speech by Mr. David MacLaren, the Ma-
nager of the South Australian Company, at a Meeting
at which almost every adult Colonist attended for the
opening of the New Port, Port Adelaide, \ lth October,
1840.
(Inserted in the Second Parliamentary Report for South
Australia, 1841, Appendix, p. 318-19.)
“ On this day, which may be regarded as the second
anniversary of his Excellency’s arrival among us, our
minds are naturally turned back to 1838
We cannot fail to remember, that at that period our
small community was a prey to dissension, and that no-
thing had a more salutary influence in healing our divi-
sions and smoothing our asperity than the kindly . . .
conduct of his Excellency; and lam persuaded that the
present harmony which so happily and generally prevails,
is not more gratifying to any individual heart than his


Excellency, who has often reminded us that we had too
much to do to quarrel
He is the father of the people, and in this character we
now hail him.”
Extract from the Report of the Second Parliamentary
Committee on South Australia , 1841, p. 8.
“ It is due to Colonel Gawler to observe, that the
general character of his administration has been spoken
of in terms of strong approbation, even by those who have
censured his expenditure as excessive.”
Extract of a Letter from Lord Lyttleton (Undersecretary
of State , Colonial Department) to Lieut. - Colonel
Gawler , 24 th July, 1846.
“ Participating in the feelings of respect for your per-
sonal character so frequently and emphatically expressed
by Lord Stanley, it would have been very gratifying to
Mr. Gladstone, as he is convinced it would have been to
his immediate predecessor in office, to give some more
decisive proof of the sincerity of that feeling than can be
found in the simple avowal of it.”
Extract of a Letter from one of the original unpaid body of
Colonisation Commissioners for South Australia , Mr.
Josiah Roberts, since deceased.
“ Camberwell, 6th February, 1846.
“ It has ever been my unshaken conviction, that the
best interests of the colony were upheld by the firm and


decisive measures pursued under your administration of
its government, amidst the most formidable obstacles,
and but for which the valuable results now appearing
would never have been realised, or, at least, not for many
years to come. The examination of facts warrants this
conclusion, and those facts may now be more impartially
considered than under the circumstances of difficulty
which were for some time pressing on the colonists.”
Mr. Josiah Roberts (the writer of the above)
was a merchant of the city of London, of remark-
ably high character. The letter, of which the fore-
going is an extract, and which is still in your Peti-
tioner’s possession, was written of Mr. Roberts’
own movement a short time before his death.
Mr. Roberts and his colleagues, if they had
been allowed by Lord John Russell to remain in
office, understanding and knowing well your Peti-
tioner, would (there is very great reason to believe)
have steadfastly supported him, and have saved the
colony and your Petitioner from severe trials ;
trials, however, which have proved the stability of
the foundation of the one that could most triumph-
antly surmount them, and the intrinsic justice of
the case of the other, which has become mighty in
spite of them.
To the foregoing Testimonials your Petitioner
mav be permitted to add the facts, that his father,


Captain Samuel Gawler, late of the 73d Regiment,
after hard service in India, fell in close conflict with
the enemy by a sjocar-wound, heading his grenadiers
(as was his custom) in an escalade in the Mysore,
on the 24th December, 1804, leaving his only child
to the protection of his sovereign : and that your
Petitioner, among his military services, in “the
storming party” at Badajoz, on the 6th April,
1812, planted within one hundred yards (as the
greatest distance) of the muzzles of one thousand
French muskets, the six ladders which were com-
mitted to him for the descent of the counterscarp,
falling wounded almost immediately afterwards on
the top of the ravelin; and that he further com-
manded the right company of the 52d Regiment in
the decisive flank attack which that corps, under
Sir John Col borne (now Lord Seaton), in conjunc-
tion with the second battalion of the 95th (Rifles),
made upon the last column of the Imperial Guard
that ascended the British position at Waterloo; an
event to which his grace the Duke of Wellington,
at his Waterloo dinner just passed, must have had
especial reference, when, among the leading toasts,
he gave, “ Lord Seaton,” who had greatly distin-
guished himself, this being certainly his Lordship’s
crowning service on that day.
Your Petitioner produces the foregoing testimo-
nials and facts, not in a presuming expectation of
obtaining partiality from your Majesty on his side


in questions of disputed justice, but in the strong
confidence of procuring, through your Majesty’s
erful protection, honourable and equal justice in
one of the most deplorable cases of partiality,
favour, affection, and most one-sided trial, that have
ever marked the pages of even political history.
Most humbly commending the subjects of the
foregoing petition to your Majesty’s most gracious
consideration,
Your Petitioner will ever pray,
That amid the convulsions of surrounding
states your Majesty’s throne may stand,
firmly “established by righteousness;” that
your Majesty, your royal Consort, and your
family, may live long in honour, peace, and
prosperity; and that the British empire,
under your Majesty’s sway, may continue to
fulfil the pre-eminently exalted and happy
course among the nations of the earth, to
which, in the most merciful counsels of
Omnipotence, she has been so signally
invited.
GEORGE GAWLER.
United Service Club,
3d July, 1850.


LONDON;
Printed by G. Barclay, Castle St. Leicester Sq.




