

THE NORTHERN TERRITORY OF AUSTRALIA.
COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT 'S POLICY WITH RESPECT TO ABORIGINALS.
(Issued by the Honourable J. McEwen, Minister for the m
Interior - February, 1939.) If
The Commonwealth Government's present policy in respect
aboriginals is administered by a Chief Protector whose headquar f
are in Darwin, The Chief Protector is also Chief Medical Officer m
of the Territory and the medical and aboriginal work is
and carried out mainly by Medical Officers. ’■
Hitherto the aboriginal policy appears to have been one of ’1
merely dealing with the physical needs of the natives as the needs .
become apparent. Thus gradually a system of medical treatment of
the natives has been evolved. Ordinances have been made compelling
employers to pay certain wages and provide certain maintenance. >
Institutions have been provided for half-caste children, police
officers have been appointed Protectors of Aboriginals and
authorised to issue rations to the aged and infirm natives. Some
small subsidies have been paid by the Government to the missions.
Reserves have been set aside. .
The tendency has been for natives to congregate in camps
around the station properties or in the neighbourhood of towns -
particularly the latter.
I have approached this problem of an aboriginal policy with
the intention of endeavouring to reverse the attitude that has been
adopted up to the present, so that instead of waiting for the need
for some care or service to become apparent, the Government will
establish for its own guidance, some final objective and frame all
its policy and action towards the reaching of that objective.
In this regard, I have assumed that the final objective of
the Government in its concern for these native Australian people
should be the raising of their status so as to entitle them by right


and by qualification to the ordinary rights of citizenship and enable
them and help them to share with us the opportunities that are
available in their own native land. To this «nd I have envisaged a
lorg range policy realising that to transform people from a nomadic
tribal state to take their place in a civilised community will
certainly take not only many years, but many generations.
commencement must be made, however, and every step in the routine must
be deliberately and conscientiously directee to the ultimate goal.
The policy must provide for the immediate physical needs of
these people, th«ir health, and within the limits of ability,
their education and training to perform some useful service, and,
perhaps, engage in some useful occupation so as to convert them from
their traditional nomaaic inclinations to a settled life. There should
be brought to them a recognition of authority and of the fact that in
any settled life there must b*, laws and property rights, end 1 penalties
for those who break them. They should bo shown that there are rewards
for those who by training adapt themselves to the settled life.
It is recognised that there must be some religious
training to instil into these people some stability of character to
replace that which has been lost by the obstruction of their ancient
philosophy and moral code through contact with civilization.
The natives of the Northern Territory fall broadly into
four classes*
(1) the fully detribalized;
(2) the semi-detribalised;
(3) the Myalls or aboriginals in their native state;
(4) Half-castes.
The action to be taken for the care of each of these
classes is mentioned in the general statement of policy which is set
out hereunder.
In the preparation of this policy, the Government has
studied closely the report and recommendations of Dr. Donald Thomson
and other authorities.


NEW ORGANISATION:
The policy which has been evolved is to create a
separate Branch of Native Affairs in the Northern Territory, thus
divorcing the aboriginal work from that of the Medical Service.
The Native Affairs Branch will be placed under the control of an
officer, with administrative ability and training in practical
anthropology, who will function as Director of Native Affairs. He
would come to Canberra from time to time and be available to
advise the Government generally on any matters relating to native
affairs.
The Director of Native affairs will be given scope to
implement the Government's policy. An officer with ability to
perform all the routine administrative work will be appointed as
Assistant Director of the Branch. He will take the responsibility
for such work off the Director of Native Affairs and give that
officer freddom to travel on inspection trips,etc.
In course of time District Officers, Patrol Officers and
Officers capable of imparting education to the natives would be
appointed, their selection being left in the hands of the Director
of Native Affairs or recommended for appointment by an Advisory
Committee. It would be necessary that officers selected for these
positions should have a keen interest in the welfare of native
races and a desire to improve their conditions. There is already
one Patrol Officer suitable for appointment as District Officer in
the south-west portion of theTerrltory. It is proposed that two
additional officers shall be appointed, one to take up duty in
the Pitzmaurice area and the other near the southern boundary of
the Arnhem Land Reserve. The Patrol Officers and educational
staff will be appointed later as the necessity in the opinion of
the Director of Native Affairs arises.


Opportunities will be afforded for officers to . „cui'e
some training in anthropology and other necessary subjects at
the Sydney University, as is done in respect of appointees to
similar positions in the Mandated Territory of New Guinea.
Efforts will be made to train half-castes as teachers.
They have been found very useful in other countries as a medium
between the white teacher and the native.
This organisation will works towards the objective of
training the natives and half-castes to qualify one by one for full
citizenship rights which vTill be the Government's objective.
The Native Affairs administration will have various
problems to deal with, which may be placed under the main heads
of fully detribalised natives, semi-detriballsed natives, myalls
or natives living in their tribal state, and half-castes.
FULLY DETRIBaLXZED NATIVES.
Fully detribalized natives fall into two groups, those
who live around pastoral stations and those living in the
neighbourhood of the principal towns. The large pastoral stations
employ a number of natives some on full time and others on part
time. Many of them are the descendants of the local tribes,
but have been born at the native camps which exist near almost
every big pastoral station.
Many natives have been attracted to the principal towns
years ago and there is a steady stream of them still coming in.
Some are descendants of the local tribes; others are attracted,
by the food and clothing which is available to them by hanging
around and by reason of the fact that every police station is a
place for the issue of blankets, and rations to the aged and
infirm. Some of them do a little work in the towns.
These people live in what is, according to our
standards, unsatisfactory conditions.


The Aboriginal Compound at Darwin, which is now being con-
structed, will provide a home for detribalised natives who have been
drawn to Darwin and for the others who inevitably will follow them
there. There will be provision for them to have their own small
houses and to engage in gardening, fishing. They will be able to
run their own goats. A small number of cattle will be kept there
for killing. There will be a school for the education of the
aboriginal children and a native hospital with Isolation provision
for venereal disease patients, etc.
Many aboriginal men, who are employed in and around Darwin,
will have their homes and families in the Compound. There will be
some provision for entertainment to keep them away from the town.
Possibly later the picture show in Darwin might be forbidden to them.
In accordance with this policy similar provision will be made for
detribalised natives living around Alice Springs and within limits
the same policy will be applied to other centres.
MYALLS (NATIVES LIVING- IN TRIBAL STATS) AND 3EMI-DSTPIBALIZED:
As to the natives who are still living in tribal state, it
is felt that these people may be left alone and protected from the
intrusion of whites until we have made much further progress in the
care of those who through their contact with civilisation are in
need of training, education, medical attention and general care.
It will be the policy of the Government to, at least for
the present, leave these natives to their ancient tribal life pro-
tected by Ordinances from the intrusion of whites and maintaining -
the policy of preventing any exploitation of the resources of the
reserves.
On the boundaries of the reserves missions or District
Officer stations will be maintained to act as buffers between the
tribal natives and the outer civilisation.


It is expected that these buffer stations will gradually
attract to them some of the natives from the tribes in the reserves,
who, it may be anticipated will, after making their first contact
with civilisation, return to their tribes. Thus gradual contact
with civilisation will be established. »
A system of District Officers, which will be instituted, is
to be on similar lines to that in operation in the Territory of Now
Guinea, These officers will be men specially selected for their
natural disposition for this work. As in the case of New Guinea,
they will have some training in legal procedure and anthropology.
These District Officers will establish stations in suitable
areas. The establishment of Government stations in selected centres
will bring the benefits of intensive control and administration
within relatively easy reach of Europeans and natives in the out-
back regions, who at present are too far from settlements to he
effectively provided for.
It will enable non-official interests affecting native life
and progress such as pastoral and mission activities to be supervised
and co-ordinated from convenient centres.
Visiting patrols will be in regular contact with even the most
backward peoples. Myalls, as they are called, providing necessary
medical treatment, adjusting troubles and giving assistance whenever
required.
They will be catering primarily for the myalls and semi-
detribalised natives. In the first place three will he appointed,
one in the south-west portion of the Territory, one near the southern
boundary of the Arnhem Land Reserve, and the other in the Fitzraaurlce
District. They will live on these stations and have with them a
squad of native police who it is expected would usually be married
men. Rations would be issued from the station to aged and indigent
natives as is now done by the white police of the Territory.


The station will consist in the first place of the District
Officer's residence, and quarters for his police. Gradually as
the work of the station increases homes will he provided for the
patrol officer and the medical assistant, and a hospital and other
administrative buildings will he added as required.
Elementary medical attention will be given to the natives,
and, when warranted, a trained medical assistant from the Territory
Medical Service will he provided for the station.
Generally the District Officer will encourage the natives
to congregate at the station and prevent them from driftjlng to the
towns.
Prom these stations there will develop a general policy of
oaring for and training of the natives. The stations will also pro-
vide a centre from which natives could he drawn for employment and
to which they could return after their period of employment had
terminated.
A detention camp will be established on each station and
ordinarily natives would servo their periods of imprisonment in such
camps instead of being taken to the Government Gaols as at present,
» As the district station develops,, it will become a centre
of hope and refuge for both the backward and the semi-detriballsed
natives within its reach, in times of sickness, hunger and tribal
troubles. Part of its function will be to establish facilities for
training young aboriginals in crafts suitable to their own lines of
progress. For instance, in pastoral country, the district
will eventually provide for adequate technical training in trades
associated with the raising of cattle, sheep, etc. , such as animal
husbandry, woodwork, iron-work, leather-work, etc., and in
agricultural country, every possible measure will be taken to
instruct all people in the cultivation of fooa plants and thus
introduce on organised lines a new and vitally important culture into
their lives.


In general, the form of uplift provided on these stations
will aim at preparing the aboriginals gradually to develop in their
own way, within their own reserves, rather than to drift into
distant settlements seeking employment or sustenance only to become
hangers-on as many of them now are.
Once the stations arc firmly established and their Influence
becomes felt, not only the backward people will look upon them as
a centre of hope but the unemployed and indigent semi-detribal!sed
together with their families thus provided with the facilities of
life, will find the incentive to settle down and give their families
a chance to develop.
With a long range policy in mind, the District Officer could
lay a foundation for the gradual conversion of the natives from
their nomadic habits to a settled life, the policy aiming equally
at the generations ahead as well as the present generation.
PATROL OFFICERS:
Later, when the District Officers have become established
on their stations, it will be necessary to appoint a few Patrol
Officers to make expeditions throughout the district and generally
to assist in the administration of native affairs. The Patrol
Officers would function on lines similar to those of Papua and the
Territory of New Guinea. They will keep regular contact with the
natives by travelling about the district, will provide elementary
medical treatment, adjust troubles and generally give assistance
whenever required,
NATIVE CONSTABULARY:
It is propsoed that there shall be established a Native
Constabulary in the Territory, similar to the force established in
New Guinea, These natives would be specially selected by the
Director of Native Affairs and trained on military lines. Under
the control of the


officers they would carry out all police work as affecting natives, and
would make their homes on the District Officers' stations. They would
accompany the District Officer or Patrol Officer on his journeys through
the district, act as guards and do ordinary routine jobs on return to the
station. They would be trained in the first place at a depot to be
established near the headquarters of the Director of Native Affairs.
MENTALITY OF THE ABORIGINAL;
In the opinion of Mr. E.'I.P. Chlnnery, Director of District
Services of the Territory of New Guinea, the Australian aboriginal is not
inferior to the natives of Papua or New Guinea. Nr. Chinnery came to
this conclusion after visiting the Northern Territory and studying the
aboriginals on the spot.
JUDICIAL PROCEDURE:
Courts for Native Affairs will be established, on similar lines
to those of Papua and New Guinea. The District Officer will, ex officio,
be the Magistrate in Charge of the Court. It will be competent for him
to constitute a Court at any place in his district. He will hear all
cases as between native and native and will dispense justice in accord-
ance with native custom or along lines prescribed, "Therever possible,
reputable natives nominated by the people themselves will sit as
assessors with the District Officer thus giving him the benefit of their
knowledge of native custom and themselves acquiring an intimate associa-
tion with European ideas of procedure and justice which should react
beneficially on development. A special Ordinance dealing with Native
Courts will be promulgated
HAIF-CASTES:
It is not usually appreciated that there are two classes of
half-castes in the Northern Territory - those born in wedlock of half-
caste parents and those born of an aboriginal mother and a non-aboriginal
father. The former are usually cared for by their parents in the same
manner as the children of whites. The latter are the responsibility
of the Administration.


For the half-castes who are the responsibility of the Adminis-
tration, there would be Government institutions where, up to a certain
age, the children of both sexes would be given the care necessary for
young children and certain elementary education. Later they would go to
seoarate institutions for each sex. Those who showed outstanding
ability would be carried on in ordinary educational subjects, but the
bulk of them would be trained in some useful occupations. The girls
would be trained in domestic service, cooking, sewing, and a limited •
number, perhaps, in typing and stenography. The boys would be trained
in station work and occupations such as horse-shoeing, elementary bush
carpentry, elementary mechanics, etc. so that those who prove adaptable
would be able to work amongst windmills, motor cars and so on. They
would provide a source from which pastorallsts would become accustomed
to recruit their junior station labour.
The near-white children should be trained apart from the
general half-caste children, and if the numbers warranted it, in a
separate Commonwealth institution. It may be possible ’to have them
trained in institutions in the States, such as those which exist for the
purpose in Western Australia.
It is hoped that some of the staff of the Native Affairs Branch
will be recruited from the half-caste institutions.
MISSIONS;
There are a number of missions operating in the Northern
Territory. The Roman Catholic Church has established missions at
Bathurst Island and at Port Keats in the Fitzmaurice District; the
Methodist Church has missions at Goulburn Island, Millinglmbi and
Ylrrkala along the north coast of the Arnhem Land reserve; the


glican Church has missions at Groote Eylandt in the Gulf of Carpen-
.ria, Roper River on the south of the Arnhem Land reserve and Oenpelli
i the eastern boundary of the reserve. The Lutheran Church has a
Ission at Hermannsburg in the south-west of the Territory.
As to the general care of aboriginals, in the first place
,he Government would co-operate more extensively with the missions,
,'his will involve increasing Government subsidies to the Missions, but
.t will be stipulated that all subsidies shall be contingent upon the
Missions following a general policy for the physical care and training
of aboriginals in accordance with the requirements of the Native Affairs
Branch.
It is felt that, through the use of Missions, there should
be a more effective service given to the native who is emerging from
the tribal state or who is in the deplorable condition of being a
"hanger-on" with no objective in life. Their recent loss of all
stability of character through the destruction of their ancient spiritual
It
’'eliefs leaves them in a condition which cannot be met by providing
hem with ordinary physical needs, education or training. If these
lople are to be given any stability of character they must be provided
.th something of a spiritual nature to replace the ancient beliefs they
ive lost. It Is considered that Church Missions, subsidised and, as
Jo their activities other than spiritual, supervised by the Native
Affairs Branch, are better able to provide the service necessary for
fchis class of native than any Government institution.
■EPICAL ATTENTION;
f Proper medical attention is already given to the natives of the
Worthern Territory. There are aboriginal wards in the hospitals
Where tha natives receive care which is quite comparable to that given
ipo whxtes. The Medical Service and the Flying Doctor respond with
/jpequal celerity to a call from an aboriginal as from a white.
*?;
fv


J The severance of the Aboriginals Branch from the Northern
Territory Medical Service will enable the latter to specialise in
medical work for the aboriginals. Provision will be made for the
training of officers of the Aboriginals Branch, and if necessary,
missionaries, in the diagnosis and treatment of maladies common to
aboriginals.
P.MPTCYMENT OF ABORIGINAL LABOUR;
The Aboriginals Ordinance of the Northern Territory has
adequate provision for the protection of natives who engage in
employment.
It will be the duty of the new Native Affairs Branch to
police this Ordinance, to visit places of employment and generally to
see that the interests of the native employees are safeguarded.
This policy is framed towards a distant objective and should
not in its details be condemned as being too ambitious or impractic-
able.
In considering our obligations to raise the status of these
people, one must not think in terms of years but of generations.
The policy is framed to define a final objective and to reconcile,
the long march towards that objective with the obligation to give
immediate care and attention to the needs and training of these
people.
